OBSERVATIONS ON THE FIRST and SECOND OF THE CANONS, Commonly ascribed to the
Holy Apostles. WHEREIN An Account of the Primitive Constitution and Government
of Churches, is contained. Drawn from ancient and acknowledged Writings.

GLASGOW, By Robert Sanders, Printer to the City and University, 1673.

The FIRST CANON.
(...).

A Bishop shall be ordained by two or three Bishops.


A BISHOP.
THIS word is sometime taken for a Spy, so Estathius ad Homeri K. sometime for
a Defender; so Hector was called Bishop of Troy by Homer, Iliad(...). There was
among the Athenians a public Office so called: and in this sense, it was also
used among the Romans; so Cicero ad Atticum, Lib. 7. Epist. 11. tells, That
Pompey would had him to be, quem tota compania and maritima ora habeant
Episcopum, ad quem delectus and summa negotii referatur, ff. de mun. and hon.
leg. ult. parag. item Episcopi sunt, qui praesunt pani and caeteris rebus
vaenalibus.

This term is sometime in the Old Testament. And Clemens Romanus Epist. ad Romans
proves Bishop and Deacon to be no new terms, from Isai. 60.17. (...) But in our
Edition, we find: (...) (where, on the way, mark how different the present
Edition of the Septuagint is, from that which Clemens made use of) (...), is
also Psalm 109.8. Among the Jews, he who was the chief of the Synagogue, was
called Chazan hakeneseth, the Bishop of the Congregation; and Sheliach tsibbor,
the Angel of the Church. And the Christian Church being modelled as near the
form of the Synagogue as could be, as they retained many of the Rites, so the
form of their Government was continued, and the names remained the same. But
more of this afterward.

Clemens Romanus in his Epistle, speaks only of Bishops and Deacons. Polycarp
again in his Epistle, speaks only of Presbyters and Deacons; where some object
that it would seem, that both in the Church of Corinth, to which Clement wrote,
and in that of Philippi, to which Polycarp wrote, there were but two Orders of
Churchmen, whom the one calls Bishops, the other Presbyters. But if Polycarp's
Epistle be genuine, then these of Ignatius, which he there mentions, must be so
too, and in them the matter is past Controversy.

Epiphanius lib. 3. baer. 75. tells, that at first there were only Bishops and
Deacons, which he says he had (...); and that ubi Episcopi erant jam
constituti, scripsit Episcopis and Diaconis. Non enim omnia statim potuerunt
Apostoli constituere. Presbyteris enim opus est and Diaconis, per hos enim duos
Ecclesiastica compleri possunt; ubi vero non inventus est quis dignus
Episcopatu, permansit locus sine Episcopo. Ubi autem opus fuit, and erant digni
Episcopatu, constituti sunt Episcopi; cum autem multitudo non esset, non
inventi sunt inter ipsos, qui Presbyteri constituerentur, and contenti erant
solo Episcopo in loco constituto. Verum sine Diacono impossible est esse
Episcopum. So it seems, that from these profound Histories which he had read,
it appeared, that in some Villages there were only Presbyters and no Bishops,
because in those places none were found worthy of it. But certainly these
places were obliged to depend upon some place where there was a Bishop
constitute: For if none were worthy to be Bishops, much less were they worthy
to constitute a Church within themselves, and independent. It also appears,
that in some places at first, they had no Presbyters: And indeed where the
number of Christians was so small (as no doubt it was in many places at first)
a Bishop alone might well have served a whole City: But where the Christians
were more numerous, there were need of more hands, to assist the Bishop in his
work.

As for that of Polycarp's naming no Bishop, but only Presbyters and Deacons,
perhaps he wrote in the vacancy of the Sea: so we find many Letters of
Cyprian's ad Clerum Romanum, when there was no Bishop. Besides, it is known
that at first the names of Bishop and Presbyter were used promiscuously.

Presbyters were so called, not from their age, as they were men, but from the
age of their Christianity: For a Neophite was not to be ordained, and the
Presbyters did jointly with the Bishop, both rule and feed the flock. But some
do stretch this too far, as if always the eldest Presbyter had been chosen
Bishop.

The Commentaries upon the Epistles, commonly called Ambrose's, but truly
Hilary, the Deacons (of which I shall say nothing, it being now agreed among
the Critics, that they are his) upon the 4th of the Ephesians. After he has at
length shown the difference which was betwixt the Churches in the Apostles
times, when they were not fully constitute, and the ages that succeeded, he
tells how at first all in the Clergy baptized and preached, and that on any
day, or where they had opportunity. But afterward Deacons were restrained in
this, and things were astricted to certain times and places. Hinc est ergo
(says he) unde nunc neque Diaconi in populo praedicant, nec Clerici, nec Laici
baptizant. -- Ideo, non per omnia convenient scripta Apostolica ordinationi,
quae nunc in Ecclesia est, quia haec inter ipsa primordia sunt scripta. Nam and
Timotheum a se creatum Presbyterum, Episcopum nominat, quia primi Presbyteri,
Episcopi appellabantur, ut recedente eo, sequens ei succederet. Denique apud
AEgyptum Presbyteri consignant, si praesens non sit Episcopus: sed quia
coeperunt praesentes Episcopi indigni inveniri, ad primatus tenendos immutata
est ratio, prospiciente Concilio, ut non ordo, sed meritum crearet Episcopum.
Multorum Sacerdotum judicio constitutum, ne indignus temere usurparet, and
esset multis scandalo. And like to this is, what he says on 1 Timothy 3. from
which words, it would appear, that he thought the Elder Presbyter, without any
Election or Ordination, succeeded unto the Chair of the deceased Bishop. But
this is directly contrary even to what Jerome himself says: neither do we find
any such constitution as that he mentions, either in the Acts of the Council of
Nice, or of any other.

It is true, Clemens Romanus says, That the Apostles ordained their first
fruits, (...), to be the Bishops and Deacons of them who should afterward
believe: but he adds, (...) (...), trying them by the Spirit (that of
discerning spirits being among their extraordinary gifts) and though they
ordained no Neophyte, yet there is no reason to believe, that either they made
the eldest Christians, Presbyters, or the eldest Presbyters, Bishops. The
choice of Matthias, and of the seven Deacons, shows that it went not simply by
age. St. James the younger was Bishop of Jerusalem, and Timothy was but young,
when ordained. Yet the difference of Bishop and Presbyter seems not to have
been unknown to Clemens, as appears from these savings of his, (...)
praepositis vestris subditi and seniores inter vos debito honor prosequentes.
-- (...). Qui nobis praesunt revereamur, seniores inter nos honoremus, (...).
Which by the words that follow, must certainly relate to some Ecclesiastical
constitution among themselves, to which he accommodates the terms of the Temple
Hierarchy. All which I propose without any peremptory decision in this matter,
submitting it to the judgment of the impartial Reader; For I know there are
exceptions against these words, yet they do clearly imply a difference and
subordination betwixt the Presbyters, and their Presidents: and what he says
of the ranks of the High Priest, the Priests, the Levites, and the Laics, has
certainly a relation to the Orders of the Church.

The next opinion about the Origin of Episcopacy, is that of Jerome, and he
has given it very fully, both in his Epistle to Evagrius, and on the Epist. to
Titus, cap. 1. He holds, that all things at first were governed in the Church,
communi Presbyterorum consilio, and that the Bishops were above the Presbyters,
non ex dispositione dominica, sed ex Ecclesiae consuetudine; And by diverse
arguments from Scripture, he proves, that Bishop and Presbyter are one and the
same, Acts 20. they who v. 17. are called Presbyters, are v. 28. called
Bishops. Titus 1.5. he left him to ordain Elders, and v. 7. it is added, For a
Bishop, etc. Whence he infers, that Bishop and Presbyter are one and the same.
As also Phil. 1. the Apostle writes only to Bishops and Deacons. And 1 Timothy 3.
he gives the Rules only to Bishops and Deacons. S. Peter also called himself
(...) And S. John designs himself the Elder.

But he adds, after there arose Schisms, and one said, I am of Paul, etc. Toto
orb decretum est, ut unus caeteris super imponeretur ad quem omnis Ecclesiae
cura pertineret, and Schismatum semina tollerentur -- ut Schismatum plantaria
evellerentur ad unum, omnis sollicitudo est delata. And ad Evagrium, he tells
how Alexandriae a Marco Evangelist a usque ad Heraclam and Dionysium,
Presbyteri semper unum ex se electum, in excelsiori gradu collocatum Episcopum
nominabant. -- Quid enim excepta ordinatione facit Episcopus, quod Presbyter
non facit. -- Et, ut sciamus traditiones Apostolicas sumptas de Veteri
Testamento; quod Aaron, and filii ejus, atque Levitae, fuerunt in Templo, hoc
sibi and Episcopi, and Presbyteri, and Diaconi vendicent in Ecclesia. And from
these words we may observe, that he accounted the difference of Bishop and
Presbyter, an Apostolical tradition, which came in place of the difference that
was betwixt Aaron and his Sons: as also, that this began from the time of the
Apostles, and of Mark the Evangelist: That it was done to evite Schism, and
that it was appointed through the whole World: as also, that the whole care and
chief Power was in the hands of the Bishop, of which he says further, Dial
adv. Luciferianos. Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet, cui si
non exors quaedam, and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesia
efficientur Schismata, quot Sacerdotes. It may seem likewise probable, from
him, that Presbyters choosed their Bishop out of their own number, and that in
Alexandria they made him Bishop without any new Ordination. And of this
Eutychius Patriarcha Alex. who was not very long after Jerome, speaks more
plainly, for he in his Origines Ecclesiae Alexandrinae, published by Seldom,
page 29.30. tells, that there were twelve Presbyters constitute by S. Mark, and
when the Sea was vacant, they did choose one of their number to succeed, and to
be their Head, and the rest laid their hands upon him, and blessed him: yet
this cannot hold true, as shall afterward appear.

But all Ignatius his Epistles, are full of the subordination of Presbyters to
Bishops, not without very hyperbolical magnifications of the Bishops Office. It
is true, in the vulgar Editions these expressions are much more frequent; but
in the Medicean Codex (published by Vossius, which agrees not only with the old
Latin one published by Usher, but also with the citations of Theodoret, and
Athanasius, and other ancient Writers which they have taken out of them) there
is a great deal of the subordination of Presbyters to Bishops. Ep. ad Tral. he
says, Necessarium est, quemadmodum facitis sine Episcopo nibil operari. --
Omnes revereantur Episcopum ut Iesum Christum existentem filium Patris,
Presbyteros autem, ut concilium Dei, and conjunctionem Apostolorum. To the
Ephesians. he bids them be subject (...), (...), and concludes that they should
obey these (...). In his Epist. to the Magnesians, he says, Quantum Episcopum
quidem vocant, sine ipso autem omnia operantur: wherefore he advises them, ut
omnia operentur praesidente Episcopo in loco Dei, and Presbyteris in loco
confessionis Apostolorum. And there he speaks of the age of Damas their Bishop,
who was but a young man, which he calls according to the vulgar Edition, (...),
but in the Medicean Codex, (...), from which some will infer, that Episcopacy
was then newly invented, but suppose that were the true reading, which some
question, who in this prefer the vulgar reading, it is clear from the whole
Epistle that he is speaking of the Bishops age, and not of Episcopacy. And from
2 Timothy 2.22. we see (...) is properly youthful, and (...) is that which is new.
And what tho Ignatius, who lived so near the Apostles time, did call Episcopacy
a new Order? Many other places to the same purpose of the difference among
these Offices occur through all his Epistles, neither is there any room for
debate: but if these Epistles be his, the difference of Bishop and Presbyter
has begun in the Apostolical times. But that debate would prove too long a
digression here; therefore I refer the Reader, if he desire a full discussion
of that question to the incomparably learned and exact defense of them, lately
published by Doctor Pearson, whose harvest is so full, that he has not so much
as left work for a gleaner.

That of the Angel in the Revelation, is brought by many, and that not without
ground, to prove that there was some singular person in these Churches to whom
each Epistle was directed, and we have a great deal of reason to believe that
Polycarp was then Bishop of the Church of Smyrna. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3. and
apud Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 13. tells that Polycarp was (...). Now Irenaeus tells
how he was Polycarp his hearer and disciple, and had conversed with him in his
youth, and had often heard him teach. And as it were great uncharitableness to
suspect the truth of his narration in a matter of fact, so we cannot think he
could have been mistaken in a matter of that importance. But whatever jealousy
may fix upon Irenaeus, there is no shadow of ground, for suspecting either the
veracity, or good information of the Church of Smyrna, who (giving an account
of his Martyrdom in an Epistle inserted by Eusebius. in his History, lib. 4. cap.
14.) call him Bishop of the Catholic Church of Smyrna.

All that can be alleged against this, is, that in their style Bishop and
Presbyter were one and the same thing. But the contrary of this is clear from
Iranaeus, who speaks always of Bishops as distinct from Presbyters: and tho he
sometimes call Bishops Presbyters, yet he never calls Presbyters, Bishops;
which is also the style of these few Writers of that age, who sometimes call
Bishops, Presbyters. Eusebius tells from the testimony of the Church of Lions,
how he was first a Presbyter in Lions under Pothinus: after whose Martyrdom he
succeeded him in the Chair, and died Bishop there. And if we will hear himself,
lib. 3. cap. 3. when he is reckoning up the tradition of the Faith from the
Apostles, he deduceth it by all the Bishops who did sit in Rome from the
Apostolic times: whence two things will follow; one, that he judged there had
been still Bishops in that Church. The other, that he looked on the Bishop, as
the chief depositary of the faith.

Further, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24. sets down his Epistle to Victor Bishop of
Rome, wherein he chides him for excommunicating the Eastern Bishops; and there
he lays the whole blame upon Victor, without sharing it among the Presbyters,
and also commends the former Bishops of Rome for their greater gentleness;
whereby it plainly appears, that he judged that the power of discipline lay
chiefly in the Bishops hands. Polycrates also ( apud Eusebius. lib. 5. hist. cap.
23.) vindicates the practice of their Church about the day of Easter, not only
from the example of the Apostles among them, but of the seven Bishops who
preceded him in his See. From which we may not only infer, that there was but
one Bishop in a City, from the days of the Apostles; but that his authority was
great, since what they did, passed for a precedent to their Successors. And
indeed the difference of Bishop and Presbyter, is so evpress in Irenaeus, that
the most learned assertors of parity, confess the change was begun before his
time, which was in the end of the second Century. Now how this change could
have been introduced, when there was neither Council, nor secular Prince to
establish it, when Churchmen were so pure ( Polycarp an Apostolical Man, having
died but about thirty years before; besides many other Apostolical men who had
long survived) when the Church was in the fire of persecution, and so less
dross could be among them; when there was no secular interest to bait them to
it: for on the contrary this subjected them to the first fury of the
persecution, seems strange. And it is not easy to be imagined, or believed,
how this could have been so suddenly received through all the Churches, both
Eastern and Western, and that there was none to witness against it; and that
neither the sincerity of some Presbyters, nor the pride of others, should have
moved them to appear for their privileges against this Usurpation: And how
neither Heretic, nor Schismatic, save one, and that about two hundred years
after, should have charged the Church with this: on the contrary, all of them
having their own Bishops; and how this Government continued in so peaceable
possession through the succession of so many ages, till of late, that even
fundamentals are brought under debate; if this Superiority were either so
criminal, as some hold it to be, or had not been introduced at least by some
Apostolical men, if not by the Apostles themselves, will not be easily cleared.

In the next Century we have Tertullian speaking clearly of the difference of
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, lib. de bapt. Dandi quidem jus habet summus
Sacerdos, qui and Episcopus, dehinc Presbyteri and Diaconi, non tamen sine
Episcopi authoritate, propter Ecclesiae bonum. Idem de praescript. advers.
haer. cap. 32. Caeterum si quae (praescriptiones) se audent inserere aetati
Apostolicae, ut ita videantur ab Apostolis traditae. -- Edant ergo origines
Ecclesiarum suarum, evolvant ordinem Episcoporum suorum, ita per successiones
ab initio decurrentem, ut primus ille Episcopus, aliquem ex Apostolis, vel
Apostolicis viris, qui tamen cum Apostolis perseverarent, habuerit authorem and
antecessorem; hoc enim modo Ecclesiae Apostolicae census suos deferunt, sicut
Smyrneorum Ecclesia habens Polycarpum, a Ioanne collocatum refert: sicut
Romanorum a Petro Clementem ordinatum edit. Proinde utique and caeterae
exhibent, quos ab Apostolis in Episcopatu constitutos Apostolici seminis
traduces habeant; confingant tale aliquid baeretici. He also lib. 4. cont.
Marcionem, cap. 5. says, Ordo tamen Episcoporum ad originem recensus, in
Joannem stabit authorem. By which we see that he both judged Bishops to be of
an Apostolical origene, and that he counted them different from Presbyters. A
little after him was Clemens Alex. who 6. Strom. p. 667. speaking of the
Constitution of the Christian Churches, says, there were among them (...),
which he thinks was taken from the Angelick glory, and from their Economy and
administration.

We shall also find through all Cyprian his Epistles this disparity so clear,
that it cannot be denied, that yet we find him as condescending as any. Epist.
6. writing to his Clergy: he says, Solus rescribere nihil potui, quando a
primordio Episcopatus mei statuerim nihil sine consilio vestro, and sine
consensu plebis meae, pivata gerere sententia. But even this looks like a
yielding to a diminution of that plenitude of power to which he might have
pretended, Epist. 65. writing to, Rogatian, who had advised with him concerning
a Deacon that had carried insolently toward him, he writes: Pro Episcopatus
vigore, and Cathedrae authoritate, haberes potestatem, qua posses de illo
statim vindicari. (and about the end) Haec sunt enim initia baereticorum, and
ortus atque conatus Schismaticorum male cogitantium, ut sibi placeant, ut
praepositum superbo tumore contemnant, sic de Ecclesia receditur, sic altar
profanum foris collocatur, sic contra pacem CHRISTI, and ordinationem, atque
unitatem DEI rebellatur. Likewise we find Epist. 31. written to Cyprian, by the
Clerus Romanus, the Seat being then vacant, what sense they had of the Bishop's
power, when they say: Post excessum nobilissimae memoriae Fabiani, nondum est
Episcopus propter rerum and temporum difficultates constitutus, qui omnia is it a
moderatur, and eorum qui lapsi sunt possit cum authoritate and consilio habere
rationem. And if in any case we receive a testimony, it should be from the
mouth of those who can only pretend to be injured. My next witness shall be
Dionysius of Alexandria, whose same and authority was inferior to none of the
age he lived in. I do not bring his words to prove there were Bishops in the
Church in his time, since that is denied by none: But to prove how full and
absolute the authority of the Bishops was then, and that the Presbyters were
simply determined by their commands. Great care was used to keep the Christian
Assemblies pure; and therefore such as fell in scandalous sins, chiefly these
who apostatised in the persecution, were not admitted to the Communion of the
faithful, but after a long and heavy penitence: And a question rising, What
should be done with those who died before they finished their penitence: he in
his Letter to Fabius Bishop of Rome, telling that signal story of Serapion,
shows that in his Diocese the Presbyters sent the Eucharist to the sick who
desired it, though they died before they had completed their penitence: and he
adds how this was by his authority, (...). Where from the style of ^ Command
given by him, which was the rule of his Presbyters, and the rest of that
Epistle, it is as clear as any matter of fact can be, that the authority of
Bishops over their Presbyters was then full, absolute, and undisputed.

If we will believe Eusebius, who certainly has been a diligent and great
Collector, as any of all the Ancients, the whole Tract, both of his History and
Chronology, runs fully in this strain; and he gives us the Catalogues of the
Bishops of the Patriarchal Sees, from the days of the Apostles to his own time.
And tho it is not to be denied that he has been too credulous in some
instances; yet it is hard to think he could have been mistaken in such a Tract
of so many particulars. And we see from the sixth Canon of the Council of Nice,
(...). That the power of Metropolitans over Bishops, was then accounted by that
Council an ancient Custom; neither was there ever any opposition made to this
before Aerius, who upon that account is reckoned an Heretic by Epiph. lib. 3.
haer. 75. and also by Augustine ad Quod vult Deum, haer. 53. Epiphanius adds,
that he was an Arrian, and gives the account of his Opinion in this matter,
thus: Aerius being a Presbyter in Sebastia, was offended when Eustathius was
preferred before him to that Bishopric: and tho Eustathius took all ways to
gain him, and committed the Xenodochium that was there to his inspection, yet
AErius too deeply irritated at the preference, said: Quid est Episcopus ad
Presbyterum; nihil differt hic ab illo, unus enim est honor, unus ordo, and una
dignitas. Imponit munus Episcopus, ita etiam Presbyter; lavacrum dat Episcopus,
similiter and Presbyter. Dispensationem cultus divini facit Episcopus, facit
and Presbyter similiter; sedet Episcopus in throno, sedet etiam Presbyter. By
which he deceived many, and had diverse followers: but it seems they have died
with their Author, for we hear no more of them.

Medina in the Council of Trent, numbered with AErius, Jerome, Ambrose,
Augustine, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Primasius, and Sedulius, as if they had been
of the same mind, wherein he certainly spoke rashly, and was either ignorant or
indeliberate. We have already considered both Jerome and Ambrose, or rather
Hilary the Deacon, their opinions in this matter.

All that is gathered from Augustine, is, Ep. ad Hieronymum, where he says:
Quanquam secundum honorem vocabulorum, quae jam usus obtinuit, Episcopatus
Presbyterio major fit, multis tamen in rebus Augustino Hieronymus major est.
Whence some would infer that the difference of these was only in words, and
brought in but by custom: But how thin and weak this is, it being but a smooth
Complement, will appear to all, especially if they set it in the balance with
the great evidence that stands upon the other side.

Chrysostom. hom. II. on I Tim. when he is giving the reason, why the Apostle
passes from Bishops to Deacons, without giving rules to Presbyters, says, the
reason was, (...). And a little after, he taxes what that little betwixt them
was, (...). But this is far from saying that they were all one; and that there
ought to be no difference betwixt them. Chrysostom. also in his first Homily on
the Phil. I. cap. on the word (...), says, Quid hoc rei est? An unius
Civitatis plures erunt Episcopi? nullo modo. Verum sic Presbyteros vocavit,
tunc enim nomina invicem communicabant, and Diaconus dicebatur Episcopus. And
there he shows that Bishop and Presbyter were taken promiscuously; for which he
cites that of Timothy's being ordained by the Imposition of the hands of the
Presbytery, which he says is to be understood of Bishops. Quia Presbyteri
Episcopum non ordinassent. (And a little after) Etiam Presbyteri olim
appellabantur Episcopi, and Diaconi Christi, and Episcopi Christi, unde nunc
etiam multi Presbyteri and Diaconi scribuntur Episcopi. But he adds, that in
process of time, each had their proper names appropriated to them.

OEcumeneus and Theophylact, in this, and all other things, follow Chrysostom
(...). As also Primasius, who on I Tim. 3. gives the reason, why the Presbyters
are not named. Eos in Episcoporum ordine comprehendit, quia secundus, imo pene
unus est gradus. Sedulius Scotus on the I. of Titus, says verbatim, that which
Jerome has on the same place, and so it is to be considered as all one with
him on the matter.

But Theodoret's opinion is a little more perplexed, who on I Tim. tells, that
the same persons were called sometimes Presbyters, sometimes Bishops: but these
who are now called Bishops, were then called Apostles, and that in the progress
of time they left the name of Apostles, and the name of Bishops was
appropriated to them who were first called Apostles. Thus he. These words it
seems dropped from him without consideration, for there is no shadow of ground
to believe it was so; otherwise how came it, that the Apostle gave no rules for
them, under that name. But these words are sufficiently tossed by Petavius and
Wallo Messalinus. And thus far we have an ingenuous account of the various
Sentiments of the Fathers, about the disparity of Bishops and Presbyters.

The next thing in this Canon to be considered is, what is meant by (...). It
is unquestionable, that by this is understood Ordination by Imposition of
hands, for all the Ancients use (...), and (...) promiscuously: But Critics
judge that by the former we are to understand all that pertained to the
Ordination, and the whole Office of it, and that the latter is to be restrained
to that particular rite of Imposition of hands given in the Ordination. Nor do
I remember of any place, where (...) stands for the Election of Churchmen,
except in the fifth Canon of Laodicea, which discharges it to be in the
presence of the hearers: and if we compare that with the 13th Canon of the same
Council, which discharges the popular elections, we shall see the reason why
they likewise forbid the elections to be in the peoples hearing, which was for
avoiding tumults. Balsamon on this Canon refutes their mistake, who understood
it (...), which was (...), who founded their gloss on that Canon of Laodicea,
(which Zonaras and Aristenus does) Quae enim fit in Ecclesia ordinatio per
preces mysticas peragitur, etiamsi fiat coram multis. And he proves his gloss
from the 4. Canon of Nice, which appoints the elections of the Bishops to be by
the whole Bishops of the Province, or by three at least. Therefore this Canon
cannot be meant of the elections of Bishops, since two suffice by this rule for
a (...); and by the recurring of this same word in the next Canon, he confirms
his assertion, since Presbyters and Deacons were not (according to him) elected
by Suffrages. Whence we see, how groundless a nicety theirs is, who would
distinguish them, as if the former had been the election, the latter the
ordination. It is true (...) is in the Greek Authors almost constantly taken
for the election of Magistrates, which was ordinarily done in Greece by the
extention or elevation of the hand; so Budaeus upon the word, and Cicero pro
Flacco speaks of their psephismata porrigenda manu, profundendoque clamore
concitata. But that distinction is not observed in sacred Writings, in which
these minute critical Modes of speaking are not attended to, and since, before
they were to lay on hands, they were to stretch forth their hands on the head
of the person, this word is not improperly used for that action: and therefore,
Acts 14. 23. (...) is used of Paul and Barnabas their ordaining of Elders,
where it is clear, it cannot be meant of the election by the people, but of
their Ordination of Pastors.

This word in Scripture is also used for an appointment, or election, Acts 10.
41. (...) is taken for GOD's election; and 2 Cor. 8.19. it is applied to these
who were chosen to carry a Message. As for the Ordination of Churchmen, it is
nothing else but a solemn Ceremony of blessing them, by laying on of hands. We
find of old, that all who were called out for any Divine Service, were solemnly
separated for it, so were both Kings, Priests, and Prophets. And the Law of
Nature says, that to all Functions for which a great veneration is due, there
should be a solemn Inauguration. The laying of the hand upon the head, was the
rite of Benediction, Genesis 48. 14. Jacob blessing Joseph's Children does it with
that Ceremony: In like manner, Deuteronomy. 34. 19. did Moses bless Joshuah. We see
also by the sinners laying on their hands on the head of the Sacrifice, that is
was a Ceremony used in the devoting of things to GOD, whence might rise that
phrase among the Latins caput devovere. And upon these accounts, this was
appropriated to the Ordination of Churchmen, who are to be both blessed, and
devoted to GOD.

We find this ceremony also used in the New Testament on many and different
occasions; sometimes when they healed diseases, Mark 16. 8. They shall lay
their hand on the sick, and they shall recover. And our LORD usually touched
the sick with his hand. Acts 28. 8. S. Paul lays his hands on Publius.
Likewise, when they conferred the holy Ghost on any who were baptized, they
used this ceremony, so Acts 8.17. and 19. 6. And farther, when they appointed
any for the Ministry of the Gospel, they separated and blessed them, by the
laying on of hands; so 1 Timothy 4.15. and 5.22. and 2 Timothy 1.6. Deacons were also
ordained by this ceremony, Acts 6. 6. As also when they sent any on a
particular mission, though already sanctified for the work of the Gospel, they
laid hands on them: so Acts 13. 3. Paul and Barnabas were ordained for the
Ministry of the Gentiles. From all which it is clear that they used imposition
of hands, as the constant ceremony of Benediction, and as a concomitant of it,
and not as a ceremony of it self significant and sacramental.

Among the Ancients, Imposition of hands was used not only in Confirmation,
which is undoubted, and is by many founded on that of Hebrews 6.2. where laying
on of hands being joined with Baptism, and reckoned among foundations, seems to
be common to all Christians. But they also used it in the receiving of
penitents: so 19th Canon of Laodicea.

As for the form of ordaining Bishops, we see here it was to be done by
Bishops, which is agreed to by all, only Eutychius seems to say, that in
Alexandria Presbyters ordained the Bishop. But as for the number of the Bishops
who were to ordain, this seems to be later, and more suitable to the state of
the Churches after they were constituted, than while they were under
persecution. The number of three was appointed, Conc. Arel. 1. Can. 21. Nic.
Can. 4. Arel. 2. Can. 5. Carth. 2. Can. 12. And see more of this Gratian did.
64. This seems to have been founded on Timothy's Ordination, which is said to
have been done by the Presbytery, which Chrysostom understands of a Company of
Bishops. But it is not probable, that in the time of persecution, when Bishops
neither durst leave their own flocks, nor meet in any number, this was then
observed; and diverse accounts are given of Ordinations, where we hear only of
one Bishop ordaining. Gregory Thaumaturg was ordained by Fidimus Bishop of
Amasia, who went to the Wilderness to seek him. And there are many instances
among the Lives of the Solitaries, of such as were brought to a Bishop, and
ordained by him, without any other assisting him. So Synesius Epist. 67. tells
how Siderius was ordained a Bishop, only by Philo Bishop of Cyrene; and tho he
call that a Transgression of the (...), and confesses it was not (...), but
(...), since he was neither ordained in Alexandria, nor by three Bishops; yet
he justifies it from the necessity of the times wherein such freedom of
Assemblies was not safe. And Gregory the Great allowed Augustine to ordain
alone in England; who upon that did ordain some Bishops alone, as Beda relates.
Dionysius the Areopagite cap. 5. de Eccles. hierar. giving the account of the
Ordination of Bishops, represents it as done by one person. Anno 555 after
Vigilius Bishop of Rome his death, Pelagius who got himself made his Successor,
being suspected of accession to his death, could only get two Bishops, to wit,
Joannes Perusinus, and Bonus Ferentinus, who with Andreas Presbyter of Ostia,
laid hands on him. And here is a Presbyter laying hands on a Bishop. The Church
of Rome, at this day, ordinarily dispenses with this, so that one Bishop and
two Abbots do often ordain Bishops.

The Areopagite loc. cit. gives the account of the Bishops Ordination, whom he
always calls (...), thus: He who was to be ordained, was brought to another
Bishop, and kneeling before the Altar, the Gospels were laid on his head, and
the Bishops hand, and so he was consecrated with a holy Prayer, and then marked
with the sign of the cross; and last of all, saluted by the Bishop, and whole
holy Order. His Theory on this is: Their coming to the Altar, shows the
subjecting of their whole life to GOD. Laying on of hands, is as a Father's
blessing of his Child. The sign of the cross signifies, that they are to follow
CHRIST, even to the cross. Their salutation signifies their union one with
another: and the Gospel is laid on the Bishops head, because he being the head
of the Hierarchy, is to illuminate the rest.

With this agrees the fourth Council of Carthage, where the rules are at length
set down for the trials and qualifications of Bishops: and Canon first, at the
end, we have, Cum in bis omnibus, examinatus, fuerit inventus plene instructus,
tunc cum consensu Clericorum and laicorum, and conventu totius provinciae
Episcoporum, maximeque Metropolitani vel authoritate vel praesentia, ordinetur
Episcopus. And Canon second: Episcopus quum ordinatur, duo Episcopiponant and
teneant Evangeliorum codicem super caput and cervicem (aliter verticem) ejus,
and uno super eum fundente benedictionem, reliqui omnes Episcopi, qui adsunt,
manibus suis caput ejus tangant. And of this see Gratian did. 23. and 77.
where we find a Bishop was to be five years a Lector or Exorcist, fourteen
years an Acoluth or Subdeacon, and five years a Deacon, ere he be a Presbyter,
and then he may hope for the highest degree. But in another Chapter it is said,
he must be ten years a Presbyter, ere he can be a Bishop. And in another
Chapter, none could be a Deacon under twenty five years of age. But by the
Civil Law, the age both of Bishop and Presbyter is the same; to wit, thirty
five. These previous degrees were introduced, and the years of trial in them
were appointed, that all might be prepared and rightly formed before they were
admitted to the government of the Church. Among other ceremonies in the
ordination of Bishops, in some places they were anointed with the Chrisma.
Nazianz. Orat. 20. tells, that his father had so anointed Basile: and Orat. 5.
tells, that himself was so ordained: but it seems that that was a custom
peculiar to that Country, since we meet not with it so early elsewhere.

As for the elections of Bishops, we have seen from Jerome and Eutychius, how
the Presbyters did choose the Bishop. But in Africa, the Synod with the Clergy,
and the people did it; of which we have a full account from Cyprian, epist. 68.
De traditione divina and Apostolica observatione tenendum est, and observandum
quod apud nos quoque, and fere per Provincias universas tenetur, ut ad
ordinationes rite celebrandas, ad came plebem cui praepositus ordinatur,
Episcopi ejusdem Provinciae proximi quique conveniant, and Episcopus delegatur
plebe praesente, quae singulorum vitam plenissime novit, and uniuscujusque
actum de ejus conversatione perspexerit. And a little before, he says, Plebs
ipsa maxim habet potestatem vel elegendi dignos Sacerdotes, vel indignos
recusandi. And from that of Numb. 10. where Moses stripped Aaron, and clothed
Eleazer before all the Congregation, he proves that it was of divine Authority,
that the sacerdotal ordinations should not be, nisi sub populi assistentis
conscientia, ut plebe praesente, vel detegantur malorum crimina, vel bonorum
merita praedicentur, and sit ordinatio justa and legitima, quae omnium judicio
and suffragio erit examinata. And this course, he says, held in the ordination
both of Bishops, Priests and Deacons. And Epist. 33. he excuses himself, that
he had ordained one a Lector without the consent of his people, though he had
been a Confessor in the persecution. the Epistle is directed to the Presbyters,
Deacons, and the whole people, and begins: In ordinationibus Clericis solemus
vos ante consulere, and mores ac merita singulorum communi consilio ponderare.

All that we meet with concerning this in Scripture, is the choosing of the
Deacons by the people, Acts 6. for that of Acts 14.23. is clearly misapplied. 1 Timothy 3. a Deacon should be first approved, and Titus 1.6. a Bishop must be
(...); and thereby it appears, that certainly some enquiry was to be made into
his Conversation, which at least must have been a Promulgation beforehand. So
we find Conc. Chalc. can. 6. (...). And Lampridius in the life of Alexander
Severus tells, that he used such a course before he made any Governor of a
Province. Dicebatque grave esse non fieri in Provinciarum rectoribus, cum id
Christiani and fudaei facerent in praedicandis Sacerdotibus, qui ordinandi sunt.

But there were frequent disorders in these elections, which occasioned the 13.
Canon of the Council of Laodicea, (...): and by the Canon goes before that,
the election of Bishops is committed to the Bishops of the Province, which was
also established by the Council of Nice, fourth and sixth Canon. Likewise
Justinian, Nov. 123. cap. 1. excludes the people from the election of the
Bishop, but leaves it to the Clergy, and the primores Civitatis, to name a list
of three, out of which the Metropolitan was to choose one. The Bishops were to
be ordained in the presence of the People, where every one might propose his
exceptions, why he might not be ordained, which were to be examined before they
proceeded to the Ordination. So Conc. Antioch. Canon 19. and Carthag. Canon 49.
and Justinian tit. 1. Nov. Constable. 1, 2.17. according to Photius in Nomocan,
tit. 1. cap. 8. Yet these popular elections were not wholly taken away, and at
least the peoples consent was asked: but there were great disorders in these
elections. Nazianz. Orat. 14. at his Father's Funeral instanceth them in two
cases at Cesarea, where his Father was present; in which there were factions at
the election of the Bishop: In one of them it was that Basil was chosen.

Ammian Mercellin tells what tumults were at Rome in the elections of their
Bishops, of whom he says, Supra modum humanum ad rapiendam sedem Episcopalem
ardebant: So that at the election of Damasus the faction betwixt his electors,
and those that were for Urcisinus, brake out into such a tumult, that there
were in Basilica Sicinini, ubi ritus Christiani est Conventiculum, centum
triginta septem peremptorum cadavera reperta, lib. 27. And he adds, It was no
wonder they struggled so about it, because id adepti futuri sunt ita securi, ut
ditentur oblationibus matronarum, procedantque vehiculis insidentes,
circumspecte vestiti, epulas curantes profusas, adeo ut eorum convivia Regales
superent mensas, qui esse poterant beati revera, si urbis magnitudine despecta
quam vitiis opponunt, ad imitationem quorandam provincialium Antistitum
viverent, quos tenuitas edendi potandique parcissime, vilit as etiam
indumentorum and supercilia humum spectantia perpetuo Numini, verisque ejus
cultoribus, ut puros commendant and verecundos.

Because of those disorders in elections, it was that Nazianz. Orat. 19.
wished, that the elections were only or chiefly in their hands who served at
their Altar. Sic enim nunquam Ecclesiis male esset. Therefore he desires they
should no more be committed iis qui opibus ac potentia pollent aut plebis
impetui ac temeritati, atque etiam plebeiorum vilissimo aut contemptissimo
cuique, as had been before. Adding, that the disorders which were in such
elections, made him loath his life, and long to be in a Wilderness.

One effect of these confused elections was, that some who were not Presbyters,
nay not so much as Christians, were chosen Bishops: for Orat. 20. on Basil,
when he tells how Basil was first ordained a Presbyter, he regrates that many
Bishops oft-times leaped into the Chair without any preceding degree, which was
contrary to Nature and Reason, since among Saylors none is made at first a
Pilot: nor is there any at first made a General among Soldiers. Nunc autem
periculum est, ne ordo omnium sanctissimus, omnium maxim sit ridiculus: non
enim virtute magis, quam maleficio, and scelere Sacerdotium paratur, nec
digniorum, sed potentiorum throni sunt. Adding, that none is called a
Physician, before he understand diseases, nor a Painter before he can mix
colors. Antistes contra facile invenitur, non elaboratus, sed recens. -- Uno
die sancto fingimus, eosque sapientes and eruditos esse jubemus, qui nihil
didicerunt: nec ad Sacerdotium quicquam prius contulerunt quam velle. And Orat.
19. he tells how in Cesarea at an election of a Bishop, his Father and other
Bishops being present, there arose a great sedition about it, which could not
be easily composed, partly through the peoples fervor about the Faith, partly
through the eminence of the Chair, which made the contentions greater. But at
length the whole people with one consent made choice of a person of great
quality, but not yet baptized, to be their Bishop: from which he was very
averse, but they took him by force, and by the assistance of some Soldiers then
in the City, haled him to the Church, and desired the Bishops, not without
threats, to ordain him: whereupon they overawed by fear and force, first
purified him, and then set him upon the Throne; but more with their hands than
with their heart. Chrysostom. also lib. 3. de Sacerdotio, cap, 15. shows the evil
of these popular elections, and that in them they looked more to riches and
honor, than to true worth.

But where the Synodical elections were set up, the People were not wholly
excluded from their interest in the choice, as we see particularly in the
Churches of Milan and Hippo. Neither were these Synodical elections so regular
as Nazianzen hoped, which appears from two famous Instances of Nectarius and
Ambrosius.

Nectarius came to the Council of Constantinople in the company of Diodorus
Bishop of Tarsus: and then it was, that upon some differences (as you shall see
afterward) Nazianzen retired from Constantinople. And Nectarius thinking to go
home to his Country, came to his Bishop Diodorus to ask his blessing, and
receive his commands. But at that time all Diodorus thoughts were, how a fit
Person might be found for Constantinople, and looking on Nectarius, considering
his Gravity, his gray Hairs, and sweet Temper, he thought (it seems by a Divine
Inspiration) what if he were made Bishop. And thereupon pretending another
errand, he took him to the Bishop of Antioch, and whispering him in the Ear,
bid him consider how fit a Person Nectarius might prove for the Bishopric of
Constantinople. Meletius laughed in his heart at Diodorus his simplicity, who
should think of Nectarius, when so many famous Men had been named for that See
by their Bishops. After that, Theodosius the Emperor commanded the Synod to
give him in writing a list of such persons as were judged fit for that Chair,
which being laid upon Miletus to draw, he to gratify Diodorus, puts Nectarius
among them. The Emperor at first reading began to think of Nectarius: but at
second reading, positively concluded that he must be the Bishop. The Synod was
amazed, and began to enquire about him, and found that he was but a Catechumen,
whereupon they desired the Emperor to change his mind; but he continuing
resolute, the Synod yielded: and after they had baptized him, they ordained him
Bishop. And by this we see that the Synod made the list, but the Emperor named
the person.

Near of kin to this is the story of Ambrose. After Auxentius the Bishop of
Milan his death, Valentinian the Emperor called a Council of Bishops, and
appointed them to choose some holy and fit person to be Bishop there, Cujus
authoritati and nos subjiciamur, cujusque reprehensiones far non dubitemus.
Etenim ut Imperatores nos simus, and rerum potiamur, homines tamen esse nos,
and humanis lapsibus obnoxios fatendum nobis est. But the Synod referred the
Election back to him, that he might name the person, yet he refused it, and
told them, it was their business, adding, Ego vero, id and viribus meis majus
and ab officio meo alienum judico. But as they went to consult about this, the
people of Milan did all run together to the Church to choose their Bishops, some
of them were Arrians, and others Orthodox, and each party was contending to
have the Bishop chosen of their own side. At that time Ambrose a Noble Roman of
the Consular Order, was Prefect there, to whom Valentinian, when he sent him to
that charge; said, Vade, age non ut Iudex, sed ut Episcopus. He fearing that
the concourse of the people might end in a Tumult, came among them to prevent
that, and with great sweetness exhorted them to calmness and unity; whereupon
they much taken with his Speech, cried out with one accord; Let Ambrose be
Bishop. But he resisted this as much as he could, and did chide them for their
indeliberate choice of a secular person, who was a stranger to Ecclesiastical
affairs, and not so much as initiated into the faith, for he was not then
baptized. Yet the Synod approving of their Election, he was first baptized, and
then ordained Bishop. But Paulinus adds, that after his Baptism, he past in
order through all the Ecclesiastical degrees, and on the eighth day was
ordained Bishop there. Thus went the Synodical Elections: but it was a great
while before that, even in the Elections of the Bishops of Rome, the people
were wholly barred from their privileges. And of all this see at large
Antonius de Dominis, lib. 3. de Repub. Eccles. cap. 3.

Metropolitans were chosen by the Patriarchs, and the Patriarchs by the
Emperors: but in some cases, the Emperors took the Elections simply to
themselves; at other times, they reserved only the ratification of them to
themselves: and so for a great while, the Elections of the Bishops of Rome were
to be ratified, either by the Emperors of the East, or by their Exarchs at
Ravenna. And after that Charles the Great assumed the Empire of the West, it
was decreed in a Synod at Rome, that the Election of the Roman Bishop belonged
to him: and accordingly he was in possession of it, though his Successors did
simply slip from it. Now the Elections are in the hands of the Canons and
Prebends, which is an art to make the Election go what way the Superior will.
But the Chapters choosing the Bishop, was not known to the Ancients, it
belonging to the whole College of the Presbyters without distinction. And all
who desire the restitution of Church discipline, think, that the erecting of
Provincial Synods, and giving the power of electing Bishops to them, is both
the best method, and most agreeable to all Antiquity.

A See was not to lie vacant over three months, nor the ordination of a Bishop
delayed, except upon an inexcusable necessity, otherwise the Metropolitan was
liable to Censure, Conc. Chalc. Can. 25. and in the Council of Sardice, Can.
10. Osius proposed, that none should be Bishop till he had passed through all
the inferior degrees, and had finished the Ministry of a Lector, Deacon, and
Presbyter; and to this all the Bishops there present gave their consent: but by
the instances already marked, we see that this order was not universally
observed. Nov. 123. it is decreed, that a Bishop be at least three months among
the Clergy, before he be ordained, that he may be instructed in the
Ecclesiastical Ministry and service.

Another Custom there had been of Bishops ordaining Successors for themselves:
so Eusebius. lib. 7. cap. 26. or according to the Greek division, (...). tells how
Theotecnus Bishop of Cesarea, ordained Anatolius to be his Successor, and that
for some time they were both Bishops together. In other places they did not
ordain, but only design their Successors. Yet Augustine was ordained Bishop of
Hippo by his Predecessor Valerius; but he apologizes for this, Epist. 110. and
says, that he did not know that it was contrary to the Council of Nice, which
decreed that there should be but one Bishop at once in a City. And from that
Epistle we see it was ordinary for Bishops to design their Successors, which
was done to prevent the tumults were usually in Elections. And Augustine tells
us of a disorder which had been in a neighbor Town, because the Bishop, though
he had designed his Successor, yet had not published it. Therefore he to evite
that hazard, designed Eradius to be his Successor, to which all the people
assented. Yet lest this might have opened a door for Bishops to have
transmitted their Sees to their kindred or Friends, it was decreed in the
Council of Antioch, Can. 23. that any such designation of Successors made by
Bishops, should be declared null, and that the Election of the Bishop should be
in the hands of the Bishops of that Synod where the Sea lay.

There might be but one Bishop in a City for Unities sake, yet sometimes there
were Coadjutors: so Nazianzen was Coadjutor to his Father. And Augustine in his
second Conference with the Donatists, offered that if the Donatists overcame,
then they should yield their Bishoprics to them; but if the Donatists were
overcome by them, and so should return to the community of the Church, they
should admit them to be conjunct Bishops with them. So was the Schism in
Antioch betwixt the Meletianists and the Paulianists settled, that both should
be Bishops together, and all should obey him that survived; to this they all
agreed, confirming it by Oath. Yet Flavianus, one of Miletus his disciples,
after his death, got himself chosen Bishop, but was in that condemned by all.

It is true, that the Novatians in diverse Sees had distinct Bishops, but these
were Schismatics. Yet in the beginning of Christianity, it would appear that
there were more Bishops in one place: for Tertullian and Epiphanius assert,
that Clemens was ordained Bishop of Rome by S. Peter. And yet all reckon Linus
to have succeeded him. So also Evodius is generally reckoned to be the first
Bishop of Antioch; thus Eusebius, Origin and Jerome. Yet Chrysostom and
Theodoret say, that Ignatius was ordained there by S. Peter. If there be any
authority in Clemens his Constitutions, they offer a clear account of this,
that Evodius was appointed Bishop of the Circumcision, and Ignatius Bishop of
the Uncircumcision; and that after Evodius's death, both Churches grew in one.
The same also is applied to the difference about Linus, and Clemens by others,
as if Linus had been Bishop of the Circumcision, and Clemens of the
Uncircumcision; and that after Cletus's death they all grew in one, and
submitted to Clemens. However, it is clear that in every Church there was but
one Bishop: and accordingly was decreed, Conc. Nic. Can. 8. (...). By which
style we see they guarded against the disorder of two Bishops in a City, as a
thing undoubtedly irregular, which has been accounted so before that time: so
that this of one Bishop in a City, is not to be accounted an act of that
Council; but a reference to some former act, or at least an universally
received practice. Yet the first succession of the Bishops of Rome, tho always
perplexed, is much more so, from the most learned Vossius (his Observations in
his Letter to Rivet, subjoined to Doctor Pearson's Vindiciae of Ignatius his
Epistles:) who from all the Manuscripts of Damasus his lives of the Popes,
informs us, that S. Peter did ordain both Linus and Cletus Bishops of Rome: and
after some enquiry into the matter, he concludes, that at first there were
three Bishops in Rome at once, Linus, Cletus, Anencletus. In the next
Succession, he places Cletus, Anencletus and Clemens; but Anencletus surviving
both the other, sat alone at Rome: after whom there was but one Bishop there.
Yet I know not if Damasus ought to have such authority, that upon his testimony
we are bound to believe a thing so different from the accounts given by elder
and more unquestioned Writers.

All ambitus was condemned in Bishops; but it seems that in Nazianzen's time it
was too common: For he in his Apologetick regrates how some (...), tanquam non
virtutis exemplum, sed victus parandi occasionem and subsidium hunc ordinem
esse judicantes: ac non munus referendis rationibus obnoxium, sed imperium ab
omni censura immune. And a little after: Prius fere quam primam comam
abjecetimus, puerilique more balbutire desierimus. -- Si duo aut tria pia verba
didicerimus, eaque non ex lectione, sed ex sola auditione bausta, ant Davidi
paulum operae dederimus, aut pallium site contraxerimus, aut zona tenus
philosophati fuerimus, pietatis quandam speciem nobis illinentes, o
praefecturam! o elatum animum! Justinian. Constable. Nov. 137. cap. 1. complains,
that absque examinatione, atque honestatis vitae testimonio ordinantur
Episcopi, Presbyteri, and Diaconi, etc. And there diverse places out of
Nazianzen's Apologetick are cited, to show that Ordination should be gone about
cum omni diligentia atque rigore, Cad. de Epis. and Cler. leg. 31. Tantum ab
ambitu debet esse sepositus, ut quaeratur cogendus, rogatus recedat, invitatus
effugiat, sola sibi suffragetur necessitas excusandi. Profecto enim est.
indignus Sacerdotio, nisi fuerit invitatus, invitus.

Chrysostom in his third Book de Sacerdotio, cap. 10. among the qualifications
of a Bishop, reckons for a chief one (...). Nam si ad eum principatum
adipiscendum vehementi animi affectu rapietur, eo adepto impotentiorem sane
suae ambitionis flammam incendet: ac vi tandem captus, ut sibi adeptum honorem
stabiliat, nulli non peccato serviet: seu adulandum, seu servile quidpiam atque
indignum sustinendum, seu res magno pecuniae sumptu tentanda: nam quod nonnulli
caedibus Ecclesias compleverint, contaminarintque tum ejus honoris gratia
depugnantes, civitates aliquot funditus everterunt dicere hic praetermitto, ne
quibusdam videar ea in medium afferre quae fide majora sunt. And to preoccupy
the objection from 1 Timothy.1.3. he adds, (...). And among other advantages of one
who wants this too forward desire, he reckons this (...). And with a great deal
of ingenuity, he confesses how strong that unlawful desire was in himself,
which frighted him from entering in holy Orders.

How far Nazianzen was from all ambitus, the whole tract of his life does fully
discover. He was no sooner ordained a Presbyter, than he with his friend
Basile, at that time likewise ordained, fled to Pontus, where they lived a
great while, purifying their souls in the exercise of prayer and mortification.
After which they returned home. Nazianzen out of compassion to his Father who
pressed his return, and Basile out of zeal to Religion, and the Church then out
of zeal to Religion, and the Church then overrun with Arrians; S. Basile by
the means of old Nazianzen, was chosen and ordained Biship of Cesarea, and he
ordained Nazianzen Bishop of Sasime: but he, what through his love of
retirement, what because Sasime being a stage of the Waggoners, was full of
stirs and disorders, immediately left that place, in which he was set against
his heart. And some say that he never ordained any in it, nor consecrated the
Eucharist while he was there: neither could ever his Father obtain of him to
return to it. And when his Father dealt earnestly with him, not without
threatening of imprecations, that he would accept the charge of Nazianzen in his
old age, he with great aversion yielded to his entreaty, declaring he would
stay no longer there than his Father lived. During which time, he managed that
See with a great deal of success and applause: but after his Father died, which
was in the hundred year of his age, he continued a little longer there, till
his Mother who survived her Husband sometime, died also. And then he retired to
a House of holy Virgins in Seleucia, that in his absence they might choose
another Bishop; but returning thither a little after, he found they had chosen
none; yet he continued stiff as an Oak, and neither prayers nor tears could
prevail with him. Afterward Constantinople was in great disorder through the
Heresies of was in great disorder through the Heresies of Apollinaris and
Macedonius lately sprung up, beside the Arrian, which was there before: and he
being inwardly called of God to go thither, and prompted by his Friend Basile,
and invited by many Bishops, and honorable Citizens, went and labored among
them: not behaving himself as their Bishop, but as a temporary Overseer. And
though all the Churches were then possessed by the Heretics, none remaining
for the Orthodox, save only Anastasia; yet through his labors the face of
affairs was quickly altered in Constantinople. When Theodosius came to
Constantinople, he possessed him of the great Church: and all the people
desired that he might be enthroned, the Emperor concurring with them in that:
but he declined it: And though the Emperor took great pleasure in him, yet he
went seldom to the Palace. Then was the second General Council called to
Constantinople, and he was by the authority of Miletus Bishop of Antioch (of
whom we made mention before) confirmed in the Bishopric of Constantinople by
the Council. But after this, there arose some contention by Timotheus Bishop of
Alexandria, who came later to the Council, and alleged upon the prerogative of
his See, that that matter should not have been decided without him. Upon this,
hot and sharp contentions arose among the Bishops, not so much out of any
displeasure they had at Nazianzen, as out of their mutual jealousies, though he
that writes his life, faith, that this was occasioned by Miletus his death. But
therein he was mistaken; for Miletus outlived not only this action, and gave
the lift to Theodosius of those who were designed to succeed him ( Sozom. lib.
7. cap. 8.) but he also outlived the Council, and subscribed its acts, and
died a little after that in Constantinople. Upon this contention, Nazianzen
finding many of those who had before established him, beginning to resile, told
them how at first he had refused that Government, tho the Church there had been
by his labors and pains settled, and enlarged; but for that he expected his
reward from GOD: yet it seemed strange to him, that after he had been forced to
accept of it, out of his love to the Flock, and pressed to it with their united
suffrages, they should now think of undoing what themselves had done. This he
said, not that he desired Riches, or the nobleness of that Seat, and to be
called Bishop of the Imperial City: But he confessed, the loss of his Children
could not but affect him: besides, he feared they might seem to proceed out of
envy or lenitv. However, if they desired it, (...). -- Mihi quidem solitudo and
olim chara fuit and nunc eft: (...). Whereupon he went out, and retired from
the house wherein he dwelt, to one more secret. But many of the people flocked
about him, and with tears besought him to have compassion on them: yet he
finding the dissension about him growing hotter among the Bishops, went again
to the Council, and charged them by the holy Trinity, that they would compose
their differences peaceably, adding: But if I seem the occasion of any
dissension among you, I am not more worthy than the Prophet Jonas: throw me in
the sea, and these raging billows shall quickly be calmed, since I shall choose
any thing you please, so if I be innocent, for drawing you to agreement on my
account. (...). After which he went to the Emperor, and with great earnestness
begged his permission to retire: which having obtained, he called the Clergy
and people together, and with many tears took leave of them, charging them to
continue steadfast in the faith. This being done, he retired to Arianze, a
Village of Cappadocia, which belonged to him by inheritance, and continued in
his retirement, giving himself to his Poetry, till he died in an old age.

That which next occurs to be considered is, in what places Bishoprics were
founded, and Bishops settled. We find in all Cities where the Gospel was
planted, and Churches constituted, that Bishops were also ordained. Among the
Jews, where ever there were an hundred and twenty of them together, there did
they erect a Synagogue. Compare with this Acts I. 15. where the number of those
that constituted the first Christian Church, is the same. So it is like where
ever there was a competent number of Christians together, that a Church was
there settled.

Yet in some Villages there were Churches and Bishops; so there was a Bishop in
Bethany: And S. Paul tells of the Church of Cenchrea, which was the port of
Corinth. It is true, some think that the Church of Corinth met there. So these
of Philippi went out of the City by a River side to prayer, Acts 16.13. But we
find Acts 18. that there was a Synagogue in Corinth, and that S. Paul stayed in
the House of Justus, near the Synagogue: and therefore there is no reason to
think that the Christians should have had their meeting without the City, since
there was no persecution then stirring: and neither in the Acts, nor in any of
the Epistles, is there mention made of their going out to Cenchrea. Therefore
it is probable that the Church of Cenchrea was distinct from Corinth: and since
they had Phebe for their Deaconness, it is not to be doubted but they had both
Bishops and Deacons.

From the several Cities the Gospel was dilated and propagated to the places
round about. But in some Countries we find the Bishoprics very thick set. They
were pretty throng in Africa, for at a Conference which Augustine and the
Bishops of that Province had with the Donarists, there were of Bishops two
hundred eighty six present, and one hundred and twenty absent, and sixty Sees
were then vacant, which make in all four hundred sixty and six: There were also
two hundred seventy nine of the Donarists Bishops. Sozom. lib. 7. hist. cap.
19. speaking how differently constituted some Churches were, he tells how in
Scythia, though there were many Cities, yet there was but one Bishop. But in
other Nations there were Bishops even in their Villages, as he knew to be among
the Arabians and Cyprians. Theodoret tells, that there were eight hundred
Parishes within his Diocese, Epist. 113. But it is to be observed, that in
those places where the Gospel was latest of planting, the Bishoprics are
fewer, and consequently larger. It is reported that in the vast tract of the
Abyssin Churches, there is one only Bishop at Abuna. Balsamon on the 57. Canon
of Laodicea tells, that at that time in some Churches of the East, it was
neither safe nor expedient for them to have Bishops: and they were supplied by
Visiters, sent them from other Bishops, so that they had no Bishops of their
own: which was occasioned both by their poverty, and the smalness of their
number, yet they were under the care and charge of other Bishops. Some Churches
lay long vacant and without Bishops. In Carthage, when Hunnerick invaded them,
they wanted a Bishop twenty four years: and he offering them one, providing the
Arrians might have the free exercise of their Religion among them, they
answered, that upon these terms Ecclesia non delectatur Episcopum habere, so
Victor lib. 2. pers. V and. When Miletus was driven out of Antioch, for ten
years together Diodorus and Flavian two Presbyters ruled that Church, Theodor.
lib. 4. hist. cap. 23. Some places are alleged to have had the Gospel long
before there were Bishops among them, and particularly Scotland, for Major lib.
2. cap. 2. faith, per Sacerdotes and Monachos, sine Episcopis Scoti in fide
eruditi erant. The time of our conversion to the faith is reckoned to have been
An. 263. And Palladius reckoned the first Bishop came not for an hundred and
seventy years after that in the year 430. Fordown in his Chronicle, lib. 3.
cap. 8. faith, Ante Palladii adventum habebant Scoti fidei Doctores, and
Sacramentorum administratores, Presbyteros solum, vel Monachos ritum sequentes
Ecclesiae primitivae. These were called Culdes, though in some Bulls they be
Celli Dei. Boethius thinks it is Culdei, quasi cultores Dei: but others judge
that it is from the Cells wherein they lived, which were held in great esteem,
and after their death were turned into Churches: and from thence they think the
name Kill is to this day so much used, as Kilpatrick, Kilmarnock, Kilbride, etc.
Of these Boethius says, That by common suffrage, they made choice of one of
their number to be chief over them, who was called Episcopus Scotorum: so lib.
6. fol. 92. This is contradicted by Buchanan lib. 5. who faith, That before
Palladius his coming, Ecclesiae absque Episcopis per Monachos regebantur,
minori quidem cum fastu, and externa pompa, sed majore simplicitate and
sanctimonia. But all our old Manuscripts being gone, it will not be easy to
come to a decision about this matter. The Gothic Churches are said to have
been planted and constituted before Ulphilas their first Bishop came unto them
for seventy years together.

In the beginning the Bishop's whole charge was called (...), and by the strain
of Ignatius his Epistles, especially that to Smyrna, it would appear, that
there was but one Church, at least but one place, where there was one Altar and
Communion in each of these Parishes: for he says, There was one Bishop, one
Church, and one Altar. And Cyprian phraseth the erecting of a Schism, by the
erecting of an Altar against an Altar: which seems to import, that there was
but one Altar in the Bishops Parish. While the number of the Christians was but
small, they might well have all met together in one place; but as they
increased, and the persecutions grew upon them, they must have had several
meeting places, and consequently several persons to preside and officiate in
these meetings. But Damasus and Platina reckon, that Evaristus who was Bishop
of Rome about the 106 year, was the first, qui titulos in urbe Roma Presbyteris
divisit: so that before his time, the Presbyters have all officiated here or
there indefinitely according to the Bishop's appointment. And Evaristus seems
to have given them assignments to particular places. As for the meaning of the
word Tituli, it is to be considered that the Christians met about the places
where the Martyrs were buried, and so their meeting places were called Memoriae
Martyrum. Now upon Burials some title or inscription being usually made, it
followed that the place of the burial or Gravestone was called Titulus among
the Latins: so Genesis 35.20. Jacob's erecting a Pillar upon Rachels Grave, is
rendered by the vulgar Latin, erexit titulum super sepulchrum: and Genesis 28.18 of
Jacob's stone at Bethel, it is said, erexit in titulum, and 2 Samuel 18. Absalom
his Pillar is called Titulus: Hence it is that Evaristus his dividing of the
titles is to be understood of his giving particular assignments of several
Churches to Presbyters.

The next thing to be examined is, what were the actions appropriated to
Bishops. If we believe Jerome, the Bishop did nothing which Presbyters might
not do, except Ordination: By which we see, that he judged Ordination could not
be done without the Bishop. Athanasius in his second Apology inserts among
other papers, an Epistle of the Synod of Alexandria, mentioning that Ischyras
his Ordination by Coluthus being questioned and examined, and it being found
that Coluthus had never been ordained a Bishop, but that he had falsely
pretended to that Title and Character, all the Ordinations made by him were
annulled: and Ischyras with such others who were so ordained, were declared
Laics. Which is an undeniable instance, that at that time, it was the general
sense of the Church, that none but a Bishop might ordain. Neither in any Author
do we meet with an instance of any that were ordained by Presbyters, save one,
that Cassian, who was about the 500. year, Collat. 4. cap. 1. gives of one
Paphnutius a Presbyter in the Desert of Scetis, who delighting in the Virtues
of one Daniel, ut quem vitae meritis and gratia sibi parem noverat, coaequare
sibi etiam Sacerdotii ordine festinaret. -- Eum Presbyterii honori provexit.
But what a few devout solitaries might do in a desert and undiscerned corner,
will be no precedent for a constituted Church: else we may allow of Baptism
with sand, for that was once done in a Desert.

But Socrates had another Opinion of this, who lib. 1. cap. 27. tells, that
Ischyras did a thin (...). And in the third Council of Toledo, set down by
Gratian, did. 23. cap. 14. this Canon was made. Quorundam Clericorum dum unus
ad Presbyterium duo ad Levitarum ministerium sacrarentur, Episcopus oculorum
dolor detentus, fertur manum suam super eos tantum imposuisse, and Presbyter
quidam illis contra Ecclesiasticum ordinem benedictionem dedisse, sed quia jam
ille examini divino relictus, humano judicio accusari non potest, ii qui
supersunt gradum Sacerdotii vel Levitici ordinis quem perverse adepti sunt,
amittant. By which we see how far they were from allowing of any Ordination,
wherein a Bishop had not intervened.

It is further clear, that the Bishop was looked upon as the Pastor of the
Flock, who was (...), and that Presbyters or Deacons could finish nothing,
(...), and that he was to give an account of the Souls of the people: and
indeed in these days a Bishopric was onus more than honos. The common treasury
of the Church was also committed to his care, so infra Can. 4. And as the
Offerings of the faithful were laid down at the Apostles feet, Acts 4.3.4. so
were the collectae, and the other goods of the Church laid in their hands. For
all the goods os the Church and collectae, were at first deposited in the
Bishop's hand, and distributed by him, tho afterward there was an OEconomus
appointed for that work.

Ignatius Epist. ad Magnes. tells, that they were to do nothing without their
Bishop. And ad Smyrn. (...). And 5. Canon of Laodicea, they might no nothing,
(...). Idem. Can. 19. Arel. 1.

As for Baptism, Tertull, de bapt. says, Dandi quidem jus habet summus
Sacerdos, qui and Episcopus, dehinc Presbyteri and Diaconi, non quidem sine
Episcopi authoritate, propter Ecclesiae bonum, quo salvo salva pax est,
alioquin laicis etiam jus est. Firmilian ad Cyprianum, which is reckoned the
75. among Cyprian his Epistles, faith, Majores natu (and by what is a little
after, where he calls these Bishops, it is clear he means not of Presbyters) in
Ecclesia praesidebant, and baptizandi, and manum imponendi, and ordinandi,
potestatem possidebant. Pacian. sermon. de Bapt. Lavacro peccata purgantur,
Chrismate spiritus super funditur, utraque, purgantur, Chrismate spiritus super
funditur, utraque, vero is it a manu and ore Antistitis impetramus. And even
Jerome himself contra Luciferianos, says, Sine Chrismate and Episcopi
jussione, neque Presbyter, neque Diaconus jus habent baptizandi. By all which
we see, that Baptism was chiefly the Bishop's work, and that the Presbyters did
not baptize without his order.

As for the Eucharist, Ignatius ad Smyrnenses, says, (...) And a little after
(...). Justin in his second Apol. giving the account of their Eucharist and
whole service, reckons all to have been managed by the (...). And Tert. de cor.
mil. Non de aliorum quam praesidentium manibus sumimus. But all this is very
unjustly applied by such as would pretend to the whole Ecclesiastical
Authority; but would exempt themselves from the great labor of it. For it is
clear, that according to the primitive constitution, the Bishop was the
immediate Pastor of the flock, and the Presbyters were assumed by him in partem
sollicitudinis: the greatest of the load still lying on his own shoulders, and
this might have been some way managed by him, where the Dioceses were smaller.
But the enlarging of the Dioceses has wholly altered the figure of Primitive
Episcopacy. All that the Bishop can now do being to try entrants well, and
oversee these that are in charge; which ought not to be performed either by
these overly visitations in Synods, or by a pompous procession through the
Diocese, but by a strict and severe Examen both of their lives and labors,
performed in such visitations, as are suitable to the simplicity and humility of
the Gospel.

As for Preaching, it was ordinary at first, even for persons not ordained to
preach, not to mention that of the Corinthians, where every one brought his
Psalm, his interpretation, or his doctrine to the Meeting, which may be called
Extraordinary; under which notion, most reject everything in Scripture that
does not please them. But this continued longer in the Church. Eusebius. lib. 6.
hist. cap. 20. tells, that Origin before he had gotten the (...) (mark how this
word stands here for the order and degree of Presbyterat) was invited earnestly
by the Bishops not only to dispute, but also to expound the Scriptures, (...)
In the public assembly of the Church. For the vindication whereof Alexander
Bishop of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus Bishop of Cesarea, wrote to Demetrius
Bishop of Alexandria thus: Quod autem in literis adjunxeris nunquam antea
auditum, neque jam usurpatum, ut Laici praesentibus Episcopis disputarent,
scripturasve exponerent in eo mihi, nescio quo modo, videris falsa dixisse: Nam
ubi idonei and habiles reperiuntur, qui fratribus in verbo DEI adjumento sint,
a sanctis Episcopis rogantur, ut populum DEI instituant in verbo, sicut
Larandis Euelpis a Neone, Iconii Paulinus a Celso, and apud Synadas Theodorus
ab Attico, qui omnes beati ac pii fratres crant: ac verisimile est, quamvis
nobis obscurum and minime cognitum sit, illud idem in aliis locis fieri. Tert.
in his Apologetick cap. 39. tells, that Post aquam manualem and lumina,
quisquis ut de Scripturis sanctis, vel de proprio ingenio potest provocatur in
medium DEO hymnum canere. And of this remember what was before cited from
Hilary the Deacon on the 4th of the Ephesians. Sozom. lib 7. cap. 19. says,
that at Rome neither the Bishop, nor any other taught in the Church: but that
in Alexandria the Bishop alone taught, that not being allowed to any Presbyter,
after Arrius broached his Heresy.

It remains only to be enquired who was the proper Minister of Confirmation.
But because this whole matter of Confirmation comes not in so properly upon any
of the other Canons, I shall therefore examine all that relates to it here, and
shall consider upon what grounds it was used, how early it was practiced, with
what Rites it was administered, who was the proper Minister of it, and for what
end it was introduced, and continued in the Church.

From Acts 8.15. and 19.6. all the Fathers have pleaded for this Rite: for
there we have the laying on of hands practiced, as a Rite clearly distinct from
Baptism: and tho we find the holy Ghost conferred by that imposition of hands,
thence it will not follow that that action was extraordinary, and so to have
expired with the Apostles: For we find extraordinary effects following upon
their ordinary actions, such as Ordination, Excommunication, and c. And yet
none will plead that these actions are now to be disused, because they are no
more attended with such effects. But Heb. 6.2. speaks most plainly for this,
where among the foundations of Religion, the laying on of hands is joined with
Baptisms: and this seemed so clear to Calvin commenting on that place, that he
judges this to have been a Rite derived from the Apostles.

The constant Ceremony of it was that which is often mentioned in Scripture,
Imposition of hands. But besides this, they began very early to use a Chrisma
of consecrated Oil, with which they anointed them in the brow. This it seems
has been taken from the mention that we find made of anointing, 2 Cor. 1.21.
where some think the whole Rites of Confirmation are set down in these words:
Now he which stablisheth us with you in CHRIST, and has anointed us, is GOD,
who has also sealed us, and given us the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts.
And 1 Ioh. 2.27. we are told of an unction from above, and a holy anointing.
But that in these words no material anointing, but the extraordinary conferring
of the holy Ghost is meant, seems clear from the Text: and so Christ is said to
be anointed with the Oil of joy above his fellows, tho we hear nothing of a
material anointing. It is true, James 5.14. there is clear mention made of an
anointing with Oil, in which certainly there is no Metaphor, but that relates
nothing to our purpose. However, it is like from these places it was that the
Ancients used the Chrisma, for we find that this was very early practiced in
the Church.

Theophilus Alexandrinus, who flourished about the year 170. lib. 1. ad
Antolycum, says, we are for this reason called Christians, (...). Et quis
mortalium est, qui vel ingreditur in hanc vitam, vel certat in arena and non
oleo inungitur. Iren. lib. 1. cap. 18. tells, That Valentinus used both
Confirmation and anointing in the receiving of his Disciples, and tells, that
he used a mixture of Water and Oil with Opobalsamum. And this seems to imply
that to have been the practice of the Church; for he tells, that Valentinus had
adapted and transformed the Rites of the Church into his Character. Tert. de
bapt. cap. 7. makes mention of the Unctio benedicta, qua egressi de lavacro
perunguntur. And cap. 8. dehinc manus imponitur per benedictionem advocans and
invitans Spiritum Sanctum, Idem de refur. carnis, cap. 8. says, Caro abluitur
-- caro ungitur -- caro signatur, caro manus impositione adumbratur, ut and
anima spiritu illuminetur. And lib. de praescript. cap. 36. Aqua signat,
Spiritu sancto vestit, Eucharistia pascit. Yet Tert. de Cor. Mil. cap. 3. when
he recounts these Ceremonies which he judged to have been of Apostolical
tradition, does not reckon this for one.

Cyprian Epist. 73. ad Iubaianum, speaking of S. Peter and S. John their laying
on of hands at Samaria, shows it was no new Baptism: Sed tantummodo quod deerat
id a Petro and Ioanne factum esse, ut oratione pro iis habita, ac manu
imposita, invocaretur and infunderetur super eos Spiritus sanctus: quod nunc
quoque apud nos geritur, ut qui in Ecclesia baptizantur praepositis Ecclesiae
offerantur, and per nostram orationem and manus impositionem Spiritum sanctum
consequantur, and signaculo divino consummentur. And Epist. 70. after he has
spoken of Baptism, he adds, Ungi quoque necesse est cum qui baptizatus sit, ut
accepto Chrismate id est unctione esse unctus Dei, and habere in se gratiam
Christ's possit. And he tell, That both the Eucharist and oleum unde unguntur
babtizati, in altari sanctificatur. Cyril of Jerusalem his third Mistagogical
Catechism is, (...), wherein he describes the anointing we have from GOD; and
the consecrated Oil, which was the rite expressive of the former, comparing it
to the Dove that descended from Christ, and was his spiritual Anointing. Which
is also done by Optatus, lib. 4. cont. Paramenianum, and the Areopagite de
Eccles. hier. cap. 4. where he at length describes the rites used in the
consecrating of the Chrisma. Yet this Chrisma was not so peculiar to
Confirmation, but that it was also used upon other occasions. Nazianzen tells
(as is above cited) that such as were ordained, were also anointed. It was also
used in Baptism, so both Tertullian, Cyprian, and Jerome, and the 48. Canon of
the Council of Laodicea decrees, that the Illuminati post baptisma should be
anointed with this unguentum coeleste. But by the I. Can. of the Council of
Orange, it was decreed, That he who was not anointed at Baptism, should receive
the Chrisma at his Confirmation: by which it seems they did not repeat the
ceremony of Anointing, to such as had received it at Baptism.

Likewise these who returned from Heresy, by the 7. Can. of the second General
Council were to be anointed and front, and oculis, and naribus, and ore, and
auribus, and signantes eos dicimus donum Spiritus sancti. And like unto this is
the 7. Can. of Laodicea. And Author Resp. ad Orthod. that goes under Iustin's
name, ad quoest. 14. Cum hoereticus ad veram fidem accedit, corrigitur lapsus
falsae opinionis, sententiae, mutatione: baptismi, sancti Chrismatis unctione;
ordinationis, manum impositione: nihilque quod prius erat, indissolutum manet.
Now by this (...), which he mentions, is not meant a new Ordination, which was
not given to these that returned from Heresy. For as appears by the Council of
Nice, the Orders which they got among the Heretics were held valid, and not to
be renewed: but this is meant of the Ceremony ordinarily given in the
absolution and receiving of Penitents. August. cont. Donatist. lib. 5. cap. 23.
confesses, that the Baptism of Heretics was valid, but denies that they
conferred the holy Ghost, and therefore imposition of hands was given to those
who returned from Heresy.

Besides this Chrisma, they used also in Confirmation the sign of the Cross, of
which that phrase of Tertullian is to be understood caro signatur. And Aug. in
Psalm.. 141. speaking of the Sacraments, says, Quaedam sicut nostri ore
accipimus, quaedam per totum corpus. And a little after, tegat frontem crux
Domini, which words are to be understood of the Eucharist, Baptism and
Confirmation. He calls this also Sacramentum Chrismatis, lib. 2. cont.
Petilianum, cap. 104. applying to it that of the Ointment on Aaron's beard,
Psalm 133. But elsewhere he calls that Bread which was blessed, not with the
Eucharistical and Sacramental benediction, but with that lower degree, called
Eulogy, which might be given to the Catechumens, Sacramentum Catechumenorum;
using this term largely, as he says Epist. ad Marcellinum. Signum cum ad rem
sacram applicatur, Sacramentum appellatur. Of this sign of the Cross, is
likewise to be understood that of the Signaculum Dominicum, mentioned by
Cyprian, Ep. 73.

The next thing to be enquired after is, who was the Minister of Confirmation?
In the Western Church the Bishop did only administer it. So Jerome adv.
Luciferianos, brings in the Luciferian in the Dialogue. An nescis Ecclesiarum
hunc morem esse, ut baptizatis postea manus imponantur, and ita invocetur
Spiritus sanctus? Exigis ubi scriptum est? In Actibus Apostolorum. Etiamsi
Scripturae authoritas non subesset, totius orbis hanc in partem consensus,
instar praecepti obtineret. Then he makes the Orthodox to answer: Non equidem
abnuo hanc esse Ecclesiarum consuetudinem, ut ad eos qui long in minoribus
urbibus per Presbyteros and Diaconos baptizati sunt, Episcopus ad invocationem
Sancti Spiritus excurrat. And asking why the holy Ghost was not given, but by
the Bishop? He answers, That was potius ad honorem Sacordotii, quam ad legis
necessitatem. Aug. de Trin. lib. 15. cap. 16. speaking of the Apostles
conferring of the holy Ghost, says, Orabant, ut veniret Spiritus sanctus in
eos quibus manum imponebant, non enim ipsi cum dabant, quem morem in suis
praepositis etiam nunc servat Ecclesia.

But in the Greek Church, Presbyters might confirm: so the above cited Hilary
on the 4 of the Ephesians. Denique apud AEgyptum Presbyteri consignant, ubi
praesens non sit Episcopus: and lib. quaest. in Vet. and Nov. Test. called
Augustin's, but believed to be the same Hilary's, quaest. 101. faith, In
Alexandria, and per totam AEgyptum si desit Episcopus consecrat Presbyter. By
the comparing of which places, it appears, that it is the same thing which is
expressed by these various names of Consecration and Consignation: but what is
meant by it, is not agreed to. It is absurd to think that Ordination can be
meant by it. For that decision of the case of Ischyras shows that in Alexandria
they were far from allowing Presbyters to ordain without a Bishop. Some think
that because Consecration is more usually applied to the blessing of the
Eucharist; therefore both it and Consignation, is so to be understood here. And
whereas it is objected that in the cited places some custom peculiar to
Alexandria seems to be mentioned; but it was universally allowed in the
Bishop's absence for the Presbyter to consecrate the Eucharist: therefore some
other thing must be there meant. It is answered to this, that in other places
Presbyters might not consecrate sine Episcopi jussione; according to what was
cited out of Ignatius; and that the custom in Alexandria has been, that the
Presbyters without any such express Mandate, might have consecrated in the
Bishop's absence. But the general practice of the Greek Church inclines me to
think, that Confirmation is meant by the cited places, which was usually
phrased by Consignation (...), or (...), only the consecrating af the Chrisma
and Oil, was peculiar to the Bishop, as his work; so that the Greeks seem to
have made a difference betwixt the hallowing and applying of the Chrisma. The
first could only be done by the Bishop, but the second was not denied to the
Presbyters. Even as in the Eucharist none might consecrate but Presbyters,, yet
Laics of both Sexes, in case of necessity, might have carried and given it to
the absents.

Of Confirmation administered by Presbyters, some instances do meet us in the
Latin Church. The first Canon of the Council of Orange, permits the use of the
Chrisma to the Priests, who are appointed to carry some of it always about with
them. Conc. Epaunense, cap. 16. permits the Presbyters to give the Chrisma to
such Heretics as were converted on their death beds. And the second Canon of
the Council of Orange is: Haereticos in mortis discrimine positos, si Catholici
esse desiderant, si Episcopus desit, a Presbyteris cum Chrismate and
benedictione consignari placuit. And the Council of Toledo permits a Presbyter
to do it in the Bishops absence, or in his presence, if commanded by him. But
both East and West, it was agreed, that the Chrisma could not be sanctified by
Presbyters. Conc. Romanum sub Sylv. cap. 5. decreed it. But as that Council is
much suspected, so the reason there given is a very poor one. Quia Christus
dicitur a Chrismate. But Canon sixth, Cod. Afric. is more authentic, ut
Chrisma a Presbyteris non fiat. And Synod Tolet. Can. 20. Quamvis pene ubique
custodiatur ut absque Episcopo nemo Chrisma conficiat, tamen quia in aliquibus
locis vel Provinciis dicuntur Presbyteri Chrisma consicere, placuit ex hoc die
nullum alium nisi Episcopum hoc facere. And the Areopagite, as he at length
describes it, and descants upon it, so he appropriates it to the Bishop.

Gregory the Great, lib. 3. Epist. 9. writing to Ianuarius Bishop of Caralis in
Sardinia, discharges Presbyters to anoint with the Chrisma on the brow,
appointing that to be reserved to the Bishop: for Sardinia, and the other
Isles, had observed the customs of the Greek Church: but Gregory Epist. 26.
writing to that same person, tells, that he heard how some were scandalized,
because he had discharged Presbyters the use of the Chrisma, which he therefore
takes off in these words: Et nos quidem secundum usum veterem Ecclesiae nostrae
fecimus, sed si omnino hac de re aliqui contristantur, ubi Episcopi desunt, ut
Presbyteri etiam in frontibus baptizatos Chrismate tangere debeant concedimus.

But 200 years afterward, Nicolaus first Bishop of Rome, observed not that
moderation. For the Bulgarians who were converted by the Greeks, receiving the
Chrisma from the Presbyters according to the custom of that Church; Nicolaus
sent Bishops to them, and appointed such as had been confirmed by Presbyters to
be confirmed again by Bishops. But upon this, Photius, who was then Patriarch
of Constantinople, called a Synod, it which it was decreed, that the Chrisma
being hallowed by a Bishop, might be administered by Presbyters. And Photius in
his Epistle contends, that a Presbyter might, unguento signare, sanctificare,
consummatos angere, and expiatorium donum baptizato consummare, as well as he
might either baptize or offer at the Altar. But Nicolaus impudently denied,
that this had ever been permitted, and upon this account it is, that many of
the Latins have charged the Greek Church, as if there were no Confirmation used
among them. But this challenge is denied and rejected by the Greeks. And so
much of the Minister of Confirmation.

It is in the last place to be considered, what value was set upon this action,
and for what ends it was practiced in the Church. We have already heard
Augustine call it a Sacrament. It is likewise so termed by Cyprian Epist. 72.
and in the Records of the Council held by him for the rebaptizing of Heretics.
But as was marked before, they took that term largely for an holy rite or
symbolical action: Whereas a Sacrament strictly taken is a holy rite instituted
by Christ for a federal stipulation, by which the promises of the Gospel are
sealed, and grace conveyed to the worthy receivers. Now in this sense it is
visible, that Confirmation is no Sacrament: it neither being instituted by
Christ, nor having any grace appended to it. Neither is it so totally distinct
from Baptism, being but a renovation of the baptismal Vow, joined with Prayer,
and a solemn benediction.

Some have thought, that Confirmation was only used by the Ancients, as an
appendix, or a consummatory rite of Baptism, which mistake is founded upon
this, that some of the riper age being baptized, got this imposition of hands
after Baptism. For the clearing of which some things must be considered: First,
The Ancients used an imposition of hands before Baptism, to such as were
admitted to be Catechumens, who were in the Christian Church, like the
Proselytes of the gates among the Jews: for they having renounced Idolatry,
were admitted to some parts of the Christian worship, and instructed in the
faith for some time, before they could commence Christians. And an imposition
of hands was used, when any were admitted to this Order: so it is express in
the 39. Canon of Elib. and in the Greek Euchology there is a prayer (...).
Where it is said, Inflat signat and manum imponit. And in the Liturgy called S.
Marks, Quotquot ad Baptismum dispositi estis accedite, ac manus impositionem
and benedictionem accipite, them manum imponit Sacerdos. And Eusebius. de vitae
Constable. lib. 4. faith of Constantine; Confessione facta precum particeps factus
est per impositionem manuum. The Areopagite makes mention also of this as done
twice before Baptism; and Aug. de mer. and remis. pec. lib. 2. cap. 26.
Catechumenum secundum quendam modum suum per signum and orationem manuum
impositionis puto sanctificari. And Cyprian ad Steph. makes Baptism a
superaddition to that imposition of hands: which he draws from the example of
Cornelius, upon whom the Spirit falling first, he was afterward baptized. It is
true, he is there speaking of such as turned from Heresy, who he judged should
be rebaptized, after an imposition of hands first given them.

But as the 39. Canon of Elib. speaks of an imposition of hands given before
Baptism, so the 7. Canon of that same Council, mentions another given after it.
Si quis Diaconus regens plebem sine Episcopo, vel Presbyteris, aliquos
baptizaverit, eos per benedictionem perficere debebit. And by the 33. Canon of
that Council, any Laick that was baptized, and was no Bigamus, might baptize a
Catechumen if sick. Ita ut si supervixerit, ad Episcopum cum perducat, ut per
manus impositionem perficere (or as others read it perfici) possit. If the
first be the reading, it will relate to Confirmation; if the second, it will
relate to the completing of the Baptism.

The 48. Canon of Laodicea is, Illuminatos post baptisma unguento caelesti
liniendos esse. To infer from that, that Confirmation was immediately to follow
upon Baptism is, (...), for (...), does not imply that it was to be done
immediately after, but only that Baptism was to go before it: and we find that
same phrase in the Canons immediately preceding this, applied to such as had
been of a great while baptized. But tho such as were of riper years had been
confirmed immediately after they received Baptism, it will no more prove that
Confirmation was an appendix of Baptism, than that the Eucharist was so
likewise, which was also given to them at the same time. So the Areopagite
tells, how such as were baptized, were carried by the Priest to the Bishop.
Ille vero unguento consecrato virum ungens sacrosanctae. Eucharistiae
participem esse pronunciat. And tho even Children were confirmed immediately
after Baptism, that does not prove the one but a rite of the other: for we find
that not only in the African Churches, but also in the Roman Church, the custom
of giving Children the Eucharist immediately after Baptism, continued long: for
the Ordo Romanus, held by some a work of the eleventh Century, appoints, that
Children be permitted to eat nothing after they are baptized, till they
received the Eucharist. That same practice is also mentioned by Hugo the S.
Victore, lib. 1. cap. 20. in the twelfth Century. And all the Greek Writers
assert the necessity of Childrens receiving the Eucharist, and yet none
asserted the Eucharist to be but a rite of Baptism. Cornelius tells of Novatian
(apud Eusebium, lib. 6. hist. cap. 35.) how he was baptized Clinicus, and being
recovered nec reliquorum particeps factus, quae secundum Canones Ecclesiae
obtinere debuerat, nec ab Episcopo obsignatus est. (It is true, it is in the
Greek (...), as if it were explicative of the (...), which in the former words
he said he wanted; whence some infer, that Confirmation was but one of the
Baptismal rites. But it is clear that the true reading is (...), and so
Nicephorus has read it) quo non impetrato, quomodo Spiritum sanctum obtinuisse
putandus est. Yet from the Story it appears that Confirmation was judged only
necessary ad bone esse, and not to the esse of a Christian; since
notwithstanding the want of this, Fabian Bishop of Rome ordained Novatian a
Presbyter.

The Greek Euchology shows, that such as were baptized, were after their
baptism anointed, and so to be confirmed: and it subjoyning that the Eucharist
was to be given to them, proves no more the one to be a rite of Baptism than
the other.

The whole current of the Fathers runs, that in Confirmation the holy Ghost was
conferred. August. de Bapt. cont. Donatistas, lib. 3. cap. 16. Spiritus sanctus
in sola Catholica, per manus impositionem dari dicitur, which he derives from
the Apostles, tho these extraordinary effects of speaking of Tongues, or the
like, did not follow upon it: Sed invisibiliter and latenter per vinculum
pacis, est eorum cordibus charitas divina inspirata. And concludes, Quid enim
est aliud nisi oration super hominem.

And certainly, were Confirmation restored according to the Apostolical
practice, and managed with a primitive sincerity, nothing should give more
probable hopes of a recovery of the Christian Church, out of the darkness and
deadness in which it has continued so long. It might quicken persons more
seriously to consider to what they were engaged in Baptism, when they were put
to so solemn a renovation of it. But the more denuded it were of all
unnecessary rites, such as Oil, and the like, it might be more suitable to the
Evangelical Spirit. And we see likewise from Antiquity, that there is no reason
for appropriating this action wholly, or only to the Bishop. It should not be
gone about till the person were ripe in years, and not only able by rote to
recite a Catechism, but of a fitness to receive the Eucharist immediately
after. But I shall conclude this whole matter with Calvin's words, lib. 4.
Instit. cap. 19. sect. 4. and sequentibus: where after he has laid out the
primitive practice of Confirmation, he subjoins: Haec disciplina, si body
valeret, profecto parentum quorundam ignavia acueretur, qui liberorum
institutionem, quasi rem nihil ad se pertinentem, negligunt; quam tum sine
publico dedecore omittere non possent. Major esset in populo Christiano fidei
consensus, nec tanta multorum inscitia, and ruditas, non adeo temere quidam
novis, and peregrinis dogmatibus, abriparentur; omnibus denique esset quaedam
velut methodus doctrinae Christianae.

A SUPPLEMENT ABOUT THE RURAL BISHOPS, CALLED CHOREPISCOPI.
IT has been already marked, that the extent of the Dioceses was not all of
one proportion: and generally the Villages which lay adjacent to Cities, having
received the Gospel at first from them, continued in subjection to the City, as
to their Mother Church: whereby the Bishops Parish was not limited to the City,
but did also include the adjacent Villages. The inscription of Clemens his
Epistles insinuates this: (...). By which we see, that the Churches of Rome and
Corinth were made up not only of such as inhabited the Towns, but also of such
as dwelt about them: and this is yet clearer from Ignatius his inscription of
his Epistle to the Romans; (...). Neither did they judge it fit to ordain
Bishops in smaller or lesser Cities, as appears by the Council of Sardis, Can.
6. where it is decreed, that a Bishop should not be ordained (...). Adding,
that it was not necessary that Bishops should be ordained there, lest the name
and dignity of a Bishop should be vilipended.

But before this, it was decreed in the Council of Laodicea, Can. 57. (...),
(for so reads the Manuscript of Oxford, Dionysius Exiguus, Isidore Mercator,
Hervetus, and Iustellus; and not (...), vel, as Binius) (...): who were to do
nothing without the knowledge of the Bishop of the City, whom the learned
Beverigius observes (on this Canon) to have been distinct from the Rural
Bishops; which he makes out both from the Civil Law, and a place of Gennadius,
where the Orders of Churchmen being reckoned, these circular Visitors are set
in a middle rank betwixt the Rural Bishops and Presbyters. Frequent mention is
also made of these Visitors in the Acts of the Council at Chalcedon. This
course therefore they took for these Villages to send Presbyters from the City,
who were called (...): and because the Bishop could not immediately over-see
them himself, he did therefore substitute a Vicar and Delegate who was
generally called (...). The first time that we meet with any of these, is in
the beginning of the fourth Century, in the Councils of Ancyra, Neocesarea, and
Antiochia. These differed from Presbyters, in that they got an Ordination
distinct from theirs, called by the Council of Antioch (...). They also might
have ordained Subdeacons, Lectors, and Exorcists, and given them commendatory
Letters. But they differed from Bishops in these things: First, that they were
ordained but by one Bishop, as appears by the tenth Canon of the Council of
Antioch, (...). And therefore it is true that Balsamon calls them, (...). Now
we have already seen, that a Bishop must be ordained by two Bishops at least.
Next, these (...) were ordained (...), says Zonaras. And therefore in their
subscriptions of the Councils, they only design themselves Chorepiscopi,
without mentioning the place where they served, as the Bishops do. Now Bishops
could not be ordained but with a Title to a particular charge and See. Thirdly,
their power was limited, and in many things inferior to the power of Bishops.
So Pope Leo the first, in his 88. Epist. Quamvis, cum Episcopis plurima illis
ministeriorum communis sit dispensatio, quaedam tamen Ecclesiasticis regulis
sibi prohibita norint, sicut Presbyterorum and Diaconorum consecratio. They
might in general do nothing (...), and both the Council of Ancyra:, Canon 13.
And that of Antioch, Canon 10. discharge them the ordaining of Presbyters or
Deacons. The words of the Council of Antioch are (...), which words clearly
import, that the Bishop must have intervened in the Ordination, and so are
wrong rendered by an old Latin Edition, praeter conscientiam Episcopi. As if
they had heen only limited not to ordain unless the Bishop gave warrant. And
thus these Bishops of the Villages and lesser Cities were reduced from the
degree of Bishops, to an inferior and limited Office, and were undoubtedly of
the Episcopal Order, tho their authority was much abridged.

In the Council of Neocesarea their relation to the Bishop, is compared to that
of the seventy Disciples to the Apostles, and they are called (...). And that
which is there marked as their chief work, is their care of the poor. But by
the Canon of Antioch, they might have ordained Lectors, Subdeacons, and
Exorcists. And yet Basil in his 181. Epist. says, That they might not have
ordained, even these inferior ranks, without having first advertised the
Bishop, and sent their testimonies, and the suffrages of their Election to him:
which is observed by Aristenus in his Gloss on the 13. Canon of Ancyra: and by
Mattheus Blastares in his Syntagma, cap. 31.

But Damasus, who was about the year 370. writes his whole fourth Epistle
against them, telling that he found it decreed by his Predecessors, that they
should be abolished, Prohibititam ab, hac sacra sede, quam a totius orbis
Episcopis. -- Nam (ut nobis relatum est) quidam Episcoporum, propter suam
quietem, eis plebes suas committere non formidant. And falls severely on these
Bishops, and compares them to Mercenaries and Whores, that give out their
Children to others to suckle. He proves they were not Bishops, because not
ordained by three Bishops, and descants upon the Canons of Neocesarea and
Antioch, which seem to import, as if they had the Ordination of Bishops;
adding, Cesset ergo, cesset tot vicibus damnata praesumptio. And yet Pope Leo
(as we have already cited) who was Bishop of Rome about 70. years after him,
makes mention of them. And notwithstanding all he says against them, of their
being condemned, it does not appear when or where it was so done. Express
mention is made of them in the Council of Nice, Canon 8. as of a rank distinct
from Presbyters. It being there provided, that such (...), as returned to the
unity of the Church, should continue in that same Order of the Clergy, wherein
they were before, only such of them as were Bishops might not continue Bishops
of a City, where there was already a Bishop placed: because there could not be
two Bishops in one City: but if it pleased the Bishop, they might either retain
the bare name of a Bishop, or be made Chorepiscopi, or continue among the
Presbyters.

Mention also is made of them in the 2. Canon of the general Council of
Chalcedon, which shows, that at that time they were not wholly taken away: but
the latest accounts we have of them is in France, where it seems they continued
longest. Conc. Paris. An. 829. they are cap. 27. compared to the 70 Disciples,
according to that of Neocesarea, and Bishops are appointed to see that they did
nothing beyond what was permitted to them by the Canons. The like is decreed
Conc. Meldensi, An. 845. cap. 44. And it is expressed there, that they might
neither give the holy Chrisma, nor the holy Ghost, nor confer any Order above
that of a Subdeacon, nor consecrate Churches. Conc. Metensi, Anno 888. cap. 5.
It was decreed, That Churches consecrated by them were to be again consecrated
by a Bishop, and any thing they did which was proper to a Bishop was declared
null, and they are reckoned all one with Presbyters; and here we lose sight of
them, hearing no more of them: for as they arose insensibly, so they vanished
in the like fashion. So much of them and upon the first Canon.

The SECOND CANON.
(...).

A Presbyter shall be ordained by one Bishop, so likewise a Deacon, and the
rest of the Clergy.


WE find most of the Fathers, even Jerome himself, drawing the subordination
among Churchmen from what was under the Law; and therefore Deacons were
ordinarily called Levites. But there is more ground to think, it was
immediately taken from the form of the Synagogue, tho that constitution might
have had its rise from the model of the Temple-service. I shall not here engage
in a large Examen of the first Origin and rise of the Synagogues, or of the
worship performed in them, or debate whether they began before the Captivity,
in it, or after it. Nor what ground there may be from the word Synagogue used
Psalm 74.8. to assert their early date. But certain it is, that the Temple
worship was merely typical, in which the whole people were to assist, but as a
few returns of the year. And beside this, the Law of Nature dictates, that GOD
is to be frequently and solemnly worshipped by such as acknowledge his great
Name, which will plead for an early rise to these Assemblies.

But be in that what may be, two things are certain. The one is, that
Synagogues were constitute in our Savior's time, and that there were Rulers,
and chief Rulers in these Synagogues, that in them Prayers were said, the Law
was read, expounded, and exhortations made upon it, and Discipline was used,
and such as were faulty were cast out of these Synagogues. All this is evident
from the New Testament: and much more than this can be gathered out of Jewish
writings. Now our Savior's going into these Synagogues, reading the Law, and
preaching in them, does abundantly evince, that this constitution was not
unlawful.

Another thing is as clear from the Old Testament, that there was neither
written command, nor warrant for such Assemblies; and the contrary of this none
can undertake to make out. From which positions, both of them equally clear and
certain, a great step might be made for the calming and composing of debates
about Government, were heats and prejudices out of the way. It being apparent,
that there was an entire frame of Church Government, and worship among the
Jews, which was not unlawful, though not of divine Institution.

In the Synagogues there was (as is marked before) first, one that was called
the Bishop of the Congregation. Next, the three Orderers, and Judges of every
thing about the Synagogue, who were called Tsekenim, and by the Greeks (...),
or (...). These ordered and determined every thing that concerned the
Synagogues, or the persons in it. Next them, were the three Parnassin or
Deacons, whose charge was to gather the collections of the Rich, and to
distribute them to the poor: And these were called Septem viri boni Civitatis.
The term Elder, was generally given to all their Judges: but chiefly to these
of the great Sanhedrin, so we have it, Matthew. 16.21. Mark 8.31. 14.43. and
15.1. And Acts 23.14. And for a fuller satisfaction to this, I must refer you
to such as have given an account of the Synagogue out of the Jewish Writers.

Next, a great deal might be said, to prove that the Apostles in their first
constitutions, took things as they had them modelled to their hand in the
Synagogue: and this they did, both because it was not their design to innovate,
except where the nature of the Gospel Dispensation obliged them to it. As also,
because they took all means possible to gain the Jews, who we find were zealous
adherers to the traditions of their Fathers, and not easily weaned from these
precepts of Moses, which by Christ's Death were evacuated: And if the Apostles
went so great a length in complying with them in greater matters, as
Circumcision, and other legal observances, (which appears from the Acts and
Epistles) we have good grounds to suppose, that they would have yielded to them
in what was more innocent and less important. Besides, there appears both in
our Lord himself, and in his Apostles, a great inclination to symbolize with
them, as far as was possible. Now the nature of the Christian Worship shows
evidently, that it came in the room of the Synagogue, which was moral, and not
of the Temple-Worship, which was typical and ceremonial. Likewise, this parity
of Customs betwixt the Jews and Christians, was such, that it made them be
taken by the Romans, and other more overly observers, for one sect of Religion:
and finally, any that will impartially read the New Testament, will find, that
when the forms of Government, or Worship are treated of, it is not done with
such architectonical exactness, as was necessary, if a new thing had been
instituted, which we find practiced by Moses. But the Apostles rather speak, as
these who give rules for the ordering, and directing of what was already in
being. From all which it seems well grounded and rational to assume, that the
first constitution of the Christian Churches, was taken from the model of the
Synagogue, in which these Elders were separated, for the discharge of their
employments, by an imposition of hands, as all Jewish Writers do clearly
witness.

So the Presbyters of the Christian Church were ordained by an Imposition of
hands. Their power was not only to preach, which (as I showed already) was
common to others, but also to administer Sacraments; so that it is true which
Jerome says, Communi consilio Presbyterorum res gerebantur.

We have already considered, how necessary it was judged, that no Ordination of
Presbyters might be gone about without the presence and concurrence of the
Bishop, as the principal Person, which was judged necessary (as I suppose) more
upon the account of Unity and Order, than from the nature of the thing in its
self: for taking things in themselves, it will follow, that whatever power one
has, he may transmit to another; and therefore there seems to be small reason,
why one who has the power of preaching the Gospel, and administering
Sacraments, may not also transmit the same to others: and it seems unreasonable
so to appropriate this to a Bishop, as to annul these Ordinations which were
managed by Presbyters, where Bishops could not be had. Maimonides says, Every
one regularly ordained, has power to ordain his Disciples also.

There remains nothing to be cleared about this from Antiquity, save the 13
Canon of the Council of Ancyra, which runs thus. (...), (others read) (...).
Others read (...).

Now the difficulty raised about this Canon is this, that if the reading be
(...) and (...), then it will follow, that the Presbyters of the City might
have ordained without the Bishops presence, if they had his warrant in writing.
Yea, they also infer, that it is probable that before that, they ordained even
without the Bishops warrant, to which they were limited by this Canon: and upon
this Wallo Messalinus triumphs not a little. But Blondel chused rather to read
the Canon (...); as if the meaning of it were, that the Chorepiscopi could not
have ordained either Presbyters or Deacons; nor the Presbyters of the City
without the Bishops Warrant in writing; which will infer, that they might have
done it being so warranted. It is true, Binnius has read it so; so also has
Gentianus Hervetus, as appears by his Latin version of this Council. The
Arabic Manuscript also favors this. And it is directly asserted by Zonaras on
this Canon, and Aristenus.

But it is contradicted by the whole tract of Antiquity, whom we find all
concurring in this, that the Chorepiscopi might neither ordain Presbyters, nor
Deacons without a Bishop, as was cleared in its due place. Fut for that of
Wallo Messalinus, it will appear to be ill grounded: For first, it is certain
that the Chorepiscopi were a dignity above Presbyters. It will be therefore
unreasonable to think that Presbyters could do that which was unlawful to the
other. Besides, how bad an Inference is it from one Canon of a Provincial
Council, of which there are such various readings, to argue for a thing which
is not only without any other ground, but also contrary to the whole Current of
Antiquity? And it was but few years after this, that in Alexandria the
Ordinations given by Colutbus, who was but a Presbyter, and only (...), were
annulled. Now Ancyra being in Asia the lesser, and diverse Bishops out of Syria
being there, in particular the Bishops of Antioch and Cesarea, who subscribed
first; how came it that there was no notice of this had at Alexandria, to have
prevented their severe Sentence in the Case of Colutbus?

But to consider the readings of the Canon, Binius reads it (...) so Iustellus:
it is true, he has on the margin ( aliter (...)) Hervetus has translated it,
in aliena Parochia. Now if this be the true reading, the meaning of it will run
thus. Whereas by a great many other Canons, Presbyters were so tied to their
Bishop, that no Bishop was to receive the Presbyter of another Bishop, without
his Bishops Warrant and License, and his literae pacificae, and dimissoriae. So
here the Presbyters of the City are discharged to go and assist at Ordinations,
in other Parishes, without a written License from their own Bishop.

But as this Canon is read ((...)) by some, so they seem to have added to it,
(...), or (...); so that the meaning of it is, that the Presbyters of the City
might do nothing without the Bishop's Warrant and License in writing: Thus have
both Isidorus Mercator, and Dionysius Exiguns read it, as appears by their
Latin versions which are, Sed nec Presbyteris civitatis (licet) sine Episcopi
praecepto, aliquid amplius imperare, vel sine authoritate literarum ejus' in
unaquaque Parochia aliquid agere. And this is according to Binius's Edition of
them. But in another Edition of Dionysius Exiguus by Iustellus, he seems to
have read it simply (...), without any supplement.

Another old Latin Edition published by Iustellus has, Sed neque Presbyteris
civitatis licere, sine jussione Episcopi, sed cum ejusdem literis eundi ad
singulas Parochias. Ioannes Antiochen in his Collectio Canonum, reads it simply
(...). Ferrandus in his Breviatio Canonum, Canon 92. cites this part of the
Canon thus: Ut Presbyteri civitatis, sine jussu Episcopi, nihil jubeant, nec in
unaguaque Paroecia aliquid agant. Alexius Aristinus in his Synopsis, has the
first part of the Canon, but wants the second part. (And in his Gloss agrees
with Zonaras, as was before observed.) And so does Simeon Logotheta, in his
Epitome Canonum. And by this diversity of reading, it will appear how little
ground there is for founding any thing upon this Canon alone, especially when
that alleged from it, is contradicted by undeniable Evidences.

But as Presbyters might not ordain without Bishops, so neither could Bishops
ordain without the advice, consent, and concurrence of their Presbyters Conc.
Carth. 4. Canon 22. Ut Episcopus, sine concilio Clericorum suorum, Clericos non
ordinet, ita ut cirvium testimonium and co^^iventiam quaerat. And it was laid
to Chrysostone's charge, (...). And in the Roman Council held by Sylvester (if
credit be due to the Registers of that Council, which are indeed justly
questionable) it was decreed, cap. 11. that one was to be ordained a Presbyter,
cum omnes Presbyteri declararent and firmarent, and sic ad ordinem Presbyterii
accederet. And none was to be made a Bishop, nisi omnis Clerus expeteret uno
voto perenni.

It is likewise certain, that all things were done by the joint advice of
Bishop and Presbyters. Neither were these wretched contests, of the limits of
Power, much thought on, or tossed among them. The Bishops pretending to no
more, than Presbyters were willing to yield to them; and Presbyters claiming no
more than Bishops were ready to allow them. Their contentions lay chiefly with
these that were without; those intestine Fewds and Broils being reserved for
our unhappy days.

But as we find Cyprian amply declaring, how he resolved to do nothing without
the consent of his Clergy, and People: so in the African, Churches, that course
continued longest in vigor. Diverse instances whereof appear in the 4. Council
of Carthage; one I have already cited, to which I shall add three more, Can.
23. Episcopus nullius causans audiat, absque praesentia Clericorum suorum,
alioquin irrita erit sententia Episcopi, nisi Clericorum praesentia
confirmetur. Can. 34. Episcopus in quolibet loco sedens, stare Presbyterum non
patiatur. And Can. 35. Episcopus in Ecclesia, and in consessu Presbyterorum,
sublimior sedeat; intra domum vero, collegam Prebyterorum sese esse cognoscat.

There were two ranks of Presbyters, as clearly appears from the 13. Canon of
Neocesareo, to wit, the Presbyters of the City, and the Presbyters of the
Country. The former were the more eminent, in so far that the latter might not
consecrate the Eucharist within the Church of the City in their presence, which
appears from the cited Canon. Over the Presbyters of the Country were the
Chorepiscopi, of whom already; but the Presbyters of the City being next at
hand, were the Bishops Counsel, and advisers in all matters. The Bishop and
they had the oversight of the Souls within the City. They were also to be
maintained out of the Treasury of the Church, and were called Canonici or
Praebendarii. The reason why they were called Canonici, was either, because of
their regular observing of the course of Worship, and hours of Prayer: or
because of the distributions that were made among them, according to the Canon
or Rule, and from the share that was assigned to them, called Praebenda, they
got the name Praebendarii.

This Consessus or Collegium Presbyterorum, was afterward designed by the
barbarous word Capitulum. The chief over them, or the Vice praeses next to the
Bishop was called Archipresbyter, or Decanus, Idem quod decurio, qui december
militibus praeerat: And insensibly the whole Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction crept
into their hands. The Presbyters of the Country either neglecting it, or being
neglected in it. But without the Capitulum, nothing that the Bishop did was
valid.

However, when the first servor and vigor of Church Discipline slackened:
avarice and ambition creeping in apace into the Hearts of Churchmen, these
Chanoins or Praebends not contented with their allowances out of the Church of
the City, which were too small for their growing desires, got Churches in the
Country annexed to them: and for most part served them by Substitutes, except
at the return of some solemn Festivities: and by this means it was, that Church
Discipline fell totally into the Bishops hands; and the ancient model being
laid aside, new Courts which were unknown to Antiquity, were set up. As these
of the Archdeacons, Chancellors, Officials, Surrogates, etc. However the
Praebends, though they had deserted their Interest in Church Discipline, yet
two things they stuck to, because of the advantage and power that followed them.

The one was the capitular Elections of the Bishop, and the other was the
meddling with, and disposing of the Church Revenues, and Treasure. But it was a
gross Contradiction to the ends of Government, that the Bishop alone might
manage the Spiritual part of his Charge, but must be limited to the advice of
his Presbyters for the governing of the Temporality. Yet this was a farther
proof of that saying, Religio peperit divitias, and filia devoravit matrem. And
thus far we have seen what Interest Presbyters had within their own Parish,
(mark that at first the Bishops Precinct was called Parish, and not Diocese)
neither was the meeting of the Bishop with his Presbyters called a Synod: by
which we see how weak that Allegiance is, that there were no Diocesan Bishops
in the first Centuries, it being merely a playing with the word Diocese.

But let us next consider what Interest Presbyters had in Provincial or
National Councils. If that of the Acts 15. was a Synod, in it we have Presbyter
subscribing with the Apostles. Brethren are also there added, not as if there
had been any Laics elected out of the Laity, such as these are who are now
vulgarly called Lay Elders, but some more eminent Christians, whom as the
Apostles called then, so the Bishops continued afterward to consult and advise
with in Ecclesiastic matters. But that Presbyters sat in Provincial Synods in
the first and purest Ages, is undeniably clear. When Victor held the Council at
Rome about the day of Easter, Damasus tells that it was collatione facta cum
Presbyteris and Diaconibus. Likewise in the Council that Cyprian held, about
the rebaptizing of Heretics, there were present, Episcopi plurimi ex provincia
Africana, Numidia, Mauritania, cum Presbyteris and Diaconibus, praesente etiam
plebis maxima part. And his contemporary Firmilian, whose Epistle is the 75.
among Cyprian's, tells us, how there were yearly Synods of Bishops and
Presbyters, Qua ex causa, says he, necessario apud nos sit, ut per singulos
annos seniores and Presbyteri, (by which it is clear, that he can mean none,
but Presbyters and Bishops) in unum conveniamus, ad disponenda ea, quae curae
nostrae commissa sunt.

Eusebius lib. 6. cap. 35. tells, That upon the account of Novatus's Schism,
there was held at Rome (...), which consisted of sixty Bishops, and many more
Presbyters, and Deacons, (...). He likewise tells, lib. 7. cap. 27. How that
upon Samosatenus's Heresy, there was a great Synod held in Antioch: and after
he has set down the names of some Bishops there present, he adds, that there
were (...). And their Synodal Letter is written in the name of the Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons.

In the Council of Eliberis in Spain, there were 19. Bishops, residentibus
originta sex Presbyteris, abstantibus Diaconibus and omni plebe. In the
Provincial Council at Arles, which judged in the matter of Donatus's Schism,
Constantine the Emperor being present, where were about two hundred Bishops
from diverse Nations, from Italy, France, Spain, Sicily, Sardinia, Africa,
Numidia, and Britain, the Canons of that Council are subscribed by many
Presbyters and Deacons. And if the Story of the Council of Rome under Sylvester
be true, it is subscribed by 284. Bishops, 45. Presbyters, and 5. Deacons. Now
all these being before the Council of Nice, evince that in the first and best
ages, Presbyters voted and judged in Provincial Councils, and if in
Provincials, why not in General ones?

The Council of Nice is subscribed by some Chorepiscopi, and one Chorepiscopus
subscribes in the Council of Ephesus, And if Chorepiscopi be (as it is the
opinion of some) in their natural dignity only Presbyters, then we have
Presbyters also subscribing General Councils. Besides that in the Council of
Constantinople, and Ephesus, diverse Bishops subscribed by Presbyters: from all
which it is clear, that there is no ground from Antiquity to exclude Presbyters
from a Suffrage in national and general Councils: and it is but a frivolous
distinction that they may have a consultative, tho not a deliberative Suffrage,
since we see them subscribing both the decisions of Faith and Canons of
discipline.

The next thing to be examined, is the qualification, election, and ordination
of Presbyters. For their qualification, great care was used to train them up
long in an abstracted and devote Life, that so they might be well prepared for
that holy Function. And therefore it was, that many of the Primitive Bishops
lived in Monasteries among them, whom they were educating for holy Orders, as
appears from the Lives of Basil, Augustine, and Martin: Neither was one to be
ordained a Presbyter, but after a long probation and trial, and all these
degrees, of which we shall speak afterward, were so many steps and preparations
through which all were to go, before they could be initiated. And indeed it
seems against reason, at first step to ordain a man Presbyter, and commit the
care of Souls to him, before a long previous probation had of him.

Therefore the ancient Monasteries, as they were Sanctuaries for such as
designed to leave the World, and live devoutly, so they were also Colleges for
the Education of Churchmen. It is true, the years of Probation may seem too too
many; but they ordinarily dispensed in that, as they found Persons worthy and
qualified. But none might be Presbyter before he were thirty years of age,
according to the Council of Neocesarea, even tho he were highly worthy ((...).)
And the reason given for this, is, because Christ was thirty years of age
before he entered upon the discharge of his holy Function.

Likewise a Clinicus, that is, one baptized in sickness, by the twelfth Canon
of Neocesarea, could not have been a Presbyter, because he was not a Christian,
(...). And this was not to be dispensed with, but upon his following Faith and
Diligence, or that others could not be had.

And in the Canon Law, did. 77. cap. Siquis, among other prerequisites for a
Presbyter, one is: Si poenitentiam publicam non gesserit, holding that any
gross scandal committed after Baptism, should be a bar upon a Man from being
ordained a Presbyter.

As also Did. 56. cap. 1. the Children of Presbyters are discharged to be
ordained: Presbyterorum filios a sacris altaris ministeriis removemus, nisi aut
in Coenobiis, aut in Canonicis religiose probati fuerint conversari. It is
like, this was either to discourage the marriage of Churchmen, or to obviate
the scandal might have been taken, if they had been partial to their own
Children. Yet this was neither old nor universal; for Nazianzen was both a
Presbyter and a Bishop, though a Bishop's Son. And in the next Chapter of that
same Did. many instances are alleged by Damasus to the contrary.

Further, none who had been Soldiers, and were Curiales, and obstricti curiae,
could have been ordained without a dimission, and that they had been fifteen
years in a Monastery, and three parts of four of their Estate were adjudged to
the fisk; so Did. 53. and Justinian 123. Nov. Now this might be first, left
any weary of the service to which they were obliged, should upon that pretense
shake it off, and run from their colors, or other employments. But next, that
men who had been much involved in the World, and particularly men of blood,
might not enter into holy Orders, without a long precedent change of the course
of their life; it not being easy to pass of a sudden from a course of
secularity, to that sublimity of holiness which is necessary for such a sacred
Function.

And finally, all ambitus was condemned in Presbyters, as well as in Bishops,
though we see both from Chrysostom's Books de Sacerdotio, and Nazianzen's
Apologetick, that there was enough of it among both kinds. Yet many there were
who resisted the Calls given them to Church-Offices with great earnestness,
some flying from them to the Wilderness, as from a persecution: some cutting
off their Noses, and other members, that they might be thought unworthy of it;
some continued to the end in their refusal: others were not ordained without
being haled even by force; many receiving this sacred imposition of hands with
trembling and many tears. And indeed were the greatness of the charge more
weighed, and the secular advantages less looked at, it is like there might be
yet need of some force to draw men to accept of it; whereas all are so forward
to rush toward it, blown up with pride, or provoked by covetousness.

We saw already how averse Nazianzen was from entering in sacred Orders: but no
less memorable is the History of Chrysostom, who (with his Friend Basil)
having engaged in a Monastic life, was struck with fear when a rumor rose
that they were both to be ordained Presbyters. (And by the way observe, that he
calls it (...).) But Chrysostom was silent, lest the expressing of his
aversion should have deterred Basil; and his his silence was judged by Basil a
consent, and so proved one of his chief inducements to accept of Orders. But
when the day came wherein Chrysostom knew that the Bishops designed to ordain
them, he withdrew privately, so that he could not be found: yet the Bishops
upon another pretense, carried Basil to the Church, and there ordained him,
much against his mind.

But when he first met with his Friend Chrysostom, he melted down in tears,
challenging him severely for his withdrawing from him; whereof Chrysostom
gives his Apology at large in these six excellent Books of his de Sacerdotio;
wherein by way of Dialogue betwixt him and his Friend, he lays out the great
dignity and weight of that Charge, chiefly in the third Book, where he shows,
That a Priest should be like one of the Angels of GOD, cap. 4. And he blames
these Elections that were rashly made, cap. 10. upon which he charges most of
the disorders that were then in the Church. And cap. 11. he confesses how
guilty himself was of that unlawful ambitus for Church employment; which being
yet unmortified in him, did frighten him from entering in holy Orders. Cap. 14.
he says, Episcopum convenit studio acri and perpetua vitae continentia tanquam
adamantinis armis obseptum esse. In the fourth Book he speaks of the great
caution was to be used in Elections and Ordinations, complaining that in these,
Regard was rather had to Riches and Honor, than true worth. Through the fifth
Book he shows the great evil and hazard of popular applause, and the sin of
being much pleased with it. And lib. 6. cap. 2. he has that excellent saying,
That the soul of the Priest should be purer than the very beams of the Sun
themselves. (...). And cap. 12. he accuses himself of his vain desires and
other faults, whence it was that he had so great a horror of attempting at
that for which he knew himself so unworthy: preoccupying that Objection, that a
Man in that is to submit to the judgment of others, by the Examples of one who
has no skill in Physic, and knowing himself ignorant, is not to administer
Physic, though all the World should desire him to undertake a Cure, declaring
their Opinion and confidence of his skill: for if upon another man's opinion of
his skill he should offer to meddle in it, and give Physic, he might as well
kill as cure. So neither one unacquainted in military affairs, was to undertake
the leading of an Army, knowing his own unfitness, though never so much
solicited to it: whence he subsumes more strongly, that none should undertake
the leading of Souls, as long as he knew his own unfitness, were the
importunities and solicitations of others never so many. And so far of the
qualifications of those who were to be ordained Presbyters.

Their Election has been touched already, for it went the same way with the
Elections of Bishops, and so was partly popular, at least was to be ratified by
the approbation, and consent of the people. Possidius in vita Augustini, tells
how he was chosen a Presbyter by the people.

We have the Ordination of the Presbyters set down thus, Conc. Carth. 4. Canon.
3. Presbyter quum ordinatur, Episcopo eum benedicente, and manum super caput
ejus tenente, etiam omnes Presbyteri, qui praesentes sunt, manus suas juxta
manum Episcopi super caput illius teneant. Dionysius the Areopagite in the
forecited place tells, That the Presbyter whom he calls (...), was ordained in
the same form that a Bishop was ordained, save only that the Gospel was not
laid on his head. From which simplicity of the primitive forms, we may see, how
far they were from all these superstitious Fopperies now used in the Romish
Church in Ordination. And so much concerning Presbyters.

Deacons are next to be treated of. The Original of them is by the general
current of the Ancients taken from the Levites under the Temple, and therefore
in not a few of the ancient Councils, they go under that designation. But as
was formerly observed, it is more probable, that the Christian Church took its
immediate Model from the Synagogue, tho that might have been taken from the
Temple. Now in the Synagogue, as there was a Bishop and Presbyters, so there
were also Deacons called Parnasin. There were three of them in each Synagogue,
two were to gather the Collections, and all the three together did distribute
them.

The first Origin of them in the Christian Church is set down, Acts 6. where
their primitive institution shows, that their first design was for looking to
the necessities of the poor, who had been neglected in the daily distribution
of the Charity, and there they are called (...). It is true, that term Luke
4.20. is used in another sense, for there the Minister of the Synagogue, to
whom CHRIST delivered the Book, could be no other, than their Chazan or Bishop,
whose Office it was to call out any to read the Law in the Synagogue. But since
all Church-Office is for service, and not for domination, Christ himself not
coming to be ministered unto, but to minister, it is no wonder, if that term
should then have been promiscuously used. We also find S. Paul applying to
himself (1 Cor. 4. a term equivalent to this.) But though the primitive
institution of Deacons import only their looking to the necessities of the
poor: yet from the Levites ministering to the Priest in the Sacrifices, it came
to be generally received and used, the Deacons should serve the Bishops and
Presbyters in the administration of the Sacraments.

The institution of them does also discover, that they were persons to be
separated for that holy service, and consecrated for it by an imposition of
hands; and so were to be no more secular, but Ecclesiastical persons: and the
usual practice of the Church was to account that Office a step, degree and
probation, in order to ones being made a Presbyter. And therefore our mungrel
Lay-Deacons differ vastly, both from the first institution of the Scripture,
and current of all Antiquity.

The Arcopagite gives the account of their Ordinations thus: That the Deacon
being brought to the Bishop, kneeled down on one knee, and so received
imposition of hands. The fourth Canon of the fourth Council of Carthage is:
Diaconus quum ordinatur, solus Episcopus, qui eum benedicit, manum super caput
illius ponat; quia non ad Sacerdotium, sed ad ministerium consecratur.

As for their Election, at the first institution they were chosen by the whole
Body of the people, so Acts 6. And tho the people were barred their suffrage in
the choice of other Church Officers, yet there might be good reason why they
should still choose the Deacons, their Office being almost wholly temporal, to
receive and distribute the peoples alms. But whatever right people might
pretend to in this, it will never be proved that by divine Right, the people
should choose those who had the charge of their souls. For reason would infer,
that none could make a choice, who were not able to give a judgment of the
qualifications, and worth of a Churchman, that being peculiar to the Clergy.
And hence it is that more than a consent cannot be justly pretended to by the
people. But after all this, if this place prove anything, it will prove in
favor of the whole body of the people, and not of a few selected Lay Elders.

All the Deacons were in their degree and order inferior to Presbyters, which
will appear from these Canons of the 4. Council of Carthage, Canon 37. The
Deacon is declared to be the Minister of the Presbyter, as well as of the
Bishop. Canon 39. He might sit in the presence of a Presbyter, if desired by
him. Canon 40. In conventu Presbyterorum Diaconus interrogatus, loquatur; so
that he might not speak, except desired. It is therefore a disorder in
Church Discipline, that the Archdeacon should not only be a Presbyter, but also
exercise Jurisdiction over Presbyters. And therefore Petrus Blesensis, Epist.
123. has well observed, how turbato ordine dignitatis, Archidiaconi body
Sacerdotibus praeeminent, and in eos vim ac potestatem suae Jurisdictionis
exercent.

Jerome is the first that makes mention of these Arch deacons, telling how the
Deacons did choose one of their number to be over them, quem Archidiaconum
vocabanst: and in the same Epistle to Evagrius, he severely inveighs against
those Deacons, who pretend to an equality with, or preference over Presbyters,
saying: Quid patitur mensarum and viduarum Minister, ut supra eos tumidus sese
esserat, ad quorum preces corpus sanguisque Christi conficitur.

Because of the first number Seven, the custom was to have but seven Deacons in
a City were it never so great: so it was decreed in the Council of Neocesarea
14. Canon. Their Office was chiefly to look to the poor, and to serve in the
administration of the Sacraments. Just in Martyr in the end of his second
Apology tells, That the Eucharist was sent by the Deacons to such as were
absent. Cyprian lib. 3. Epist. 15. reckons it as a part of the Deacon's Office
to wait upon the Martyrs, and Epist. 17. of that same Book, he tells, That
where there was no Presbyter, and urgere exitus coeperit. The Deacon might
receive the Exhomulagesis of penitents, and absolve them by imposition of
bands. Optatus lib. 2. calls them the Defenders of the holy Table; telling how
the Donatists had broken through the roof of a Church, and had killed and
wounded some of the Deacons, who preserved the holy Elements from their
sacrilegious attempt.

The Deacons distributed the Eucharist, and sometime they did give it to the
Presbyters, but that was forbidden by the 18. Can. of the Council of Nice. Yet
in the fourth Council of Carthage, Can. 38. Diaconus, praesente Presbytero,
Eucharistiam corporis Christi populo si necessitas cogat, jussus eroget. Cyril
of Jerusalem in his 17. Catechism, counts the Deacon the Minister of Baptism,
as well as the Bishop or Presbyter. And certain it is, that generally Baptism
was administered by the Deacons, as well as by the Presbyters.

Some parts of the public Worship were also discharged by the Deacons.
Chrysostom hom. 14. ad Romans tells, that the Deacons offered prayers for the
people; and hom. 17. ad Heb. he tells, That the Deacons stood in a high place
at the administration of the Eucharist, and calling with a terrible voice, as
Heralds, invited some, and rejected others from these holy mysteries. And thus
far I have given an account of the sense which the Ancients had of the Offices
of Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon, which three were the only ones they accounted
Sacred and Divine. And this held good even at the time, that the Areopagites's
pretended Books were written (I call them pretended, because there is none now
so simple as to believe them his) for he reckons the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy
to consist in these three degrees.

To this account given of Deacons, I shall add somewhat of Deaconesses, of whom
mention is made, Romans 16 1. where Phebe is called (...) the Deaconess ^f the
Church of Cenchrea. They are likewise so called in the 15. Canon of Chalcedon;
but more ordinary in ancient Writings (...) IJerome on that place to the
Romans, speaking of Phebe, understands her to have been a Deaconess: and adds,
Etiam nunc in Orientalibus Diaconissae mulieres in suo sexu ministrare
videntur, in baptismo, sive in ministerio verbi, quia privatim docuisse
foeminas invenimus sicut Priscillam. He likewise understood the Widows
mentioned, 1 Timothy 5. to be Diaconesses: Tales eligi voluit Diaconissas quae
omnibus essent exemplum vivendi. Origin likewise takes it as undoubted, that
Phebe had a particular office in the Church of Cenchrea: and says on that
place, Hic locus Apostolica authoritate docet etiam foeminas in ministerio
Ecclesiae constitui, in quo officio positam Phaeben apud Ecclesiam quae est
Cenchreis. Chrysostom likewise understood it to be an Office: And says on
that place, (...). If any credit be due to the Apostolical Constitutions, they
tell us many things of their Office, tho with a great alloy of much idle stuff.
They tell, That no Woman might come to a Bishop or Presbyter, except in the
company of a Deaconess, Lib. 2. cap. 26. And that they were to go to Women's
Houses to instruct them, which had been scandalous for Churchmen, Lib. 3. cap.
15. They did likewise receive them in Baptism, Cap. 16. And kept the gates by
which Women entered into the Church, Lib. 8. cap. 28. So it seems their Office
was to instruct and teach Women. And so S. Paul, Phil. 4.3. speaks of Women who
labored with him in the Gospel. And Romans 16. we find mention not only of
Priscilla, but of Tripbona, Triphosa and Persis, who labored in the Lord. And
it is like their Office was also to minister to the necessities of Churchmen:
and therefore when S. Paul speaks of leading about a Sister and a Wife, as well
as other Apostles, he may be well understood to speak of one of those who might
both have supplied his wants, and assisted him in the conversion of Women; but
for eviting scandal, they were not to be under sixty years of age.

Mention is made of them by Pliny, lib. 10. Epist. 97. who writing to Trajan,
of the enquiry he was making of the Christians, says, Necessarium credidi ex
duabus ancillis quae ministrae dicebantur quid effet very and per tormenta
quaerere. They were received by an Ordination in Tertullian's time: for he
speaking of them, says, ( De castit. cap. 13.) Ordinari in Ecclesia solent.
And ad uxorem, lib. 1. cap. 7. Viduam allegi in ordinationem nisi univiram non
concedit. The 19. Canon of the Council of Nice, reckons the Deaconesses among
those that were (...), but says that they had no imposition of hands, so that
in all things they were reckoned among the Laics; but hints that they had a
particular habit, calling them (...). Balsamon's Gloss on this is, that the
Virgins who dedicated themselves to GOD, continued in a Laical habit till they
were forty years of age; and were then, if found worthy, ordained Deaconesses,
by a particular imposition of hands. To this Zonar as adds, that the Virgins in
the twenty fifth year of. their age, got a particular habit from the Bishop.
The 74 Canon of Nice, according to the Arabic Edition, appoints the Office of
a Deaconess to be only the receiving of Women in Baptism. Epiph. baeres. 79.
after he has proved that a Woman is not capable of the public service of the
Church, adds, That the Order of the Deaconesses was instituted out of reverence
to that Sex, that when the Woman's body was naked in Baptism, they might not be
so seen by the Priest. And with this agrees the 12th Canon of the fourth
Council of Cartbage: Vidue vel sanctimoniales quae ad ministerium baptizandarum
mulierum eliguntur tam instructae sint ad officium, ut possint apto and sano
sermon docere imperitas and rusticus mulieres tempore quo baptizandae sint,
qualiter baptizatori interrogatae respondeant, and qualiter accepto baptismate
vivant. This is also confirmed by the 6. Chap. of the 6. Novel, which appoints
the age both for Virgins and Widows to be fifty years: Sicque sacram promereri
ordinationem. And their Office is denied to be adorandis ministrare
baptismatibus, and aliis adesse secretis quae in venerabilibus ministeriis per
eas rite aguntur. And the rest of that Chapter gives diverse other rules
concerning them.

The 15. Canon of Chalcedon, appoints a Deaconess not to be ordained till she
were forty years of age (it is (...) in the Canon) and it is appointed that it
be done after a strict examination; but that after she was ordained, and
continued some time in the Ministry, if she gave her self in Marriage, she (as
one that had reproached the grace of GOD) was to be anathematized with her
Husband. Zonaras reconciles this age with the Apostle, that the Apostle speaks
of Widows, and this Canon of Virgins, tho it be (...) in the Canon. Yet it
seems some of these Deaconesses have given scandal in the Church, and perhaps
proved like the Females among the Pharisees, whom the Rabbis reckoned among
these who destroyed the World: And so we find the Western Church being
scandalized at some miscarriages in this Order, they are discharged to be
ordained by the first Council of Orange, Can. 26. Diaconissae omnimodo non
ordinandae, si quae jam sunt benedictioni quae populo impenditur, capita
submittunt. And in the beginning of the sixth Century, it seems they gave great
scandal; for Canon 22. Council Epaun. they are simply discharged: Viduarum
consecrationem quas Diaco^as vocant ab omni regione nostra penitus abrogamus,
solam eis poenitentia benedictionem si converti ambiant imponendo. And Anno
536. Con. Aurel. 2. C^^. 17. Benedictio Diaconatus, is said to be given to the
Women contra interdicta Canonum. And the next Canon of that Council is, Placuit
etiam ut nulli postmodum foeminae Diaconalis benedictio pro conditionis hujus
fragilitate credatur. Yet they are mentioned in the Council of Worms in the
year 868. Canon 73. where the 15. Canon of Chalcedon is wholly insert. One
scandal we find occasioned by these Deaconesses, was, that they presumed to
distribute the Elements in the Eucharist; which Gelasius blames in his ninth
Epistle written to the Bishops of Lucani^, Quod foeminae sacris altaribus
ministrare ferantur. And this it seems has continued longer: For we find
Ratherius of Verona in the tenth Century, appoints in his Synodal Epistle
(which in the Tomes of the Councils is printed as a Sermon of Pope Leo the
fourths) Nulla foemina ad altar Domini accedat. And Matthaeus Blastaris in his
Syntagma, lit. 1. cap. 11. concludes it to be unknown what the Office of the
Deaconesses was. Some judged that they ministered to Women, who being in age
received Baptism, it being accounted a crime for a Man to see a Woman naked.
Others thought that they might enter to the Altar, and exercise the Office of
Deacons, who proved this from many things, particularly from some words of
Nazianzen's Oration at his Sisters Funeral, but that was afterward forbidden
(...); yet he doubts much the truth of that, it not agreeing with reason, that
Women who were not suffered publicly to teach, should be admitted to the
Office of a Deacon, whose duty it was by the ministry of the word, to purify
these who were to be baptized. And after that he gives an account of the form
of their Ordination.

Mention likewise is made of them in the Council in Trullo, Canon 14. A
Deaconess was not to receive imposition of band's, before she was forty years
of age. Which is more expressly appointed in the 40. Canon, where they decree,
that though the Apostle made the age 60. yet the Canons had allowed their
Ordination at 40. because they found the Church was become firmer in the grace
of GOD, and had advanced forward: and by the 48. Canon of that Council, a
Bishop's Wife, when separated from her Husband by consent, was to live in a
Monastery, and if found worthy might be made a Deaconess. Basil by his 18.
Canon allows Virgins to be received at the sixteenth or seventeenth year of
their age, but by his 24. he reckons it a fault to receive a Widow into the
Order under 60: yet it seems that was not peremptorily observed. For in his 44
Canon he speaks of Deaconesses found in Fornication, who might not be allowed
to communicate before seven years had been past in penitence. Whence this Order
failed in the Greek Church, we know not; but Balsamon on the 15. Canon of
Chalcedon tells. That in his time Deaconesses were no more ordained, and his
reason is, because no Woman was suffered to enter unto the Altar, though (says
he) some Women were abusively so called.

As for the inferior degrees of Subdeacon, Acolyth, etc. as they were only
Iuris Ecclesiastici, so they were not designed for any sacred performance, nor
had they any holy Character upon them: but were intended as steps for those
whom they were training up to sacred employments, and were but like the degrees
given in Universities. No mention is made of them in the first two Centuries:
Ignatius is express that there is no intermedial step betwixt the Laick, and
the Deacon, which style we also meet in all the Fathers before Cyprian's time.

He, Epistle 24. speaks of the Lectors and Subdeacons, telling how he had
ordained Saturus a Lector, and Optatus a Subdeacon, quos jam communi consilio
Clero proximos feceramus. And of the Lectors, he says, Epist. 34. Caeterum
Presbyterii honorem nos illis designasse sciatis. And by what follows, it is
clear he means of a share in the maintenance of the Church. Epistle 28. he
speaks of the Subdeacons and Acolyths, showing how they likewise had a share in
the divisions of the offerings made to the Church. Epistle 33. he tells of one
Aurelius, who had been twice a Confessor in the persecution, whom he had
ordained a Lector, apologizing that he had done it without the consent of his
Clergy and people. In ordinationibus solemus vos ante consulere, and voces ac
merita communi consilio ponderare; sed expectanda non sunt testimonia humana,
cum praecedant suffragia divina. And after he has laid out the merits of the
Person, he adds, Placuit tamen ut ab officio Lectionis incipiat, quia and nihil
magis congruit voci quae Dominum gloriosa praedicatione confessa est, quam
celebrandis divinis lectionibus personare. Of the same strain is his following
Epistle concerning Celerinus, who had refused to be ordained a Lector, until he
was persuaded to it by a divine Revelation in the Night. Likewise in his 76.
Epistle, he makes mention of Exorcists: who are also mentioned by Firmilian in
his Epistle, which is reckoned the 75. among Cyprians. And at the same time
Cornelius, the Bishop of Rome, in his Epistle (insert by Eusebius, lib. 6. cap.
43.) wherein he gives account of the Clergy were then at Rome; tells, That
there were 46 Presbyters, 7 Deacons, 42 Acolyths, 50 Exorcists, Lectors, and
Porters. These inferior Orders we see were then in the Church. And since we
have no earlier accounts of them, we may conclude their rise to have been about
this time. A short account will suffice for their several employments, which
will be best gathered from the several Canons of the 4th Council of Carthage.

Canon 5. Subdiaconus quum ordinatur, quia manus impositionem non accipit,
patinam de Episcopi manu accipiat vacuam, and calicem vacuum. De manu vero
Archidiaconi urceolum cum aqua, and mantile, and manutergium. So his Office was
to look to the Vessels for the Eucharist, and to serve the Deacons in that work.

Canon 6. Acolythus quum ordinatur ab Episcopo quidem doceatur, qualiter in
officio suo agere debeat. Sed ab Archidiacono accipiat ceroferarium cum cereo
ut sciat se ad accendenda Ecclesiae luminaria mancipari, accipiat and urceolum
vacuum, ad suggerendum vinum in Eucharistiam sanguinis Christi. As for these
Cerei, they shall be spoken of upon the next Canon. The work of Acolythus was
to light the Candles, and provide the Wine: And from the ratio nominis, we may
believe their Office was particularly to wait upon the Bishop, and follow him.

Canon 8. Lector quum ordinatur, faciat de illo verbum Episcopus ad plebem,
indicans ejus fidem ac vitam, atque ingenium. Posthaec spectante plebe tradat
ei codicem, de quo lecturus est, dicens ad eum: accipe, and esto lector verbi
Dei, habiturus, si fideliter and utiliter impleveris officium, partem cum eis,
qui verbum Dei ministraverunt. And by what has been already cited out of
Cyprian compared with this, it appears, that the Office of the Lector was
judged that of the greatest importance of them all.

Canon 9. Ostiarius quum ordinatur postquam ab Archidiacono instructus fuerit,
qualiter in domo Dei debeat conversari, ad suggestionem Archidiaconi, tradat
and Episcopus claves Ecclesiae de altario, dicens: sic age, quasi redditurus
Deo rationem pro bis rebus, quae his clavibus recluduntur.

Canon 10. Psalmista, id est, Cantor potest absque scientia Episcopi, sola
jussione Presbyteri, officium suscipere cantandi, dicente sibi Presbytero;
vide, ut quod ore cantas, cord credas; and quod cord credis, operibus
comprobes. Now the Psalmistae were these that were the Singers, for it was
appointed in the Council of Laodicea, that none might sing in the Church,
(...), that is, those of the suggestum, or Pulpit.

But because the 7. Canon will afford more matter of question, I have reserved
it last. Exorcista quum ordinatur, accipiat de manu Episcopi libellum, in quo
scripti sunt Exorcismi, dicente sibi Episcopo: accipe, and commenda memoriae,
and habato potestatem imponendi manum super Energumenum, sive baptizatum, sive
Catechumenum.

But for examining this of the Exorcist, we must run a little back. The Jews
under the second Temple were much addicted to Magic. In the Talmud it is given
as a necessary qualification of one that might be of the Sanhedrin, that he
should be skilled in all Magic doctrines and charms. And in the inner Court of
the Temple, called the Court of Israel, there was a Chamber said to have been
built by one Parva a Magician, by the Art of Magic, from whom it was called
Happarva: And much of what they say of the Bath-col, seems to hint that it was
an effect of Magic. Many places are also cited out of the Talmud, of their
Rabbis killing one another by that Art; and so highly do they extol it, that
many of them thought that all Miracles were wrought by the exact knowledge of
the Cabbalistick Arts, and it is well enough known how that abounded among the
Heathens. Ulpian made a Law against these Physicians who cured Diseases by
Exorcisms.

We see our LORD triumphed over the powers of darkness, who were then raging
through the World: and that the Oracles were silenced at this time, is
confessed by Heathens. Neither did this gift of casting out Devils, conferred
by our LORD on his Disciples, die with them, but remain some ages in the Church.

Tertullian speaks of it as a Gift communicated to all Christians. De corona
mil. he tells, That some Soldiers did exorcismis fugare spiritus malignos: and
de Idololatria, cap. 11. Quo ore Christianus Thurarius (this is one that
offered incense to Idols) si per templa transibit, fumantes aras despuet, and
exsufflabit, quibus ipse prospexit: qua constantia exorcizabit alumnos suos,
quibus domum suam cellariam praestat. So that he has understood this Power of
exorcizing to have been the effect of every sincere Christian's Prayer.

Origin in his 35. tract. on Matthew. condemns the form of doing it, by adjuring
the Devils, saying that CHRIST has given us power to command them. Est enim
Iudaicum adjurare Daemonia.

Cyprian speaks of an Exorcism ordinarily preceding Baptism; but prefers the
virtue of Baptism to that of Exorcism, Epist. 76. Hodie etiam geritur, ut per
Exorcist as voce humana and potestate divina flagelletur, and uratur, and
torqueatur Diabolus; and cum exire se and dimittere homines DEI saepe dicat: in
eo tamen quod dixerit, fallat -- Cum tamen ad aquam salutarem, etc. And ad
Demetrianum, he says, O si audire eos velles, and videre, quando a nobis
adjurantur and turquentur spiritalibus flagris, and verborum tormentis, de
obsessis corporibus, ejiciuntur; quando ejulantes and gementes voce humana, and
potestate divina flagella, and verbera sentientes, venturum judicium
confitentur. And much of this nature is to be met with among the primitive
Writers, which shows that the power of Exorcising was an Authority over Devils.

Yet if this had been a formal Office, Reason will say it should rather have
been among the highest than lowest Orders, the work being so great and
miraculous. But from the Areopagite, and others, we are told, that before
Baptism there was used a renunciation of the Devil, with a Prayer for casting
him out: And there is some probability that these called Exorcists were only
Catechists, who had some formuls, whereby they taught, such as they instructed,
to renounce the Devil: and this with the Prayer that accompanied it, was called
an Exorcism.

Nazianz. Orat. in Bapt. Ne exorcismi medicinam asperneris, nec ob illius
prolixitatem animo concidas, nam vel ut lapis quidam Lydius est, ad quem
exploratur, quam sincero quisque pectore ad baptismum accedat.

Cyril of Jerusalem, Praefat. in Catech. Festinent pedes tus ad catecheses
audiendas, exorcismos studiose suscipe, etiamsi exorcizatus and inspiratus jam
sis, salubris enim est tibi res ista. The Council of Laodicea, Can. 26.
discharged all to exorcize either in Churches or Houses, except these appointed
for it by the Bishops. And by the tenth Canon of Antioch, the Rural Bishops are
warranted to constitute Exorcists, from which we see they could not esteem that
a wonder-working Office. And Balsamon in his Sholion, makes them one with the
Catechists, (...)and on the Canon of Laodicea, (...). And toward the end of
his Gloss on that Canon, he says, That an Exorcist though appointed by the
Chorepiscopus, and not by the Bishop, (...). And Beveregius cites Harmenopolus
to the same purpose on the tenth Canon of Antioch. From these evidences it is
most probable to think, that the Exorcists at first were nothing but
Catechists; but afterward, as all things do in any tract of time degenerate,
they became corrupt, beyond perhaps either these of the Jews or the Gentiles;
so that the Books of Exorcisms now in the Roman Church, are so full of Bombast
terms, and odd Receipts, that they are a stain to the Christian Church.

And it is the most preposterous thing can be imagined, that what was given in
the New Testament for the greatest confirmation of the Christian faith, should
be made a constant Office, and put in so mean hands. And to this I need not add
the base Arts and Cheats discovered among that sort of people.

I shall conclude this long tedious Account of the sense the Ancient Church had
of the several Officers in it, with some words of Tertullian, which I shall
barely set down, without any descant on them, tho they have occasioned much
perplexity to diverse good Antiquaries. Tertullian in exortatione ad uxorem,
cap. 7. says: Nonne and laici Sacerdotes fumus? Scriptum est regnum quoque nos
and Sacerdotes DEO and Patri suo fecit. Differentiam inter Ordinem and plebem
constituit Ecclesiae authoritas, and honor per Ordinis consessum sanctificatus.
Ideo ubi Ecclesiastici Ordinis non est consessus, and offers, and tingis and
Sacerdos es tibi solus, sed ubi tres sunt, Ecclesia est, licet laici. But
others read these words differently, their Copies having them thus:
Sanctificatus a DEO. Ubi Ecclesiastici Ordinis est consessus, and offert, and
tingit, Sacerdos qui est ibi solus: sed ubi tres, Ecclesia est, licet laici.

FINIS.
POLYHISTOR TO BASILIUS.
YOUR desire, and my own promise, have engaged me to send you the enclosed
Papers: For the trouble the reading them may give you, my Apology lies in my
Obedience; and yet I have contracted things as much as I could, and perhaps
have exceeded in my abridging: For had I let loose my Pen in a descant on every
particular, these few Sheets had swelled to a Volume. And my design was not to
act the Critic, but to be a faithful Historian. These gleanings were intended
partly for my own use, and partly for the direction of some under my charge in
the study of Antiquity; and were written some years ago, when I had no thoughts
of making them more public, than by giving a few transcripts of them. But now
I leave the Midwifry of them to you, that you may either stifle this Embryo, or
give it a freer Air to breath in. I have here only given you what related to
the constitution and modelling of Churches, referring to my Observations on
other Canons, matters that come to be treated more properly upon their Texts,
as of the administration of all the parts of the Pastoral charge, of all their
forms in Worship, and Church Discipline, of their zeal against Heresies and
Schisms, together with the methods used for reclaiming them; and of the
poverty, simplicity, abstraction from secular affairs, and sublime sanctity of
the primitive Bishops and Presbyters. These with many other particulars, if
well examined, as they will make the Work swell to a huge bulk, so they will
bring pleasure, as well as advantage, to such as desire a better Acquaintance
with the state of the Church of GOD in her best times; but what through the
entanglements of affairs, and other avocations, what through their want of
Books, are not able to engage in so laborious an enquiry by searching the
Fountains themselves.

I assure you, I have not gone upon trust, having taken my Observations from
the Writings themselves, that I have vouched for my Warrants. I once intended
to have cited all the Testimonies I brought in English; and so to have avoided
the pedantry of a Babylonish Dialect, as the French begin now to write. But
observing that the foul play many have committed, has put a jealousy in most
Readers of these Citations, where the Author's words are not quoted, I chused
rather to hazard on the censure of being a Pedant, than of an unfaithful
wrester in my Translations. Only to save the Writer the labor of writing much
Greek, which I found unacceptable, I do often cite the Latin translations of
the Greek Authors. I shall only add, that as I was causing write out these
Papers for you, there came to my hands one of the best Works this Age has
seen, Beveregius his Synopsis Canonum. I quickly looked over these learned
Volumes, that I might give these Sheets such improvements as could be borrowed
from them, which indeed were not inconsiderable.

I detain you too long, but shall importune you no more. I leave this to your
Censure, which I know to be severely Critical in all such matters. Your
judgment being the wonder of all who know you, especially who consider how
little your leisure allows you, to look unto things so far without the Orb you
move in: though nothing be without the vast Circle of your comprehensive
understanding, if you let loose these Papers to a more public view, let this
Paper accompany them, which may some way express the zeal of your faithfullest
Servant, who humbly bids you Adieu.


