THE MEMOIRES OF THE LIVES and ACTIONS OF James and William DUKES OF HAMILTON
and CASTLEHERALD, etc. In which an Account is given of the Rise and Progress of
the CIVIL WARS of SCOTLAND With other great Transactions both in England and
Germany, from the Year 1625, to the Year 1652.

Together with many LETTERS, INSTRUCTIONS, and other PAPERS, Written by King
Charles the I.

Never before Published.

All drawn out of, or Copied from the Originals.

By GILBERT BVRNET*

In Seven Books.

LONDON, Printed by I. Grover, for R. Royston, Bookseller to the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty, MDCLXXVII.

To the King.
May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
THE following History being a Relation of Your Royal Fathers Counsels and
Affairs in Scotland, I hope for an easy Pardon of my Presumption in offering it
to Your Majesty. Your Concern in a Work that relates so much to the King, Your
Blessed Father, moved You to look on it, and read some parts of it; and after
You had honored it with a Character too advantageous for me to repeat, You
were Graciously pleased to allow me Your Royal License, not only to Publish it,
but to Address it to Your Self: and therefore I hope Your Majesty will
favorably Accept this tribute of my Duty, which with an humble Devotion I lay
down at Your Feet.

My Zeal for Your Majesty's Honor and Service engaged me first in this Work,
and the same Passion which I derived from my Education, and still governs my
Heart and Life, makes me now Publish it. For nothing does more clear the
Prospect of what is before us, than a strict Review of what is past; which I
have labored to make with all possible Fidelity and Diligence. I know I shall
not escape Censures, since few can bear a true and free History; but as I have
set down nothing for which I have not Authentic Vouchers, so I have observed
Your Majesty's Acts of Oblivion and Indemnity, as much as could consist with
the Laws of History, and have avoided the naming of Persons upon Ungrateful
Occasions. But no Precaution can secure one from severe Challenges that writes
so near those Times, while many Persons concerned are yet alive: yet if Your
Majesty continues to honor these Memoires with Your Royal Approbation, I shall
easily bear them.

SIR, You have here a true Account of the Services and Sufferings of two of
Your Subjects, who dedicated themselves to Your Majesty's Interests, and became
Sacrifices for them. The Elder of these Brothers had not the honor of being
known to Your Majesty, yet he lost his life in Your Reign. The Younger survived
as long as he could serve Your Majesty: but when he saw his Life like to be
unprofitable to Your Service, it became uneasy to himself, which made him so
prodigal of it in Your own sight. And Your Majesty does his Memory the Honor
of remembering him still with the highest expressions of Esteem and
Acknowledgment which a King can bestow on a Subject.

They had that Unblemished Loyalty conveyed to them from their Ancestors as the
Entail of their Family, which has always paid an Uninterrupted Fidelity to the
Crown, and they have transmitted it as an Inheritance to those who have
succeeded them, who have already given great Demonstrations of most sincere and
Loyal Duty to Your Majesty.

That God of his Infinite Mercy may preserve Your Majesty, and bless you with
Wise Counsels, Obedient Subjects and Prosperous Undertakings, and after a long
and happy Reign on Earth, may Crown You with an Incorruptible Crown of Glory,
is the daily Devotion of,

May it please your Sacred Majesty, Your Majesty's most faithful, most humble,
and most loyal Subject and Servant, Gilbert Burnet.
London, the 21st of October, 1673.
CHARLES R.

WHereas Gilbert Burnet, one of Our Chaplains in Ordinary, has composed a
Book, entitled, Memoires of the Lives and Actions of the Dukes of Hamilton,
which We have Seen and Approved; and whereas he has humbly desired Our Royal
License for the Printing and Publishing of the sam^, We have thought fit to
condescend unto that his Request, and We do accordingly hereby Grant Our Royal
License and Privilege unto the said Gilbert Burnet, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, for the sole Printing and Publishing of the
foresaid Book, for the Term of fourteen Years, to be computed from the day of
its being first set forth. And Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby
Require and Command, that during the said Term of Fourteen Years, no Printer,
Publisher, or other Person whatsoever, Our Subjects, do presume to Imprint, or
cause to be Imprinted, without the knowledge and consent of him the said Gilbert
Burnet, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators, or Assigns, the foresaid Book, in
whole or in part, or to Sell the same, or to Import into Our Kingdom any Copies
thereof, Imprinted in Parts beyond the Seas, upon pain of the Loss and
Forfeiture of all Copies so Imprinted, Sold, or Imported, contrary to the
Tenor of this Our Royal License, and of being further proceeded against as
Offenders against the Act made in the Fourteenth Year of Our Reign, entitled,
An Act for Regulating Printing, and Printing-presses, and suffering the Mulcts,
Penalties, and Inflictions in the said Act, particularly mentioned, as the
Cause shall require.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, the third day of November, 1673. in the Five
and Twentieth Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command, H. Coventry.

THE PREFACE.
HIstories are of all Books the most universally read: the wiser find matter of
great Speculation in them, and improve their Knowledge by the Experience these
give them; and weaker Persons make them their Diversion, and entertain
Discourse with them. But most Writers of History have been men that lived out
of business, who took many things upon trust, and have committed many and
palpable Errors in matters of Fact, and either give no account at all of the
secret Causes and Counsels of the greatest Transactions, or when they do
venture upon it, it is all Romance, and the effect of their Imagination or
Interest.

And indeed the Authors of all the Histories that were written for near a
thousand years together, being for the most part Monks, there is no great
reason to think they were either well informed, or ingenuous in what they
delivered to Posterity, though there is perhaps no Nation that is more
beholding to their Labors than England is.

Of all men those who have been themselves engaged in Affairs, are the fittest
to write History, as knowing best how matters were designed and carried on, and
being best able to judge what things are of that Importance to be made Public,
and what were better suppressed. And therefore Caesar's Commentaries are the
most Authentic, and most generally valued pieces of History; and in the next
Form to these Philip de Comines, Guicciardine, Sleidan, Thuanus, and Davila,
are the best received, and most read Histories, (only the last has failed in
some particulars:) for these men wrote of things in which they were
considerable Actors, and had great Interest and good Information. Next to
these, those that have had the perusal of the Cabinets of great Ministers, and
of Public Records, are the best qualified for giving the World a true
Information of Affairs. This makes the most celebrated History of the Council
of Trent be received over all the World as a Pattern of History. Strada and
Grotius are also highly valued upon the same account.

But it has been commonly found, that Historians being generally of a Party,
and having Ends to serve, or being under the curb of procuring Licenses, have
accommodated their Relation to the taste of those they intended to flatter, and
so have corrupted the Truth with the concealment of many things fit to be
known; and to make amends for that, have added as many Sophisticating Colors
to make the best things look ill, and to give some fair appearances to the
worst things. And this has generally detracted so much from the value of
History, that most people begin to neglect such Books, for they do not believe
that they write Truth. And it is no wonder many are full of such prejudices at
Ancienter Histories, for they reckon that men in all Ages were pretty near the
same temper they find them to be of at this day, and there is such foul dealing
in the Histories of our own Time, and things that are so eminently false are
positively asserted, that from thence many conclude all other Writings of that
nature are likewise to be suspected: only Forgery and Impudence has not now so
much Art to conceal or disguise it with, as it had in former Ages, since most
of our late Histories are written either in the style and strain of Panegyricks
or Satyrs, which of all things an Historian that would be believed ought to
avoid most carefully; for naturally all people are apt to suspect Interest or
Malice, when they find much Flattery, or Passion in a History.

Too much Art does but disgrace it, for though Father Paul has written his
History of the Council of Trent in as flat and plain a style as was possible,
and Cardinal Pallavicini has adorned his with all the Beauty of Art and Wit;
yet there appears somewhat so native in the one, and so labored in the other,
that it does much prepossess the Reader with an inclination to believe the one,
and disbelieve the other.

A short and concise style, though it succeeded wonderfully with Tacitus, and
not ill with Grotius; yet by the common Verdict of all men is judged not so
proper for a History, which should open up things fully, so as to be easily
understood by every Reader.

These common failings of Historians have in this last Age made people desire
to see Papers; Records, and Letters published at their full length. Livy begun
the making of Speeches in Councils, and at the heads of Armies, for Statesmen
and Generals, and was much followed till within this Age, that these things
became Universally distastful; and instead of that which was but the issue of
the Writers brain, the World desires nothing so much as to see the Truth of
things as they were really designed and acted, rather from some Original
Papers, than from the Collections or Extracts of persons of whose Fidelity or
Judgment they are not well assured.

Of all Nations in the world the French have delighted most in these Writings,
so that the Memoires written in that Nation and Language since the days of
Henry the 3d, would almost make up a Library: and every year we get over new
Memoires of some one Great Person or another. And though there are great
Indiscretions committed in publishing many Secrets and Papers, not fit for
Public View; yet this way of Writing takes now more in the World than any sort
of History ever did. There is but one in this Island that has hitherto written
in that Method, and his Collections are so well received that it gives great
encouragement to any who will follow him in it.

And indeed it is a much easier thing to write in this way than any other, for
when a man undertakes a History, he ought to be well informed of all that
passed on both sides, and is obliged to publish every thing that is of
Importance for opening up the secretest Causes and Beginnings of great Changes
or Revolutions; this being the chief Instruction that men receive from History,
by which they are most enabled to provide against, and prevent mischief for the
future. But he that writes Memoires from a Collection of Papers that are in his
hands, has no such ties on him, being only obliged to give a faithful account
of such things as are in his Papers; and where these fail, he is at no loss,
but may well pass over such Particulars as occur not to him.

For the Lives of Great Persons, though it might have been expected that after
the many excellent Patterns Plutarch had left the World, those should have been
generally well written; yet there is no sort of History worse done, they being
so full of gross Partiality and Flattery, and often swelled with trifling and
impertinent things, so that it is no great wonder if this kind of Writing be
much decried and neglected.

I had all these Considerations before me when I designed and drew this Work,
and therefore will be more guilty if I transgress the Laws of Writing History
without Partiality and Passion.

The late Civil Wars of this Island deserve a good and full History, as much as
any Transaction in any part of the World. For it was a strange and unheard of
thing to see a Prince, whose Title was unquestioned, and who had great Virtues
and eminent Piety; and was of the same Religion with His Subjects, and had
never put any of them unjustly to Death, so oppressed by a prevalent Faction;
and that a Party which was not headed by any new Pretender, nor under the
united Authority of any one Person, but on the contrary was divided from the
very beginning into two great Factions, should become so successful, as to
defeat Him in the Field, take all His Garrisons, imprison His Person, and in
end put Him to Death openly, with a Form and show of His Justice, many
thousands of His lamenting Subjects looking on; and that all this was done near
so great and populous a City, which did universally pity His Condition, and
abhor the Crime, and yet not so much as one Person made a Tumult to oppose it.

The Rise and Progress of such a War is a thing which every one desires to be
particularly informed about: for though many have published Relations of those
times on both sides, yet there is scarce any body satisfied either with the
Truth of Matters of Fact, or with their way of Writing. But the first beginning
and rise of the Civil Wars having been in Scotland, from whence they moved
Southwards, there can be no clear Understanding of what followed until these
first Disorders be truly stated.

This made me often wish that some Moderate Pen were employed in giving a just
and true Relation of the Reign of the late King. I was my self pretty early
acquainted with a great deal more of the Truth of these Affairs than is
generally known, having had the blessing of my Father's Conversation for many
years, who had been a very exact Observer of all that passed. He was also much
importuned by men of all sides to write the History of those distempered Times,
being esteemed a Person of great Moderation and Candor; who, as he had his
breeding in the Law, so lived in great Friendship with the most eminent Persons
of both Persuasions: for before the Troubles began he was accounted a
Malcontent, but he did afterward give such signal demonstrations of his
Loyalty, that he was put from his Employment, and made to take a voluntary
Exile on him, which was granted him as a great Favor by the Covenanters, who
generally had much kindness for him, for all his being so contrary to their
way. And Warriston, his Brother-in-Law, in whose hands were all the Original
Papers of the Covenanters side, offered them to him for his Assistance, if he
would undertake it; but he was overgrown with Age and Infirmities, and so
could not set about so difficult a Work. But I received from him such
Informations, as made me look on most of the Writers of those Times with
Indignation, who were either utterly ignorant, or so basely partial, that
Matters of Fact are falsely represented, and the whole Counsels and Secret
Contrivances either quite passed over, or so palliated that there is very
little truth in the Relations they have made.

And particularly, I wondered to find James Duke of Hamilton represented to the
World, with such foul and base Characters, as if he had been a Monster both for
Ingratitude and Treachery, though he had laid down his Life for the King, and
involved his Estate in vast Debts for His Service. It seemed to me the greatest
Injustice in the World, that one who served his Prince and his Country so long,
and so faithfully, and sealed all with his Blood, should not only be deprived
of the Honor due to his Memory, but that a company of ignorant and impudent
Slanderers should do what they could to attaint his Blood and Family, by the
black Imputations they have cast on him, and that this should pass current
without any Vindication.

This made me resolve, if ever I could meet with such Instructions as might
direct me well to write an account of the late Troubles, and in particular to
give a true and clear Relation of that Duke's Concerns, to set about it. I knew
well the Temper of those who were most severe in their Censures on him, to be a
violent and hotheaded sort of People, who were for nothing but Fire and Sword,
and yet knew not how to do much more than to drink and swagger; and therefore,
as I was naturally inclined to disregard their Blusterings, so I was apt to
think his Counsels must have been moderate for tempering the eagerness of other
men's Passions, which did enrage them so much against him; so that they having
dispersed many false Stories of him, these were easily received by our
Scribbling Historians, and have been made use of to poison the Truth of the
History.

It is such a natural and constant effect of Passion to carry men to Extremes,
that it is no wonder if those who had more temper and foresight, and studied
to heal the Breaches, and followed more moderate Counsels, were hated on both
sides; for in all times the Moderate Party is the weakest, and has most
obloquie cast on it from all hands.

I also thought that I could not do a greater Service to my Country, than to
enquire into the whole Course of the late Civil Wars. And I knew there were
none so eminently Employed as the two Dukes of Hamilton, the one having been
the Kings High-Commissioner in the beginning of them, and the other the
Secretary of State in the sequel of them: therefore it was certain, that if
their Papers had not been destroyed in the common fate of Scotland, I could not
find a clearer thread to direct me than from them.

I shall not deny that I had many pre-engagements on me to have a high value of
that Family, both from the Great Worth of those who now represent it, and from
the Unblemished Fidelity their Ancestors have always paid the Crown, and
their constant Affection to their Country; so that since the first Greatness of
it in King James the third his days, who gave his Sister in Marriage to the
Lord Hamilton, they were never in any Rebellion against their King, nor did
they ever abuse their Prince's Favor to be a Grievance to their Country.

And though they stood next the Crown for fifty years together, from the year
1543, that King James the fifth died, till the year 1593 that Prince Henry was
born, during all which time there was none but Queen Mary and King James of the
Royal Blood: yet all that while their Deportment showed, that they had no other
design but to serve those Princes with all possible Fidelity and Zeal. And
though Scotland was then much distracted with Intestine Broyls and Disorders,
yet they never set themselves at the head of any Faction, nor departed from the
Interests of the Crown.

When King James the fifth died, he left his only Daughter Queen Mary but a few
days old, and the Government of Scotland fell by Right to the Earl of Arran,
being her nearest Kinsman; and if such an Ambition, as the Enemies of that
Family have pretended was hereditary to it, had been lodged in him, he would
never have let such an Opportunity of raising himself slip out of his hands.
But he was a Person of great Justice and Candor, and set nothing before his
eyes but the Public Good: so that Archbishop Spotswood tells of him in his
History, that in his Court there was nothing seen that the severest eye could
censure or reprove. In the Public Government such a Moderation was kept, as no
man was heard to complain: the Governor was reverently obeyed, and held in as
great respect as any King's of preceding Times. It is true, he was of too easy
a nature, and his base Brother, who was afterward Archbishop of St. Andrews,
had great power over him, which did much prejudice his Reputation.

In the disposing of the Queen in Marriage, he had much to have said for
himself, if he had married Her to his own Son, who was but a few years older
than the Queen: but he showed, he designed Her Greatness more than his own, and
perhaps more than the true Interest of his Country, for I am far from thinking
that he carried himself wisely in that, when he consented to send Her to the
Dolphin of France, afterward Francis the second: in acknowledgment of which,
he was made Duke of Castle-herald (or as it is pronounced by the French,
Chastle-herault) by the French King.

After the Death of Francis the second, when Queen Mary returned into Scotland,
the Duke of Castle-herald had again great advantages, if any such desire of
Power had governed him: for the Reformation had then prevailed in Scotland, and
he and all his Family, except his youngest Son, Lord Claud (from whom descended
the Earls of Abercorn) were Protestants; so that to have put himself at the
head of that, was the likeliest way to have advanced his own Designs: but it
appeared that he and his Sons embraced the Religion, not for Faction but out of
Conscience, for he continued true and faithful to the Queen to the last; of
which She was so sensible, that (beside many Public Testimonies of Her
confidence in them, such as the naming the Duke of Castle-herald her Adopted
Father, and calling him still by that Name, and the referring Her whole
Concerns, when She was a Prisoner in England, to his Care) when that severe and
unparalelled sentence of Death was to be executed on Her, She took a Ring off
Her finger, and gave it to one of Her Servants, and ordered him to carry it to
Her Cousin, Lord John Hamilton, who then represented his Father that was dead,
(his elder Brother being sick of a Frenzy) and tell him, that that was all She
then had to witness her great sense of his and his Families constant Fidelity
to Her, and of their suffering for Her Interests; and desired that it might be
still kept in the Family, as a lasting Evidence of Her kindness to it, which is
preserved to this day.

Nor was t^eir Duty to the Crown at that time easy or cheap to them, for the
contrary Faction designed to root them out of Scotland; and therefore in one of
their Mock-Parliaments their Blood was attainted, and their Estates and Honors
were afterward given to other Persons, and they were forced to seek shelter in
England and France, till King James came to Govern by his own Couns^ls; and
then being also pressed to it by the Intercession of Queen Elizabeth, He
restored them to their Honors and Estates, and created Lord John Hamilton
Marquis of Hamilton, who was Grandfather to the two Dukes, whose MEMOIRES I
now publish. King James did also treat him with the same respect that the
Queen, his Mother, had done the Duke of Castle-herald, and called him always
Father; and wrote to him often with the greatest Freedom and Familiarity that
was possible: and when that King went to Denmark to bring home His Queen, He
named him Lord Lieutenant of the South of Scotland, and left for him a Letter
(yet extant) full of great Esteem and Kindness, to which He added this
Postscript with his own Hand.

MY LORD, if my constant Trust had not been in you of your great Love toward
me, I had not thus employed you upon such an occasion; therefore I assure my
self you will not frustrate my Expectation.

He also called him to Christen one of his Children, and continued to the last
to put great Confidence in him. That Lord did indeed deserve to be so used by
him, for as he had with an invincible Patience and Loyalty submitted to the
hard Usage ^e met with during that King's Childhood, and for some years after;
so he made no Stirs nor Disturbance, but that little that was at Sterlin, An.
1585. so that when he was admitted to the King's presence, the King said to
him, My Lord, I did never see you before, and must confess, that of all this
Company you have been most wronged; you were a faithful Servant to the Queen my
Mother in my Minority, and when I understood not, as I do, the estate of
things, hardly used. And though he was frequently invited by the Violent
Church-party to head them in their Mutinous Courses, yet he would never engage
in it. And when that old Lord was dying, as he was giving his Blessing to his
Son, and reckoning up the most signal Favors of God to him, he named three
more particularly. The first was, That during all his Troubles, and
notwithstanding the great Offers were made him in France by the House of Guise,
if he would change his Religion; yet God had never left him to do so base a
thing, though he lost his Interest in that Court by refusing it. The other was,
that he had never oppressed any of his Vassals and Tenants. And the third was,
that he had never entertained one thought contrary to the Duty he owed the
Crown, and that no hard Usage ^e met with had ever prevailed on him to any such
Design, and therefore charged his Son on his Blessing to continue in the same
Courses.

All this I thought needful to be said for the Honor of that Family, because
Buchanan studied with much Art and Industry to cast an eternal Disgrace upon
it. For as he from being a great Flatterer of Mary Queen of Scotland (which may
be seen in his Dedication of his Incomparable Paraphrase of the Psalms to Her)
became Her mortal Enemy, and partly by Lies, partly by his cruel aggravating of
some unjustifiable things, has written the History of Her Reign with so much
Malice, that his Work stands condemned as a base Libel, by an Act of Parliament
in Scotland: so being provoked by an Injury which a Servant of the Duke of
Castle-herald's youngest Son did him, of which he thought he got not sufficient
Reparation, and carrying a spite to them because they adhered to the Queen's
Interests, he wrote of that Family with the most impudent and virulent Malice
that was possible. And his admirable style of Latin, in which he is inferior
to none that wrote since the days of Augustus, has made all Foreigners take
their Informations wholly from him; and the Collectors of the General History
of that Age, do for the most part draw all the Account they give of Scottish
Affairs out of him; by which that Family has suffered much in the opinions of
Foreign Nations: so dangerous it is to provoke one that has much Malice, and
can write ^ History so, that it shall take with the World.

But that Writer contradicts himself so often in what he says of that Family,
that small regard is to be had to it. And Lesly Bishop of Ross,
Privy-Counsellour to Mary Queen of Scotland, who wrote the History of that
time, and bore no great good will to the Duke of Castle-herald and his
Children, for being such Promoters of the Reformation, speaks always of them
with a great deal of Honor and Justice.

For the Father of those Dukes, he was, as Archbishop Spotswood truly calls
him, a Nobleman of rare gifts, and fitted for the greatest Affairs, and was
most Universally beloved by all his Countrymen: he was a very Graceful and
Gallant Person, and of a most agreeable Conversation, and ^ery obliging, and so
did recommend himself to all sorts of Persons. King James finding him
excellently qualified, broug^t him to Court, where he made a great Figure the
rest of his Life.

All these things concurred to make me very desirous to see whether the late
Dukes had continued in those steps their Progenitors went in, or had departed
from them; therefore I told the Duke and Duchess of Hamilton that now are,
that if I might have the favor and trust of perusing such Papers as remained
in their hands, I should do my endeavors to make the best use of them I could,
upon which they were pleased to send them all to me. The Collection was great,
and in as great disorder; yet by a little care I brought them into some Order,
and found I had very authentical and full Materials for a greater Work than I
had at first designed: but having read many scandalous Pamphlets, that had
charged these Dukes in diverse particulars with an equal degree of Injustice and
Malice, I found it necessary to enquire, as far as their Papers could carry me,
into the Truth of these Reports, which forced me to be more particular than had
been otherwise needful. And yet I hope the Reader shall have no great cause to
complain of my tediousness, but that he shall find an Entertainment through the
whole Work that shall not be unpleasant to him.

I have opened the Intrigues and Counsels of those Times as clearly as I could.
This, some that perused the Work have censured much, as a disclosing the
Secrets of Government; and because in some places errors of Government are
neither concealed nor pallia^ed, some advised me to pass these over, and not
insist on them: but with this I could-by no means comply, for I know no good
that History does the World so much as the making Posterity the wiser, both by
showing the Faults of Ministers that raised the Discontents, and the Follies
and Madness of those who put all in confusion to get Grievances redressed. For
the Iealousies that were conceived, either from the ill opinion of Ministers,
or the consciousness of their own Guilt, made the Fomenters of those Troubles
think, that neither Concessions nor Pardons were a sufficient Security, but
that as soon as the Country and Government was settled, what they had done would
be remembered and punished, and did drive the Faction much further than it seems
they intended at first.

All this I wrote with the more Assurance, after I had presumed to tell His
Majesty, that since I was writing of the late Times, I sound it necessary to
set down some Errors, that were committed even by some of the Ministers of the
King, his Blessed Father, and I could give no true account of matters if these
were not likewise related: upon which His Majesty most graciously told me, That
such things were unavoidable in a History; and therefore He allowed me to tell
the Truth freely.

Vp^^ so gracious a Permission, I was the more emboldened to lay open things
clearly, and to trace the Troubles of Scotland to their first Beginnings. It is
true, there were some things that had much influence on Peoples Minds, of which
I have given no Account, having found no Papers in this Collection to direct me
in them: and these were the whole Progress of the Design for the Resumption of
the Tithes into the Crown, and the restoring them to the Church, with all the
steps that were made in it; which was so nice a point, and had so much of the
subtilties of Law in it, that I did not think fit to meddle with it, especially
it not lying before me in these Papers, nor having any Relation to the Concerns
of these two Brothers. The other was the Proceeding in Parliament Anno 1633,
when His late Majesty was Crowned, with the Petition that was afterward drawn,
for which the Lord Balmerino was tried, and found Guilty, and had Sentence of
Death passed on him. Then did the Party begin to be more united, and secret
Engagements were given either to rescue him by Force, or to revenge his Death,
upon which the Earl of Traquair procured a Pardon for him; but from that time
the date of the Confederacy of that Party is to be reckoned, and though it lay
quiet for some years, yet it was still fermenting, which made it burst forth
upon the Crisis that afterward appeared. They were also much encouraged to all
that followed, by the Informations they had of the Malcontents in England; for
a Gentleman of Quality of the English Nation, who was afterward a great
Parliament Man, went, and lived some time in Scotland before the Troubles broke
out, and represented to the men that had then greatest Interest there, that the
business of the Ship-mony and the Habeas Corpus, with diverse other things, of
which there was much noise made afterward, had so irritated the greatest part
of the English Nation, that if they made sure work at home, they needed fear
nothing from England. And of this the Duke of Hamilton, who had lived so many
years in England, could not be ignorant: for so great a disease in the Body
Politic, as a Civil War, does not break out on a sudden, but there go before
it many Symptoms, which are well discerned by men of Judgment and Foresight;
the matter must be brought to the nature of Tinder or Gunpowder, before a
Spark can set it on Fire. And it was the Prospect he had of what was like to
follow in England if once a War begun, that made him employ all his Endeavors
to carry the King to as full Concessions as he could possibly obtain. This, to
such as do not reflect on the State of England at that time, may perhaps appear
mean, or Malice may give it a worse Character. But as no sort of provocation
will justify any man, though of the clearest Courage, that will go and fight
with a Sword loose in the hilt, but he must be concluded rash and
inconsiderate; so the Duke knowing the disjoynted condition of England, and
apprehending that by all appearance the War would be unsuccessful, and that the
Demands of the Faction would then grow higher, did as became a Wise and
Faithful Minister, in trying all the ways he could think of to settle Matters
before there should be any Breach; since the keeping the Kingdom in quiet,
though upon terms which had been hard to the King, and derogatory to His
Authority, was much to be preferred to a War that was like to prove fatal to
the King and Kingdoms.

For all that while the Affection of the English to the Party in Scotland, did
discover it self in many high Expressions, which others could not but see, and
the King sadly, but too late, felt afterward; for Princes most commonly see
such things last of all their People, their pretending Flatterers, who are in
truth their greatest Enemies, keeping up such Advertisements from them as long
as can be, as if one out of fear to awaken his Master, should let him sleep
when his House is on fire, till it were scarce possible for him either to
quench, or escape the Flames. All these things concurred to set on the hot
Zealots, to begin the Troubles that ended so tragically in the Murder of the
King, and Slavery of the Nations.

And therefore nothing seems more needful in our present circumstances, than to
represent those things truly, That Ministers on the one hand, considering the
ill effects that followed on a stretched Prerogative, and the People on the
other hand apprehending the dismal consequences of Tumults, Iealousies, and
Civil War, there may be such an Universal Harmony between the King and his
Subjects, as may rejoice all good men, and disappoint and confound all the
Enemies of our Peace and Happiness.

But all those things not being yet so fully clear to me, and not lying in the
Papers that were in my hands, I have given no account of them in this Work,
which I confined to the Negotiations of those two Brothers, whose Papers I
per^sed. Nor have I written any thing of the Affairs of England, further than
was necessary by their Relation to, and Intermixture with those of Scotland:
and though there are very considerable Papers in that Collection, that were
sent to Scotland, both from the Committee of both Kingdoms, and from some
Eminent men of both Houses; yet there is not a continued thread in them, and
therefore I have published none of them. Nor have I drawn down my Relation
farther than Worcester-Fight, where the younger of these Brothers lost his
Life: for though I have been much pressed to write a full History of Scotland
from K. James his Death, where the most Reverend Dr. Spotswood ended his so
much, and so justly valued History, and to bring it down to the present Time;
yet I will see how the World is satisfied with what I now publish, before I
give my self and others more trouble of this sort.

At first I wrote this Work Historically, and only drew the most material heads
and passages out of the Papers that lay before me: but that Noble and Judicious
Gentleman, Sir Robert Murray, to whose Memory I owe the most Grateful
Acknowledgments that can be paid by a Person infinitely obliged to him, and
that did highly value his extraordinary Parts, and rare Virtues, gave me such
reasons to change the whole Work, and to insert most of the Papers at their
full length, that prevailed on me to do it; and when it was written over again,
as I now offer it to the World, he was so much pleased with it, that though I
know the setting down his words would add a great value to it among all that
knew him, yet they are so high in the Commendation of it, that I cannot but
conceal them. Some have wondered to find sewer of the Duke's Letters here than
of other Persons; but the truth is, these are so full, and so particular, in
the Advices and Advertisements he wrote to the King, that it was by no means
thought fit to publish too many of them, though the Originals of them are yet
extant, being written on the back by the King's hand.

The Vouchers of this whole Work lie at Hamilton, where Curious Persons may
both be satisfied about the truth of what is now published, and about many
other very important things, from which I drew these MEMOIRES: only in a few
particulars, for supplying some defects, I was forced to seek Informations from
Persons of great Honor and Worth.

My writing from such Vouchers was the cause, that sometimes the angry Language
I found in Letters did slip into my pen. I know there is nothing that does more
misbecome an Historian than to mix Passion with the Account he gives; and so I
studied to cleanse this Work from it all I could, and read it over once or
twice to throw out all those angry words which I had mixed in it carelessly,
having among other things Copied them from the Letters that were in my hands.
But upon a further Review, I find that some of these Reflections do still
remain, for which I am very sorry; but I can assure the Reader, I had no design
to leave needless Imputations on any Persons, for I took great care to write
with all possible Respect and Caution, even of those who were the greatest
Enemies that both these Dukes had: and those that know the present
circumstances of that Family, and of the Writer himself, will find that no
Resentments for any hard Usage they have met with, has biassed him from what
becomes an honest Man, and a faithful Historian.

I thought it unworthy of my pains to set down and confute those base and
malicious Calumnies, which fill many Books that pass for the Histories of the
late Times. The Truth of this Work is a fuller Confutation than any other could
be. These Writings indeed made me examine all the Duke's Papers more carefully,
particularly the Copies of their Letters to their nearest and most assured
Friends, with the Letters they received from them: most of these were written
in C^pher, and the decyphering of them was no small trouble; yet I resolved to
spare no pains that might give me a full satisfaction about their most secret
Correspondencies. But after all that search, I was still more and more
confirmed of the great Integrity of their Professions, and of their constant
Fidelity to the Crown.

I publish these MEMOIRES with the more confidence, because they having been
seen and perused by diverse of the most Considerable and most Intelligent
Persons of both Kingdoms, either they went very far with their Civility and
Complement, or were well satisfied with them.

I shall enlarge this Preface no further, but desire that all the faults in the
Style, or way of Writing, may be charged only on my self, and may leave no
Imputation on those Worthy Persons whose Actions I relate, nor on those w^o now
represent them, since they deserved a far better Pen to be employed in writing
their History. All that is good in this Work is only from them, and all that is
evil in it must fall entirely to my share, and I alone must bear it. They have
suffered too much already from the Malice of their Enemies, it will therefore
be very unjust to make them suffer more for the Indiscretion or Weakness of an
ill Writer. I shall not stand longer on labored and formal Apologies, which
are more used to show the Wit of the Writer, in making them gracefully, than
from any humble opinion they have of their own Performances who make them. If I
have not done this to the best advantage, it is because I could do it no
better; for the Importance of these Transactions, the Merit of the Persons, and
the great Honor I pay the Family, and the Duke and Duchess of Hamilton that
now are, made me judge it very well worth all the Application and Industry I
could bestow upon it.

ERRATA.
THough a great deal of care was used to revise the sheets, yet the following
Errata must be corrected: Literal Faults, and some errors in the punctation
are not marked, which it is supposed the Reader will easily perceive.

P^ge 11. Line 30. for Titles, read Tithes. p. 11. l. 44. for Cleazar, r.
Eleazar. p. 13. l. 1. for seeming, r. seemed. p. 40. l. 28. for at, r. as. p.
55. l. 16. after This add I. p. 120. l. 7. after all r. he. p. 130. l. 37.
require, r. required. p. 145. l. 7. dele will after it, and r. will after
Assembly. p. 161. l. 18. for Mirtland, r. Maitland. p. 178. l. ult. for
Cumbermwald r. Cumbernald. p. 219. l. 22. after Hamilton r. William Earl of
Morton. p. 225. l. 11. refore r. therefore. p. 240. l. 6. after by for that r.
these. p. 242. l. 22. after at r. that. p. 279. l. 2. emitted r. remitted. p.
283. l. 26. berid r. be rid. p. 284. l. 23. for stop r. step. p. 334. l. 9. met
r. meet. p. 342. l. 17. did we r. we did. p. 368. l. 5. which upon r. upon
which. p. 384. l. 23. after guards r. that. p. 387. l. 51. apart r. a part. p.
388. l. 12. after were r. clear. p. 408. l. 30. after despise dele at. p. 423.
l. 2. after though r. the. ibid. l. 4. after virtue r. he. p. 427. l. 8. for
greater r. regrate. p. 428. l. 26. wrack r. rack. ibid. l. 50. after heavy r.
on. p. 429. l. 44. Death r. die. p. 431. l. 26. after about for him r. himself.

The Contents of the Seven Books.
Lib. I.
Of what happened from his Father's Death, till the Year 1638.

Lib. II.
Of what passed when he was the King's Commissioner in Scotland, in the Years
1638, and 1639.

Lib. III.
Of what passed after he laid down his Commission, till July 1642.

Lib. IV.
Of the Duke's, and his Brother, the Earl of Lanerick's Negotiation in
Scotland, till their Imprisonment.

Lib. V.
Of the Duke's and his Brother's Employments after his Enlargement till the
Year 1648.

Lib. VI.
Of the Duke's Engagement for the King's Preservation, and what followed till
his Death.

Lib. VII.
A Continuation of Affairs till Worcester-Fight.

MEMOIRES OF THE LIFE and ACTIONS OF James Duke of Hamilton, etc.
LIB. I. Of what happened from his Fathers Death till the Year 1638.
JAMES Marquis of Hamilton died at London in March, 1625. An. 1625.
and was succeeded in his Honor and Fortune by his Eldest Son and Heir James,
afterward created Duke of Hamilton, The Marquis succeeded his Father.
whom his Father had brought with him to England some years before, and was
then in the Eighteenth year of his Age, and sent to prosecute his Studies at
Oxford; from whence he was called to see his Father die, and came in time to
receive his last advices and blessings. Thus died that Great and Illustrious
Person in the flower and vigor of his Age, being then but 36 years old.

He was in great Esteem in both Kingdoms, His Fathers Character*
equally dear to the Sovereign and the Subjects; and it was certain no person
could have disputed with him the Kings Affection and Confidence, the Duke of
Buckingham only excepted. His serving as Commissioner for the King in the
Parliament 1621. had much lessened his Interest in Scotland; for these five
Articles of Perth, (where the Assembly of the Church that settled them was
held) commonly called the Five Articles, were generally so odious, that his
carrying the Settlement of these in Parliament drew much dislike from all that
Party, which was then called Puritan: but his carriage in that Parliament,
gained him as much trust and favor with the King as ever man had. The King
created him Earl of Cambridge, a Title that was never conferred on any, but
such as were of the Royal Blood; he made him also Knight of the Garter, and
Lord-Steward of the Household. King James was likewise glad to see his
Friendship for my Lord Marquis and his Family like to prove Hereditary, by the
kindness he saw growing up with the Prince for his Son; in whose youth there
was an agreeable Sweetness, which gained an early room in the Princes
Affections, and took so deep rooting there, that nothing was ever able to
deface it: and as he had the Honor to be the Princes nearest Kinsman by the
Royal Blood of Scotland, so he spent several of his younger and more innocent
years in his company; and when the Prince was in Spain, he made one of that
honorable Train that went to wait on his Highness.

But since the following Narration is to be filled with great and considerable
Transactions, wherein this Marquis was so eminently engaged, I shall dismiss
such Particulars as were of less concernment, and therefore at one step shall
leap over the whole tract of his Youth; neither shall I interrupt my Narration
of Public Matters with Accounts of his Personal and Domestic Affairs, which
shall be referred to one place, in which, as I give his Character, such of
those as are fit to be made public shall be mentioned: neither will I here
offer any further Account of his Father, but what shall be the matter of the
whole following History, which is, that he was the Father of two such excellent
Sons.

King James as he received the tidings of his Death with much grief, King James
his Death.
so he Prophetically apprehended, that as the Branches were now cut down the
Root would quickly follow; for the Duke of Richmond died about the same time
likewise. This Marquis his Death was followed with an universal regrate, and I
sind diverse of the English Nobility, in their Letters to his Son, expressing
their Affection and Esteem for the Father, in terms beyond the cajolery of
Civility or Complement. The loss of so great and such a tenderly affectionate
Father, meeting the sweet Disposition and dutiful Love of the Son, could not
but prove very afflicting to him: but this private Grief was followed by a
public Calamity, brought upon these Kingdoms by the Death of King James, on
whose Character I shall not adventure, since it is without the lines of my Work.

The Marquis sent down his Fathers Corpse to Scotland, The Marquis leaves the
Court.
where it was nobly interred in the Burial-Place of that Family; but could not
follow it himself, being obliged to wait and assist at the Coronation of King
Charles the first, which shortly followed, where he carried the Sword of State
before the King; and he found the Crown had rather heightened than lessened the
new Kings Affection for him. But within a little he resolved to return to
Scotland, to look to his own Affairs, which were in great disorder by his
Fathers magnificent Nobleness, who notwithstanding his being Lord Steward, and
the benefit of other Places he enjoyed, had far outrun himself at Court. But
indeed his Son had too much of his own Temper, and was too Generous to be very
Frugal. During his absence from Court, his Majesty's Affection for him appeared
not only in his ready granting of every thing was moved for his advantage, but
in the kind Letters which upon different occasions he wrote to him with his own
Hand, (not to mention the many public ones he got upon all occasions.) In one
of them the King writes:

James, An. 1627.

THE reason why your Business is not yet settled, is, The King writes to him*
that this long time I have attended the coming of him, your self thought
fittest to be trusted in it, he is now on the way; and shall no sooner be
arrived but the direction shall be given, as I have already promised you. I
doubt not but your want forced you to leave me, but mine shall not hinder me to
help yours; and I am sure likewise, that as you see I do not forget your Turns,
you will at this occasion of the late Commission I have sent down, show your
self forward in mine. So farewell.

Your constant loving Friend, CHARLES R.
New Market, 4. March* 1627*

In another he writes: James,
HAving (as I hope) dispatched your Business, and invites him to Court*
I must tell you, it was ill luck and not ill will that made it so long adoing,
and likewise of the importunity of a House of Women for calling you hither: but
it may be the company of some where you are, will make you give a negligent Ear
to those that are here; yet I doubt not but when you know (as these lines do
assure you) that you cannot come before you shall be welcome to your best
Friends here, that your stay will not be long where you are. So referring you
for other business to the Bearer your man, I rest,

Your loving constant Friend, CHARLES R.
The first day of the Year, 1628.



But the Marquis excused himself upon the great Encumbrances were on his
fortune, But he prefers a Country retired life to the Court.
which made it impossible for him to live at Court in the rank that became his
quality; he seemed also at that time to be in love with a retired life, and
spent much of his time in the Isle of Arran. It cannot be denied to be without
example, to see a King entreating his Subject to accept of the Favors and
Honors he designed for him, when he was with much humble modesty declining
these Royal Offers. But as the King pressed his return to Court very earnestly,
he was likewise solicited to it by a great many of chief rank there, and by
none more warmly than by the Duke of Buckingham, with the greatest and
heartiest offers of all the friendship and service he could do him: yet he
continued in Scotland till the end of the year 1628. and all the while kept
himself at a distance from public Affairs, not meddling in any thing beyond his
private concernment; An. 1628.
but his sweet and obliging temper took exceedingly with all people.

In the end of the year 1628. his Father-in-law Earl Denbigh came down to press
his return to Court, Earl Denbigh comes for him:
with a new and kind invitation from the King, expressed in the following
Letter.

Hamilton,
I Have taken this occasion by Denbigh's going to affirm to you, under my own
hand, the Message Traquair brought to you from me. I need say little more at
this time, because according to your Letter I look that you should be quickly
here, which again I assure you will be well done. So referring you to your
Father Denbigh, I rest,

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Hampton Court 25 Sept. 1628.

The Earl of Denbigh brought also with him from his Majesty the offer of the
Master of the Horse his place, He goes to Court, and is made Master of the
Horse.
which was fallen by the murder of the Duke of Buckingham. This earnest and
noble Message, brought and enforced by such a Bearer, could be no longer
refused; therefore in the end of the year he went to Court, where he was
presently made Master of the Horse, and Gentleman of the Kings Bedchamber, and
Privy Counselor in both Kingdoms: and the King used him with so much tender
kindness, that his carriage to him spoke more of the affection of a Friend than
of the power of a Master; he called him always James, both when he spoke to him
and of him, His usage at Court,
as an expression of his familiarity with him; and it was presently observed by
all, that none had more of the Kings heart than he pos^essed. But as high
favor with a Prince is ever attended with envy and jealousy; and behavior
there.
so he missed not his share of it, from those who were looking on him as the
rising Favorite; though as he bore that Character worthily, he managed it
prudently, for he neither studied to engross things to himself nor his kindred:
he grew not insolent upon favor, nor impatient of Competitours; neither did he
obtrude himself upon the management of particular Affairs, but did rest
satisfied with the Royal marks of his Masters favor, which upon all occasions
were poured on him liberally.

The great Design which at this time possessed the King wholly, was about the
affairs of Germany, The Affairs of Germany.
and the recovery of the Palatinat, with the rescue of his Sister and her
Posterity, from the ruin which was not only hanging over them, but had already
overwhelmed them.

I need not here resume the too-well-known occasions of these Troubles, nor
tell how the Wars of Boheme first began, nor how the Prince Elector Palatine
being chosen their King, did by accepting that Crown involve himself and all
Germany in a tract of the most lasting and bloody Wars that have been heard of.
The new-elected King was scarce well-settled on his Throne, when it was not
only shaken but overturned; and the Emperor, An. 1629.
with the assistance of Spain and the Duke of Bavaria, who was thirsting after
his Cousins Dignities and Dominions, was not content with the recovery of his
own Dominions, but carried his conquering Eagles into the Palatinat; which not
being able to resist so powerful an Invasion, was forced under his obedience,
and the Electoral Dignity was by the Emperor afterward translated to the Duke
of Bavaria. King James was very much displeased with his Son-in-law for
engaging in the affair of Boheme, but could not be unconcerned when he saw the
ruin of his Family following upon it; yet his inclinations to Peace overruled
his other resentments, and his hopes to prevail by Treaties made him still
delay entering into Action; for at that time the Treaty of the match with Spain
was on foot, and the King was abused by the Spaniards, and made believe the
Palatinat should be again restored: but his slowness in that missed not the
severe censures of all Europe.

King James left his Crowns and Designs to his Son, who judged himself bound by
all Ties divine and humane, to see to the recovery of the Palatinat, and the
stopping of the Imperial success, which by a great Torrent of victories was
become formidable, and burdensome to all the Princes of Germany; yet the
opposition the King met in some Parliaments, which were dissolved soon after
their meeting made his Designs go on slowly. But to ravel no further into
matters without the lines of this Narration,

The Marquis was no sooner at Court, but the Queen of Bohemia recommended the
care of her Affairs to him, The Queen of Bohemia recommends the care of her
Affairs to the Marquis.
as the person (being her nearest kinsman and best known to her) in whom of all
that were about her Brother she confided most; and as during the King her
Fathers life she had employed none so much as his Father, so she did entail
that trust upon the Son: and indeed in all her Letters to him (hundreds of
which remain) she continued such expressions of genuine and ^rank kindness, as
show, she never thought she had misplaced her trust.

At this time the King of Sweden being provoked with a desire of glory, The
King of Sweden invites the King to his assistance.
and led on by the aspirings of a great and generous mind, resolved to
adventure on that which had been fatal to all who had attempted it, and to
oppose the Emperors designs, declaring, his resolutions were to deliver
Germany from the yoke of Tyranny, which was beginning to be twisted about their
Necks; but fearing his own strength was not able to compass so great a design,
much of his confidence was grounded on the assistance he expected from the
King. Therefore as by his own Ambassador the Lord Spence he solicited his aid,
so he employed the King of Bohemia to interpose with his Majesty for his
assistance in the prosecution of that great Affair; who pressed it with much
earnestness by his Agent Curtius, representing, that now or never was the time
that it should appear to the World, what effects he might look for from his
Alliance: and the King was resolved in good earnest to advance that design, but
judged it not fit for himself to own it in his own name at first, for some
reasons of State; a chief one being, that his Ambassador in Germany, Sir
Robert Anstrother, was entertained at that time with some hopes of the
restoration of the Palatinat, though that was judged to be without any other
intentions but to cajole the King, and so keep him from concurring in the
Swedish designs. His Majesty finding it not convenient to appear in it himself,
resolved it should pass for the voluntary assistance of his Subjects, to which
he should only give way, and made choice of the Marquis for the person in whom
he had the greatest confidence of his zealous pursuing his designs upon the
Palatinat. who appoints the Marquis to enter in Treaty with that King.
Whether this motion came originally from the King or not, I do not see, or if
it was the desire of the King or Queen of Bohemia, which seems more probable;
for the Swedish Ambassador did first move it, and pressed it with much
earnestness: others suggest that it came from some of the Marquis his enemies,
who envying and suspecting his rising greatness, and seeing no possibility of
lessening his interest in the Kings affection that was daily growing, judged
this honorable Proposition would once set him a good way from the Court. There
was too much of honor in this Proposition to be rejected by the Marquis, and
his age being at that time pronest to a thirst of glory, he could not but be
hearty in the undertaking, though the ruin of all, who had hitherto embarked
in that Design, gave but small encouragement to any who should engage in it;
yet the great renown of the Swedish King, together with the fears into which
all the Princes of Germany were now driven, which rendered them almost
desperate, made the Attempt look more promising than formerly: but the Marquis
his duty to his Master, and his affection to all his interests, chiefly those
of his only Sister, made him with alacrity accept that Employment. One thing
was certain, that which way soever the first Proposition of this was made, it
came not from himself; for if the King had known or suspected it to have flowed
from him, it would have appeared afterward when the Calumnies to be related
were under examination, or when the Marquis was a prisoner: but no such thing
ever dropped from his Majesty.

In the end of the year 1629. the Marquis according to the Kings Orders sent
Colonel Hamilton, The Marquis sends Col. Hamilton to treat,
brother to the Earl of Hadington, to the King of Sweden with a general offer
of his service, and his resolution to come in person with a considerable force,
to join with him in his noble enterprise for the Liberty of Germany. This had a
very kind reception from the King of Sweden, for at that time the valor of the
Scots was so great, and that Kings value of them so high, that he welcomed the
Proposition with a sincere heartiness; and as he wrote a very kind Answer to
the Marquis, (which with many others of his Letters is yet preserved;) so he
sent him a Commission to be General of what Army he should raise for his
assistance.

Upon this the Marquis sent one David Ramsay a Gentleman of the Privy Chamber,
and after him David Ramsay.
to agree the Conditions upon which he should embark in the Swedish design.
This Ramsay was one in whom he had no interest at all, neither can any account
be given what he was, save that there is a Letter from the King of Bohemia in
my hands, wherein he recommends him to the King as one who had served him
faithfully in Germany; he therefore as being acquainted with the German
language and affairs, and zealous for the King of Bohemia's service, was made
choice of for this Negotiation: but for the Marquis to have made this man, who
could be no longer known to him than since he came last to Court, a Confident
in so great and desperate a resolution, as was afterward fastened on this
Employment, it had the same likelihood which was in the rest of the Calumnies
wherewith his Innocence was attacqued. An. 1627.


Colonel Hamilton, The Articles of the Treaty yet extant in Latin.
who had stayed with the King of Sweden and Mr. Ramsay, agreed with that King
on the following Conditions, which I set down, faithfully translated from the
Original which is in Latin.

WE Gustavus Adolphus, by the Grace of God King of the Swedes, Articles signed
by the King of Sweden.
Goths, and Vandals, Great Prince of Finland, Duke of Esthone and Carel, and
Lord of Ingria, etc. To all and sundry whom it concerns, make it known and
certain, That whereas the Illustrious and Our sincerely beloved Lord James
Marquis of Hamilton, Master of the Horse to the most Serene King of Great
Britain, out of his zeal for the public good; and for acquiring eternal fame,
has resolved to dedicate himself and the fortunes and forces of all he is
concerned in, for restoring Our oppressed Friends in Germany, and for that end
has offered to Us by the Illustrious and Our sincerely faithful Colonel,
Alexander Hamilton, his fidelity and service, and that he will on his own
expense gather a strength of six thousand men, and bring them over, as soon as
may be, to any place We shall appoint, either against the Imperialists, or any
other of Our Enemies, and maintain them on his own charge, and do Us all
faithful and vigorous service with them, till this great Affair be brought to a
good issue, provided We shall authorize this his design with Our protection,
and give him the underwritten Assistance; Therefore, there being nothing dearer
to Us, than to make all vigorous resistance to the common enemies of Liberty,
and having in high estimation the brave undertakings of generous men, We not
only would not reject, but have heartily embraced the nobleness of so good
Resolutions: We have therefore admitted, like-as by the vigor of these
presents We admit, the said Lord Marquis into Our service, Armies and Military
Counsels, on the following Conditions.

First, when ever ^e shall signify to Us, that he is ready to bring over his
Forces, We shall assign him a place for his landing, either to come and join
with Our Armies, or to make an impression elsewhere, as We shall think fit.

Next, if We appoint him to land in any place from whence he shall not come
straight to Us, We shall for strengthening his Forces, send to the place We
shall assign for his landing four thousand Foot out of Our Armies, whom We
shall furnish with all necessaries, and maintain on Our charges a whole year.

Thirdly, because the said Marquis thinks two thousand Horse are necessary for
his Foot, for whose levy and pay he promises all assistance; We shall therefore
think of all ways and means for raising and maintaining these.

Fourthly, We not only give the said Illustrious Marquis the absolute Command
of this Army in our absence, but shall also join to him a Counselor with whom
he may consult in all things, that so his Deliberations be more expedite and
clear.

Fifthly, wha^ever the Illustrious Lord Marquis shall take from the Enemy, the
Lands and Territories shall belong to Us, but the Revenues and all the
Emoluments shall go to him, and to the relief of his Army: yet so as these
Revenues (...) be gathered decently and in order, without Depredations or
Plunderings; since Our design is not to oppress those who have been already
enough pressed, but rather to deliver them from the oppressions of others, as
much as by the Divine assistance We can.

Sixthly, that the Marquis may more effectually perform what he has bravely
resolved, and may sooner make those warlike Instruments of his own invention,
on which he relies much in his Expedition, An. 1630.
We shall not only with the first occasion furnish him with a hundred
Ship-pounds of crude Iron, but shall also assign Hammers for working it
according to his design; of which Instruments he has promised to leave a Model
with Us, and We shall be careful that none of Our Servants shall make use of
them before he has first made trial of them himself.

Seventhly, W^ shall also furnish him with three hundred and seventy
Ship-pounds of Iron-ball for his Guns, and two thousand and five hundred Pikes,
and as many Muskets.

Eighthly, whenever the Marquis shall advertise Us of his needing Gunpowder,
We shall assign him Bills of Exchange in Holland for buying seventy two
Ship-pounds of Gunpowder.

Ninthly, if any other Kings or States shall concur with Us, all they
contribute shall be at Our disposal; but if the Marquis his necessities require
further assistance, We shall not abandon him, but faithfully assist him, as
much as Our Affairs shall permit.

Tenthly, for all which the said Illustrious Lord Marquis with all his Forces
has promised Fidelity to Us, and shall be bound to it as well as Our men, and
these who receive Our Pay, are, for which both he and all his Captains shall be
particularly engaged.

But because there is to be a Treaty betwixt Our Commissioners and the
Imperialists at Dantzick, therefore if a Peace shall be there concluded, so
that We shall not need the Service of the Marquis and his Army, he has obliged
himself to pay for the foresaid Materials at their entire value.

All which things being thus concluded, and to be firmly observed by Us, We
have subscribed these Articles with Our Hand, and commanded Our Royal Seal to
be put to them.

At our Castle in Stockholm the last of May, Anno Dom. 1630. Signed, Gustavus
Adolphus. Locus Sigilli.



These were signed by the King of Sweden at Stockholm the thirtieth of May,
1630. which was the day after the Prince of Wales his birth, (His Majesty who
now reigns, whom God long preserve) at whose Christening the Marquis had the
honor to represent the King of Bohemia, who was one of his Godfathers, K.
Charles 2d. is born, and baptized, the Marquis representing the King of
Bohemia, who was Godfather.
the King of France being the other, who was also represented by the Duke of
Lenox; and at this time a Stall of the Order becoming vacant, His Majesty
conferred on the Marquis the most noble Order of the Garter, The Marquis is
Knight of the Garter.
that he might go in this Expedition with the more luster.

But to these Articles I shall add the return was sent by the Marquis, which
though not done till the next year, yet is most properly inserted here, because
of the relation it has to the foregoing Paper. What follows is a Translation
taken from an Authentical Sealed Duplicate of the Original in Latin.

WHereas there is a mutual Compact agreed betwixt the most Serene and Mighty
King of Sweden and me, for joining of our Forces; Articles signed by the
Marquis.
that the Articles be fully ratified, and lest any thing afterward fall in
which may put a stop in our Counsels, or give matter for sinistrous Glosses, I
therefore subscribe for my part all the Articles, adding only the following
Explication to some of them.

To the first, if the most Serene King assign me a place for landing, I vow and
promise by the grace of God to do it, betwixt and the day of the next June.

To the second, if the most Serene King of Sweden send me the agreed number of
Soldiers out of his Own Forces, at the place and time appointed, I understand
that by furnishing them with all necessaries, a full and entire Pay without any
deductions be laid down for a whole year, according to the establishment of His
Majesty with his Own Officers.

Besides, if the most Serene King cannot allow of so great a diminution of His
Forces, it will be necessary that He not only settle a Fond, for such a sum
as may levy, arm, and pay* as many Soldiers, but there will be need of some
more; for the odds will be vastly great betwixt His Majesty's trained
Soldiers, and a sudden Levy of raw Novices.

To the third, since the Article of the Horse is conceived in general terms, on
both sides, nothing being certainly fixed on either, it will be expedient that
Your Sacred Majesty declare Your mind in it plainly, how far You oblige Your
self: and what shall be agreed for me, betwixt Your Majesty and these to whom
this Affair is trusted by me, I bind my self to ratify.

To the fifth, since the reasons of my Expedition to Germany are the same with
Your Majesty's, I have firmly resolved to help and relieve the oppressed
Princes and States of Germany, with the ease of all these burdens with which
they are now pressed, and therefore shall do every thing in order, and
decently, as becomes most friendly Auxiliaries; and if any thing be taken by me
from the common Enemy, I shall desire nothing more than that the right of it be
entirely and inviolably Your Majesty's.

To the ninth, since I have devoted my whole fortune with all my interests for
promoting this our Design, I promise that whatever any shall contribute for it,
shall all be laid out for this War, which I shall with my whole Forces manage
and carry on, till either it please God that You obtain a desired Peace, or
that the Liberty of Germany, which is now oppressed, be restored.

To the tenth, since by this Article Your Majesty requires and expects Fidelity
from me and my Army, I James Marquis of Hamilton, by these presents give my
Faith for my self and them, and bind both my self and them; and for the
Confirmation of this I do subscribe this Article with all the preceding, and
put my Seal to it,

at London the first of March, Anno Dom. 1631. Signed, Hamilton Locus Sigilli.



Ramsay had in Commission to deal with any Scottish or English Officers who
served beyond Sea, to come and serve under the Marquis; and finding Mackay the
Lord Reay in good reputation, Ramsay treats with the Lord Reay.
he dealt with him to engage in his Service, who cordially undertook it, and
some months after that wrote to the Marquis, (which Letter is preserved:) That
though the King of Sweden had given him the Command of three Regiments, and
made him Captain of his Guards; yet he was so desirous to put life in his noble
designs, that he would serve him, were it but to carry a Pike in his Army: and
thus Ramsay returned, and Colonel Hamilton with him. Whereupon the Marquis went
about the executing of his designs, and the levying of his men, but all was
according to the Kings Orders and Instructions; yet His Majesty seemed only a
consenter to it. The Levies went on all this Winter, in which many were
backward, because the King owned them so little. As for Money, the King
advanced a good sum, though far short of what was necessary: but he gave the
Marquis a Lease of the Customs of the Wines in Scotland for 16 years, upon
which Security he and all his friends raised as much Money as the design
required. Many of the Marquis his friends did in the beginning dissuade him
from the undertaking, apprehending the hazards both of his person and fortune,
which were visible from an attempt that was full of dubious success; but when
they saw him engaged in it, they did all very frankly concur, mortgaging their
Fortunes for raising such sums of Money as were necessary for the Expedition.

Next Spring the Marquis sent Ramsay to Holland, to see what assistance he
might expect from the States, An. 1631.
and in particular to deal with some British Officers who were then in their
Service, to come and take employment in his Army. He likewise sent one
Elphinston to the King of Sweden, Ramsay is sent over to the States, and
Elphinston to the King of Sweden.
to show him, that he would be ready to land with his Army in June or July, and
to press that the Forces he was to have from the Swede might be ready to meet
him where ever he were appointed to land his men: or if the King of Sweden
could not spare so many men, that he would order the money for their Levy and
Pay to be sent to Hamburg, or to any other Bank, that so the Marquis might levy
them himself. Upon this the King of Sweden sent the Lord Reay first to Denmark,
and then to Holland, for carrying on of those Levies; and committed the levying
of 3000 Foot and 1000 Horse to Colonel Farensback, The King was betrayed by
Farensback.
a Leeflander of good repute in the Wars; who had served the Emperor, but for
I know not what crime had lost his favor, and undertaken the Service of the
Swede, and seemed to be going on with his Levy till the time was past, and then
did basely run over to the Emperor; showing how great a Service he had done by
his cousening the King of Sweden, since he hoped the failing of the Swedish
Auxiliaries would keep the Marquis of Hamilton's Army from coming over that
Summer.

King Gustavus was now in Germany, and by his frequent Letters pressed the
Marquis his dispatch, He pressed the Marquis to come in all haste,
for he was then in great straits: the Princes of Germany begun to fear his
success, and were not so forward in joining with him as he expected; and by
diverse Letters, both from himself, and Camerarius his Ambassador in Holland,
and Salvius his Agent in Hamburg, it appears that the Princes of Germany took
their measures chiefly from the Kings resolutions. The King of Sweden also
desired a League with the King, and that the King should send over ten thousand
men, whom the King of Britain should maintain during the Wars, and desires a
League with the King.
and that Army, with the other twelve thousand, should be under the Marquis his
Command as General: upon which the King of Sweden should oblige himself, never
to make Peace with the Emperor till the Palatinat were restored. To this the
King gave a good hearing, and promised to send over an Ambassador to finish
the Agreement; and in the mean time the Marquis his dispatch was hasted forward
with all diligence. His Army was partly Scots, partly English, and they were to
be transported in the Kings Ships; the Scottish Forces were to be shipped at
Leith, and the English at Yarmouth, and Yarmouth-Road was to be their
Rendezvous.

In the end of May both Reay and Ramsay came out of Holland to England. Ramsay
got nothing done with the States, who would give no assistance to the Marquis,
till the King formally engaged himself; yet he got some Officers to come over,
and in particular that gallant English Gentleman, Sir Jacob Ashly, who had
acquired much reputation in the Dutch Wars: but Ramsay drew much trouble on
himself, for being a man of an intemperate tongue, he had talked loosly of the
Court of England to the Lord Reay. At this time the Marquis was in Scotland,
drawing the Soldiers together, and having made all ready there, he returned to
Court, having nothing more to do but to kiss His Majesty's Hand, and receive
his last Commands: but there was then at Court the Lord Ochiltree, Reay
acccuseth Ramsay, and Ochiltree the Marquis.
a man of a subtle spirit and good parts, had not those endowments of his mind
been stained with some ill qualities. He had acquired some interest in Court by
the service he did the Earl of Niddisdale in the matter of the Kings Revocation
and the Commission of Surrenders, (which to explain were too long a digression
here, and needless to all who understand how the Rights of the Titles were at
that time unsettled in Scotland.) His malice against the Marquis was
hereditary, he being the Son of Captain James Stewart, who in King James his
Minority, when the Hamiltons were groundlesly and in a mock-Parliament
attainted, carried the Title of Earl of Arran; and possessed their Fortunes.
Lord Reay (upon what irritation I know not) alleged to him, that Mr. Ramsay
had told him, that the Marquises designs were not upon Germany but Britain, and
that when this Army was once gathered he purposed to pretend to the Crown of
Scotland. This lie was so ill told, that it could take with none but those
whose Judgments were blinded through malice: for as that Army was very small,
and in no manner of capacity to prosecute such a design, so it was made up of
Scots and English; and most of the Officers were persons of whom the Marquis
had no acquaintance. Reay alleged likewise the testimony of one Mr. Cleazar
Borthwick, Borthwick being a witness clears the Marquis.
to whom Mr. Meldrum should have communicated the same design: but this
testimony turned to his shame, for that person, who was of known integrity,
being brought from Germany, and examined upon what Meldrum had said to him,
desired liberty to send his Deposition to the King sealed, since the
particulars were not fit to be publicly heard; to which the King yielding, he
sent it. The sum of it was, that Meldrum had never communicated any such
design to him; that he had indeed spoken abominably of the King and Court, but
all was in his own name; and that he brought no credence with him from the
Marquis, for his errand to the Swedish Court was only to solicit the payment
of some Arrears due to his Uncle, who had served that Crown; and he had no
Employment from the Marquis, only he got from him Letters of recommendation
for the dispatch of his business, so that whatever he said was understood as
his own sense, and not as a message from the Marquis.

Reay also alleged the testimony of Lieutenant Colonel Lindsay, for a great
part of that he charged on Ramsay. This Lindsay indeed was a brave Gentleman,
and Reay's Lieutenant Colonel, but was killed two or three months before Reay
met with Ochiltree at London. He was in new Brandenburg, with other Swedish
Officers, when Tilly took it in, and all Reay's Regiment was cut to pieces
except a very few; which turned to his eternal disgrace, who in such a hot time
of Action left his Command to come over to England and forge lies: and after
that Reay was in no esteem neither with Scots nor Swedes, and irrecoverably
lost himself in the K. of Swedens opinion. But Reay kept himself from charging
any thing on the Marquis, fixing all he said on Ramsay; which Caution was not
observed by Ochiltree, who drew a representation of the Marquis his interest in
Scotland, to show what probabilities might be of such a design, and reckoned up
all his Kindred and Allies, by which he drew in most of the Nobility of
Scotland, and so fastened suspicions on them all; a madness only incident to
those of Bedlam, to which his malice drove him though he was no fool.

With this account of Reay's and his own he went to the Lord Weston, Weston
carries the Accusation to the King,
then Treasurer of England, and personating great zeal for the safety of King
and Kingdoms, revealed this alleged Treason to him; adding, that it was
probable, all things being now ready to be put in execution, that the Marquis
upon his return, to put things in the more fearful disorder, might (if admitted
to wait in the Kings Bedchamber) murder him. This was a Calumny than which
Hell could not have forged a fouler; for Lord Ochiltree judged that this would
have infallibly produced one of two effects, either raised such a Jealousy in
the Kings thoughts as to have quite ruined the Marquis, since few Princes are
proof against such whispers; or at least it would have stopped his voyage for a
while, till he were tried, and the smallest delay in that would have scattered
his Soldiers; so that this design failing, in which his Honor was now so far
engaged, a stain should lie on him through all Europe. Lord Weston carried this
Story to the King, whether provoked to it out of hatred to the Marquis, or
moved from his zeal and duty to the King, shall not be determined; though the
last was pretended by him, and in many of his Letters to the Marquis, when he
was in Germany, he expressed much friendship for him.

who gives it no good hearing,
But His Majesty knew the Marquis too well, and understood all his motions, and
the progress of this Affair too exactly, to give any credit to this Forgery:
and indeed he rejected listening to it, in terms so full of affection for the
Marquis, as discovered he was incapable of any Jealousy, either of him, or any
of his actions; neither would he hearken to those who only desired that upon
his return he might not be admitted to his Presence, at least not to lie in his
Bedchamber. Within a very little while the Marquis came to Court, utterly
ignorant of the execrable designs of his Adversaries: His Majesty welcomed him
with an air of kindness beyond what he ordinarily gave him, and drawing him
apart, immediately told him all that villainous story which had been whispered
against him. The Confusion this raised in his thoughts was unspeakable, and
opens the whole matter to the Marquis;
being amazed to find himself so horridly misrepresented, knowing his heart to
be full of duty and affection to his Sovereign; he wondered how malice could be
so impudent, as at a time when he was hazarding Life, Honor, Friends, and
Fortune, for the Kings Service, to fasten such a devilish gloss on his
actions: but this surprise was overcome with a greater, when he saw His Majesty
with an unheard of, and truly Royal generosity, express his confidence in him
in such obliging terms, as scarce to allow him to speak in his own
Justification; which seeming to insinuate, he thought he needed to be
vindicated, the Marquis begged he might be presently tried, and offered himself
to restraint till he were cleared. But His Majesty would not hear of that, on
the contrary commanded him to lie in the Bedchamber that night; and made him
lie in the Bedchamber that same night.
and he expressed his confidence and kindness for him, in such a strain both of
behavior and discourse, that the Marquis frequently said, he looked on the
kindness of that night, as that which obliged him more than all the other
public testimonies of the Kings favor and bounty he ever met with; for His
Majesty embraced him with such tender affection, that he had been a monster of
ingratitude, if he had been ever capable of forgetting it: and indeed the
Marquis used to say, that never were his resentments for any usage he
afterward met with so great, but the remembrance of that night stifled them
quite; and it must be confessed to be a passage without example in History,
since the days of the conquering King of Macedon. But the Marquis was not able
to lie under such terrible imputations, wherefore he pressed that Ochiltree
might be put to it to prove what he had alleged: but all he offered against
Ramsay was only a presumption, which Ramsay denied and Reay affirmed; so that
they were both put under Bail, and nothing appeared that did touch the Marquis:
for, though Ramsay had been as guilty as the Lord Reay called him, that left no
imputation on him, since none can be made answerable for those they employ,
unless it appear that they followed the Instructions given them. So the Marquis
was dispatched to Germany. Lord Ochiltree had charged the Marquis with Treason,
Ochiltree tried and sentenced for his Forgeries
and failing so totally in his probation was sent down to Scotland to be tried,
where he had a legal and free Trial for his false Charge, before the
Justice-general, and such As^essors as were appointed to sit with him by the
Privy Council: and had the Marquis repaid him in his own coin, he could not
have escaped capital punishment; but he was satisfied with his own
Justification, and such a Censure put on the Calumniator, as might deter others
from the like attempts; wherefore he was condemned to perpetual Imprisonment in
Blackness Castle, to perpetual Imprisonment*
and he continued there for twenty years. But that all this matter may be ended
at once, ten years after this, when His Majesty was in Scotland in the year
1641, the Marquis was prevailed on, by the addresses Ochiltree made to him, to
procure his liberty from the King; which he was to have done, but at that time
one Captain Stewart, who had married his daughter, was amongst these who
discovered the alleged Plot, commonly called the Incident, (whereof an account
shall be given in its due place:) and this bound up the Marquis from
interposing for Ochiltree's liberty, lest it should have been supposed that he
had done it as a kindness to his Son-in-law for that discovery, which might
have raised some Jealousies.

As for the Lord Reay and Mr. Ramsay, Reay and Ramsay desired a Combat.
they continued the one positively affirming, the other as confidently denying
what was alleged; but in the whole progress of the Trial the King expressed
that concernment in the Marquis, that he seemed earnest even to have Ramsay
vindicated. Ramsay carried himself very fiercely in the pursuit; at length both
of them desired to be judged by the Martial Court, and that they might be
permitted a Combat. Ramsay was the more eager in that, but though Reay did not
decline it, yet he was not so forward as the other. It seems needless to give a
relation of the particular procedure of this Affair, though another, to swell
up his Volume with impertinent Stories, Sandersons Life of King Charles.
has at length set down the Journal of the proceedings of the Martial Court,
with no other design but to heap the more envy on the Marquis, which he usually
does with as much ignorance as malice. All the account to be added shall be in
the words of one against whom there can be no exception: I shall therefore set
down His Majesty's Letter to the Marquis, upon the conclusion of this matter,
which is taken from the Original.

James,
His Majesty's Letter about that Affair.
SInce you went I have not written to you of Mackay's business, because I
neither desire to prophecy nor write half news; but now seeing (by the grace
of God) what shall be the end of it, I have thought fit to be the first
advertiser of it to you. I doubt not but you have heard, that (after long
seeking of proofs for clearing the business as much as could be, and
formalities which could not be eschewed) the Combat was awarded, day set,
weapons appointed: but having seen and considered all that can be said ^n
either side, as likewise the Carriage of both the men, upon mature deliberation
I have resolved not to suffer them to fight; because first, for Mackay, he has
failed so much in his circumstantial probations, especially c^ncerning
Muschamp, upon whom he built as a chief witness, that no body now is any way
satisfied with his accusations; then, for David Ramsay, though we cannot
condemn him for that that is not, yet he has so much and so often offended by
his violent tongue, that we can no ways think him innocent, though not that way
guilty whereof he is accused: wherefore I have commanded the Court shall be
dismissed, and Combat discharged, with a Declaration to this purpose, that
though upon want of good proof the Combat was necessarily awarded, yet upon the
whole matter I am fully satisfied, that there was no such Treason as Mackay had
fancied; and for David Ramsay, though we must clear him of that Treason in
particular, yet not so far in the general, but that he might give occasion
enough by his tongue of great accusation if it had been rightly placed, as by
his foolish presumptuous carriage did appear.

This is the substance, and so short, that it is rather a direction how to
believe others than a Narration it self, one of my chief ends being that you
may so know David Ramsay, that you may not have to do with such a Pest as he
is, suspecting he may seek to insinuate himself to you upon this occasion;
wherefore I must desire you, as you love me, to have nothing to do with him.

To conclude now, I dare say that you shall have no dishonor in this business,
and for my self, I am not ashamed that herein I have showed my self to be

Your faithful Friend and loving Cousin, CHARLES R.
London, May 8. 1632.

But to return to our Story; the King of Sweden appointed General Lesley,
afterward Earl of Levin, to wait on the Marquis at his landing, which he
desired might be at Breme; The Marquis sets sail, and intends for Breme,
and appointed his Agent to deal with the Archbishop of Breme about it, who was
well satisfied, promising him all assistance: he was also put in hope of the
Auxiliary Forces to be in readiness to meet him there; but seeing no other
appearances besides words and promises, he did not think it safe to land his
little Army in a Country so distant from the Swedish Camp, when the Enemy lay
betwixt them, so that he might easily have been cut off before they could join;
therefore he resolved to sail through the Sound, but sails through the Sound*
and land in Pomerania, where none lay betwixt him and the King of Sweden.

On the 16th of July he set sail from Yarmouth-Road, which was the place
appointed for Rendezvous, his Fleet being about 40 Ships: and on the 27th he
came to Elsenor, where he went ashore to kiss the King of Denmark's hand, and
to deliver the Kings Letters to him for a free passage, in case he took that
course; from whence he dispatched Pennington to His Majesty to receive further
Orders, to which he had the following Answer.

James,
I Could not let Colonel Peebles go without telling you, that I have received
your Letter of the 25th of July by Pennington. As for my resolutions concerning
the Affairs of Germany, you shall know now very sh^rtly (by the grace of God.)
I have resolved to dispatch Henry Vane within ten days at furthest, till which
time I thought it not amiss (by these lines) to assure you, that I neither do
nor shall forget you; and then you shall see, that I remember you with that
care and kindness that you may truly expect from

Your loving Friend and Cousin, CHARLES R.
8 Sept. 1631.

On the 29th of July he set sail again, and on the 31th came to the mouth of
the Oder between Voll-Gast and the Isle of Vsedom, where the Swedes had first
landed; so on the 2d and 3d of August he landed his Forces, which upon muster
were found to be above 6000 able men. he lands in Germany with 6000,
The next day they passed over from the Island to the Continent, and there he
had a return from the King of Sweden, by the Messenger he had sent to give him
notice of his safe arrival. That King welcomed these tidings with much joy, and
appointed him to go into Silesia for the reducing of that Country, promising
that the Army he was engaged to give for his assistance should meet him on his
way; and with this he sent him a Commission to be his General in Silesia.

in good time to the King of Sweden.
The same of this Army run through Germany, being represented to be about 20000
men, which struck a great terror into the whole Imperial Party, so high was the
same of the Scots valor: and it was confessed through Germany, that the
Marquis his coming at this time was a great occasion of the famous Victory
obtained at Leipsick in the beginning of the next month; for the fame of this
made the Elector of Saxony agree presently with the Swedes, and encouraged the
whole Protestant Party, who now hoped to see the assistance of Britain prove
more effectual than it had been formerly: it also obliged Tilly to leave about
six or seven thousand more in his Garrisons than otherwise he would have done,
which weakened him much at the next Battle. But the Country they landed in was
totally wasted, both by the Imperial Army, which had been led through it the
former year, and by the Swedish Army that had lately passed it; so that they
met nothing before them, but Vastation, Plague, and Famine.

A little after that the King of Sweden desired the Marquis to come to him, The
Marquis goes to the King of Sweden,
and receive Orders from himself; so he went, and found him on the other side
the Elb at Werben. That King caressed him with the highest expressions of
kindness, professing extraordinary obligations to him, and acknowledged what
advantage the very name of his Army had already done him. The Marquis
discovered in that noble Conqueror an air of Majesty and Courage which could
not be equalled, neither was his Prudence in Affairs inferior to his Conduct
of Armies: but those rare excellences were much soiled with unsupportable Pride
and Ambition, which grew with his success to an intolerable degree. He pressed
the Marquis to solicit his Master earnestly for a more vigorous supply, both of
men and money; and he excused his not sending the Forces he had promised to
meet him, since his design was presently to give Tilly Battle, so that he could
not weaken his Army; but he bade him levy what Germans he could, whose Pay the
King of Sweden said he should advance; and so he sent him away to keep Custrin,
Frankfurt and Lansberg, and other Passes on the Oder, who sends him to keep
some Passes,
for his retreat in case he were beaten.

Whereupon the Marquis marched with his Army from Stetin up to Frankfurt, but
the Famine was so great in this wasted Country that it was scarce possible for
them to subsist. The Plague was also at Frankfurt, which broke in upon their
Army so hotly, where the Plague broke in on his Army.
that in a few days it swept away above a third part of them, and came so near
the Marquis himself, that one of his Pages died of it: yet so tender and so
equally divided was his care of the Soldiers, that notwithstanding of all the
straits they were in none of them mutined or complained of him. After the great
Victory of Leipsick, which altered the whole state of Germany* the King of
Sweden ordered the Marquis to march up to Silesia, though 200 Horse and 300
Foot were all the Auxiliaries he sent him.

At this time the Marquis had notice from the Governor of Crossen, He relieves
Crossen,
which was a good Town in the borders of Silesia in the Swedes hands, that they
were besieged, and were so weak within that they could not hold out long;
whereupon, that being a place of great importance, the Marquis sent Lesley with
500 men for their relief, who no sooner arrived but the Enemy retired, though
they had resolved to assault the Town that morning; and went away in such
haste, that they left a great deal of their Baggage behind them, and some
Cannon, which were taken by these of the Garrison. And a few days after that
the Marquis had intelligence, that the Garrison of Guben (a Town in Silesia in
the Emperors hands) was much weakened; 2500 Soldiers had lien in it, but 2000
were drawn out for recruiting the Imperial Army, and 500 only remained, who as
he heard kept but bad Guard; whereupon he sent Lesley with 600 men to surprise
the place: but his intelligence proved false, for they kept good Watch, and had
barred up two Ports; the third had two Draw-bridges and was well-guarded. But
Lesley lay close in the Suburbs, expecting the letting down of the Bridge at
next Sunrising, for they within knew nothing of his being so near them; so
next morning as the Bridge was let down* Lesley caused a few Horse to come for
making the Port good till the Foot should advance. These of the Town got the
Port shut on them, yet they kept the Bridge; but the Foot coming up, after half
an hours sharp dispute upon the Bridge, they did with Hatchets cut a hole in
the Port, and takes G^ben;
at which a few of the more resolute entered, and opened it for the rest: a
great many of the Enemies were killed, and about 250 Soldiers, with 4 Captains
and some Underofficers, were taken prisoners, who took service under the
Marquis. The taking of this Frontier Town put much courage in his little Army,
and from this he was setting forward to Glogow, the second Town of Silesia,
with good hopes of carrying it: but as he was to march, he received Letters
from the Swedish King, telling him, that by his Agreement with the Duke of
Saxony, that Elector had undertaken to reduce Silesia; wherefore he appointed
the Marquis to follow him into the lower Saxony. The Marquis regrated
extremely, that after he had marched so many days through a desert Country, and
was now come to a plentiful one, where there were fair hopes of good success,
he should be presently called back into those barren and wasted Fields. But he
began to find the King of Sweden was blown up with Success, and neglected those
he had formerly caressed; and Silesia being united to the Crown of Bohemia, he
understood that the King of Sweden would never trust him in any. Country where
the King of Bohemia had interest. He once thought of going forward at all
adventures, but the King of Sweden had ordered his Garrisons in that Country to
acknowledge him no more; so he was forced to return to Custrin, and there he
got Orders to come and besiege Magdeburg. but is recalled to besiege Magdeburg.


His Army was strangely diminished, for he was forced to leave a thousand
behind him with the Plague upon them, and about another thousand were divided
in Garrisons, and so he had but a thousand and five hundred of his own men, and
about three thousand German Foot, whom he had raised; whereupon with these, and
a thousand Swedish Horse, he came and blocked up Magdeburg, which being the
chief Town of the lower Saxony, had a great Garrison of about 3000 within it,
commanded by one of the Counts of Mansfield. That great and flourishing City
had been besieged and taken by Tilly the same year, where the Inhabitants were
cut down, and the City burnt all to ashes, except 80 or a 100 houses about the
great Cathedral, by a cruelty which had not been practiced by the Goths or
Vandals; for neither Age nor Sex was spared, nor was there any cessation till
all were butchered down: and here it was, that Tilly had brought together the
whole plunder had been taken in all his Victories, so that it was full of
riches, besides the great importance of the place. The Marquis could have no
great hopes of carrying it, when they within were almost as strong as he was
without, for all that Bannier brought to his supply, made in the whole not 7000
Horse and Foot: there was no attempting of it by storm, for it could only be
carried by starving them, so that there were no blows given, except in two
little Skirmishes not worth the naming.

At this time the King sent over Sir Hen. Vane Ambassador to the King of
Sweden to enter in a League with him; Sir Henry Vane comes Ambassador to the
King of Sweden.
who gave the Marquis advertisement of his landing from Hamburg, and that he
was ordered to communicate all his Instructions to him, and to proceed in every
thing according to his advice, in particular to espouse all his Concernments as
the Kings own; and with this he sent him the following Letters from His Majesty.

James,
ACcording to my promise I have dispatched Henry Vane, whom I have commanded to
impart unto you both his public and private Instructions; so that it will be a
good excuse for my laziness in writing shortly to you, and a testimony to you,
that your absence neither makes me alter nor forget you; for you may be
assured, that my Trust of you is so well-grounded, that it lies not in the
power of any body to alter me from being

Your loving Friend and Cousin, CHARLES R.
Hampton Court 21 Sept. 1631. POSTSCRIPT.
As you have begun, so I desire you may continue, in letting me hear from you
as often as you have occasion; the last I received from you was the 7th of August.




The other had followed the Ambassador.

James,
Just now I have received a Letter from you, dated the 22th of August from
Stetin, half of which is in Cipher, but I am afraid I shall hardly read it; for
there is so little distance betwixt the numbers, that it seems but one
continued number from the beginning to the end of every line; so that I must
desire you henceforward to distinguish your numbers perfectly: as soon as I
have decyphered this, you shall have an Answer of it from

Your loving Friend and Cousin, CHARLES R.
Hampton Court, 23 Sept. 1631.

The Ambassador desired him to name any place where he might come and speak
with him, before he saw the King of Sweden, for he had no mind to begin his
Treaty till he had spoke with him; and at the same time the King of Sweden
desired him to come to his Camp for a few days, in order to the carrying on the
Treaty, which he knew the British Ambassador was coming to propose.

Whereupon he left his Army under the Command of Lesley and Bannier, and went
to the King of Sweden, The Marqui^ goes to the King of Sweden.
whom he found at Frankford on the Main, much blown up with Success, so that he
seemed to make less account of the Kings Friendship; yet he expressed a great
desire to finish the Agreement, and when he appointed Gustavus Horn to negotiat
with the Ambassador, he ordained him to make the Marquis Vmpire of all their
Differences, declaring, that he would stand to his Decision.

This, which is yet to be seen under his Hand and Signet, was an unusual
Complement from that high-spirited King; but the Marquis thought not fit to put
it to the Test, how much of it was meant for reality. He pressed the King of
Sweden for more Auxiliaries, but was sent back by him to his Army, loaded only
with hopes and fair words. So he came again to Magdeburg about the end of
December, Magdeburg comes to a Parley;
where he found that they within were much straightened, and (as another Historian
acknowledges) had Bannier been as forward as the Marquis was, the Town might
have been rendered. On Christmass-Eve they came to a Parley, and would have in
few days rendered it: but on the second day of their Treaty they had notice that
Papenheim was coming with an Army to their relief, whereupon the Treaty broke
up, An. 1632.
and Bannier would have been retiring. The Marquis pressed his stay, but he
produced his Orders to command all the Dutch and Swedish Forces, and not to
hazard an Engagement. This the Marquis looked on as a great breach of
Agreement, that any should have Command in his Army but himself, but he must be
patient; whereupon he retired to Saltsa, two leagues from the City, where he
expected Duke Weimar with 5000 men, and resolved on his arrival to have given
Papenheim battle: but Weimar came not, and Bannier drew his men yet further
away to Kalbe, a league and a half off, and passed the River Sala, pressing the
Marquis to pass with him, so afraid was he of Papenheim; but the Marquis sent
Sir Jacob Ashley to view the Pass, who told him it was so good, that he might
safely march away in a quarter of an hours warning, in spite of Papenheim and
his Army, upon which he would not stir. Meanwhile Papenheim advanced with his
Army, but is relieved by Papenheim,
which he gave out to be ten or twelve thousand, though it was only 4700 men;
but, to make the fame of it greater, the Purveyors who went before him made
provision for near thrice so many: his men were drawn out of Garrisons, and
brought up in all haste; and if Bannier had not been stiff, it had been easy
to have fought him, and the least foil given him had made Magdeburg their own.
Papenheim getting to Magdeburg, and finding that it could not be kept, who
leaves it.
marched away with the Garrison, and every thing worth carrying with them; but
when he came out of the Town, the Marquis and he faced one another in a Plain
betwixt Kalbe and Saltsa, and the Marquis, though very much weaker than he, yet
had a great mind to have engaged: but Bannier would not think of it, neither
had Papenheim any mind to provoke them, and so he marched away: thus Duke
Weimar's slowness, and Bannier's carefulness, lost them that occasion. After
Papenheim was gone the Marquis entered Magdeburg, where he found they had left
about 40 piece of Cannon, and great store of Ammunition, with plenty of Corns:
he staid there till the beginning of February, that the King of Sweden ordered
him to lie about Halberstadt: but his Soldiers were ill-entertained, and those
he had levied in Germany were pressing for Pay, which should have been advanced
by the King of Sweden; therefore in the middle of February he went to that
King, who received him with his former kindness: and by other Letters from His
Majesty he found, he was still so happy as to retain the room he had in his
Heart, which appeared by the two following he found there from His Majesty.

James,
I Have received four Letters from you almost all together, (to wit, of the
23th of September, of the 8th and 14th of October, and of the 11th of November;
this last being under Henry Vane's Cover:) which makes me not let this Post go,
without letting you know of the receipt of your Letters, having little other
thing to write to you at this time; because I am taking two or three days to
make a full Dispatch to you and Henry Vane, that you may know the uttermost of
what you may expect from hence, assuring you that in all these Conditions you
shall still find me to be

Your loving Friend and Cousin, CHARLES R.
Whitehall, 16 December. 1631.

James,
YOu know that I am lazy enough in writing, being willing to find excuses to
write short Letters; therefore, though I confess that at this time I have
matter sufficient to fill a long Letter, yet in earnest (having commanded Henry
Vane to acquaint you fully with all my resolutions) it were needless to trouble
my self with writing, or you with reading, a long Letter: therefore I will
only say, that you will find that I neither mean to forget, or break my
Promises to you, and that you will not be unluckie if you have but as good
fortune in all your actions, as is wished to you by

Your loving Friend and Cousin, CHARLES R.
Whitehall, 31 December. 1631.

But there were great rubs in the Treaty with England: the main thing pressed
by the Ambassador was, that the King of Sweden should give the Marquis an
Army, The King of Sweden proposes unmeasurable terms to the King.
with which and the Forces and Moneys to be sent from England, he should fall
in on the Palatinat. But the King of Sweden proposed unreasonable Conditions,
demanding greater Assistance from the King of Bohemia than the whole Palatinat
could have given in its most flourishing Condition, and some Cities of the
Palatinat to be put into his hands till the Wars were ended; with many other
hard Conditions, almost as severe as these which had been proposed by the
Emperor: so that the Marquis did clearly perceive, Gustavus was beginning to
reckon on all Germany as his Conquest, and that he was to give what Laws he
pleased in it. Thus the Ambassador and he were in very ill terms, but he
continued to use the Marquis with great civility; yet he still declined to give
him a Commission to levy a new Army, neither would he pay him those Sums of
Money he had laid out in his Service; and his Chancellor said to him, they
knew very well he had spent none of his own Money, having gotten 100000 l. from
his Master. He answered, though that were true, he and his Master were to
reckon, but that must not be set to their Account.

In April the Marquis desired, that some order should be taken with the
remainders of his Army till he got a new one, for their number at that time
could only have made him a Colonel, but not a General; so they were reduced
into two Regiments, The Marquis's Army is reduced to two Regiments.
the one of English, and the other of Scots: the English were commanded by
Colonel Bellandin, since made Lord Bellandin, and the Scots by Colonel
Hamilton, and they were put in Duke Weimar's Army.

The Marquis sent over Sir Jacob Ashley to give the King accounts of what
passed, who was quickly dispatched back with the following Letter.

James,
YOu did very well to acknowledge to the Chancellor of Swede his allegation
concerning the 100000 l. that he supposed you had from me for His Masters
Service, and so much as you did reply to him thereupon was good; but methinks
you might have adde^ that, that would more plainly have showed him his error,
which is, That if his Master would not account to you for what I gave you, yet,
if he will take notice of it that way, it were reason not only that he should
thank me for it, but also suffer me to put it on his account in part of that
Assistance I am to give him; but if he will (as he ought) stand to his bargain
with you, then he must leave you and me to reckon together, having n^thing to
do to enquire particularly what passes betwixt us. I need write little more to
you at this time, the trust and sufficiency of this Bearer making it needless,
only to recommend him to you as you did to me, and to tell you freely, that
you had done better in my mind if you had reserved to him the English Regiment,
when your Army was reduced. This I write merely of my self, (on my word) for no
body knows that I do this, and I never heard any blame you for it: and for
Jacob Ashley himself, he is so far from censuring of you, that you need wish to
be no better than he calls you; and he solicits your business beyond the
diligence and industry of a fee'd Lawyer. So referring my self for what else I
have to say at this time to him, I rest,

Your constant loving Friend and Cousin, CHARLES R.
London, the last of April, 1632. POSTSCRIPT.
I hope shortly you will be in a possibility to perform your promise concerning
Pictures and Statues at Muneken, therefore now in earnest do not forget it.




All this Summer the Marquis followed the King of Sweden in the quality of a
Volunteer, The King of Sweden refuses to give a new Commission.
of which he was sufficiently weary: but he found that King was so jealous of
him, that he was not to expect any Trust near or in the Palatinat, where he
desired most earnestly to be employed, and that he did put him daily off; in
which the King of Sweden's design was, that by his Impatience he might be
quickened to carry on the Treaty with England on any terms. But no consideration
of his own could make him betray his Masters Service, or drive on Propositions
which he judged so dishonorable for him, as were those he offered about the
Palatinat; wherefore he wrote to His Majesty to receive his positive Commands
what to do. His Majesty's Answer follows.

James,
I Have received three Letters from you by James Lesley, about the 25th of
July, all which I assure you have given me very good satisfaction, as well for
your right understanding of Affairs in general, as to give me a light how to
direct yours in particular, which at this time is the only subject of mine.
One of two you must choose, either to stay, or come away. For the first, it were
very Honorable to do (in the timis of Action) if you had an Employment, but
neither having, nor likely to have any hereafter, it were dullness, not
patience, to stay any longer; yet it is fit to come off handsomely, neither
showing impatience nor coffeehouse, if may be, although I think you have
cause for both: therefore I have commanded Henry Vane to propose a new
Employment f^r you, which though I think it will not take effect, yet it will
show, there is no way unsought for to find you out an Employment with the King
of Sweden. It is, that you may be sent into the Palatinat, to assist the French
with so many men as my Contribution will maintain; which if it may be done,
they promise me to put the lower Palatinat in my hands. This though I do not
hold as Gospel, yet, if this design might be put in practice, it might
certainly prove useful to my Affairs: this being denied, (as I think it will)
you have no more to do but to seek a fair excuse to come home, which will be
best, in my opinion, upon the conclusion of the Treaty between Sweden and Me;
or if any rubs arise, that you might be sent to clear it with me. So that upon
the whole matter my Judgment is, that if you cannot serve me in the Palatinat,
(as I have already said) the best way is, that you take the first civil excuse
to come home to

Your loving Cousin and faithful Friend, CHARLES R.
Oatland, 1 Aug. 1632. POSTSCRIPT.
David Ramsay will (as I imagine) meet with you before you come hither, which
if he do, I hope you will remember what I have said concerning him already.




But at this time Oxenstern demanded a League Offensive and Defensive between
the Crowns of Britain and Sweden, and that the making of Peace in Germany
should be only in the King of Swedens hands. This varying wholly from the
former Treaty, wherein they had only treated about the Affairs of Germany, and
whereby no Peace could be without the Kings consent, the Ambassador and he
broke up in very ill terms; and on the back of this, the Marquis pressing the
King of Sweden to assign him a Country for levying a new Army, The Treaty
breaks up.
His Majesty answered him with a new delay: but he told that King, that he had
been now fifteen months from his own Country, and though he had been at a vast
expense he had received nothing in that Service, and that his Heart was too
great to be a perpetual Volunteer, as he had been these diverse months past;
wherefore he pressed for a present Answer. The King of Sweden confessed he had
reason to be weary, and he acknowledged the great obligation he had to him, and
that he would always look upon him as one of his best Friends; but said the
blame of all the delays he met with fell on the English Ambassador, on whom he
fell a-railing with the greatest passion that the Marquis had ever seen him in;
The King of Sweden in ^reat passion.
and in a huffing way pulled the Marquis his Hat out of his hand, and clapped
it on his own head, and went stamping up and down the room in great rage. The
Marquis shunned the Discourse, since as he could not condemn the Ambassador,
so he would not irritat the King of Sweden by an ill-timed Justification of
him: but the chief reason of his passion was, that many of the Princes of
Germany were beginning to talk, that their Deliverer was like to prove a
greater Tyrant than the Emperor had ever been, and he suspected the
Ambassador was Caballing with them.

But the Marquis seeing nothing but delays, desired liberty to return to
England, that he might levy a new Army, and remove any Misunderstandings were
betwixt his Master and the King of Sweden. This Proposition was so fair that it
could not be refused; so on the 8th of September the King signed a Commission
to him for bringing over a new Army, The Marquis returns to England.
and gave him Instructions for ending the Treaty with the King: and a little
after that he took leave of him, and was dismissed by the King of Sweden and
all about him with very high expressions of Friendship, that King telling him,
that in whatsoever place of the World he were, he would ever look upon him as
one of his own.

As he was returning home he received the following Letter from the King.

James,
I Wrote to you in my last to find a pretext to come home, but now I must tell
you, it is not fit to stay any longer where you are; for the impossibility of
your Employment there, and the necessity of your business here, requires your
return; so that at this time I Will say no more but, Nil mihi rescribas, attamen
ipse veni; for you shall be no sooner come than welcome to

Your faithful Friend and Cousin, CHARLES R.
Hampton Court, 24 Sept. 1632.

And thus ended the Marquis his Expedition into Germany, wherein if he missed
that Success which himself or others had expected, it was no miscarriage nor
neglect of his own; nor could it be said that he had failed in a jot of what he
undertook, though almost in every particular the King of Sweden failed to him;
neither was any thing so much the occasion of these neglects he met with in
Germany, as the firm affection he bore his Masters Service: yet though this
lessened his Confidence in him, yet it could not but increase his Esteem of
him. It Is true, he did not survive this long, to give any expressions of it;
for in November next at Lutzen was that great and conquering King brought to
the end of his days, The King of Sweden is killed.
and so all his thoughts and grasping designs did perish with him; only the
Renown of his never-dying Fame survives.

But both Oxenstern and his other Counselors in their Addresses to the
English Court, during the Minority of their young Queen, did recommend all
their Affairs to the Marquis, as to one of their own Nation, with the highest
expressions of Esteem and Friendship; and diverse of the Electors and Princes of
Germany were much taken with his Converse, having seen him in the Swedish Camp,
and continued their Friendship with him both by Correspondence and Presents.

When he returned to Court, The Marquis is well received at Court*
his reception with the King was as affectionate as his parting had been, and
he continued about His Majesty in the highest Characters of Favor; but he kept
himself much out of business, meddling little in Scottish Affairs, except it had
been to procure a particular kindness to his Friends, in which he was so
sparing, that many were dissatisfied with him for it.

Next year the King went into Scotland, to receive the Crown of that his
ancient and native Kingdom, and held a Parliament there; An. 1633.
thither did the Marquis follow him, assisting at that Ceremony according to
his Rank with much joy. He waits on the King to his Coronation in Scotland*
But his Expedition to Germany had involved him and all his Friends in vast
Debts; yet his Lease of the Customs of the Wines was a good Security, and fully
able to free him of that burden, and was ratified in that Parliament. But the
Earl of Traquair, who was then Treasurer-Deputy, suggested to the King, that
these Customs were the readiest and surest Moneys that the King had, and that
the Treasury would signify little without them: wherefore he moved that some
other way might be fallen upon, for refunding the Expense the Marquis had been
at for his Army in Germany, that so these Customs might return to the Treasury.
All the Marquis his Friends having got a hint of Traquair's Proposition,
pressed him to oppose it with all his Interest; since the Security he had was
good, and well-settled on him by Law, and any new Project could be fallen on,
would neither prove so sure, nor so speedy Payment. But Traquair's Proposition
pleased the King well, and he moved it to the Marquis, who without either
murmuring or reluctance offered back his Lease of the Customs of the Wines, and
submitted his whole pretension to the King.

But His Majesty was both just and generous, and so would not suffer him to be
ruined by those Burdens which had been contracted by his own Commands;
wherefore a Taxation being laid on the Country by the Parliament for the Kings
supply, together with another Imposition of two of the ten, which was then the
Interest of Money, the Collecting of these was put in the Marquis his hands
till he should be paid all was due to him by His Majesty for the Expedition to
Germany, and for some other great Sums His Majesty was owing, which he
undertook took to pay; and for the rest he was to be accomptable to the
Treasury, upon which he yielded up his Lease of the Customs of the Wines.

In the end of that year His Majesty sent down the Marquis to settle, with the
several Shires and Buroughs of Scotland, both for the Taxation and the Two of
the ten: and though his Power in that was full, so that he might have acted
singly; yet he would do nothing without the consent of the Lords of Exchequer
and Session. He spent some months in these Agreements, and after he had
settled with the greatest part, he returned to his attendance at Court, having
devolved the management of his Fortune and private Affairs on his Friends: and
thus his Fortune was in a few years recovered from the burdens it lay under.

A year after that he was sent down again to examine the Earl of Morton's
Accounts, who was Treasurer, and then he gave a new Instance of his being
against the engrossing of Power; for though his Trust warranted him to have
acted singly, yet he carried along with him in all his procedure the whole
Exchequer.

And this is all the meddling that (for ought I find) he had in public Affairs
till the Year 1638.

MEMOIRES OF THE LIFE and ACTIONS OF James Duke of Hamilton, etc.
LIB. II. Of what passed while the Marquis was Commissioner in Scotland in the
Years 1638, and 1639.
HItherto the course of the Marquis his Life had been more easy and serene,
An. 1638.
but henceforth we shall find it a tract of Clouds and Storms; for now he came
to engage in a disorderly Affair, The Marquis enters on the Affairs of Scotland.
if ever any was: he found it troubled, but had no hand in the occasions of
these Confusions, having abstracted himself from public Affairs for diverse
years, meddling no further than in giving general Advices when called for; and
so far had he been from engaging himself in any designs, that at his entry upon
business there was neither Privy Counselor, Officer of State, nor Lord of the
Session, of his recommending, or that depended on him, the Justice-Clerk only
excepted.

But because this year gave the rise to those dismal Troubles, whose tragical
Catastrophe we have all felt so sensibly, and since the Affairs of Scotland
were wholly and only trusted to the Marquis his Conduct for this year, the
account of it shall be enlarged, perhaps to tediousness: but it is hoped that
the importance of the Narration shall more than compense the pain of its
length. And this is the more necessary, because the Marquis his Actions this
year are generally so little known, and so ill represented; besides, that great
Encouragement is offered from the copious and authentic materials yet extant,
for composing of this Narration. But to give a clearer prospect of the State of
things before his Negotiation, an account must be given of the rise and
occasion of this years Disorders, and of the state in which he found matters at
his first Engagement.

A brief Summary of Church Affairs from the Reformation to the present Year.
What is here to be said as a requisite Introduction to these Transaction^, is
indeed out of the Road, and not made out by his Papers; but the Discourse will
be grateful, it is presumed, to those who have not had a true, full, and clear
Information of the particular passages of these Times: whereof though some have
attempted to give the World an account, yet none (for ought I know) has done
it upon knowledge or authentic Information, as what is here said of these
matters shall be.

It is well known that in Scotland the first Reformation from the corruptions
of Popery was Popular, without the concurrence or allowance of Supreme
Authority, though the Nobility for the most part joined in it; and the
Preachers being the chief actors and prosecutors of it, came to have great
power over the People and interest with the Nobility.

The Ministers were popular and factious.
It continued thus during King James his Minority; but no sooner came he to
assume the Government, and to consider the state of the Kingdom, than he found
the power the Ministers had with the People was swelled to such insolence, that
it was more than necessary to limit it to its just bounds: for nothing passed
in the Court or Council but their Pulpits did ring with it, and no favor was
showed to any that were Popishly affected, but Jealousies were infused into the
minds of the People, as if Religion had been in hazard; and the People being
then in their first fervours against Popery, were apt to take those Alarms
pretty hot; neither did the King cherish any who was not devoted to them, but
they did represent him a Favourer of Popery. They also held Opinions which
savoured too much of that Church which was so odious to them, concerning the
power of their Assemblies, and their not being accountable for what they
preached, how Treasonable soever, till it were first judged by the
Church-Judicatory; where all such things were sure of a mild Censure, to say no
worse: diverse other Tenets they held, which were judged inconsistent with good
Government. But many of them being popular Preachers, and of insinuative
tempers, they were much depended upon by the People, who looked on all their
Excesses as holy zeal.

King James bent all his thoughts to the regulating of this, King James brought
in Episcopacy,
and judging that the only course to effectuate it was, to have some few of
greater temper and discretion to be set over the rest, he studied by all means
to get Episcopacy introduced in Scotland; promising himself, by that means, an
infallible remedy of all these Evils, of which he was extremely sensible,
though his great Gentleness made him very slow in punishing them: but they
foreseeing well the Kings Intentions, and the effects they might produce, did
as cautiously resist all his attempts that way.

though not without great and long opposition.
I shall not tell what endeavors that wise and peaceable King used for
compassing of his designs, nor with what hindrances they were obstructed: but
no sooner was he happily settled on the Throne of England, but he went more
roundly to work; and yet it was not without opposition that he got Episcopacy
settled and ratified in Parliament, Anno 1612. But though great art was used to
get Assemblies framed to the Kings designs, he could never compass it.

Episcopacy being settled, King James also erected a High Commission Court, for
punishing such as offended against that Constitution of the Church. This Court
was made up of Bishops, and other Noblemen and Gentlemen; but the Bishops being
those who kept the Diets of it best, most of the Secular persons absenting
themselves often on design, and the Bishops leading all matters in it, it was
counted their Court, and the odium of all that passed there fell to their share.

This step being made, King James advanced toward an Uniformity with England
in Worship and other Ceremonies; moved to it, either that he might thereby make
way for the Union of both Kingdoms, which of all things he most desired, or
that he might root the seeds of Puritanism out of Scotland. But in this he met
greater opposition, and all the progress he made in it was, that in one
Assembly it was decreed, there should be a Liturgy drawn for the use of the
Church of Scotland; and in another at Perth the Five Articles, that bore the
name of that place, were settled not without great contradiction: and these
were the Confirmation of Children, Private Baptism, Private Communion in cases
of necessity, Kneeling in Communicating, the Observation of the Holy days of
the Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and Pentecost. Those were also
established in Parliament, Anno 1621. where the Marquis his Father was
Commissioner, and managed that Affair so dexterously, that it gained him an
equal share of esteem and hatred, these things being generally very odious. As
King James was going on warily in this design, he died, King James dies.
lamented and admired by all the World; and even those who had irritated him
most when alive, did bewail his Death with deep and just regrates.

He was succeeded in his Throne by his only Son CHARLES the First, who was
zealously conscientious for Episcopacy; King Charles goes on in hi^ designs for
the Church.
so what his Father begun out of Policy, was prosecuted by him out of
Conscience. The Bishops therefore were cherished by him with all imaginable
expressions of kindness and confidence; but they lost all their esteem with the
People, and that upon diverse accounts. The People of Scotland had drunk in a
deep prejudice against every thing that savoured of Popery. Prejudices are
conceived against the Bi^hops;
This the Bishops judged was too high, and therefore took all means possible to
lessen it, both in Sermons and Discourses, mollifying their Opinions and
commending their Persons, not without some reflections on the Reformers. But
this was so far from gaining their design, that it abated nothing of the zeal
was against Popery, they are charged with Popery,
but very much heightened the rage against themselves, as favoring it too much.

There were also subtle Questions started some years before in Holland about
Predestination and Grace; and Arminius his Opinion, and Arminianism,
as it was condemned in a Synod at Dort, so was generally ill reported of in
all Reformed Churches, and nowhere worse than in Scotland: but most of the
Bishops, and their Adherents, undertook openly and zealously the defense of
these Tenets. and breach of Sabbath.
Likewise the Scottish Ministers and People had ever a great respect to the
Lords Day, and generally the Morality of it is reckoned an Article of Faith
among them: but the Bishops not only undertook to beat down this Opinion, but
by their Practices expressed their neglect of that Day; and after all this they
declared themselves avowed Zealots for the Liturgy and Ceremonies of England,
which were held by the Zealous of Scotland all one with Popery. Upon these
accounts it was, that they lost all their esteem with the People.

Neither stood they in better terms with the Nobility, The Nobility became
jealous of them.
who at that time were as considerable as ever Scotland saw them; and so proved
both more sensible of Injuries, and more capable of resenting them. They were
offended with them, because they seemed to have more interest with the King
than themselves had, so that Favors were mainly distributed by their
recommendation; they were also upon all Affairs, nine of them were Privy
Counselors, diverse of them were of the Exchequer, Spottiswood Archbishop of
S. Andrews was made Chancellor, and Maxwell Bishop of Ross was fair for the
Treasury, and engaged in a high rivalry with the Earl of Traquair, then
Treasurer, which tended not a little to help forward their Ruin. And besides
this, they began to pretend highly to the Tithes and Impropriations, and had
gotten one Learmonth a Minister presented Abbot of Lindoris, and seemed
confident to get that State of Abbots, with all the Revenue and Power belonging
to it, again restored into the hands of Churchmen; designing also, that
according to the first Institution of the College of Justice, the half of them
should be Churchmen. This could not but touch many of the Nobility in the
quick, who were too large sharers in the Patrimony of the Church, not to be
very sensible of it.

They were no less hateful to the Ministry, because of their Pride, which was
cried out upon as unsupportable. Their Presbyters dislike them.
Great complaints were also generally made of Simoniacal pactions with their
Servants, which was imputed to the Masters, as if it had been for their
advantage, at least by their allowance. They also exacted a new Oath of
Intrants, (besides what was in the Act of Parliament for obedience to their
Ordinary) in which they were obliged to obey the Articles of Perth, and submit
to the Liturgy and Canons. They were also making daily Inroads upon their
Jurisdiction, of which the Ministers were very sensible; and universally their
great rigor against any that favored of Puritanism, together with their
meddling in all Secular Affairs, and relinquishing their Dioceses to wait on the
Court and Council, made them the object of all men's fury.

The Liturgy is appointed for Scotland.
But that which heightened all to a Crisis was, their advising the King to
introduce some Innovations in the Church by his own Authority* things had
prospered so ill in General Assemblies, that they thought of these no more. And
in the Parliament 1633. that small addition to the Prerogative, that the King
might appoint what Habits he pleased to the Clergy, met vigorous opposition,
notwithstanding the King seemed much concerned for it; those who opposed it
being sharply taken up, and much neglected by His Majesty, which stuck deep in
their hearts, the Bishops bearing all the blame of it.

At this time a Liturgy was drawn for Scotland, or rather the English reprinted
with that Title, save that it had some Alterations which rendered it more
invidious and less satisfactory; and after long consulting about it and another
Book of Canons, they were at length agreed to, that the one should be the form
of the Scotsh Worship, and the other the Model of their Government, which did
totally vary from their former Practices and Constitutions: and as if all
things had conspired to carry on their Ruin, the Bishops not satisfied with
the general High Commission Court, produced Warrants from the King for setting
up such Commissions in their several Dioceses, in which with other Assessors,
Ministers, and Gentlemen, all of their own nomination, they might punish
offenders.

That was put in practice only by the Bishop of Galloway, who though he was a
pious and learned man, yet was fiery and passionate, and went so roundly to
work, that it was cried out upon as a yoke and bondage which the Nation was not
able to bear.

And after all this the King (advised by the Bishops) commanded the
Service Book to be received through Scotland, and to be read according to the
new book at Edinburgh on Easter Day in the year 1637. yet by the Council it was
delayed till the 23th of July: A Tumult at reading Divine Service.
but then it met with a tumult from Women and the meaner sort of people, whom
though none owned in that Attempt, yet there wanted not enough who suspected
them to have been set on by others. However certain it was, that the constant
Discourse of the discontented Ministers and Noblemen was, that Popery was to be
introduced, and Liberties like to be destroyed, and the Bishops to blame for
all. By such Insinuations it was, that the People were animated unto an
unparallelled Fury, so that they threw Stools at the Dean of Edinburgh when he
begun to read the Service, and interrupted it often, notwithstanding all the
means used by the Lords of Council and Magistrates of Edinburgh to hinder it.
The Lords of Council, as they complained to the King of this Disorder, so they
spared not to lay the greatest blame of it upon the Bishops, which appears from
the following Letter, written by the Earl of Traquair to the Marquis.

My Noble Lord,
AT the meeting of the Council here at Edinburgh the 23th of this instant,
Traquair 's Letter about the occasion of the Troubles.
we found so much appearance of Trouble and Stir like to be amongst people of
all qualities and degrees, upon the urging of this new Service Book, that we
durst no longer forbear to acquaint His Majesty therewith, and humbly to
represent both our Fears, and our opinions how to prevent the Danger; at least
our opinions of the way we would wish His Majesty should keep therein, or
before he determine what course to take for pacifying of the present Stir, or
establishing of the Service Book hereafter; wherein all I will presume to add
to what the Council has written, is to entreat your Lordship to recommend to
His Majesty, that if he be pleased to call to himself any of the Clergy, he
would make choice of some of them, of the wisest and most calm Dispositions;
for certainly some of the leading men amongst them are so violent and forward,
and many times without ground or true judgment, that their want of right
understanding how to compass business of this nature and weight, does often
breed us many difficulties, and their rash and foolish Expressions, and
sometimes Attempts, both in private and public, have bred such a Fear and
Jealousy in the hearts of many, that I am confident, if His Majesty were
rightly informed thereof, he would blame them, and justly think, that from this
and the like proceedings arises the ground of many Mistakes amongst us. They
complain that the former Ages have taken from them many of their Rents, have
robbed them of their Power and Jurisdiction, and even in the Church it self and
Form of Gods Worship have brought in some things that require Reformation: but
as the deeds of these Times, at least the beginnings thereof, were full of
notour and tumultuary disorder, so shall I never think it will prove for the
good either of Gods Service or the Kings, by the same ways or manner of dealing
to press to rectify what was then done amiss. We have a wise and judicious
Master, who will (nor can) urge nothing in this poor Kingdom, which may not be
brought to pass to his contentment: and I am most confident, if he shall be
graciously pleased to hear his faithful Servants inform him of the Truth, he
shall direct that which is just and right; and with the same assurance I dare
promise him Obedience. The interest your Lordship has in this poor Kingdom, but
more particularly the Duty you owe to His Majesty, and the true respect I know
you have ever carried to His Majesty's Honor, and the good of his Service,
makes me thus bold to acquaint your Lordship with this business, which in good
faith is by the folly and misgovernment of some of our Clergymen come to that
height, that the like has not been seen in this Kingdom of a long time. But I
hope your Lordship will take in good part my true meaning, and ever construct
favorably the actions of

Your loving faithful Friend, and humble Servant, TRAQVAIR.
Edinburgh, Aug. 27.

After all inquiry was made, it did not at all appear that any above the meaner
sort were accessory to that Tumult, the sequel whereof in the Afternoon had
almost been Tragical, not only to the Bishop of Edinburgh, but to the Earl of
Roxburgh, for having him in his Coach. But His Majesty, though he was willing
to be gentle to the Transgressors, yet continued firm to his former
Resolutions, of having the Liturgy and Book of Canons established. In October
thereafter a new Tumult fell out in Edinburgh, against the Earl of Traquair and
some of the Bishops, whom the People in their fury went about to have killed:
upon which by Proclamation the Council and Session, and other Courts, were
removed from Edinburgh.

Hereupon the Earl of Roxburgh, who was then Lord Privy Seal, went to Court, to
give the King an account of Affairs: for all this time diverse had petitioned
the Council against these Books, complaining, they were contrary to Religion in
the matter of them, and the Laws of the Land in the manner of bringing them in:
but all he could procure was a Pardon for what was past, to such as should
thenceforth live quietly, and that was proclaimed in December, but was far from
giving satisfaction; for by this time the Malcontents were become
considerable, and had formed themselves into a Body.

It was also studiously infused in the minds of all through Scotland, that the
Bishops were introducing Popery, that many points of Popery were in these
Books, and that the whole of them was both superstitious and illegal. This took
mightily with the Vulgar, and the malecontented Ministers began everywhere to
talk high in their Pulpits against the Bishops; they also formed themselves
into a Body called the Table, where there were Deputies from the Shires and
Buroughs, and a great many Noblemen and Ministers.

That which they pretended was the Security of Religion, They pretend the
Security of Religion, and swear the Covenant.
with the preserving the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of the Land, the Honor
of the King, and the defense of his Authority: and for this end it was judged
fit and necessary to renew the Covenant made in King James his time against
Popery, and signed by that King, with his Council and Family; which, according
to the new draught, was made up first of King James his Covenant, next of a
long Narrative of all Acts of Parliament whereby the Reformed Religion was
ratified; thirdly, of an Addition wherein the late Innovations were sworn
against, till they were judged in a free General Assembly, and declared also to
be abjured in the old Covenant, as formally as if they had been expressly named
in it: and all ended with a Bond of Defense for adhering to one another, in
pursuing the ends of the Covenant. This was no sooner moved, but the advice
took as if it had been an Oracle; so the Covenant was sworn, first at Edinburgh
in the month of February, and then sent everywhere through the Country, to
get the example of those in Edinburgh imitated; which was accordingly done, not
without great appearances of Devotion among all sorts of People, they
pretending it was nothing but the preservation and purity of Religion they
aimed at.

For the Covenant I judge it needless to insert it here, both because of its
length, and that it is in the large Manifesto of the Affairs of this year,
published in His Majesty's Name: and therefore, that Book being both common,
and of great Authority, I do not insert Papers at their length that are to be
found there, and shall only add, that the Originals, and other authentic
Justifications of that Declaration, are in my hands.

The Session or Term was held that Winter at Sterlin, but the Council sat
often at Dalkeith within four miles of Edinburgh; which being then so full of
People, it was not judged fit for the Council to withdraw too far from it.
Petitions were often offered to the Council, encouraged from the Table, full of
Complaints against the Bishops and the late Innovations; but they were as often
rejected. Upon this the Earl of Traquair went to Court, and gave a full account
both of the Petitions, the Humors, and the Strength of the Malcontents: and
that all was occasioned by the Bishops misgovernment, and by the introducing
the lately-authorized Books, with which scarce a Member of the Council (the
Bishops only excepted) was well satisfied; neither were all these cordially
for them, for the Archbishop of S. Andrews from the beginning had withstood
these designs, foreseeing how full of danger the executing of them might prove.
The Archbishop of Glasgow was worse pleased; but the Bishops of Ross, Dumblane,
Brechin, and Galloway, were the great Advancers of them. Traquair represented
also, that the Body of all Scotland was staggering, if not wholly alienated,
from their Duty to the King, and that nothing could recover them out of this
distemper, but assurances of His Majesty's affection to the Protestant
Religion, and of his aversion from Popery, together with the laying aside of
these Books, at least till better Times. At this time also the Covenanting
Lords wrote to the Duke of Lenox, the Marquis of Hamilton, and the Earl of
Morton, who were then at Court, representing their Grievances, and desiring
they would offer their Petition to His Majesty, which was humble enough, though
full of Complaints against these Books; desiring they might be heard to object
against them, offering under the highest pains to prove, they contained things
both contrary to Religion and the Laws of the Land.

But all the Earl of Traquair said was suspected, his prejudices against the
Bishops being known. The opposition he had made the Bishops had rendered him
hitherto very Popular in Scotland, and there want not grounds to suspect him a
secret worker in this opposition to these Books, though he seems to have been
far from cherishing any further designs.

All he could procure from the King was a Proclamation, The King proclaims his
firmness to the Protestant Re-Religion.
Giving assurance of His Majesty's firmness to the Protestant Religion, and
that great care was used in drawing the Liturgy; so that not only it was not
contrary to, but would prove a ready mean to preserve, the true Religion
already received, and beat down all Superstition. Withal the King considering
the disorderly Conventions had been to form Petitions against these Books,
though they deserved a high Censure; yet His Majesty willing to impute that
rather to a preposterous Zeal, than to any Disloyalty, therefore dispensed with
them to all such as should thence forth retire, and return to their Obedience,
whereupon these Conventions were in all time coming discharged under pain of
Treason.

The Tumults grow.
This was proclaimed at Sterlin the nineteenth of February, but was so far from
giving satisfaction, that it proved a crisis to greater Confusion; for it met
with a Protestation as it was proclaimed, sent from those of the Tables, who
notwithstanding continued to sit in that Iunto. An Answer also came from the
Duke of Lennox, and the other Lords at Court, directed only to three of the
Lords of the Covenant in Scotland, the Earls of Rothes, Cassils, and Montrose,
wherein they wrote, that they had communicated their desires to His Majesty,
who answered, that as hitherto he had received all the Petitions they had
offered to the Council; so he had considered them, and would declare His Royal
Intentions about them. The Combustions continuing and growing, the Council
appointed a solemn Meeting to be the first of March at Sterlin, for a full
examining of things that they might send their joint Advices to Court. This was
likewise agreed to by the Lord Chancellor, who was then at Edinburgh, and
undertook for himself, and the rest of the Clergy that were of the Council, to
keep that Appointment. The first of March came, but none of the Clergy kept the
day (the Lord Bishop of Brechin only excepted:) an excuse came from the Lord
Chancellor; but the necessity of Affairs pressed the Lords of the Council to
go on: they continued four days consulting and debating about things, but after
the third day Bishop Brechin left them, seeing in what Determinations they were
likely to close. The issue of their Consulting was to send Sir John Hamilton,
the Justice-Clerk, to the King with Instructions, which follow as they are
taken from the Original yet extant.

INSTRUCTIONS from His MAJESTY'S Council to the Lord Iustice-Clerk, whom they
have ordained to go to Court for His MAJESTY'S service.
Instructions to the Justice-Clerk, concerning the rise and remedies of these
Disorders.
IN the first place you are to receive from the Clerk of the Council all the
Acts past, since our meeting upon the first of March instant.

Item, You have to represent to his Majesty, That the Diet of Council was
appointed to be solemnly kept, by the advice of the Lord Chancellor, and
remnant Lords of the Clergy, being at Edinburgh for the time, who assured us,
that they should keep the Diet precisely; but at our meeting at Sterlin, we
received a Letter of excuse from the Lord Chancellor, which forced us to
proceed without his Lordships presence, or any others of the Lords of the
Clergy, except the Bishop of Brechin, who attended us three days, but removed
before the closing of our Opinions anent the business.

Item, That immediately after we had resolved to direct you with a Letter of
Trust to His Majesty, we did send our Letter to the Lord Chancellor,
acquainting him with our proceedings, and desiring him to consider thereof, and
if he approved the same, to sign them, and to cause the remnant Lords of the
Clergy nearest unto him, and namely the Bishop of Brechin, who was an ear and
eye Witness to our Consultations, to sign the same, and by their Letter to His
Majesty to signify their approbation thereof; or if his Lordship did find some
other way more convenient for His Majesty's Honor, and the Peace of the
Country, that his Lordship by his Letter to the Lord Treasurer, or Privie-Seal,
would acquaint them therewith, to the effect they might convene the Council for
consulting thereabout.

Item, That you show His Majesty, that His Majesty's Council all in one voice
finds, that the causes of the general Combustions in the Country, are the Fears
apprehended of Innovation of Religion, and Discipline of the Kirk (established
by the Laws of the Kingdom) by occasion of the Service Book, Book of Canons,
and High Commission, and from the Introduction thereof, contrary to, or without
warrant of the Laws of the Kingdom.

Item, You are to represent to His Majesty our humble opinion, That seeing as
we conceive the Service Book, Book of Canons, and High Commission, (as it is
set down,) are the occasion of this Combustion, and that the Subjects offer
themselves, upon peril of their Lives and Fortunes, to clear that the said
Service Book and others foresaid, contain diverse Points, contrary to the
Religion presently professed, and Laws of the Kingdom, in matter and manner of
Introduction; That the Lords think it expedient, that it be represented to His
Majesty's gracious Consideration, if His Majesty may be pleased to declare, as
an act of his singular Justice; that he will take trial of His Subjects
Grievances, and the reasons thereof, in His own time, and in His own way,
according to the Laws of this Kingdom; and that His Majesty may be pleased
g^aciously to declare, that in the mean time he will not press nor urge His
Subjects therewith, notwithstanding any Act, or Warrant made in the contrary.

And in case His Majesty shall be graciously pleased to approve of our humble
opinions, you are thereafter to represent to His Majesty's gracious and wise
Consideration, if it shall not be fitting to consult His Majesty's Council, or
some such of them as He shall be pleased to call to Himself, or allow to be
sent from the Table, both about the time and way of doing of it.

And if His Majesty (as God forbid) shall dislike of what we have conceived
most conducing to His Majesty's Service, and Peace of the Kingdom, you are to
urge by all the arguments you can, that His Majesty do not determine upon any
other course, until some at least of His Council from this, be heard to give
the reasons of their Opinions; and in this case you are likewise to represent
to His Majesty's Consideration, if it shall not be fitting and necessary to
call for His Informers, together with some of His Council, that in His Own
presence, he may hear the Reasons of both Informations fully debated.

You shall likewise show His Majesty, that His Council having taken to their
Consideration, what further was to be done for composing and settling of the
present Combustion within the Kingdom, and dissipating of the Convocations and
Gatherings within the same, seeing Proclamations are already made and
published, discharging all such Convocations and unlawful Meetings, the Lords,
after debating, find they can do no further than is already done herein, until
His Majesty's pleasure be returned to this our humble Remonstrance.

Signed, Traquair. Roxburgh. Winton. Perth. Wigton. Kinghorn. Lauderdale.
Southesk. Angus. Lorn. Down. Elphinston. Napier. J. Hay. Tho. Hope. Ja.
Carmichael. W. Elpinston.


These Instructions being afterward transmitted to the Lords of the Clergy,
were returned signed as follows, St. Andrews. Da. Edin. Io. Dumblanen. Tho.
Gallovid. Wall. Brechinen.


This was seconded by a private Letter to the King, signed by Traquair and
Roxburgh, which follows copied from the Original.

Most Sacred Sovereign,
A Letter from Traquair and Roxburgh to the King.
ALthough the miserable Estate of this poor Kingdom will be sufficiently
understood by Your Majesty from this Gentleman, Sir John Hamilton's Relation;
yet we conceive our selves in a special manner bound and obliged to represent
what we conceive does so nearly concern Your Majesty's Honor and Service; and
therefore give us leave truly and faithfully to tell Your Majesty, that since
the last Proclamation, the fear of Innovation of Religion is so apprehended by
all sorts of Subjects from all corners of this Kingdom, that there is nothing
to be seen here but a general Combustion, and all men strengthening themselves
by subscribing of Bonds, and by all other means for resisting of that which
they seem so much to fear. This is come to such a height, and daily like to
increase more and more, that we see not a probability of Force or Power within
this Kingdom to repress this Fury, except Your Majesty may be graciously
pleased, by some Act of Your Own, to secure them of that which they seem so
much to apprehend, by the inbringing of the Books of Common Prayer and Canons.

The way which the Subjects have taken and daily go about in the prosecution of
their business is inexcusable, and no ways agreeable to the duty of good
Subjects, but Your Majesty is wisely to consider what is the best and safest
course for Your Own Honor and Peace of Your Government; and since Religion is
pretended to be the cause of all, if it shall not be a safe course to free them
at this time of Fears, by which means the wiser sort will be satisfied, and so
Your Majesty enabled with less pain or trouble to overtake the Insolences of
any, who shall be found to have kicked against Authority.

We are the rather moved at this time to be of this opinion, that having found
it the opinion, not only of those to whom Your Majesty wrote in particular,
(except of the Marquis of Huntley, who as yet is not come from the North:) but
of most of the Noblemen, and men of respect within this Kingdom: we find few or
none well-satisfied with this business, or to whom we dare advise Your Majesty
to trust in the prosecution thereof; and if any have, or shall inform Your
Majesty to the contrary, give us leave humbly to entreat Your Majesty, to be
pleased to call them before Your Self, that in our presence You may hear the
reasons of both Informations fully debated. So praying God to grant Your
Majesty many happy days* and full contentment in all Your Royal designs, we
humbly take our leave, and rest,

Your Majesty's humble Servants, and faithful Subjects, Traquair. Roxburgh.

Sterlin March 5. 1638.

There was also (besides many private Letters recommending this business) a
public Letter written by the Council to the Marquis, which follows taken from
the Original.

Our very Honorable good Lord,
WE finding the Subjects Fears and Stirs to increase since the last
Proclamation, did appoint by the Lord Chancellor, A Letter from the Council to
the Marqui^.
and other Lords of the Clergy, their Special Advice, a solemn Diet of Council
to be kept at Sterlin, on the first of March, where the Lord Chancellor, and
other Lords of the Clergy, promised to be present to consult upon the growth
of the public Evils and Remedies thereof, for His Majesty's Honor and Peace
of this Country; but having met at Sterlin, we received a Letter of excuse from
the Lord Chancellor, and were forced to proceed without him, and the other
Lords of the Clergy; where, after we had spent four days in advising upon the
said Evils and Remedies of them, we resolved in end to direct Sir John Hamilton
of Orbiston, one of our number, with a Letter of Tru^t from us to His Majesty,
to whom we have imparted our Opinions, and Reasons of the said public Ills,
and Remedies of the same, to be represented to His Sacred Majesty; and because
the business is so weighty and important, that in our opinion the Peace of the
Country was never in so great hazard, we have thought fit to recommend the
business to your Lordships consideration, that after your Lordship has heard
the Iustice-Clerk therein, your Lordship according to your great interest in
His Majesty's Honor and Peace of the Kingdom, may concur by your best advice
and assistance at His Majesty's hands to bring these great and fearful Ills to
a happy event. So committing your Lordship to the Grace of God, we rest

Your Lordships very good Friends* Traquair. Roxburgh. Winton. Perth. Wigton.
Kinghorn. Lauderdale. Southesk. Angus. Lorn. Down. Elphinston. Napier. J. Hay.
Tho. Hope. J. Carmichael. W. Elphinston.

Sterlin March 5. 1638.

The Covenanters also wrote again to the Scottish Lords at Court, desiring
Liberty to send up one to represent their Grievances; for they doubted the
Council did not use them well, and one of them wrote very peremptorily to the
Marquis, That they were resolved rather to hazard the whole Business, than
change a word of their Petitions, and that they would quit their Lives, if they
got not granted to them what they desired.

The King resolves to send the Marquis Commissioner to Scotland.
The Justice-Clerk being thus instructed came to London, where, after he had
discharged himself of his Trust, His Majesty partly doubting his Council,
partly hoping the Authority of a Commissioner might qualify the Peoples fury
not a little, resolved to choose one; and about this he made no long
Deliberation, but presently set his thoughts on sending the Marquis to Scotland
for that Service: and it was the opinion of all, that a fitter choice could not
have been made, both because of his Quality and Kindred, as also that he was at
this time free of all Jealousies; for his course heretofore had been more like
a Courtier than a Statesman, so that he was untouched with the sus^icions of
what had been hitherto done, his Advice having scarce ever been called for, so
he was fitter to treat with that Party; but chiefly his temper was so obliging
and insinuative, that none alive was more able to gain people to Reason, and to
manage their Spirits than he was.

It is alleged that some moved the employing my Lord Huntley for this Service,
but no vestige of such a motion appears; and if it was made, it could not take
with the King, who at that time knew not Huntley well: and since the King
designed to try all could be effectuated by Treaty, there was not a person so
unfit for it as the Marquis of Huntley; for his Family being always odious to
that Party, and himself all his life suspected of Popery, he had been a very
improp^r person to be employed for drawing those sinistrous Jealousies out of
the Subjects minds: But His Majesty confiding as well in the Marquis his
Abilities, as trusting to his Fidelity, was resolved on the Choice, and did
first communicate it to himself: he told His Majesty, That Life and Fortune,
and all he had, he would never stick to hazard for his Service; but this
Employment was full of danger, the success of it was at least dubious, and he
was very much a stranger to Scottish Men and Affairs; and he could not but
foresee, how it should endanger his losing what next his Salvation he valued
most, which was His Majesty's Favor; however he was absolutely at His
Majesty's disposal.

My Lord Lorn eldest Son to the Earl of Argyle, and after him Earl Traquair,
and diverse of the Nobility, came to Court at this time, who were also followed
by some of the Clergy. The Covenanters made likewise a new Address to the
Scottish Lords at Court, full of Complaints of the harsh usage they had met with
from the Council, together with their Grievances; which Paper, with their
Letter dated the 28th of April, is extant, Signed, Rothes, Cassils, and
Montrose, consisting of Eight Articles.

ARTICLES for the present Peace of the Kirk and and Kingdom of Scotland.
IF the Question were about such matters as did come within the compass of our
own power, we would be ashamed to be importunate, and should be very easily
satisfied without the smallest trouble to any; but considering tha^ they are
the matters of Gods honor, of the Kingdom of Christ, and the peace of our
Souls, against the Mystery of Iniquity, which we clearly perceive to have been
uncessantly working in this Land since the Reformation, to the ruin of true
Religion in the end; it cannot stand with our duty to God, to our King, to our
Selves and Posterity, to crave or be content with less, than that which the
Word of God, and our Confession of Faith does allow, and which may against our
Fears establish Religion afterward.

The discharging of the Service Book, the Book of Canons, and of the late

When it is considered what have been the Troubles and Fears of His Majesty's

Remembering by what ways the Articles of Perth were introduced, how

The Judgments of the best Divines of the Reformed Kirks, and of the Act of
Parliament, and by other Cautions to be made afterward, as the Assembly should
find meet and necessary: and therefore, if we will declare our minds, after
lamentable experiences of the Evils which were then foreseen, feared, and
foretold, we cannot see how Ministers voting in Parliament, absolutely without
the limitation of these Cautions, can be thought fit to Vote in the name of the
Kirk.



James to be the most necessary means for preservation of Piety and Union, and
for extermination of Heresy and Schism, (who willed therefore, that the Act of
Parliament for convening the General Assemblies once in the year should stand
in force;) if they were revived, and by His Majesty's Authority appointed to be
kept at the ordinary times, and if one at His Majesty's first opportunity,
and so soon as may be conveniently, should be indicted, Kirkmen might be tried
in their Life, Office, or Benefice, and kept in order without trouble to His
Majesty, and without offense to the People, the present Evils might be speedily
helped, to His Majesty's great honor and content, and to the preservation of
the Peace of the Kirk, and these courses might be stopped afterward: and on
the contrary, while Kirkmen escape their due Censure, and matters of the
Worship of God are imposed without the consent of the free Assemblies of the
Kirk, they will ever be suspected to be unsound and corrupt, as shunning to be
tried by the Light, to the continual entertaining of heart-burnings amongst the
People, and to the hindrance of that cheerfulness of obedience which is due,
and from our Hearts we wish may be rendered to the Kings Majesty.

call a Parliament, for the timeous hearing and redressing of the just
Grievances of the Subjects, for removing of their common Fears, and for
renewing and establishing such Laws, as in time coming may prevent the one and
the other, and may serve to the good of the Kirk and the Kingdom, that the
Peace of both might be firmly settled, and men's minds now so awakened might be
easily pacified; and all our Tongues and Pens are not able to represent, what
would be the joyful Acclamations, and hearty Wishes of so loyal and loving a
People, for His Majesty's Happiness, and how heartily bent all sorts would be
found to bestow their Fortunes and Lives in His Majesty's Service.

The more particular Notes of all things expedient for the well of the Kirk

Those Bishops who stayed in Scotland sent up also one Learmonth to the
Archbishop of Saint Andrews then at London, with their Complaints and
Grievances, which are also set down according to the Original.

ARTICLES of Information to Mr. Andrew Learmonth, for my Lord Archbishop of
Saint Andrews, the Bishop of Ross, etc. and in their absence, for my Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace.
YOu shall show their Lordships, How they have changed the Moderator Edinburgh,
The Complaints of the Clergy.
and are going on in changing all the Moderators in the Kingdom.

How they have abused Doctor Ogstone the ninth of May in Edinburgh, George
Hannay at Torphichen the sixth of May, Doctor Lamond at Markinch the ninth of
May, Mr. Robert Edward at Kirkmichael, whom Kilkerrin is forced to entertain at
his own House.

That the Presbytery of Hadingtown have given Imposition of Hands to John Ker's
Son, to be his Colleague, without the knowledge of the Bishop; and likewise the
Presbytery of Kircaldy to Mr. John Gillespy's Son, to the Church of the Weemes;
and the Presbytery of Dumfrice, to one Mr. John Wier, to the Church of Morton
within two miles of Drumlanerick; and that they of Dumfermline have admitted
Mr. Samuel Row (a Minister banished from Ireland) to be helper to Mr. Henry
Mackgill; and they of Air Mr. Robert Blair, to be helper to Mr. William Annand;
and that the Town of Dumfrice have made choice of Mr. James Hamilton to be
their Minister; and the Town of Kirkudbright one Mr. John Macklennan, all of
them banished from Ireland; and Mr. Samuel Rutherford is returned and settled
in his Place; and they intend to depose Mr. John Trotter, Minister at
Dirleuton; and how they intended to use the Regents.

That the Council of Edinburgh have made choice of Mr. Alexander Henderson to
be helper to Mr. Andrew Ramsay, and intend to admit him without advice or
consent of the Bishop.

That the Ministers of Edinburgh, who have not subscribed the Covenant, are
daily reviled and cursed to their Faces, and their Stipends are withheld and
not paid; and that all Ministers who have not subscribed are in the same case
and condition with them.

Samuel Cockburn did one John Shaw at Leith.

Edinburgh to pay any Prebend-fee, to those who have subscribed the Covenant;
as also by His Royal Letters to discharge the Lords of Session, to grant any
Process against the Bishop for their Fees.





Signed, Da. Edin. Ja. Dumblanen. Ja. Lismoren. Ja. Hannay. Da. Michell. Da.
Fletcher.


The King resolves to gain his Subjects by redressing their Grievances,
All these matters being considered, though there were grounds enough to have
provoked a less Gracious Prince to have proceeded against the Covenanters by
the extreme course of Rigor and Authority, and there were some who advised him
to it; yet such was his innate love to that His Ancient and Native Kingdom,
that he resolved to leave no mean unessayed, before he should proceed to a
Rupture with them: He also well foresaw, that it would not prove so easy a
Work, as some would have persuaded him, the greatest part on the South of Tay
being confederate, and resolved to stand to their Defense at all hazards;
neither was England too well fixed in their obedience, as the following Wars
did sadly prove, and so there were small grounds to expect any heartiness from
them for such a Work.

and calls the Bishops to his Closet.
All this being weighed, His Majesty called to His Closet the Archbishops of
Canterbury and St. Andrews, and the Bishops of Galloway, Brechin, and Ross, the
Marquis being there before they came, and to all these the King declared the
choice he had made, and that he intended to send the Marquis to Scotland, with
the Character of High Commissioner, for establishing the Peace of the Country,
and the good of the Church. St. Andrews said, he approved the Choice, and hoped
for good success. My Lord of Canterbury asked why His Majesty had called him;
the King said, to be a Witness of what was done, and because he had been before
acquainted with the proceedings of that business, he was also to be informed of
what passed thereafter. Then the Marquis desired to know, what the Bishops
expected he could do; they answered, nothing but procure the Peace of the
Country, and good of the Church: he desired they would contribute their
assistance for reclaiming the Ministry, who were once conformable; and for the
Ministers that were censured, but were now stirring, he should deal with them.
They answered, their power was small at that time, and their danger great, and
so inclined to stay still at London; but that was overruled, the Marquis
undertaking, that so far as in him lay he should stand betwixt them and danger.
The Archbishop of Canterbury said much and well on this head; so it was agreed
that they should go home. Next, the King expressed, how necessary he conceived
it was that every one of them should live in their own Diocese: Canterbury
seconded this, and the Bishops acknowledged it was the best way. Much was said
concerning General Assemblies, and that Ecclesiastical matters ought to have
been introduced by them; and the Marquis was ordered to give assurance, that in
all time coming nothing substantial should be introduced in the Church, but by
them. Much debate passed about the Oath of admission of Ministers, and it was
concluded, it should be no other than what was warranted by the Law; and the
Bishops were required to be sparing and moderate for the present both in urging
that, and the Ceremonies. All this His Majesty concluded with his wishes for
good success, adding, that the Marquis had been so far from seeking this
Employment, that he had commanded him much against his will to undertak^ the
journey.

This was in the beginning of May, and upon the 7th of May Letters were
directed to Scotland, giving notice of the Resolutions taken to the Nobility:
the Marquis wrote also to all his Friends and Dependers to meet him at
Hadington the 5th of June. The next thing that was taken into consideration was
the drawing up of his Instructions.

A Commission in the ordinary form being first drawn, there were two
Proclamations signed by the King, both which are extant, the one written with
the Earl of Traquair's hand, the other by the Marquis; the first whereof
follows.

CHARLES R.

CHARLES by the Grace of God King of Scotland, England, The Proclamation sent
by the Marquis.
France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, to our Lovits, our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting.

Forsamiekle as We are not ignorant of the great Disorders which have happened
of late within this Our ancient Kingdom of Scotland* occasioned (as is
pretended) upon the introduction of the Service Book, Book of Canons, and High
Commission, thereby fearing Innovations of Religion and Laws; for satisfaction
of which Fears We well hoped, that the two Proclamations of the eleventh of
December, and nineteenth of February, had been abundantly sufficient:
nevertheless finding, that Disorders have daily so increased, that a powerful
rather than a persuasive way might have been justly expected from Us; yet We,
out of Our innate Indulgence to Our People, grieving to see them run themselves
so headlong into Ruin, are graciously pleased to try if by a fair way We can
reclaim them from their faults, rather than let them perish in the same. And
therefore once for all, We have thought fit to declare, and hereby to assure
all Our good People, that We neither are, were, nor (by the Grace of God) ever
shall be stained with Popish Superstition, but by the contrary are resolved to
maintain the true Protestant Christian Religion, already professed within this
Our ancient Kingdom* And for further clearing of Scruples, We do hereby assure
all men that We will neither now nor hereafter press the practice of the
aforesaid Canons and Service Book, or any thing of that nature, but in such a
fair and legal way as shall satisfy all Our loving Subjects, that We neither
intend Innovation in Religion or Laws; and for the High Commission, We shall so
rectify it, with the help of advice of Our Privy Council, that it shall never
impugn the Laws, nor be a just Grievance to Our Loyal Subjects. And as hereby
it may appear how careful. We are to satisfy the foresaid Fears (how needless
soever) of Our good Subjects[*]. So We do hold Our Selves obliged both in
Conscience and Honor, to hinder the course of that which may prejudge that
Royal Authority, which God has endued Us with; wherefore, understanding that
many of Our Subjects have run themselves into seditious and undutiful courses,
and willing to reduce them rather by a benign, than forcible mean, (because We
hope that most of them are drawn thereto, blindly out of fear of Innovations)
are content hereby to declare, and promise upon the Word of a King to pardon
what is past, and not to take notice of the bygone faults, no not so much as
of those factious and seditious Bonds, upon condition that they seek to Our
Mercy by disclaiming the same, and in testification of the true sense of their
Misdemeanors, that they deliver up, or continu^ with their best endeavors to
procure the delivering up, of the said Bonds into the hands of Our Council, or
such as Our Council shall appoint: Declaring always, likeas We by these
presents do declare, all these to be esteemed and reputed as Traitors in all
time coming, that shall not renounce and disclaim the said Bond or Bonds,
within after the publication hereof; that is to say, Whosoever will from
henceforth be thought a good Subject, and capable of Our Mercy, must either
deliver up the same, in case he have it, or concur with his best endeavors to
the del^vering up thereof, or at least must come to some of Our Privy Council,
or chief Officers in Burgh or Land, and testify to him, that he renounces and
disclaims the said Bonds. Our Will is therefore, and We charge you straightly and
command, that incontinent this Our Lette^ seen, etc.

C. R.

The other Proclamation penned by the Marquis agrees with the former to the
place that is marked [*]; after which it follows thus.

Another Proclamation.
So We expect that their behavior will be such, as may give testimony of their
Obedience, and how sensible they are of Our Grace and Favor, that thus pass
over their Misdemeanors, and by their future carriage make appear, it was
only the fear of Innovations that caused those Disorders that have happened of
late in this Our Kingdom, which now cannot but by this Our Declaration be
removed from the hearts of Our loving Subjects: but on the contrary, if we find
not this performed with that cheerfulness and alacrity that becomes good and
obedient Subjects, We declare and hold Our Self obliged in Honor and
Conscience, to make use of those forcible means which God has armed Royal
Authority with, for the curbing of disobedient and stubborn People. Our Will
therefore is, and we charge you, etc.

C. R.

And by another Paper His Majesty left it to the Marquis his choice, whether of
the two he should make use of, as he found it might tend to His Service; but
withal, if he made use of the second, and it gave no satisfaction, so that
within 6 Weeks, most of the Bonds were not delivered up, upon his desiring them
to do so, then he should publish another Proclamation, Declaring the
Covenanters Traitors if within 5 days they came not to accept of Mercy, and
deliver up the Bonds, if they were in their power.

And so a third Declaration penned by the Chancellor was laid aside, only it
is extant, marked by the Kings Hand on the back, and therefore shall be set
down here.

WHereas we were in hope by Our late Proclamations to have given satisfaction
to Our People, and to have removed their Mistakings of the Book of
Common Prayer, which We caused to be published, having thereby declared, that
it never entered into Our thoughts to make any Innovation in Religion and Form
of Gods Worship, nay, not to press the said Books upon any of Our Subjects,
till by a fair way they were induced to approve the same; yet having
understood, that to the contrary (by what means We know not) occasions have
been taken to confirm them in their former Mistakings, and to bind them by the
Oaths and Subscriptions against the Laws established by Our dear Father of
blessed memory, and ratified by Our Selves since Our coming to the Crown:
howsoever there is in that more than just cause offered to take punishment of
such an open Contempt and Rebellion, yet considering that this is not the fault
of the simple sort and multitude of People, who have been seduced through
specious pretexts, as if nothing were contained in the said Bond or Covenant,
as they call it, but the promoting of Gods Glory, the maintaining of Our
Honor, and Liberty of the Country, with the preserving of Unity among
themselves, We no way willing to use Our People with rigor, or to enquire
severely into their errors of that kind, have thought meet to renew Our former
Declaration, by assuring them, and every one of them, that Our constant
Resolution is, and has been, to maintain the true Religion professed and
established by the Laws of that Our Kingdom, without any Change or Innovation,
at the hazard of Our Life and Crown, and that We will not force on Our Subjects
either the said Book of Common Prayer, or Book of Canons, till the same be duly
examined, and they in their Judgments satisfied with the legality thereof; nor
will We permit the exercise of any Commission upon them, for whatsoever cause,
which may give unto them any just cause of Grief and Complaint. Willing
therefore and requiring all Our People and Subjects to acquiesce to this Our
Declaration, and not suffer themselves to be misled by the private or public
Informations of turbulent spirits, as if We did intend any thing contrary to
this Our Profession, having always esteemed it a special point of Royal
Dignity, to profess what We intend to do, and to perform what We do promise;
certifying all Our good Subjects, who shall hereupon rest quiet in the
obedience of God and Us, that We will faithfully perform whatsoever We have
declared, whether in this or in Our former Proclamations made to that purpose,
and be unto them a good and merciful King: as on the other side, if any shall
hereafter make business, and disturb the Peace of that Church and Kingdom, by
following their private Covenants, and refusing to be ruled by the Laws
established, that We will use the Force and Power, which God has put into Our
hands, for compescing and subduing such mutinous and disobedient Rebels. Given
at Our Palace of

This is marked by the Kings Hand; Declaration made by the Chancellor.

Thus that wise Prelat foresaw well, how it would be easier to effectuate all
that had been designed, than to get that alone of disclaiming the Covenant
brought about; and therefore left that out in his draught of the Declaration.
But the King was peremptory, saying,

That as long as that Covenant was not passed from, He had no more Power than
the Duke of Venice.

For the Commissioners Instructions the Chancellor gave his Advice in writing,
which was very closely followed. After that many particular Questions were
given in by the Marquis in writing, for Orders how to carry himself whatever
might meet him in his Negotiation; to which he got positive Answers in writing
from the King, which are extant: and though the Material points in that Paper
be to be found in the Instructions, yet this seems too considerable to be
suppressed; and therefore it is set down in the very Form wherein it is in the
Original, the Queries being written by the Marquis, and the Answers over
against them by the King.

QUERIES whereunto Your MAJESTY'S Direction and Resolution is humbly prayed,
that accordingly I may govern my self, and be warranted for my Proceedings.
1. IF before the publishing of the Declaration some of the chiefest of the
Petitioners may not be prepared, and labored to conceive aright of the same,
and in general acquainted with Your Majesty's gracious Intentions? They may. 2.
Where the first meeting of the Council shall be? Where you shall find most
convenient, the City of Edinburgh only excepted. 3. If Your Majesty will not
permit the Council to sit, where, and in such places as is conceived, may tend
most for the advancement of Your Service? Yes. 4. If the Declaration shall not
be read to the Council, and they required to sign the same? By all means. 5. If
we shall not all swear to give our best assistance for the putting the same in
due execution? Yes. 6. If any Counselor refuse to do it, what course shall
be taken with him? Dismiss him the Council. 7. If Acts of Council are not to be
made, finding that this Declaration ought to free us of the fears of
Innovations either of Religion or Laws? Yes. 8. If all Councillors are not to
be warned to give their attendance till the business be settled? Yes. 9. If
upon the publication of this Declaration there be Protestations made, what
course shall be taken? The Protesters must be proclaimed Rebels. 10. If no
Protestations but Petitions of new be presented, either demanding further
satisfaction, or adhering to their former, what Answer shall be made, or what
course taken? Vt supra. 11. If they remain still in a Body at Edinburgh or
elsewhere, after the Declaration, what course shall be taken? You must raise
what Force you may to treat them as Rebels. 12. If they should petition against
the High Commission itself, as not to be introduced without an Act of
Parliament, what Answer shall be given? That they mu^t be content with My
Declaration in that point. 13. If against the matter contained therein, it is
then desired that those particulars may be expressed that will not be yielded
to. The settling thereof according to My Declaration will answer this. 14. If
it be pressed that what is now concluded, concerning the High Commission be
ratified in the next Parliament, what Answer shall be given? If I may be sure
that a Parliament will do it, I shall be content. 15. If they Petition for a
Convention, what Answer shall be given? No Petition must be admitted till the
Bond be broken; if after, you may grant it, leaving the time to Me. 16. If they
petition for a General Assembly, that it may be once in the year, what Answer
shall be given? I will not be tied, but as I shall find cause. 17. If they
petition that the Ministers Oath may be no other than that which the Act of
Parliament does order them to take, what Answer shall be given? I and the
Bishops will consider of it. 18. If they petition that the Five Articles of
Perth may be held as indifferent, what Answer shall be given? I will hear of no
Petition against an Act of Parliament. 19. If the Town of Edinburgh may not be
dealt with apart to petition for Your Majesty's Favor, and if they desire that
the Council, Exchequer, and Session may be returned them, what Answer shall be
given? Upon their full submission, and renouncing of the Bond, they may have
their desires. 20. If the like course may not be taken with some other
principal Burghs? As before. 21. If to gain some leading men from the Party,
marks of Your Majesty's Favor may not be hoped for? To some, I; to some, No.
22. If particular men desire either Acts of Council, or Pardons under the Great
Seal, what shall be done? Grant their desires. 23. What Service shall be used
in the Chapel Royal? The English. 24. If the Lords of Council and Session,
shall at that time be pressed to receive Kneeling? This is no time for a
Communion, but when there is they must kneel. 25. If thought fit, what shall be
be done to them that refuse? Advise of it. 26. If all Acts of Council, that
have enjoined the use of the Service Book, Book of Canons, are not to be
suspended, and declared of no force in time coming? Yes. 27. How far Your
Majesty will warrant me to declare Your Pleasure to the Lords of the Clergy,
concerning their living within their Diocesses? I shall do it My Self, but you
may tell any of it. 28. How far I may declare Your willingness to give ear to
and receive the private Complaints of Your Subjects in general, and in
particular against any of the Bishops? Refuse none. 29. If those Ministers (who
have been by the Multitude displaced) are not again to be established? They
must* 30. If in the Abbey-Church the use of the Organs shall be presently
enjoined? Yes. 31. If those Ministers formerly silenced may not for a time be
connived at, and permitted to preach? If they preach not Sedition. 32. If Your
Majesty aim at more for the present, than establishing the Peace of the
Country? No more for the present. 33. If more, it is humbly desired, Your
Majesty may be pleased to express it? When time shall be fit. In execution of
all which, or what else Your Majesty shall think fit to command, it is most
humbly desired, that I may be so warranted, that the laboring to put them in
execution may not turn to my Ruin, nor hazard the losing of Your Majesty's
Favor, dearer to me than life? You shall.
The whole Instructions were signed the 16th of May, which follow taken from
the Original.

CHARLES R.



Edinburgh only excepted, and to change the Meeting thereof as often as
occasion shall require.











Edinburgh, or elsewhere, you must raise what Force you can to di^sipate, and
bring them under Our Obedience.







5 Articles of Perth, but for the present you are not to press the exact
execution of them.

Edinburgh shall depart from the Covenant, and petition for Our Favor, We will
that you bring back the Council and Session to it.





All Acts of Council that enjoin the use of the new Service Book are to be
suspended, and to be of no force hereafter.

You shall declare Our pleasure to Our two Archbishops, (as soon as the Country

You shall refuse Complaints against no man in particular, whether Officers

All those Ministers who have been displaced by the seditious Multitude, are

As for silenced Ministers, you may connive at their Preaching, if you find it

For the Organs in the Abby-Church, We leave them to your discretion when

You are to cause insert 6 Weeks in Our Declaration for the delivery up of

You shall declare, that if there be not sufficient Strength within the Kingdom
England, and that My Self will come in Person with them, being resolved to
hazard My Life rather than to suffer Authority to be contemned.

If you shall find cause, you are to raise a Guard of 200 or more to attend Our

You may treat with the Earl of Mar for the keeping of Our Castles of
Edinburgh Sterlin, and for the present he must be charged with their safe
Custody.

You shall take seriously into consideration the Copper-coyn, and declare Our

You may declare, that as We never intended to assume the Nominating the
Edinburgh, so We mean not by Our too frequent Letters to hinder the free
Election of their own Officers.

You may likewise declare, (if you find cause) that as We never did, so by Gods

If you cannot by the means prescribed by Us bring back the refractory and
seditious to due Obedience, We do not only give you Authority, but command all
hostile Acts whatsoever to be used against them, they having deserved to be
used no other way by Us, but as a Rebellious People; for the doing whereof We
will not only save you harmless, but account it as acceptable Service done Us.

Such of these Instructions, as you shall find cause, We give you leave to
divulge and make use of as you find Our Service shall require.

C. R.
At Whitehall the 16th May, 1638.
All things being thus expeded, he took leave a few days after, The Marqu^^
goes for Sco^land,
His Majesty having ordered him to write often to himself, and to my Lord of
Canterbury, he being the only English person trusted with the secrets of that
business. The Earl of Sterlin was then Secretary of State for Scotland; but as
the Copper-coyn made him at that time odious there, so he was little esteemed
in the Court, and not at all employed in Affairs, except in matters of course.
Sir Henry Vane and the Marquis had contracted a Friendship in the Swedish Camp,
and so did keep a Correspondence; yet that was most about accounts of the
posture the King was in in England, and what he could do by Force if Treaty
could not prevail. But with my Lord of Canterbury he kept a constant and free
Intercourse; and whatever that Archbishop might have been formerly in Scottish
Affairs, being abused by persons who did not truly represent them to him, he
was certainly a good Instrument this year, which appears from his Letters to
the Marquis, with the Copies of his Returns, which are extant.

where there were great Jealousies of him.
My Lord Commissioner begun his Journey about the end of May, and on his way he
met Letters from Scotland, telling him that great Jealousies were raised and
vented upon his advertising so many to meet him, as if he had some strange
design; and that his Vassals in Cliddisdale were under high pains discharged,
to come and pay the duty they owed the Kings Commissioner and their own
Superior. On the third of June he came to Berwick, and there the Earl of
Roxburgh met him, who told him in what fury all People were, and how small
hopes there remained of prevailing upon the grounds he was to go on; he
answered he was resolved to follow his Instructions, and be at his hazard. Next
day the Earl of Lauderdale, with my Lord Lindsay, came to him; and from the
later he learned, that they would never give up the Covenant, that they would
have the five Articles of Perth abolished, Episcopacy limited, so that it
should be little more than a Name: and if these things were not granted them,
and a General Assembly and Parliament not called quickly, they would call them
themselves, before the great Crowds at Edinburgh were scattered.

There was also no small Disorder in Edinburgh at this time, for they had
notice that there was a Ship in the Road loaded with Arms and Ammunition; from
which they took the Alarm, having it represented much beyond the truth, 200
Muskets and as many Pikes, with a small quantity of Powder, being all the Arms
that were in the Ship. They resolved to go out the next day, and seize the
Ship, which had been easily done, it being only a Merchant-Vessel; but the
Earl of Traquair apprehending the hazard, caused all the Arms to be sent down
in a Boat that night to Fisher-raw, and got Carts, and presently transported
them to Dalkeith, which was then the Kings House. This enraged the Covenanters,
when known by them next day; and some of the more forward moved that they
should presently go to Dalkeith, and take them out by force; but the wiser of
them stopped this: yet they set sure Guards around the Castle of Edinburgh, and
at all the Ports of the City, that none of them might be carried thither. This
meeting with the Marquis his coming down, was made use of by the Incendiaries
to persuade the People, that he designed mischief by these Arms; and by the
Advertisements he had formerly given: another hellish report was also spread,
that he designed to call a Meeting of the chief Covenanters of all Ranks to
Dalkeith, and there to blow them up; whereupon they resolved not to go out, nor
treat with him there at all. All this was done to irritate the People into a
prejudice against him, of which he gave Advertisements to the King, and held on
his Journey.

The first thing he did was to inform himself exactly of all Matters and
Persons, that he might accordingly apply himself to his business; but he found
things in a greater disorder than he could have imagined. He finds the Country
in a very ill posture.
Almost the whole Council did favor the Covenant, and the Bishops were hated
by all, so that there were few or none whom he durst trust: the Earls of
Traquair, Roxburgh, and Southesk, were the men he found best affected, yet even
their Limitations vexed him.

My Lord Lorn, who about the end of the year by his Fathers death was Earl of
Argyle, seemed to go on with the Kings Service; but he was suspected both by
the King and the Marquis to favor the Covenant. In a word, those of the
Council who were best set were yet overawed by the fury and threats of the
other Party. The Marquis of Huntley was forward in His Majesty's Service, but
the Marquis was obliged to send him North, to keep that Country (which was yet
peaceable) in order. Many Lawyers were of the Covenanters side, and chiefly the
Kings Advocate Sir Tho. Hope, which was one of the greatest troubles the
Marquis met with; for he being a stranger to the Scottish Law, (in which the
other was skilled as much as ever any was) was often at a great loss; for he
durst advise with him in nothing, and often the Kings Advocate alleged Law at
the Council Board against what he was pressing. Of this he complained
frequently to the King, and intended to have discharged him the Council; but he
durst scarce adventure on it, lest others should have removed with him. He
tried what he could do to get some Lawyers to declare the Covenant to be
against Law; but that was not to be done. Sir Lewis Stewart promised private
assistance, but said, that if he appeared in public in that matter, he was
ruined. Sir Thomas Nicolson, who was the only man fit to be set up against the
Kings Advocate, though he had never all his life before pretended to a nicety
in these matters, yet begun now to allege Scruples of Conscience.

Next to this the Marquis dealt with the Covenanters, who were chiefly the
Earls of Rothes, Cassils, Montrose, Lowdon, Lothian, my Lords of Lindsay,
Yester, Balmerino, and Cranston; these were the chief Contrivers and Actors,
though they had many followers and abettors of all Qualities. With these he
dealt by all means possible; but neither could Reason convince them, nor
Assurance satisfy them, nor Promises or Cajolery prevail with them, nor
Threats overrule them.

He quickly saw that nothing could be obtained from the Covenanters by way of
Treaty; and therefore before he left Berwick, He puts the King on his guard to
look for mischief from the Covenanters,
he advertised the King to prepare himself for teaching them their Duty by
Authority, since milder ways were like to prove ineffectual. He also found the
Country very destitute of Arms, and that the Covenanters were beginning to give
order for furnishing themselves from several places; of which he also
advertised the King, desiring him to send in all haste Expresses to his Agents
in Holland, Hamburgh, Denmark, Sweden, and Poland, to stop any Arms might be
bought up by Scottish men.

At first when the Marquis came to Dalkeith, who fortify themselves and are
insolent.
he heard that 1500 men were set to guard the Ports of Edinburgh, and that they
of the Tables had taken the Keys of the City from the Magistrates, and had some
thoughts of securing the Castle of Edinburgh; which had been easily done if
attempted, there being neither Arms nor Ammunition within it. But the wiser of
them thought it fitter only to set Guards about it, by which it was rendered
useless, rather than make so hasty a Rupture; and the more violent threatened
they would force both Commissioner, Council, and Session, to take the Covenant.
All this the Marquis heard, but he might well regrate it, but had no power to
curb it; for they were resolved to hear of no Proclamation, unless with the
discharge of the Service Book and Book of Canons; the Articles of Perth were
also promised to be abrogated, Episcopacy promised to be limited, and an
Assembly and Parliament presently called. But his Instructions being so far
short of this, he durst not adventure on publishing His Majesty's Declaration,
knowing it would meet with a Protestation; and as for that part of it which
concerned the Covenant, my Lords of Traquair and Roxburgh told him, he was the
ruin of the Country if he did not divide the Declaration, and wholly leave out
what concerned the Covenant: this he said he would yield to, and put his Head
in the Kings Mercy, if they could assure him that thereby matters might be
settled.

The Marquis gives a clear* representation of the state of Affairs.
Of all this he advertised the King, and told him he must resolve either to
yield to all they demanded, or haste down his Fleet quickly with 2000
Land-souldiers in it, and send down Arms to the Northern Counties of England;
advising him also to send Soldiers for Garrisoning of Berwick and Carlisle,
1500 for Berwick, and 500 for Carlisle; and that His Majesty would resolve to
follow these Orders in Person with a Royal Army, and there was no doubt of
Victory, if the matter were well managed: but he represented withal, that His
Majesty would consider how far in His Wisdom He would connive at the madness of
His own poor People, or how far in His Justice He would punish their folly;
assuring Him their present madness was such, that nothing but Force would make
them quit their Covenant, and that they would all lay down their Lives ere they
would give it up.

But that which he applied himself first to, was the dispersing of the
Multitudes. After he held a Council at Dalkeith, where His Commission was only
read and registered, he received Addresses from the Town of Edinburgh, He goes
to Edinburgh,
humbly inviting him to come to Holyroodhouse, which he refused, unless the
extraordinary Guards about their Ports and the Castle were dismissed. But this
being done, he went thither on the ninth of June: they were guessed to be about
60000 that met him, the greatest number that Nation had seen together of a
great while, among whom there were about 500 Ministers, and four of the most
zealous had resolved to entertain him with Speeches: but this he shunned not
without great difficulty, so earnest were they to be disburdened of their
Harangues; but they came to him in private, and with great vehemence, not
without tears in their eyes, represented the danger Religion was in, but kept
themselves within bounds.

and mollifies some of the Covenanters.
And now he came to have access to their ears, and this was followed by that
which always attended the engaging sweetness of his Converse, for he began to
gain ground on their affections: he showed them how firm the King was to the
Protestant Religion, and how ready to hazard Life and Crown in the defense of
it; that if any error had been committed in the way of introducing the late
Books, His Majesty did more than correct that by His gracious Condescensions;
that he was resolved (as soon as the Country was settled) to call both an
Assembly and Parliament, if they themselves obstructed it not: but withal he
represented to them the madness of hazarding on a Rupture with the King: they
knew it would not be uneasy to engage England against them, the Kings Navy was
in good case, and it would be no trouble to the King to destroy their Trade,
which would quickly impoverish the Country; therefore he desired they would
follow such courses, as might redeem themselves and their Country from Ruin
and Infamy. This prevailed with diverse, and all acknowledged there was that
strength of reason in his Discourse, that it was not easy to resist him long
and see him much; but there were rough and wild Spirits, who could neither be
tamed nor tuned right by it; yet the Multitudes began to disperse: but the
Covenant was so dear to them that it was the endangering of all, to speak of
delivering it up. On the 15th of June he received the following Answer from His
Majesty to the Accounts he had sent him.

Hamilton,
THough I answered not yours of the fourth, yet I assure you that I have not
been idle, so that I hope by the next week I shall send you some good assurance
of the advancing of our Preparations. This say not to make you precipitate any
thing, (for I like of all you have hitherto done, and even of that which I find
you mind to do;) but to show you that I mean to stick to my Grounds, and that
I expect not any thing can reduce that People to their Obedience, but only
Force. I thank you for the clearness of your Advertisements, of all which none
troubles me so much, as (that in a manner) they have possessed themselves of
the Castle of Edinburgh; and likewise I hold Sterlin as good as lost. As for
the dividing of my Declaration, I find it most fit (in that way you have
resolved it;) to which I shall add, that I am content to forbear the latter
part thereof, until you hear my Fleet has set sail for Scotland. In the mean
time your care must be how to dissolve the Multitude, and (if it be possible)
to possess your self of my Castles of Edinburgh and Sterlin, (which I do not
expect.) And to this end I give you leave to flatter them with what hopes you
please, so you engage not me against my Grounds, (and in particular that you
consent neither to the calling of Parliament nor General Assembly, until the
Covenant be disavowed and given up;) your chief end being now to win time, that
they may not commit public Follies until I be ready to suppress them: and
since it is (as you well observe) my own People, which by this means will be
for a time ruined, so that the loss must be inevitably mine; and this if I
could eschew, (were it not with a greater) were well. But when I consider, that
not only now my Crown, but my Reputation for ever, lies at stake, I must
rather suffer the first, that Time will help, than this last, which is
irreparable. This I have written to no other end, than to show you I will
rather die than yield to those impertinent and damnable Demands, (as you
rightly call them;) for it is all one as to yield to be no King in a very short
time. So wishing you better success than I can expect, I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Greenwich, 11 June, 1638. POSTSCRIPT.
As the Affairs are now, I do not expect that you should declare the Adherers
to the Covenant Traitors, until (as I have already said) you have heard from me
that my Fleet has set Sail for Scotland, though your six weeks should be
elapsed. In a word, gain time by all the honest means you can, without
forsaking your Grounds.




But he had taken his Resolution about this set down in the Postscript before
he got the Kings Answer; He delays to publish the Proclamation to avoid an
affront.
for he wrote to the Archbishop of Canterbury that he was resolved on it,
finding the hazard on the one side was a present Rupture, which would have been
the ruin of the Kings Affairs, and of all his Friends; whereas the hazard of
not doing it was only the cutting off his Head for transgressing his
Instructions, which he was willing not only to endanger, but lose for the
Kings Service. But till the Multitudes were wholly dispersed, he du^st not
hazard on the the publishing of the Proclamation, lest Authority might have met
with an affront in it. This was now doing apace, Commissioners only staying in
name of the rest; but all the Ministers hearing that the Covenant must be given
up, or no Treaty, made their Pulpits ring with it; and the Marquis was to
purpose inveighed against, some not sparing to say that the faggots in Hell
were prepared for his reward: but all declared, they would never quit their
Covenant, but with their Lives. A Protestation was also resolved on, whenever
the Declaration should be published, which made it be delayed a little longer;
and it was told him by the Kings Advocate, that a Protestation might be legally
made, and that it had been done so in the year 1621. But for all this things
begun to promise some likelihood ofSettlement, which made him write to the
King, not to proceed in his warlike Preparations till things were more
desperate; to which he received the following Answer.

Hamilton,
THe dealing with Multitudes makes diversity of Advertisement no way strange,
and certainly the alteration from worse to less ill cannot be displeasing:
wherefore you may be confident, I cannot but approve your Proceedings hitherto,
for certainly you have gained a very considerable point, in making the heady
Multitude begin to disperse, without having engaged me in any unfitting thing I
shall take your advice in staying the public Preparations for Force; but in a
silent way (by your leave) I will not leave to prepare, that I may be rea^y
upon the least advertisement. Now I hope there may be a possibility of securing
my Castles, but I confess it must be done closely and cunningly. One of the
chief things you are to labor now, is to get a considerable number of
Sessioners and Advocates, to give their opini^n that the Covenant is at least
against Law, if not treasonable. Thus you have my Approbation in several
shapes, t^erefore you need not doubt but that I am

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Theobalds, 13 Jun. 1638.

At this time the Session sat not, He advises the King to bring back the
Session to Edinburgh.
for the Town and Country about Sterlin threatened them, so that they could not
return thither; wherefore the Marquis desired a Warrant from the King to bring
the Session back to Edinburgh, both because it was not fit they should be too
far from himself and the Council, as also that many of the Covenanters were
broken in their Estates, so that if Justice were patent some of the most
troublesome of them might be driven away: but chiefly the settling them again in
Edinburgh, looked like a resolution of going on with a Treaty, of which it was
fit they should be persuaded, till the King were in a good posture for reducing
them. He tried what assurance he might have of the Lords of the Session being
fixed to their Duty. Diverse of them, who were no ill-wishers to the Kings
Authority, yet durst not own it, being threatened by the Covenanters; of some he
had all reason to hope well, yet the greater part of that Court, what through
fear, what through inclination, was so biassed, that he saw little hope of
prevailing with the College of Justice, whether Judges or Lawyers, to declare
the Covenant seditious or treasonable; and he was secure of none who sat on
the Bench, save Sir Robert Spottiswood President, Sir John Hay Clerk-Register,
and Sir Andrew Fletcher of Innerpeffer, Halyburton of Fotherance, and one or
two more: the first of these was among the most accomplished of his Nation,
equally singular for his Ability and Integrity; but he was the Archbishop of S.
Andrews his Son, and so his Decision in that would have been of the less weight.

On the 16th of June the Covenanters came and presented their Petitions to the
Marquis, craving a present redress of their Grievances, The Covenanters press
speedy satisfaction.
otherwise they said they would be put off no longer by delays; and they
desired he would propose the matter to the Council, and give them a speedy
Answer. He told them that His Majesty did resolve to call both an Assembly and
Parliament for the redress of all Grievances; but if this was not yet done,
they had nothing but the Disorders of the Country to blame for it, which should
be no sooner composed but all their Desires should be fully examined. They went
away no way satisfied with this Answer; but the Marquis found all the Lords of
Council inclined to the granting of what they demanded, so that he durst call
no Council about it, lest they should have avowedly sided with the Covenanters:
of which he advertised His Majesty, showing him, that persons of all ranks
pressed him, to represent to him that the Covenant was not illegal, and that if
His Majesty would allow of the Explication of the Bond of mutual Defense, Many
move that an Explanation of the Covenant might be received.
which they offered, (that they meant not thereby to derogate any thing from
the Kings Authority, for whom they were ready to hazard their Lives,) all might
be settled without more trouble, either to the King or Country; and that
otherwise it must needs end in Blood. He desired His Majesty would consider
well in what forwardness his Preparations were, before he hazarded on a
Rupture; lest if they had the start of him, all his faithful Servants in
Scotland should be ruined ere he could come to their rescue. England wanted not
its own Discontents, and they in Scotland seemed confident that they had many
good Friends there; France had not forgot the Isle of Rhea, and had certainly a
hand in cherishing those Broils in Scotland. He also added, the Covenanters
resolution was upon the first Rupture to march into England, and make that the
seat of the War. Upon all this he craved His Majesty's Pleasure, which he would
punctually obey; and ended, begging pardon for the fair hopes he had given him
in his last, protesting, that his desire of seeing Royal Authority again
settled, without a bloody Decision (for which he was gladly willing to
sacrifice his Life) made him too easy sometimes to believe what he so
earnestly desired.

Thus I give the most material Heads of the Marquis his Dispatches to His
Majesty; for though the Originals of them be in my hands, yet they are not
inserted, both because of their being too long and too particular for public
view; as also that the substance of them may be seen in the Kings Answers,
which for many reasons are set down at their full length. But to this I shall
add a surprising thing, that I find the Archbishop of S. Andrews was for
accepting an Explanation of the Covenant, for a draught of it yet remains under
his Pen, which follows.

The Archbishop of S. Andrews his draught of an Explanation.
WE the Noblemen, Barons, Burgesses, Ministers, and others, that have joined in
a late Bond or Covenant for the maintaining of true Religion and purity of Gods
Worship in this Kingdom, having understood that Our Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty is with this our doing highly offended, as if we thereby had usurped
His Majesty's Authority, and shaken off all Obedience to His Majesty and to His
Laws; for clearing our selves of that Imputation do hereby declare, and in the
presence of God Almighty solemnly protest, that it did never so much as enter
into our thoughts, to derogate any thing from His Majesty's Power and Authority
Royal, or to disobey and rebel against His Majesty's Laws, and that all our
Proceedings hitherto by Petitioning, Protesting, Covenanting, and whatsoever
other way, was and is only for the maintaining of true Religion by us
professed, and with express reservation of our Obedience to His most Sacred
Majesty; most humbly beseeching His Majesty so to esteem and accept of us, that
he will be graciously pleased to call a National Assembly and Parliament, for
removing the Fears we have not without cause (as we think) conceived of
introducing in this Church another form of Worship than what we have been
accustomed with, as likewise for satisfying our just Grievances, and the
settling of a constant and solid Order to be kept in all time coming, as well
in the Civil and Ecclesiastical Government: which if we shall by the
intercession of Your Grace obtain, we faithfully promise (according to our
bounden duties) to continue in His Majesty's Obedience, and at our utmost
powers to procure the same during our Lives, and for the same to rest and remain

Your Graces obliged Servants, etc.

His Majesty's Answer follows.

Hamilton,
I Do not wonder, though I am very sorry for your last Dispatch, to which I
shall answer nothing concerning what you have done, or mean to do, because I
have approved all, and still desire you to believe I do so, until I shall
contradict it with my own Hand. What now I write is, first to show you in what
Estate I am, and then to have your Advice in some things. My Train of Artillery
consisting of 40 Piece of Ordnance (with the appurtenances) all Drakes, (half
and more ^f which are to be drawn with one or two Horses apiece) is in good
forwardness* and I hope will be ready within six weeks; for I am sure there
wants neither Money, nor Materials to do it with. I have taken as good order
as I can for the present, for securing of Carlisle and Berwick; but of this you
shall have more certainty by my next. I have sent for Arms to Holland, for
14000 Foot and 2000 Horse: for my Ships they are ready, an^ I have given Order
to send three for the Coast of Ireland immediately, under pretense to defend
our Fishermen. Last of all, which is indeed most of all, I have consulted with
the Treasurer and Chancellor of the Exchequer, for Money for this years
Expedition; which I estimate at two hundred thousand pounds Sterlin, which they
doubt not but to furnish me* more I have done, but these are the chief heads.
Now for your Advice, I desire to know whether you think it fit that I should
send six thousand Land-men with the Fleet that goes to the Frith, or not; for
since you cann^t secure me my Castle of Edinburgh, it is a question whether you
can secure the landing of those men, and if with them you can make your self
Master of Leith, to fortify and keep it: of this I desire you to send me your
Resolution with all speed. I leave it to your consideration, whether you will
not think it fit to see if you can make all the Guns of the Castle of Edinburgh
unserviceable for any body, since they cannot be useful for me. Thus you may
see, that I intend not to yield to the Demands of those Traitors the
Covenanters, who I think will declare themselves so by their Actions, before I
shall do it by my Proclamation; which I shall not be sorry for, so that it be
without the personal hurt of you, or any other of my honest Servants, or the
taking of any English place. This is to show you, that I care not for their
affronting or disobeying my Declaration, so that it go not to open mischief,
and that I may have some time to end my Preparations. So I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Greenwich, 20 June, 1638.

The Marquis did again send a new Dispatch much of the same strain with the
former, before he had received this Letter, representing the great hazards he
apprehended from a Breach, and that he feared the King would be faintly
followed by the English: withal he gave the King a large account of the
Explanation was offered to that part of the Covenant, by which they were bound
to mutual Defense; to which His Majesty wrote the following Answer.

Hamilton,
I Must needs thank you that you stand so close and constantly to my Grounds,
and you deserve the more since your fellow-Counsellours do rather dishearten
than help you in this business, for which I swear I pity you much. There be two
things in your Letter that require Answer, to wit, the Answer to their
Petition, and concerning the Explanation of their damnable Covenant; for the
first, the telling you that I have not changed my mind in this particular, is
Answer sufficient, since it was both foreseen by me, and fully debated betwixt
us two before your down-going; and for the other, I will only say, that so
long as this Covenant is in force, (whether it be with, or without Explanation)
I have no more Power in Scotland than as a Duke of Venice; which I will rather
die than suffer: yet I commend the giving ear to the Explanation, or any thing
else to win Time, which now I see is one of your chiefest cares, wherefore I
need not recommend it to you. Another I know is, to show the World clearly,
that my taking of Arms is to suppress Rebellion, and not to impose Novelties,
but that they are the seekers of them; wherefore if upon the publishing of my
Declaration a Protestation should follow, I should think it would rather do
right than wrong to my Cause: and for their calling a Parliament or Assembly
without me, I should not much be sorry, for it would the more loudly declare
them Traitors, and the more justify my Actions; therefore in my mind my
Declaration would not be long delayed: but this is a bare Opinion and no
Command. Lastly, my resolution is to come my self in person, accompanied like
myself, Sea-forces nor Ireland shall not be forgotten; the particulars of which
I leave to the Comptrollers relation, as I do two particulars to the Archbishop
of Canterbury, which you forgot to mention in my Letter: and so I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Greenwich, 25 June, 1638.

Upon this the Marquis spoke big to them, The Marquis threatens the Covenanters,
and threatened to leave the Employment, and go to Court, but to return to
Scotland again shortly, attending His Majesty in another posture. This cooled
their Courage a little, for they were not then in a posture for a Breach; and
so they spoke more mildly, saying, who speak with more submission*
That they were sorry His Majesty mistook their good and innocent Intentions,
all they designed being the preservation of Religion and Laws, and that if
these were secured, they would demean themselves in all time coming as good
Subjects: he said, If they would all go home to their Houses, he would beg
liberty to wait on His Majesty with their Desires, and return them an Answer
within three weeks or a month. But the true reasons that moved him to desire
permission to go up, were, that hereby he gained so much more time, as also he
would more fully inform the King of the state of Affairs, and see in what
forwardness the Kings Preparations were; but chiefly, to try what he could
prevail about establishing the Confession of Faith, which had passed in
Parliament 1567: for he judged if His Majesty did sign and authorize that
Confession with a Bond for defending it in subordination to the Kings
Authority, The Marqui^ asks leave to go to Court*
it might give full satisfaction to all, that there should be no Innovation in
Religion; at least, the Vulgar, who had been poisoned with those Fears, might
be recovered, a considerable party of the Covenanters gained, and His Majesty's
Cause made more favorable to all the World. This was not to be moved or
managed by Letters; therefore he begged permission to wait upon His Majesty,
which the King granted in the following Letter.

Hamilton,
YOurs of the 24th (though it be long) requires but a short Answer, it being
only to have leave to come up, and obtains i^ of His Majesty*
which is grounded upon so good reason, that I cannot but grant it. Some
Considerations in the mean time I think fit to put to you; first, to take heed
how you engage your self in the way of Mediation to me; for though I would not
have you refuse to bring up to me any Demand of theirs to gain time, yet I
would not have you promise to mediate for any thing that is against my Grounds;
for if you do, I must either prejudice my self in the granting, or you in
denying: then, I would have you take care, that no more Subscriptions be urged
upon any, especially of Council or Session: lastly, that you leave such
encouragement to these few, that have not yet forsaken my Cause, that they may
be a^sured (as well as I) that your up-coming is neither to desert them nor it.
And thus certainly if (as you write) you get the mutinous Multitude once
dispersed, you will have done me very good Service; for I am confident that my
Declaration published before your coming away, (according to the Alterations
that I have given you leave to make) will give some stop to their Madnesses:
however your endeavors have been such, that you shall be welcome to

Your assur^d constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Greenwich, 29 June, 1638.

The King did also signify to him by my Lord of Canterbury, that he appointed
him to add to the Declaration some general words, giving hopes of an Assembly
and Parliament, by whom also he gave him Warrant for calling the Session to
Edinburgh.

To this I shall add a Letter of the Bishop of Ross to the Marquis, which will
show what sense the Bishops had of his Proceedings all this while.

My Lord, may it please your Grace,
Letter from the Bishop of Ross to the Marquis.
WE are exceeding sorry to hear that the success of your Lordships Travels in
this difficult Business; is otherwise than good Christians and Subjects do
wish, and heartily pray for; but on the other part, are glad to hear from our
Friends there, that, whereof we were ever confident, that nothing is omitted by
your Lordship to effectuate what is necessary for His Majesty's Honor, and
expedient for the good and quiet of that poor distracted and distempered
Kingdom. For my own part give me leave, without either flattery or presumption,
to say ingenuously, that the Course your Lordship keeps, seems to be such as
all good and wise men must approve your Lordships wisdom and Loyalty.
Infallibly the fruit will be, besides the Warrant your Lordship has in your
own Conscience by this Noble and Wise carriage, your Lordship must be more (if
any accrewment can be to former Deserts) beloved of your Master: it will indear
your Lordship more to all good, wise, and well-affected Patriots, and oblige
all, especially honest Churchmen, to be your Servants. It cannot seem strange
to any wise heart, who looks on the Distemper of that Kingdom, wherein is the
concourse of so many different and diverse Distempers, where so many of all
sorts of different Judgments, and no less variety of Affections, are so
strongly engaged, and where many have their own private ends; that the best,
wisest, and most powerful Agents, are not able on a sudden to rectify their
Judgments, cure their Affections, and by disappointing the private intentions
of some, to reduce all to Order, Peace, and Quiet. In any great Work of this
strain, we must all rely somewhat more on the wise and gracious Providence of
God, than in other ordinary accidents: He is able to work good out of ill,
light out of darkness, and order out of confusion, which I pray God heartily,
we may see to His Glory, the Kings Honor, and Peace of the Church and State,
without any other effect upon any author or abetter of these Disorders, but of
Gods Mercy, and His Majesty's Royal Clemency. In this I fear I have exceeded
more, possibly, than becomes me with your Grace; but as I humbly beg pardon, so
I trust your Lordships Goodness will easily pardon the expressions of a poor
Heart surcharged with grief, not so much flowing from, or following the fear of
any Personal or Private evil can befall it, as fearing the danger the Public
is in, because of our Sins, which are calling for Vengeance. God of his Mercy
give us Repentance, and be merciful to that Church and State.

We can return nothing for your Lordships care and kindness to us but humble
and hearty thanks, and earnestly pray God Almighty for all Honor, Wealth, and
Happiness to your Lordship here and hence.

As your Lordship has commanded us we shall go from hence, and where we pitch
our abode, with the first opportunity shall acquaint your Lordship. We were
ad^ised by our best friends to do so, before we received your Lordships; but
that Obedience we owe, and promised to His Majesty and your Lordship, made us
that we would not stir for any Advertisement or Advice, how necessary or
affectionate soever, till we had your Lordships Warrant.

All that kind respect which is above our desert and condition, and tender care
your Lordship has expressed to us, for our safety, and that which your
Lordship has superadded out of your noble Bounty, desiring us to be so bold as
to show your Lordship what Money, or any thing else necessary we stand in need
of, that your Lordship may supply our necessity in this, has so perplexed us
for a time, that we knew not what to choose; on the one part being ashamed to
do it, both because it seems impertinent, and incongruous to trouble one of
your Lordships Honor, Place, and Employment, with matters of this kind, and
especially so unreasonably at such a time, when your Lordship is at such charge
for the Honor of His Majesty's Service; as also that we are unprofitable, and
cannot be useful to your Lordship in any kind, and so how should we to other
troubles we make your Lordship, add this to be chargeable: yet your Lordships
noble and generous offer, and the necessity we are cast into at this present,
that what is our own or due to us we cannot command, and know as little who
will do us the favor at this time to trust us, has made us (seeing Obedience
is better than Sacrifice) to cast our selves upon your Lordships Bounty and
Favor; fearing on the one part your Lordship may be offended if we do it not,
and on the other, that otherwise we cannot be provided: Therefore I humbly
entreat your Lordship, to let me have with the Bearer a hundred and fifty
Pieces, payable at Whitsunday next with the Interest, or Martinmass, as your
Lordship pleases; for which your Lordship shall receive from the Bearer my own
personal Bond. Here and at this time I cannot give better Security, but by Gods
Grace your Lordship shall be in no danger, come the world as it will.

I have more than need to beg humble pardon for my unmannerly and impertinent
importunities, in troubling your Lordship at this time, taken up with weighty
Affairs, if it were but to read this long Paper; and that I offend no more in
this kind, I shut up all with my hearty Prayers to God Almighty for all Honor
and Happiness to your Lordship, and an effectual blessing upon your Travels. So
wishes he who shall be, whilst he lives,

Your Graces most humble and bounden Servant, IO. ROSSEN.
Berwick, 29 June, 1638.

The Marquis had Orders from His Majesty to see the Bishops or other Churchmen,
who suffered for their Duty, relieved out of the Treasury, but that was
exhausted; yet the Marquis was careful that none of them should want, and
therefore supplied them liberally out of his own Money, even without taking
from them any Legal Security for repayment, as appears by the Accounts of his
Trustees at that time.

Upon the Kings Pleasure that was signified by the Archbishop of Canterbury the
Marquis emitted a Proclamation for the Sessions sitting down on the second of
July at Edinburgh, The Session sits again at Edinburgh.
and thither he went that day to intimate to them His Majesty's Goodness for
them, in no^ putting them to the trouble and expense of removing their Families
elsewhere; wherefore he recommended His Majesty's Service to them, and that if
any thing came from the Tables, they should not fail to pass that Censure on it
which was according to Law. Next he called for the Covenanters Petitions, which
he promised to present to His Majesty, and return them an Answer betwixt that
and the fifth of August, with which they were satisfied for that time.

On the fourth of July he held a Council, and presented the Kings Declaration
to the Councillors, and having beforehand prepared most of them with a great
deal of industry, he got it signed by them all, and an Act passed, The Kings
Proclamation is published, and protested against.
that the Subjects ought to rest satisfied with it. It was immediately sent to
the Market-cross, and proclaimed; but notwithstanding all the Grace it
contained, it met with a Protestation from the Tables. But upon the back of
this the Marquis met with one of the most troublesome passages of his whole
Negotiation. There were some Councillors who were not satisfied with the
Declaration, and those he got to be absent from Council that day: but diverse of
thos^ who had signed the Act, (that the Subjects ought to rest satisfied with
the Declaration) came afterward to him, telling him, that he had pressed them
to what they had not well considered when they did it, but upon second thoughts
they found they had wronged their Consciences; wherefore they desired he would
call a new Council, The Council is inconstant.
that they might retract what they had done. This he studied to divert by all
means, representing how contrary it would be to their Honor, and to the Kings
Service, and Good of the Country, and so he shook them off that night: but next
day those and many more came to him with the same Desires, and say or do what
he could, nothing would prevail with them; for they told him plainly, if he
called not a Council, they would find another way to make their Retractation
well enough known, and that was to subscribe the Covenant. The Marquis having
spoken with the whole Council apart, found that three parts of four would
immediately fall off, if he gave them not satisfaction; and judging that such a
visible breach with the Council would ruin the Kings Affairs, therefore since
the Act was not registered, but only subscribed, he thought the Course that had
least danger in it was to tear it before them: by this means he got that storm
calmed.

All this while that he had been in Scotland he had not forgot the Kings Orders
about his Castles. The Marquis takes care of the Kings Castles.
Dumbriton was secured, though it run a risque, the Constable being at London,
and the Under-keeper taking the Covenant: but he called home Sir William
Stewart, who was Constable under the Duke of Lennox, to wait on his Charge; and
this delivered him from that hazard.

As for Edinburgh-Castle which was then in the Earl of Marre's hand, it cost
him more trouble. Diverse of the Earl of Marre's friends, who had much credit
with him, being not well inclined, and much being trusted to the Constable, he
durst not in the Kings Name require him to yield it up, lest that had hasted on
a Rupture; and he could not prevail by fairer ways at first: but the issue of
this shall be told in its due place.

This being done, the Marquis took his Journey, He takes Journey,
and on the way he had the following Letter from His Majesty.

Hamilton,
I Hope that this will find you on the way hitherward; wherefore remitting all
business till I speak with you, these Lines are only to hearten you in your
Journey, for I think that it will be very much for my Service. So desiring you
to make as much haste as the weather will permit, I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Greenwich, the 9th July, 1638. POSTSCRIPT.
Forget not to bring with you the Copies of all the Proclamations and
Protestations that have been made.




When he came to Court he gave the King a full account of all had passed in
Scotland, and of the strength and fury of the Covenanters, and gives the King
an account of Affairs;
together with the inconstancy of many of the Council, and how His Majesty had
been abused in the hopes he was put in of the readiness of his Preparations in
England; which I gather from some little Notes he took of things, and the
Copies of his Letters.

He next told His Majesty, that nothing prevailed so much on the Vulgar in
Scotland, as the cursed insinuations were given of His Majesty's staggering in
the Protestant Religion; wherefore he proposed, that His Majesty might cause
renew the Confession of Faith; which was established at the Reformation, and
ratified in Parliament, An. 1567: and to that His Majesty did readily consent.

At length His Majesty having considered for some days of the whole Affair, and
having fully debated every particular with the Marquis, and my Lord of
Canterbury, in end His Goodness, and Paternal Affection for his poor Subjects,
overcame all that Indignation which their Actions had raised in him; wherefore
he resolved on enlarging his Instructions, which he did as follows.

CHARLES R.

YOU shall try by all means to see if the Council will sign the Confession of
Faith, established by Act of Parliament, and gets new and fuller Instructions.
with the new Bond joined thereto; but you are not publicly to put it to
Voting, except you be sure to carry it, and thereafter that probably they will
stand to it.

If the Council do sign it, though the Covenanters refuse, you shall proceed to
the indicting of a free General Assembly; and though you cannot procure the
Council to sign it, yet you are to proceed to the indicting thereof* if you
find that no other Course can quiet business at this time.

You shall labor by all fair means that the sitting of the Assembly be not
before the first of November, or longer if you can obtain it: for the place, We
are pleased to leave it to your election; for the manner of indicting, you must
be as cautious as you can, and strive to draw it as near as may be to the
former Assemblies in my Fathers time.

You must labor that Bishops may have Votes in Assemblies, which if you cannot
obtain, then you are to protest in their Favors in the most formal manner you
can think of.

As for the Moderator in the Assembly, you are to labor that he may be a
Bishop, which though you cannot obtain, yet you must give way to their Election.

You are to labor, that the Five Articles of Perth be held as indifferent;
strive that the admissions of Ministers may continue as they are; you may
condescend, that the Oaths of their Admission be no other than is warranted by
Act of Parliament.

You are, if you find that it may any wise conduce to Our Service, to enact and
publish the Order made at Holyroodhouse by Our Council the fifth of July last,
for discharging the use of the Service Book, Book of Canons, and the practice
of the High Commission.

You are to protest against the abolishing of Bishops, and to give way to as
few restrictions of their power as you can; as for the Bishops not being
capable of Civil Places, you must labor what you can to keep them free.

You may give way that they shall be accountable to the General Assembly, which
you shall indict at the rising of this against that time twelve month.

As for the Bishops Precedence, you are not to admit them of the Assembly to
meddle therewith, it being no point of Religion, and totally in the Crown.

If the Bishop of St. Andrews, or any other, be accused of any crime, you are
to give way to it, so they may have a free Trial; and likewise the same of
whatsoever person or Officer of State.

It is left to your discretion what course Bishops shall take, that are for the
present out of the Country.

You are to advise the Bishops to forbear sitting at the Council, till better
and more favorable times for them.

Notwithstanding all these Instructions abovementioned, or any other accident
that may happen (still laboring to keep up Our Honor so far as possibly you
can) you are by no means to permit a present Rupture to happen, but to yield
any thing though unreasonable, rather than now to break.

C. R.
London the 27th July, 1638.
But with this His Majesty ordered him to see, That the Country were again
settled before he indicted the Assembly, that the Moderators named by Bishops
in Presbyteries might be again reponed, and according to the Act of the
Assembly 1606. they might be held necessary Members of the Assembly, that all
Ministers turned out since these Stirs began, might be again restored, and that
all Ministers admitted without Bishops might desist from the exercise of their
Function: That all people might keep their own Churches, and that Bishops and
Ministers who took not the Covenant, might live quietly without disturbance,
and have their Stipends paid them. His Majesty also so gave warrant, That if
need required he might call a Parliament against April next: and with these
Instructions the King wrote to the Council the following Letter.

CHARLES R.

RIght trusty and well-beloved Cousin, Counselor and Commissioner, The Kings
Letter to the Council,
and Right trusty and well-beloved Cousins and Councillors, and trusty and
well-beloved Councillors, We Greet you well.

The great Distractions which have of late arisen both in Kirk and
Commonwealth, in that Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, have much troubled the
minds of many good and loyal Subjects there, and these Distractions have fallen
out among them upon Iealousies and Fears of Innovation in Religion, and
introducing of Popery; and not without some Fears conceived amongst them, as if
We Our Self were that way inclined.

Upon occasion of these Fears they have of late signed a Covenant, or Bond for
conserving the Religion established, and the Laws of the Country: but this Bond
being not subscribed by Royal leave and Authority (as was that in Our dear
Fathers time) must needs be both null in it self, and very prejudicial to the
ancient and laudable Government of both Kirk and Commonwealth: which though We
must declare unto you, yet out of Our inborn Love to that Our Native Country,
and Loyal Subjects there, and for the obviating of these causeless Fears, and
to satisfy your selves and all Our loving People, We do hereby under Our hand
let you know that We are, and have ever been satisfied fully in Our Judgment
and Conscience, both for the Reformed Religion and against the Roman; and that
by Gods Grace and Goodness, We purpose both to live and die in the belief and
practice of the Religion now established, and to preserve it in full strength,
according to the Laws of that Our Kingdom: and to the end that this may appear
to Posterity, how firm and settled We are in that Our Religion, We require you
Our Commissioner and Council to see these Letters registered according to course.

Given at Our Court at Oatlands, July 30. 1638.

His Majesty signed also the following Declaration.

CHARLES R.

THE great Distractions which of late have risen both in Kirk and Commonwealth,
in this Our ancient Kingdom, and Declaration,
have so troubled the minds of many of Our good and loyal Subjects there, that
they have been possessed with Fears as if Popery had been intended to have been
introduced, and as if We Our Self were that way inclined: upon occasion of
which Fears a Covenant or Bond of late has been drawn up, intended by the
Subscribers (as does appear by their Supplication, presented to Our
Commissioner the 26th of June last) for conserving the Religion and Laws of the
Country; but it not being done by Royal leave and Authority, as was that in Our
dear Fathers time, must be both null and void of it self, and much prejudicial
to the ancient and laudable Government of Kirk and Commonwealth: Therefore We
for obviating those Fears, which have been misconceived, both against Our
Person and Profession, for matters of Religion, and to satisfy not Our loving
Subjects only, but all the Christian World, that We do, and (by Gods Grace)
ever will maintain the true Christian and Reformed Religion, established in
this Our Kingdom, and to let the World see, that this shall be done in and with
all freedom according to the Laws of Our Country, have signed the Confession of
Faith, established by Act of Parliament An. 1557. with this Bond following, in
defense of it, and Royal Authority, Laws, and Liberties of the Country; and do
also require the present Subscription of this Confession, and Bond by all Our
loving Subjects, that it may remain in force to Posterity, that they may know
how careful We are, and have been to preserve the integrity of Religion, and
the freedom of Our Laws.

Here the Confession of Faith was inserted, which is to be seen in the Acts of
Parliament An. 1567. and therefore it being of great length, the Reader is
referred to the Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland.

Thereafter followed this ensuing Bond.

with the Bond to be signed.
We and every one of us underwritten do protest and swear in the presence of
God Almighty, that we are truly and fully resolved in our Consciences, that
this is the Confession of the true Faith of Christ, established by the Laws of
this Country, and that (by the Grace of God) we will profess and maintain the
same all the days of our Lives; and because the safety of Religion, Kirk, and
Commonwealth, depends much upon the comfortable assistance which all of them
daily receive from Royal Justice and Authority, we protest and promise with our
Hearts, under the Obligation of the same Oath, to defend not only this our
Religion, but the Kings Majesty's Sacred Person and Authority, as also the Laws
and Liberties of this our Country under His Majesty's Sovereign Power, with our
best Counsels, Bodies, Goods, and whole Estates, according to the Laws, and
against all sorts of persons, and in all things whatsoever, and likewise
mutually to defend our selves, and one another, in this abovementioned Cause
under the same obligation.

But while the Marquis was busy at Court, procuring this Gracious Answer to
their Demands, and while His Majesty was condescending to such extraordinary
Favors to them, the Covenanters in Scotland were going on, The Covenanters are
very busy in Scotland.
posting up and down the Country for more Subscriptions to the Covenant: and
because the North continued firm to their Duty, some Noblemen and Ministers
went thither to draw them to their Party, and on the 23d of July, they came to
Aberdeen, where there was a company of worthy and learned Doctors and
Professors. But the Covenanters welcome there was so cold, (all the
Subscriptions they got being but 19 or 20; and they were not admitted to preach
in the public Churches, which made them preach in the Court of the Earl
Marshal's Lodgings) that they went away full of fury and threats against that
Place; and this gave the rise to that Debate which followed betwixt the Doctors
of Aberdeen and those Ministers, Debates betwixt the Doctors in Aberdeen and
them.
which the Learned Doctors managed with so great advantage, as did not a little
confound the whole Party: and the Ministers being pinched by them about the
lawfulness of combining without warrant of Authority, alleged, that my Lord
Commissioner was satisfied with the Covenant, upon the offer of that
Explication was mentioned formerly. But the falsehood of this Calumny was cast
back on them with shame, by him at his return; for as he had never expressed
any satisfaction with their Covenant, so all the ground they had for that, was,
because according to the Kings Order he had treated about that Explication to
gain time.

He brought along with him to Scotland Dean Balcanqual, Doctor Balcanqual comes
to Scotland.
a man of great parts, of subtle wit, and so eloquent a Preacher, that he
seldom preached in Scotland without drawing Tears from the Auditors. Him the
Marquis intended to make use of, as his Council in Church Affairs, which Trust
he discharged faithfully and diligently, and received those Informations which
were made public in the large Declaration penned by him.

The Marquis came to Holyroodhouse on the tenth of August, and found things in
a much worse posture than he had left them, and that the Flames were growing
almost past quenching; for at a Convention of Buroughs a few days before, they
had enacted, The Covenanters high resolutions.
That none might be Magistrates, or bear Office in any Borough, except he had
first taken the Covenant: and the Covenanters were resolved, that Bishops
should have no Vote in the Assembly, unless they were chosen by a Presbytery;
and they were sure that should not be. They were resolved to abolish
Episcopacy, and to declare it unlawful, and excommunicate, if not all, yet most
of the Bishops; they were resolved to condemn the Articles of Perth, and
discharge Bishops to Vote in Parliament; they were also resolved, to ordain all
under pain of Excommunication to sign the Covenant; and to show they meant to
break out into Hostility, they were beginning to levy men in several places.
But to make sure work of the Assembly, they fell on a new device of Lay Elders
to be chosen Commissioners, who should be men of the greatest power and
interest, whereby they doubted not to carry all things; and because in a
Meeting at Edinburgh of Ministers being 120 in number, about four parts of five
were only for limiting of Episcopacy, it was resolved by the Iunto, that none
of these should be Commissioners. The Marquis being surprised with so great a
change of the State of Affairs* gave account of all these inconveniences to His
Majesty, and resolved not to proceed to call a General Assembly, since he saw
what effects it was like to produce, till he first went and acquainted His
Majesty with these hazards.

On the 13th of August the Covenanters came to demand his Answer: The Marquis
makes known His Majesty's intentions.
he told them, he had a clear and full Answer to give them, but desired to be
excused till he first communicated it to the Council, which was to sit next
day. So they were satisfied for that time, and on the fourteenth he held a
Council, where he delivered His Majesty's Answer in these Terms.

My Lords,
I Thought it fit to acquaint your Lordships before I returned His Majesty's
Answer to the Noblemen, and others petitioning for the same, which is so full
of Grace and Goodness, that we have all cause to bless God, and thank His
Majesty for it, such is his tender care of this poor distracted Kingdom, that
he will leave nothing undone, that can be expected from a Just Prince, to save
us from Ruin; and since he finds such Distraction in the Church and State,
that they cannot be well settled without a Parliament and Assembly, the state
of the Country and business being prepared for it, he has given me Warrant for
calling of both, that they may be orderly held, as formerly they have been,
according to the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom.

And further I am to declare to your Lordships, that this we are to attribute
only to His Goodness, for we cannot but acknowledge, that our carriage has
been such, as justly we might have expected that he would have taken another
course with us: which he was Royally and really prepared for, (had not His
Mercy prevailed above His just Indignation) and by a powerful and forcible way
have taught us Obedience, which he has forborne to make use of, merely out of
His Grace and Goodness. It is our duty to let His Subjects know, how great our
obligation is to Him, which every one of us in particular, and all of us in
general, should strive to make every one sensible of; and labor, so far as
lies in our power, to procure satisfaction to His Majesty, and quiet to this
distracted Church and State.


The day following he gave the Covenanters the same Answer, with which they
were no way satisfied. But the Covenanters were not satisfied.
They asked, what he meant by preparing of business; he said, it was to
establish Order and Government again in the Country, as it was before those
Combustions; and upon this he gave them a Note of those particulars His Majesty
ordered to be settled, and assured them immediately upon their Obedience, he
should indict an Assembly and Parliament, as he was instructed. They continued
treating about this till the 20th of August, but still declined to execute
those particulars that were commanded, and threatened to call an Assembly and
Parliament themselves: wherefore the Marquis craved again the space of twenty
days, to go and bring an Answer from His Majesty; which he did to gain more
time, and to show the King into what extremities they were now run; and that it
was necessary He should immediately break with them, or give way to the full
Career of their zeal: The Marquis goes again to Court.
and so he took Journey on the 25th to Court.

But the first night he stopped at Broxmouth to consider with the Earls of
Traquair, Roxburgh and Southesk, what advice to offer His Majesty, who agreed
on the following Articles, taken from the Original penned by Traquair.

Articles of advice offered to His Majesty.
SInce the cause and occasion of all the Distractions, which of late have
happened both in Kirk and Polity, seems to proceed from the conceived Fears of
Innovation of Religion and Laws, and that the Service Book, Book of Canons, and
the unbounded power of Bishops in the High Commission (never yet warranted by
Law) was that which first gave ground and occasion to the Subjects Fears, and
seeing the said Books are offered to be proved, to be full of Tenets and
Doctrines contrary to the Reformed Religion, professed and established within
this Kingdom, and the same introduced against all form and custom practiced in
this Church; it were an Act of Justice well beseeming so Gracious and Glorious
a King, absolutely and fully to discharge the same.

And seeing likewise this High Commission has given so great offense to so
many of Your Majesty's good Subjects, and as is constantly affirmed, is of so
vast and illimited a power, and contrary to express Laws, by which all such
Iudicatories, not established by Act of Parliament, are declared to be of no
force; it would much conduce to the satisfaction of this People, if this
Iudicatory were discharged till the same were established by Law.

The practice of the Five Articles of Perth has been withstood by the most
considerable part of the Subjects of all qualities, both Laity and Clergy,
whereby great Divisions have been in this Church, and are like to have an
increase, if Your Majesty (in Your accustomed goodness and care of this poor
Kirk and Kingdom) shall not be graciously pleased to allow that the pressing of
these Articles may be forborne until the same may be considered of in an
Assembly and Parliament; and although we conceive Episcopa^y to be a
Church Government most agreeable with Monarchy, yet the illimited power which
the Lords of the Clergy of this Kingdom have of late assumed to themselves, in
admitting and deposing of Ministers, and in diverse other of their Acts and
Proceedings, gives us just ground humbly to beg, that Your Majesty may be
pleased to remit to the Consideration of the Assembly this their unwarranted
Power.

The sense and apprehension of these foresaid Evils, has s^irred up the
Subjects without warrant of Authority, to join in a Bond and Covenant, to
withstand the foresaid Innovations, and for maintenance of the true Religion,
the Kings Majesty's Person, and of one another in the defense thereof.

If Your Majesty might be graciously pleased in supplement hereof, to allow or
warrant such a Confession of Faith, with such a Covenant or Bond joined
thereto, as that signed by Your Majesty's Father, and by His Command, by the
Council and most part of the Kingdom, we are very confident the same would be a
ready and forcible mean to quiet the present Disorders, at least to satisfy
most part; and if Your Majesty shall condescend to the foresaid Propositions,
we are hopeful, if not confident, it shall give so great conten^ to so
considerable a number of Your Majesty's good Subjects, of all qualities, that
if any shall stand out, or withstand Your Majesty's Royal Pleasure, after the
publication thereof, they may be overtaken by Your Majesty's Power within this
Kingdom, without the help or assistance of any Force elsewhere.

And because it is to be hoped, that all that has past in this business, and
all the Courses that have been taken herein by the Subjects, has proceeded
from the foresaid Fears of Innovations, and not out of any Disloyalty or
dissatisfaction to Sovereignty, and that Your good People may still taste the
fruits of Your Grace and Goodness, we wish Your Majesty may be graciously
pleased, upon the Word of a King, to pardon what is past, and never so much as
to take notice of any of the Actions or Proceedings of what person soever, who
after this shall carry himself as becomes a dutiful Subject, and in
testification thereof shall give his best assistance for settling the present
Disorders.

And if Your Majesty may be pleased to condescend hereto, we conceive all Your
Majesty's Subjects, Petitioners or Covenanters, should acquiesce, and rest
heartily satisfied therewith; and if any shall be so foolish or mad, as
notwithstanding this Your Majesty's grace and goodness, still to disturb the
Peace of Your Majesty's Government, we in testification of our hearty
thankfulness to our Sovereign, by these humbly and heartily make offer of our
Lives and Fortunes, for assisting Your Majesty, or Your Commissioner, in
suppressing all such Insolences or insolent persons.

Signed, Hamilton. Traquair. Roxburgh. Southesk.


From Broxmouth he went forward to wait on His Majesty, and did show him, that
unless he enlarged his Instructions he was to treat no further; The Marquis
advises the King to renew King James his Covenant.
since he saw the Contempt was like to be put on the last Instructions so
visibly, that he durst not make use of them, lest he should thereby have
exposed His Majesty's Goodness to new Affronts. And as he represented this to
His Majesty, so he told him, nothing seemed so likely a Course for removing of
Jealousies and settling all things, as the Authorizing the Covenant that upon
King James his command was drawn up by Mr. John Craig, An. 1580* containing the
renunciation of all the Articles of Popery, which was the ground of the present
Covenant.

The King reasons against that.
His Majesty did utterly disrelish the Proposition of signing that Covenant,
usually called the Negative Confession; for he remembered how his Father had
resented his doing of that, as rash and indeliberate. And it seemed strange to
him, that so many Negatives should be sworn to, especially with such
aggravations of Epithets; as if one might not be firm enough to the Protestant
Doctrine, unless he not only abjured Popery in bulk, but also by retail, in so
many particulars, some whereof might be both uncertain and indifferent. And it
seemed tyrannical over tender Consciences, to require such an Oath from all
Persons, but more especially from Women and simple People who could not judge
well, and so were not fit to swear in such nice points; therefore the King
said, he looked upon the Remedy proposed as full as bad, if not worse, than the
Disease. The Marquis was so far from denying this, that he confessed, he could
hardly without straining of his own Conscience resolve on the doing of it
himself, upon diverse accounts; a chief one being, that in disclaiming of
Transubstantiation, the real presence of the Body and Blood of Christ was
rejected, which he could not sign without declaring, that by real, he
understood corporal (and this he accordingly declared when he signed it.) But
to this he added, that it was the Idol of Scotland, and he saw no other way to
reduce things to any temper, unless this Course were taken and followed.

He presented likewise to the King a Paper of all the Inconveniences, which
were not only like to follow on the calling of an Assembly, but seemed certain:
which Account was so full, that when the Bishop of Ross came up after that,
being sent by the Bishops, to divert the King from calling an Assembly, His
Majesty said, he offered no inconvenience could follow on it, but what the
Marquis had laid out to the full before him. And now the King resolved to try
the utmost of yielding, for the recovery of His Subjects; therefore he again
dispatched His Commissioner from Oatlands, on the tenth of September, with
ample Instructions which follow.

CHARLES R.

The Marquis gets new Instructions.
declare, That We do absolutely revoke the Service Book, the Book of Canons,
and the High Commission.

Perth, notwithstanding the Act of Parliament, which does command the same, and
in the said Proclamation you shall promise, in Our Name, that if in the first
Parliament to be held the three Estates shall think fit to repeal the said Act,
We shall then give Our Royal Assent to the said Act of Repeal.

You shall likewise declare, that We have enjoined, and authorized the Lords of
Our Privy Council to subscribe the Confession of Faith, and Bond thereto 1580.
and likewise have enjoined them to take order, that all our Subjects subscribe
the same.

You shall likewise declare, That Our meaning and pleasure is, that none of

You shall likewise declare, That we are Graciously content, that the

You shall offer a Pardon by Proclamation, and promise in it a
Ratificatification

You shall procure an Act of Council, wherein every Counselor shall declare

You shall likewise require every Lord of the Session to subscribe the
Confession

You shall likewise declare, that Our Pleasure is, That a most solemn Fast

You shall labor as much as in you lies, that both the Electors, and Persons

The time and place of the Assembly, (Edinburgh only excepted) We leave

You shall likewise presently indict a Parliament; the time and place We

Whether you shall first publish Our Gracious Offers, or first indict the
Assembly,

If you shall find the most considerable part of the Council not to acquiesce
in this Our Gracious Declaration, and not to promise hearty and cheerful
Assistance to Us, as is above-expressed, or not a considerable part of other
Lords and Gentlemen, in case Our Council refuse, then you shall neither indict
Parliament nor Assembly, nor publish any of My Gracious Offers, except only the
abolishing of the Service Book, Book of Canons and High Commission; but leave
them to themselves, and to such further Order, as We shall be forced to take
with them: only if you foresee a Breach, you shall give timely warning thereof,
to such as have stood well-affected to Our Service, that so they may in due
time provide for their safety, and your self is to return to Us with expedition.









CHARLES R.
Oatlands the 9th of September. 1638.
With these His Majesty did also sign the following Instructions for his
behavior with the Bishops.

CHARLES R.

Instructions to be communicated to the Bishops.
YOU shall show My Lord of St. Andrews, that We intend by being content with his
demission of the Chancellours Place no injury to him, and most willing We are,
that in the manner of doing it he may receive no prejudice in his reputation,
though we cannot admit at this time of his nominating a Successor; and to make
it more plain, that We are far from having any thought to affront him, by
thinking of his demission, We will in no ways that you urge him to do it; yet
you are to intimate, that in Our opinion a fair Demission will prove more to
the advancement of Our Service, and be better for him, than if he should retain
the Place.

If you find him willing to demit, you shall then try what consideration he
does expect from Us, and if the same be not altogether unreasonable, you shall
promise it in Our Name.

If a demission, then it is presently to be done.

If he resolve to hold that Place, then you must pr^sently command his repair
to Scotland, all excuses set apart.

You shall communicate to him and the rest of his Brethren, that far of Our
Intentions, that it is probable you may indict a General Assembly.

Thai We are content absolutely to discharge the Books of Service, and Canons,
and the High Commission.

You shall show that the Five Articles of Perth We are pleased be esteemed as
indifferent, and that though We maintain Episcopacy, yet We will be content
that their Power be limited according to the Laws.

And it is Our further Pleasure, that if an Assembly be indicted, he and the
rest of his Brethren be there, to defend themselves and their Cause: and for
that end, that he and they repair to Newcastle, Morpeth, or Berwick, there to
attend your further advertisement, that so immediately they may repair to
Scotland, not only to answer for themselves at the said Assembly, but likewise
to consult with you, what will be fi^test to be done, for the advancement of
Our Service, that evil may be kept off, so much as in you and them lies, both
from Kirk and Commonwealth.

C.R.
Oatlands the 9th September, 1638.
As for the Place where the Assembly should be held, The Assembly was to sit at
Glasgow.
though in the written Instructions it is referred to my Lord Commissioners
choice, ( Edinburgh only excepted) yet it seems it has been concerted betwixt
the King and him where it should hold; for in a Paper concerning the Assembly,
presented by the Marquis to the King, yet extant, where mention is made of the
Place of the Assembly, the King with His Own hand interlined, (Glasgow if may
be;) and without doubt, that was the fittest place: for as the City was large
and convenient, so the Magistracy there was right set. Besides, it was next to
the place of the Marquis his Interest, whereby his power for overruling them
might have been greatest; neither was it fit they should go so far from the
scene as Aberdeen (which was advised by my Lord St. Andrews;) since for the
Strangers, it would have been all to one purpose, for thither they would all
have flocked; and it seemed not so proper, they should meet in a Place or
Country, which was still well set, lest the numbers and boldness of those
Strangers, had either poisoned or frighted them from their Duty. But to make
the whole matter clear, I shall here set down the Covenant and Bond, which were
now enjoined by His Majesty.

WE all and every one of us underwritten, protest, The National Covenant first
signed by King James, and now received by the Kings Order.
that after long and due examination of our Consciences in Matters of true and
false Religion, we are now thoroughly resolved in the Truth, by the Word and
Spirit of God; and therefore we believe with our Hearts, confess with our
Mouths* subscribe with our Hands, and constantly affirm before God and the
whole World, that this only is the true Christian Faith and Religion, pleasing
God, and bringing Salvation to man, which is now by the Mercy of God revealed
to the World by the preaching of the blessed Evangel, and received, believed,
and defended by many and sundry notable Kirks and Realms, but chiefly by the
Kirk of Scotland, the Kings Majesty, and the Estates of this Realm, as Gods
eternal Truth, and only ground of our Salvation; as more particularly is
expressed in the Confession of our Faith, stablished, and publicly confirmed
by sundry Acts of Parliaments, and now of a long time has been openly
professed by the Kings Majesty, and whole body of this Realm, both in Burgh and
Land: to the which Confession, and form of Religion, we willingly agree in our
Consciences in all points, as unto Gods undoubted Truth, and verity grounded
only upon his written Word; and therefore we abhor and detest all contrary
Religion and Doctrine, but chiefly all kind of Papistry in general, and
particular Heads, even as they are now damned and confuted by the Word of God,
and Kirk of Scotland. But in special we detest and refuse the usurped Authority
of that Roman Antichrist upon the Scriptures of God, upon the Kirk and Civil
Magistrate, and Consciences of men; all his tyrannous Laws made upon
indifferent things against our Christian Liberty, his erroneous Doctrine
against the Sufficiency of the written Word, the perfection of the Law, the
Office of Christ, and his blessed Evangel; his corrupted Doctrine concerning
Original Sin, our natural inability, and rebellion to Gods Law, our
Justification by Faith only, our imperfect Sanctification, and obedience to the
Law, the nature, number and use of the Holy Sacraments; his Five bastard
Sacraments, with all his Rites, Ceremonies, and false Doctrine, added to the
ministration of the true Sacraments, without the Word of God, his cruel
Judgments against Infants departing without the Sacrament, his absolute
necessity of Baptism, his blasphemous opinion of Transubstantiation, or real
presence of Christ's Body in the Elements, and receiving of the same by the
wicked, or bodies of men; his Dispensations with Solemn Oaths, Perjuries, and
degrees of Marriage forbidden in the Word, his cruelty against the Innocent
divorced, his devilish Mass, his blasphemous Priesthood, his profane Sacrifice
for the sins of the dead and the quick, his Canonization of men, calling upon
Angels or Saints departed, worshipping of Imagery, Relics, and Crosses,
dedicating of Kirks, Altars, Days, Vows to Creatures; his Purgatory, Prayers
for the Dead, praying or speaking in strange Language, with his Processions and
blasphemous Litany, and multitude of Advocates or Mediators; his manifold
Orders, Auricular Confession, his desperate and uncertain Repentance, his
general and doubtsome Faith; his Satisfactions of men for their sins, his
Justification by Works, Opus operatum, Works of Supererrogation, Merits,
Pardons, Peregrinations and Stations; his Holy Water, Baptizing of Bells,
conjuring of Spirits, crossing, saning, anointing, conjuring, hallowing of Gods
good Creatures, with the superstitious opinion joined therewith; his worldly
Monarchy, and wicked Hierarchy, his three solemn Vows, with all the
shavellings of sundry sorts; his erroneous, and bloody Decrees made at Trent,
with all the Subscribers and Approvers of that cruel and bloody Bond, conjured
against the Kirk of God; and finally we detest all his vain Allegories, Rites,
Signs and Traditions brought into the Kirk, without or against the Word of God,
and Doctrine of his true Reformed Kirk, to the which we join our selves
willingly, in Doctrine, Faith, Religion, Discipline, and use of the Holy
Sacraments* as lively Members of the same in Christ our Head; promising and
swearing by the great Name of the Lord our God, that we shall continue in
obedience of the Doctrine and Discipline of this Kirk, and shall defend the
same according to our vocation and power, all the days of our lives, under the
pains contained in the Law, and danger both of body and soul in the day of
Gods fearful Judgment: and seeing that many are stirred up by Satan, and that
Roman Antichrist, to promise, swear, subscribe, and for a time use the Holy
Sacrament in the Kirk deceitfully against their own Consciences, minding hereby
first, under the external Cloak of Religion, to corrupt and subver^ secretly
Gods true Religion within the Kirk, and afterward where time may serve, to
become open enemies and persecuters of the same, under vain hope of the Popes
Dispensation, devised against the Word of God, to his greater confusion, and
their double Condemnation in the day of the Lord Jesus.

We therefore willing to take away all suspicion of h^pocrisie, and such
double-dealing with God and his Kirk, protest, and call the Searcher of all
hearts to witness, that our minds and hearts do fully agree with this our
Confession, Promise, Oath, and Subscription, so that we are not moved for any
worldly respect, but are persuaded only in our Consciences, through the
knowledge and love of Gods true Religion, printed in our hearts by the Holy
Spirit, as we shall answer to him in the day when the secrets of all hearts
shall be disclosed. And because we perceive that the quietness and stability of
our Religion and Kirk* does depend upon the safety and good behavior of the
Kings Majesty, as upon a comfortable Instrument of Gods Mercy, granted to this
Country for the maintenance of his Kirk, and ministration of Justice among us,
we protest, and promise with our hearts, under the same Oath, hand-writ, and
pains, that we shall defend his Person and Authority, with our Bodies and
Lives, in the defense of Christ his Evangel, Liberties of our Country,
ministration of Justice, and punishment of Iniquity, against all Enemies within
this Realm, or without, as we desire our God to be a strong and merciful
Defender to us in the day of our Death, and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit be all Honor and Glory eternally.
Amen.

WE underscribing and considering the strait link and conjunction betwixt the
true and Christian Religion presently professed within this Realm* The Bond
joined to it.
and our Sovereign Lords Estate and Standing, having both the self-same Friends
and common Enemies, and subject to the like event of standing and decay;
weighing therewithal the imminent danger threatened to the said Religion, the
Preservation whereof being dearer to us than whatsoever we have dearest to us
in this Life, and finding in His Majesty a most Honorable and Christian
Resolution, to manifest Himself to the World that zealous and religious Prince,
which he has hitherto professed, and to employ the means and power that God
has put into his hands, as well to the withstanding of whatsoever foreign
Force shall mean within this Land, for alteration of the said Religion, or
endangering of the present State, as to the repressing of the inward Enemies
thereto amongst our selves, linked with them in the said Antichristian League
and Confederacy, have therefore in the presence of Almighty God, and with His
Majesty's Authorizing and Allowance, faithfully promised and solemnly sworn,
likeas we hereby faithfully and solemnly swear and promise, to take a true
effauld and plain part with His Majesty, amongst our selves, for diverting of
the appearing danger threatened ^o the said Religion, and His Majesty's State
and Standing depending thereupon, by whatsoever foreign or intestine Plots or
Preparations; and to that effect, faithfully, and that upon our Truth and
Honors, bind and oblige us to others, to convene and assemble our selves
publicly with our Friends in Arms, or in quiet manner, at such Times and
Places as we shall be required by His Majesty's Proclamation, or by Writ or
Message directed to us from His Majesty, or any having Power from him, and
being convened and assembled to join and concur with the whole Forces of our
Friends and Followers, against whatsoever foreign or intestine Powers or
Papists, and their Partakers, shall arrive or rise within this Island, or any
part thereof, ready to defend or pursue, as we shall be authorized or conducted
by His Majesty, or any others having his Power and Commission, to join and hold
hand to the exe^ution of whatsoever Mean or Order shall be thought meet by His
Majesty and His Council, for suppressing of the Papists, promotion of the true
Religion, and settling of H^s Highness Estate, and Obedience in all the
Countries and Corners of this Realm, to expose the hazard of our Lives, Lands,
and Goods, and whatsoever means God has lent us, in the defense of the said
true and Christian Religion, and his Majesty's Person and Estate, against
whatsoever Jesuits and Seminary or Mass Priests, condemned Enemies to God and
His Majesty, to their utter wreck and exterminion according to the Power
granted to us by His Majesty's Proclamation and Acts of Parliament, to try,
search, and seek out all Excommunicates, Practisers, and other Papists whatever
within our bounds and Shire where we keep residence, and delate them to His
Highness and His Privy Council, and conform us to such Directions as from time
to time we shall receive from His Majesty and His Council in their behalfs: and
so specially so many of us as presently are, or hereafter shall be appointed
Commissioners in every Shire, shall follow, pursue, and travel by all means
possible, to take and apprehend all such Papists, Apostates, and
Excommunicates, as we shall receive in Writ from His Majesty. And we the
remanent within that Shire shall concur and assist with the said Commissioners,
with our whole Friends and Forces to that effect, without respect of any person
whatsoever, and generally to assist in the mean time, and defend every one of
us another, in all and whatsoever Quarrels, Actions, Debates, moved, or to be
moved against us, or any of us, upon Action of the present Bond, or other
Causes depending thereupon, and effauldly join in defense and pursuit against
whatsoever shall offer or intend any injury or revenge against them, or any one
of them for the Premises, making his cause and part that is pursued all our
parts, notwithstanding whatsoever privy grudge or displeasure standing betwixt
us, which shall be no impediment or hinder to our said effauld joining in the
said common cause, but to lie over and be misken'd, till they be orderly
removed, and taken away by the Order under-specified. To the which time, we for
the better furtherance of the said Cause and Service, have assured, and by the
tenor hereof, every one of us taking the burden upon us for our selves, and
all that we may let assure each other to be unhurt, unharmed, or any ways to be
invaded by us, or any our aforesaids for old Feid or new, otherwise than by
ordinary course of Law and Justice; neither shall we or any of our foresaids,
make any Provocation or Tumult, Trouble or Displeasure, to others in any sort,
as we shall answer to God, and upon our Honors, and Fidelity to His Majesty.
And for our further and more hearty Union in this Service we are content and
consent, that all whatsoever our Feids and Variances fallen, or that may fall
out betwixt us, be within forty days after the date hereof amicably referred
and submitted to seven or five indifferent Friends, chosen by His Majesty of
our whole number, and by their moderation and arbitrament compounded and taken
away. And finally, that we shall neither directly nor indirectly separate or
withdraw us from the Union and Fellowship of the remanent by whatsoever
suggestion or private advice, or by whatsoever incident regard, or stay such
resolution as by common deliberation shall be taken in the premises, as we
shall answer to God upon our Consciences, and to the World upon our Truth and
Honors, under the pain to be esteemed Traitors to God and His Majesty, and to
have lost all Honor, Credit, and Estimation in time coming. In witness
whereof, by His Majesty's special Command, Allowance, and Protection promised
to us therein, we have subscribed these presents with our Hands at 1589.

The Marquis being thus again dispatched took journey to Scotland, and at
Ferrybridge he met the Bishops, The Marquis finds the Bishops jealous of him.
to whom he signified His Majesty's Pleasure, at which they seemed infinitely
grieved, and spoke against it with so great vehemence, as clearly told they
were no way pleased with the Marquis: yet they resolved to keep the Assembly,
and in the mean while to send one of their number to Court, to which he gave
way. The Archbishop of S. Andrews seemed willing on a good Composition to quit
his Place of Chancellor, and the Marquis offered him 2500 l. S^erlin, with
which he was satisfied.

Hitherto the Marquis had wrestled against the Malice and Jealousies of the
Covenanters, and now Storms begun to rise from another Hand, which ceased not
to persecute him to his Grave: but the Truth of this Narration will best
discover both their Injustice who charged him, and his Innocence.

He holding on his Journey came to Holyroodhouse on the 17th of September, He
comes to Scotland, and finds some Jealousies amongst the Covenanters.
where he found Jealousies beginning to arise betwixt some of the wiser
Ministers and the Lords of the Covenant, concerning the Lay-ruling-elders,
which he was resolved to cherish with all the Art he was master of; causing
some represent to the Ministers, that if they gave way to that inordinate Power
Gentlemen were pretending to in Church Matters, it might end in a greater
Servitude than any they had ever reason to fear from either King or Bishops:
this was well considered by many, but they were overruled. He also found the
Covenanters were ready immediately to have indicted an Assembly, if he offered
at any more delays; and therefore resolved to give them present satisfaction.
But his first Work was to deal with the Lords of the Council, most of whom he
found abundantly satisfied with His Majesty's Gracious Offers: so that he began
again to gather some hopes, and to the first accounts he gave His Majesty he
had the following Return.

Hamilton,
IF I should be too long silent, I might seem to contradict that Rule which my
self prescribed; therefore, though for the present I can say nothing of the
main business, yet this must go if it were but to acknowledge the receipt of
your two, viz. of the 12th of September from Ferribridge, and of the 17th of
the same from Holyroodhouse. So referring you to the Comptroller for what
concerns the Ordnance that is to be transported to Hull, I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Hampton Court; 22 Sept. 1638.

Upon the 20th of September the Covenanters sent to ask the Marquis when they
might wait on him to know His Majesty's Pleasure: The Marquis lets the Kings
intentions to be known,
he answered, when they would; for he was resolved to hold a Council next day,
and the day following to publish it. So on the 21th in the morning they came to
him: he told them he was going to Council to make His Majesty's Pleasure known,
which should be also known at the Cross next day; but for their present joy he
told them, that the King had granted all they had desired, and more also, and
that a free Assembly and Parliament should be immediately indicted. Some did
hang their heads, and seemed surprised, yet they expressed thanks. He also
spoke frankly to some of them, telling them what the particulars were which His
Majesty had granted; for having opened them to so many PrivyCouncellours, at
which the Covenanters were troubled.
he could not think but all was known to them. They seemed reasonably well
satisfied, only they pressed him to desist from renewing the Confession of
Faith; for they clearly saw that this could not but take off a great many, and
would heal most of the Subjects of the Jealousies they had been infusing in
them: but he resolved to hear of no delay, having made most of the Councillors
sure beforehand, and that by Oath. The Council sat in the afternoon, and it
was a very frequent Meeting. After they were set, the Marquis with all the Art
and Industry he could think of, He proposes the matter in Council,
laid out His Majesty's Gracious Intentions for the Preservation of the true
Reformed Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of that Kingdom; and that for the
saving it from utter ruin, and keeping of peace in the Land, he had done many
things to which he had never been induced to have given way, except out of that
Consideration.

Then was the Kings Letter to the Council read, which was of the same strain
with the Instructions, after which there was a general silence. But the Marquis
(not willing that should last long, much less that any whose affection he
suspected should begin the Discourse) desired Traquair to speak, who spoke (as
he used to do) both long and well. After that he called up ten or twelve of
whom he was most assured, who expressed their satisfaction to the full. Then he
pressed it might be put to the Vote, which was there debated at length,
but some desired they might proceed more maturely, since it was a Confession
of Faith they were to sign. This could not be refused, and so was followed by a
long debate, and in end many desired, they might not be put to sign it that
night. The Marquis remembering the Disorder had followed upon the last Act, and
resolving not to run such a risque again, said, he did not desire it should be
signed that night, but that they should be ready for it next morning; withal
protesting, he would have none sign it, but such whose Consciences were
satisfied, and who were ready to hazard Life and Fortune in the prosecution of
it: and so after he had caused Registrate His Majesty's Letter, they rose about
ten a clock at night.

Most part of that night he spent in laboring those who had Scruples, and
consulting with such as were well affected.

In the morning the Clerk-Register and Kings Advocate came to draw the Forms of
indicting the Assembly. The Kings Advocate seemed unwilling it should be
according to the style used in King James his latest times, and much opposed by
the Covenanters.
but he was overruled. About six in the morning the Earl of Rothes, and many
of the Covenanting Lords, desired access; and the Marquis calling as many of
the Council together as could be had of a sudden, admitted them. Rothes in the
name of the rest said, they heard the Council were to sign the old Confession
of Faith, and to publish a Declaration thereabout, which they desired might be
delayed till Monday next, and then they doubted not to be able to give good
reasons why they should not do it. The Marquis replied, he should return them
an Answer by the advice of the Lords of the Council quickly; and from them he
went to Council, being firmly resolved to admit of no delay, knowing that it
was sought on design to divide the Council. The Covenanters upon their Petition
were called in to the Council, and they raised a long Debate which lasted about
four hours, and in the end no delay was granted, at which the Covenanters were
infinitely discontented, and went away not without some big words. At length
after three hours more debate amongst the Councillors, The Council ^est
satisfied with His Majesty's offers;
it was carried without a contrary voice, that the Confession should be
presently signed: next, the Proclamation of Grace was ordered to be published,
with another for indicting an Assembly at Glasgow the 21th of November, and
another for a Parliament at Edinburgh the 15th of May next: then they passed an
Act, declaring their full satisfaction with His Majesty's Concessions, together
with a Letter of Thanks to His Majesty, expressing their full satisfaction,
with large Engagements to adhere constantly to His Service; and so they rose at
four a clock, having sat from seven in the morning.

The Proclamations were immediately sent to the Cross, yet the Covenanters
protest.
which there met with Protestations: but many judged they went upon Grounds so
weak, that it was visible they were designed for no other end, but to keep the
People from being satisfied, and to hinder the Subscription of the Confession
and Bond. Many of the Council were displeased with the Protestation, and swore
to the Marquis, that since Religion was now secured, they would appear in
another manner for the Kings Interest; but all he could do could not persuade
them to pass a Censure upon the Protestation as Seditious. Next, there were
Commissions given out for the Shires to seek in Subscriptions to the Confession
of Faith; and the Earl of Rothes, and some other Covenanters were joined in the
Commission for the several Shires: which was censured by many, but most of all
by the King himself, who knew not how to construct of this, as will appear by a
Letter which will be inserted in its place. But most of the Councillors were
earnest for it upon these Reasons, that it gave these Lords a fair opportunity
of retreating if they would accept of it; it might also confirm all that the
Kings Indemnity was designed to be Real, when such persons were so soon
trusted: it might give some Jealousy to the other Covenanters against those
who were so trusted, as if underhand they had given some Engagements. But
chiefly the Body of the People would be very much persuaded that the thing was
designed in earnest, when they read those Names in the Commissions. Upon these
Grounds the Marquis yielded to the desires of the Councillors, and the King
was fully satisfied when he was informed about it; which will quickly appear.
Upon the notice His Majesty had of what passed, he wrote the following Letter.
Hamilton,
I Have no time now to make my observations upon your Proceedings, therefore
now I shall only tell you that I approve them all, (in what concerns your part
of them;) and that not only so, but that I esteem it to be very great Service
(as the times are.) This much I thought necessary at this time to encourage you
in your Proceedings: my next shall be longer, yet this is enough to assure you
that I am

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Hampton Court 30 Sept. 1638.

This being done, the Marquis his next Work was to preserve Episcopacy, which
was in visible hazard, since the worst-affected every where were chosen
Commissioners for the Assembly: The Marquis apprehends the design against
Episcopacy.
and of this he advertised the King, desiring him to go on with his
Preparations for fear of the worst: and particularly he remembered him of the
Resolution he had taken about Berwick, which was, that because Soldiers could
not be levied in England, and sent thither, without making a direct Breach;
therefore a thousand and five hundred Soldiers should be levied in the Prince
of Orange his Name in Holland, and these be suddenly shipped, and as suddenly
landed at Berwick for securing of that place. But withal he advertised His
Majesty to go on with much secrecy, lest the Covenanters might take the start
of him; and therefore he advised the stopping of a Magazine that was to be sent
to Hull, which since it was not presently to be made use of, he thought might
lie as well in the Tower of London as there. And to this Dispatch he had the
following Answer.

Hamilton,
I See by yours of the 27th of September, that the Malignity of the Covenanters
is greater than ever, so that if you who are my true Servants do not use
extraordinary Care and Industry, my Affairs in that Kingdom are likely rather
to grow worse than better: therefore, you that do your endeavors accordingly
deserve the more praise, and your opposers the more punishment; and in my mind
this last Protestation deserves more than any thing yet they have done, for if
raising of Sedition be Treason, this can be judged no less. And methinks if the
College of Justice have signed my Covenant, (which I hope they have, because I
hear nothing in the contrary) it were no impossible thing to get them to do me
Justice in this particular. And this I will say confidently, that until at
least the Adherers to this last Protestation be declared Traitors, nothing will
go as it ought in that Kingdom; I say this not to alter your course, but only
to show you my opinion of the State of Affairs.

As for the danger that Episcopal Government is in, I do not hold it so much as
you do; for I believe that the number of those that are against Episcopacy
(who are not in their hearts against Monarchy) is not so considerable as you
take it.

And for this General Assembly, though I can expect no good from it, yet I hope
you may hinder much of the ill; first, by putting Divisions among them
concerning the Legality of their Elections, then by Protestations against their
Tumultuous Proceedings. And I think it were not amiss if you could get their
Freedom defined (before their Meeting,) so that it were not done too much in
their Favors. And I hope you will remember to weigh well the Propositions for
the Assembly, and send them up to me with all convenient s^eed. I have seconded
your Letter to the Major of Newcastle for the freeing of these Horses, and have
stopped all Provisions according to your advice at Hull; yet methinks now they
may be avowed to go against those that will not rest satisfied with what you
have lately done in my Name. But in this I assure you that I take your advice;
and so I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Hampton Court, 20 October. 1638.

Now the Covenanters were not idle; and two Stories were at this time not a
little talked of. The one was about one Mistress Mitchelson, The pretended
Prophetess.
who was judged a devout person; (a zealous Covenanter she was) she was
troubled with Vapors, and, as is incident to persons in that condition, spoke
as one transported, and most of all her Raptures were about the Covenant: she
did also inveigh severely against the late Act for signing the Confession of
Faith. This was highly magnified, and she was spoken of as a person inspired of
God, and her words were recited as Oracles, not a few taking them from her
mouth in Characters. People of the best Quality came to see her in her Fits,
and she was brought to the house of a noted Covenanter, and laid in a large
Bedchamber, which was always crowded to the doors; she was called an
Impostress by many, but those who understood Nature better, knew the root of
her Distemper, which to have called so at that time had met with a high
Censure: though, it afterward abating, they were willing to defend it under
that notion, and counted them favorable who believed no worse of it.

The other Story was of one Abernethy, who from a Jesuit Priest turned a
zealous Presbyterian; A Jesuit turns Presbyterian.
and had learned so much falsehood in the Jesuits School, as to forge a Story of
the Liturgy of Scotland being sent to Rome to some Cardinals to be revised by
them; and that Signior Con had showed it to himself there. Upon the report of
this, the Marquis wrote to Con, who was then at London: but Con protested
seriously, he never so much as had heard of a Liturgy designed for Scotland,
till he came last to England; that he had never seen that Abernethy at Rome,
but once, and finding him lightheaded, had never again taken notice of him:
yet Abernethy's Story had a ready belief, as well as a welcome hearing; though
the lightness and weakness of the man became afterward so visible, that small
account was made either of him or his Story, which at this time took
wonderfully.

Upon the 24th of September a new debate arose in the Council, which had almost
set all wrong again. Some at the Board, whose hearts were with the Covenanters,
moved that it might be declared, That matters of Discipline and Ceremonies were
points of Faith; this was at length debated and determined in the Negative. The
Marquis his next care was, to write to all the Kings Friends through Scotland,
The Kings Proclamation published over Scotland.
that they might see His Majesty's Proclamation published, and get in as many
Subscriptions to the Confession of Faith as was possible, and do their utmost
to see that the Elections of the Commissioners to the Assembly might be well
considered: but in none did he confide more, and to none did he write more
freely than to the Marquis of Huntley, who expressed great zeal for His
Majesty's Service, of which he gave the King a full account; and as he saw
cause, he moved His Majesty to write diverse Letters for encouraging all His
good Subjects. The Doctors of Aberdeen were also much cherished by him, The
Marquis does all was possible to prepare things for the Assembly.
and very kindly recommended to the King; neither was any thing omitted that
might cherish such as he saw well-affected to His Majesty's Service. He caused
also draw a Remonstrance against Lay Elders, and sent it through the Country,
to get as many Ministers Hands to it as was possible against the Sitting of the
Assembly. He was likewise very earnest with the Doctors of Aberdeen to have
come to Glasgow to the Assembly, finding them the only persons then in Scotland
fit for undertaking the defense of Episcopacy; he was to have sent one of his
Coaches to the North for them, but that Road being always bad for a Coach, was
unpassable in Winter; and the Doctors were so extremely averse from coming,
that he could not importune them any further, since he saw it was resolved,
that though an Angel from Heaven should come to plead for Episcopacy, all would
be rejected. He also discovered the Prelimitations which the Tables were
setting on the Assembly, by the Orders they sent through all the Presbyteries,
both about Lay Elders, and that none should be chosen save Covenanters, and
chiefly those that were able to argue on those Heads that were under debate. In
the mean time he went home to Hamilton, to get those of Cliddisdale to sign the
Confession, the Justice-Clerk having gone before him to Glasgow, and published
the Proclamations there; but he himself met with more difficulty in
Cliddisdale; yet he overcame most of them, though they had been strangely
wrought upon to resist him: of all which having given the King an Account he
had from Him the follow-Letter.

Hamilton,
I Confess this last Dispatch does more put me to seek how to judge of the
Affairs of that Kingdom, than any that I have yet received; for I did not think
that you would have met with so much opposition within your bounds, since (as I
thought) you past well over a greater difficulty, to wit, the Peevishness of
the Council. The cause of this I judge to be, that you did not make so much
opposition against the Protestation as it deserved, though (I believe) as much
as you could. But one thing I desire you to send me the reason of, which is,
why you have mingled the Protesters with my good Subjects, as Commissioners in
most of all the Shires, for the procuring of Subscriptions to my Bond: now it
seems to me, that this will make the Covenanters oppose my Service with a show
of more Authority than otherwise they could, (and certainly you cannot but
imagine, that they must oppose that that they have protested against;) for by
this the ignorant Multitude may be brought to believe, that my Council have
either admitted, or at least do not gainsay, the Protestation: yet whether I be
right in this or not, I will suspend my Judgment, even of my own Opinion, until
I hear from you. But one thing I will confidently affirm, that until most of
the Council express themselves vigorously in detestation of this last damnable
Protestation, never look for any Obedience there. In the latter end of your
Letter, you are very careful not to give them cause of Fears of my
Preparations, or hindering theirs; yet in the middle persuade to hasten on
Mine: now, besides that this seems to me a Contradiction, I think that there is
as much (if not more) danger now, that they should imagine I fear to displease
them, than to make them scar at my Preparations, or for stopping of theirs; for
now that the pretext of Religion is (I dare say) fully satisfied, fearful
Proceeding now may hazard the loss of the little Party we have, by making them
probably fear, that I either cannot, or dare not maintain my own Authority. But
I doubt not your Dexterity and Diligence will help me to break through these
difficulties, and so I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Hampton Court, 9 October. 1638.

This Letter seems of another strain than the former; but as soon as His
Majesty was informed of the Reasons, which were given in the former account of
the Proceedings of the Council the 22th of September, which were forgotten by
the Marquis in the long Dispatch, he then sent, he was well-satisfied, as will
appear by His Letter bearing date the 24th of October to be inserted in its due
place.

Many every where did at first offer to sign the Confession, The Covenanters do
much oppose the signing King James his Covenant.
and the Covenanters seeing an inclination in most persons to return to their
Duty, forgot nothing could be devised, to fill the Peoples minds with new
Jealousies, as if the King were but abusing them, and intended the performance
of nothing that was promised; all being done only to to evite the present
Storm, which would be no sooner calmed, but they might expect worse Usage than
ever: and with this they added a great many Reasons to persuade all, that it
was Perjury for such as had taken the Covenant, to sign the Confession. And the
sins of Scotland being so great, that they were to be punished with a tract of
bloody Civil Wars, God in his holy and wise Judgments permitted the poor People
to be so blind in their Obedience to their Leaders, that these Arts took
universally with them; to which may be justly imputed all the mischiefs that
Kingdom has smarted under ever since.

The Covenanters were no less careful to see well to the Elections for the
Assembly, the Ruling-elders coming to all the Presbyteries, Great disorders in
Elections.
and being of one knot, and men of power, carried the Elections as they
pleased; for there being an Elder out of every Parish, they equalled the
Ministers in number, but exceeded them when the Election was voted, all the
Ministers who were on the List, and were ordinarily six or seven, being
removed; yet in many Presbyteries Protestations were used against them by some
Ministers. The Marquis seeing how things were carried, and having Informations
from all places of the unlucky Elections, begun to draw up the Nullities of the
Assembly, sending the particulars to the King as he had them; advising him
withal to go on more frankly with his Preparations, since he saw it impossible
to prevent a Rupture a Glasgow. And it was now apparent to him, that the
Factious Spirits among the Gentry and Ministry were resolved to receive no
satisfaction from any thing the King could offer, how just and rational soever.

The Kings Declaration was published through all the Shires in Scotland; in
some it met with Protestations, but in other places the Marquis his diligence
in sending the Commissions for it had prevented the Tables.

Most of the Councillors were slack in procuring of Subscriptions, yet in all
there were twenty eight thousand Subscribers; of which number those the Marquis
of Huntley procured made twelve thousand.

The Bishop and Doctors of Ab^rd^^n subscribed the Kings Covenant.
But I should be injurious to the Memory of the Bishop and Doctors of Aberdeen,
did not I mention how they signed the Confession, it being presented to them by
the Marquis of Huntley. The matter is little known, and the Original is in my
hands, therefore it will not be unpleasant that I relate how they signed it
with these seven Restrictions, which I shall set down in their own Words.

FIrst, we do heartily abhor and condemn all Errors truly Popish, or repugnant
to the Holy Scripture, and consequently to the Uniform Doctrine of the Reformed
Kirks, and to our National Confession registered in Parliament An. 1567.

Secondly, we do no ways hereby abjure or condemn Episcopal Government, as it
was in the days, and after the days, of the Apostles in the Christian Kirk for
many hundreds of years, and is now conform thereto restored in the Kirk of
Scotland.

Thirdly, we do not hereby condemn nor abjure the Five Perth Articles, or any
thing lawful of that sort, which shall be found by the Church conducible at any
time for good Policy and Order, or which is practiced by any sound Reformed
Kirk.

Fourthly, we still hold to that Clause of our great National Confession,
(chap. 20. art. 21.) that the General Councils, and consequently the National
Kirk of Scotland, have no power to make any perpetual Law which God before has
not made.

Fifthly, by the adhering to the Discipline of the Reformed Kirk of Scotland,
we mean not any immutability of that Presbyterial Government which was An.
1581. or of any other Humane Institution: but we do hereby understand that the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and Discipline of the Kirk of Scotland does not
depend on the Pope of Rome, or any other Foreign Power; and hereby we do
confess our constant Obedience to the Kirk of Scotland in all her lawful
Constitutions.

Sixthly, we do not presume by this our personal Oath either to prejudge the
liberty of the Kirk of Scotland, to change and reform this foresaid short
Confession, in some ambiguities and obscure expressions thereof, whereupon some
men have builded inconvenient Interpretations and Doctrines, or to exime our
selves from Obedience to the Kirk in that case.

Seventhly, by this our personal Oath we do not take upon us to lay any further
Bond upon our Posterity, than the Word of God does, recommending only our
Example to them, so far as they shall find it agreeable to Gods Word.

In this sense as is said, and no otherwise, do we subscribe the said
Confession, and the general Bond annexed thereunto, at Aberdeen October. 5. 1638.
Signed, Ad. Aberdonen. John Forbes D. and P. of Div. R. Barrone D. and P. of
Div. Al. Rosse D.D. Ja. Sibbald D.D. Al. Scrogie D.D. Will. Lesley D.D.


These Explanations were too just not to be accepted of by the Marquis of
Huntley; but lest an humor of annexing Explications might have run through
others from their example, which might have not only retarded the Work, but
occasioned new Grounds to the Covenanters to quarrel this Confession, he kept
the matter secret, and took their Subscription in a Bond apart, and so sent it
to the Marquis. But leaving to the Reader to judge how judiciously cautious
these Exceptions were, I quit this Digression and go on.

From all places some Subscriptions were brought, except from Argyleshire, my
Lord Argyle alleging, that since the Assembly was so near, all desired to be
excused till it had sat and determined about it. This confirmed the Jealousies
of him, it being well known how absolute his Authority was in that place.

The Marquis returned to Edinburgh about the 20th of October, but was much
disordered to find neither my Lord S. Andrews, nor the other Bishops, come
thither as he had appointed; so that he was left destitute of Council how to
resolve on the legality of his Procedure at the Assembly: yet having advised
with such as he durst trust about the Method in which he was to go on at
Glasgow, he drew it up, and sent it to my Lord of Canterbury, to communicate it
to His Majesty. Likewise those Bishops who stayed in Scotland, having pressed
him earnestly to prorogue the Assembly, foreseeing what was like to follow on
it, Some advise to prorogue the Assembly.
he advertised His Majesty of the hazards which on the one hand were visible;
but on the other hand, if it were prorogued it would not fail of fortifying the
Jealousies the Covenanters had spread, as if the King intended not to observe
what he promised; which might work much on the Vulgar. Besides, he saw grounds
to fear, that most of the Council would desert him if it went to that; and
certain it was, that the Covenanters would not obey, but keep the day only
with this odds, that they would hold it at Edinburgh: he therefore judged it
fitter the day should be kept, and His Majesty's Gracious Offers first
proposed, and next the Nullities of the Elections examined, and then the
Bishops Declinator offered; and by that time there was no reason to doubt they
would give too good grounds for dissolving them. All this he submitted to His
Majesty's Judgment, adding, that if he thought fit to prorogue it, there were
grounds enough from the Actions of the Covenanters for justifying it, but a
present Rupture would be unavoidable; to which he received the following Answer.

Hamilton,
YOu will receive a particular Answer by my Lord of Canterbubury of all your
Propositions touching the Assembly, wherein you will find that my Alterations
are rather circumstantial than material. As concerning the way of your
Proceeding, though I confess of importance to my Service, you foreseeing
rightly what my Judgment would be of them; yet I dare say, I have left them as
full as any of my Proclamations or Declarations, and why I should go further I
see no reason; for certainly those that will not be contented with what I have
done already, will be less contented if I should d^e more. As for the Opinions
of the Clergy to prorogue this Assembly, I utterly dislike them, for I should
more hurt my Reputation by not keeping it, than their mad Acts can prejudice my
Service; wherefore I command you hold your day: but (as you write) if you can
break them by proving Nullities in their Proceedings, nothing better. Lastly,
concerning Assessors, I like their Names, and (as you say) you must not suffer
me to lose my Privilege. To conclude, I like your way well, and hope (upon
consideration) that you will not mislike my Alterations; for I will make none
in being

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Havearing, 29 Oct. 1638.

In the end of October the Earl of Rothes, with the other Covenanters,
petitioned for a Warrant to cite the Bishops to appear before the Assembly: The
Covenanters summoned the Bishops to the Assembly.
the Marquis answered, the Law was patent, and there were legal ways for citing
all such as were either within or without the Country; but for him to give
Warrants, it had never a President, and so could not be granted; for it was
enough that he did not protect them against a fair Trial: whereupon the
Covenanters addressed themselves to the Presbytery of Edinburgh for it, who
gave Warrant for the most scandalous Summons that was ever heard of in the
Christian Church, which is to be seen in the large Declaration, wherein all the
Bishops were cited as guilty of Heresy, Simony, Perjury, Incest, Adultery,
Fornication, Breach of the Sabbath, and what not! to which they added
respective, which many said was on design to abuse the poor Vulgar, who could
not understand the importance of that Law-term, but would undoubtedly believe
them all guilty of these Crimes. This was ordered to be read in the Churches of
Edinburgh, but carried so secretly, that it was only on the Saturday-night
before that the Marquis had notice of it; whereupon he presently sent to
require them under pain of Treason to forbear, but that was not formidable to
them: so notwithstanding that, it was read in the Colledge-Church of Edinburgh
after Communion, and ordered to be read in all the Churches over Scotland, and
accordingly done.

They sent also Orders through all Scotland to search into the Bishops
Conversations, that all their escapes being gathered together, and Witnesses
being cited to Glasgow, they might find pretexts of Justice to second the
fervor of their Zeal.

Upon the first of November the Session sat down at Edinburgh, The Session
sits, and most of the Lords sign the Kings Covenant.
and the Marquis having dealt with all the Lords of that Court before, went
thither to get them to sign the Confession of Faith: some desired a delay, and
this raised a Debate of three hours; at length nine of the fifteen signed it,
two were absent, and four refused: but those who signed it durst hardly walk
the Streets, so odiously had the Ministers represented the Confession to all.

At this time the Marquis got the Earl of Mar to resign the Castle of
Edinburgh to the King: The Castle of Edinburgh in the Kings hands.
five thousand pounds Sterlin was that he demanded for it, but he was brought
to accept of two thousand; and because the Earl of Mar would not meddle with
the Exchequer for payment, the Marquis gave him Security out of his own Estate
for it; and at the same time the Archbishop of S. Andrews resigning the place
of Chancellor, he gave him also Security for two thousand five hundred pounds
Sterlin out of his own Fortune: so ready was he to go through with His
Majesty's Affairs, and to hazard the ruin of his Fortune and Family; for the
Treasury of Scotland was so entirely exhausted, that there was no Money in it.
And though no Payments were made the Marquis for the great Expense he was at,
yet in all his Letters to the King he never once complained of it; nor did he
press the King to send him Money, except only ten thousand pounds Sterlin,
which he earnestly called for to distribute among the Bishops, and other poor
Ministers who were ruined for their Duty to the King; and though this was not
sent, he suffered none of them to be pinched, but supplied them in all their
straits, for which the Bishops made great Acknowledgments not only to himself,
but to my Lord of Canterbury, who returned him many thanks in their Names.
Concerning all these particulars His Majesty wrote to him the following Letter.

Hamilton,
THe Letter that To. Lesley gave me this day from you, though it be long, yet
will require but Answer by me in two particulars; (the rest you will find
answered by my Lord of Canterbury) to wit, the Castle of Edinburgh, and the
Supply of Money to the Bishops. To the first I totally agree, both for the Man
to be put into it, and the Sum of Three thousand pounds S^erlin, if you can
draw it no lower; for the other, I cannot say how soon I shall be able to do
it, Expense daily increasing, and in particular the securing of Berwick and
Carlisle being of necessity to be done (as you know) in the middle of the next
Month. But I hope in God at furthest before Christmas, yet I cannot promise
it with that secrecy that would be wished: for I find the way by the Prince of
Orange both unpracticable and unsafe. So both pitying and praising your Pains
in my Service, I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Whitehall, 8 Nov. 1638.

Ruthwen made Governor, but the Castle is ill furnished.
Having got the Castle of Edinburgh into his hands, he advised the King to trust
Genesis Ruthwen (who had returned from the German Wars loaded with Fame) with the
keeping of it; to which His Majesty consented. And this may sufficiently clear
the Marquis of all other Designs, but those his Duty inspired him with; since
to the greatest Trust in Scotland, considering those Times, and the Command
that Castle has over Edinburgh, he recommended one whos^ Loyalty was as
invincible as his Courage. But the Marquis having visited the Castle, found it
in the worst case imaginable, not a Musket but one in it, and it not for
Service: very little Powder, and not a Yard of Match. The buying the Command of
the Castle made so great a noise, that he durst not proceed to the furnishing
it with Men, Victuals, and Arms, all which were wanting, till the first Heats
were over, and the Body of the Covenanters had gone to Glasgow; for besides
that they set Guards about it, had they set upon it, they would have infallibly
carried it, by starving them within, who were able to do them no hurt. Ruthwen
would not go to the Castle till it were better furnished, neither did the
Marquis think fit to change the Captain of it too soon. But finding him no
Covenanter, and having taken his Oath in writing, which is yet extant, never to
surrender it but with his Life, he laid down the best course he could for
furnishing it; which he got no opportunity to do, as we shall see hereafter.

Now was the Bishop of Ross, Bishop of Ross comes from London.
whom my Lord S. Andrews and the other Bishops had sent to London, dispatched
home again, who brought with him the following Letter from His Majesty.

Hamilton,
I Would not answer your two of the 14th and 15th of this month till I had
fully dispatched the Bishop of Ross, whom I have sent away not only well
instructed, but well satisfied with my ways. It is true that his Instructions
were not totally according to our Grounds, but I made him alter (I am
confident) as well in Judgment as Obedience; for upon discourse he much
approved of my Alterations, confessing likewise, that you upon the place may
find reason to make more; wherefore all is referred to you, as well what I
answered, as what not: so leaving and recommending him to your care, I come to
answer your last Letters, with the account of which I am much more satisfied
than your other Dispatch before; as likewise you have fully satisfied me in all
my Queries, and in particular I confess clearly, you had reason to join the
Covenanters with my honest Servants, for procuring of Subscriptions to my Bond,
because I see the Council would have it so. But certainly it had been better
otherwise, if you could have done it with their consent. In short, I am truly
and fully satisfied with all your Proceedings, so that you may be confident
that I am

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Whitehall, 24 October. 1638.

The draught of the Bishops Declinator was revised by the King, The Kings
Observations on the Bishops Declinator.
and His Majesty made diverse Observations and Amendments with his own Hand, yet
extant: which Paper, though not so clearly to be understood, unless the first
draught of the Declinator were to be set down with it, which is not in the
Writers power; yet may give some satisfaction, and at least will both show how
tender His Majesty was of any thing which might give new Irritations to his
distempered Subjects, and how diligently himself reviewed all Papers.

His MAJESTY'S Observations upon the Declinator.
CHARLES R.

THe second reason to be advised with my Lord Commissioner, whether or

The third is a very good reason against the Proceeding of the Assembly, but

In all the reasons where the Assembly is called a pretended Assembly, it is
pretended be deleted out of the Copy showed to His Majesty.

For the seventh reason, if it offend not the inferior Clergy, His Majesty is

In the ninth reason, to omit the precondemning of the Service Book, Book of

The tenth reason is so full that the eighth may be totally omitted.

The eleventh reason militates abundantly against all those who hold such
Tenets,

The thirteenth de loco tuto, and accessu tuto, to be totally omitted.

The fourteenth and last to be totally omitted.

In the conclusion thereis one clause marke^ by His Majesty's own Hand,

Whitehall, 19th October, 1638.

The Marquis having got clear Directions in every particular, (for not so much
as the Speech he was to have at Glasgow but was sent up, and returned with the
Kings Superscription, a few lines of the first draught being only dashed out
by His Majesty;) he resolved to set out for Glasgow on the 16th of November.
But before he went he declared in Council, that His Majesty's positive Pleasure
was, that Episcopacy might be limited, but not abolished; and delivered them a
Letter from the King, commanding them to follow him to Glasgow; and required
the Kings Advocate to prepare himself to defend Episcopacy to be according to
the Laws of Scotland, he answered, that it was against his Conscience to do
so, and that he judged Episcopacy both contrary to the Word of God, and to the
Laws of this Church and Kingdom. This brisk Answer, though it was no surprise
to the Marquis, put his temper to a greater trial than any thing he met with in
Scotland: he threatened him with taking his Place from him, but he answered him
boldly, that his Right to it was ratified in Parliament. So he could do no more
for that time but command him not to come to Glasgow, which he obeyed.

On the 17th of November the Marquis came to Glasgow, The Marquis goes to
Glasgow.
and thither came to him a Letter from the Bishops of Ross and Brechin, whom he
left in Hamilton till he had opportunity of conveying them securely to the
Castle of Glasgow, which he did. The night after he received the Letter that
follows.

May it please your Grace,
WHat came from my Lord S. Andrews is herewith enclosed. We humbly and heartily
thank your Grace for your excessive favor and kindness toward us; we must
take it the more kindly, that we know at such a time it is to let others see
what respect your Grace carries to our Coat: for our selves we could more
willingly choose a more sober diet and less ease; considering our own Sins, and
the difficulties of the Times, do admonish us rather to fast than feast, to
afflict our Souls rather than to relish any worldly pleasure. But above all we
two for our selves, and in name of our Brethren, do with most thankful hearts
acknowledge your Graces most pious care of the Liberties of this poor distressed
and distracted Church; and especially the solicitude and care your Grace has,
that our Protestation be orderly done, secretly kept, and seasonably presented,
before either the Cause, or we that are Bishops, suffer wrong. It is that which
now concerns us most and is dearest to us, both for Conscience before God,
and our credit to the present Age and future; and we cannot express how happy
we are to have in this Exigent such a Pious and Noble Patron, careful and
sollicitous with the most tender affection both of our Cause and Persons, where
otherwise (with the greatest loss, at least hazard, can be, to discharge our
Duty to God and his Church) we should be necessitated to do it our selves, and
happily neither with so much safety nor honor. God will reward your Grace we are
confident, and bless your Grace and yours; for we dare aver in this Division
your Grace has made choice of the better part. The Difficulties are great, the
Hopes none, but too pregnant Fears to the contrary; yet it is the more like to
be Gods Cause, that his Work may appear: and it may be called digitus Dei, and
mavelous in our eyes. Man's extremity is Gods opportunity.

We have given Doctor Hamilton our best directions, which we submit humbly to
your Graces better Judgment, to add and command what you think fit: he needs
no more Deputation, but the inserting of his Name in the Procuratory, which is
in the close of the Declinator. Above all we have recommended to him, a care
that it may be timeously presented; but in this we trust only to your Grace.

As we pity the Difficulties your Grace is cast into, so shall we be earnest
supplicants to God Almighty, to bless and preserve your Grace in this and all
other Services, wherewith God and His Majesty has trusted you.

Your Graces most humble and bounden Servants, John Rossen. Wall. Brechinen.

Hamilton, Nov. 20. 1638. POSTSCRIPT.
What goes from my Lord of St. Andrews directed to me, I beseech your Grace to
open and read for your own use.




Because of an ambiguous word which was in the Paper the Marquis was to offer
in His Majesty's Name to the Assembly, so strictly conscientious was His
Majesty, The strictness of his Majesty's Conscience.
that he wrote His sense of it in the following Letter that found him at
Glasgow.

Hamilton,
THis is rather to give the reason of My Answer than the Answer it self, (you
being to receive it at large by My Lord of Canterbury.) The truth is, that the
same reason which made me blot out the whole Sentence before, has made me
desire to alter a word now; to wit, that I should not be thought to desire the
abolishing of that in Scotland, which I approve and maintain in England, namely
the Five Articles of Perth: now the word content expresses enough my consent to
have them surcease for the present; but the word pleased, methinks imports as
much as if I desired them to take them away, or at least were well-pleased that
they should do so. But I leave it to your ordering, so that you make it be
clearly understood, that though I permit, yet I would be better pleased if they
would let them alone; and so I rest,

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Whitehall 21th of November. 1638.

At Glasgow the Marquis found the greatest confluence of People, The Assembly
sits at Glasgow.
that perhaps ever met in these parts of Europe at an Assembly. On the 21th
they sat down; Mr. Bell Minister of Glasgow preached, as the Marquis had
ordered. The Marquis judged it was a sad sight to see such an Assembly, for not
a Gown was among them all, but many had Swords and Daggers about them: when
they were set he as Lord Commissioner begun with this Speech.

My Lords, and the rest of this Reverend Assembly,
The Marquis his Speech.
THE making of long Harangues is not suitable either with my Education or
Profession, much less with this Time, which now after so much Talking ought to
be a time of Action.

I pray God that as a great (and I hope the worst) part of men's Spirits has
been evaporated into bitter and invective Speeches, so the best and last part
of them may be reserved for Deeds, and these answerable to the Professions
which have been made on all sides when this great Assembly should come.

For the Professions which have been made by Our Sacred Sovereign (whom God
long preserve to reign over us) I am come hither by His command to make them
good to His whole People, whom to His grief He has found to have been poisoned
(by whom I know not well, but God forgive them) with misconceits of His
Intentions, concerning the Religion professed in this Church and Kingdom. But
to rectify all such Misconceptions of His Subjects, His Majesty's desire is,
that before this Assembly proceed to any thing else, His Subjects may receive
ample and clear satisfaction in these Points, wherein His Majesty's gracious
Intentions have been misdoubted, or glanced at, by the malevolent Aspects of
such, as are afraid that His Majesty's good Subjects should see His clear mind
through any other Glasses or Spectacles, than those they have tempered and
fitted for them.

Those sinistrous Aspersions, dispersed by surmizes, have been especially two;
first, as if there had been in His Majesty, if not some Intention, yet at least
some inclination, to give way, if not to Alterations, yet to some Innovations
in the Religion professed in, and established by the Laws of this Church and
Kingdom.

I am confident that no man can harbor or retain any such thought in his
breast any more, when His Majesty has commanded that Confession of Faith,
(which you call the Negative) to be subscribed by all His Subjects whatsoever,
and has been Graciously pleased to put the Execution of this His Royal Command
in your own hands.

The next false, and indeed foul and devilish Surmize, wherewith His good
Subjects have been misled, is, that nothing promised in His Majesty's last
most Gracious Proclamation (though most ungraciously received) was ever
intended to be performed, nay, not the Assembly it self; but that only Time was
to be gained, till His Majesty by Arms might oppress this His Own Native
Kingdom; than which Report Hell it self could not have raised a blacker and
falser.

For that part which concerns the Report of the Intention of not holding the
Assembly, this Day and Place, as was first promised and proclaimed, (thanks be
to God) confuteth that Calumny abundantly; for the other of making good what
His Majesty did promise in His last Gracious Proclamation, His Majesty has
commanded me thus to express His Heart to all His good Subjects.

He has seriously considered all the Grievances of His Subjects, which have
been presented to Him, by all and several of their Petitions, Remonstrances,
and Supplications, exhibited unto Himself, His Commissioner, and Lords of His
Secret Council, and has graciously granted them all; and as He has already
granted as far as could be by Proclamation; so he does now desire, that His
Subjects may be assured of them by Acts of this General Assembly, and
afterward by Acts of Parliament respective.

And therefore he not only desires, but commands, that all the Particulars he
has promised be first gone in hand with in this Assembly, and enacted, and
then afterward what His Subjects shall desire being found reasonable may be
next thought upon, that so it may be known to God and the whole World, and
particularly to all His good Subjects, how careful His Majesty is to discharge
himself of all His Gracious Promises made to them; hoping that when you shall
see how Royally, Graciously, and Faithfully His Majesty has dealt with you,
and all His Subjects, you will likewise correspond in loyal and dutiful
Obedience, in cheerful but calm and peaceable Proceeding, in all other business
to be treated of in this Assembly: and because there shall be no mistake, I
shall now repeat the Particulars, that you may see they are the same which were
promised by His Majesty's first Proclamation.

To this I shall add the Paper of His Majesty's Concessions taken from the
Original, wherein His Majesty had interlined and dashed out some things with
his own Pen.

CHARLES R.

THe Kings Majesty being informed, The Kings O^fers to the Assembly.
that many of His good Subjects have apprehended, that by the introduction of
the Service Book and Book of Canons, the in-bringing of Popery and Superstition
has been intended, is Graciously pleased to discharge the said Books, and to
annul all Acts made for establishing thereof; and for His good People their
further satisfaction, is Graciously pleased to declare by me, that no other in
that kind shall hereafter be introduced, but in a fair and legal way of
Assembly, allowed by Act of Parliament, and the Laws of this Kingdom.

The Kings Majesty, as he conceived for the ease and benefit of the Subjects,
established the High Commission, that thereby Justice might be administered, and
the Faults and Errors of such persons as are made liable thereto taken order
with, and punished with the more convenience, and less trouble to the People:
but finding His Gracious Intentions to be herein mistaken, has been pleased,
likeas he is Graciously content, that the same be discharged, with all Acts and
Deeds made for the establishing thereof; and is pleased to declare by me, That
that Court or Iudicatory, nor no other of that nature, shall be brought in
hereafter, but in that way allowed by the Laws of this Kingdom.

And the Kings Majesty being informed, that the urging of the five Articles of
Perth's Assembly has bred Distraction in the Church and State, has been
Graciously pleased to take the same into His consideration, and for the quiet
and peace of Church and State, does not only dispense with the practice of the
said Articles, but also discharges, and by these has discharged, all and
whatsoever Persons from urging the practice thereof, upon either Laick or
Ecclesiastic person whatsoever: and does hereby free all His Subjects from all
Censure and Pain, whether Ecclesiastical or Secular, for not urging,
practicing, or obeying them, or any of them, notwithstanding any thing
contained in the Acts of Parliament or General Assembly, to the contrary.

And because it is pretended, that Oaths have been administered to Ministers at
their entry contrary, and differing from that which is set down in the Acts of
Parliament, His Majesty is pleased to declare and ordain, that no other Oath
shall be required of any Minister at his entry, than that which is expressly set
down in the Acts of Parliament: and this He is content be considered of in the
Assembly, to be represented to the Estates of Parliament, and enacted as they
shall find expedient.

And that it may appear how careful His Majesty is that no Corruption or
Innovation shall creep into this Church, neither any scandal, vice, or fault of
any person whatsoever censurable or punishable by the Assembly, go unpunished,
it is His Majesty's Pleasure, likeas by these His Majesty does assure all His
good People, that hereafter General Assemblies shall be kept as often as the
Affairs of this Kirk shall require: and to this purpose, because it is probable
that some things necessary for the present Estate and Good of this Church may
be left unperfected at this present Assembly, We do by these indict another
Assembly to be holden at And that none of Our Subjects may have cause of
Grievance against the Procedure of Prelates, Our Pleasure is, that all and every
one of the present Bishops, and their Successors, shall be answerable, and
accordingly from time, to time censurable according to their Merits by the
Assembly, which His Majesty is likewise pleased be enacted in this present
Assembly, and thereafter ratified in Parliament.

And to give all His Majesty's good People good assurance that he never
intended to admit any Alteration or Change in the true Religion professed
within this Kingdom, and that they may be truly and fully satisfied of the
Reality of His Intentions toward the maintenance of the Truth and Integrity
of the same, His Majesty has been pleased to require and command all His good
Subjects to subscribe the Confession of Faith, subscribed by His dear Father in
Anno 1580. and for tha^ effect has ordained the Lords of His Privy Council to
take some speedy course whereby the same may be done thorough the whole
Kingdom; which His Majesty requires likewise all those of this present Assembly
to sign, and all others His Subjects, who have not done it already: and it is
His Majesty's Will, that this be inserted and registered in the Books of this
Assembly, as a Testimony to Posterity, not only of the sincerity of His
Intentions to the said true Religion, but also of His Resolution to maintain
and defend the same, and His Subjects in the professing thereof.

C. R.

The Marquis consults the Bishops how to proceed,
The Marquis sent a Gentleman to ask the advice of the Bishops then in the
Castle of Glasgow about the particular way of his Procedure in the Assembly,
from whom he had the following Letter.

My Lord, may it please your Grace,
THis Worthy Gentleman has desired my Judgment concerning three things: who
write to him.
first, concerning the production of a Letter from His Majesty to the Assembly,
directed to the Archbishops, Bishops, and Ministers, whether or not this can be
produced, and any Note made upon it, before there be a Moderator condescended
upon. My humble Opinion is, (which I humbly submit to your Graces better
Judgment) that the Letter be presented, given by your Grace to the Clerk, and
read by him. Here it is most like your Grace will be pressed, that the Letter
is directed to an Assembly that cannot be without a Moderator, and yet on
purpose to get a Moderator by Election, and an Assembly established; to which
in my Judgment it may be replied, that it may be that the Kings Letter
contains something to that purpose, which therefore is to be read, and noted
by the Clerk as produced only. The second is concerning the Examination of the
Commissions and Commissioners: My Lord, it is certain that both are most
illegal, and there is more than sufficient ground from this one (if there were
no more) to void this Assembly and make it null. But how to begin at this I see
not so well, for if the Commissions and Commissioners be rejected, then how
shall the Kings Real and Royal Intentions be manifest to the Subjects, which is
most necessary, that the Factious may not have advantage to possess good and
loyal Subjects, that His Majesty is only deluding them for other ends. On the
other part, if your Grace approve the Commissions and Commissioners, how far
King and Church shall suffer, your Grace is wiser to conceive than I am able to
express. The third is concerning the Declinator, when it shall be proposed or
presented to your Grace; My Lords of Glasgow and Brechin are fully of that
mind, that at the very first it is to be used before the Assembly be
established: their Reasons seem very pregnant, first, because all Declinators
are used so; next, if the Assembly be once established, how can it be declined,
or your Grace admit our Declinator or Protestation?

My Lord, seeing two things are mainly to be looked to, the one that His
Majesty's Pious Intentions be made known to this present Meeting; the other,
that the Church suffer no prejudice; my humble Opinion is, that first the Kings
Letter (as I have said) be read, and marked Produced; next immediately after,
our Declinator produced, and presented to your Grace, read in audience of all,
Instruments taken in the Clerk-Registers hands, and it marked by the Clerk
Produced. Then your Grace may by your own Wisdom conceive a brief Speech,
excusing your self that you are not so well acquainted with the Formalities and
Legalities of Church-meetings; yet that seeing in such Distractions and
Combustions all things cannot be done in that orderly way is requisite, and
that your Grace does know how that, with a most earnest and Fatherly Care, His
Majesty endeavors the binding up of this Breach, and the restoring of Church
and State to Quiet and Peace, and that your Grace for that Duty you owe to your
Master, and Love you have to your Native Country, will leave nothing undone
that is in your power, and incumbent to a faithful Servant and kind Patriot,
and therefore will adventure to choose rather to err in formal Errors: than to
leave so material and necessary a Work at such an exigent of time; and so
seeing there is no Archbishop nor Bishop present, your Grace by connivence will
permit them (for how your Grace can allow it I see not) to choose a Moderator,
and will not fall upon that shelve or rock of Examination of Commissions or
Commissioners; being confident that if matters go on in a moderate way, what
shall be agreed upon shall be liked by all, even those that are taken to be
their Party; and what is amiss in Formality and Legality, if no error be in
the matter of the Conclusions, may most easily and speedily be helped. After
the Moderator is condescended upon, the first thing your Grace would urge is
the Registrating the Kings Letter in the Books of the Assembly, then the
Registrating of our Declinator. After this your Grace will be careful, that
nothing be proposed till what is in His Majesty's Declaration be enacted, and
if (this being done) they fall upon any extravagancy, your Grace then may by
advice of the Council declare, that seeing they will not hold Moderation, your
Grace and the Council must examine their Commissions and Commissioners, (to
which before you gave connivence) and discuss the relevancy of our Declinator.

This Course kept, in my poor Judgment, will fully manifest to all His
Majesty's pious Intentions, evidence your Graces sincere affection to Religion
and the Kingdom, preserve our Right, make them unexcusable, let the People see
how unreasonable and immoderate they are, and give to your Grace a fair way and
ground, to discontinue and discharge the Meeting under pain of Treason. This my
weak and poor opinion I have made bold to declare to your Grace, not out of any
confidence in my self, but necessitated because of that Obedience I owe your
Grace, and true affection to the Peace of Church and State, which with my self,
and all my endeavors, I humbly prostrate to you, and submit to your Graces
better Judgment.

I humbly beg of your Grace to let me know by this Gentleman, what shall be
done with our Declinator, and let him come and speak with my Lords of Glasgow,
Brechin, and me, that we may be acquainted by him of your Graces commands. God
in his mercy bless you in this difficult Work.

Your Graces most humble and bounden Servant, IO. ROSSEN.
Castle of Glasgow 22th Nov. 1638. at 7 a clock in the morning.

The Constitution of the Assembly.
They were about two hundred and sixty Commissioners: besides that from every
Presbytery there were also Assessors, from some two, three, four, or more who
pretended to no Vote, but only to give Advice; so that in all they made a great
number. Some Commissioners there were who could neither read nor write, and yet
these were to judge of Heresy, and condemn Arminius his points. All depended
on a few that were more Learned and Grave, who gave Law to the rest. The
Marquis staved off the choosing of the Moderator the first day, and desired
them first to receive in the Commissions, and examine their Elections: but he
soon foresaw he could not run a great way with them, and that they were
resolved stoutly to disobey, and were beginning in their Cabals to threaten to
seize on his Person, and on such of the Council as should withstand them. But
he resolved not to quit the Grounds were laid down to him, follow on it what
would; yet finding afterward, that there were surmizes of Designs upon his
Life, he judged himself bound to let His Majesty know all he understood of the
A^^airs of Scotland since his last coming from Court. The Marquis gives the
King a full account of the State of Affairs.
Therefore he sent up Sir James Hamilton, with a full account of all matters,
containing likewise the Characters of all the Councillors, together with his
Advice to His Majesty, how to reduce the Country to his Obedience: those he
commended most to the King, and of whose Adherence he had received the fullest
assurances, were my Lords of Traquair, Roxburgh, Perth, Tullibardin, Kinnoul,
Seaforth, Lauderdale, Southesk, Hadingtown, and Daliel; but above all the
Marquis of Huntley, whose cordial affection to His Majesty's Service he highly
magnified. His advice was, that Berwick and Carlisle should be secured, of
which he put the King in mind almost in every Letter; that His Majesty was to
send a Fleet of some of his Ships to lie in the Frith, and to be plying from
that to the North, to block up their Trade; and also some others to ply from
the Mule of Galloway to Kintire, marking to the King the Roads and Harbors
whither they might retire. Next, His Majesty was to come down with a Royal
Army, and this he was assured would either teach them or force them to Reason:
but because upon a Rupture they in Scotland would no doubt presently fall on
those who adhered to His Majesty, therefore he advised that there might be
Commissions of Lieutenantries sent to the Marquis of Huntley for the North, and
to the Earls of Traquair and Roxburgh for the South, that all might gather to
them upon the Breach. He also spared not to show the King how the Bishops had
miscarried, and that their Ambition had been great, but their Folly greater.
His Majesty expressed His sense of this Dispatch in the following Letter.

Hamilton,
I Have sent back this honest Bearer both for safety of my Letters, and to ease
me from length of Writing, therefore in a word I thank you for your full and
clear Dispatch, totally agreeing with you in every point thereof, as well in
the Characters of Men, as in the Way you have set down to reduce them to
Obedience: only the time when to begin to act is considerable; to this end I
have fully instructed this Bearer with the state of my Preparations, that you
may govern your business accordingly. Only I must tell you, that you have
given me so good satisfaction, that I mean not to put any other in the chief
Trust in these Affairs but your self. So remitting you to this Bearer, I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Whitehall, 3 December. 1638.

At Glasgow on the second day of the Assembly's Sitting they went to the
Election of the Moderator; The Affairs of the Assembl^.
but the Marquis desired that they might first hear His Majesty's Letter, which
thereupon was read. After that he moved that they would read the Bishops
Declinator, which was presented to him by Dr. Hamilton; but that they refused,
saying, they must first be constituted before they could consider of any
business. Upon this he protested, which with all the other Instruments that he
took, is yet extant under the Clerk of Registers hands. Mr. Henderson was
chosen Moderator. Then the Marquis desired that his Assessors, who were only
six, to wit, the Earls of Argyle, Traquair, Roxburgh, Lauderdale, and Southesk,
and Sir Lewis Stewart, might also have a Suffrage: but this was refused, and so
they would give the King but one single Vote, though the Town of Edinburgh had
two in their Assembly. Upon this also the Marquis took Instruments, according
to the Scottish Forms: and thus for a few days he went on in the Assembly,
protesting at every step; but as he was consulting what to do, he received the
following Letter.

Hamilton,
COncerning our Preparations here I have commanded the Comptroller to give you
a full account, of which you may take public notice, and declare, That as
their Carriage has forced me to take care to arm my self against any Insolence
that may be committed: so you may give assurance that my care of Peace is such,
that all those Preparations shall be useless, except they first break out with
insolent Actions. Now for Answer to your Letter, it was never heard that one
should be both Judge and Party: besides, the Lawfulness of the Iudicatory must
be condescended upon, before any Cause can be therein lawfully determined;
therefore I say that the Assembly can in no case be Judge of their own
Nullities: yet you have reason, not only to make good what I have promised,
but also to promise them a new Assembly, upon the amendment of all the Faults
and Nullities of this. I approve of both your Bargains, and shall take care
that you shall not lose by them, and so I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Whitehall, 17 Nov. 1638.

And two days after that he got the following Letter.

Hamilton,
THis is rather to show you, that I do not forget you nor your pains, than for
any Answer that your last Leter needs, it being more of Accounts than Demands.
Only I shall tell you, that you needed not to have made an Excuse for asking
the Ten thousand pounds Sterlin; for I know that there is but too much use for
it, and the more I consider it, I find you have the more reason: therefore I
assure you, that what may be done shall be done in this, and with what speed is
possible; and so I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Whitehall, 21 Nov. 1638.

His Majesty was also pleased to take such notice of Dr. Balcanqual, as to
write the following Letter about him.

Hamilton,
I Have heard this day that the Dean of Durham is dead, for the disposing of
which Place, though I may have many Suitors, and (which is more) though
heretofore I have had diverse Intentions upon the disposing of that Place, for
the better accommodating of my Service, the reason of which is now as forcible
as ever; yet I have thought fit not to dispose of it till I might (if your stay
be not longer than I expect) speak with you: and to show you that I am not
unmindful of the daily pains that at this time Balcanqual takes in my Service,
I would let you see the case before I dispose of it, and have your Opinion, if
he might not stay a little longer for another nearer my eye, and yet not
dishearten him, when it may accommodate my Service another way; and so I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.


The Assembly went on at such a rate that the Marquis judged it no longer fit
to bear with their Courses; for all Elections, how disorderly soever, were
judged good; their ears were shut upon Reason, and the Bishops Declinator being
read was rejected, and an Answer drawn: The Marqui^ resolves to dissolve the
Assembly.
wherefore on the 28th in the morning he called a Council in the Chapter House,
and told them he was necessitated to dissolve the Assembly, and gave his
Reasons for doing it, using much industry to gain them to concur with him in
it. The Earl of Argyle asked if he was to desire the Councils Approbation of
what he intended, or not: the Marquis answered, his Instructions from His
Majesty were clear and positive for what he was to do, and therefore it was
not in his Power to let any Debate be whether he should do it, or not; only
he desired their concurrence and advice as to the manner of doing it. Two hours
were spent in Discourse, but clear advices were not given from any of them:
from thence the Marquis went to the Church where the Assembly sat, and after
he sat long a Witness to some Debates were among them, it was offered to be
put to the Vote, whether the Assembly was a free Assembly notwithstanding the
Bishops Declinator, or not; upon which the Marquis knowing well how the Vote
would run, rose up and said.

I Find this day great contrarieties of Humors in my self, first, His Speech
a^ the Dissolution.
cause of Joy; next, cause of Sorrow: cause of Joy, in making good what has
been promised by His Majesty; cause of Sorrow, in that I cannot make further
known His Majesty's Pious Intentions.

You have called for a Free General Assembly: His Majesty has granted you one,
most Free on his part, and in his intentions; but as you have handled and
marred the matter, let God and the World judge, whether the least shadow or
footstep of Freedom can be discerned in this Assembly, by any man who has not
given a Bill of Divorce both to his Understanding and Conscience. With what
wresting and wringing your last Protestation charges His Majesty's last
Gracious Proclamation in the point of Prelimitations, is both known and
misliked by many even of your own pretended Covenant; but whether your Courses,
especially in the Elections of the Members of this Assembly, be not only
Prelimitations of it, but strong Bars against the Freedom of it, nay utterly
destructive both of the Name and Nature of a Free Assembly, and unavoidably
inducing upon it many and main Nullities, will be made manifest to the whole
World.

But His Majesty's Sincere Intentions being to perform in a lawful Assembly all
he has promised in his Gracious Proclamation, if you find out a way how these
things may pass, and be performed even in this Assembly, such as it is, and yet
His Majesty not made to approve any way the Illegalities and Nulliti^s of it,
for satisfying all His Majesty's good Subjects of the Reality of his Meaning; I
am by His Majesty's special Command ready to do it, and content to advise with
you how it may be done.

And after this he caused read His Majesty's Concessions, as they had been
before proclaimed: upon which he took Instruments, that by producing and
signing of them, first, his Majesty's Intentions were made known; next, that in
the producing and delivering of them, the Lawfulness of the Assembly was not
acknowledged. After that he went on, and discoursed against the Constitution of
the Assembly in the following words.

But now I am sorry I can go on with you no more, for the sad part is yet
behind, about Ruling-elders; for neither Ruling-elders, nor any Minister chosen
Commissioner by Ruling-elders, can have voice here, because no such Election is
warranted, either by the Laws of this Church or Kingdom, or by the practice or
custom of either: for even that little which appears to make for those Elders
in the Book of Discipline, has at this time been broken by you, there being
more Lay Elders giving votes at every one of those Elections, than there were
Ministers, contrary to the Book of Discipline; as in Lanerick but eight
Ministers, and eighteen or nineteen Lay Elders; and so in diverse other
Presbyteries: and in every Presbytery, when the Ministers upon the List were
removed, the remaining Elders exceeded far the remaining Ministers. But say
there were Law for those Lay Elders, the interruption of the execution of that
Law, for above 40 years, makes so strong a Prescription against it, that
without a new reviving of that Law by some new Order from the General Assembly,
it ought not again be put in practice; for if His Majesty should put in
practice, and take the Penalties of any disused Laws without new intimations of
them from Authority, it would be thought by your selves very hard dealing.

To say nothing of that Office of Lay Elders, it being unknown to the Scripture
or Church of Christ for above 1500 years, let the World judge whether those
Laymen be fit to give Votes in inflicting the Censures of the Church,
especially that great and highest Censure of Excommunication, none having power
to cast out of the Church by that Censure, but those who have power to admit
into the Church by Baptism: and whether all the Lay Elders here present at this
Assembly be fit to judge of the high and deep Mysteries of Predestination, of
the Universality of Redemption, of the Sufficiency of Grace given, or not given
to all men, of the Resistibility of Grace, of total and final Perseverance, or
Apostasy of the Saints, of the Antilapsarian or Postlapsarian Opinion, of
Election and Reprobation; all which they mean to ventilate, if they do
determine against the Arminian, as they give out they will.

In many Presbyteries these Lay Elders disagreed in their Elections wholly, or
for the most part, from the Ministers, and carried it from them by number of
Votes, though in all reason the Ministers themselves should best know the
abilities and fitness of their Brethren: and this was done in the Presbyteries
of Chirnside, Linlithgow, Aberdeen, and diverse more.

How can these men now elected be thought fit to be Ruling-elders, who were
never Elders before, all or most part of them being chosen since the Indiction
of the Assembly, some of them but the very day before the Election of their
Commissioners; which demonstrates plainly, that they were chosen only to serve
their Associates turn at this Assembly?

Since the Institution of Lay Elders by your own Principles is to watch over
the Manners of the People in the Parish in which they live, how can any man be
chosen a Ruling-elder from a Presbytery, who is not an inhabitant within any
Parish of that Presbytery, as has been done in diverse Elections, against all
Law, Sense, or Reason?

By what Law or Practice was it ever heard, that young Noblemen, or Gentlemen,
or others, should be chosen Rulers of the Church, being yet Minors, and in all
Construction of Law thought unfit to manage their own private Estates, unless
you will grant that men of meaner Abilities may be thought fit to rule the
Church, which is the House of God, than are fit to rule their own private
Houses, Families, and Fortunes?

By what Law can any Ruling-elder be sent to a Presbytery to give Vote in any
thing, especially in choosing Commissioners for the General Assembly, who is not
chosen for that purpose by the Session of that Parish in which he is a
Ruling-elder? And who gave power to the Minister of every Parish, to bring with
him to the Presbytery for that purpose any Ruling Elder of his Parish whom he
pleased?

But it is well known, that diverse Elders gave Votes in these Presbyteries to
the Elections of some Commissioners here, who were not chosen by the Sessions
of their several Parishes to give Votes in those Presbyteries; and therefore
such Commissioners as were chosen by such Lay Elders can have no Vote here.

By what Law or Practice have the several Parishes or Presbyteries chosen
As^essors to their Ruling-elders, without whose consent some of the
Commissioners here present are sworn not to vote to any thing?

This introducing of Ruling-elders is a burden so grievous to the Brethren of
the Ministry, that many of the Presbyteries have protested against it for the
time to come, some for the present, as shall appear by diverse Protestations and
Supplications ready to be here exhibited.

For the Ministers chosen Commissioners hither, besides that the fittest are
passed by, and some chosen who were never Commissioners of any Assembly before,
that so they might not stand for their own Liberty in an Assembly of the nature
whereof they are utterly ignorant, choice has been also made of some who are
under the Censure of the Church, of some who are deprived by the Church, of
some who have been banished and put out of the University of Glasgow, for
teaching their Scholars that Monarchies were unlawful, some banished out of
this Kingdom for their Seditious Sermons and Behavior, and some for the like
Offenses banished out of another of His Majesty's Kingdoms, Ireland, some lying
under the fearful Sentence of Excommunication, some having no Ordination nor
Imposition of Hands, some admitted to the Ministry contrary to the standing
Laws of this Church and Kingdom, all of them chosen by Lay Elders; what a
Scandal were it to the Reformed Churches to allow this to be a lawful Assembly,
consisting of such Members, and so unlawfully chosen?

Of this Assembly diverse who are chosen are at the That is, under a Writ of
Outlawry.
Horn, and so by the Laws of this Kingdom are incapable of sitting as Judges in
any Judicatory.

Three Oaths are to be administered to every Member of this Assembly, the Oath
for the Confession of Faith, lately renewed by His Majesty's Commandment, the
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; and whosoever shall refuse any of these,
cannot be a Judge in any Judicatory of this Kingdom; and therefore resolve
presently whether you will take them or not.

You have cited the Reverend Prelates of this Land to appear before you by a way
unheard of, not only in this Kingdom, but in the whole Christian World, their
Citations being read in the Pulpits, which is not usual in this Church; nay,
and many of them were read in the Pulpits after they had been delivered into
the Bishops own hands. How can His Majesty deny unto them, being His Subjects,
the benefit of His Laws, in declining all those to be their Judges, who by
their Covenant do hold the principal thing in question, to wit, Episcopacy to
be abjured, as many of you do? or any of you to be their Judges, who do adhere
to your last Protestation, wherein you declare, that it is an Office not known
to this Kingdom, although at this present it stand established both by Acts of
Parliaments, and Acts of General Assemblies? Who ever heard of such Judges as
have sworn themselves Parties? And if it shall be objected, that the Orthodox
Bishops in the first four and other General Councils could not be denied to be
competent Judges of the Heretics, though beforehand they had declared their
Judgments against their Heresies: it is easily answered, that in matters of
Heresy no man must be patient, since in Fundamental points of Faith a man
cannot be indifferent without the hazard of his Salvation, and therefore must
declare himself to be on Christ's side, or else he is against him; but in
matters of Church Government and Policy, which by the Judgment of this Church
in the 21th Article of our Confession is alterable at the will of the Church,
it is not necessary for any man who means to be a Judge, to declare himself,
especially against that Government which stands established by Law at the time
of his Declaration, being not only not necessary, but likewise not lawful for
him at that time so to do: now this Declaration all you who adhere to the last
Protestation have made, even since you meaned to be the Bishops Judges.
Besides, even those Orthodox Fathers never did declare themselves against the
Heretics, their Persons or Callings, by Oaths and Protestations, as you have
done; for that had been a prejudging in them, and this prejudging in you makes
you now to be incompetent Judges.

Upon the whole matter then there are but two things left for me to say: first,
you your selves have so proceeded in the business of this Assembly, that it is
impossible the fruits so much wished and prayed for can be obtained in it;
because standing as it does, it will make this Church ridiculous to all the
Adversaries of our Religion, it will grieve and wound all our Neighbor
Reformed Churches who hear of it; it will make His Majesty's Justice to be
traduced throughout the whole Christian World, if he should suffer His Subjects
in that which concerns their Callings, their Reputations and their Fortunes, to
be judged by their sworn Enemies. If therefore you will dissolve your selves,
and amend all these errors in a new Election, I will with all convenient speed
address my self to His Majesty, and use the utmost of my Intercession with His
Sacred Majesty for the Indiction of a new Assembly, before the meeting whereof
all these things now challenged may be amended: if you shall refuse this Offer,
His Majesty will then declare to the whole World, that you are disturbers of
the Peace of this Church and State, both by introducing of Lay Elders against
the Laws and Practices of this Church and Kingdom, and by going about to
abolish Episcopal Government, which at this present stands established by both
the said Laws: two points (I dare say) and you must swear it, if your
Consciences be appealed to, (as was well observed by that Reverend Gentleman we
heard preach the last Sunday) which these you drew into your Covenant were
never made acquainted with at their entering into it; much less could they
suspect, that these two should be made the issue of this business, and the two
stumbling blocks to make them fall off from their Natural Obedience to their
Sovereign.

Mr. Henderson made a long Speech, Mr. Henderson answers.
wherein he said much to the magnifying of the Kings Authority in matters
Ecclesiastical, calling him The Universal Bishop of the Churches in His
Dominions, with other such like Expressions, which gave no small disgust to
many of the zealous Brethren: but in the end he said, that we must render to
God the things that were Gods, as well as to Caesar the things which were
Caesar's; and spoke much for vindicating their Proceedings, and charging the
Bishops. And after him many of the Lords spoke about the Freedom of the
Assembly, to whom the Marquis replied.

AS for your pretense of your unlimited Freedom, The Marquis replies,
you indeed refused so much as to hear from His Majesty's Commissioner, of any
precedent Treaty for the preparing and right-ordering of things before the
Assembly; alleging, that it could not be a free Assembly where there was any
Prelimitation either of the Choosers, or of those to be chosen, or of things to
be treated of in the Assembly, but that all things must be discussed upon the
place, else the Assembly could not be free: but whether you your selves have
not violated that which you call Freedom, let any man judge; for besides these
Instructions, which it may be are not come to our knowledge, we have seen, and
offer now to produce, four several Papers of Instructions sent from them, (whom
you call the Tables) containing all of them Prelimitations, and such as are not
only repugnant to that which you call the Freedom, but to that which is indeed
the Freedom of an Assembly. Two of these Papers were such as you were contented
should be communicated to all your Associates, to wit, that larger Paper sent
abroad to all Presbyteries, immediately after His Majesty's Indiction of the
Assembly, and that lesser Paper for your meeting first at Edinburgh, then at
Glasgow, some days before the Assembly; which Paper gave order for choosing of
Assessors, and diverse other particulars: but your other two Papers of Secret
Instructions were directed, one of them only to one Minister of every
Presbytery, to be communicated by him as he should see cause, but to be quite
concealed from the rest of the Ministers; the other Paper was directed only to
one Lay-elder of every Presbytery, and to be communicated by him as he should
see cause, but to be quite concealed from all others: in both which Papers are
contained such Directions, which being followed, as they were, have quite
banished all Freedom from this Assembly; as shall appear by reading the Papers
themselves.

These he caused read, but they were disowned by the Members of the Assembly;
and they said, they might have been the private Opinions of some, but did infer
no Prelimitation on the Assembly: to which the Marquis answered, That all the
Elections being ordered according to these, was a clear proof, they were sent
by an Authority which all feared to disobey. And after that he told, That for
many months the Orders of the Table had been obeyed by all; but he would now
make a trial what Obedience they would give to the Kings Command: and
protested, that one of the chief Reasons that moved him to dissolve this
Assembly, was to deliver the Ministers from the Tyranny of Lay Elders, who (if
not suppressed) would (as they were now designing the ruin of Episcopal Power)
prove not only Ruling, but Over-ruling-elders.

By this time his Heart was so full of Grief (which was easily to be observed
by diverse Indications) that almost all present were affected with it. In end,
seeing nothing said in reason did prevail, he in His Majesty's Name dissolved
the Assembly, and dissolves the Assembly; but they continued to sit.
and discharged their further Proceeding under pain of Treason. Mr. Henderson
and the Earl of Rothes answered him, that they were sorry he left them: but
their Consciences bore them witness, they had hitherto done nothing amiss, so
they could not desert the Work of God; protesting much of their Duty and
Obedience to the King in its due line and subordination: and after this a long
Protestation was begun and read.

This being done, the Marquis presently went out, and called a new Council, The
Council approved of it.
to whom he told how sorry His Majesty would be for this Breach, and how really
desirous he was to have done all was possible for satisfying of his Subjects,
but that their Behavior had extorted what was done; he therefore encouraged
them all to their Duty to the King, assuring them, that whatever any of them
might suffer for it, His Majesty would see they should be no losers. From this
Council the Earl of Argyle withdrew, and fully cleared all Jealousies about
him; for he told the Marquis in plain Language, he would take the Covenant and
own the Assembly. But most of the Councillors seemed satisfied with the
Marquis his Carriage in the Assembly, particularly all his Assessors, ( Argyle
only excepted:) yet the Marquis durst not offer the Proclamation for
dissolving the Assembly to be signed in Council, for fear of a refusal, not
having tried them all in it beforehand; but got most of them to sign it next
morning, and then he sent it to the Market-Cross to be proclaimed, where it met
with a new Protestation. Argyle's Example was followed by some few
Privy-Councelours, whose declaring themselves the Marquis judged rather an
advantage than a loss.

The Council also wrote a Letter to the King, highly commending the Marquis his
zeal and industry in what had passed in the Assembly, which is in the Large
Declaration, to which the Reader is referred for the perusal of all the Papers
set down there at length; these being only inserted here that were not then
made public.

Thus he left Glasgow, and went first to Hamilton, The Marquis returns to
Edinburgh.
carrying some of the Bishops with him for their security from hazard; and
after two or three days stay there went to Edinburgh, (hoping that as he had
outlived their Threats, he should ere long see His Majesty master their
Insolence:) and from thence he gave His Majesty an account of what had passed
since his last, together with a desire for a Permission to come and wait on
him; to which the King wrote the following Answer.

Hamilton,
I Never expected other than that you would have too just grounds to dissolve
this Assembly; The King approves of his dissolving the Assembly.
and certainly I were very unjust if I did not approve you therein, since not
only your Instructions warrant you the same, but even the Council has
testified to me the Necessity of it. And now I shall lay before you some
Considerations; in the first place to take care, that your coming away do not
cast things so loose, that the honest men ^f my Party do believe that you leave
them as in a case desperate, or at least, that by your Absence they be denuded
of Advice and Protection: therefore I hope before you come up you will take so
good order, that your Absence do neither dishearten, nor prejudice my Party. As
for my Preparations, I doubt not but ere this you have had a full account by
your Cousin Sir James, whereby you find that I shall not be able to show my
self like my self before February or March; wherefore I lay it to your
Consideration, whether it were not fit to give hopes that the Parliament shall
hold, (notwithstanding all the impertinencies of this last Assembly) so that
their Follies break not out into open Acts of Rebellious Violences: and really
I will not say, but (that things may be so prepared) it may be fitting that it
should hold. To conclude, I hope you do not conceive, that the Date of your
Commissionership is out; wherefore I expect that (if you find cause) you send
out Commissions of Lieutenantries to Huntley f^r the North, and to Traquair or
Roxburgh, either jointly or severally, (as you shall find most fit) for the
South; yet all as subaltern to you. This I confess is not to be done but upon
great necessity, of which I leave you (as upon the place) to be Judge, (being
abundantly satisfied of your zeal and dexterity to serve me) as I do of all
that I have now written: and so I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Whitehall, 7 Dec. 1638.

To this shall be added two Letters written by the Archbishop of Canterbury to
the Marquis on the same subject.

My very good Lord,
Letters from my Lord of Canterbury to the Marquis.
I Received your Lordships Letters of November. 27th, they came safe to me on
December. 2d after 8 at night. I was glad to see them short; but their shortness
is abundantly supplied by the length of two Letters, one from the Lord Ross,
and the other from the Dean. They have between them made their word good to
your Lordship, for they have sent me all the passages from the beginning of the
Assembly to the time of the Date of their Letters: and this I will be bold to
say, never were there more gross absurdities, nor half so many, in so short a
time, committed in any Public Meeting; and for a National Assembly never did
the Church of Christ see the like.

Besides His Majesty's Service in general, that Church is much beholding to
you, and so are the Bishops in their Persons and Callings: and heartily sorry I
am, that the People are so beyond your expression furious* that you think it
fit to send the two Bishops from Glasgow to Hamilton; and much more, that you
should doubt your own safety. My Lord, God bless your Grace with Life and
Health to see this Business at a good end, for certainly, as I see the face of
things now, there will very much depend upon it, and more than I think fit to
express in Letters; nay perhaps, more than I can well express if I would.

I am as sorry as your Grace can be that the Kings Preparations can make no
more haste. I hope you think (for truth it is) I have called upon His Majesty,
and by His Command upon some others, to hasten all that may be, and more than
this I cannot do; but I am glad to read in your Letters that you have written
at length to His Majesty, that you may receive from himself a punctual Answer
to all necessary particulars: and I am presently going to him to persuade him
to write largely to you, that you may not be in the dark for any thing.

But (my Lord) to meet with it again in your Letters, that you cannot tell
whether this may be ^our last Letter, and that therefore you have disclosed the
very thoughts of your Heart, does mightily trouble me: but I trust in God, he
will preserve you, and by your great Patience, Wisdom, and Industry, set His
Majesty's Affairs (to your great Honor) in a right posture once again; which
if I might live to see, I would be glad to sing my Nunc dimittis.

I pray (my Lord) accept my thanks for the poor Clergy there, and particularly
for the Bishop of Ross, who protests himself most infinitely obliged to you.

I heartily pray your Lordship to thank both the Bishop of Ross and the Dean
for their kind Letters, and the full account they have given me; but there is
no particular that requires an Answer in either of them, saving that I find in
the Deans Letter, that Mr. Alex. Hende^son, who went all this while for a quiet
and calm-spirited man, has showed himself a most violent and pa^sionate man,
and a Moderator without Moderation. Truly (my Lord) never did I see any man of
that humor yet, but he was deep-dyed in some violence or other, and it would
have been a wonder to me if Henderson had held free. Good my Lord, since ^ou
are good in the active part, in the commixture of Wisdom and Patience, hold it
out till the People may see the Violence and Injustice of them that would be
their Leaders, and suffer not a Rupture till there be no Remedy. God bless you
in all your ways, which is the daily prayer of

Your Lordships most faithful Friend, and humble Servant, W. CANT.
Lambeth, 3 December. 1638.

My very good Lord,
I Received your Letters of the second of December upon the sixth of the same
at night, and could not speak with His Majesty till this day. This day I did,
and showed him your Letters and the Deans; and I read to him more than the
later half of all the long Discourse which the Dean wrote unto me, for His
Majesty was very desinous to know what occasion you took to dissolve the Synod,
and how you prosecuted it; in both which that Paper gave him great satisfaction.

With your Letters I have received three other Papers, that which s^ews you
have kept within your Instructions, the Copy of the Proclamation which
dissolves the Assembly, and a Copy of the Councils Letter to the King; both
which His Majesty takes to be very good Service done for him, and commands me
to give your Grace thanks in his Name, which I am very glad to do, and I do
it heartily.

For the Earl of Argyle I can say no more than I have already, though now I
know him more perfectly than I did. Your Resolution was to put him from the
Council Table, if he refused the Kings Co^enant; he has now deserved it more,
but whether it be a fit time as yet to proceed so far, I dare not determine
here. This I am sure of, if he do now publicly adhere to the Covenant and the
Assembly, nay be the professed Head of the Covenant, (as the Dean calls him;)
yet he will have much ado to look right upon that, who ever looked asquint upon
the Kings business.

Concerning your coming up to Court, I am glad I find His Majesty in that
Opinion which I cannot choose but be of, that is, to leave it to your self, and
your own Judgment upon the place, whether it be fitter for you to come or stay:
for the truth is, my Lord, in my poor Judgment the King must needs leave this
to your self, or discern himself; for if he bids you come, you will not stay;
and if he would have you stay, you will not come: but whether it be fittest to
come or stay cannot be prudently judged here, therefore (my Lord) do that
which shall be best approved there for His Majesty's Service. And as much as I
desire to see you, I will be bold to add this, that I hope you will not stir
to come thence* till you have so settled the Country, or at least the Kings
Party there, as that you may be sure they may be safe, till further course for
Security may be taken: for I do not know how much it may dishearten them if
your Grace come away from them too soon.

In tender care of His Majesty's both Safety and Honor, I have done and do
daily call upon him for his Preparations. He protests he makes all the haste he
can, and I believe him; but the jealousies of giving the Covenanters umbrage
too soon, have made Preparations here so late. I do all I can here with
trouble and sorrow enough.

Here is News that three Ships-full more of Arms are come to Leith from Poland;
whence have they money to buy all this? If this be true, the King of Poland
has watched a shrewd opportunity to quit the King for the late neglect of his
Ambassador. And that which troubles me not a little is, that the Kings Party
there (I doubt) is not half so well provided of Arms as the Covenanters are.

For the Money you mention, I wish with all my heart you had received it, for
at the rising of the Assembly most miserable will be the Condition of them who
have faithfully served God and the King. I have now again put it to the King,
and he sees enough, but cannot well tell how to ^elp it; yet this he said, If
he could possibly scrape so much together, it should be had.

I pray be pleased to thank the Dean for his great pains, though it cost me the
sitting up some part of the night to read it. His Letter, beside that
Discourse, contains but two things, The necessity of a present show of Force
against the rising of the Assembly, before men be urged to new Confederacies,
and Subscriptions to all things determined in this Assembly; The other, that
some care may be had for the poor Ministers, who will be put to the greatest
sufferings, and all for God and the King. And to these two I have said as much
as I can, and shall daily labor with the King to do all that may be done for
them. I pray God bless your Lordship, but I am infinitely sorry so much Grace
and Goodness of the Kings should be no better received. To Gods blessed
Protection I leave you, and all your Endeavors, and shall ever show my self

Your Graces most faithful Friend, and humble Servant, W. CANT.
Whitehall, December. 7. 1638.

The Assembly go on at a great rate.
The Assembly all this while were not idle, but went on at a great rate, now
that there was none to curb them. They condemned all the Assemblies had been
for forty years before, as prelimited and not Free; they declared Episcopacy
unlawful, and contrary to the Laws of their Church: the same was the fate of
the Service Book, Book of Canons, High Commission, and the Articles of Perth.
They appointed the Covenant to be taken by all under pain of Excommunication,
with their new Gloss against Episcopacy and the Ceremonies: and then they
proceeded to the Processes of Bishops notwithstanding their Declinator, which
was sure not to be sustained by them; for they being both Judges and Parties,
would not fail to carry the matter as they desired.

The Marquis at his coming to Edinburgh on the 17th of December emitted a large
Proclamation, The Marquis puts for^h a Proclamation against them.
containing the Reasons of his dissolving the Assembly, and declared those who
continued to sit in that pretended Assembly Traitors. He added His Majesty's
Pious Intentions to preserve the Religion established; discharging all his
Subjects to acknowledge or obey the Acts of that pretended Assembly, with an
assured promise of Protection to all such as continued in their Obedience to
His Majesty's Service. This he sent every where to be proclaimed through
Scotland, and wrote to all he heard of that were affectionate to His Majesty's
Service, encouraging them to continue in their Duty, assuring them of the Kings
Favor and Goodness. But now were all Peoples minds set on flame, every one
expecting what should be the issue of this disorderly Affair.

He begun again to talk with the Covenanters, according to the Kings Order for
a continuance of Treating; but they received it with so much neglect, that he
was scarce able to bear it: and sinding they did encourage themselves with the
Kings Clemency, he resolved to prostitute the Offers of it no more. He found
the Castle of Edinburgh in some better posture at his return thither, than he
had left it when he went to the West; forty good men were stolen into it with
some Muskets and Cases of Pistols, and abundance of Ammunition, and Provision
for five weeks. This was carried with great cunning, for the Castle had been
watched all the while: but when the Covenanters understood what was car^ied in,
they were enraged, and beset the Castle so closely with their Guards, that it
was as good as besieged.

The Assembly of Glasgow, after they had deposed all the Bishops, The Assembly
end their business, and write to the King.
and excommunicated eight of them, wherein it was easy to proceed against
Absents, at length they closed with a Letter to the King, (to be found in the
Printed Acts of that Assembly:) and in it they justified their Procedure,
complained of the Usage they met with from His Commissioner; and prayed His
Majesty to look upon them as good and dutiful Subjects, and be satisfied with
what they had done.

The Marquis his Journey was delayed, The Marquis indisposed through long
Fatigue.
through an Indisposition of Body, some days longer than he intended; and
indeed (all things being considered) it was a wonder how either Body or Mind
could hold out so long. His Negotiation was both painful and unprosperous: most
of the day he was obliged to spend with unmanagable and unruly Spirits, and
much of the night in writing Letters; for every third or fourth day he gave the
King a large account of what passed, which was sometimes of the length of two
sheets of all sides in close writing. This was always seconded by another to my
Lord of Canterbury of the same, and often a greater length. Besides that, about
other matters of course he wrote as often to the Earl of Sterlin, and almost as
often to Sir Henry Vane. And this was besides all his Letters up and down
Scotland, most of which, particularly those to my Lord Huntley, (which were at
least weekly) were all with his own Hand. And the most uneasy part of all was,
that he was obliged to keep himself in a reserve almost with every Body, there
being very few about him whom he durst entirely trust: and certain it is, had
not his Mind been of a great and undaunted stayedness and calmness, the shocks
he met with had dashed him to pieces.

But having recovered his Health, and put things in the best Order could be
expected in the midst of so great Disorders, he took Journey to London on the
28th of December, having committed the chief care of business to the Earl of
Traquair; in who^e hands he left some of the Blanks under the Kings Hand which
he had by him, to be filled up as Traquair should be answerable; with a
particular Order, that if the Lords of the Covenant pressed the Lords of the
Session to do any thing that might infer an Acknowledgment of the Assembly of
Glasgow, and if he saw any grounds to fear their yielding, then he should fill
up one of the Blanks with a Proclamation to the Session to rise. Thus ended
this Ominous Year.

An. 1639.
Anno 1639.
The sad posture Affairs were in.
THE Marquis his thoughts did bear him sad company during his Journey: the least
painful of them was, that he knew he had many Enemies, who would impute the
present Disorders to his Mismanagement, if not to his unfaithfulness; but those
he quieted with his confidence in His Majesty's Justice, and his own Integrity.
And indeed any personal Hazard could meet him must have had small footing in a
mind prepossessed with other thoughts. That which tormented him most (as
appears by his Letters) was, that he saw inevitable Ruin hanging either over
his Master, or his Country, if not over both; since the Ruin of either would
prove fatal to both. To advise His Majesty to Treat any further, before he were
in a posture to command as well as to treat, was so dishonorable that he could
not think of it. He saw a Kingly way must be taken, but he knew well His
Majesty's Affairs were not in a very good posture. England had enjoyed a long
quiet, and so both their Warlike Spirits and Preparations were much rusted:
there was store of Factious Spirits among them, who would give heartless
assistance to His Majesty in his Designs; and those who would be most forward,
he knew were ready to drive His Majesty's Resentments too far. He saw little
hope of any Party to be made for the King in Scotland, except from the Marquis
of Huntley. He knew the Covenanters would proceed as men desperate; and less
heartiness could be expected from His Majesty's hired Soldiers, than from such
as had no hope but in their hands and actions. In a word, all things looked so
cloudy to his discerning mind, that it proved a melancholy Journey to him.

The King highly displeased with the Covenanters.
On the 5th of January he came to Whitehall, where he gave the King a true and
ample Relation of all particulars. His Majesty was fully satisfied with his
Carriage in every step of it, approving all he had done; but was so highly
irritated at the Covenanters, that he resolved neither to think nor talk of
Treating, till he should appear in a more formidable posture; judging it would
render his Person and Government contemptible, not only to all abroad, but to
his other Subjects, and teach them to kick off his Authority, if after all the
Affronts had been put upon his Laws and Condescensions he should be so tame as
still to Treat; and therefore was resolved not to receive the Letter he knew
was coming from the Assembly to him, backed with a Petition from the Lords. But
the Marquis desired he would delay any such more apparent Breach, till he were
ready to appear in the Field, which was impossible before March. All His
Majesty's thoughts were now bent upon the way of reducing Scotland to due
Obedience, in which the Marquis offered him his humble and hearty concurrence:
for though his Affection to his Country and Friends did struggle strongly
against his engaging further, yet it yielded to his Duty; but not so entirely,
as to clear his Spirit of sad regrates. And in this he was not only rivalled,
but far out-stripped by his Sovereign, whose Sorrow keeping pace with his
Affection and Interest, made this Expedition prove as sad as it was just.

The Design was thus laid down: His Majesty was to raise an Army of thirty
thousand Horse and Foot, and to lead them in Person toward Scotland: He was to
write to all the Nobility of England; and resolves on a War;
to wait upon him to the Campaign with their Attendants, who should be
maintained by His Majesty's Pay: He was to put good Garrisons in Berwick and
Carlisle, two thousand in the former, and five hundred in the latter: He was at
the same time to send a Fleet to ply from the Frith Northward for stooping of
Trade, and making a great Diversion for guarding the Coast: He was also to send
an Army of five thousand men under the Marquis his Command to land in the
North, and join with Huntley's Forces: all which should be under his Command,
he retaining still the Character of Commissioner, with the addition of General
of the Forces in Scotland. And with these he was, First, to make the North
sure, and then to move Southward, which might both make another great
Diversion, and encourage such as wished well to His Majesty's Service, who were
the greater number in those Parts. Next, the Earl of Antrim was to land in
Argyle-shire, upon his Pretensions to Kyntire, and the old Fewds betwixt the
Mackdonalds and Campbels; and he promised to bring with him ten or twelve
thousand men. And last of all, the Earl of Strafford was to draw together such
Forces as could be levied and spared out of Ireland, and come with another
Fleet into Dumbriton-Frith; and for his encouragement, the Marquis desired him
to touch at Arran, (that being the only place of his Interest which he could
offer unto His Majesty) and he would be sure of all his Men there, ( such naked
Rogues as they were, is his own phrase.) Besides, there were store of Cows in
that Island for the provision of the Fleet, which he appointed should not be
spared.

Thus was the Design laid down for curbing the Scottish Insolences: and lays
down method^ for the effectuating of his design.
yet His Majesty firmly resolved, that whenever they returned to their
Obedience, he should not be inexorable. The first thing for prosecuting this
Design, was the looking for Officers and Money: for the former, England was
pretty scant; yet the best were sought out. On the second of February the King
named the Earl of Arundel to be General, the Earl of Essex to be
Lieutenant General of the Foot, and the Earl of Holland to command the Horse.
Letters were also sent through the Counties for levying of Men, and
Advertisements given to the Nobility to meet the King at York against the first
of April. Antrim undertook bravely, and Strafford said, he should do what was
possible with all expedition. The Fleet was appointed presently to be rigged
out; and Orders issued out for levying five thousand Soldiers, under the
Command of the three gallant Colonels, Morton, Byron, and Harecoat, who should
go with the Fleet without knowing whither they went. A Commission for the
Lieutenantry of the North of Scotland was sent to the Marquis of Huntley; but
he was ordered to keep it up as long as was possible, and carefully to observe
two things. One was, not to be the first Aggressor, except he were highly
provoked, or His Majesty's Authority signally affronted; the other was, that he
should keep off with long Weapons, till His Majesty were on the Borders; lest
if he should begin sooner, the Covenanters might overwhelm him with their whole
Force, and either ruin him, or force him to lay down his Arms. As for the
Marquis his Employment, he told His Majesty, that though he was so far from
declining his Service at such a time, that he should be infinitely troubled if
he were not employed: yet he desired the King might choose a fitter person for
the Naval Forces, since he was altogether unacquainted with Sea-affairs, and
not fit for such an important Service. But His Majesty looking upon this as an
effect of his Modesty, gave no hearing to it; telling him, that as for Affairs
purely Naval, Sir John Pennington the Vice Admiral should go with him, and
would abundantly supply his defects in that.

But the getting of Money was the hardest part of all, for two hundred thousand
pound Sterlin was all the Money the King could make account of. The Treasury
was much exhausted; and an unlucky Accident fell in at that time, which put the
King to much extraordinary Expense, the Queen Mother of France coming over to
England: yet the King found Himself able to do well enough for the Summer
following, but His Purse could not weather out another year.

Thus did the King frame and prosecute His Design, with the Secret whereof very
few were trusted; it being communicated to none without reserve, save to
Canterbury, Arundel; Sir Henry Vane, and by Letters to Strafford, but above all
to the Marquis.

But here this Narration must be stopped, that we may take a view of Scotland,
The Covenanters prepare for War.
and of the Power and Practices of the Covenanters. In the beginning of January
there was a full Meeting of them at Edinburgh, where they first resolved to
send a Gentleman to the King, with the Assemblies Letter, and a Petition from
themselves, full of Submission to the King, Invectives against the Marquis, and
Justifications of their Procedure in all things, particularly in the late
Assembly: which they doubted not, they should make appear in the ensuing
Parliament, of the holding whereof they seemed to make no question. With this
the Earl of Argyle wrote a general Vindication of his own Behavior; and these
Letters were sent to Court by Mr. Winram. His Majesty received their Petition,
but resolved to give it such an Answer in due time as their Behavior deserved:
but he wrote back to Argyle, that he should be willing to receive from his own
mouth a Vindication of his late Behavior, though it seemed scarce capable of
any. The Covenanters their next, and indeed chief care, was, to fortify
themselves against what they knew in reason they might quickly expect. Orders
were therefore given through all the Shires of Scotland, that a Committee of
War should sit in every Shire, Soldiers be listed and trained, and a
Commissioner sent from every County, to lie at Edinburgh for receiving and
transmitting of Orders. Great care was also taken to provide the Country with
Arms and Ammunition, Merchants were sent every where to buy up all were to be
had, and in a short time there were Arms for above thirty thousand men brought
to Scotland; and particular Orders were given, that none should be sold, but to
such as were well-affected to the Cause. Strong and strict Guards were set
about the Castle of Edinburgh, so that it being but hitherto ill furnished,
little was to be expected from it; wherefore Ruthwen would not shut himself up
within it, but went to offer his Service to His Majesty, where he might be more
useful. They were also careful to fortify Leith, apprehending hazard from the
Kings Fleet; and about fifteen hundred of all Sexes, yea and all Qualities, for
encouraging of others, wrought about it till the Fortifications were completed.

But of all men the Ministers were the busiest: the Pulpits did ring with the
Ruin of Religion and Liberties; and that all might look for Popery and
Bondage, if they did not now quit themselves like men. and are much inflamed by
the Ministers.
Curses were thundered out against those who went not out to help the Angel of
the Lord against the mighty, (so oddly was the Scripture applied;) and to set
off this the better, all was carried on with many Fasts and Prayers: and they
forgot not to pretend much Duty and Affection to the King; but the Bishops and
his other ill Councillors (as they called them) got the blame of all, and none
more than the Marquis. By these means it was, that the poor and well-meaning
People were animated into great extremities of Zeal, resolving to hazard all in
pursuance of the Cause: for they were told, that the design was to reduce
Scotland to a Province under the Power of the English, whose Oppression they
must resolve to bear if they stood not now to their own Defense. Upon this it
was that the Committees for War, which were held in the several Shires about
the beginning of February, found small resistance, and no difficulty of levying
Men; greater numbers being offered than could be either armed or maintained.

At Edinburgh the Session met with great trouble from the Covenanters; The
Session is disturbed.
for the greater number of the Lords of the Session being resolved not to own
the Assembly, all such Petitions wherein the Bishops were not designed as they
ought to have been, but were called either pretended Bishops, or late Ministers
of the Places where they served before their Promotion, were rejected: and some
Signatures being offered in Exchequer, wherein they were so designed, Traquair
took them and tore them to pieces. Of all this the Covenanters complained, as
if Justice were denied; but it was told them, that if they went to force the
Session, it would be High Treason, and that they would never yield to them. But
the four Covenanting Lords of the Session having passed Petitions wherein the
Bishops were so called, these were stopped at the Signet. The Covenanters made
also great Complaints to the Council, of some persons who had written to
England of their Designs to invade it; of which they protested themselves
innocent, and craved liberty to pursue their Slanderers: but that was laid
aside, only a Letter was written about it to the King. Yet all, at least most,
of the Council, what through fear, what through inclination, went along with
the Covenanters; and such as stood firm to their Duty were forced to fly into
England.

The Covenanters made sure work of all the Shires; They become Masters of all
Scotland.
only in Tweddale Traquair resisted them a little, and got their Meetings to
be deserted for two or three Diets; but that was all he could do. In
Teviotdale the Earl of Roxburgh kept all right, and begun to levy men as well
as others; but he was faintly followed. The Marquis of Douglass was not able to
do His Majesty that Service his Illustrious Ancestors had done the former
Kings; for himself was a Papist, and so not followed by the Friends and
Dependers of that Noble Family: so that all the Marquis could do, was to go
and wait upon His Majesty, and offer his House of Tentallon to be made use of
as the King pleased. But the Covenanters seized both it and his House of
Douglass: and thus all on the South of Tay was lost without stroke of Sword.
But in Angus the Earls of Airly and Southesk made more vigorous resistance to
the Attempts of the Covenanters, and were able to have made that Country good
for the King, but could not withstand the Force came upon them from other
Places. They all armed, and Earl Airly stood out to the Pacification, but
Southesk was fitter for a Council than a Camp; and seeing inevitable Ruin to
follow, since the Kings Preparations went on so slowly, he struck sail and came
to Edinburgh. Huntley gave them more trouble: for my Lord of Montrose and
Kinghorn, with some others, coming to hold a Committee at Turreff in that
County, he gathered so many together, and came so near them, that they were
forced to disperse themselves; yet he kept up his Commission of Lieutenantry,
acting only in the quality of a Peer and Counselor. But they resolved, since
they could do nothing against him with the men of that Shire, to bring a Body
from other Places to ruin him. The want which pinched the Covenanters most at
first was, of good Officers; and this made General Lesley (who at that time had
acquired much Fame in the Wars of Germany) get an earnest Invitation sent him
from the Earl of Rothes, in the name of the Covenante^s, to come home to
command their Forces: upon which he did quit his Employment there, and came to
Scotland with many other Commanders. He was chosen their General, and undertook
the Service with much Joy. And this was the Posture and Preparations of
Scotland, which I draw from the Letters that are yet extant, written to the
Marquis from the Lords of Traquair, Huntley, Airly, and Roxburgh.

Meanwhile the King went on, making all the haste with his Levies and
Preparations that was possible, in which none acted his part with more Fidelity
and better Dispatch than the Earl of Northumberland, who was Admiral, and
discharged what was committed to him so well, that nothing was defective that
concerned the Fleet. But the Marquis found the Hearts of many of the English
Nobility both backward and cold; and in particular he assured the King, that he
saw much Heartiness was not to be expected from some of the general Officers;
which the King apprehending, The King emits his Declaration of the Reasons of
the War.
trusted them as little as was possible. About the middle of March the King
published a Declaration of the Reasons of his Expedition against Scotland,
which was followed by a larger one, commonly called the Large Declaration or
Manifesto, penned by Balcanqual, and revised by His Majesty: in which a full
account was given of the rise and progress of the Combustions of Scotland; of
which no more shall be said, it being so commonly known, save that from the
account has been given it will appear, how unjustly that Book was charged to
be full of Lies and Calumnies.

The Covenanters begin the War.
The News of this coming to Scotland set all a-flaming; whereupon they first
sent in Papers and Letters through all England, and to the Court, vindicating
themselves with high Protestations, that they designed not the Invasion of
England, as had been misrepresented: and therefore they expected no Hostility
from them, to whom they neither did, nor intended hurt. These Letters were said
not to be ill-received, even by some at Court, who were in the highest Trust.
The Covenanters also resolved to take the start of the King; and so on the 23th
of March General Lesley with some Companies went to the Castle of Edinburgh,
and petarded the Gates, and set Ladders to the Walls, and carried it, no
resistance being made from those within. It is true, much could not be made;
but that could not wipe off their stain, who yielded that impregnable and
important Place so faintly. The occasion of their negligence was, that a
Gentlewoman of good Quality was sent in under pretense of visiting the Captain
of the Castle, to keep him in discourse: she dined with him, and engaged him to
play at Cards, so that they were about his ears, before he was apprehensive of
danger. Dumbriton run the same fate, it being surrendered by Sir William
Stewart; whose only excuse was, that at his coming down the former year, he
found the whole Garrison Covenanters, that he durst not turn them off, nor take
on new Soldiers without a powerful assistance; and so finding them resolved
both to deliver him and the Castle up, he could do nothing alone: besides that
he was unprovided of every thing that was necessary for a Siege. The next day
after the Castle of Edinburgh was seized, the Covenanters went to the Session
to force the Lords to take the Covenant^ but most of them refused it: then they
seized on the Privy Seal, and thought to have got the Great Seal, which the
Marquis had committed to the keeping of an honest Servant Mr. John Hamilton, by
their endeavors to prevail with him for it; but he refused to part with it
except with his Life, and so preserved it.

Their next Attempt was upon Dalkeith, whither Traquair retired with a small
Company: and he without stroke of Sword surrendered it, for which his Courage
seemed more blameworthy than his Honesty. But his greatest fault was, that he
yielded up the Regalia, the Crown and Scepter which lay there, and carried them
not with him: neither did he spoil the Arms that lay there, which since he
could not carry with him, he ought to have done, and not to have left them to
strengthen the Enemy. But from this he hasted to meet the King at York.
Roxburgh's Misfortune followed this; his County being upon the Borders was of
great importance for the Kings Service, and he kept it in pretty good order,
till Munro came with some Forces out of other Shires: but his Son Lord Ker,
whom he left with the Trust of all, (going himself to wait on the King) turned
over to the Covenant. The News of this overtook Roxburgh in his Journey, in
which he made the more haste, that he might be the first who should give the
King an account of that unlucky Adventure, whereby he might prevent all
Jealousies against himself.

The King set out from London the 27th of March, and came to York the first of
April. The first blast of this Storm fell on Huntley, against whom the
Covenanters sent a great Force both of Horse and Foot with some Cannon,
commanded by the Earls of Montrose and Marshal. But Marquis Huntley finding
himself unable to resist them, retired in some disorder to Turreff, and they
followed him, taking Aberdeen in their way; which had hitherto stood for the
King, but was now forced to render, the Bishop with the Doctors escaping by Sea
to Berwick. At Turreff My Lord Huntley laid down Arms, where treating with
them, by a surprise he and his Son the Lord Gordon were taken Prisoners, and
brought over, and committed to the Castle of Edinburgh, The Marquis of Huntley
is taken prisoner.
where they lay till the Capitulation at Birks. I am sorry I want materials for
saying more in the vindication of that Noble Person; but I must not dismiss one
Story without taking notice of it, which is, that the Marquis is blamed, as
having given him Orders to do as he did. And this, with other Stories of the
like truth, was put in to swell the Charge given in against him some years
after this; yet it is strange that when the Viscount of Aboyne, who was
Huntley's second Son, came to wait upon the King at York, there was no
Complaint made of that: nor when Huntley was enlarged and waited on the King,
do^s there appear the least vestige of his alleging any thing to the Marquis
his prejudice. The ground of the Story is this, the Marquis had written in the
Kings Name, and by his Order, to the Marquis of Huntley, when he sent him the
Commission of Lieutenantry (as has been said) to beware as much as was
possible, that he should not be the first Aggressor, till His Majesty were upon
the Borders; for the King knew that Huntley could not resist all the
Covenanters Forces, and to make a powerful Diversion when the King should be
dealing with them in the South, was all could be expected from him. Likewise,
the Marquis failed not to give weekly Advertisements of the progress of the
Kings Preparations; which appears both from Huntley's Letters to the Marquis,
and the Copies of the Returns he gave them, that are yet extant: and therefore
there remains nothing upon this account to charge or suspect the Marquis his
Fidelity.

The Marquis prepares for the Sea, and gets three Letters from the King.
The Marquis was left at London to see that the Fleet and the other Land
Soldiers, who were to be shipped in some Colliers Vessels, might be ready to
go aboard upon Order: and His Majesty wrote him the following Letter before he
left London.

Hamilton,
I Received yours but this morning, to which before I answer, I must tell you
News: First, that Jacob Ashly has possessed Berwick with 1000 Foot and 60
Horse, and Carlisle is likewise possessed by My Lord Clifford with 300 men;
Secondly, I have commanded Traquair to keep his C^amber, until he give me an
account how he left Da^keith, without striking one stroke, and before any
Cannon was br^ught before it, having left the Ammunition (not destroyed) to
their reverence, and likewise the Regalia: of this more by the next. Now for
Answer, I have given the Proclamation to be written over by the Clerk-Register,
with the General Oath, both which you shall have with all speed: for your
Military Oath, I like it extreme well, as likewise your opinion for detaining
the Patents of Honors until the Country be settled; for your Brother,
certainly if you had forgotten him I should not, but have remembered my old
Engagement: and for Dalliel, indeed he deserves well; yet methinks a Viscounty
may serve at this time, that I may have something more to give upon further
occasion: and so I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
York, 2 Apr. 1639.

The next day he had that which follows.

Hamilton,
ACcording to my promise yesterday I have sent you back the Proclamation and
Oath, but with very few Additions. As touching Traquair I can say little more
than I did, because I have not yet seen his Defense; only if I had not taken
this rude notice of his base Action, I am sure I should have disheartened a
number of honester men than ever he was, or will be. This morning I have News
of the safe Landing of the 500 Irish, which are by this time in Carli^le, there
to attend until further Directions. I have no more at this time to say, but to
know, if Col. Gun be not one that you have entertained, for it is said that he
is going back again to Germany. One thing I had almost forgot; they say for
certain that Aberdeen holds out still, and is not likely to yield in haste; if
it be so, you know what to do. And so I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
York, 3 Apr. 1639.

The day following he got the next Letter.

Hamilton,
THis is to tell you, that the News of the rendering of Aberdeen came
immediately after the dispatch of the last Post, and that though Huntley be
retired, yet he is neither beaten nor overrun: but the chief cause of my
writing at this time is, that since I have shown the Proclamation to Orbiston
and Sir Lewis Stewart, they have both been very instant with me to change
something in it: which (though my Judgment goes with them in the most, and
therefore I will not be wilful; yet) I think I shall alter, or (but rather)
palliate one point, to wit, not to set Prices upon the declared Rebels Heads,
until they have stood out some little time; which time is to be expressed in
this same Declaration. Another thing is, whither and when to send you Devick;
and lastly, whether I shall see you before you put to Sea, which I should be
glad of, if it should not retard the Service: and so I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
York, 5 Apr. 1639.

A Dispatch came at this time from Ireland, showing that it would be about the
end of June, before the Lord Lieutenant could come with the Army he was
preparing for His Majesty's assistance: The hopes from Ireland fail.
adding, that all Antrims fair undertakings were like to vanish in Air, and
that he was not able to do as he had engaged; for after he had used many Arts,
to find some color of fastening the failing on the Lieutenants part, by
unreasonable demands, finding him satisfied with them all, was forced to
acknowledge that he was not able to do the King the Service he had unde^taken
that Summer: yet most of the Scots in Ireland offered their Service very
cordially, and willingly declared their dislike of the Covenant.

The King advises about the Indemnity he was to offer the Covenanters.
His Majesty's next care was about His Proclamation for Scotland, wherein he
gave an account of the Affronts His Authority had received by the Covenanters,
and his designs to do himself right, according to the Power and Authority God
had put in his hand: withal offering Indemnity to such as should within eight
days lay down their Arms, some few excepted; Declaring such as would not obey,
Rebels, setting a Price upon their Heads, and ordering their Vassals and
Tenants not to acknowledge them, nor pay them Rents. But by His Majesty's
Letters it will appear, how he was advised to change some particulars of the
first Draught, to which Counsels His Majesty did willingly give ear: though
there were some about him of both Nations, studious enough to dissuade him from
any thing that looked like a temper; some carried on by their Revenge, and
passionate Resentments: others were acted perhaps with worse Principles and
Designs. In end His Majesty having resolved on a draught of a Proclamation, he
sent one to the Marquis with this following Letter.

Hamilton,
I Send you with this my Proclamation, as I have now made it upon debate with
Sir Lewis Stewart, wherein I have altered nothing from the first, but what I
wrote you by my last; only I have added some things of favor to those that
shall repent, which nevertheless are of so little moment, that although this
should not come to your hands time enough, the other might pass very well. As
for the publishing of it, I shall do my best to get it proclaimed both in
Edinburgh, and in the rest of the Kingdom: nevertheless you must not leave to
do your best for the publishing of it. So wishing good success as well to your
Person as Cause, I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
York, 7 Apr. 1639.

And with this Letter the King sent the following Order written with His Own
Hand.

Hamilton,
I Send you herewith my Pleasure in a Proclamation to my Subjects of Scotland,
and by this command you to use all sort of Hostility against all those who
shall not submit themselves according to the tenor of the same; for which this
shall be your Warrant.

CHARLES R.
York, 7 Apr. 1639.

At the same time the Marquis received the following Letter.

Hamilton,
I Have spoken with Henry Vane at full, of all those things that were concerted
betwixt you, and agree in all things but one, which is, that he thinks your
going into the Frith, will make the Rebels enter into England the sooner;
whereas on the contrary, I think that my po^sessing of Carlisle and Berwick
has made them so mad, that they will enter in as soon as they can persuade an
Army together, except they be hindered by some awful Diversion: wherefore I
could wish that you were even now in the Frith, though the Borders might be
quiet till my Army be brought together, which they say will hardly be yet these
ten days. Yet I am not out of hope to be at Newcastle within these fourteen
days, and so to Berwick as soon as I may with either Honor or Safety;
wherefore my Conclusion is, go on a Gods Name in your former Intentions, except
I send you otherwise lord, or your self find some inevitable necessity: and so
I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
York, 10 Apr. 1638. POSTSCRIPT.
I have sent y^u ten Blanks, whereof four be Signaturewise.




Both these found him at Yarmouth Road on the fifteenth of April, whither he
was come to take in his Soldiers. The Marquis is at Yarmout^ to put his
Soldiers aboard.
The Officers were very affectionate to His Majesty's Service, but did not know
what their employment was to be, save that in general they were to go to Sea.
When he told them they must go to Holy-Island, and there receive the Kings
further Orders, they seemed surprised; yet were resolved on Obedience. Their
men were good bodies, well clothed, and well armed; but so little exercised,
that of the 5000 there were not 200 that could fire a Musket. The occasion of
this was, a Clause in the Councils Letter to the Lieutenants of the Counties,
in which they were levied, that if other good men could be had, the trained men
should be spared; and the Deputy Lieutenants upon this ordered it so, that not
so much as the Sergeants and Corporals were trained. But whether there was a
Design in this God knows, for nothing appears to make it out beside Jealousies.
This was a great affliction to the Marquis, for he knew the King confided much
in him; and yet he saw there was an Impossibility of his doing any thing to
purpose, till the Soldiers were some ways exercised; which he caused do upon
the Ships as frequently as was possible. The furnishing them with Water and
other necessaries, together with Cross Winds, kept them some days in the Road;
and before they got out of it, the Marquis received the following Letter from
His Majesty.

Hamilton,
IT is true that I was content to hear your Advice concerning your going into
the Frith, it being chiefly to show Henry Vane, that your Judgment went along
as well as your Obedience: though I had a care ever to take off from you the
envy of seeking this particular Employment, taking it, as it is just, upon my
own absolute Command; yet I will not say, but that you might have cause to
wonder, because neither of us expressed our selves so clearly as we might. But
my chief errand to you at this time is, that upon serious Debate upon your long
Letter to Henry Vane, only with him and Arundel, (for I dare trust no other) we
found no reason to alter my former Commands, but were more confirmed in the
fitness of them; only we have thought requisite to alter some things in the
Proclamation, which you shall receive by the next Dispatch, at furthest within
a day or two of this: so that you are not to (indeed I think you cannot)
publish any, until the New one come to you, (for I believe it will be at the
Holy-Island before you:) the Alterations of which you will only find to be,
that I do not say all I think; but in no ways slack my Resolution, much less
seem to yield to any new thing. So referring you to Henry Vane for the relating
of our Proceedings here, I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
York, 18 Apr. 1639. at ten a clock at night.

About the end of the Month he set Sail, but the Winds were contrary, and so it
was the 29th of the Month e're he got to Holy-Island; where he met the
following Letters from His Majesty.

Hamilton,
ACcording to my Promise on Thursday last, I send you herewith the Proclamation
altered as I then wrote; and that you may not think that these Alterations are
grounded upon new Counsels, I shall desire you to observe, that I do not so
much as seem to add the least thing to my former Promises. It is true, that I
neither mention the late pretended General Assembly at Glasgow, n^r the
Covenant, at this time: my reason is, that if for the present I could get Civil
Obedience, and my Forts restored, I might then talk of the other things upon
better terms. As for excepting some out of the General Pardon, almost every one
now thinks that it would be a means to unite them the faster together; whereas
there is no fear, but that those who are fit to be excepted, will do it
themselves by not accepting of Pard^n, of which number I pray God there be not
too many: So that you are now to go on according to your former Directions,
only proclaiming this instead of my former signed Proclamation; and so to
proceed with Fire and Sword against all those that shall disobey the same. So
praying to God to prosper you in all things, I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
York, 10 Apr. 1639. at 4 in the Afternoon.

Hamilton,
BEfore that this come to your hands you will have received two of mine of an
el^er Date, to which I can add so little, that if I had not received yours of
the 18th, I would not have written at this time. You have done well in laying
all the Doubts before me, and showing all your Defects, (for which I am
heartily sorry) by which I see there is not so much to be expected as otherwise
there might: yet I continue my former Resolution, being glad that your own
inclination leads you thereto; recommending Tantallon to your thoughts, for the
which I have agreed with the true Owner. Think not of the North until I have
done some good in the South. I shall haste to Berwick as soon as possibly I
may; but I fear it will not be before the 12th of May, and I hope the 15th will
be the latest. So hoping to have a merry meeting with you in Scotland, I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
York, 23 Apr. 1639.

With these he got also the following Note in answer to his last Letter from
Yarmouth-Road.

Hamilton,
HAving opened your Packet to Master Treasurer, I could not but tell you, that
I could not but pity your cross Winds, and commend your Diligence: and so I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
York, 25 Apr. 1639.

Having received these Orders he held on his Course, and on the first of May he
entered the Frith, and found the fittest place to cast Anchor in was Leith-Road.
The Covenanters had committed a great escape, in not building a Fort on
Inchkeith; which might have occasioned much trouble to him, besides that it
would have kept that Place from him, which proved of great use to his weary
Soldiers. As soon as he came thither, Fires were presently set up on all the
Hills to gather the Country for the defense of the Coast, which they expected
he should have set on immediately. But he was first to get the Proclamation
published, wherefore that same night he sent one ashore with a Letter to the
Clerk of the Council, commanding him to come aboard. He wrote also to the
Magistrates of Edinburgh to send him to him. The Bearer of these Letters was
used civilly, but kept as a Prisoner; and the Town-Council of Edinburgh excused
themselves from sending the Clerk of the Council to him. The Clerk also wrote
to him, that he was kept by Force from coming to wait upon him. Next day he
landed his Regiments on Inchkeith and Inchcolm, (two little Islands in the
Frith;) one of them upon the former, and two on the latter, both for giving
them air, and exercising them. He caused also search and cleanse the Wells of
these Places, which gave great relief: but at this time the Small Pox got among
his Men, whereupon he put all the Infected in Ships by themselves; some few
died. Yet for all the stories were made of his Men's dying below Decks, very few
died during his whole stay at Sea; and he divided his care so equally among
them, and was so obliging to them all, that they not only were far from
mutinying, but all of them became most cordial to him: and the Colonels did
highly magnify both his Conduct, and his obliging Civilities to them, in their
Letters to Sir Henry Vane.

He sends the Kings Proclamation to Edinburgh.
Three days after his former Message he sent one ashore with His Majesty's
Proclamation, (enclosed in a Letter to the Magistrates of Edinburgh) commanding
them to publish it next day in due form, under all pains; and sent another
Proclamation to the Clerk of the Council, commanding him to see it published;
or if that were not done, to cause affix it at the Cross. And next day at the
hour wherein it ought to have been published, he caused loose some Piece of
Ordnance: but the Magistrates of Edinburgh desired a delay of three days; to
which he yielded because he was willing it might fall out so, that as soon as
the eight days prefixed in the Proclamation were expired, His Majesty might be
on the Borders, that so they might be ready to enter into Hostilities
immediately. Upon which he wrote to His Majesty what he had learned of the
Strength and Resolutions of the Covenanters, suggesting how necessary he
believed it was to listen to a Treaty, if the Covenanters desired it.

On the 9th of May he received the following Letter, signed by about 40 of the
chief Lords and Gentlemen of the Covenant, the Original whereof is yet extant.

Please your Grace,
AS we were here met to attend the Parliament indicted by His Majesty, there
was showed to us by the Provost of Edinburgh a Letter from your Grace to
himself, and the Bailiffs, and Council of this City, with the Copy of theirs
returned to your Grace, deferring the more full Answer till our Meeting. And
withal there was presented from your Grace His Majesty's Proclamation, which
having perused, we find it does contain diverse points not only contrary to our
National Oath to God, but also to the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom: for it
carries a denunciation of the high crime of Treason against all such as do not
accept the Offer therein contained; albeit it be only a Writing put in Print
without the Kingdom, and not warranted by Act and Authority of the Council,
lawfully convened within this Kingdom. And your Grace in your Wisdom may
consider, whether it can stand with the Laws, Liberties, and Customs of this
Kingdom, that a Proclamation of so great and dangerous Consequence, wanting the
necessary Solemnities, should be published at the Mercat Cross of this City.
Whereas your Grace knows well, that by the Laws of this Kingdom, Treason and
Forfeiture of the Lands, Life, and Estate of the meanest Subject within the
same, cannot be declared but either in Parliament, or in a Supreme
Iustice-Court, after Citation and lawful Probation, how much less of the whole
Pe^rs and Body of the Kingdom, without either Court, Proof, or Trial. And
al^eit we do heartily and humbly acknowledge and profess all dutiful and ci^il
Obedience to His Majesty as our Dread and Gracious Sovereign: yet since this
Proclamation does import in effect the renouncing of our Covenant made with
God, and of the necessary means of our lawful Defense, we cannot give Obedience
thereto, without bringing a Curse upon this Kirk and Kingdom, and Ruin upon
our selves and our Posterity; whereby we are persuaded, that it did never
proceed from His Majesty, but that it is a deep Plot contrived by the Policy of
the Devilish Malice of the known and cursed Enemies of this Church and State;
by which they have intended so to disjoyn us from His Majesty, and among our
selves, as the Rupture, Rent, and Confusion of both, might be irreparable,
wherein we hope the Lord (in whom we trust) shall disappoint them. And seeing
we have left no means possible unessayed, since His Majesty's coming to York,
(as before) whereby His Majesty's Ear might be made patent to our just
Informati^ns, but have used the help (to our last Remonstrance) of the Lord
Gray, the Iustice-Clerk, the Treasurer, and the Lord Daliell, as the Bearer can
inform your Grace, and yet have never had the happiness to attain any hopes of
our end, but have altogether been frustrate and disappointed thereof; and now
understanding by the sight of your Graces Letter, that your Grace as His
Majesty's High Commissioner is returned with full Power and Authority to
accommodate Affairs in a peaceable way, we will not cease to have recourse to
your Grace, as one who has chief Interest in this Kirk and Kingdom, desiring
your Grace to consider, (as in our Judgments we are persuaded) that there is no
way so ready and assured, to settle and compose all Affairs, as by holding of
the Parliament according to His Majesty's Indiction, either by His Sacred
Majesty in Person, which is our chiefest desire, or by your Grace as His
Majesty's Commissioner, at the time appointed, wherein your Grace shall find
our Carriage most Humble, Loyal, and Dutiful to our Sovereign, or to your Grace
as representing His Majesty's Person: and in the mean time that your Grace
would open a safe way, whereby our Supplications and Informations may have
access to His Majesty's Ears. And we are fully persuaded, that we shall be able
to clear the Lawfulness and Integrity of Our Intentions and Proceedings to His
Majesty, and make it evident to His Majesty, and to the World, that our Enemies
are Traitors to the King, to the Church and State; and that we are and ever
have been His Majesty's Loyal and Obedient Subjects. So we rest

Your Graces humble Servants, A. Lesley Argyle Mar Rothes Eglinton Cassils
Wigtown Dalhousie Lothian Angus Elcho Lindesay Balmerino Montgomery Forrester
Erskins Boyd Napier Burghly Kirkudbright

Edinburgh, 9 May, 1639. And about 30 Commissioners for Shires and Buroughs.




To this Letter the Marquis wrote the following Answer next day, directing it
to the Earl of Rothes.

My Lord,
I Received a Letter yesterday morning signed by your Lordship, and diver^
Noblemen, and others, wherein you allege you are come to attend the
Parliament; but considering your Preparation and Equipage, it appears rather to
fight a Battle, than to hold a Civil Convocation for the good of the Church and
Commonwealth. You may perceive by His Majesty's Gracious Proclamation, that he
intended in His Own Sacred Person to be present at the Parliament, so soon as
with Honor and Safety he might do it, and for that end expressed therein what
was fit to be done. But these Courses which you take, and your Disobedience to
his Just Commands, daily more and more showed, will necessitate him to have
them put in execution another way.

It is true, that His Majesty sent me hither to accommodate these Affairs in a
peaceable manner, if it were possible, which I have labored to do; and
accordingly my Deportment has been, which has been met with that Retribution,
as if I had met with the greatest Enemy: but your refusing to publish His
Majesty's Grace to his People, signified in his Proclamation, has taken away
that Power which otherwise I had; that being a Liberty taken to your selves,
which never any Loyal Subjects assumed in any Monarchy. You allege many
Reasons for your selves, of the Illegality of that Proclamation; but you cannot
be ignorant, that your Carriage has forced many of these principal
Councillors for safeguard of their Lives to forsake the Kingdom, out of which
they remain yet for the same cause. You have suppressed the Printing of all
Writings, but what is warranted by Mr. Alexander Henderson, and one Mr.
Archibald Johnstown: neither was the Clerk of the Council, whom I sent for
twice to give him Directions concerning this Business, permitted to come aboard
to me, upon Conference with whom (for any thing you know) I might have resolved
to come ashore my self, and convened a Council for the Publication thereof in
the ordinary way. But your extraordinary Proceedings in all things must needs
force from His Majesty some things, which perhaps you may think not ordinary.
Whereas you desire me to be a means that your Supplications may have free
access to His Majesty's Ears, it is a work of no difficulty; for His Majesty
has never stopped his Ears to the Supplications of any of his Subjects, when
they have been presented to him in that humble and fitting way which became
dutiful Subjects: nor did I ever refuse any all the time I was among you, or
conceal any part of them from His Majesty. So that your Allegation of not being
heard, is grounded upon the same false Foundations that your other Actions are;
and serves only for a means to delude the simple People, that by making them
believe what you have a mind to possess them with, they may become backers of
your unwarranted Actions; which as it is generally lamented by all His
Majesty's good Subjects, so it is more particularly by me, who have had the
Honor to be employed in this Business with so bad Success.

My Lord, Your humble Servant, HAMILTON.


After this on the 11th of May a Letter came from the Council and Session,
desiring liberty to send some of their number to wait on him, Some come aboard
and treat with him.
which being granted, Southesk and Innerpesser came to him with a very bare
Message, asking what he had to propose: he said it was contained in the
Proclamation, to which he could neither add nor change. They represented to
him the Rage in which all People were, and how hard a Work it would prove,
either to reclaim them by Reason, or conquer them by Force, unless way were
given for some time to their Follies.

On the 13th day he received a Letter from His Majesty, which follows.

Hamilton,
THe length of Henry Vane's Dispatch will shorten this, not being willing to
trouble my self with writing, nor you with reading, of Repetitions. This I must
observe to you, that whatsoever either he or I writes at this time is no
absolute Command, but merely Advices to help your Knowledge, that you may the
easier judge what is best for my Service. Upon this ground I send you here a
Discourse of Mr. Thomas Hamilton's, wherein many things to my seeming are very
well said, but how far practicable, or when, I leave you to judge; as likewise
upon the whole matter I give you my Opinion, that if you find it not fit to
land all your 5000 men upon Lothian-side, then it may be counsellable to send
most of your Land-men to the North, to strengthen my Party there. As for your
landing in the South, I shall only name two Places besides Tentallon, to wit,
Sterlin, (if that be not too far off to be relieved) and Dumbar: as for
Tentallon, I shall command the Marquis of Douglass to send one to agree that
business with you. So longing to hear from you, and wishing you good luck, I
rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newcastle, May 8. 1639.

To this shall be added the Paper mentioned in the Kings Letter.

A Paper of the Ferries in Scotland.
THE River of Nesse is large and deep, falls out of a Lake named Nesse 24
miles long, and 5 or 6 in breadth, into a great Bay of the Sea. On this River
stands the Town of Innernesse, which has a strong Castle, in the keeping of
the Marquis of Huntley, as yet not taken: if in this Town and Castle were put a
competent Garrison, with a Ship and Pinnace in the Bay, you might break the
Ferry-boats, and stop all Passages from Northward of that River.

The River of Tay falls out of a Lake ten miles long, and one and an half
broad, from whence the River has the name, which is the main and only Passage
between the North and the South parts of the Kingdom. This River falls into
the East Sea below Dundie, the biggest Town almost in Scotland. At the entry to
the Sea it is two miles broad, and continues the same breadth upward till
within three or four miles of Saint Johnstown, between which Town and Dundie
there are 16 miles and above, at no part whereof there is any Passage but by
Ferry-boats. If a few Ships would ride at the mouth of this River below Dundie,
and send up some small Pinnaces, they might break all the Ferry-boats, and stop
all the Passages that could be made over at any part, between the North of the
River and the said Town of Saint Johnstown, above which to the said Lake the
River is not ridable, but at some few Fords; the Passages whereof might be kept
by the Noblemen who stand well-affected to His Majesty's Service, and whose
Estates do lie thereabouts in Strathern: such as the Earls of Airly, Perth,
Tullibardin, and Kinnowl, who if they were sent home with a competent number of
Soldiers to attend them, all those of their Name, their Friends and Tenants
gathered unto them, might stop all Land-passages whatsoever from North to South.

And in case the People of Fife, who dare not now cross Forth-river in regard
of your Majesty's Ships, should march with Supply by Sterlin-bridge to Lothian,
these Noblemen with their Forces might be in some narrow Passage in their way;
and if they could not force them to retire, yet they might fall upon their
Country in their absence, so that they could not both be able to defend their
Seacoasts, and secure them from danger on their backs: neither durst they all
turn back on Strathern, for fear that those of the Fleet should land on their
shores in their absence.

The Shire of Perth would be a Rendezvous and safe retreat to all those of
Fife, Angus, Strathern, and Highlands, who upon this Proclamation shall abandon
the Covenanters Party, and stand for His Majesty's Service.

These four Noblemen, with the number Your Majesty will send with them, might
be sent almost to their Dwellings by Sea on the said River.

If the Town of Sterlin were seized, these River-passages made sure, and the
Town of Aberdeen secured, in regard of Your Majesty's Forces in the North, no
harm could be expected from benorth Leith.

The 13th of May the Marquis received the following Letter, signed, but not
written, by the Earl of Rothes.

Please your Grace,
I Should have been far better contented to have seen you here at the
Parliament with His Majesty, The Earl of Rothes his Letter to the Marquis.
or holding that indicted as His Majesty's Commissioner, than with a Navy and
Army to constrain us beyond these just limits of Religion and lawful Obedience,
which we were always willing to perform. It was far by my Expectation, and your
Graces Oath and Promise, that you should ever come in any chiefCommand against
your Native Country. Whereas your Grace does challenge our coming in such
numbers to attend this Parliament, I hope you conceive that this Navy and Army
upon the Borders, and the Invasion threatened in the West, do sufficiently
warrant our Preparations to defend these places, and divert such dangers. That
Proclamation that is said to carry so much Grace and Goodness, is as destitute
of that, as your Invasion is of a good Warrant; which persuades me, that
neither of the two proceeds from His Majesty's own Gracious Disposition. I
cannot stand here to answer all these misconceived particulars, contained in
your Graces Letter; but if I had the Honor to see your Grace, before any more
mischief be done, I dare engage my Honor and my Life to clear all these
Imputations laid on our Proceedings; and I can demonstrate how hardly we have
been used without any just reason. I dare not be answerable to God Almighty,
and to that Duty I owe my Prince and Country, if I do not show your Grace, that
your going a little further in this violent and unjust way will put all from
the hopes of Recovery, for which both a great deal of Blame from Men, and
Judgment from above shall attend you, as the special Instrument, which I wish
you labor to evite. If our Destruction be intended, we are confident in that
Majesty who owns this Cause, and is able to defend it: and if only Terrors to
fright, and prepare us to accept of any Conditions will be offered, that
Intention is already as far disappointed as any of these many former. But as we
are ready to defend, so ever to insist in supplicating, and using all humble
and lawful means, as becomes us. Mr. Borthwick will deliver to your Grace our
Supplication to His Majesty, and both his and my mind, till I shall have the
occasion to disburden my self surcharged with grief at your Proceedings; being
most desirous (as I have been formerly) to have all these occasions removed
that may divert me from being still

Your Graces humble Servant, ROTHES.


On the 17th of May the Marquis returned the following Answer to the former
Letter.

My Lord,
The Marquis his Answer.
I Have received your Lordships Letter signed by you, but I cannot conceive it
of your Lordships enditing; for I believe you would not have sent such an one
to me, if you had not had some malignant spirits busied in the framing of it;
for you cannot but remember that my words were never other, than that I would
die at my Masters feet, and that I would prove an Enemy to the uttermost of my
Power to this Kingdom, if my Countrymen continued in their Obstinacy: and here
I set it under my Hand, that I will (by Gods Grace) make it good. It is true,
knowing my own inability, I neither desired, nor indeed willingly did accept,
the Conduct of an Army against this Nation; but my backwardness proceeded not
out of a desire not to be employed against such in this Country as were
disobedient, but that His Majesty might have found many more able to have
served him: but since he has been pleased to trust me, I will not deceive him.

You pass by many particulars in your Answer to my Letter untouched, saying,
you cannot stand here to answer them. It is most true, they are not to be
answered, and so I take it. As for your own Justification, it is the same which
you ^ave ever used, and so continue: but the best is, none that ever were truly
informed of your Proceedings, does or can give any approbation of them.

You say, If I go any further in a violent course, it will be past all hope of
Remedy. If I do, none can blame my Master, for that can never be called
Violence which is only to suppress Rebellion: and if I proceed to execute his
Commands therein, you are the causers of it. As Mr. Borthwick told me, I
expected to have heard further from you before now: but nothing coming, I would
forbear no longer to give you this Answer under my Hand, that both you and all
the World may take notice what my Inclinations are, which notwithstanding I do
infinitely desire they may be stopped by your speedy and real Submission to His
Majesty's just Commands. And this is the prayer of him who wishes it may be
still lawful for him to call himself

Your Lordships humble Servant, HAMILTON.
From aboard the Rainbow, 27 May, 1639.

The Kings Proclamation not suffered to be published.
Upon this the Marquis was hopeless of getting the Proclamation published:
wherefore he sent a great many Copies of it to all places, as he had occasion,
to be dispersed over the Country. At the same time the King sent Sir James
Carmichael the Treasurer-depute to Edinburgh, to get it published; and he
meeting the Lyon-Herald require him to go do his Duty; but he was timorous,
and being threatened with his Life, as he was going to the Cross, run away
without putting on his Coat.

The Marquis proposes a Treaty to the King.
On the 14th of May the Marquis dispatched Sir James Hamilton to the King, with
an account of all he had learned; desiring positive Orders how to proceed:
whether eight days being now passed since he had offered the Proclamation, he
might not proceed to Hostilities; or if he should continue talking in the
language of a Treaty: and sent the following Paper to Sir Henry Vane, of the
Heads on which he thought a Treaty might be set on foot.

IF they can be brought to lay down their Arms, and every man to repair in
quiet manner unto their own Dwellings, except such who are to attend the

If they can be brought to deliver up Your Majesty's Castles, and other private

If they can be brought to express their Sorrow, that they have offended Your

If they can be brought to supplicate, that what they have to say against
Bishops

The like for the last pretended General Assembly.

If they in all Civil things will acknowledge Your Majesty's Authority, and

If they will desist from their going on in their Fortifications, and they
only

Hamilton.
I shall desire that none may see this but His Majesty, or at least that it be
not known that it came from me.




In Answer to this His Majesty wrote him the following Letter.

Hamilton,
I Have kept this honest Bearer the longer, that I may with the more assurance
give you my Directions what to do, consisting of two points, Fighting and
Treating: for the first, we are still of the same Opinion; that it is not fit
that you should give on until I be on the Borders, which will be (by the Grace
of God) by this day eight days, except you find that before that time they
march down to meet me with a great Strength. In that case you are to fall on
them immediately, and in my Opinion as far up in the Frith as you think
probably may do good, thereby to make a Diversion. In the mean time I like
well, that you go on upon that ground of Treaty you sent a Note of t^ Master
Treasurer, (which you will find I have underwritten) no body else being
acquainted with it. Thus having given you my Directions both concerning
Fighting and Treating, I leave the rest to the faithful Relation of the honest
Bearer, and rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newcastle, 17 May, 1639.

And with this Letter His Majesty sent back the Note of the Grounds of Treaty,
which was sent to Sir Henry Vane, with the following words written at the end
of it with his own Hand.

of which His Majesty approves.
I like well that you go on upon those Grounds of Treaty until I come to the
Borders: which will be (by the Grace of God) by the 15th of this Month.

C. R.
Newcastle, 16 May, 1639.

After this the Marquis was assaulted with thundering Letters from all Hands,
both from Ministers and Noblemen. Many of these Letters, with the Copies of his
Answers, are yet extant, and run in a strain very far from any thing of
Friendship or Correspondence; indeed they look liker Challenges than Letters of
Civility. The Covenanters desired a Safe Conduct for such as they should send
to him to treat with him: but he answered, he was the Kings Commissioner, and
so would give no Conduct for any of his Subjects coming to wait upon him. And
after a days Advisement, they sent the Lord Lindsay (the Marquis his
Brother-in-law) aboard with a Petition of the former strain, who told the
Marquis, that they would lay down their Lives sooner than pass from what they
had done; that their Army consisted of 25000 Men: they knew the Kings Cavalry
was better than theirs, but their Infantry exceeded his far. After some
Discourse had passed, (all before Witnesses) the Marquis dismissed him. In the
mean while all Trade was stopped, and every Vessel that belonged to Scotland was
seized: only such as took an Oath for adhering to the King against the present
Rebellion in Scotland, were let go, according to His Majesty's Orders. One
Vessel was taken which was of more Importance, having in her about twenty
Officers, who were coming home from Germany upon Lesley's Invitation. All these
the Marquis sent to Berwick. He sent also a free Advice to the King, informing
him of all he knew of their Strength: and that besides the Army, which was
marching to the Borders, there were about 20000 Men lying on both sides of the
Frith, so that his being there made a powerful Diversion. He besought His
Majesty not to hazard on a Battle, the success whereof was always dubious, but
more than commonly so in this case, where the one side was desperate, and the
other but half cordial. He told His Majesty, how much he feared his Foot might
be too weak, wherefore he desired His Majesty to consider, if he would call for
two of His Regiments; since all the three were not sufficient for him to land
with them, and march into the Country, and one was enough to burn the Coast,
which was all he could do: and for that he was resolved not to fail in it as
soon as he had Orders; adding, that in a Fortnight he would do all that could
be done that way: after which he thought it would be fittest, that he went
Northward, and landed His Regiments there, (which must be supplied another way,
if His Majesty called for any of them) where some good might be done. But as
for Treating, he desired His Majesty would employ others in it, if that were to
be done; for he confessed his Spirit was so irritated against them, that he
desired neither to see nor meddle with them: only he told His Majesty, that
the Covenanters had addressed both their Letters and Petitions to some English
Lords, which he thought they should have brought to His Majesty unopened, and
given no other Answers but such as His Majesty ordered.

On the 26th of May he received the following Letter from His Majesty.

Hamilton,
RVmours come here so thick, of the great Forces that the Rebels mean very
shortly to bring down upon me, that I thought it necessary to advertise you,
that you may be ready at the first Advertisement to land at the Holy-Island,
wind and weather serving; yet not to come from where you are until I send you
word, except you shall find it necessary by your own intelligence: and so I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newcastle, 22 May, 1639. POSTSCRIPT.
I leave it to your Consideration, if it be not fit to leave some 300 Men in
Inchcolm, though it should be fit that you should come away with the rest of
the Landmen.




And the day following Sir Henry Vane wrote to him to send two of his Regiments
to Holy-Island, The King calls for two Regiments from the Marquis.
to which Letter the King added with his own Pen, I have seen and approved
this; C. R.

Upon this Order the two Regiments, commanded by Morton and Harecoat, were
accordingly dispatched away immediately, and did land at Berwick on the 29th of
May. About this time the Covenanters sent a new Message to the Marquis, the
account whereof shall be given from a Paper written by Sir Henry Devick, who
was particularly trusted by His Majesty at this time, and was a Witness to the
Conference. The Paper follows.

THE whole Discourse (so far as I can remember of it) may be reduced to these
Heads. A Conference betwixt some Covenanters and the Marquis.


Their Invitation of your Excellence to go in person to His Majesty, to present
their Desires, and to mediate for an Accommodation.

To this your Excellence answered.

First, that having full Power from His Majesty to treat and conclude of all
things concerning that Business, you held it unnecessary to go to him.

Secondly, your Excellence thought it unfit, you having so great a Charge here,
which required your presence, and they having propounded nothing that could
give sufficient occasion to such a Voyage to undertake it.

Thirdly, that if the distance from His Majesty were thought by them to be a
hindrance to the Treaty, they might address themselves to His Majesty by such
of the Nobility as were about him, who was not distant above threescore and
twelve miles from the Leaguer.

They replied, that things would be more facilitated by your Excellence's being
there, wishing, that as you had a part in the beginning of these Affairs, you
might have the Honor to put an end to them.

Your Excellence returned, that the Lords Traquair and Roxburgh, who were now
with His Majesty, were employed in them before you; which they acknowledged,
but wished it had never been, confessing that they were spoiled before you had
the managing of them.

Concerning a Cessation of Acts of Hostility, both by Sea and upon the
Frontiers, where they complained of diverse Insolences committed by the
Horse-troops of His Majesty; your Excellence answered, That in what concerned
the first, you ^ad committed none since your coming hither: true it was, you
had stayed and taken many Barques and Boats, but some of them you had dismissed
without touching any thing that they had in them; and these from whom you did
take to supply your uses, you had paid them for it: that this day you had sent
to Burnt-Island, and would do so to other Places, to offer them full
permission of Trade, provided they would swear not to carry Arms against His
Majesty, and take the Oath of Fidelity; and for the Fishermen you required no
Oath.

As for the other, namely some pretended Insolences upon the Frontiers, you
kn^w of none, and believed not any; and if t^ere was any it was their fault, by
their deferring to return to their Obedience to His Majesty: and when they made
Instance in some particulars, your Excellence did cut them short, and said,
That it was an unfit thing, and nothing conducible to make an end of Business,
for them to stand upon those Punctilio's with their Sovereign; and for your
particular, you would never be an Instrument of any dishonorable Act to His
Majesty, such as would be the engaging him not to correct the Misdemeanors of
his Subjects: that you had made a like Answer when you was demanded for
Pass-ports to those that should come to you; which you had rejected* as judging
it dishonorable for His Majesty to grant, or any of his Subjects to ask or
capitulate with His Majesty for.

They pressed to know what His Majesty required of them, and what would be the
extent of his condescending to their Desires in point of Conscience, namely
touching Bishops, and the Acts of the last General Assembly; wherein they said
if they might have satisfaction, they would cast at His Majesty's feet their
Bodies and Fortunes, to be disposed of at his Pleasure.

In answer to this your Excellence caused me read His Majesty's Proclamation,
wherein desiring to be cleared of His Majesty's Intentions, in the particular
of the Civil Obedience, your Excellence said, it was the retiring with their
Troops, laying down t^eir Arms, and the Nobilities waiting on him with their
Swords only upon the Frontier, the restoring of His Majesty's Castles unto
such as His Majesty should appoint, and the demolishing of their own
Fortifica^ions unlawfully erected, and the like.

As for the enjoying of Liberty of Religion, wherein likewise they did press to
know how far His Majesty would condescend to their humble Supplications, as
likewise in the point of the Acts of the last pretended General Assembly, your
Excellence answered, It would be so far as the Laws of the Kingdom did permit.

They asked who should judge of these Laws, and of their intention, and if it
might be decided by a General Assembly: Your Excellence answered, Yes, and that
either His Majesty would call one, or your self, as His Majesty's High
Commissioner.

They desired to know if His Majesty would stand to the Award of such an
Assembly, especially in what concerned the Acts of the later.

Your Excellence answered, His Majesty was not bound to it, as having his
Negative Voice; which they not acknowledging, your Excellence added, that
notwithstanding you were confident, that whatsoever should be agreed on by such
an Assembly, called by His Majesty's Command, and where the Members should be
legally chosen, His Majesty would not only consent unto them, but have them
ratified in Parliament.

They desired your Excellence would limit them a time wherein to return, and
treat further with you, with full power to conclude all things wherein they
desired not to be pressed with scantness of time, in regard of the Nobilities
being dispersed in several places of the Country.

Your Excellence answered, it should be when themselves would, were it tomorrow
or a month hence; for you assured them, they would find you so long in these
quarters.

Lastly, they desired to know, what they might report of what your Excellence
had assured them of His Majesty's Intentions concerning Religion and the
General Assembly.

Your Excellence answered, that as they brought no Commission to treat of all
these particulars, but kept themselves within the limits of the Contents in
their Letters, you would do accordingly in your Answer, and that in writing
they should receive something to morrow.

This was that Conference which some were pleased to misrepresent under the
odious Characters of Treacherous and Secret Dealing with the Covenanters.

At this time there were diverse Scottish Lords and Officers waiting on the King,
but being of no use and burdensome to His Majesty, Some Lords come from the King
to the Marquis.
he sent them to the Marquis, with whom he wrote the following Letter.

Hamilton,
I Cannot let these Lords go without a Letter, it being more to please them
than to inform you; there having nothing happened since my last of the 17th
that makes me either alter or take new Counsels: so that this is only to
recommend them to your care, in so far as may comply with my Service; which
shows you both my good Opinion of them, as likewise that I am

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newcastle, 21 May, 1639.

But the Marquis was very ill-satisfied with their coming to him, since they
were able to do nothing but help away with his Victuals, which were beginning
to run low, and therefore were to be well-husbanded; wherefore he persuaded
them that it was fit for them to go to the Places of their Interest, and do
what in them lay for getting some to appear for the King: and so he got himself
rid of them the best way he could.

Two days after that the Marquis got the following Letter.

Hamilton,
THe Trust I have both in the Honesty and Sufficiency of this Bearer, shall
ease me much at this time; therefore I shall only mention what he shall speak
of more fully to you. The Lord Aboyne's Proposition I have in my last
recommended to you, though at that time I thought not that himself would have
been the Messenger of it: other Lords I have sent to you, to see if they can
do me better Service there than here, for here I am sure they can do none. I
shall conclude with that with which I have neither acquainted this Bearer, nor
any body else, to wit, your Proposition of packing up this Business. It is
true, that according to my Proclamation I would rest quiet for this time, upon
their yielding me Civil Obedience; but that must be understood by demanding
Pardon for their bypast Disobedience, and rendering up what they unjustly
possess of mine and others. Less than this I will not be contented with, no,
not for the present. For all this, I do not take my self to be in such a case
as to conquer them, yet I doubt not but (by the Grace of God) to force them to
Obedience (in time,) what by stopping of their Trade, and other courses:
therefore go on, for this is the Resolution of

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.


After them the Viscount of Aboyne.
But on the 29th of May the Lord Aboyne came to him with the following Letter
from the King.

Hamilton,
HAving been some days since I wrote to you, I could not let my Lord Aboyne go
without these Lines, though it be rather to confirm than to add to my two
former: only I shall desire you to take heed how you engage me in
Money-expence. As for what Assistance you can spare him out of the Forces that
are with y^u, I leave you to judge, and I shall be glad of it if you find it
may do good. The truth is, that I find my state of Moneys to be such, An. 1638.
that I shall be able (by the Grace of God) to maintain all the Men I have
afoot for this Summer; but for doing any more I dare not promise: therefore if
with the Countenance and Assistance of what Force you have, you may uphold my
Party in the North, and the rest of those Noblemen I have sent to you, I shall
esteem it a very great Service; but I shall not advise you to engage me in
further Charge, except it may be the Pay of some few Officers. So not doubting
but that you will make as much of little as you may, and recommending this Lord
to your care, I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newcastle, 13 May, 1639.

The Marquis found Aboyn had no Propositions to make besides General Stories,
and he saw him to be of an unstay'd Humor, so that he was hopeless of any good
account of his business. As for Money, he was limited by the King; and for Men,
he had sent away the two Regiments that same day; and since he expected Orders
every Hour from His Majesty for somewhat to be executed by the third Regiment,
he could not weaken it too much: yet he sent a few Officers, the chief of whom
was Colonel Gun, together with some Ammunition, and four small Piece of
Artillery. And of all this he gave an account to His Majesty, adding, that
perhaps some might misrepresent his lying so long idle; but His Majesty knew
what Orders himself had given, it being his part to obey: yet he earnestly
craved liberty to do somewhat worth the while; to which he received the
following Answer.

Hamilton,
HAving much Business, I refer you to Master Treasurer; yet thi^ I think
necessary to pass under my own Hand, (because of a Clause in yours of the 26th
of this Month) that I am so far from having the least hint in my Heart against
you, that I would think my self a happy Man, if I could be as confident in the
Faith, Courage, and Industry of the rest of my Commanders and Officers, as I am
of you; which makes me really to be

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Berwick, May 29th 1639.

By this time the King had encamped at the Birks, three miles from Berwick,
where His Majesty lay in the Camp himself.

All this while Traquair was not allowed to see the King, till he had done some
Service which might expiate his former Errors. And My Lord Roxburgh was in the
same case; Some on the Borders are gained for the King.
for he coming to wait on the King at York, to clear himself of his Sons fault
in turning in to the Covenant, His Majesty was so Gracious as to tell him, he
believed him innocent, yet for examples sake he found it necessary to keep him
under some mark of his Displeasure. So after a few days Confinement, both
Traquair and he were suffered to go near the Borders, to see whom they could
engage to the Kings Service; and they gained the Earl of Hume to be satisfied
with His Majesty's Proclamation, and had got good assurances both of the Lord
Iohnstown, the Earl of Queensberry, and of Buckcleugh his Friends. The
Proclamation was published, first at Heymouth; next, by General Arundel and
Ruthwen at Dunce: upon which Lesley brought forward his Forces* and lay at
Duncelaw, in view of the Kings Army. On the fourth of June at noon the Marquis
received the following Letter from His Majesty.

Hamilton,
The King orders the Marquis to enter on Hostilities.
THis day I received yours by the Lord Seaton, and find your Opinion therein
very good, if I might spare so many men; but every one, (that I dare consult
with about this) protests against the diminishing of one man from my Army:
besides, I have no mind to stay here upon a mere Defensive, which I must do, if
I send you that Strength you mention. Likewise I think that I have my Lord Hume
sure, and am reasonably confident of my Lord Johnstown; I have good hopes too
of Queensberry, and the Scots; therefore all these things considered, it were a
shame if I should be idle. Wherefore now I set you loose, to do what mischief
you can do upon the Rebels for my Service, with those men you have; for you
cannot have one man from hence. Leaving the rest to the relation of this honest
Bearer, I rest

Your assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Camp near Berwick, 2 June 1639.

The Marquis no sooner got this, but he presently set to work, resolving
neither to spare Burroughstownness which was his own Town, who goes about it.
nor Prestonpans which was his Cousins. But a strange Accident befell him the
next day; for as he went out in a small Vessel with a Drake on her, and 60
Soldiers, to view the Queensferry, and burn the Ships that lay in the Harbor,
he saw a Merchant-barque coming down toward him, and he caused row up to her:
but she perceiving her Danger, run her self aground upon the Sands of
Barnbougle. The Tide falling apace, and he following her indeliberately, run
himself likewise on ground; where he was like to have been very quickly taken
by the men on the Shore, who were playing upon him and some Volleys passed upon
both hands. But they on the Land were waiting till the Waters should fall,
reckoning him their Prey already, which had been inevitable, had not the Seamen
got out, and being almost to the middle in Water, with great tugging set them
afloat; and so he returned safe to the Fleet. And this was all the ground for
that Calumny, of his making Appointments on the Sands of Barnbougle with the
Covenanters.

The next day at eight in the morning, being the sixth of June, he received the
following Letter from Sir Henry Vane.

My Lord,
BY the Dispatch Sir James Hamilton brought your Lordship from His Majesty's
Sacred Pen, and gets new orders from His Majesty.
you were left at your liberty to commit any act of Hostility upon the Rebels,
when your Lordship should find it most opportune: since which my Lord Holland
with 1000 Horse and 3000 Foot marched toward Kelso, himself advanced toward
them with the Horse (leaving the Foot three miles behind) to a Place called
Maxwel-heugh, a height above Kelso: which when the Rebels discovered, they
instantly marched out with 150 Horse, and (as my Lord Holland says) eight or
ten thousand Foot; five or six thousand there might have been. He thereupon
sent a Trumpet commanding them to retreat, according to what they had promised
by the Proclamation. They asked whose Trumpet he was, he said my Lord
Holland's; their answer was, he were best to be gone. And so my Lord Holland
made his Retreat, and waited on His Majesty this night, to give him this
account.

This morning Advertisement is brought His Majesty, that Lesley with 12000 men
is at Cockburn-spath, that 5000 men will be this night, or to morrow, at Dunce,
6000 at Kelso; so His Majesty's opinion is, with many of his Council, to keep
himself upon a Defensive, and make himself here as fast as he can: for His
Majesty does now clearly see, and is fully satisfied in his own Judgment, that
what passed in the Gallery, betwixt His Majesty, your Lordship, and my Self,
has been but too much verified on this occasion. And therefore His Majesty
would not have you to begin with them, but to settle things with you in a safe
and good posture; and your self to come hither in person, to consult what
Counsels are fit to be taken, as the Affairs now hold. And so wishing your
Lordship a speedy passage, I rest

Your Lordships most humble Servant, and faithful Friend, H. VANE.
From the Camp at Huntley-field this 4th of July, 1639.

To this His Majesty added the following Postscript with his own Hand.

HAving no time to write my Self so much, I was forced to use his Pen;
therefore I shall only say, that what is here written I have directed, seen and
approved.

C. R.


How great the Marquis his surprise and trouble was when he received this,
cannot be easily expressed, The Marqu^^ goes to the King*
though it was but what he always looked for: and before the King left
Whitehall, he told him in the Gallery, (none but Sir Henry Vane being present)
that few of the English would engage in an Offensive with Scotland. However he
was too well taught in Obedience, to question or delay it after such positive
Orders: and therefore could neither give a satisfactory answer to the Earl of
Airly, who at that time wrote to him, pres^^ng him to come to the North in all
haste, otherwise the Kings Party there would be presently overrun; nor to my
Lord Aboyne's Letter, who desired fresh Supplies of Men and Moneys, though the
refusing of both these was after that alleged against him. Yet the last being
dated the fourth of June, met him on his way to the King; the other could be no
sooner at him, being of the 26th of May, and in the Postscript excuse is made
that it was of an old Date for want of a sure Bearer: both these are yet
extant. But most of all it appears, how groundless that great and crying
Accusation was, (which as it made up no small part of his Charge to be
mentioned in its proper place, so was it in the mouths of every person) that he
betrayed His Majesty's Service in the Frith, which could not be better cleared,
than by giving this particular Deduction of every step of it.

where he finds a Treaty begun,
About the time that the Marquis arrived at His Majesty's Camp, the Covenanters
sent a Petition by the Earl of Dumfermline to the King* desiring a Safe Conduct
for such of the^r number as they should send to His Majesty's Camp, with their
humble Desires and Offers for a Treaty. This was granted, and their first
Meeting was appointed to be on the ^leventh of June at Arundel's Tent. So they
^ent the Earls of Rothes, Dumfermline, and Lowdon, the Sheriff o^ Tevio^dale,
Mr. Alexander Henderson, and Mr. Archbald Iohnstown, who first proposed their
Desires in general, That Religion and Liberties might be secured, upon which
they should behave themselves as good Subjects: and then the Marquis his
affection to his Country, made him employ his whole Interest with the King, for
procuring a Gracious Answer to them; offering, that if the King found it
suitable to his Honor, and fit for his Service, he should not be displeased,
though His Majesty did disown his former Actions, and let the load of Obloquy
and Censure fall as heavy upon himself as the King pleased. But in this His
Majesty was positive, judging the owning of what he had done the former year,
to be both for his Honor and Interest. However the Marquis did show the King,
that while the fire-edge was upon the Scottish Spirits, it would not prove an
easy task to tame them, but would be a Work of some years, and cos^ much Money
and many Men: he therefore desired the King would consider, if it were not fit
to consent to the abolishing of Episcopacy, and giving way to their Covenant
till better times; and that as the chief Leaders had entered upon that Course,
being provoked by some Irritaons and Neglects they had met with, so it might be
fit to regain them by Cajolery and other Favors. And to persuade the King to
this Course was the easier, that both his Reason and his Affection to his
Subjects did cooperate with it; a great strengthening coming to it by my Lord
Canterbury's Opinion, who saw a Pacification absolutely necessary for the Kings
Service, and did advise it.

So on the thirteenth of June His Majesty returned Answer, That he supposed
Religion and Liberties were abundantly settled by his former Proclamations: but
if any thing was wanting, wherein either Religion or Liberties were concerned,
none should be more zealous for it than himself. The Covenanters insisted, That
the Assembly of Glasgow might be ratified; but His Majesty rejected that,
adding, That he was willing to call a new Assembly, and ratify what should be
legally established by it in the following Parliament. The Commissioners were
willing to yield to this, provided His Majesty did not oblige them to renounce
the Assembly of Glasgow, to which they resolved to adhere. His Majesty said, He
should not press them to that, but that Assembly should not be mentioned on
either hand. They moved next about Lay Elders in the Assembly: The King
referred himself in that to the Laws of the Land. They next moved, That
Episcopacy should be abolished: The King answered, He would not prelimit his
Vote by declaring what it should be in the ensuing Assembly. Finally, after all
things had been debated diverse days, not without some heat, wherein the Earl of
Rothes got new Irritations from some warm expressions of the Kings to him; at
length on the eighteenth of June all was concluded. which is within few days
concluded.
First, His Majesty signed the following Declaration, of which the Original is
extant.

CHARLES R.

WE having considered the Papers and humble Petitions presented to Us, His
Majestie^ Declaration.
by those of Our Subjects of Scotland who were admitted to attend Our Pleasure
in the Camp, and after a full hearing by Our Self, of all that they could say
or allege thereupon, having communicated the same to Our Council of both
Kingdoms, upon mature Deliberation, with their unanimous Advice, have thought
fit to give them this Just and Gracious Answer; That though We cannot
condescend to ratify and approve the Acts of the pretended General Assembly at
Glasgow, for many grave and weighty Considerations which have happened, both
before and since, much importing the Honor and Security of that true
Monarchical Government lineally descended upon Us from so many of Our
Ancestors: yet such is Our Gracious Pleasure, that notwithstanding the many
Disorders committed of late, We are pleased not only to confirm and make good
whatsoever Our Commissioner has granted and promised in Our Name; but also We
are further Graciously pleased to declare and assure, that according to the
Petitioners humble Desires, all matters Ecclesiastical shall be determined by
the Assembly of the Kirk, and matters Civil by the Parliament, and other
inferior Iudicatories established by Law; and Assemblies accordingly shall be
kept once a year, or as shall be agreed upon at the next General Assembly.

And for settling the general Distractions of that Our Ancient Kingdom, Our
Will and Pleasure is, that a Free General Assembly be kept at Edinburgh the
sixth day of August next ensuing, where We intend (God willing) to be
personally present, and for the Legal Indiction whereof, We have given Orders
and Command to Our Council; and thereafter a Parliament to b^ holden at
Edinburgh the twentieth day of August next ensuing, for ratifying of what shall
be concluded in the said Assembly, and settling such other things as may
conduce to the Peace and Good of Our Native Kingdom, and therein an Act of
Oblivion to be passed.

And whereas We are further desired, that Our Ships and Forces by Land be
recalled, and all Persons, Goods and Ships be res^ored, and they made safe from
Invasion, We are Graciously pleased to declare, That upon their disarming and
disbanding of their Forces, dissolving and discharging all their pretended
Tables and Conventicles, and restoring unto Us all Our Castles, Forts, and
Ammunitions of all sorts, as likewise Our Royal Honors; and to every one of
Our good Subjects their Liberties, Lands, Houses, Goods and Means whatsoever,
taken and detained from them, since the late pretended General Assembly, We
will presently thereafter recall Our Fleet and retire Our Landforces, and
cause Restitution to be made to all persons, of their Ships and Goods detained
or arrested since the aforesaid time: whereby it may appear, that Our Intention
in taking up of Arms was no ways for invading Our Own Native Kingdom, or to
innovate the Religion and Laws, but mainly for the maintaining and vindicating
of Our Royal Authority.

And since that hereby it does clearly appear, that We neither have, nor do
intend any Alteration in Religion and Laws, but that both shall be maintained
by Us in their full Integrity, We expect the performance of that humble and
dutiful Obedience, which becomes loyal and dutiful Subjects, and as in their
several Petitions they have often professed.

And as We have Just Reason to believe, that to Our peaceable and well-affected
Subjects this will be satisfactory; so We take God and the World to witness,
that whatsoever Calamities shall ensue by Our necessitated suppressing of the
Insolences of such as shall continue in their Disobedient Courses, is not
occasioned by Us, but by their own procurement.

After this the following Articles were signed.

THe Forces of Scotland to ^e disbanded and dissolved within eight and forty
hours, after the Publication of His Majesty's Declaration being agreed upon.

His Majesty's Castles, Forts, Ammunition of all sorts, and Royal Honors, to
be delivered after the Publication, so soon as His Majesty can send to receive
them.

His Majesty's Ships to depart presently after the delivery of the Castles,
with the first fair Wind, and in the mean time no interruption of Trade or
Fishing.

His Majesty is Graciously pleased to cause to restore all persons Goods and
Ships, detained and arrested since the first of November last.

There shall be no Meetings, Treatings, Consultations, or Convocations of His
Majesty's Lieges, but such as are warrantable by Act of Parliament.

All Fortifications to desist, and no further Work therein, and they to be
remitted to His Majesty's Pleasure.

To restore to every one of His Majesty's Subjects their Liberties, Lands,
Houses, Goods, and Means whatsoever, taken and detained from them by whatsoever
means since the aforesaid time.

Next the Commissioners signed the following Note.

IN obedience to His Majesty's Royal Commands, we shall upon Thursday next the
20th of this June dismiss our Forces, and immediately thereafter deliver His
Majesty's Castles, and shall ever in all things carry our selves like Humble,
Loyal, and Obedient Subjects.

Signed, Rothes Dumfermline Lowden W. Douglas Al. Henderson Arch. Johnstown


The Treaty being thus ended, The Treaty is variously censured.
all parted with great expressions of Joy. But few wise men expected it should
be followed with a lasting Agreement, the Covenanters being peremptory not to
part with a hoof, so that whatever Concessions came not up to all their
Desires, were not like to prove satisfactory. Those who understood not the true
state of the English Army, wondered that the King should have let this
opportunity out of his hands, whereby they judged he was able to have broken
and subdued Scotland. And according to the vulgar Civility of of all Censurers
of Kings Actions, his bad Counselors bore the blame, whereof the far greatest
share fell upon the Marquis. But others who saw beyond those superficial
Observers, acknowledged there was an equal temperature of Wisdom and Goodness
in His Majesty's Concessions, not denying a proportionable share of the praise
to his good Counselors. The Covenanters judged they had escaped well, who got
off so easily; for it would have been impossible for them, to have maintained
the great Bodies they had gathered together any longer, except they had marched
into England, to which they had no mind unless forced by necessity. But some
made another Observation though of less moment, yet not unpleasant, upon Mr.
Henderson's signing the former Paper, That it was strange to see a Churchman
who had acted so vigorously against Bishops for their meddling in Civil
Affairs, made a Commissioner for this Treaty, and sign a Paper so purely Civil;
so strongly does Passion and Interest biass and turn men.

When the Commissioners came back to the Camp, A Paper is given out for the
Conditions of the Agreement, though not agreed to.
they gave an account of their Negotiation; and besides the Articles of Treaty,
they produced another Paper which passed among all for the Conditions of the
Agreement. It was a Note containing some Points which were alleged to have
been agreed to at Berwick verbally, though not set down in the written Treaty:
which was made up of some downright Mistakes, and of other things which the
King in discourse had indeed said, but not positively, nor as a Determination
on which he had concluded. However the Army made a Declaration, that their
accepting of the Kings Papers wherein the Assembly of Glasgow was called the
pretended Assembly, did not infer their accounting it so which they could never
do. Yet all the Forc^s withdrew, most of them laying down Arms, but still
keeping in great Bodies together; and a Proclamation was sent to the North to
Montrose on the one side, and Aboyne on the other, to lay down Arms, (for all
this while there had been a Body of about 2000 that had stood for the King in
Aberdeenshire, who were commanded by my Lord Bamf, against whom my Lord
Montrose was sent:) and these Orders were obeyed by them both; and indeed they
came in good time to Aboyne, otherwise he had been sore put to it.

On the 22th of June the Marquis was ordered to go to the Castle of Edinburgh,
The Marquis receives, and furnishes the Castle of Edinburgh.
and take possession of it in the Kings Name, and relieve the Marquis of
Huntley, and put Ruthwen (now created Lord Estrick) in it; and also to furnish
it with store of Provision and Ammunition out of the Magazine in the Navy:
which being done, the Fleet was to be sent out of the Frith. And accordingly on
the 24th of June he came to Edinburgh, but he met with such Reproaches and
Hootings from the Vulgar, that he was forced (for preventing a Tumult) to
desire some of the Covenanting Lords to wait on him to the Castle; and yet on
the way he was all along cried out upon with most unworthy Names, as Pyrate,
Traitor, Enemy to God and his Country, with other suchlike Invectives. These
he could not but despise, though he was sensible of the Dishonor put upon the
Kings Commissioner by that Usage: yet he might well have expected, that it
should have secured him from the Jealousies and Stories which were spread of
him, as if he had been all that time so popular, that he was looked upon as the
chief Friend of the Good Cause; which was as well grounded as the rest of these
Reports. But having executed the Kings Orders about the Castle of Edinburgh, he
left the Earl of Traquair (whom with the Earl of Roxburgh His Majesty had again
received into his Favor) to see the rest of the Conditions fulfilled.

The Tables continued to sit, The Tables continue to sit,
pretending it was necessary they should do so till all were scattered. It is
true, I have in my hands a Copy of a Warrant for them to sit till the 20th of
July; but whether it was signed, I can neither assert nor deny.

Diverse Disorders fell out in Edinburgh, and Traquair met with many Insolences,
in one of which the White-staff, which was carried by his Servant before his
Coach, was pulled out of his Hand; and Complaint being made of this to the
Town-Council of Edinburgh, all the Reparation they offered, was to bring my
Lord Treasurer another White-staff: so it was said, they rated the Affront put
on the King in the Person of his Treasurer at Six pence.

Other Insolences were also complained of, and the Covenanters partly excused
them, and the Covenanters are insolent.
partly denied what was alleged; but no Reparation was made. These Disorders
obliged His Majesty to change his purpose of coming to Scotland in Person,
resolving to be present only by his Commissioner.

The Marquis returned to His Majesty, and stated all that was to be thought
upon for Scottish Affairs in a Paper presented to His Majesty at Berwick the 5th
of July, yet extant in these words.

To leave all that is past, the Question is briefly; The Marquis his advice to
the King.
WHether the Assembly and Parliament now indicted is fittest to be held or
discharged?

If held, the Success of the Assembly will be the Ratisying of what was done at
Glasgow; or if that point be gained, yet certainly most of the Acts that were
made there will of new enacted: nor is there any hope to prevent their finding
Episcopacy to be abjured by their Covenant, and the Function against the
Constitution of their Church.

This will be by the Members of Parliament ratified, and put to the Kings
Negative Voice; and if it be not condescended to by him, it is more than
probable, that his Power even in that Court, and in that Place, will be
questioned.

If it will be discharged, nevertheless the Assembly be kept by the Rebels,
and the same things done in it by them, and thereafter maintained by the
generality of the Kingdom, this consequently will bring along with it the
certain loss of Civil Authority, and so necessitate the re-establishing the
same by Force, or otherwise the desertion of that Kingdom.

So it is to be resolved on, whether it be fit to give way to the Madness of
the People, or of new to intend a Kingly Way?

If way be given to what is mentioned, it is to be considered in that case, if
the King shall be personally present or not; if not present, who shall be
employed, and how instructed?

If the Kingly Way be taken, what shall be the means to effectuate the intended
end: particularly how Money may be levied for the waging of this War, and if
that be feisible without a Parliament?

If a Parliament, what the Consequence may prove? So all may be summed up in
this; Whether to permit the Abolishing of Episcopacy, the lessening of Kingly
Power in Ecclesiastic Affairs, the Establishing Civil Authority in such manner
as the Iniquity of the Times will suffer, and to expect better; and what will
be the Consequence of this if way be given thereto: or to call a Parliament in
England, and leave the event thereof to hazard and their discretions, and in
the interim Scotland to the Government of the Covenanters?

This Freedom declares how heartily he dealt with the King in all his Counsels.
It is true, he pressed the King earnestly to give way to the abolishing of
Bishops, judging that to be the only mean to bring Scotland again into Order:
but this was out of no other Principle, save his Desire to see the King again
enjoy the Affections, as well as the Obedience, of his Subjects of Scotland;
thinking Episcopal Government not so essential or absolutely necessary, as not
to be parted with for a time in such an Exigency, wherein the Ruin of the King
and Kingdom was was so manifestly threatened.

His Majesty considering that God did not tie him to Impossibilities, The King
intends to send him again Commissioner into Scotland,
resolved, notwithstanding his Conscientious adhering to Episcopacy in England,
to give way for some time to lay aside that Government in Scotland, hoping to
draw more good from it; but intended to employ another for executing it,
knowing that his Countenance and Carriage would betray the Discord was betwixt
his Heart and his Actions, if he went himself: and being well satisfied with
the Marquis his Behavior, desired him to return to Scotland in the same
Character, and finish that Business.

But he made use of all his Forces both of Reason, Friendship, who opposes it
with all his Interest.
and Interest, to divert the King from this, representing the following Reasons
to dissuade him from it, in a Paper presented the 8th of July in these words.

IF Your Majesty give way to the Covenanters Demands, it would be seriously
considered which will be the fittest way to do it; if by Your Majesty's Own
Personal Presence, or by a Commissioner; if Your Self, I shall say in that case
nothing in this Paper; if by a Commissioner, then give me leave humbly to
represent to Your Majesty's Consideration, how unfit it is that I should be
employed.

The Hatred that is generally carried me, and in particular by the chief
Covenanters, will make them (hoping thereby either to ruin me, or at least
make my Service not acceptable) stand more peremptorily on these other Points
of Civil Obedience, which Your Majesty aims at, than they would do to one that
is less hated.







if I be continued, as otherwise would be if any other were employed.

If Your Majesty should at this time continue me Your Commissioner, they would
apprehend that I might resent the many particular Injuries done me, and

They know that I am so well acquainted with their Ways and Proceedings,

There are so many of Your Majesty's Subjects of all sorts, whom I have
persuaded

This Work will make me (I fear) even lose Your Majesty's Favor; for I

Give me leave humbly to represent unto Your Majesty, if it be fit either for
an Honest man or a Gentleman, to be made the Instrument of doing that which he
has so often in public and private condemned in so high a degree, and
withstood to the certain loss of most of my Country, and many of Your Majesty's
Court and Kingdom of England. Nor can I ever hope to live without perpetual
Accusations of such who will find themselves grieved by that which will be
done; for not dissuading Your Majesty from this course, or at least for
accepting that Employment, and proving Your Instrument therein. This I could
enlarge, for much thereof I have already heard; but I have presumed too much:
yet I hope Your Majesty will pardon me, since these Arguments are (as I
conceive) used for Your Service, the Good of which shall be ever preferred by
me, before either Life or Fortune; which I would willingly expose to all
Dangers, rather than You shall be pleased to lay this Employment on me, for
Your Majesty's Affairs would be infinitely prejudiced thereby.

All which I humbly beseech You to take into Your Royal Consideration.

The King chooses Traqu^ir to be Commissioner,
There was too much Justice in these Reasons, and His Majesty was too full of
Affection for him to press it any further; therefore the King made choice of
his Treasurer the Earl of Traquair for the Service, making account that if he
served honestly, it would do well; if otherwise, his Majesty would have good
reason to shake him off. Upon this he was presently called from Scotland. The
King also wrote for 14 of the Lords that were the chief Covenanters, and writes
for many Covenanters.
to come and wait upon him at Berwick, that he might advise with them about the
Affairs in hand. But the true reason (as was believed) was to try what fair
Treatment might do with them. This gave great Jealousies to the Covenanters,
who were not so blind as not to understand what the effect of this might prove.
And indeed some studied to infuse worse Jealousies, as if the Design of calling
for the Lords had been to send them all Prisoners to London. In end they
resolved none should go, save three from each Estate: the three Lords were the
Earls of Montrose, London, and Lowthian; and Lowthian was the person who
pressed them most to send any, for many had no inclinations to send at all.

But before they came to Berwick the King ordered the Marquis by a Warrant in
writing, yet extant under His Majesty's Hand, to try what way he could gain
upon them, and discover the bottom of their Intentions, how the Estate of
Bishops should be supplied in Parliament, and how far they intended to lessen
the Kings Authority. The King also allowed him to use what means he pleased,
and speak to them what he thought fit; not only authorizing, but requiring him
to it, and warranting him if he were ever questioned or accused for it by any.
Bearing date at Berwick the 17th of July, 1639.

The Kings Trust in the Marquis.
It is easy from this to infer, both how entirely His Majesty confided in him,
and how unjust they are who upon any Expressions he might then have used, offer
injury to his Memory: and yet he managed this so cautiously, that very little
escaped him for which he could not have justified himself without this Order.
But so tender was he of His Majesty's Reputation, that when he was afterward
charged for some hard Speeches, alleged to have been uttered at that time, in
all his written Defenses he never made use of this Justification; knowing how
at that time it might have prejudiced His Majesty's Service, if it had been
known that he gave such Warrants to those he employed; reserving to whisper it
in His Majesty's Ear, when he should be admitted to his Presence. And indeed
till this appeared, the Writer of these Memoires was not a little stumbled with
some of his Speeches then uttered, which were hard to be understood: for having
them so near the Fountain, he could scarce doubt his Information: but this
Order reconciles the Truth of these Reports he had heard with the Marquis his
Innocence.

The King gains Montrose.
The King was highly sensible of the Affront put upon him, by hindering all he
had called for to come to wait on him; yet he resolved to bear as far as Humane
Patience could go, and studied to gain upon the Lords that came. The Earl of
Montrose was much wrought upon, and gave His Majesty full Assurances of his
Duty in time coming; and upon that entered in a Correspondence with the King.
The other two were a little mollified, but not gained: only from them the
Marquis learned, that all the Acts of Parliament for Episcopacy were to be
abrogated by the next Parliament; and that they designed to change the course
of bringing in things to the Parliament by the Lords of the Articles, as a
Prelimitation upon the Parliament. Whereupon the next thing to be done was to
draw Traquair's Instructions, which was not done without great and long
Consultation, none being privy to it besides the Marquis and Traquair himself.
That which made the King so tender, was his Zeal for Episcopacy: but Traquair
helped him out of all Difficulties, by telling him, that do the next
Parliament what it would, there were still good grounds to introduce
Episcopacy, when ever the King was able to carry it; for Bishops being (by all
the Laws of Scotland) one of the three Estates of Parliament, no Act that
passed without them could have force in Law, much less the Act that abolished
them, especially they not appearing or consenting to it, but protesting against
it. This gave much ease to the Kings thoughts, and so on the 27th of July
Traquair's Instructions were signed, which follow as they are taken from a Copy
of them under the Marquis his Hand.

CHARLES R.

AT the first Meeting of the Assembly, Traquair 's Instructions.
before it be brought in dispute who shall preside, you shall appoint him who
was Moderator in the last Assembly, to preside in this till a new Moderator be
chosen.

We allow that Lay Elders shall be admitted Members of this Assembly: the but
in case of the Election of Commissioners for Presbyteries Lay Elders have had
Voice, you shall declare against the informality thereof; as also against
Lay Elders having voice in Fundamental Points of Religion.

At the first opening of the Assembly you shall strive to make the Assembly
sensible of Our Goodness, that notwithstanding all that is past, whereby We
might justly have been moved not to hearken to their Petitions, yet We have
been Graciously pleased to grant a Free General Assembly, and for great and
weighty Considerations have commanded the Archbishops and Bishops not to appear
at this Assembly.

You shall not make use of the Assessors in public, except you find you shall
be able to carry their having Vote in Assembly.

You shall labor to your uttermost, that there be no question made about the
last Assembly; and in case it come to the worst, whatever shall be done in
Ratification, or with relation to the former Assembly, Our Will is, that you
declare the same to be done as an Act of this Assembly, and that you consent
thereunto only upon these terms, and no ways as having any relation to the
former Assembly.

You shall by all means shun the Dispute about Our Power in Assemblies; and if
it shall be urged or offered to be disputed, whether We have the Negative
Voice, or the sole Power of Indicting, and consequently of Dissolving, except
you see clearly that you can carry the same in Our Favors, stop the Dispute;
and rather than it be decided against Us, stop the course of the Assembly until
We be advertised.

For the better facilitating of Our other Services, and the more peaceable and
plausible progress in all Businesses recommended to you, We allow you at any
time you shall find most convenient, after the opening of the Assembly, to
declare, That notwithstanding Our Own Inclination, or any other Considerations,
We are contented for Our Peoples full satisfaction, to remit Episcopacy, and
the Estate of Bishops to the Freedom of the Assembly, but so as no respect be
had to the Determination of the Point in the last Assembly.

But in giving way to the abolishing of Episcopacy, be careful that it be done
without the appearing of any Warrant from the Bishops; and if any offer to
appear for them, you are to inquire for their Warrant, and carry the Dispute
so, as the Conclusion seem not to be made in prejudice of Episcopacy as
unlawful, but only in satisfaction to the People, for settling the present
Disorders, and such other Reasons of State: but herein you must be careful that
Our Intentions appear not to any.

You shall labor that Ministers deposed by the last Assembly, or Commi^sions
flowing from them, for no other cause but the subscribing of the Petition or
Declinator against the last Assembly, be upon their Submission to the
Determinations of this Assembly, reponed in their own Places; and such other
Ministers as are deposed for no other faults, that they be tried of new: and if
that cannot be, strive that Commissions may be directed from this Assembly for
Trying and Censuring them according to the nature of their Process.

That immediately upon the Conclusion of this Assembly you indict another at
some convenient time, as near the expiring of the Year as you can: and if you
find that Aberdeen be not a Place agreeable, let Glasgow be the Place, and if
that cannot give content, let it be elsewhere.

The General Assembly is not to meddle with any thing that is Civil, or which
formerly has been established by Act of Parliament, but upon His Majesty's
special Command or Warrant.

We will not allow of any Commissioners from the Assembly, nor no such Act as
may give ground for the continuing of the Tables or Conventicles.

In case Episcopacy be abolished at this Assembly, you are to labor that We
may have the Power of choosing of so many Ministers as may represent the 14
Bishops in Parliament; or if that cannot be, that 14 others whom We shall
present be agreed to, with a Power to choose the Lords of the Articles for the
Nobility for this time, until the Business be further considered upon.

We allow that Episcopacy be abolished for the Reasons contained in the
Articles, and the Covenant 1580 for satisfaction of Our People be subscribed,
provided it be so conceived, that thereby Our Subjects be not forced to abjure
Episcopacy as a point of Popery, or contrary to Gods Law, or the Protestant
Religion: but if they require it to be abjured as contrary to the Constitution
of the Kirk of Scotland, you are to give way to it rather than to make a Breach.

After all Assembly-business is ended, immediately before Prayers, you shall in
the fairest way you can, protest that in respect of His Majesty's Resolution of
not coming in Person, and that His Instructions to you were upon short
advertisement, whereupon many things may have occurred, w^erein you have not
had His Majesty's Pleasure, therefore and for such other Reasons as occasion
may furnish, you are to protest, that in case any thing has escaped you, or
has been condescended upon in this present Assembly, prejudicial to His
Majesty's Service, that His Majesty may be heard for redress thereof in his own
time and place.

We will not allow, that either by the Commissions already granted, nor upon no
other Bill or Petition, any part of the burden of the Charges of the last
Business be laid upon any of Our good Subjects, who have stood by Us, and have
refused to subscribe their Bonds and Covenants.

That you stop the Signatures of the Rights of Kintyre, Abbacy of Dear, Abbacy
of Scoon, and generally all Acts in favors of Covenanters, so far as you can
without stopping the ordinary course of Justice: and you are to consider
withal how His Majesty's Right to any of the aforesaids may be put on foot
without making interruption to the present Business in hand.

You shall take a course whereby the Rents of all such Bishoprics as are
vacant be detained, and either by Warrant of the Incumbent, or by Demission may
be collected: and when any person shall be provided to these Benefices so
vacant, Our Will is, that you take the same course with the Rents of these, as
by these We do command you to do with the rest of the Rents of the Bishoprics
of Scotland; which is this, to cause draw up a formal Assignation to the whole
Rents, Fruits, Customs, etc. belonging to the Bishopric, whereof they are
Bishop, to be subscribed by them to and in Our Favor, upon return whereof to
you, you shall give Power and Commission to such Persons as you shall receive
under every one of their Hands, to collect and intromet with the aforesaid
Rents of the several Bishoprics, and to deliver and be accomptable to you for
the same; and upon your receipt thereof, you are to issue them out immediately
again to the aforesaid Bishops, or any having their Warrant to that effect.

You shall hear the Complaints or Petitions of any of Our Subjects, or against
any of Our Subjects, but such as you know to be Sufferers for refusing to join
with the Covenanters in the Covenanting way; and you shall protect all such
Persons by all the fair ways you can, and particularly Sir John Hay and Sir
Robert Spottiswood.

If any thing occur either in Civil or Ecclesiastical Iudicatory, wherein you
have not Our express Will and Pleasure signified unto you, wherein you see
clearly Our Royal and Princely Power and Authority prejudiced, We will you to
acquaint Us therewith before any Proceeding be made.

You shall pay weekly for defense of Our Castle of Edinburgh an hundred
Soldiers at eight pence per diem, besides the English Gunners and Artificers,
at the Rates set down by the Marquis of Hamilton. And as for Ruthwen himself,
you shall assign him the Rents of the Castle; and you shall likewise keep a
competent number ofWorkmen for completing the Fortifications already begun, and
shall withal provide the Castle with 6 months Victuals for the foresaid
number of Soldiers and other Officers.

And as for Dumbriton, you shall pay for the Defense thereof Soldiers at eight
pence per diem to the number of 40: allowing the Rents and other Customs
thereof for paying the Captain and other Officers.

At Berwick the 27th of July, 1639.
These were the Instructions given the Earl of Traquair, of which the Marquis
wrote to a Covenanter, That if they were not worse than Devils they would rest
satisfied.

MEMOIRES OF THE LIFE and ACTIONS OF James Duke of Hamilton, etc.
LIB. III. Of what passed after the Marquis laid down his Commission till July
1642.
AND now I am come to a Period in the series of the Marquis his Public Actings
for this turn, after which for some Years he continued at Court under the
private Character of a Counselor much in His Majesty's Favor; The Marquis
out of Public Employment.
it cannot be therefore expected, that henceforth the Accounts of Scottish
Affairs should be enlarged to the former Fullness, since it is the Marquis his
Story, and not Scotland's, that is undertaken to be written: neither are the
Materials so copious, as to bear the Writer through all particulars, were he so
bold as to adventure on them. Therefore all that shall be henceforth offered of
Public Affairs, shall be only to give the Reader such a clear prospect of the
State of them, that when the Marquis shall again appear in business, his
following Actions may hang together with his former; yet the Writer will not so
sullenly confine himself to a general Account, but when any particulars occur
wherein he is authentically informed, he will truly represent them.

My Lord of Traquair waited upon His Majesty to Whitehall, Traquair goes to
Scotland.
whither the King came in the beginning of August: and on the sixth his
Commission was signed, and himself dispatched to Scotland. On his way he was
ordered to deliver the following Letter from His Majesty to my Lord S. Andrews,
(who was then at Newcastle) in answer to an Address made by the Bishops to my
Lord of Canterbury to get the Assembly prorogued. It was penned by the Marquis,
as appears by the Brovillon of it yet extant, and interlined in some places by
my Lord of Canterbury.

CHARLES R.
Right Trusty and Well-beloved Counselor, and Reverend Father in God, We
greet you well.
YOur Letter, and the rest of the Bishops, (sent by the Elect of Caithnes) to
my Lord of Canterbury, has been shown by him to Us; and after serious
Consideration of the Contents thereof, We have thought fit Our Self to return
this Answer to you, for Direction according to Our Promise, which you are to
communicate to the rest of your Brethren.

We do in part approve of what you have advised concerning the Prorogating of
the Assembly and Parliament, and must acknowledge it to be grounded upon Reason
enough, were Reason only to be thought on in this Business; but considering the
present state of Our Affairs, and what We have promised in the Articles of
Pacification* We may not (as We conceive) without great prejudice to Our Self
and Service, condescend thereunto: wherefore We are resolved, nay rather
necessitated, to hold the Assembly and Parliament at the time and place
appointed. And for that end We have nominated the Earl of Traquair Our
Commissioner, to whom We have given Instructions, not only how to carry himself
at the same, but a Charge also to have a special care of your Lordships, and
those of the inferior Clergy, who have suffered for their Duty to God and
Obedience to Our Commands. And We do hereby assure you, that it shall be still
one of Our chiefest Studies, how to rectify and establish the Government of
that Church a-right, and to repair your losses, which We desire you to be most
confident of.

As for your Meeting to treat of the Affairs of the Church, We do not see at
this time how that can be done; for within Our Kingdom of Scotland, We cannot
promise you any place of Safety, and in any other of Our Dominions We cannot
hold it convenient, all things considered: wherefore We conceive that the best
way will be for your Lordships, to give in, by way of Protestation or
Remonstrance, your Exceptions against this Assembly and Parliament to Our
Commissioner, which may be sent by any mean man, so he be Trusty, and deliver
it at his entering into the Church; but We would not have it to be either read
or argued in this Meeting, where nothing but Partiality is to be expected, but
to be represented to Us by him, which We promise to take so in consideration,
as becomes a Prince sensible of His Own Interest and Honor, joined with the
equity of your Desires: and you may rest secure, that though perhaps We may
give way for the present to that which will be prejudicial both to the Church,
and Our Own Government; yet We shall not leave thinking in time how to remedy
both.

We must likewise intimate unto you, that We are so far from conceiving it
expedient for you, or any of my Lords of the Clergy, to be present at this
Meeting, as We do absolutely discharge your going thither, and for your
Absence, this shall be to you and every one of you a sufficient Warrant. In the
interim, your best Course will be to remain in Our Kingdom of England, till
such time as you receive Our further Order, where We shall provide for your
Subsistence, though not in that measure as We could Wish, yet in such a way as
you shall not be in want.

Thus you have Our Pleasure briefly signified unto you, which We doubt not but
you will take in good part; you cannot but know, that what We do in this We
are necessitated to. So We bid you farewell.

Whitehall, Aug. 6. 1639.

This Letter being delivered to the Bishops by the Kings Commissioner, they
signed the following Declinatour, and put it in his hands.

WHereas His Majesty out of His surpassing Goodness was pleased to indict
another National Assembly, The Bishops Declinatour of the Assembly.
for rectifying the present Disorders in the Church, and repealing the Acts
concluded in the late pretended Assembly at Glasgow, against all right and
reason; charging and commanding us the Archbishops, and Bishops of the Church
of Scotland, and others that have place therein to meet at Edinburgh the 12th
of August instant, in hopes that by a peaceable Treaty and Conference, matters
should have been brought to a wished Peace and Unity; and that now we perceive
all these Hopes disappointed, the Authors of the present Schism and Division
proceeding in their wonted courses of Wrong and Violence, as has appeared in
their presumptuous Protestation against the said Indiction, and in the business
they have made throughout the Country, for electing Ministers and Laics of
their Faction to make up the said Assembly; whereby it is evident, that the
same or worse effects must needs ensue upon the present Meeting, than were seen
to follow the former.

We therefore the Vnder-subscribers for discharge of our Duties to God and to
the Church, committed to our Government under our Sovereign Lord the Kings
Majesty, Protest, as in our former Declinatour, as well for our Selves, as in
name of the Church of Scotland, and so many as shall adhere to this our
Protestation, That the present pretended Assembly be holden and reputed null in
Law, as consisting and made up partly of Laical persons that have no Office in
the Church of God, partly of refractory, schismatical, and perjured Ministers,
that contrary to their Oaths and Subscriptions, from which no Humane power
could absolve them, have filthily resiled, and so made themselves to the
present and future Ages most infamous: and that no Churchman be bound to
appear before them, nor any Citation, Admonition, Certification, or Act
whatsoever, proceeding from the said pretended Meeting, be prejudicial to the
Jurisdiction, Liberties, Privileges, Rents, Possessions, and Benefices
belonging to the Church, nor to any Acts of former General Assemblies, Acts of
Council, or Parliament made in favors thereof: but to the contrary, That all
such Acts and Deeds, and every one of them, are and shall be reputed unjust,
partial, and illegal, with all that may follow thereupon. And this our
Protestation we humbly desire may be presented to His Majesty, whom we do
humbly supplicate, according to the practice of Christian Emperors in Ancient
times, to convene the Clergy of His whole Dominions, for remedying the present
Schism and Division, unto whose Judgment and Determination we promise to
submit our Selves, and all our Proceedings.

Given under our hands at Morpeth, Berwick, and Holy-Island, the tenth and
eleventh of August, 1639. Signed, St. Andrews. Da. Edinburgen. Jo. Rossen. Th.
Galloway. Wall. Brechinen. Ja. Lismoren. Ad. Aberdon.



When my Lord Traquair came to Scotland, he found all the Conditions of the
Treaty violated, the Fortifications of Lies continued, the Forces not all
disbanded, Lesley keeping up still the Character of General, besides many other
particulars.

The Assembly sits and proceeds violently.
After his coming to Edinburgh, the Assembly was held there about the middle of
August, but they had not remitted any thing of their Fervor: only in renewing
the last years Acts, they were contented not to mention the Assembly of
Glasgow; magnifying that as a high Condescendency, not considering how
disproportioned it was to the great Concessions made by His Majesty. Neither
were they content with discharging the use of the Service Book and Book of
Canons, but would needs tax them of Popery, and the High Commission of Tyranny.
Like to these were their Narratives of Annulling the General Assemblies held by
King James, and of abolishing Episcopacy, of which my Lord Traquair gave His
Majesty an account; and the following Answer was sent from His Majesty. But one
difference of the Kings Usage of the Marquis from what he gave his other
Commissioners, is, that to him he wrote his Orders all with his own Pen; but to
others he wrote by another Pen, only Superscribed the Letters himself. And in
his Letters to Traquair he employed the Marquis for his Secretrary. The Kings
Letter follows, taken from the Marquis his Copy, bearing date the 20th of
August.

CHARLES R.
Right Trusty,
WE have hitherto commanded Hamilton to answer several of your Letters; but
that of the 16th of August being of more weight than any of your former, We
have thought fit to answer it Our Self.

And whereas you say, that nothing will satisfy them, except in terminis the
last Assembly be named and ratified, or that way be given to the discharging
Episcopacy as abjured in that Church, as contrary to the Confession of Faith
1580. and the Constitutions of the same, you being yet in some hope, that the
word Abjured may be got changed, and that in drawing up the words of the Act it
be only condemned, as contrary to the Constitution of that Church; We in this
point leave you to your Instructions, they being full, if you consider what We
have said concerning Episcopacy, and subscribing the Confession of Faith 1580:
We thinking it fit to declare hereupon unto you, that let their Madness be what
it will, further than We have declared in Our Instructions in these points, We
will not go.

For the Service Book and Book of the Canons, though We have been and are
content it be discharged; yet We will never give Our Voice nor Assent, that
they be condemned as containing diverse Heads of Popery and Superstition. In
like manner, though We have been and are content, that the High Commission be
discharged; yet We will never acknowledge that it is without Law, or
destructive to the Civil and Ecclesiastical Iudicatories of that Our Kingdom,
nor that the Five Articles of Perth, though dischargod with Our Approbation, be
condemned as contrary to the foresaid Confession. As concerning the late
Assemblies, We cannot give Our Consent to have them declared null, since they
were so notorously Our Father (of Happy Memory) His Acts: It seeming strange,
that We having condescended to the taking away all these things that they
complained of, which were done in those Assemblies, they will not be content
therewith, without laying an Aspersion on Our Fathers Actions. Wherefore if the
Assembly will in despite of your Endeavors conclude contrary to this, you are
to protest against their Proceedings in these points, and be sure not to
ratify them in Parliament.

Concerning the yearly Indicting of General Assemblies, and the Confession of
Faith, We commanded Hamilton in his of the 16th to answer that point to this
effect; That We think it infinitely to Our Prejudice, that We should consent to
tie Our Self for the keeping yearly of their Assemblies, not needing to repeat
the Reasons, they being well enough known to you; seeing at Berwick it was
conceived upon debate of that Point, that your having Power to indict a New one
within the Year, would save that dispute, which you are by all means to eschew.
But if this will not give satisfaction, you are by no means to give your assent
to any such Act, nor to ratify the same in Parliament.

The Article in your Instructions which is only, That the Covenant 1580 shall
be subscribed, you must have an especial care of, and how you proceed therein:
That the Bond be the same which was in Our Fathers time, mutatis mutandis; and
that you give your Assent no other ways to the Interpretations thereof then may
stand with Our future Intentions, well-known to you: nor is the same otherwise
to be ratified in Parliament.

Thus you have Our Pleasure fully signified in every particular of your Letter,
which you will find no ways contrary to Our Resolution taken at Berwick, and
Our Instructions given to you there. But if the Madness of Our Subjects be
such, that they will not rest satisfied with what We have given you Power and
Authority to condescend to, which notwithstanding all their Insolences We
shall allow you to make good to them, We take God to witness, that what Misery
soever shall fall to that Country hereafter, it is no fault of Ours, but their
own procurement. And hereupon We do command you, that if you cannot compose
this Business according to Our Instructions, and what We have now written, that
you prorogue the Parliament till the next Spring; and that you think upon some
course how you may make publicly known to all Our Subjects, what We had given
you Power to condescend to. And because it is not improbable that this way may
produce a present Rupture, you are to warn and assist Ruthwen for the defense
of the Castle of Edinburgh, and to take in general the like care of all Our
Houses and Forts in that Kingdom; and likewise to advertise all such who are
affected to Our Service, that timously they may secure themselves. And so We
bid you heartily farewell.


The greatest Point gained in the Assembly was, an Explication of the Bond of
Defense, which was conceived in these Words.

WE do swear not only our mutual concurrence and assistance for the cause of
Religion, and to the uttermost of our power, The Explication of the Covenant.
with our Means and Lives, to stand to the Defense of our Dread Sovereign, and
His Authority, in the preservation and defense of the said true Religion,
Liberties, and Laws of this Kirk and Kingdom: but also in every cause which may
concern His Majesty's Honor, we shall (according to the Laws of this Kingdom,
and Duties of good Subjects) concur with our Friends and Followers in quiet
manner or in Arms, as we shall be required of His Majesty's Council, or any
having His Authority.


The Clause about Episcopacy was worded, That it was unlawful in this Church.
Episcopacy abjured in Scotland.
Upon this the Covenant was presented to the Commissioner and Council on the
30th of August, with a desire that it might be signed, and it was accordingly
done; which was received with great Joy, witnessed by Bonfires and ringing of
Bells, and all the Pulpits and Streets were full of Traquair's Praises. But His
Majesty was no way satisfied with this, as appears from the following Letter.

CHARLES R.

Right Trusty, etc.
The King displeased with Traquair.
YOur Letter of September the 27th to Hamilton We have seen, and think fit to
return Answer thereunto Our Self; and the rather because We find by yours, that
some Points in the former Letter were not so fully expressed, but that you
desire more clear Answers. First you say, that in all your Directions it is
condescended, that by Act of Assembly Episcopacy should be declared unlawful in
this Kirk; and that by all the Capitulations of Agreement, and Instructions
given to you, that same is allowed to be ratified in Parliament upon the
foresaid terms agreed upon in the Assembly. In this Point We must tell you,
that you are much mistaken: for though you have Power for giving way to the
Abolition of Episcopacy, as contrary to the Constitutions of the Church of
Scotland; yet you will not find either in your Instructions, or any other
Direction since sent you, that We have consented to declare the same Unlawful:
We making a great difference therein, for many things may be contrary to the
Constitutions of a Church, which of th^mselves are not simply unlawful; for
whatsoever is absolutely unlawful in one Church cannot be lawful in the other
of the same Profession of Religion, but there may be many several
Constitutions, and yet they all lawful. Therefore if I do acknowledge or
consent, That Episcopacy is unlawful in the Church of Scotland, though as you
have set it down in your consenting to the Act, the word Unlawful may seem
only to have a relation to the Constitutions of that Kirk; yet the
Construction thereof does run so doubtfully, that it may be probably inferred,
That the same Function is acknowledged by Us to be unlawful in any other
Churches in Our Dominions. Therefore as we totally disapprove of your
consenting to the word Unlawful, as well to the Function, as Civil Places and
Power of Churchmen, in the Act of the General Assembly: so We absolutely
command you, not to ratify the same in these terms in the Parliament, but
only as contrary to the Constitutions of that Kirk; and to declare, that We
ratify this Act merely for the Peace of the Land, though otherwise in Our Own
Judgment We neither hold it convenient nor fitting; which you are to declare at
the Ratifying of the same. And for the rest of your Declaration in the
Assembly, to be registered in the Books of Council, for brevities sake We send
you herewith a Copy of the same, as likewise that of the Covenant, interlined
in those places which We disapprove of, and conceive to be the contrary to your
Instructions, and some other Directions.

As We have formerly written to you, We cannot consent to the rescinding any
Acts of Parliament made in favor of Episcopacy; nor do We conceive that Our
refusal to abolish those Acts is contradictory to what We have consented to, or
to that we was obliged to: there is less danger in discovering any future
Intentions of Ours, or at the best letting them guess at the same, than if We
should permit the rescinding those Acts of Parliament, which Our Father with so
much expense of Time and Industry established, and which may hereafter be of so
great use to Us. And though it should perhaps cast all loose, (as you express;)
yet We take God to witness, We have permitted them to do many things in this
Assembly, for establishing of Peace, contrary to Our Own Judgment. And if on
this point a Rupture happen, We cannot help it; the fault is on their own part,
which one day they may smart for. So you have in this Point Our full Resolution.

We likewise wrote formerly to you, that We thought it not fit at this time,
that the Power of the Lords of the Articles should be defined, and that you are
to avoid the same, and to be sure not to consent thereunto. Now your last
Letter gives Us ground to repeat the same again, and to declare to you, that We
remain in Our former Opinion.

And whereas you say, that it is to no purpose to vex Us with all the
indiscreet and mad Propositions that are made, since they go about not only to
reform all pretended Abuses, of what nature soever, but to constitute and
define the Power of all Iudicatories from the highest to the lowest, and that
you are like to agree in few or none of the General Acts: If you find, that
what We have commanded you to do is likely to cause a Rupture, their
impertinent Motions give you a fair occasion to make it appear to the World,
that We have condescended to all matters which can be pretended to concern
Conscience and Religion; and that now they aim at nothing but the Overthrow of
Royal Authority, contrary to all their Professions, which We can neither with
Honor nor Safety suffer. And therefore We hope and expect, that if a Rupture
happen, you will make this appear to be the cause thereof, and not Religion,
which you know not only to be true, but must see it will be of great advantage
to Us, and therefore must be seriously intended by you.

We have no Directions of new to give you, concerning the Marquis of Huntley,
Sir Donald Mack-donald, or any others to whom Malice is carried for their Zeal
for Our Service, but again recommend them to your care.

What has past betwixt your self and the Earl of Argyle, We have heard nothing
of; but We are easily induced to believe, that what you wrote of his undutiful
Carriage is true, and that you will easily make it appear, to which We will
give no unwilling Ear.

Thus you have your last Letter answered, with what for the present and on such
a sudden has come into Our thoughts: and so We bid you Farewell.

Whitehall, October. 1. 1639.

The Parliament sat at Edinburgh the day appointed, The Parliament sits in
Scotland,
but their Actings can only be overly related, they being too remote from the
Marquis his Story; so that only such Generals are to be hinted as occur among
his Papers. They consented that for that time Traquair (as Commissioner) should
name those Lords of the Articles that were for the Nobility, who should have
been named by the Bishops; but protested it should be no Precedent for the
future. And they went roundly to take away the Lords of the Articles totally,
and were framing all their Acts at the rate of the Assembly. But Traquair,
finding he could not hold pace with them, and keep close to his Instructions,
to the Letter of which he resolved to adhere, and is quickly prorogued.
did on the 30th of October prorogue the Parliament to the 14th of November
next. The Covenanters, though they resolved not to sit till the day to which it
was prorogued; yet protested against the Legality of any Prorogation without
consent of Parliament, and sent up the Earls of Dumfermline and Lowdon with the
Acts of the Assembly to the King, desiring he would order his Commissioner to
give way to their Ratification in Parliament, as also to purge themselves of
any Misrepresentations the King might have received of their Actions.

They came to London on the 8th of November: but His Majesty resolved not to
see them, since they came from Scotland without His Commissioners Warrant;
wherefore they were commanded presently to return home. They sent a Letter to
the Marquis, (for he would not see them) desiring him to interpose for
procuring them a Hearing, and that they might not be condemned unheard; whose
Answer was, That the Order which the King had sent them was upon mature
Deliberation, and that nothing remained for them but Obedience: so they
returned. And the King ordered Traquair to prorogue the Parliament, (Proroguing
and Adjourning are all one in Scotland) to the second of June next, and to come
up and give an account of Affairs: which accordingly he did, but got a cold
Reception, the King being highly displeased with his Subscription of the
Covenant, as was before marked. But he complained, that he could have no
Assistance from them to obtain any thing if he had not done that, and that it
was impossible to prevail with these People, Traquair incites the King to a new
War.
except by Force, or by a total Compliance. The Bishops failed not to take
advantage at this trip of his, to pursue him with much eagerness, and he to
recover himself was the more earnest to press the King to a new Invasion;
assuring him that Ruthwen was so strong in the Castle of Edinburgh, that he
would teach them their Duty, and was very formidable to them. He also furnished
the King with a great many Grounds for justifying his following Procedure
against them; a chief one being a Letter he had got, which the Covenanters had
written to the French King, desiring his Protection and Assistance, which was
High Treason by the Law of Scotland, as being a Treaty with a Foreign Prince
without the Kings Permission. And upon these Grounds it was, that the Earl of
Traquair was afterward pursued as the Grand Incendiary.

The Marquis saw there was too much Ground for His Majesty's Resentments,
either to contradict or condemn them; but that which grieved him was, that he
saw not a way how His Majesty should be able to defray the Expense of a War
without calling a Parliament in England, which was no less formidable to the
Court than the Covenanters in Scotland, they foreseeing what followed.

At this time the Covenanters sent up their Petition to His Majesty by one
Cunningham, desiring permission to send some of their Number for their own
Vindication: which His Majesty granting, the Earls of Lowdon and Dumfermline
were again sent up. But Lowdon being accused of that Letter to the French King,
The Earl of Lowdon committed to the Tower.
was committed to the Tower. Yet he vindicated himself; first, that the Letter
was not finished, and had neither Date nor Direction, since that which was on
the back of it (Au Roy) was added afterward, and by another Hand; next, that
it was written before the Pacification, and so was buried by the Oblivion; that
it was never sent, and that it was designed only that the French King should
interpose and mediate for them. Upon all this he offered himself to a strict
Trial by his Peers in Scotland: but added, that he being sent by the States of
Scotland, and come upon His Majesty's Warrant, was first to be returned a
Freeman thither, and thereafter to be accused and tried. This Accident troubled
the Marquis extremely, for he knew it would raise Clamours against His
Majesty's Justice, among those who were inclined to misconstrue his Actions;
and indeed it was highly resented by the Scottish Lords, as a violation of the
Law of Nations to meddle with any public Messenger: but the King judged no
Consideration could warrant his Subjects to commit Treason, nor secure them
from Trial and Censure when found Guilty. There were some ill Instruments about
the King, who advised him to proceed capitally against Lowdon, which is
believed went very far; but the Marquis opposed this vigorously, assuring the
King, that if that were done, Scotland was for ever lost. They would then have
somewhat to pretend against so much as Petitioning and Treating: besides, it
was against the Laws of Scotland to proceed against a Scottish Peer for a Crime
committed in Scotland, but by the Peers of Scotland. And after all this, he
assured His Majesty, that he knew few of the Covenanters who might be more able
to serve the Kings Interest, and could be more easily gained than Lowdon. And
the truth was, that Letter was signed by six of the Covenanting Lords, but
being put in the hands of the Lord Mirtland to sign it, (as he told the Writer)
he found it was False French; and so it was laid aside for that time, and never
again taken into consideration: but one taking up the Letter brought it to
Traquair. His Majesty being of himself both Just and Good, did reject those
cruel Counsels, as hurtful to his Service: yet Lowdon continued prisoner for
some months; his Enlargement shall be mentioned in its proper place.

But how to proceed in the public Affairs was a hard Chapter. A new War with
Scotland.
Which way the Counsels were taken this Winter, does not appear to the Writer,
but from the Effects. Only the Marquis was full of apprehensions, foreseeing
that it would be impossible for the King to do much without a Parliament in
England, and Subsidies granted by it; but they had reason to think the
Parliament would begin with Grievances, before they went to Subsidies; and if
their enquiring into the former proved long and fierce, as it would protract
the Kings Supply, it might also breed Irritations and Heats, and end in a
Rupture, without relieving the King. Neither could much be expected from a Loan
of Money: most of the Cities ( London especially) were not well-affected to the
Court, and so were like to prove backward and narrow; and all might be promised
from that, was to put off one Summer: but the Scottish Storm was like to lie
longer. Besides, he believed, that if the Loan of Money went through, the Scots
would think that a good reason for their entering into England, to make the
Northern Countries the seat of the War, which would prejudice the Kings Service
in England. All this he foresaw well, and therefore was racked with perplexity:
only he was not doubtful what to do himself, resolving to follow the Kings
Interests on all hazards: and in these Consultations this Year ended.

Anno 1640. An. 1640.

They prepare in Scotland for War.
IN Scotland they begun again to prepare for a new War: and the Ministers this
year were likewise very busy, taxing the King, as having violated the late
Pacification, because way was not given to all their Acts. Besides, it was
preached in the very Pulpits of Edinburgh, that the King had caused burn at
London, by the hand of the Hangman, the Articles of the Treaty at Berwick. This
was founded on the Censure was put on the Paper spoke of last year, which they
gave out as the Conditions of Agreement; and was burned by Order of the Council
of England, upon the Declaration made by all the English Lords who were on the
Treaty, That no other Articles were agreed upon, beside the Seven
abovementioned: yet this took with the People. Next, they laid on great Taxes
for paying the last years Debts, and defraying the Expense this year was like
to draw on: and for procuring of Money* they fell on a new Device, to cause the
Ministers exhort all to lend liberally for the Service of the Cause; which they
did with so much Art and Zeal, that the Women came, and brought in their
Jewels, Rings, and Plate, however much Money was not got that way, and all was
far short of what they needed: therefore diverse of the most zealous of the
Lords, chiefly the Earls of Rothes and Cassils did give Bonds for great sums of
Money, and one Dick a rich Citizen of Edinburgh was got to lend them many
thousand pounds.

Lanerick made Secretary of State.
In February the Earl of Sterlin the Secretary died, for whose Place the King
made choice of the Marquis his Brother, Lord William, whom he created Earl of
Lanerick. It was indeed the Kings choice, for neither had the Marquis moved it,
nor himself pretended to it. The Earl of Lanerick did act so considerable a
part in Affairs after this, that methinks their History should be as little
divided, as their Counsels and Affections for the Kings Service were: and
therefore as Lanerick's Actions come in my way, they shall not be passed over
in silence. Being made Secretary, his first care was to inform himself of all
that belonged to his Place and Duty, in the discharge whereof he resolved
neither to spare labor or industry, that thereby he might supply the defect of
his years, which were then but four and twenty.

But to go on with the Series of the Story, the King went on carefully with his
Preparations; only the Charge of a Fleet was so great, that he could not think
of it this year, but sent out as many Ships as stopped the Scottish Trade. And
finding how ill he had been served by his Lieutenant-Generals the former year,
and confiding both in the valor, fidelity, and conduct of the Earl of
Strafford then Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, he was called over to be
Lieutenant General in this Expedition: and the Marquis was designed Colonel of
the Kings Regiment of Guards.

The state of Affairs in Scotland.
In Scotland they were gathering Money, bringing in more Arms, and fortifying
suspected Places, few resisting them, except Huntley in the North, and
Niddisdale in the South; but the later was able to do little. The Marquis had
diverse Letters from my Lord Lindesay, which are yet extant, complaining of the
Preparations they heard were making against them: That Officers for the Army
were already named, Money was gathering; not only Berwick and Carlisle were
fortified, but Edinburgh-Castle and Dumbriton also had new men put in them, and
Englishmen were put in the former; whereupon they were forced to resolve on
hazarding the utmost for the Defense of Religion and Liberties, and that all
were Contributing very liberally, and knew of good Friends, both in England and
abroad; wherefore he assured him, if things went to extremities, they would not
end so well as they did last year. And he besought him that he would prove a
good instrument betwixt the King and the Country, protesting, that for his own
part nothing next to Religion went so near his Heart as the Kings Service. In
end, he conjured him not to accept of any new Service, if it went to an open
Breach, assuring him he would be ruined if he did; telling him that God had
provided a relief for them beyond their expectation. The Marquis carried all
these Letters, as he got them, to his Majesty, and by his command wrote the
following Answer.

My Lord,
I Received yours of February, The Marquis his Letter to the Lord Lindsay.
wherein you endeavor to let me see the hazard that His Majesty may run, if he
take not a peaceable Course with his Subjects of Scotland, which you say, I am
reported to be no adviser of; as likewise the unavoidable Ruin that will
befall me, in case of my accepting of any Employment against them.

The Arguments that you use, are the Resolutions of your own People, and the
assistance that you will have elsewhere, the particular way you forbear to
write; yet you say, that God has provided it beyond your expectation; and as
it was beyond your expectation, so it is still beyond my belief; my Reasons you
shall have anon. But first I will say somewhat concerning my self.

Know then, Brother, for a truth, that I heartily pray a Curse may follow him
and his Posterity, that does not endeavor and wish, that these unhappy
Troubles may be composed in a fair and peaceable way. God, who knows the
Secrets of all men's thoughts, can bear me record, with how much care, pains,
and zeal I have endeavored that; and I promise you, I shall as faithfully
continue in that Course, as ever man did, in any Resolution which was with
reason grounded in his heart; how few either believe, or know this, I care not,
for I have laid my account long since, and am resolved on the worst that can
befall me. And for your further satisfaction, know, that nothing can grieve me
more in this World, than to be sent in any Hostile manner against my Friends,
Kindred, and Country; where at the best, though I may merit something from His
Majesty, (to whose Goodness I owe much besides the Duty of a Subject) yet I
shall never be called other than the Destroyer of them; and what cause of
Sorrow this will be to a kind-hearted Scotsh-man, I leave to you to judge.
Therefore I assure you, that if either my Industry, Entreaties, nay Prayers
prevail, no such Charge will be imposed on me, my inclinations having always
led me in this rather to follow your Advice, and absent my self, in case things
come to the worst, than to accept of that Employment; though I must tell you,
it may bring along with it His Majesty's Displeasure, and so consequently
certain Ruin. Yet I do intend to put that to the hazard, and if it happen, I
will have the Vanity to say, it will neither prove advantageous to the Country,
nor to those in it, who once did me the Honor to esteem me their Friend. To
conclude this point, consider, if a Navy come, probably I must be miserable;
for what can I gain by it? if employed, a Discontented Life ever hereafter. If
the King should impose the Charge on me, and I refuse it, what the better would
you be? an abler would be employed in it, and I need never look for His
Majesty's Favor thereafter, after, and without that in his Kingdom will I
never live. If I had no other Reasons but these, (but I could write you forty
more,) consider if I have not cause to endeavor Peace, and believe me I will
do it.

For the Danger that His Majesty will run if he enter into this War, I do
acknowledge with you it may be great; but that certain Ruin must follow, I
cannot confess: yet I must say, that his Gain will be but small, when he has
g^^ that by Force which is his, or ought to be his already; but what remedy? He
conceives a Kingdom to be lost, and two will be hazarded to regain that, if
they continue in the Course they are in.

For the Assistance you mention God has provided for you elsewhere, that is
conceived to be used as an argument to fright us: For from whence can it come?

From a Party in England? Trust not to that, nor give credit to a few Factious
Spirits, with whom perhaps Correspondence may be kept.

From France? Reason and the knowledge of their Affairs make us confident, that
no great matter can come from thence: Reason, for they will not assist the
Rebels (for so you will be called) of a King for examples sake; and the
necessity of their Affairs, for we know they have enough to do elsewhere.

From Sweden? Though they perhaps be willing, yet it is known, they have not
men to do it in these Parts.

From Holland? The Body of that Estate has by their Public Ministers
disallowed your Actions, and has given assurance that they will be far from
either giving Countenance or Assistance to you; what private men may do by way
of Stealth, is little regarded or to be esteemed.

Thus I freely write what is thought of the Assistance you are like to get from
abroad, of which Opinion I shall still be, unless you can make it more clearly
appear; therefore I will use the old Proverb to you, Beware that your stout
Hearts make not your Heads dry a Gutter, and make you neglect the receiving of
His Majesty's Pleasure with all thankful Obedience, which, for any thing I
know, nay I durst Swear, will be no other than stands with the true Protestant
Religion and the Laws of the Kingdom. What pity is it then, that these mistakes
should continue? but how much more will it be, that they should increase to a
Bloody War. If all amongst you would rightly consider what true Religion and
Piety is, and lay that only before their Eyes, there are yet, not only good
hopes, but certain assurances of a peaceable Conclusion of those unhappy
Troubles; and as you have advised me, so let me you, (which perhaps may be the
last time, that on this Subject I shall write to you) endeavor Peace, which if
gained, the effusion of much Christian Blood will be saved, the Country
preserved, Scotsh-men esteemed Valiant, Just and Loyal, not only in this
Kingdom, but through all Europe, and no man happier than

Your now much troubled, and affectionate Brother, HAMILTON.
POSTSCRIPT.
For Answer to your Postscript, I am not in despair, but to bring it to a good
pass if your own carriage do not mar it; for His Majesty is content to sign
the Signature, but i^ is to remain in my hands, and not to be delivered except
your Carriage do deserve it, as well as Crawfords, who knows not as yet, how
far His Majesty has condescended. This Letter is not fit to be long kept,
therefore it will not be amiss it be burnt. Let me hear from you with the first
occasion, and thereafter I care not how seldom, if matters come to the worst.

Since the writing of this, the Letter which Rothes wrote to the Chamberlain by
Dumfermline was this day publicly read at Council Board, His Majesty being
present: it has produced contrary effects to what (I believe) he expected, for
not only does the Chamberlain swear that there is not one true word in it, but
has beseeched His Majesty, that Rothes may be called to an account for the
traducing of him in so high a nature, (to use his own words) nay to make him,
(if it were in his Power) appear to be a greater Traitor than himself. In a
word, the whole Table was much scandalized with the Letter, and no ways
satisfied with the Writer of it, even though it had been all as he expressed.

I profess I have loved Rothes, and am sorry when any misfortune befalls him;
and likewise I thought fit to mention this, that you may see what those of this
Country will do, when it comes to an issue; therefore I hope not only he, but
the whole Country will take example by this, and grow wise while there is time.




This Letter he carried to the King, and at the end of that Copy he retained,
yet extant, His Majesty with his own hand wrote, I have perused this Letter,
and have not only permitted, but commanded that it should be sent.

CHARLES R.
Whitehall, 2 March 1639.



This is set down to show what his Correspondence with his nearest Friends was,
and how warranted by His Majesty.

But that the Reader may not be wholly in the dark about the Grounds of this
Confidence the Covenanters had, The Grounds of the Covenanters Confidence.
I shall set down what I had from some Persons of great Honor, who were fully
informed about it. When the Earls of Dumfermline and Lowdon came to London, a
Person of Quality of the English Nation (whose Name is suppressed because of the
Infamy of this Action) came to them, and with great vehemence pressed them to
engage in a new War, and among other Motives brought them Engagements in
writing from most of the greatest Peers of England, to join with them, and
assist them when they should come into England with their Army. This did much
animate them, for they had not the least doubt of the Papers brought them. But
all this was discovered at the Treaty of Rippon to have been a base Forgery:
for there the Scottish Lords looking very sullenly on some of the English Lords,
as on Persons of no Faith or Truth, the Lord Mandevil came to the Earl of
Rothes, and asked the reason of that Change of their Countenance and Behavior
in them, who after some high reflections, at length challenged him and the
other Lords of not keeping what they had engaged to them. Upon which that Lord
stood amazed, and told him, and so did the other Lords there, that they had
sent no such Messages nor Papers to them, and that they had been abused by the
blackest Imposture that ever was. Thus it appeared how dangerous it may be to
receive some things that seem to have the highest Probabilities in them easily
and upon trust.

In April following the King called a Parliament in England; A short Parliament
in England.
but they begun with their Grievances, in which they rose to so high a strain,
that after twenty days Sitting the King by advice of his Council dissolved
them: but the hopes of Money from the Parliament failing, the next Course was
to try, what could be drawn by Loan; and for good example the Councillors
subscribed for near two hundred thousand pounds Sterlin. The Councillors lend
Money.
What the Marquis his part was in this I should have willingly concealed,
judging fit that his Story should be as sparing in relating it, as himself was
modest in not boasting of it: but Sanderson, and some other malicious or
ignorant Pens, who say, That he pretended Poverty, and subscribed for none,
force me to free him of that Calumny, by a true Relation of what his Duty to
the King cost him at this time. He subscribed for 10000 l. Sterlin, and laid
down Eight thousand of it presently in Gold: likewise in August following at
York he again subscribed, and laid down Six thousand and three hundred pounds,
for both which he had Tallies struck. Besides this, when he served as
Commissioner in Scotland in the year 1638. he got no Payments made him; Ten
thousand pounds Sterlin was allowed him, of which he had not received a
farthing: and besides the great expense he was at in that Service, he laid that
year out of his own Money about 5000 l. Sterlin on the Kings account. And thus
in the space of four years he advanced to the King near Thirty thousand pounds
Sterlin, and this was in a time when the advantages he had by his Places and
Pensions were (through the necessity of the Kings affairs) dried up.

But since I was forced to say this, I must not conceal His Majesty who now
reigns, His Justice and Goodness to his Heiress, in repaying the sum contained
in those Tallies, together with the other Royal effects of His Favor, which
they have felt in the repayment of the Scotsh Debt.

This is said once for all, and all this was little reckoned of by him, who was
ready to hazard both Life and Fortune for His Majesty's Service, acknowledging
that it was Just, since he and his Ancestors owed so much to the King and his
Progenitors bounty, that all he had should be spent in his Service.

The Covenanters in Scotland were beginning to look to themselves, and fearing
Ruthwen, Ruthwen a terror to the Covenanters.
who was in the Castle of Edinburgh, they required him to obey their Orders:
but he told them, he had his Trust from the King, and would acknowledge no
Commands but his; whereupon they blockt him up. He might easily have done them
much Mischief, but his Orders were to hold himself most on the Defensive, and
to amuse them, but not to break out to open Hostilities, within which limits he
contained himself.

The second of June came, which was the day the Parliament was to Set: but the
King had sent down an Order to the Justice-Clerk for proroguing it, The
Parliament sits notwithstanding the Kings Orders for proroguing of it.
and he was to carry along with him in this Affair the assistance of the Kings
Advocate, who was at this time confined to his House in Fife by the King, upon
pretense of some petty maleversation in his Office, but really because of his
adhering to the Covenanters too much. The Kings Advocate was glad both of being
delivered from that Disgrace, and for being honored with the Employment. But
to clear the Method in which he intended to proceed to make this Prorogation
legal, I must look back a little; when Traquair got his Commission under the
Broad-Seal, there was another Commission given under the quarter-Seal to the
Lord Elphinstown, the Lord Napier, the Kings Advocate, and the Justice-Clerk;
these or three of them were empowered to act as Commissioners in Traquair's
absence, and upon his Orders. Therefore the Kings Advocate judged it needless
to fill up a Blank that was sent down to be made use of if need were, to make
the Prorogation Legal; but resolved to require one of the other two, to concur
with the Justice-Clerk and himself in the Prorogation, which was to be done
after the Parliament was Fenced; therefore they provided the persons necessary
for Fencing of it, (a Ceremony they use in the beginning of a Session) who are
the Constable, the Marshal, the Provost of Edinburgh, the Sheriff of Lowthian,
and a Doomster; and if any of these be absent, the King must name others for
their Service that day. So the Members of Parliament being met, the Kings
Advocate required the Lord Elphinstown, who was first in the Commission, to go
up with them to the Throne, for executing the Kings Commands; who having read
the Commission, found their Power was only to act by the Commissioners Order,
and therefore called for Traquair's Warrant: the Kings Advocate answered, That
as when the King is present a Commissioners Power of it self expires, so also
when his Warrant is produced, there is no need of one from his Commissioner.
But Elphinstown stood on the Letter of the Commission, and so found, he was not
legally warranted to do it. That same was the Lord Napier's Answer, who was
also of the Commission, and so the Kings Advocate and the Justice-Clerk could
do nothing but take Instruments. Many imputed this to the Kings Advocat's
Juggling; but he vindicated himself solemnly* which is extant under his Hand,
with a long Narrative of this whole Affair sent up by him to the King. However
the effects of this Error were great; for the Members voted themselves to be
in a Parliamentary Capacity, as being summoned by the King at first, and again
adjourned to this day: whereupon they proceeded to the Enacting of what they
had designed the former Year; and their Acts, though of great importance, yet
meeting no opposition were quickly dispatched: all which with a Prologue and
Epilogue of two high Declarations were sent in the Packet to the Earl of
Lanerick, with the following Letter written by a Committee of Lords they had
left to sit at Edinburgh.

Right Honorable,
IT is not unknown to your Lordship with what difficulties this Kingdom has
wrestled this time past, A Letter from the Committee of Parliament to Lanerick.
in asserting their Religion and Liberties against the dealings of bad
Instruments with His Majesty to the contrary. The Means which they have used
have been no other, but such as they humbly petitioned and obtained from His
Majesty, a Free National Assembly and Parliament. The Assembly went on in a
fair way, and was closed with the liking and full consent of His Majesty's
Commissioner; but the Parliament indicted by His Majesty was prorogated, till
the Reasons of the Demands of the Estates were rendered to His Majesty: which
having done by their Commissioners, they kept the second of June (the day
appointed by His Majesty) for the sitting of the Parliament. An. 1639.
And after diligent Inquiry, hearing nothing from His Majesty nor His
Commissioner, neither by their own Commissioners, or any other sent from His
Majesty, which might hinder the Parliament to proceed to the settling of their
Religion and Liberties, after mature Deliberation and long waiting for some
signification of His Majesty's Pleasure, they have all with one consent
resolved upon certain Acts, which they have judged to be most necessary and
conducible for His Majesty's Honor and the Peace of the Kingdom, so far
endangered by Delays: and have committed to us the Trust to show you so much;
and withal to send a just Copy of the Acts, that by your Lordship (His
Majesty's principal Secretary for Scotland) they may be presented to His
Majesty. The Declaration prefixed to the particular Acts, and the Petition in
the end, contain so full Expressions of the Warrants of the Proceedings of the
Estates, and of their humbly continued Desires, that no word needs to be added
by us. We do therefore in their Name (according to the Trust committed to us)
desire your Lordship (all other ways of Information being stopped) with the
presenting of these Acts of Parliament, to represent unto His Majesty, against
all Suspicions, Suggestions, and Tentations to the contrary, the constant Love
and Loyalty of this Kingdom unto His Majesty's Royal Authority and Person, as
their Native King and kindly Monarch; and that they are seeking nothing but the
establishing of their Religion and Liberties under His Majesty's Government,
that they may still be a free Kingdom to do His Majesty all the Honor and
Service that becomes humble Subjects: that their Extremity is greater through
the Hostility and Violence threatened by Arms, and already done to them in their
Persons and Goods, by Castles within, and Ships without the Kingdom, than they
can longer endure: and that as His Majesty loves His Own Honor, and the Well
of this His Ancient Kingdom, speedy course may be taken for their relief and
quie^ness; and that if this their faithful Remonstrance (which as the great
Council of the Kingdom they found themselves bound to make at this time for
their Exoneration) be passed over in silence, or answered with delays, they
must prepare and provide for their own Deliverance and Safety. We are very
hopeful that your Lordship (as a good Patriot, and according to the Obligement
of your Place) will not be deficient in that Duty for your Native Country, and
send us a speedy Answer, as we shall in every Duty be careful at all occasions
to show our selves

Your Lordships humble Servants: Signed, Balmerino Burghly Napier Thomas Hop J.
Murray J. Hamilton G. Dundas J. Smith Ed. Eggar Tho. Paterson Ja. Sword

Edinburgh, 17 June, 1640.

The Covenanters did also sign a Bond among themselves for adhering to these
Acts, and prosecuting of those who had been the Incendiaries from the beginning
of the these Stirs, the Marquis and Traquair being the chief of them.

The King is highly offended.
But all this gave great Offense at Court, the King looking upon it as a bolder
Attempt than any yet made, which struck at the root of His Authority, and
overturned the Fundamental Laws of Scotland; and therefore he judged himself
bound to repair this Affront with the Sword God had put in his Hands. An. 1640.
At this time the Marquis got the following Memorial sent him from my Lord
Lowdon out of the Tower of London, written all with Lowdon's Hand, and yet
ext^nt.

Memorandum for the Lord Lowndon,
TO speak to the Marquis of Hamilton, Lowdon moves for his Enlargment.
that according to that Interest of Blood, and the Confidence which the Lord
Lowdon reposeth in him, his Lordship may be pleased to intercede seriously with
the King, that His Majesty may be Graciously pleased to consider of the
Petitions and Informations which have been tendered to His Majesty from the
Lord Lowdon, and for him from Scotland, which do abundantly clear his Innocence
concerning that French Letter, in respect of the time and occasion of writing
that Letter, the Letter it self being only for Mediation and Intercession, as
is clear by the Instructions yet extant, to have been sent with that Letter,
which are the true Commentary of the Letter. The Letter it self was never sent
nor used, but rejected, and no other Letter sent. It was written long before
the Pacification, wherein His Majesty was Graciously pleased to pass all
preceding Deeds in Oblivion.

The Lord Lowdon came hither upon His Majesty's Own Warrant, which is
sufficient for his Indemnity and Return, till he be exonered of his
Employment. He came from the Parliament with Commission from them to show His
Majesty the Reasons of their Demands, trusting confidently in His Majesty's
Justice and Goodness, and with most Loyal Affection and Ardent Desires to have
given His Majesty satisfaction, and to have returned with no less Fidelity and
Forwardness in carrying and pressing His Majesty's Royal and Just Commands,
during which time he could expect nothing less than that he would be called in
question for a prior Deed; all which are most manifest by the Petitions and
Informations presented to His Sacred Majesty.

Therefore I most humbly beseech, that His Majesty may be Graciously pleased to
consider of the former Petitions and true Informations, which being pondered in
the Balance of His Majesty's Righteous Judgment, I am most confident my
Innocence will appear clearly to His Majesty, and that I will find such a
speedy delivery, as may give demonstration to the World of His Majesty's
Justice and Goodness, and as may not only from the Conscience of my Duty, but
likewise from the sense of His Royal Benignity, encourage me ever to contribute
my best Endeavors for furthering of His Majesty's Service.

And if His Majesty be not fully satisfied with my humble Petitions and true
Informations of my Innocence and Loyalty, but does notwithstanding thereof
harbor any opinion of my Disloyalty, or casting off my dutiful Obedience and
Subjection to His Majesty, or offering Subjection to any other King or
Potentate in the World, I am content to undergo the most exact Trial which is
agreeable to the Laws of that Kingdom by which only I ought to be judged,
rather than lie under such a heavy Imputation, which to me (who am conscious of
my own Innocence, and of my most tender and humble Duty toward His Majesty,)
is more grievous than my Sufferings, which can only prejudice and hurt me and
my private Estate, but can no ways conduce for advancing of His Majesty's
Service, but rather be a hinderance to the Accommodation of Affairs; whereas my
Liberty or lawful Trial will serve for the Illustration of His Majesty's
Justice to the World, and will make His Subjects without fear of danger to
tender their humble Suits and Remonstrances at the Throne of His Royal Justice.


An. 1639.
Upon this the Marquis pressed the King much for my Lord Lowdon's Enlargement,
since the Covenanters made great noise with it in all their Complaints, The
Marquis treats with him by the Kings Order.
and pretended, that they durst send up no more Commissioners; and therefore
they sent their Acts in the Packet.

He did also show His Majesty, that he knew by the Lieutenant of the Tower that
Lowdon was very fearful: wherefore he desired permission from the King to try
what this Fear could draw from him, and to see if his Enlargement, with the
hopes of a Noble Reward, could engage him to the Kings Service; which (if
obtained) might prove of great advantage; since the Irritations he had received
would make his Advices less suspected in Scotland. His Majesty approving this,
he treated with Lowdon, and found him abundantly pliant: and so on the 26th of
June he agreed with him on these Terms, which he got under Lowdon's Hand, in
two Papers yet extant.

THE Lord Lowdon does promise to contribute his faithful and uttermost
Endeavors for His Majesty's Service, and furthering of a happy Peace, and
shall with all possible diligence and care go about the same, and shall labor
that His Majesty's Subjects of Scotland may in all humility petition, that His
Majesty may be Graciously pleased to authorize a Commissioner with full Power
from His Majesty to establish the Religion and Liberty of that His Majesty's
Native and Ancient Kingdom according to the Articles of Pacification, and that
by a new Convening or Session of the Parliament, without cohesion or dependence
on what has been done by themselves without His Majesty's Presence, or of a
Commissioner to represent His Majesty's Royal Person and Power.

That if there be not an Army already convened in Scotland in a Body, he shall
endeavor that they shall not convene, nor come together during the time of
Treaty, in hope of Accommodation; and if they be already convened in a Body
before his return, he will labor that they may dissolve and return to their
several Shires, or dispose so of them, that they remain not in one Body, as may
best evince that they intend not to come into England; but may carry themselves
in that respective way, as may best testify their Duty to His Majesty, and
their Desires of Peace.

That if General Ruthwen shall happen to become their Prisoner, they may (as a
testimony of their desire to shun every thing which may provoke His Majesty's
displeasure) preserve him, and that the Lord Lowdon will show how far he is
engaged for his Safety.

That when Affairs shall be brought to a Treaty in Parliament, and that His
Majesty shall be Graciously pleased to settle the Religion and Liberties of the
Kingdom according to the Articles of Pacification, he will endeavor that the
Kings Authority shall not be entrenched upon, nor diminished, that they may
give a real demonstration to the World, how tender and careful they are, that
His Majesty's Royal Power may be preserved both in Church and State.

That what is done or imparted to the Lord Lowdon concerning His Majesty's
Pleasure shall be kept secret, and not revealed to any here, further than His
Majesty shall think expedient.

That the Lord Lowdon shall (as soon as conveniently he can) return an account
of his Diligence.

There was given with this another Paper, which follows. An. 1640


Memorandum of what passed betwixt the Marquis of Hamilton and me, 26 June 1640.
BEcause no great matters can be well effectuated without Trust, Fidelity,

Our desires and designs do tend mainly for Preservation of Religion, Laws,

If (after using of our utmost Endeavors) it be not Gods will that we

If my Endeavors and Service (which doubtless will put me to a great deal of
expense and pains) shall prove useful for His Majesty's Service and Honor, and
the Good of the Kingdom, which are inseparable, the Marquis will intercede
really, and employ his best Endeavors with the King, to acknowledge and
recompense the Lord Lowdon 's Travels and Service, in such manner as a Gracious
King and Master should do to a diligent and faithful Servant.


Upon this Lowdon was enlarged next day, Lowdon is enlarged.
and permitted to go down to Scotland; but those who did not know the Secret of
this, thought the King had weakened himself much, by letting go an Hostage of
such importance: and this gave new Suspicions of the Marquis his Tamperings
with the Covenanters.

His Majesty commanded the Earl of Lanerick to write, by the Lord Lowdon, the
following Answer to the Letter sent up by the Lords of Scotland, with the Acts
they had lately passed.

My Lords,
BY my former of the Date the 23th of June, Lanerick 's Answer to the Committee
in Scotland.
His Majesty was pleased to promise by me, to let you know within few days His
further Pleasure concerning those Proceedings and Desires of the Noblemen, and
Barons, and Burgesses, which you sent me to be presented to His Majesty;
whereupon he has now commanded me to tell you, that the not proroguing of the
Parliament in a Legal and Formal way, was not for want of clear Instructions,
and of full and ample Power from His Majesty, He having fully signified His
Pleasure to those whom He did entrust with the executing thereof, not thinking
it fit to employ other Servants of greater Eminence, by reason of the disorders
and iniquities of the Times: and as forced by the importance of his other great
and weighty Affairs, He was necessitated to prorogue the Parliament for some
few days, so did He most really intend to perform at the time prefixed
whatsoever He had promised by the Act of Pacification. But neither can the
neglect of His Servants, (if any be) nor those other Reasons alleged by the
foresaid Noblemen, Barons, and Burgesses, in their Declaration for their
Sitting, satisfy His Majesty for their proceeding in a Parliamentary way;
since by the Duty and Allegiance of Subjects, they are bound to acknowledge in
a most special manner His Transcendent Power in Parliaments; and if Subjects
there do assume the Power of Making Laws, and of Rescinding those already made,
what Act can be done more derogatory to that Regal Power and Authority we are
all sworn to maintain? Therefore His Majesty conceives, they cannot in reason
expect He can interpose His Royal Authority to these, or any other Acts
whatsoever, whereto neither He in His own Royal Person, nor by His Commissioner
did assist. Yet such is His Majesty's Clemency, that when they shall take such
an Humble and Dutiful way as may witness, that they are as careful and tender
of His Majesty's Royal Power, as they are desirous of His Approbation, then
shall it be time for them to expect such a Gracious and Just Answer, as may
testify His Majesty's Fatherly Compassion of that His Native Kingdom, and his
Pious and Princely care of performing whatsoever is necessary for establishing
their Religion and Laws. So thus having imparted unto you all that was enjoined
me by His Majesty, I shall say no more from my self, but I am

Your Lordships humble Servant, LANERICK.
Whitehall 27th of June, 1640.

My Lord Lowdon found matters at so great a height, that he was able to do
little more than give intelligence, that he delivered the Letter to the Lords
at Edinburgh, who returned to it the following Answer.

My Lord,
The Reply of the Committee.
WE received your Lordships Letter of the 27th of June from the Lord Lowdon,
whose relief out of Prison, gives us occasion (before we answer your Lordships
Letter) to acknowledge the same as an act of His Majesty's Royal Justice and
Goodness, although the pretended cause of his Imprisonment was but a malicious
Calumny of the Enemies of the Kings Honor and our Peace, forged to engage both
His Majesty's Kingdoms in a National War. As we cannot but regrate, that any
neglect of His Majesty's Officers, or absence of His Commissioner, whose
presence we did both desire and expect, should hinder the interposing of His
Royal Authority to these Acts of Parliament, which were found most necessary
for establishing Religion and the Peace of this Kingdom, and which according to
the Acts of Pacification, His Majesty was graciously pleased to promise; so we
have and shall still endeavor to give demonstration of that tender Respect we
have of His Majesty's Honor and Royal Power. And whereas your Lordships Letter
does imply, that we should take some other way for the more easy obtaining His
Majesty's Approbation, which also by several reasons has been most instantly
pressed by the Lord Lowdon; yet we conceive that Parliamentary way, which was
taken by the Estates convened by His Majesty's Special Warrant, to have been
most Legal and necessary, and no ways derogatory to His Majesty's Power in
Parliament, nor contrary to the Duty of good Subjects, who are warranted by the
Articles of Pacification, under His Majesty's Hand, to determine all Civil
questions, ratify the Conclusions of the Assembly, and remove the present
Distractions of this Kingdom, as is more abundantly demonstrated by their
Declaration in Parliament thereabout. So that we dare not take any other
Course, which may entrench upon their Parliamentary Power, or Proceedings; nor
will we (being so few in number appointed by them to stay here) presume of our
selves, in a matter of so great moment, to return a more full and particular
Answer, till there be a more frequent Meeting of those appointed by Parliament,
which will be shortly; and then your Lordship shall be acquainted, that you may
show His Majesty their Resolutions and humble Desires, and we shall remain

Your Lordships affectionate Friends and Servants. Signed, Lindsay. Balmerino.
Burghly. Napier. J. Murray. G. Dundas. Ja. Sword. J. Forbes. Ed. Eggar.

Edinburgh 7th of July, 1640.

They went on with their Preparations, The Preparations are great in Scotland.
and caused all to bring in the tenth Penny of their Rents, to make this War
look like a Sacred one, since carried on by the Tithes: and ordered their
Forces to be drawn together. Mean while the King went on at as good a pace as
he could, and went from London in the end of July, to make his Rendezvous at
York. The Earl of Strafford staid some time behind, partly for Sickness, partly
to see what Money could be borrowed from London; and at this time there were
great and high Misunderstandings between him and Sir Henry Vane, both making
their Complaints to the Marquis by their Letters. Strafford was also to bring
an Army out of Ireland, upon the West of Scotland, whereupon they in Scotland
drew their Forces together in the end of August, and resolved to march into
England, and make that the Seat of the War, pretending (as by their Declaration
then emitted does appear) that their Trade was block't up by English Ships;
that in England and Ireland, Scotishmen were proceeded against for taking the
Covenant, and the English Council had voted a War with them: wherefore, they
said, they were constrained to go into England with their Petitions, declaring
they came not to invade England, but to avert the Invasion of their Country,
that was designed; adding, that they should be so far from doing prejudice to
any in England, that severe Justice should be executed upon those who took any
thing in England without payment. And about this time Ruthwen, being for many
months block't up in the Castle of Edinburgh, (so that Victuals and Ammunition
were spent, his Water also failed, and most of his Soldiers died,) was forced
to Capitulate, and render up the Castle of the Covenanters.

But not to stand too long on matters universally known, as soon as they entered
England, The Scottish Army enters England.
the King by Proclamation declared them Traitors on the 22th of August: yet
they went on, and when they came to the Ford of Tine at Newburn, some miles
above Newcastle, they found it guarded by a Body of Foot, who had raised a
Brest-work near the River, and lay there to obstruct their passage. Yet no
sooner did the Scottish Cannon begin to play, but they, struck with Fear, threw
down their Arms and run away; whereupon the General passed over with some
Troops, and they were encountered by three Troops, commanded by Wilmot, whom
after a little Dispute they routed: their Officers were taken Prisoners, and
some were killed. And after this the whole Body of the English Army, that lay
there, marched to Newcastle, which consisted of 2000 Horse, and 9000 Foot: the
Disorder among them was the greater, The English Forces are routed; and fly at
Newburn.
because the Lord Conway, who Commanded, had gone that day from the Camp to
Dine at a place about a miles distance called Stella. The Scots continued
passing till it was late, and lay in the Fields all night: next day they
marched toward New Castle, and were beginning to be in some strait; for they
had driven as many Cattle out of Scotland with them, as served hitherto for
their Provision, and were resolved to take nothing in England but for payment,
which would have been a vast charge to them. They purposed therefore to summon
New Castle, and in case it yielded not, to threaten to burn all the Coaleries
which lay on the South Side; though they designed not the executing of that,
for fear of making the Rupture beyond remedy. But as they were marching,
doubtful what Course to take, they met a Scotchman, who had been a prisoner at
Durham; he told them, how that morning by six a Clock all the English Forces
had marched throw Durham in great haste; whereupon they went forward, and found
New Castle open to them, and there they took up their Quarters, and found great
Magazins of Provision, which the King had laid in for his Army, and by those
they maintained their Army a great while.

This Loss and Affront went very near the Kings Heart, who begun to fear this
years Success, as much as he had done the last.

After this the Lords of the Covenant wrote the following Letter to the Earl of
Lanerick by one Cathcart.

Noble Lord,
AS we have ever professed and declared, as well by our Words as Actions, that
the Grounds of our Desires are, and ever shall be the redress of Wrongs and
reparations of our Losses, and that we will never leave off in all humility to
Supplicate His Majesty for the same, so this has moved us now, being come this
length, yet again humbly ^o Petition His Majesty to take our Case to
Consideration, and grant our Desires. We are debarred from sending or carrying
our Supplications in the ordinary way, which makes us have our Address to your
Lordship, Entreating your Lordship in our Names to present this our Petition
herein enclosed to His Majesty, and in all humility to beg an Answer thereunto,
to be sent with the Bearer to us, who shall ever endeavor to approve our
selves His Majesty's Loyal Subjects, and most unwilling to shed any Christian
Blood, far less the English; whereof we have given very good prooff by our
bygone Carriage to every one who has with Violence opposed us, yea, even to
those who entered in Blood with us, and were taken Prisoners, whom we have let
go with Meat and Money, notwithstanding that all those of ours, who did but
deboar'd from their Quarters, are miserably massacred by these whom we can
term no otherwise than Cutthroats. Our behavior to these in New Castle can
witness our Intention, which is to live at peace with all, and rather to suffer
then to offend. We bought all with our money, and they have extortioned us to
the triple value: the Panick fear made most of them leave the Town, and stop
their own Trade; but we have studied, to solve their doubts. As all our Actions
shall ever tend to that which is Just and Right, so we could wish, they were
interpreted to a true sense; and whatever may be the event of business, we hope
the blame shall not lie upon

Your Lordships affectionate Friends to serve you. Signed, Rothes, Cassilis,
Dumferline, Lindsay, Lowdon, Napier, Tho. Hope, W. Richarton, J. Swith, P.
Hepburn, D. Hoom, Keir, Ja. Sword, J. Rutherford.

Leager beside New Castle, 2d. September, 1640. POSTSCRIPT.
We entreat Your Lordship to let the Bearer have a Pass for his safe Return to
us.




The Petition enclosed was presented by him to His Majesty, which follows.

To the Kings Most Excellent MAJESTY, The Humble Petition of the Commissioners
of the late Parliament, and others of His Majesty's Loyal Subjects of the
Kingdom of Scotland. They Petition the King.

Humbly Shows,
THat Whereas after our many Sufferings the time past, extreme necessity has
constrained us for our Relief, and obtaining our Humble and Just Desires, to
come into England, where according to our Intentions formerly declared, we have
in all our Journey lived upon our own Means and Victuals, and Goods brought a
long with us, and neither troubling the Peace of the Kingdom, nor harming any
of Your Majesty's Subjects of whatsoever quality in their Persons or Goods, but
have carried our selves in a most peaceable manner, till we were pressed by
strength of Arms, to put such Forces out of the way, as did without our
deserving, and (as some of them have at the point of death confessed) against
their own Consciences, opposed our peaceable passage at New-burn on Tine, and
have brought their Blood upon their own Heads, against our purposes and desires
expressed in our Letters, sent unto them at New Castle, for preventing the
like, or greater Inconveniences. And that we may without further opposition
come into Your Majesty's Presence, for obtaining from Your Majesty's Justice
and Goodness satisfaction to our just Demands, we Your Majesty's most Humble
and Loyal Subjects, do still insist in that submiss way of Petitioning, which
we have kept since the beginning, and from which no provocation of Your
Majesty's Enemies and ours, no adversity that we have before sustained, nor
prosperous success can befall us, shall be able to divert our minds.

Most humbly entreating, That Your Majesty would in the depth of Your Royal
Wisdom, consider at last our pressing Grievances, provide for the Repairing of
our wrongs and losses, and with the advice and consent of the Estates of the
Kingdom of England convened in Parliament, settle a firm and durable Peace,
against all Invasion by Sea or Land, that we may with cheerfulness of heart pay
unto Your Majesty, as our Native King, all Duty and Obedience that can be
expected from Loyal Subjects, and that (against the many and great Evils, which
at this time threaten both Kingdoms, whereat all Your Majesty's good and loving
Subjects tremble to think, and which we beseech God Almighty in mercy timeously
to avert) Your Majesty's Throne may be established in the midst of us, in
Religion and Righteousness; and Your Majesty's Gracious Answer we humbly
desire, and earnestly wait for.


The King having considered their Petition, commanded my Lord Lanerick to write
the following Answer, Dated at His Majesty's Court at York the 5th of
September, 1640.
His Majesty's Answer.
HIS Majesty has seen and considered this Petition, and is Graciously pleased
to return this Answer by me, that he finds it in such general terms, that till
you express the Particulars of your Desires, His Majesty can give no direct
Answer; therefore His Majesty requires, that you set downthe Particulars of
your Demands with expedition, he having been always willing to hear and redress
the Grievances of His People: and for the more mature Deliberation of these
great Affairs, His Majesty has already given out Summons for the Meeting of
the Peers of the Kingdom in the City of York upon the 24th of this Month, that
so with the advice of the Peers you may receive such Answer to your Petition,
as shall most tend to His Honor, and the Peace and Welfare of His Dominions.
And in the mean time (if Peace be that you desire, as you pretend) He expects,
and by these His Majesty commands, that you advance no further with your Army
to these parts; which is the only means that is left for the present to
preserve Peace betwixt the two Nations, and to bring these unhappy Differences
to a Reconciliation, which none is more desirous of than His most Sacred
Majesty.

Signed, LANERICK.


With which he wrote this Cover.

My Lords,
ACcording to your Desires, I presented unto His Majesty in your names the
Petition you sent me; whereupon His Majesty has been Graciously pleased to
command me to make this reference, which you shall receive herein enclosed,
joined unto the Petition.

My Lords, by this you may see His Majesty is, as he ever was, willing to hear
and redress the Grievances of His Subjects; and I pray God, you may take those
Courses that may not too much incroach on the Goodness of so Gracious a
Sovereign. This shall be the earnest Prayer of

Your Lordships Servant, LANERICK.
York, 5th Sept. 1640.

To this they returned the Answer that follows, which was sent by Sir James
Mercer.

Right Honorable, An. 1639.

AS nothing in Earth is more desired of us than His Majesty's favor, so does
nothing delight us more than that His Majesty begins again to hearken to our
Humble Desires, The Covenanters make a second Address.
wherein we trust nothing shall be found but what may serve for His Majesty's
Honor, and for the Peace of His Dominions. The Particulars we would have
expressed, but that they are contained in the Conclusions of the late
Parliament, and our Printed Declarations, which were sent to your Lordship; but
in case the Papers be not by your Lordship, we now summarily repeat them.

That His Majesty would be Graciously pleased to command, that the last Acts of
Parliament may be published in his Highness's Name, as our Sovereign Lord, with
the Estates of Parliament convened by His Majesty's Authourity; Next, That the
Castle of Edinburgh and other strengths of the Kingdom of Scotland, may
according to the first foundation, be furnished and used for our Defense and
Security; Thirdly, That our Countrymen in his Majesty's Dominions of England
and Ireland may be free from Censure for subscribing the Covenant, and be no
more pressed with Oaths and Subscriptions unwarranted by our Laws, and contrary
to their National Oath and Covenant approved by His Majesty; Fourthly, That the
Common Incendiaries, who have been the Authors of this Combustion in His
Majesty's Dominions, may receive their Just Censure; Fifthly, That our Ships
and our Goods, with all the Damage thereof, may be restored; Sixthly, That the
Wrongs, Losses, and Charges, which at this time we have sustained, may be
repayed; Seventhly, That the Declarations made against us as Traitors may be
recalled, and in end, by advice and consent of the Estates of England convened
in Parliament, His Majesty may be pleased to remove the Garrisons from the
Borders, and any Impediment that may stop free Trade, and with their advice may
condescend to all Particulars, which may establish a stable and well-grounded
Peace, for enjoying of our Religion and Liberties, against all fears of
molestation and undoing from year to year, as our Adversaries shall take the
advantage. This Royal testimony of His Majesty's Justice and Goodness, we would
esteem to be doubled upon us, were it speedily bestowed, and therefore must
crave leave to regrate, that His Majesty's Pleasure concerning the Meeting of
the Peers the 24th of this Instant, will make the time long ere the Parliament
be convened, which is conceived to be the only mean of settling both Nations in
a firm Peace, and which we desire may be seriously represented to His Majesty's
Royal thoughts; the more this time is abridged, the more able will we be to
obey His Majesty's Prohibition of not advancing with our Arms, Our Actions, and
whole comportment since the beginning of these Commotions, and especially of
late since our coming into England, are Real Declarations of our love, and
desire of Peace: nothing but invincible necessity has brought us from our
Country to this Place, no other thing shall draw us beyond the limits appointed
by His Majesty; which we trust His Majesty will consider of, and wherein we
hope your Lordship will labor to be a profitable Instrument, for the Kings
Honor, the Good of your Country, and of

Your Lordships humble Servants, and affectionate Friends, A. Lesly, Rothes,
Cassils, Montrose Dumfermline, Lindsay, Lowdon, Napier, Tho. Hope, W.
Rickarto^n, J. Smith, P. Hepbu^^, D. Home, Keir, Ja. Sword.

Scots-Leager at New Castle, Sept. 8th 1640.

An. 1640
On the 24th of September, the Peers of England having met, the King by their
Advice commanded his Secretary to write the following Letter.

My Lords,
The King appoints a Treaty.
ACcording to His Majesty's appointment, the most part of the Peers of this
Kingdom of England met here at York this day, where His Majesty did communicate
unto them your Desires and Petitions; and because you do so earnestly press for
a speedy Answer, His Majesty, with Advice of the Peers, has nominated such a
number of them for a Conference with you upon Tuesday at Northallerton, whose
Names are underwritten. But withal if you shall think the time too short, and
that with convenience you cannot come so soon thither, if betwixt this and
Sunday you do acquaint His Majesty therewith, he will take Order for the delay
thereof, for one day or two.

And that you may without all fear or danger of Detention, send such Persons
unto the said Conference as you shall think most fit, if betwixt this and
Sunday you send hither the Names of these you mean to employ, His Majesty will
with all possible diligence return a safe conduct under his own Royal Hand, for
them and their necessary Servants.

His Majesty has likewise commanded me to let you know, that upon your
relieving of such Officers, and others of His Subjects, as are detained by you,
he will return all such of yours as are his Prisoners, either here or at
Berwick; and hereafter resolves, that fair Quarters should be kept betwixt both
Armies. Thus having imparted His Majesty's Pleasure, I continue

Your Lordships Servant, LANERICK.
York, 24th of September, 1640.

And now the King was in a great strait what to resolve on. Most of all the
Peers advised a Settlement with Scotland, and a Parliament in England:
Strafford's Advice was more severe, and the Marquis pressed a Pacification. But
though their Opinions varied, yet their Friendship continued, since both had
the same designs for the Kings Honor and Service. A recruit of Money (which
was beginning to run low) was not to be hoped without a Parliament, and their
late experience told, on how uneasy terms that was to be had. Earl Lowdon also
assured the Marquis by his Letters, that the Covenanters were well armed, well
commanded, and very resolute, nor did they doubt of a strong Party in England;
and therefore showed, how dangerous it would prove to His Majesty's Affairs, if
a Treaty should not presently follow. The Marquis, little regarding how ill
these Counsels would be represented by others, used all his Industry to prevail
with the King for a Pacification on any terms; since none could be so bad, as
the hazard the King was like to run, if matters continued so broken: for it was
now apparent, how faintly His Majesty's Forces did serve him, and with how much
resolution the Scottish Armies proceeded; neither were they without fears in
their own Army, and that many of the Peers, and People of England, would have
assisted the Scots, if matters had run to extremities.

A Breach betwixt the Marquis and the Earl of Montrose.
But at that time a passage fell out, which drew after it a tract of great
Troubles on the Marquis. The Earl of Montrose had in July that year, procured a
Meeting of some Noblemen at Cumbermwald, the Earl of Wigtons house, where there
was a Bond signed by them of adherence to one another in pursuance of the
Covenant; and from New Castle he continued to keep Correspondence with His
Majesty, notwithstanding an Act that had passed in the Committee, that none
should under pain of Death write any Letters to the Court, but such as were
seen and allowed of by at least three of the Committee. But this Correspondence
of my Lord Montrose came to the knowledge of the Covenanters, and there were
ill Instruments who suggested, that this Advertisement must have been given by
the Marquis, which being too easily believed, occasioned a Breach betwixt them
that could never be made up. And Sanderson has had the Impudence not only to
fasten this on him, but as if there had not been Imputation enough in it, he
adds that the Marquis had in the night picked His Majesty's Pockets for his
Letters. Indeed he needed not take such Courses, had he been capable of that
Treachery; for the Kings Confidence in him was such, that he delivered all the
Letters he had from Scotland to his keeping, and if he had designed such a
thing upon Montrose it was in his Power to have done it long before: for in
October and December of the former year, Montrose had writ much in the same
strain to the King; which Letters the King gave him, and are yet extant, but
were never heard off, till now that the Writer gives this account of them. But
the way how that Letter was discovered was this: the Covenanters sent Sir James
Mercer to York, with their Letters to my Lord Lanerick of September the 14th.
with whom my Lord Montrose sent his Servant with Letters to some of his Friends
at Court; and these Letters had been shown to the Committee: but as he sealed
them up, he put within one to Sir Richard Grahame a Letter to the King, which
had not been seen; and Sir Richard opening his Letter carelessly, the enclosed
to the King dropped out: whereupon Sir James Mercer being near him stooped down
in civility to take up the Letter, and read the Direction of it; and he
returning next day to the Scottish Camp, told what he had seen to the General,
who (in a Committee, that sat that afternoon wherein it was my Lord Montrose's
turn to preside) said, that the Gentleman they had sent must be examined
concerning any Letters he carried to the Court; and so he was called in, and
examined. But Montrose understanding that his Correspondence with the King was
discovered, said, that seeing others kept a Correspondence with the Court, he
knew not why he might not do it as well as they: it was answered, if others
were guilty that did not excuse his fault, but when that could be made out
against any, they were liable to the same Censure he had now incurred;
whereupon he was commanded to keep his Chamber, and he called a great many of
his Friends to him, to try who would adhere to him: whereupon the General bade
the Earl of Calender, who was then Lieutenant General, tell him, that if he
came not, and submitted himself, he would hold a Council of War upon him, and
proceed against him Capitally. Upon this my Lord Montrose came, and produced a
Copy of the Letter, he said he had written, and craved pardon, and so this
Matter was passed over: ^ut it was suspected, that his Letter had been sent to
the Covenanters by the Marquis; whereas indeed they knew no more of his Letter,
but what they had from Sir James Mercer, who read the Address of it, and so
they knew not what was in it, but by the Copy he produced. Yet this went
current for the Marquis his Treachery, though Sir James Mercer did often vouch
the truth of this before many Witnesses, and particularly particularly to
Sanderson himself before Noble Witnesses, who acknowledged his Misinformation,
and promised to expunge that in the next Edition of his Book; though there are
no grounds to fear, the Wo^ld will ever be troubled with another Edition of so
ill a Book.

The Treaty at Rippon.
In the end of September a Treaty was agreed upon, and His Majesty named the
Marquis and my Lords of Traquair and Lanerick, to be amongst the Commissioners,
who should Treat in His name. But the Covenanters excepted against the Marquis
and Traquair, whom they intended to pursue as Incendiaries, and therefore they
could not Treat with them; as for Lanerick they had nothing to fasten on him.
Upon this the King resolved to send none but English Lords, conceiving it not
fitting to send any Scotchman, if the persons he had employed as Commissioners
were not of the number.

Rippon a little Town fifteen miles from York, was appointed to be the place of
Treaty instead of Northallertown, and the King sent the English Lords thither,
appointing Traquair and Lanerick to wait upon them, for giving them Information
of Scottish Affairs; but he kept the Marquis to wait upon Himself. The Treaty
begun at Rippon, and after a few days, by reason of the new Parliament the King
had summoned against the beginning of November, was removed to London. The
Covenanters Demands were the same with those contained in their Letter of the
8th of September, about which they continued Treating till the June of the next
year; and so this year ended.

But here I shall insert a Paper, all written with His Majesty's hand, which
though it do not relate to Scottish business, yet I judged it a crime to let any
of the Relics of that Princes Pen perish. How it came into the Marquis his
hand, I know not; it is an Answer to a Remonstrance, sent to the King by the
Two Houses at Westminster, in the end of this year.

I Having taken to my serious Consideration the late Remonstrance made to me by
Both Houses of Parliament do make this Answer.

I take in good part your care for the Preservation of the true Religion
established in this Kingdom, from which I will never depart; as also for your
tenderness of my own Safety, and security of this State and Government.

It is against my mind that Popery or Superstition should any way increase
within this Kingdom, and I will restrain the same by causing the Laws be put in
due execution. I resolve likewise to provide against the dangers of Jesuits
and Priests, setting forth a Proclamation with all speed, commanding them to
depart the Kingdom within one month, whereof if they fail or shall return, then
they shall be proceeded withal according to the Laws.

Concerning Rosettie you must understand, that my Wife has always assured me,
that (to her knowledge) he has no Commission, but only to entertain a pers^nal
Correspondence betwixt Her and the Pope, of things requisite for the exercise
of Her Religion, which is warranted to Her by the Articles of Our Marriage,
which give Her a full Liberty of Conscience; yet I have so persuaded Her, that
(since the misunderstanding of this person's Condition gives offense) She will
within a convenient time remove him. Moreover, I will take special care to
restrain my Subjects from resorting to Mass at Denmark-house, St. Jame 's, and
the Chapels of Ambassadors.

Lastly, concerning John Goodman the Priest, you must know the reason why I
reprieved him, is, that (as I am informed) neither Queen Elizabeth, nor my
Father, did ever avow that any Priests in their times were executed merely for
Religion, which to me seems to be this particular case; yet seeing that I am
pressed by Both Houses, to give way to his Execution, (because I will avoid the
inconvenience of giving so great a coffeehouse to my People, as I perceive
this Mercy may produce) I remit this particular Cause to Both Houses: but I
desire you to take into your serious Considerations the inconveniences, which
(as I conceive) may upon this occasion fall upon my Subjects, and other
Protestants abroad, especially since it may seem to other States to be a
Severity with surprise; which I having thus represented to you, think my Self
discharged, from all ill consequences that may ensue upon the Execution of this
person.

Anno 1641.
THe Marquis (notwithstandi^g all the malice he knew some of his Countrymen
bore him) did not slacken his endeavors to bring things to a final Settlement;
An. 1641.
and the high language which was now spoken at Westminster, furnished him with
too strong Reasons, for enforcing the necessity of agreeing with the
Covenanters. The King yields to all the Demands of the Covenanters.
At length the King weary of contending so much, resolved to yield to most of
their Demands.

For the first of publishing their Acts, though it was contrary to the practice
of Scotland, to hold a Session of Parliament, unless the King were present by
himself or his Commissioner: yet it was represented, that was but a point of
Form; for as they Sat by the Kings Summons, so they did not pretend their
Votes were Laws without the Kings Ratification; and their Sitting in this
manner (though disorderly) could not be so derogatory to the Kings Authority,
as at first view appeared; since it was the constant practice of the Two Houses
in England, to Sit and Vote in the Kings absence. The King was willing all
these Acts should be of new voted, promising his Royal Assent to them; but they
were stiff, and the King yielded. For the Reparation of Losses, the King
remitted them to the Two Houses, who considered their Accounts, and gave them a
large Brotherly Assistance.

For the disposal of the Castles, the election of the Councillors, Officers of
State and Judges, which the Covenanters desired should be done with Advice of
Parliament, they went very harshly down with the King. But they alleged diverse
old Laws for their Demands, which seemed now necessary to he revived, since His
Majesty was so seldom in Scotland. The Kings great apprehension of this was,
that it would give a Copy to England, for making the like Demands: to which it
was answered, that the Kings residence in England made the case to differ
vastly; the Scottish Lords engaging upon their Honor, to declare (in case the
Two Houses should make the like Demands) they were unreasonable in so doing.

In a Word the King granted all they demanded, only he thought it unjust, and
unreasonable to grant an Indemnity to the other Party, and let his Friends be
secluded from it; wherefore he pressed nothing so earnestly, as that the
Oblivion might be without exception* and the List of those who were summoned
upon the pretense of being Incendiaries, was so great, that he thought to
abandon so many of his Faithful Servants to the violence of the Times was so
dishonorable, that he could not answer for it, neither to God nor man. The
Covenanters, to yield somewhat, reduced their great number to five persons, who
were the Earl of Traquair, the Bishop of Ross, Sir Robert Spotswood, Sir John
Hay, and Doctor Balcanquell: but the King thought he could not yield to that
Demand, were there but one excepted; and told them, that though he had better
Grounds to pursue some of themselves as Incendiaries, yet being willing to
dispense with these his Resentments, he had reason to expect the same
Condescendency from them. But they pretended their Bond and Oath for
prosecuting of them; and though it was told them, that an ill Oath was worse
kept, yet they were stiff; and the temper found, was, that their Processes
should go on, but their Censure should be remitted to the King, and that the
Scots should be satisfied with his Assurance, that he should employ them no
more in Scottish Affairs without consent of Parliament.

And thus all things were agreed on, and His Majesty determined to go in Person
to Scotland, to settle matters there; but at this time the Scottish
Commissioners began to Cabal with the Malcontents in the Two Houses, and in
particular concurred with them in the pursuit of the Earl of Strafford. The
Friendship betwixt the Marquis and that Gallant man, had been great and entire:
and as his Testimony in those matters about which he was examined was among the
Evidences Strafford had in his Defenses; so his Confidence in the Marquis did
appear by the following handsome Letter he wrote to him a few days before his
Death.

May it please your Lordship,
HItherto I judged it not fit to endanger your Lordship by any Intelligence
betwixt us, which might have turned much to your prejudice, in a time when the
World is in so much misunderstanding of me; but now be your Lordship pleased,
to admit me to resort to your noble Expressions and former Friendship, that I
may carry forth of the ^ourt with me the belief and tokens of it.

It is told me, that the Lords are inclinable to preserve my Life and Family,
for which their generous Compassions, the great God of Mercy will reward them:
and surely should I die upon this Evidence, I had much rather be the Sufferer
than the Judge.

All that I shall desire from your Lordship is, that divested of all Public
Employment, I may be admitted to go home to my own private Fortune, there to
attend my own Domestic Affairs, and Education of my Children, with as little
asperity of words or marks of Infamy, as possibly the Nobleness and Justice of
my Friends can procure for me, with a Liberty to follow my own occasions, as I
shall find best for my self.

This is no unreasonable thing I trust to desire, all considered that may be
said in my case, (for I vow my fault that should justly draw any heavy Sentence
on me, I yet do not see:) yet this much obtained will abundantly satisfy a
Mind hasting fast to quiet, and a Body broken with afflictions and infirmities.
And as I shall take my self highly bound to any that shall further me therein,
so I more particularly desire to receive an obligation therein from your
Lordship than from others, as being purposed in the truth of my former
Professions, to express my self

Your Lordships humbly to be Commanded, STRAFFORD.
Tower, 24th of April, 1641.

But since all His Majesty's most vigorous Intercessions were not able to
preserve that Great man, it is not to be imagined, any good Offices done by
meaner persons could succeed; yet the Marquis acted in it with Great Candor and
Friendship: but that preserved him not from being suspected, of having advised
the King to consent to Strafford's Death; and for his Vindication, I shall only
refer the Reader to his own words, in the Speech he delivered the morning
before he died, to be inserted in its proper place.

The Scottish Bishops who were now at London, thought themselves undone, and
complained of the Marquis as the cause of their Ruin; Many complain of the
Marquis.
and yet he had been careful, to get them all either provided with Places, or
relieved with the Kings Money, so that all of them in their Letters to him
acknowledged him to be their only Patron, about the King. Traquair was worst
pleased of any, and complained that the Marquis had opposed the Article of
Incendiaries till his own Name was dashed out, and then had deserted the rest;
but his Name was not struck out alone, Huntley's, and many others being dashed
out with him: besides, the prejudice of that Process, was only to be put out of
Employment in Scotland, by which the King was engaged in Honor to make up that
loss another way, wherein the Marquis engaged to serve him faithfully. Others
of the Court who hated and envied him, were glad to find colors of Censure in
any of his Actions, and it was loudly talked, that the King was now to part
with his Crown of Scotland with his own hands, by granting Concessions so
derogatory from Kingly Authority: but the King, who understood his own Affairs
better than any of these Censurers, saw the necessity of settling with Scotland
immediately. For the Marquis represented to His Majesty, that though those Acts
did very much diminish his Authority; yet the Scottish Parliament, being
governed but by a few Heads, who influenced the rest, there was no doubt but
the gaining of the Leading-men, might so prepare things, that ere a few years
went about all might be brought to a greater Temper: for the King was firmly
resolved to make good what he now promised, and never to violate these
Concessions, unless he could get them rescinded in Parliament.

And let me once for all say freely, this was the great Measure of all the
Marquis his Counsels about Scotland, that (except when he saw at the beginning,
as has been said, that the Kings Interest and Honor required, his utmost
Resentments, and that a forcible Redress seemed not improbable, and promised
success) way should be given to the present heats for some time, in hope of
recovering of them by such Concessions: The Earl of Rothes is gained, and soon
after dies.
and in pursuance of this design Rothes was much caressed by the King, and
entirely gained; but as he was recovering to his Duty, he was overtaken by
sickness, of which he died at Richmond, and was much regrated both by those of
the Court, and the Covenant, being a man of great Abilities and much Honor.

In June the Earl of Dumfermline and Lowdon were sent from London to Scotland
with the Articles of the Treaty, and a desire that the Parliament there might
yet be prorogued for some time, since the Affairs of England put a stop to the
Kings present Journey. They also carried down a Submission from Traquair, and
were to deal, that the Acceptance of it might stop the further agitation of the
Pursuit against him.

All this while there had been diverse Meetings of Parliament in Scotland; but
by reason of the dependence of the Treaty, they were still prorogued. The
Parliament of Scotland is often prorogued, but goes on with the Process against
Incendaries.
Their greatest business was to prepare the Process against the Incendiaries,
both the President Spotswood, and the Clerk of Register Hay, being Prisoners in
the Castle of Edinburgh, since the former Winter. The Covenanters required the
Kings Advocate to concur with them, according to his Place, which obliged him
to assist in the Pursuit of all Public Crimes; but Lanerick in the Kings Name
commanded him to deny his concurrence, and this made much ado; as also in all
the Kings Orders for proroguing the Parliament, mention was made of my Lord
Traquair as Commissioner, against which they always protested. But at this time
the Parliament would not consent to Prorogue of new, only they declared they
should be preparing matters, and not go on to the Determining any thing before
the middle of August, against which time the King purposed to be in Scotland.
As for Traquair's Submission, it was rejected, and many begun to complain
aloud, that whereas they signed a Bond to prosecute the Incendiaries, yet many
were dispensed with; and much pains was taken by distinctions to satisfy their
Consciences, that they meant not to set up an Inquisition by that Oath, and
that it was only meant of those that were declared and avowed Incendiaries: but
others said that the words were general, and tied them without respect of
persons to pursue all equally.

The Earl of Montrose is made Prisoner for corresponding with the Court.
At this time there was a Gentleman seized at Broxmouth with Letters to my Lord
Montrose, which discovered a new Correspondence of his with the Court, for my
Lord Traquair's Preservation: and with this the story of the Bond signed the
former year at Cumberwald broke out; upon which he, and some of his Friends,
were committed close Prisoners to the Castle of Edinburgh, and were called
Plotters.

On the 12th of August the King came to Scotland, The King comes to Scotland.
accompanied by the Prince Elector who came along with him, to see what
Assistance he might expect from the Scottish Parliament. The King, to please the
Scottish Clergy the more, appointed Mr. Henderson to wait upon him while he
should be in Scotland, and to provide Preachers for him, being resolved to
conform himself to the Scottish Worship while he was among them.

The Parliament at first Voted that all the Members should subscribe the
Covenant, which was done by all; only the Duke of Lenox took a few Days to
advise, All the Members of Parliament subscribe the Covenant.
after which he came and subscribed with the rest. Most differences had been
settled at London, but the matter of the Incendiaries and Plotters was that at
which things stuck long, and occasioned the Kings stay in Scotland. Many
censured the Marquis, as not concerning himself so much for those persons as
became him; and because he in prosecution of the Design the King had laid down,
took much Pains on the Earl of Argyle, it was said, he was courting the Kings
Enemies and neglecting his Friends. But he judged the great Design of Settling
the King with the Country, was to be prefered to all private Interests; and his
brother following his Method, shared with him in the same Jealousies, though
not to so high a degree. But His Majesty knew the Marquis too well to be easily
moved with these Whispers; therefore in one of his Speeches in Parliament He
declared, That the Marquis had carried himself as a faithful Subject and
Servant in all his Employments, during these Troubles, and as one that designed
the Good and Happiness of his Country: upon which the King gave his Assent to
the following Act of Parliament.

IN the Parliament holden at Edinburgh, The Marquis is vindicated by the
Parliament:
in this Session thereof holden the last day of September, the year of 1641
years, this Act following was made by the King and Estates, whereof the Tenor
follows.

Whereas there have been certain scandalous words spoken of the Marquis of
Hamilton, tending to the prejudice of his Honor and Fidelity to His Majesty
and his Countr^, which are now acknowledged by Henry Lord Ker, Speaker thereof,
in presence of His Majesty and Estates of Parliament, to have been rash and
groundless, for the speaking whereof he is heartily sorry; and since His
Majesty and the Estates of Parliament know it to be so. Therefore His Majesty,
and Estates foresaid, declare the said Marquis of Hamilton to be free thereof,
and esteem him to be a Loyal Subject to His Majesty, and faithful Patriot to
his Country: and the said Estates remit the further Censure of the said Lord
Ker to the Kings Majesty. Extracted out of the Records o^ Parliament by me Sir
Alexander Gibsone younger of Dury, Knight, Clerk to his Highness's Register and
Rolls, under my Sign and Subscription manual.

Alex. Gibsone Cl. Reg.


The Marquis had often heard that his Enemies had Designs upon him, and he
represented what he heard to the King, yet he loses ground with the King.
but acknowledged he had it only by Whispers; and thus matters went on till the
11th of October. Yet all this while the Marquis was insensibly losing ground
with the King; for the perpetual Whispers of his Enemies could not choose but
make some impression, being specious, though forged grounds of Jealousy,
cunningly contrived, and managed with great assiduity, art, and malice.

Lanerick also found the Kings Countenance beginning to change toward him,
whereupon he assumed the freedom to ask His Majesty, if he judged that he had
been capable so far to forget his particular Favors to himself, (who from
nothing had heaped both Fortune and Honors on him) as to do any thing might
merit the change he saw in him: the King answered, He believed he was an honest
man, that he had never heard any thing to the contrary, but that his Brother
had been very active in his own Preservation. This made Lanerick Look the more
narrowly to his Brothers Actions, to see if he could discover, whether in any
thing he had studied to preserve himself, by prejudicing the King; but in a
long Account of that business, which I have under his hand, he protested that
the nearer he looked he discovered in him the greater Fidelity and Affection to
his Master. It is true, the King met with great Opposition in Scotland in the
matter of the Incendiaries and Plotters, and it was represented that the
Marquis and his Brother might have made it less, which perhaps left some
Impressions on His Majesty; but having it so often under both their hands, That
might their Souls perish, if they left any thing undone that was in their
power, to get a Compliance to the Kings Desires from the Parliament, I must
believe this Opposition flowed from the Distempers of that Time.

But about the middle of October, an odd passage fell in, which for its not
being expected, was called the Incident. A Gentleman, not known to the Marquis,
brought him and the Earl of Argyle the Discovery of a Plot, he said, was laid
for their Lives, and the Earl Lanerick's; which he said he could justify by
one Witness, who was invited to the execution of it. He told also a long formal
Story of the persons were to be Actors, of Time, Place, and Manner, and said it
was to be executed that very night. This the Marquis carried to the King
without naming Particulars, which could not be done safely by the Law of
Scotland, since he had but one Witness to prove them by. The King desired him
to examine the thing to the bottom, and bring him what further Evidence he
could find. In the Evening other Presumptions were brought to the Marquis, but
no clear Evidence, and the matt^r was got abroad, and in every bodies mouth; so
that all who depended on these Lords came about them in great numbers: and
those on whom the Design was fastened, gave out it was a Forgery to make them
odious, and gathered also together. The Marquis hearing this, did not stir out
of doors, lest some of their too officious followers had raised Tumults; and
next day in the Evening, he with the Earl of Argyle and his Brother, and half a
dozen Servants, went out of Town to his House of Keneel, twelve miles from
Edinburgh, and sent his excuse to His Majesty, with the true account of the
Reasons that moved him to do what he had done. Upon this many Discourses went
about, People of all sides passing construction as they were affected; but the
Parliament took the whole matter into Consideration. Those who had given the
Information, owned what they had said, and those on whom the Plot was fixed,
did as positively deny all: so that no clear Proof being brought, the
Parliament could come to no other Decision, but that the Lords had good reason
to withdraw themselves; and so they were invited to return to their place in
Parliament. But he is again in His Majesty's favor.
This was a tedious business, and put a great stop to the Settlement betwixt
the King and the Nation; but further Particularities are thought needless to be
set down, since this Matter vanished no effect following on it.

The Marquis quickly recovered his former ^oom in the Kings Affection, so that
there remained not so much as a vestige of this cross Adventure. Things in
Scotland took presently a Settlement, and those were called Plotters and
Banders (after examination, and a delivering up of their Bond, which was burnt
by the hand of the Common Hangman) were set at Liberty, after some time of
further Restraint: but the Process of the alleged Incendiaries was to go on,
yet they were to enjoy their Liberty, and undergo no other Censure but the loss
of Public Employment; which though yielded at London, was long resisted in
Scotland, they pretending their Oath to bring them to condign Punishment.

But as the King was going on with the Settlement of one Kingdom, The Rebellion
breaks out in Ireland.
he got the saddest News that ever were heard out of Ireland, of the desperate
Rebellion and Massacre had broken out there; whereupon His Majesty recommended
to the Parliament of Scotland, the Relief of his oppressed Protestant Subjects
in Ireland, which they undertook very willingly. But because of the interest
England had in Ireland, Commissioners were appointed to Treat with the
Parliament of England, for Concluding a Peace betwixt the two Nations, and
Settling of Trade, and particularly about the Terms upon which they should
engage in the War of Ireland: and so about the middle of November, the King,
having granted to the Scottish Nation all they could demand, ended the
Parliament there, and returned to London about the end of that month. But
before the Marquis left Scotland, he by the Kings particular Command, entered in
a close Friendship with Argyle, considering that, besides the great Power of
that Family, his Interest with the Clergy and Covenanters was such, that none
could be so useful to His Majesty's Service as he. And this Friendship was to
be twisted closer by a Bond of a near Alliance betwixt their Children. But from
all the Letters that passed betwixt them, (yet to be seen) it is as clear as
can be, that all the Marquis his design in this Friendship was for the Kings
Service, and that all that time Argyle expressed a hearty concurrence in it. To
gratify the Covenanters the more, the King had created him a Marquis: Lowdon
was also made Chancellor, Lesley Earl of Leven, and Lindsay put in a fair way
to be Treasurer, Traquair being turned out.

The King at his return to London, The King returns to London where he finds
matters worse.
found the Edge he had left on some of their spirits was no way blunted, but
growing into more sharpness. When the Marquis was in Scotland, a Member of the
House of Commons, laying out their Grievances, among other things inveighed
against Monopolies, and spoke so plainly, that all understood he meant the
Marquis, as a Person that deserved to be accused, as well as either Strafford
or Canterbury; but others of that same Cabal took him up sharply. And now upon
the Kings return, his Enemies finding their designs against him could not take
with the King, in whose Favor he was as much as ever, they took a strange
Course to destroy him; which was to set on some Members of the House of Commons
to accuse him, as the Incendiary betwixt England and Scotland, who had engaged
England into all that Expense; who had also invited the Scots to march into
England, and had been always the third in Strafford's and Canterburie's
Counsels; who had advised the Dissolving of the former Parliament, and had
oppressed the Subjects by the grants of many Monopolies which he had. This was
smelled out even by some of the same Cabal, who persuaded their Friends to
desist; showing them, That for his Carriage betwixt England and Scotland, an
Oblivion was passed in the late Treaty, which was ratified by the Parliament of
England; That for other things, though his Engagement in the Court had carried
him along to some extreme Counsels; yet they said, it was well enough known,
how moderate his Inclinations were, how great an Instrument he had been in the
late Settlement of Scotland, and how much he was hated upon that account; and
that this was a design to destroy him, either out of malice, or because some
feared his moderate Counsels in England, as much as they hated them in
Scotland. This seems to have flowed from the Friendship which diverse of the
Leaders in the House of Peers had for him, whom he had often obliged; and as
they were not unsensible, nor forgetful of his good Offices, so they seem to
have had a particular kindness for his Person. And while he was in Scotland; he
kept Correspondence with Mandevil, Essex, and others, and chiefly with the Lord
Say and Seal; but all their Letters show that his greatest business with them,
was to prepare them to a better Correspondence with the King.

But when the Marquis smelled out the design against him, he gave the King an
account of it; and told him, that if His Majesty intended to go on in his
Affairs in a Kingly way, he would wait on his Commands, and expose himself to
the displeasure of the House of Commons: but if His Majesty intended to settle
Matters by an absolute Compliance with the Parliament, then he conceived it was
fit, that his Servants should use their endeavors for their own Preservation,
that so they might be afterward useful to his Service: yet he said, he would
do nothing for himself, but by His Majesty's Allowance and Direction (being it
is like taught more caution by the Jealousies had been taken from his care of
vindicating himself in the Parliament of Scotland.) The King upon this allowed
him to use all means for his own Preservation, which he so managed that the
designed Accusation came to nothing. This partic^lar His Sacred Majesty
vouchsafed to tell the Writter, adding, that he had it from the Queen His
Mother.

Anno 1642.
An. 1642.
THe Tumults and Disorders about Whitehall and Westminster rose to that height,
that the King withdrew to Windsor in the beginning of the year. The Scotch
Commissioners continued Treating about their engaging for Ireland, The S^ots
Commissioners animate the Houses to press the change of the Laws about
Church Government,
which the King pressed forward very earnestly: but some of the Commissioners
begun to tamper with those who were most opposite to the Court in the Two
Houses, and in stead of Moderating them, were instigating them to persist in
their Demands about Religion, to get Episcopacy brought down, and Presbytery
set up. To the first of these most assented, but few were cordial for the
latter. In order to this on the 15th of January, the Scottish Commissioners
seconded the Desires of the Two Houses with a Paper, which they presented to
the King, on that Subject, and afterward Printed it.

The King was highly displeased, that they were not satisfied with the
Opposition they made him in Scotland, with which the King was highly displeafed.
norwith the Concessions he had granted them there; but were now come to foment
Troubles in England. It was not long since they made loud Complaints against
the designed Uniformity with England, and the Interest the Englishmen had in
managing the Affai^s of the Scottish Kirk; and would they now act that part
which they had condemned in others? They could not allege that against
Episcopacy in England, which they pretended in Scotland, that it had never been
fully nor clearly settled in it, or that the stream both of Clergy, and Laity,
had run cross to it: the contrary of all that was clear in England, where
Episcopacy was deeply rooted in their Law. And ever since the Reformation, for
eighty years together, the Church of England had flourished under Episcopacy;
so that it was the wonder and envy of the World, till of late that some
Brownists, and other Sectaries, begun to disturb its quiet. They knew, he
declared the Grounds on which he dispensed with Episcopacy in Scotland, were
not from his own Judgment about it, but merely to comply with their A version
to it; but the case was very different in England. All this he said for giving
them satisfaction, and it is the sum of what he repeated afterward upon the
like occasions. But in the end he told them, their Commission was not to
mediate betwixt him and the Two Houses, and therefore on the 19th of January,
he signed the following Order to Lanerick.

CHARLES R.

WE have thought fit to require you to repair to the Commissioners from Our
Parliament of Scotland, and let them know, The King forbids their doing so any
more,
that We expected before they should have interessed themselves, in any manner
of way, betwixt Us and Our Parliament of England, they would (according to Our
Desire expressed to them by Our Letter of the 13th of this Instant) have
acquainted Us with their Resolutions in private, and that for the time coming
We are very confident (out of the respect due to Us from them, and their
earnest Desires to shun Mistakes and Disputes) they will no way engage
themselves in these present Differences, without first they communicate their
Intentions with Us in private, whereby all Iealousies and Suspicions may be
removed, and they better enabled to do Us Service.

Given at Our Honor of Windsor, the 19th. of January, 1641. Directed, TO Our
Right Trusty, and Right well-beloved Cousin and Councellor, the Earl of
Lanerick, Our Secretary for Scotland.




After this the King sent Mr. Mungo Murray to Scotland, with Complaints of the
Commissioners, signified by the following Letter to the Chancellor.

Right Trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Chancellor, We Greet you well.
AS it has been always Our care and Study to have a right Understanding
betwixt Us and Our Subjects of Scotland; and complains of them in his Letters
to Scotland.
so nothing can joy Us more than to hear the effects thereof to be such, as
that they in peace and quietness enjoy the benefit of Our Courts of Justice;
and that under Our Government they reap the fruits of those sound and wholesome
Laws, established in that Kingdom by Us, and Our Predecessors, for their good
and happiness.

We cannot but take kindly from you, your representing unto Us the Miseries and
Afflictions, to which Our good Subjects of Ireland are reduced, through the
inhumane and unheard of Cruelties of the Rebels there. We on Our part have left
nothing undone, which We thought could express how sensible We are of their
Sufferings: but the present Distractions of this Kingdom do both delay the
sending of those necessary A^sistances and Supplies, which they ought to expect
from hence, and prolong the Treaty with Our Commissioners of Scotland; so that
if some extraordinary Course be not taken for their present Supply, it is not
like their Miseries will end sooner than their Days. The Consideration whereof
induces Us to require you to move Our Council, that these Forces, that are
already on foot in Scotland, may be presently sent over thither, and We will
oblige Our Selves to see them readily and punctually paid by this Parliament;
which if they shall refuse to do, We will engage Our own Revenues, rather than
delay so good and necessary a Work: to which purpose, We shall issue forth such
Commissions, and give such Warrants under Our great Seal of England, as Our
Council of Scotland shall think necessary for their Service, and grant all such
their Desires for the advancement of this Work, as in reason can be demanded
from Us; and therefore do require you, with all possible diligence, to return
Us their Resolutions herein, which We are confident, will be such as will
testify their Respect to Us, and Affection to their distressed Brethren in
Ireland.

And now We are confident, We shall not need to remember you of those Dutiful
expressions of Respect and Fidelity you made to Us at Our late being in
Scotland: for the same Affection which produced those expressions, will induce
you to make them good by your Actions. We remember well, you expressed your
readiness to hazard both Life and Fortune, for the maintenance of Our Temporal
Power; and even in matters Ecclesiastic, though you wished Uniformity therein
betwixt the two Nations, yet you would not interest your selves in these
Differences, further than should be with Our knowledge and good liking. We wish
Our Commissioners of Scotland had taken that Course, and not meddled, nor
offered to mediate betwixt Us and this Parliament, before they had first made
their Intentions known unto Us in private, ac^ording to Our express Desire; nor
made their private Advice publicly known unto Both Houses, which is now in
Print. We did conceive the Intention of the Commission granted them by Us in
Parliament, was for finishing the remainder of the Treaty, for Se^tling of
Trade and Commerce, and keeping a right Understanding betwixt the two Nations,
not betwixt Us and Our Parliament here. It is true, they were to receive their
particular Instructions from the Council, which We believe to have been limited
to these Generals, which certainly never could have reached this Particular.
But we shall pass by this, and remember it no more, so we may find Our Council
hereafter give them no further Warrant, to meddle any more betwixt Us and this
Parliament, but in so far as We shall first know and approve of it; which
truly We conceive to be the only Means to shun those Suspicions and Iealousies
that might breed any interruption of that happy Understanding that is now
established, betwixt Us and that Our Native Kingdom. Herein We exspect your
best endeavors, as a real Testimony of your Affection to Our Service. We do
likewise think fit, that a Double of all such Instructions, as have already
been given, or shall hereafter be given* to the Commissioners, be sent Us,
which will exceedingly conduce to the shunning of unnecessary Mistakings. And
in case there come any Dispute betwixt Us and Our Parliament here, about the
Nomination of Officers and Counselors, We hope you will remember, upon what
Grounds We were induced to yield in this particular to the desires of Our
Subjects in Scotland, it being Our necessary absence from that Our Native
Country; and you in private did often promise, upon occasion, to declare that
this Kingdom ought not to urge it, as a Precedent for the like to them, the
Reasons not being the same: therefore now you are to think upon the most
convenient way to make good that Promise, and labor to prevent so great an
Inconvenience unto Us, which We expect from you as one of the most acceptable
Services can be done unto Us.

POSTSCRIPT, With His Majesty's own Hand.
I have commanded this My Servant Mungo Murray to tell you some things, which I
think not fit to write; therefore desiring you to trust what he will say to you
from Me, I will now only add, that your Affections rightly expressed to Me (at
this time) will do Me an unspeakable Service, to the effecting of which I
expect much from your particular Affection and Dexterity.


CHARLES R.
Windsor, 26th January. 1642.

His Majesty also wrote to the same purpose to the Marquis of Argyle, and added
the following Postscript with His own Hand.

I Cannot but thank you for your Letter I received by Kinnoul, it being the
performance of a Promise you made at my last being in Scotland; not doubting
but you will perform the rest with the same cheerfulness. And I assure you,
this is a time wherein the kything of your Affection to Me* will do Me an
unexpressible Service, as Mungo Murray will tell you more at large, whom I
desire you to trust in what he shall tell you from Me.

CHARLES R.
Windsor, 26th January. 1642.

His Majesty named the Officers of the Army that was to go over to the relief
of the Protestants in Ireland, choosing them so, that they might be most
acceptable to Scotland: and this he did both to gain the more upon them by his
Confidence, as also to set those troublesome People out of the way; though this
turned to the great prejudice of his Affairs in Scotland, as shall afterward
appear. But for this Advice, the Marquis deserved no share of the Blame; for
the King left him behind at London, to see what could be effectuated by
Mediation with those of the Peers, whom he knew to love him; and it appears by
the following Note, that he continued in His Majesty's Confidence.

Hamilton,
I Desire you to come hither to morrow, not only to end our last Discourse, but
also upon other business of great Importance; and you shall find that I am

Your constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Windsor, 1st February, 1642.

What that business was does not appear to the Writer.

When the King withdrew further from the Parliament, and went Northwards, the
Marquis was kept at London by a great Sickness of some months continuance, The
King leaves the Parliament, and the Marquis stays at ^ondon being sick.
the length of it being occasioned by his frequent relapses into Fevers, and a
lingering Recovery out of them; yet his ill-willers at Court represented the
story of his Sickness, to be but feigned, that under that pretext he might
desert the King when he needed his Service most. But he hearing of this was
resolved to be carried sick as he was to the King, which the King knowing,
commanded him to stay till God gave him Strength to come, without prejudice to
his Health.

In March the Treaty between the Parliament of England and Scotland was closed;
The Treaty with Scotland for the relief of Ireland is ended.
and among other Articles one was cast in, That an Uniformity of Religion
should be endeavored betwixt the Kingdoms. But the King would do nothing that
might seem to stop the Irish business, and therefore gave way to it, though he
smelled the design of it abundantly well. Besides, the words being conceived in
general Terms, he would not oppose them; since he judged an Uniformity of
Religion was to be endeavored, as well as they did, but with this odds, that
he thought the Standard of it should be taken from England. As soon as this
went home, the Scottish Armies went over speedily in the beginning of April: And
the Scottish Council wrote to His Majesty, and the Two Houses, that they
designed to send the Marquis of Argyle over to Ireland, but first to send him
and the Earl of Lowdon to London, to mediate betwixt the King and the Houses;
with which His Majesty was pleased. But the Houses excused it in a fair way,
pretending, that they judged Argyle's presence necessary in Scotland. Many
wondered whence this Jealousy of him did flow; some thought it was because the
King consented to it, and therefore they misdoubted him; others apprehended
that their Jealousy was founded on the Friendship that was betwixt the Marquis
and him; and that finding the Marquis so inflexibly firm to the Kings Interest,
and averse from theirs, they feared that Argyle's Friendships and his was
founded on the same designs.

New Calumnies on the Marquis,
At this tim^ some of the Marquis his Enemies represented to His Majesty, that
he made Offers of the Militia to the Houses, with other things highly
derogatory to His Majesty's Authority; and that he pretended a Warrant for
those Offers was sent him by Mr. Murray of the Bedchamber. These were the bad
offices some fiery spirits studied to do, to all who endeavored the quenching
of that Flame which was like to devour Britain; but notice being given of this
to the Marquis, he wrote Mr. Murray this Answer.

Worthy Friend,
IT is no new thing for me to find my self traduced to His Majesty, but I
should wonder very much. of which he clears himself.
if he give Credit to a Report grounded upon such Improbabilities: for if His
Majesty would be pleased to call to mind, how often he repeated to me that He
would never condescend to the Parliaments. Demands concerning the Militia, no
not for an Hour in the way it was, I am sure He will not think that I could
engage my self to the Parliament, that He would perform that which He never
gave me Ground to believe my self.

And as for His return to London, I likewise affirm He never gave me cause to
hope, let be to engage my self to the Parliament for it. I have had the Honor
to be entrusted in diverse Employments from Him, and He knows I never exceeded
His Instructions: I hope He will not now think me so mad, or so great a Knave,
as to do that which might bring Him any Inconvenience: for why should I be an
undertaker to the Parliament for either, having neither my Instructions, nor
Directions from Him to mention to the Parliament, or any Member there. But
these Reports proceed from such, who perhaps (if the matter were looked into)
have said what probably they will not make good, and so endeavor to make other
men bear the Burden. I am not sorry they have joined you with me in this,
since it cannot prove your disadvantage, the thing being so eminently false.

I see my Enemies malice will have no end, and when they want other grounds,
Sickness is enough for them to take advantage of; but if they had been in the
Condition that I have been in these three weeks, they would have been more
charitable, and so I leave them.

The uncertainty of my Recovery has made me write thus much to you, and truly
not without trouble, that you may let His Majesty know my Innocence in these
particulars, and that I still continue in a Condition not able to attend Him,
which is a great grief to

Your faithful Friend and Servant, HAMILTON.
Whitehall, 7th April 1642.

In the middle of April, the King signified to his Council in Scotland, his
Design of going in Person against the Rebels in Ireland, The King thinks of
going to Ireland*
which he purposed, both to put more vigor in the Army by his Presence; as
also to refute those Calumnies were spread upon him, as if he inclined to
Popery, and had been accessory to the late Rebellion, with which damnable
Calumnies his Enemies were beginning to asperse him. But the Scottish Council,
as well as the Two Houses, but that motion is disliked by both Nations.
interceded earnestly with him against this Design, pretending the Hazard his
Sacred Person would be in. Some judged that they were afraid, lest by such a
real Argument the Calumnies were cast on His Majesty, and scattered among the
Vulgar for carrying on their Designs, might be refuted; and some feared lest
His Majesty, had he gone to the Army, might have gained too much upon their
Hearts, whereby he might have been in a Condition to have overawed the Two
Houses.

In May the Scottish Council sent up the Lord Chancellor to offer a Mediation
for a better Understanding betwixt the King and the Two Houses; but the King
was much irritated, The Chancellor of Scotland sent to mediate betwixt the King
and the Two Houses,
by the Affront he had lately received before Hull from Hotham. He likewise
found the Chancellor insisting on Uniformity of Church Government, therefore he
ordered his return into Scotland; and gave him a full account of all had passed
betwixt him and his Two Houses, requiring him to give a true representation of
it to his Council there. In the end of the Month the Marquis had recovered so
much Strength as to come and wait on the King at York, where he would gladly
have prosecuted his former Counsels, for advancing a Settlement betwixt the
King and his Two Houses: but he knew not how to advise the King to grant more
than he had already yielded to, which (as the King said to him) was more than
had been granted by all the Kings of England since the Conquest: adding, that
though he had gone a great length in Concessions to them, they had not obliged
him by one favorable Vote, so that nothing remained for the Marquis but to
lament the Kings Misfortune; yet he offered the uttermost of his Services to
him, and subscribed for the pay of threescore Horse in the Kings Army. But he
represented to His Majesty the Hazard of Scotland's concurring with the Two
Houses; which the King might easily apprehend, both from the late carriage of
their Commissioners, and from what he knew of their Temper, especially of the
Ministers Zeal, and Power with the People. For his own part, he said, he was
able to do the King small Service any where; but having neither Interest,
friends, nor followers in England, he would be but a burden to His Majesty
there: but if he could signify any thing, it was in Scotland, where he should
use his utmost Endeavors to divert them from assisting the Kings Enemies; for
to expect Aid from them, was not to be thought upon. His Majesty judging this
most expedient, sent him to Scotland, without any positive Instructions,
recommending only to him his Service in General, of which he was so confident
that he wrote the following Letter after him.

Hamilton,
and is sent by the King to Scotland.
I Have no time to write Particulars, and to persuade you to serve me, I
suppose that I have less need than time; therefore in a word, this is a Time to
show what you are, assuring you that at all times, I will show that I am

Your most assured and constant Friend, CHARLES R.


MEMOIRES OF THE LIFE and ACTIONS OF James Duke of Hamilton, etc.
LIB. IV. Of the Duke's and his Brother the Earl of Lanerick's Negotiation in
Scotland till their Imprisonment.
THE Marquis came to Edinburgh in the beginning of July, Great Jealousies of
the King in Scotland.
and found very many disgusted with him for his late concurrence in the Council
at York, as a Peer of England. He studied by all means to remove the wicked
Insinuations, which some in England had sent to Scotland against the King: the
most hurtful of them was, about his favoring of Popery, and his Designs of
falling upon Scotland by Force, as soon as he had mastered the Two Houses.
These were zealously propagated by the Emissaries from England, and all Places
sounded with the danger Religion was in; so that he found his Negotiation was
like to prove again unfortunate. The only means by which he had any hopes of
engaging Scotland in the Kings Quarrel, was, to move that an Invitation might
be sent from Scotland to the Queen for her return, (whom the Tumults at London
had driven beyond Sea) that she might mediate for a Settlement betwixt the King
and the Two Houses. This he judged might insensibly draw them on to own the
Kings Service, for if the Queen came upon their Invitation, they would be
obliged in Honor to protect her, and see that she met with no Injuries, and to
resent such as should be done her; and therefore he sent a confident Friend to
give His Majesty an account of the Posture things were in, according to the
following Instructions.

Show His Majesty with what a prejudicated Opinion I was received, by reason of
what I have done at York, which I still lie under.

Show in what Temper I found this Kingdom, occasioned (as I conceive) by the
apprehension they have of His Majesty's not observing what He has already
granted, if He shall be in a Condition to force them; see^^g it is believed,
that what He has given was against His Will. Next, diverse eminent Persons
apprehend, that if He obtain His ends by Force, they will be neglected, and
Persons obnoxious to this Kingdom cherished.

Show that some activ^ m^n will not lie idle in so stirring Times; and
therefore His Majesty would consider how to make use of them, lest otherwise
they may be engaged, and with them the Kingdom.

Show that it will be impossible longer to delay the Meeting of the
Commissioners for Conserving of the Peace, and what my Part has been therein;
and therefore to Consider, if it were not fit they were called by His Majesty's
Warrant.

Show that I could not think of a better way to serve Her Majesty (for the
present) than by procuring an Invitation from the whole Kingdom for Her return;
which Proposition if His Majesty conceive fit for His Service, and be
acceptable to Her Majesty, I doubt not of the effectuating it, otherwise it
shall here end.

Show that though I can be of no great use to His Majesty any where, yet I
conceive more here than at York; for albeit I still say I can undertake for
nothing, yet I may possibly be able to prevent Evil, if I can do no Good.

Show the miserable Condition of my Fortune, which occasioneth the not sending
as yet the Moneys for entertaining the Horse, which if the sale of Land can
procure, shall be quickly remedied.

In August following there was an Assembly, to which the King sent the Earl of
Dunfermline Commissioner, Dunfermline Commissioner to the General Assembly.
with full Assurances of His Majesty's Resolution to adhere to what was now
settled by Law, and to encourage all good Motions for advancing of Piety and
Learning: and it was also recommended to him, as his chief Work, to keep the
Assembly within their own bounds; that they might not meddle with England, nor
interpose in the Differences betwixt the King and the Two Houses. But this was
not to be done, except by Authority backed with Force; for there came a
Declaration from the Parliament of England, which was very welcome to them, and
had such a Return as they of England desired. For the Assembly declared Prelacy
to be the great Mountain that lay in the way of the advancement of Religion,
The Assembly declares against Episcopacy in England,
which must first be removed before the Church and Work of God could be
established; and nothing the Kings Commissioner said, was able to divert them
from this, so irresistible was their Zeal. They also sent a Petition to the
Council, desiring them to second their Address to the King, for an Uniformity
in Church Government in all his Dominions; and likewise desired, that by reason
of the Commotions were in England, the Council would call together the
Conservatours of the Peace (this was a Court established by the late
Parliament, to see to the Preservation of the Articles of the late Treaty with
England.) The Council upon this recommended Uniformity in Church Government, by
a Letter to the King, wherein they desired also Warrant to convene the
Conservatours of the Peace: the Assembly wrote also to the King to the same
purpose.

The Marquis represented to His Majesty, that their Zeal for this Uniformity
was so great, that no Art could hinder them from Petitioning for it; but if
they could be preserved from Deeds, Many desire Uniformity in
Church Government; and that the Conservators of Peace might meet.
their big words were to be answered with smooth Language.

But as for the Meeting of the Conservatours of the Peace, he laid out the
hazard of it to the King; for if he refused to convene them, it would raise
Jealousies in the Peoples minds, and there was ground to fear they would meet
of their own accord, if they were not called; which would be an affront to the
Kings Authority, and might precipitate a Rupture. But on the other hand, there
was no small danger in their Sitting, for of that number, some were likelier to
disturb than conserve the Peace. To the Letters from the Assembly and Council
the King wrote the following Answer.

CHARLES R.

BY your Letter to Us of the 19th of this Instant August, We find you concur
with Our late General Assembly, The Kings Letter about Uniformity of
Church Government.
in their Desire to Us about Unity of Religion, and Uniformity of
Church Government in all Our three Kingdoms; which cannot be more earnestly
desired by you, than shall be really endeavored by Us, in such a way as We in
Our Conscience conceive to be best, for the flourishing Estate of the true
Protestant Religion. But as for Joining with Our Houses of Parliament here in
this Work, it were improper for Us at this time to give any Answer: for since
their Meeting they have never made any Proposition to Us, concerning Unity of
Religion, or Uniformity of Church Government: so far are they from desiring any
such thing, as we are confident the most considerable Persons, and those who
make fairest Pretenses to you of this kind, will no sooner embrace a
Presbyterial than you an Episcopal. And truly it seems, (notwithstanding
whatsoever Profession they have made to the contrary) that nothing has been
less in their minds than Settling of the true Religion, and Reforming such
Abuses in the Church Government, as possibly have crept in, contrary to the
established Law of the Land: to which we have been so far from being averse,
that We have by diverse Declarations and Messages pressed them to it, though
hitherto it has been to small purpose. But whenever any Proposition shall be
made to Us by them, which We shall conceive may any way advance the Unity of
the true Protestant Religion, according to the Word of God, or establish the
Church Government according to the known Laws of this Kingdom, We shall by Our
cheerful Joining with them, let the World see, that nothing can be more
acceptable unto Us, than the furthering and advancing of so good a Work. So we
bid you Farewell.

From Nottingham the 26th of August, 1642.

All in Scotland called for the Conservatours Sitting, and said, that they must
be on their guard, The Chancellor calls a Meeting of the Conservators of the
Peace.
when War was like to be on their Borders; whereupon the Council ordered the
Chancellor to convene them.

At this time all the Scottish Commissioners returned from London, every thing
that concerned the Treaty being expeded: but the Council thought it necessary
to send the Earl of Lindsay, and Sir John Smith, to lie there for
Correspondence, of which they gave the King notice. With this His Majesty was
highly displeased, for he said, they were either sent to Treat by virtue of the
Commission from the Parliament, in which case they were not a Quorum, or by the
Councils Authority: if so, then he asked who warranted them to do that without
his Order? yet to take away any ground of Heats or Jealousies, he empowered
them to go, that they might see to the preserving the Articles of the Treaty.
As for the Conservators of the Peace, he gave the Earl of Lowdon Warrant to
convene them against the 22th of September, and sent Mr. Murray of the
Bedchamber, afterward Earl of Dysert, with Instructions, Mr. Murray sent to
Scotland,
to inform them of all had passed betwixt him and the Two Houses; whose account
of the state he found things in, follows in a Letter to my Lord Lanerick.

My much honored Lord,
who informs about the State of Affairs there.
WHen I arrived here, your Brother was in Argyle; but upon knowledge of my
coming, came himself, and brought that Marquis with him to Hamilton, whither
the Chancellor went likewise, and there I attended all three.

I found them with the same Affections and Desires your Lordship left in them,
but as they conceive, not so able to Act as they were then. They apprehend, the
Parliament of England will be much higher in their Demands than at that time;
as understanding now both the Kings Power, and their own, which were then but
upon forming, and promised a greater Equality. The Kings two Messages to the
Parliament have likewise so discredited His Majesty's Affairs in this Country,
that they fear many forward enough before, will now unwillingly engage in any
way which may displease the Parliament; yet they are resolved to do their best,
and I believe say little less in this enclosed Letter, signed by all three.

His Majesty must expect in point of Religion, to be pressed for Uniformity in
Church Government; and if His Majesty may be moved to publish some handsome
Declaration satisfactory in that point, it would infinitely advance all his
Affairs in this Country, and from hence have a powerful influence upon that.

The Parliament has gained much here by their last Vote, and there is a very
fine Answer expected to their last Message sent by the Lord Maitland, which
will extraordinarily confirm the former Correspondence; if the King do not
something plausible in the same kind, timeously and unconstrained, the two
Kingdoms will shut upon him in despite of what his best Servants can do.

Here is no Order for publishing His Majesty's Declarations, and great care
taken to the contrary, which occasions great prejudication in the common
Peoples minds, and were very fit to be amended.

I am looked upon here with great Jealousy, yet it lessens because they see I
am not busy. I am advised by your Brother, and the rest, for avoiding of
suspicion to go up to Court, which (having dispatched some particular business
I have of my own) I am resolved to do. They have entrusted me with these
particular Queries, of which they desire His Majesty's Resolution; if your
Lordship find opportunity you may acquaint His Majesty with them They desire
likewise your Lordship may be sent down with a Letter to the Commissioners full
of Confidence, and allowing them all Freedom in their Consultations. In respect
of this great Meeting, your Brother cannot make his Journey to Holland: no Act
of that nature being now to be done, their Opinion and Authority not consulted:
but I find them all right set in the thing, and truly so respective to the
Queens Person, it did my Heart good to hear them. All the Lords Conservators
which are with you, will receive Summons: but it is not desired they should
come down, and truly I believe their Presence will do more hurt than good.

I must entreat your Lordship to acquaint His Majesty with these Particulars,
to receive his further Commands, and convey them to

My Lord, Your Lordships faithful humble Servant, M. MVRRAY.
Edinburgh, 10th Sept. 1642. POSTSCRIPT.
The King must send to New Castle Directions concerning his Ships, for their
Victuals are quite spent; my poor opinion is, they should be sent to Holland,
where they may be safer, and attend the Queen.




What the Queries mentioned in this Letter were, appears not to the Writer: but
for the Letters and Declarations the King sent to Scotland, they are all of one
strain; and because the clearest and fullest was sent the next Summer, I shall
refer all to that, which shall be set down in its proper place. Only I have
here inserted an account of the Kings Affairs with the Two Houses, written by
Lanerick to one in Scotland, (whose Name I find not set down but believe it was
to Mr. Murray,) and corrected with His Majesty's Pen in some places.

SIR,
AS you desired me, I moved His Majesty for a Copy of the last Message to the
Houses of Parliament, which you will herewith receive. An account o^ Affairs in
England.
His Majesty has not as yet had any Answer from them, but we are informed
here, His Messengers have been far otherwise received than he expected, (since
they were the Carriers of so good a Message:) for the Earl of South-Hampton, a
better Poster than the Earl of Dorset came to the House upon Saturday last, and
as he was going to take his place, he was called to, to withdraw. He said, he
had a Message to deliver them from His Majesty, but received no other Answer
than still a Command to withdraw, which at last he obeyed: then they sent the
Black Rod to him, requiring him to send the Message to them by him; which he
refused, having Commands to deliver the Message himself to the House. But they
again pressed it, yet he still refused; at last they declared, that if any Evil
did arise from the not delivering of his Message, they were free of it:
whereupon he sent it to them by Mr. Maxwell, to which he received no other
Answer, than their absolute Command immediately to remove from Town. The House
of Commons were something more favorable to Sir John Culpeper, who after some
Debate, was admitted into the House, (though not to his Place) but, as I am
informed, delivered his Message at the Bar, and thereafter was commanded to
withdraw. It was then taken into Consideration, whether or not he should any
more be admitted as a Member of that House; which was voted in his favors, so
that it is like their Answer will be returned by him: which I hear will only be
to let His Majesty know, that so long as his Proclamations are out against the
Earl of Essex (and such others their Adherents, of whom they account themselves
to be) as Traitors, and the Standard up for raising of Men to suppress them;
they account themselves as out of His Majesty's Protection, and so incapable to
Treat.

By this the World will see, whether His Majesty or they be the occasion of
this War, and of all the Blood which is like to be shed in this unfortunate
Kingdom. His Majesty has left no means of Accommodation unessayed, for he has
even descended to make the first Offer of a new Treaty; so careful is He of His
Subjects Lives, that for their Safeties, He is even prodigal of His Own Honor:
and certainly he has not a Subject that has Honor, but will be sensible of
the Extremities he is now reduced into. I wish our Countrymen may take it so to
heart, as not to neglect this occasion of witnessing their Affections to His
Majesty, by making some Overtures for such a Treaty, or offer of their Service
to Him, (since His Majesty is absolutely resolved to send no more Messages) as
may be most for His Majesty's Honor, and Peace of His Kingdoms: which if they
shall refuse or despise, I hope we will not then forget, that it is our King
that is reduced to this necessity, and that we will never look on unconcerned
where he is so deeply engaged. I hope you will pardon the Trouble I give you in
reading this long ill-written Letter; for had I not been Commanded to it, by a
Power which God willing I shall never disobey, it had not been hazarded on by

Your most humble Servant, LANERICK.
Nottingham, the last of August 1642.

The Marquis took all the pains imaginable on Argyle and Lowdon, to persuade
them to a cordial owning of the Kings Service, Much pains taken to engage
Scotland to the Kings Service.
as the only way to give Scotland a lasting Interest in the Kings Affection,
which also would make them famous all the World over. And since the Scottish
Troubles had involved the King in all His difficulties, it was just they should
study to extricate him: and for the pretense of Religion, with which the
English were cajoling our Scottish Clergy, he said he was to be pardoned, if he
presumed to know them better than they could, assuring them that Religion was
only pretended by them. He took also a great deal of pains in many others, to
prepare them against the day in which the Conservatours were to meet; to which
Lanerick came with the following Letter from His Majesty.

Right trusty, etc.
The Kings Letter to the Conservatours of the Peace.
HAving been informed that upon Petition of the Commissioners from Our late
General Assembly, Our Council thought fit, that you should meet for discharging
of that Trust imposed on you by Us, and Our Parliament, whereby all fair means
may be used to prevent such Troubles and Divisions, as may interrupt or
endanger the common Peace of Our Kingdom. And as it ought to be the continual
study of all Good and Pious Princes, to preserve their People, so certainly it
is the Duty of all Loyal and Faithful Subjects, to maintain the Greatness, and
Just Authority of their Princes; so that without this reciprocal Endeavor,
there can be no Happiness for the Prince, nor Security for the People. We are
sure, Our late Actions in Scotland, will to all posterity be an acceptable
witness of Our Care, in preserving the Liberty of those Our Subjects, and Our
Desire to settle perfect Peace in that Our Kingdom. And We are also confident,
that the many good Acts We have past here since the Sitting of this Parliament,
(indeed denying none but such as denied Us any Power at all, and were never so
much as demanded from any of Our Predecessors) will bear the like Testimony of
Our Affection to the Good and Peace of this Kingdom, though the success has
not been alike. For though We have used Our best Endeavors, to prevent the
present Distractions and threatening Dangers: yet so prevalent have been the
opposers of Us, and the Peace of Our Kingdoms, that not so much as a Treaty can
be obtained, (though by Our several Messages We have descended to demand and
press it) unless upon such Conditions, as would either by taking all Power of
Government from Us, make Us as nothing; or by forcing Us to quit the Protection
of such, as for obeying Us (according to Law and their Oath of Allegiance) they
would have Traitors, and so make Us do an Act unworthy of a King. Yet so
desirous We are to save Our Subjects Blood, (which cannot but be prodigally
spent, if We be necessitated by force of Arms to decide these unhappy
Differences) that no sooner any such Treaty shall be offered unto Us by them,
(which with Honor and Safety We can receive) but We shall cheerfully embrace
it. This We have thought fit to acquaint you with, that from Our Selves, you
may know Our love to Peace, and We doubt not but your Meeting at this time will
produce something which will witness your tender respect to Our Honor and
Safety; and so much We do confide in your Affections, as We shall absolutely
leave the ways and means of expressing it to your selves. So We bid you
heartily farewell.

From Our Court at Stafford, the 18th of September.

This so far prevailed with them at their first Meeting, The Conservatours
incline to serve the King,
that all things went very fairly; so that they sent a Return to the Kings
Letters, without making any Judgment on the Differences betwixt Him and the
Parliament. They also resolved to Mediate betwixt the King and the Two Houses,
and for that end, designed to send the Marquis to Holland, with an Invitation
from Scotland to Her Majesty, for her Return to mediate a Peace betwixt the
King and Parliament. and to invite the Queen:
And the Marquis got a Paper signed, by almost all the Lords, not only those
who were the best-affected, but by Lowdon, Arg^le, Waristoun, Mr. Alexander
Henderson, and the other Leaders of the Party, containing an Invitation for Her
Majesty, to come to Scotland, with assurance of Security for Her Person, and
the free exercise of Her Religion for Her Self and Family, (so that no others
were admitted to share in it;) and that they should concur with Her Majesty, in
mediating a Peace betwixt the King and the Two Houses, which if it were
rejected by the Two Houses they obliged themselves to engage for the King
against them. This was carried with great Address, and managed so prudently,
that wise men called it the Masterpiece of the Marquis his Life. Lanerick
carried it to the King, to receive His Pleasure about it, a Note whereof
follows, written by Lanerick in general Terms.

Diverse of the most considerable of the Nobility of Scotland, and send Lan^rick
to the King.
have (by the Earl of Lanerick) humbly offered unto His Majesty their sense of
the present Differences betwixt Him and His Parliament of England, which they
conceive will hardly be reconciled so long as Her Majesty is at so great a
distance; and therefore are persuaded, it would conduce much for Settling these
Distractions, if Her Majesty might be moved to return and mediate in so good a
Work: for which end the Marquis of Hamilton (if His Majesty think fit, and
conceive it may be acceptable to Her Majesty) will be ready to go to Holland,
humbly to invite Her Majesty hereunto, in Name of this whole Kingdom of
Scotland, who will as dutiful and faithful Subjects, humbly join their
Endeavors and Mediation with Her Majesty, that His Majesty may have Honor and
Contentment, and His People Happiness and Security under His Royal Government.

But the King was jealous of them.
The King at first welcomed this Proposition with a great deal of Joy, but upon
other grounds, he thought not fit to listen to it; for his Affection to the
Queen made him fear the hazard of Her Person so much, that this Proposition was
not entertained, which the Marquis often regrated as a Loss which could never
be recovered: for this raised Jealousies in the minds of the Scottish Lords, as
if the King had no Confidence in them, which was cherished sufficiently by
diverse Malcontents, upon which the Marquis despaired of getting any good done
in Scotland. All he judged possible thereafter, was to prevent, and provide
against the Evil he feared, and that he prosecuted with all the Zeal he was
master of; which His Majesty understanding by Mr. Mungo Murray Cupbearer, wrote
him what follows.

Hamilton,
YOur Letter and this Bearer has so fully satisfied me, (that I cannot be more
confident in any thing than that you will (beside what you have) deserve that
mark of Favor I intend you. You know me too well to have more words spent upon
you; only this, I think unfit to trust particulars to Paper, having so trus^y a
Messenger, whom I stayed this long, expecting daily a Battle: but now I think
the Rebels want either Courage or Strength to fight, before they be forced. So
referring you to my Servant Mungo, I rest

Your most assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Wollerhampton, the 27th October. 1642.

The next Meeting of the Conservatours was on the 24th of November, The
Conservatours become worse affected.
where their strain seemed much altered to the worse; yet they still resolved
to interpose in a Mediation betwixt the King and the Parliament of England:
whereupon they wrote both to the King and the Two Houses, for a Safe Conduct to
such as they should send up.

At this time there were great Complaints of some encroachments made upon the
Privileges the Scottish Nation had enjoyed in France: The Earl of Louthian is
sent to France.
for Redress whereof the Council thought it necessary to send one to France,
and made choice of the Earl of Louthian; and sent him first to the King, with
the Instructions they had given him, that His Majesty might send him as His
Minister, to negotiate that Affair. One of the Instructions, was to get the
Marquis put in possession of the Honor and Revenue of Chastle-herault.

Upon the Earl of Lowthian's coming to Court, the Instructions he had from
Scotland were called for by His Majesty; who judged he had no reason to allow
this Precedent of His Subjects instructing His Agents to Foreign Courts, and
these are yet extant among Lanerick's Papers. But the King caused write them
over in his Name, so that there was no ground from this, to charge any thing on
the Marquis, as tampering with Foreign Princes, which was publicly done by his
Enemies on this occasion; it having been ordinarily recommended by King James
to all the Ministers he sent from Scotland to France. Neither was this done
without the Kings particular Knowledge and Orders; for besides that the King
gave that Instruction with the rest, he very seriously recommended it by word
of mouth to Lowthian's Care, as he informed the Writer.

After this the Marquis represented to the King, that it were fit he should
send down some person of Quality to give fresh Assurances and Hopes, before
they sent up their Commissioners: Lanerick is sent back to Scotland.
whereupon the King sent down the Earl of Lanerick, as the person who
understood his thoughts best, and was ablest to second his Brother in advancing
his Service. He came from Oxford in the beginning of December, and brought the
following Letter from the King to his Brother.

Hamilton,
THough the Trust of this Bearer needs not a Credential Letter, An
extraordinary Letter of the Kings.
yet the Civility of a Friend cannot but under his hand, as well as by word of
mouth, express his Kindness, and resentment of Courtesies; which of late have
been such, that you have given me just cause to give you better Thanks, than I
will offer at in in words. I shall not neglect the lazy use of so trusty a
Bearer, by referring to him, not only the estate of my Affairs here, but
likewise in what way you will be of most use to Me: yet I cannot but tell you,
I have set up my rest upon the Justice of my Cause, being resolved, that no
extremity or misfortune shall make me yield; for I will be either a Glorious
King, or a Patient Martyr, and as yet not being the first, nor at this present
apprehending the other, I think it now no unfit time, to express this my
Resolution unto you. One thing more, (which but for the Messenger were too much
trust to Paper) the sailing to one Friend has indeed gone very near me;
wherefore I am resolved, that no Consideration whatsoever shall ever make me
do the like. Upon this Ground I am certain, that God has either so totally
forgiven me, that he will still bless this Good Cause in my Hands; or that all
my Punishment shall be in this World, which without performing what I have
resolved, I cannot flatter my self will end here. This accustomed Freedom will
(I am confident) add cheerfulness to your honest Resolutions, seeing beside
Generosity, to which I pretend a little, my Conscience will make me stick to my
Friends, assuring you, I have none if I am not

Your most assured constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Oxford, 2d December. 1642.

This excellent Letter will both show, what pious Resentments His Majesty
carried along with him in the greatest perplexities of his Affairs, and
discover how he did not think that the Marquis had either neglected or abused
his Trust. Lanerick acted with more briskness, and spoke more home and roundly
than his Brother, which preserved him in a high degree from the Jealousies,
which the smoothness of his carriage brought upon him. Now the Pulpits were not
idle, for the Ministers begun again to work on the People, The Ministers
persuade the People to Arms.
for the Defense of the Good Cause now in hazard, which was ecchoed back with
the applause of the Vulgar.

The Marquis and Argyle at enmity.
At this time the Marquis his Friendship with Argyle grew to a Coldness, which
after a few months turned into an Enmity; for he finding Argyle so backward in
all motions for the Kings Service, and that he could not be prevailed upon to
continue in a Neutrality in the English quarrel, broke with him.

There was then in Scotland one Pickering, an Agent from England, who studied
to poison all with Misinformations of the Kings Proceedings and Designs. The
Marquis is complained of England as the Incendiary.
He wrote to Mr. Pym, that he found good inclinations with all in Scotland, to
own their Quarrel, and declare for them; only the Marquis with his Friends
resisted it so powerfully, that till he were laid aside, the success of his
Negotiation was to be feared. Wherefore he advised to proceed against him
roundly, and either to summon him to the House of Peers, or to send down a
Warrant to pursue him in Scotland as the Incendiary betwixt the two Kingdoms:
and he sent threatenings of this to the Marquis; but he found his firmness to
the Kings Service was proof against all Attempts, and he could neither be
caressed, nor cudgelled out of it. Most of Pickering's Letters, both to Pym and
Clotworthy, were intercepted, from which I draw these Accounts.

About the 20th of December there was a Council-day, (a particular account
whereof I shall give, Great debates in the Council about the Kings Declaration.
as I have it from a Copy of a Letter written to London) in which the
Chancellor presented to the Council a Letter from my Lord Lindsay (then at
London) with the Declaration of the Parliament. But though the Lords of that
Party knew nothing of this, yet by private Letters Lanerick had some
conjectures of it beforehand. After the Parliaments Paper was twice read,
Lowdon resumed it fully, and as soon as he had done with that, Lanerick
delivered another Letter from the King, with as large a Declaration within it:
and after it was twice read, Lanerick bade the Chancellor resume it, as
faithfully as he had done the former; which accordingly he did. The first thing
the Marquis thought best to move, as that of the least Importance, which yet
would discover how the Council was inclined was the Publishing the Kings
Declaration. The Lord Balmerino said, the Parliament desired not theirs to be
published, so it were Officiousness to do it; but that it were Injustice to
publish the one without the other. The Marquis asked, was that because we owed
as much to the Parliament of England, as to the King? Lanerick added, he had a
Command from the King for it. Argyle answered, they sat there to good purpose,
if every Message to them was a Command; and they two let fly at one another for
a while with much eagerness. But the Marquis and Balmerino took the debate off
their hands, and managed it more calmly. The Marquis said, the Vote was to be
stated, Obey or Not obey: the other answered, that was the Bishops way of
proceeding, to procure Orders from the King without Advice, and then charge all
who offered better Counsel with Disobedience. The Marquis said, to what did
they mean to reduce the Kings Authority, if he might not set out Declarations,
for removing the Aspersions were cast on his Person and Government? or would
they speak plainly, were they afraid that his Subjects might have too good an
opinion of him, if they heard himself? There appeared a variety of Opinions
before it was put to the Vote, some were for Printing both, some were for
Printing neither, some for Printing the Kings and not the Parliaments; and one
had a singular Opinion, for Printing the Parliaments, and not the Kings. There
were one and twenty Councillors present, and it being put to the Vote, Print
or not Print, there were eleven who voted I, I, I, and nine voted No, No, No.
This being carried that the Kings Declaration, and not the Parliments should be
Printed, the Marquis moved next, that the matter of these Declarations might be
considered. But the Lord Balmerino said, the Parliament of England was long in
contriving their Paper; and the King, and those about him, had been no doubt,
as long in forming the other; and if we shall fall upon a few hours
Consideration, to give our sense of them, we were pretty fellows in faith,
which he twice repeated. This rude Raillery touched the Marquis in the quick,
because he conceived these words were not so much a reflection upon himself, as
on the King, who (on another great occasion) had used the same expression.
However they had sat and debated long, so they gave it over for that day. This
is set down more particularly, because it was the first instance that these two
Parties fell visibly asunder: and henceforth they continued stated in two
Factions. But because I love not to name persons upon invidious occasions,
henceforth all the other Faction shall be designed by the General term of the
Church-party, (others calling them Argyl's Party) and the other the
Hamilton-party. However the Declaration was printed, which drew a large share
of Censure and Hatred on the two Brothers; but the King was so well pleased
with their Behavior, that he wrote the Marquis the following Letter.

Hamilton,
YOu know I am ill at words: I think it were best for me to say to you (as Mr.
Major did) you know my mind, and indeed I know none of my Subjects, that knows
it better; and having for the present little else to give my Servants but
thanks, I hold it a particular Misfortune that I can do it no better, therefore
this must suffice. I see you are as good as your word, and you shall find me as
good in mine, of being

Your most assured constant Friend, CHARLES R..
Oxford, December 29th 1642. An. 1643.
POSTSCRIPT.
You cannot take to your self, nor express to your Brother, better thanks than
I mean to you both, for the Service you did me the last Council-day.




Anno 1643.
THe next Year begun with Petitions, which were brought from diverse Shires and
Presbyteries, complaining of their Publishing the late Declaration; but the
Conservatours of Peace (who were for the most part of the Church-party) made
this up the best way they could; Most are inclined to join with the Two Houses
against the King.
for first, they declared a Publication was not an Approbation; next, they
appointed the Parliaments Declaration to be also Published. At this time the
Marquis and Traquair renewed their old Friendship: and seeing these Petitions
coming in so fast, which did clearly insinuate desires of engaging in the
Parliaments Quarrel, he with his Brother's and Traquair's advice, contrived a
Cross Petition to be offered to the Lords of Council. And as the Motion of it
came first from him, so the first draught of it was from his Pen, of which I
find an account under Lanerick's hand: so little reason there was to charge him
with Juggling in that matter; though it was not fit, he should have owned it,
lest upon that account the Church-party might either have accused him as a
Plotter, or at least cast him from Sitting and Judging in it. The Petition
follows.

May it please your Lordships,
The Cross Petition.
THat whereas His Majesty, with Advice of his Great Council the Estates of
Parliament, has been pleased to select your Lordships to be His Councillors,
and has, by an Act of the late Parliament, committed to your Lordships the
Administration and Government of this Kingdom, in all Affairs concerning the
Good, Peace, and Happiness thereof; and in regard of that great Trust reposed
by His Majesty, and the Estates of Parliament in you, your Lordships have been
and will continue so careful to acquit your selves of that weighty Charge, as
you may be answerable for all your Actions and Proceedings to His Majesty, and
the Estates of Parliament, to whom (as we conceive) you are and can only be
accomptable: And now we being informed of a Petition presented by some
Noblemen, Gentlemen and others, to the Commissioners, for conserving the
Articles of the late Treaty, upon pretext of your Lordships not Sitting at that
time, wherein it is represented, that your Lordships late Warrant for Printing
His Majesty's Letter has occasioned great Grief and heavy Regrate, of all who
tender the Glory of God, His Majesty's Honor, and procuring Unity of Religion,
and Uniformity in Church Government, the continuance of Peace, and Union
betwixt the two Kingdoms, and fearing if at this time, we should be silent,
your Lordships should conceive us, and the rest of the Kingdom, to be involved
with them in the like Desires, Judgments and Opinions, and lest by our silence
our Gracious Sovereign the Kings Majesty should believe us wanting in the Duty
and Allegiance, which by so many Ties and Obligations we owe to Him, our Native
King, or that our Brethren of England should apprehend the least Intention, ^r
Desire in us, to infringe, or any ways to encroach upon the Brotherly Union of
the two Kingdoms, so happily united under one Head; We presume in all Humility
to clear our selves, and our Intentions to your Lordships, and to all the
World, and therewith, to represent our humble Wishes and Desires, for
Establishing His Majesty's Royal Authority, and continuing that happy Union
betwixt the two Kingdoms, which can never truly be conceived to be intended to
weaken the Head, whereby it is knit together, and without which it can have no
subsistence.

The happy Union of the two Kingdoms under one Head, our King, does so much add
to His Majesty's Greatness, and Strength of both Kingdoms, that we British
Subjects cannot choose but wish that the said Brotherly Union be heartily
entertained, and cherished by all fair and reasonable means, to which we
conceive no one thing will so much conduce, as that the late Articles of the
Treaty of Peace, and Conclusions taken thereupon about Unity of Religion, may
be carefully and timeously prosecuted: wherein as our Commissioners then, so we
now without presuming or usurping to prescribe Rules, or Laws of Reformation to
our Neighbor-kingdom (Civil Liberty and Conscience being so tender that it
cannot endure to be touched, but by such as they are wedded to, and have lawful
Authority over them) notwithstanding, seeing the duty of Charity does oblige
all Christians to pray and profess their Desires, that all were of the same
Religion with themselves, and since we all acknowledge that Religion is the
base and foundation of Kingdoms, and the strongest Bond to knit the Subjects to
their Princes in true Loyalty, and to knit their Hearts one to another in true
Unity, we cannot but heartily wish, that this work of Union so happily begun,
may be crowned and strengthened by the Unity of Church Government; and that
your Lordships with us may be pleased to represent it to His Majesty, and Both
Houses of Parliament, as an expression and Testimony of our Affections to the
good of our Brethren in England, and of our Desires to make firm and stable our
Brotherly Union by the strong chain and Bulwark of Religion: but, as we have
said, no ways intending thereby to pass our bounds, in prescribing, and setting
down Rules and Limits to His Majesty, and the Two Houses of Parliament, their
Wisdom and Authority, in the way of prosecution thereof. The sense we have of
the great Calamities, and irreparable Evils, which upon occasion of these
unhappy Distractions and Mistakes betwixt the Kings Majesty and the Two Houses
of England, (which if not speedily removed cannot but produce the fearful and
prodigious effects of a bloody and Civil War) obliges us in the duty of
Christians, and as feeling members of what may concern our Common Head, the
Kings Majesty, and the Good and Happiness of our Brethren of England, humbly to
represent to your Lordships, That as we will not be wanting with our Prayers,
and our faithful and best Endeavors, to assist in the removing of these
unhappy Mistakes and Misunderstandings: so we heartily wish, and humbly
Petition your Lordships, that from the deepness of your Wisdom such happy
Motions may flow, as upon that tender care of our Sovereigns Person and
Authority, Peace and Truth may be settled in all His Majesty's Dominions.
Although we will not presume nor take upon us, to prescribe Laws and Rules to
your Lordships, yet in all Humility we entreat your permission, to represent
such Particulars as we conceive, and are very confident, will conduce much to
the removing of all ^hese Mistakes betwixt His Majesty and His Two Houses of
Parliament, and be a ready mean to facilitate a happy and wished Peace, and
continue the Brotherly Union between the Two Kingdoms.

And first, that in answering the foresaid Petition your Lordships may be
pleased to do no Act, which may give His Majesty just occasion to repent him of
what Trust he so Graciously expressed (in his Letter of the Date the fifth of
December) He reposes in us His Subjects of His Ancient and Native Kingdom; for
we cannot think, that our Brethren in England, or any other, can believe, that
the ground of this Mutual Union of the two Kingdoms, by the several and
respective Unions to our Prince and Head, should weaken the strong Bond,
whereby it is knit, and by which we are so firmly tied, by so many Ages, and
unparalelled lineal descents of an hundred and seven Kings. Neither can we
suppose, that any good Protestant, or true member of our Church, can imagine,
far less seduce others to believe, that by the late Treaty of Peace, or Act of
Union, we as Scottish Subjects are in any sort liberated from the Dutiful
Obedience, which as Scotishmen we owe to our Scottish King, or from that due
Loyalty, which as Scottish Subjects we owe to our Native Sovereign, for
Maintenance of His Person, Greatness and Authority; or that thereby, we are in
any other Condition in these necessary Duties to our Sovereign, than we and our
Ancestors were, and have been, these many Ages and Descents, before the making
of the said Act, or before the Swearing and Subscribing of our late Covenant,
by which we have solemnly sworn, and do swear not only our mutual Concurrence,
and Assistance for the cause of Religion, and to the utmost of our power, with
our Means and Lives, to stand to the Defense of our Dread Sovereign His Person
and Authority, in the preservation of Religion, Liberty, and Laws, of this
Church and Kingdom; but also in every Cause, which may concern His Majesty's
Honor, we shall according to the Laws of this Kingdom, and Duty of Subjects,
concur with our Friends and Followers in quiet manner, or in Arms, as we shall
be required of His Majesty, or His Council, or any having His Authority.

Secondly, That if your Lordships think it fitting, to make any answer to the
Parliament of England their Declaration, your Lordships may be pleased not to
declare, enact, or promise, any thing which may trouble or molest the Peace of
this Kirk and Kingdom; which by God's special Grace, and His Majesty's Favor
and Goodness, we enjoy and have established unto us according to our Hearts
desire, by the Laws Ecclesiastical or Civil of this Kingdom respective, and
which His Majesty since, by so many Declarations and deep Protestations has
Sworn to maintain inviolably.

Thirdly, That your Lordships may be pleased to consider, that as nothing will
more diminish His Majesty's Greatness, than that this Kingdom should consume in
Civil War; so nothing will more conduce to the Suppressing of insolent Papists,
malignant, schismatic, and Disloyal Brownists, and Separatists, the special,
if not the sole promovers of these unhappy Misunderstandings, than that
heartily and freely, without respect of worldly and secondary Considerations,
we give to Christ what is Christ's, and to Caesar what is Caesar's; by means
whereof, the Truth and Purity of Religion shall be established, to the utter
Confusion of all these Sectaries, true Monarchical Government firmly settled; by
which likewise, Laws and Authority shall retain their ancient vigor and force,
to the Suppression of all Commotions and tumultuous Conventions, the bane and
overthrow of all true Religion and Policy.

Fourthly, Although there be nothing farther from our minds, than to presume to
question, or crave of your Lordships an account of your Actions, knowing
perfectly by the inviolable Laws and Customs of this Kingdom, that to be only
proper and due to the King and Parliament, from whence you have that great
Charge and Trust delivered unto you: yet we hope your Lordships will give us
leave, in all Humility to remember your Lordships of your Deliverance June
1642. and are confident, that the said Lords, the Petitioners, neither have,
nor shall have, necessity to trouble themselves, nor the Council with
Supplications of this kind, and that your Lordships in your Wisdom will take
some Course for preventing all occasions, which may in any sort disturb the
Peace of this Kingdom, or make Division among the Subjects thereof.


This Petition was signed by a great many Noblemen, and Gentlemen; Many sign it.
but though they took much pains to get Ministers to concur in it, yet none of
them could be drawn to it. This Petition was presented with many hands at it to
the Council; and it was observed, that as it was written by a trusty Friend of
the Marquis's; so also all his Friends signed it, which made the Author
suspected, and did show that his Friends adhered (hitherto) to their Duty, and
his Example. All the Answer the Counselors returned to it, was, that they
should be careful to proceed as they should be answerable: All the Ministers
condemn it.
But the Preachers threatened Damnation to all the Authors and Subscribers of
it, and detestable Neutrality became the Head on which they spent their
Eloquence. The Commission of the General Assembly passed a severe Censure on
the Cross Petition, in a Remonstrance they gave in against it, which was
answered by a Counter-remonstrance. Upon these cross tides of Petitions, that
were offered to the Council, the Conservatours of the Peace resolved to send
some Commissioners to London, Commissioners sent to Treat betwixt the King and
the Two Houses.
to Mediate betwixt the King and the Two Houses, and endeavor chiefly the
Uniformity of Church Government; for which end the Commission of the Kirk was
also to send their Commissioners, to second them in it: and no resistance could
be made to this, that was able to obstruct it. They also moved, that the King
should be desired to call a Parliament in Scotland. The Marquis and his Friends
opposed this vigorously, not that he was against a Parliament, but judged the
Motion unseasonable; and thought the Time prefixed at the last Parliament, for
the next, to wit, after three years, needed not be anticipated. It was also put
in their Instructions to their Commissioners, to press the King to put all
Papists from his Person. The Marquis and his Friends also opposed this, not
upon the account of the thing it self, but because it seemed to cast a Scandal
upon the King, as if his Religion were to be suspected. But the Church-party
was strongest in this Meeting of the Conservatours, and so carried every thing
in it. The Safe-conducts being come, they named their Commissioners, the
Chancellor being the chief of them; and though Lanerick in the Kings Name
excepted against the Lord Waristoun, and produced the Kings Warrant for it; yet
they named him, but were so wise as not to send him. They were also so
discreet, that they appointed the Commissioners to go first to the King. Things
being thus determined, Lanerick took the start of them; but they were at Court
before him, he being detained by a Garrison of the Parliaments for some days.

In the end of February he came to Oxford, Lanerick goes to Court, and
discovers the inclination of the Church-party.
where he gave the King an account of the present state of the Scottish Affairs,
and that it was the Advice of His Majesty's truest Friends in Scotland, that he
should entertain the Commissioners with the best words he could give them, but
should not by any means suffer them to go to London; since there were great
grounds to fear, they would engage too deep in the Quarrel if they went
thither. This Advice agreed so with the Kings Inclinations, that it could meet
no resistance in his thoughts. When the Commissioners arrived they delivered
their Message; but the King repeated what was formerly told them, That Scotland
and England had different Laws and Interests, and therefore it was to give the
one Kingdom too great an advantage over the other, to suffer them to come and
be Vmpires in the present Differences. They pressed their Desires as warmly as
they could, but all was in vain, for the King would by no means suffer them to
go to London; and in particular he told the Earl of Lowdon, what grounds He had
to believe they designed to raise an Army for the Parliaments Quarrel, and that
some of his fellow-Commissioners would prove Incendiaries rather than
Mediators. But Lowdon with great Protestations denied that they designed to
raise Arms; and said to the King, These were but the Misrepresentations, with
which the Marquis and his Brother abused His Majesty. As for the Calling a
Parliament, the King said he saw no reason for it, and therefore would not
anticipate the Day that was already prefixed for it. But to the Commissioners
from the Assembly, the King gave the following Answer; which I set down in his
own Words, having it written all with His Majesty's own Hand.

HIs Majesty commends the Zeal of the Petitioners for the advancement of the
true Reformed Religion, against Heresy, Popery* Sects, Innovations, and
Profanity, and always shall use His best and uttermost endeavors, for
Advancing the one, and the utter Suppressing the rest.

For the Unity in Kirk-Government, His Majesty knows, that the Government now
established by the Laws, has so near a relation and intermixture with the
Civil State, (which may be unknown to the Petitioners) that till a composed
digested Form be presented to him, upon a free debate by Both Houses of
Parliament, whereby the Consent and Approbation of the whole Kingdom may be
had, and He and all His Subjects may discern what is to be left, or brought in,
as well as what taken away, He knows not how to consent to an Alteration,
otherwise than to such an Act for the ease of Tender Consciences, in the matter
of Ceremonies, as His Majesty has often offered.

And His Majesty has formerly expressed Himself (and still continues) willing,
that the Debates of Religion may be entered into by a Synod of Learned and Godly
Divines, to be regularly c^osen, according to the Laws and Customs of this
Kingdom; to which end His Majesty will be very willing, that some Learned
Divines of the Kirk of Scotland may be likewise sent to be present, and offer
their Reasons and Opinions.

This was the Success of that Negotiation; but because the Reader may wonder
how Lowdon, and the Marquis came to be in such terms, I shall set down the
occasion of their Breach.

When Lowdon was to go up, the Marquis resolved on a Course that should either
stop his Journey, or make him so obnoxious to the King, that he should not dare
to act contrary to his Duty; which was this. Lowdon had purchased from the King
a Right to the Annuities of the Tithes, that was confirmed to His Majesty by
Act of Parliament, whereupon the Marquis caused the following Petition to be
drawn by Traquair's Advice.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Humble Petition of the Noblemen,
Barons, and Gentlemen, occasionally met at Edinburgh.
Humbly Shows, THat whereas Your Majesty at Your late being in Scotland,
being humbly moved to disburden and liberate the Subjects of this Kingdom of
the Annuity due to Your Majesty out of the Tithes, The Petition against the
Annuities.
were pleased in that only Particular to delay to give us our Hearts desire,
and now out of the sense of the great Burdens that lie on us, and in Confidence
of the Continuance of Your Majesty's Fatherly Care of the Good of Your
Subjects, we presume humbly to supplicate Your Majesty, to be Graciously
pleased in this Particular to dispense with Your Own Benefit: or at least, till
Your Majesty be informed of the true state thereof, to discharge Execution
against us for the said Annuities. And for Your Majesty's incomparable Goodness
and Gracious Favors, we shall, as in duty bound, behave our selves in every
thing as becomes Loyal and Faithful Subjects. As we have unanimously
endeavored, so shall we still continue to return such thank^ul Acknowledgment,
as may give to Your Majesty a real Testimony of our zealous Affections to Your
Majesty's Sacred Person, Honor, and Greatness, derived upon Your Majesty by so
many unparalelled Descents, and as Your Majesty may expect, and justly
challenge from the Allegiance of us Your Majesty's most obedient and obliged
Subjects.

16th February 1643.
The last words of this Petition were by the first draught so conceived, as
would have amounted to a Bond of Mutual Defense and Adherence, which the
Marquis thought might draw on a Rupture, and occasion a pursuit as against
Plotters; therefore, since this Paper was to be avowed and public, he judged
such Expressions as were smooth and general were fittest for their Design.

This Petition was signed by him, and a great many of the Nobility: he also
sent it up and down, all the places where he or his Friends had Interest, to
get Subscriptions to it. This was generally looked upon as a well-couched Bond,
both by such as took it, and those who refused it; and yet this smoothing of
the Expressions of it, was represented by the Marquis's Enemies, as done in
prejudice to the Kings Service. These Petitions were sent immediately to the
King; upon which great Complaints were made, as if by these immediate
Addresses, the Judicatories of Scotland had been neglected: but the King
justified that part of it in an Answer he wrote to the Council; and for the
thing it self, he resolved to keep Lowdon under the fear of it, and therefore
delayed to make any Answer.

In the end of February Her Majesty landed at Burlingtown, whither the Earl of
Montrose went to represent to Her the hazard of a new Rebellion in Scotland,
The Queen lands in England, and Montrose waits on Her, and offers his Service.
and that the only way to prevent it, was to take the start of them before they
were ready; and with a great deal of forwardness offered his Service in that
Design, adding, that he had great Assurances of a considerable Party, who he
knew would own the Kings Quarrel: but he did not condescend on the particular
way of prosecuting it, so that the Queen was not satisfied of his being able to
effectuate what he undertook. Meanwhile the Marquis hearing of Her Majesty's
Landing, went to wait on Her, to whom She proposed the Earl of Montrose's
Offer; but he studied by all means to divert Her from listening to it, upon the
following Grounds.

The King had settled a Treaty with Scotland, The Marquis goe^ to Her, and
dis^wades the precipitating a Rupture with Scotland.
and till that were violated on their part, he knew His Majesty would never
consent to a Rupture on his part: and the King had so often and so lately, in
his Letters and Declarations, protested, he was resolved unalterably to adhere
to the late Settlement; that if he should now authorize the first Breach, it
would bring an indelible stain upon his Honor, and create a perpetual
Dif^idence in his Subjects of all his Concessions and Assurances. He conf^ssed
he had great Fears of Scotland, and therefore would undertake for nothing but
his own Faithfulness, and Diligence; yet he hoped to get things kept in
Agitation all that Summer, so that for that Year there should not be a Scottish
Army in England. But that was the utmost of his Hopes; yet it was much fitter
to spin out things as long as could be, than to precipitate them by an
overhasty Rupture: besides, he could not see, how any Hopes could be conceived
from that design of Force. There was never a Castle nor Strength in Scotland in
the Kings Power, to which they might retire. The Vulgar were still at the
Ministers devotion, and by late and fresh experience they saw them all as one
man resolved to die in the Defense of the Covenant; and any handful of Gentry
could be gathered together, would signify nothing, but to expose their own
Throats to their Enemies Rage, and the Kings Authority to their Hatred and
Scorn: so there remained no hopes but in the Highland-men, which he accounted
as good as none. Their two chief Heads where the Marquis^es of Huntley and
Argyle; the former was not to be much rested on, being unable to do what so
brisk an Undertaking required, and they knew well what to expect from the
other. Besides, any Companies could be brought down from the High-lands, might
do well enough for a while; but no Order could be expected from them, for
as soon as they were loaded with Plunder and Spoil, they would run away home to
their Lurking-holes, and desert those who had trusted to them. And after all
this, there was a Scottish Army in Ireland, which was now well trained and
disciplined, consisting of ten thousand men, who were for the most part at the
Covenanters devotion, and these would be instantly brought over, there being no
way to stop their Passage: and it was not to be imagined, that any Body of an
Army could be raised in Scotland able to resist that Force. Upon these Reasons
it was, that he not only dissuaded the Queen from consenting to a present
Breach, but resisted it as long as was possible; yet he undertook for none but
himself, of which he put the Queen frequently in mind, and the utmost of his
expectation was to drive off Matters for that Year. And in this both my Lord
Traquair and Mr. Murray concurred with him, and desired the whole Matter might
be laid before His Majesty, that his Pleasure might be made known about it; but
after a few days waiting on the Queen, the Marquis returned back to Scotland.

The Scottish Commissioners continued all this while at Oxford, The
Commissioners at Oxford get their last Answer.
giving in Papers, and receiving Answers, but advancing nothing; and the last
Answer they got from His Majesty the 19th of April, containing both the
Substance of their Papers, and of His Majesty's former Answers, will give a
clear account of the Grounds on which His Majesty went. The Paper follows.

IT is acknowledged by His Majesty, that if any one of the Articles of Treaty
had been broken or violated, (as His Majesty does not so much as see pretended)
or any Debate or Difference had risen thereupon, (about which there is now no
Dispute) the Commissioners had then been not only warranted, but obliged to
have labored to prevent all Troubles and Divisions, which might arise by such
a Breach to the disturbance of the Common Peace, and to remove and compose all
such Differences, according to such Power as was granted to them: but till His
Majesty be satisfied, that Authority (by some Law) is given to the
Commissioners for Conserving the Articles of Treaty, to represent His Majesty's
Native Kingdom of Scotland, in this Offer of Mediating for a desired and
blessed Pacification here; His Majesty cannot see how the pious, dutiful,
provident or charitable, Concernment of that Kingdom in the Calamities of this,
or their Sympathy and sense of the Troubles of their Head, and Fellow Subjects,
can interess the Commissioners, any more than any other of His good Subjects of
that Kingdom, to bestir themselves in Matters of that kind: or why any such
Endeavors should be by any (much less universally) expected from them; so far
is he from seeing that any undeclinable Necessity constrained them to it. And
since the express words of the Act of Pacification it self are, that the Power
of the Commission shall be restrained to the Articles of Peace concluded in the
Treaty, His Majesty cannot but wonder, whence they can pretend any Obligation
or Authority to meddle with, or press him concerning any such Articles, as are
not included, but still left dependent, how important soever they suppose them
to be, (even to the Common Peace:) And it giving them only liberty to convene
to that effect among themselves, or with the Commissioners chosen by His
Majesty with consent of the Parliament of England, and restraining them in all
their Proceedings to the Power granted to them, in manner aforesaid and no
otherwise, as clearly intending to restrain all Power that might be pretended
to by any Inserences, Analogies or Consequences (how manifest soever they might
appear) and requiring them to consist of the number of Twelve, and not giving
them Power to delegate a smaller number; His Majesty cannot consent, That that
number the Laws allow not (that is, Three) should address themselves to those
the Law has not appointed them (this is, Both Hous^s) not only concerning that
which the Law entrusted not to them, (as a Pacification here) but even
concerning that from which the Law expressly restrains them, that is, one of the
Articles of the Treaty no way concluded, or agreed on, but expressly reserved by
the Parliament to be considered in due time, that is, in their own time,
concerning Church Government, the intermixture of which with the Civil State,
as His Majesty still conceives to be very great, and of very high Concernment,
and not to be understood by the Commissioners, who have not the knowledge of
the Laws and Policy of this Kingdom; so His Majesty is confident,
(notwithstanding the Declaration, and Bill abolishing the Order of Bishops)
that if they well knew, how generally any thing of that kind was opposed whilst
the Houses continued full, and how the Major part of Both Houses were absent at
the passing of that Declaration and Bill, (in so much that His Majesty, is
credibly informed, that there were not above five Lords present when the Bill
past) and what violent and tumultuous Assemblies had occasioned so great and
unusual Absence, they would be confident, as he is, that in a full and
peaceable Convention of Parliament, Both Houses will appear to be of the same
opinion with His Majesty in this Particular, and to have in that the same
thoughts of the Law and Policy of this Kingdom.

His Majesty's care that the deluge of the Troubles of this Kingdom affect not
that with the danger of the like, is very visible to all the World. His Majesty
out of His great desire of continuing t^em in Peace and Tranquillity, not
desiring any assistance from them, even for His Own Preservation. And whoever
does desire any Commotion there, to assist their Rebellious and Invasive Arms
here, will (He hopes) be looked upon as the Troublers of Peace, and as
Incendiaries laboring to lay foundations of perpetual Hostility betwixt the
Two Kingdoms. And then (for ought His Majesty can see) there will be no cause
to expect any Commotions there, and such Dangers will rather prove imaginary
than real, though the Conservatours of the Treaty contain themselves within
their legal and proper Bounds. His Majesty wonders, that since His approbation
of their Mediation was desired when His Safe Conduct was asked, and the first
was not given, when the latter was, that it should not have been easily seen by
these Proceedings of His Majesty's, that as He never granted the first, (as
seeing no Authority they had for such a Mediation) so He only at last granted
the other, as being contented to hear what they could say to Him upon that
Point, either as private persons, or to give Him better satisfaction than He
could give Himself, what Right they could pretend to any Public Capacity of
that kind: but having heard all they have offered, and not finding any thing
that warrants them in this, in any special manner above His Majesty's other
Subjects, His Majesty cannot with reason admit of any private Persons
whatsoever into such a Public Capacity, nor with His Own Dignity, and that of
this Nation, can allow His Subjects of another Kingdom, not authorized by any
Law, to make themselves (under the title of a Mediation) Vmpires and
Arbitrators of the Differences here.

For the Calling of a Parliament in Scotland, His Majesty desires to know what
Promise of His it is, which they mention Him to have particularly expressed to
His late Parliament. The Law which His Majesty then Graciously past concerning
that Point, His Majesty well remembers, (and will justly, punctually, and
religiously observe it, together with all the rest consented to by Him,) that
the Parliament there shall convene upon the first Tuesday of June, 1644. And,
according to the same Act, will appoint one betwixt this and that Day, if His
Majesty shall think fitting; who as He is by that very Law expressed to be sole
Judge of that Convenience, so the Commissioners are neither by that, nor any
other Law, entrusted, or enabled to Judge thereof.

At Oxford, 19th of April. 1643.

In the beginning of April Reports came to Scotland, that their Commissioners
at Oxford were under Restraint; whereupon the Conservatours met, and ordered
their speedy Return. The Commissioners recalled to Scotland.
The Marquis wrote also to the King, that their Return should be by no means
stopped, or delayed; otherwise he might expect present Disorders in Scotland:
but withal he told him, he apprehended upon their Return, some great
Resolution would be taken; therefore he desired His Majesty would send down all
the Scottish Lords that were about him, who might by their Votes in
Judicatories, or by their Interest in the Country, advance the Kings Service in
Scotland. He likewise desired His Majesty might divide his Trust in Scotland
among those Noble persons, The Marquis advises the King to join others with
him in public Trust,
whose Fidelity he did not suspect, that thereby both himself might be
delivered from the odium* and danger of acting alone in such tender Points, and
in that ticklish Time; as also for a further Encouragement of those, who were
resolved to adhere to His Majesty: and with this he wrote the following Letter
to Her Majesty then at York, under whose Address his Letters to the King were
to go.

May it please Your Majesty,
THere is as yet small or no Alteration in the Condition of Affairs in the
Country, since I presumed to trouble Your Majesty last; and writes to the Queen.
nor do I believe there will be any till the fourth of May, at which time it is
probable, the final Resolution of the Council and Commi^sioners for Conserving
the Articles of the Treaty will be taken. It is still conceived, that His
Majesty's absent Servants would be of great use at that time; and the uncertain
knowledge, if they will come or not, keeps us that are here, from a positive
Resolution what Course to take therein; therefore I humbly beseech Your
Majesty, let us know if by appearance we may expect them or not.

There is a general noise, as if the Lord Chancellor and the rest of the
Commissioners, were not only kept as Prisoners, but in some further Danger. By
Mungo Murray Your Majesty was advertised, that it was conceived fit, that
seeing those that sent them had so positively recalled them against the fourth
of May, they should be dispatched against that Time. In our opinions there was
no Danger now to be apprehended by their Home-coming, but there would arise
great Inconveniences if they should be detained: of that same Judgment we
continue to be still.

We do likewise humbly entreat, that we may know, if what was proposed to Your
Majesty by my Lord of Traquair, Mr. Murray and my self, be come to His
Majesty's knowledge: and if we may expect the signification of his Pleasure
against the fourth of May, in these Particulars, which we exceedingly wish.

By the Lord Montgomery Your Majesty will know, how far the General has
promised his best Endeavors, that His Majesty shall receive no prejudice from
the Army under his Commandin Ireland; the same he has confirmed to me with
deep Protestations, and truly I take him to be a man of that Honor that he
will perform it.

But the Truth is, it will be a Work of great difficulty to keep these Men
there any time, seeing there is little appearance that Money will be got from
the Parliament of England, and how to raise any considerable Sum here, as yet
we see not; so even in this we desire to know Your Majesty's Pleasure and
Directions, what Course will be fitest to be taken; and if Your Majesty shall
find it expedient, that we engage our Fortunes for their Supply, many of us
will do it to the last Penny, and none more readily than,

May it please Your Majesty, the humblest, most faithful, and most obedient, of
all Your Majesty's Servants, HAMILTON.
Peebles, 21st April, 1643.

The Commissioners are not suffered to go to London, and returned to Scotland.
But at Oxford the Commissioners insisted warmly, for a Permission to go to
London for Mediating; and His Majesty persisting in his Refusal, the Lord
Chancellor resolved on making a Protestation, that His Majesty, by not
suffering them to go to Westminster, had violated the Safe Conduct. My Lord
Lindsay, who was ordered to come from London, and second the Chancellor in
this Negotiation, did all he could to divert him from that Resolution; but the
other said, he had positive Orders from Scotland: he was also peekt with the
Petition about the Annuities, and got a great disgust by a Letter of his
Ladies, which not coming under a right Cover had been intercepted, and brought
to His Majesty, wherein severe things were said against the Kings Cause and
Party; and particularly the Marquis was bitterly enveighed against, for having
given himself up so entirely to the Kings Service, that he designed the Ruin of
all who opposed it. The Chancellor came, and made his last Address to the
King, for liberty to enter on a Mediation betwixt Him and the Two Houses:
adding, that if that were denied, he would be constrained to Protest in the
Names of them who sent him, that His Majesty's Conduct was violated. But the
King was not shaken with it, only he took the Chancellor apart, and used many
persuasions to divert him from it, and made him great Offers if he would comply
with his Desires: for the King apprehended, that it might have precipitated a
Breach betwixt Him and Scotland. But the Chancellor said, he acted by a Trust
committed to him, which he must discharge faithfully, and obey the Orders sent
him, from those in whose Name he came; and said much to assure the King, there
was no design in Scotland to own the Quarrel of the Two Houses against His
Majesty, and protested, he should die rather than concur in such Courses. But
this did not satisfy His Majesty, whereupon finding the Chancellor could not
be wrought upon, his next Attempt was upon Lindsay, to whom he spoke with more
Freedom, and told him in how great a Strait he was; for it seemed, if he
refused to allow their going to Westminster a Breach might follow betwixt him
and his Native Kingdom: but on the other hand, he could not permit them to go,
both because of the Reasons he had alleged, and the Fears he had of their
engaging with the Parliament; and chiefly, that all his Councillors and
Officers at Oxford were so far against it, that he heard it was whispered
amongst them, that they would all forsake him if he gave them leave, since they
held themselves assured that the Design of their going was to bring an Army
from Scotland: wherefore he entreated Lindsay would serve him in that
Particular, which he undertook frankly, though he added he had small hopes,
since he had already attempted as much as he could with no Success. But as he
left His Majesty, he made a Visit in his way to his Lodgings, where he met the
Earl of Crawford, who told him plainly, That though the King should consent to
their going to London, thither should they never get; for a great many were
resolved to lie in their way, and cut them all to pieces ere they were many
miles from Oxford. This he confirmed to him with many Oaths, adding, that as
the King knew nothing of it, so it would not be in his power to hinder it; and
out of kindness to my Lord Lindsay, he advised him not to go, though the
Chancellor went. With this Lindsay came to his Lodgings, and showed the Lord
Chancellor the hazard, not only their Lives would be in, but of the
irreparable Breach would follow upon it; which being considered by them, it was
resolved they should pass from their Desires, and crave the Kings Commands for
Scotland, since they would not offend him by the importunity of an unacceptable
Mediation; which they accordingly did, to His Majesty's great satisfaction. And
so they took leave, the Chancellor with the other Commissioners going for
Scotland; only Lindsay returned to London. Upon this His Majesty sent all the
Scottish Lords, then at Court, to Scotland to serve him there, who were the
Earls of Morton, Roxburgh, Kinnoul, Annandale, Lanerick, and Carnwath; but
before they could be dispatched, he sent Mr. Murray to Scotland with an account
of his opinion about the Services his Friends might do him there; who came by
York, and brought from the Queen the following Letter to the Marquis, in answer
to what he had written to Her Majesty: which (though written in French, as all
Her private Letters were, yet) I shall set down, translated in English, that
all may run more smoothly.

Cousin,
I Received your Letter with the assurances of the Continuance of your
A^fection, of which I hold my self secure, and make no doubt to see both the
effects of it, and of that which you promised me at your parting, concerning my
Lord of Argyle. Will. Murray came yesterday from Oxford: as for News from
hence, I refer you to Henry Jermine, who will give you an account of them; I
shall only tell you, that the Scottish Lords, who were with the King, are on
their way for Scotland, so likewise are the Commissioners that were with the
King. You will know from Will. Murray the Kings Answers, to the Propositions
which you made me at York. I am very glad to know by Your Letter, as likewise
by what my Lord Montgomery has told me, the Protestations General Lesly makes
concerning the Armies in Ireland; and now when all the Kings Servants shall be
together, you must think of the means for preserving that Army: for my part I
know not what to say farther about it, I am now upon my going to the King, and
hope to part hence within ten days. If there be any thing that has occurred
of late, I shall be glad to know it, and that you will believe how much I am

Your affectionate Cousin and Friend, HENRIETA MARIA R.


About the beginning of May, Lowdon and the other Commissioners came down, and
a day after them came the Earl of Morton, who told the Marquis, They proceed to
final Resolutions in Scotland.
that in a few days he should see the Earls of Roxburgh, Kinnoul, and Lanerick,
with the Kings Instructions; but by reason of Kinnoul's Infirmity, and
Roxburgh's Age, they moved slowly. On the 21th of May the Iunto of the
Church-party moved, that there might be a Joynt-meeting of the Council and
Conservatours of the Peace, and Commissioners for Public Burdens, to consider
of the present State of Affairs. The Marquis and Morton resisted this all they
could, but they were overruled, and so these Judicatories met: to them it was
proposed, that considering the hazard the Nation was in, by reason of Armies,
which were now levying in the North of England, there was a necessity of
putting the Kingdom in a posture of Defense, which could not be done without a
Convention of Estates or a Parliament; wherefore it was moved, that a
Convention of Estates should be presently called. The Marquis argued much
against it, showing that this was to encroach upon the Kings Prerogative in the
highest degree, and so would be a direct Breach of the Peace with the King, and
against the Laws of the Land; adding, Was this all the Acknowledgment they gave
the King for his late Gracious Concessions, for this struck at the root of his
Power? In this he was seconded by my Lord Morton, but most vigorously by Sir
Thomas Hope the Kings Advocate, who debated against it so fully, from all the
Laws and constant Practice of Scotland, that no Answer could be alleged; and
indeed discharged his Duty so faithfully, that the Marquis forgave him all
former errors for that days Service. But it was in vain to argue, where the
Resolution was taken on Interest more than Reason; so it was carried, that the
Lord Chancellor should summon a Convention of Estates against the 22th of
June. A Convention of Estates is called.


This Resolution being taken, they gave Advertisement of it to the King in the
following Letter, which all who Voted against it refused to sign.

Most Dread Sovereign,
THe extreme necessity of the Army, sent from this Kingdom by Order from Your
Majesty and the Parliament here, against the Rebellion in Ireland; the want of
means for their necessary Supply, through the not payment of the Arrears and
Maintenance due to them by the Parliament of England; the delay of the Payment
of the Brotherly Assistance, so necessary for the relief of the Common Burdens
of this Kingdom, by reason of the unhappy Distractions in England, and the
sense of the danger of Religion, of Your Majesty's Royal Person, and of the
Common Peace of Your Kingdoms, have moved Your Majesty's Privy Council, the
Commissioners for conserving the Peace and Common Burdens, to join together in
a Common Meeting, for acquitting our selves in the Trust committed to us by
Your Majesty and the Estates of Parliament; and having found after long Debate,
and mature Deliberation, that the Matters beforementioned are of so Public
Concernment, of so deep Importance, and so great Weight, that they cannot be
determined by us, in such a way, and with such hope of Success, as may give
satisfaction to Your Majesty, serve for the good of this Your Majesty's
Kingdom, and as may make us answerable to the Trust committed to us by Your
Majesty's Parliament; We have been constrained to crave the advice and
resolution of a Convention of the Estates to meet June 22th, which, as
according to the obligation and duty of our Places we are bound to show Your
Majesty, so do we humbly entreat, that against the Time agreed upon by Common
Consent, Your Majesty may be Graciously pleased to acquaint us with Your
Pleasure and Commandments, that Matters may be so determined, as may most serve
for the Honor of God, Your Majesty's Service, and Well of Your Kingdoms;
which now is, and ever shall be, the earnest desire and constant endeavor of

Your Majesty's faithful and humble Subjects and Servants, Lowdon Cancellarius,
Leven Argyle Cassilis Dalhousy Lauderdale Balmerino Yester Burghley Balcarres
Gibson-Dury T. Myrton Tho. Hope A. Johnstoun T. Hepburne J. Hamilton J. Home T.
Wauchop T. Raffrerland T. Bruce J. Smith Edward Edgar J. Binny W. Glendoning
Hugh Kennedy G. Gourdon

Edinburgh 12th May 1643.

Three days after this came the Lords who were sent down, who being all met,
Lanerick delivered the following Instructions from His Majesty.

CHARLES R.
Instructions to Our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Cousins and Councillors,
James Marquis of Hamilton, William Earl of Glencairn, Robert Earl of Roxburgh,
George Earl of Kinnoule, David Earl of Southesk, William Earl of Lanerick.
Instructions for the Lords that were trusted by His Majesty.

THat you endeavor by all fair and lawful Means to prevent Division Scotland.

That you give all the Assurances in Our Name which can be desired, of

That you take what Courses you shall think most fit, for causing Print and
Scotland or at York, Our Declaration which We now send with you to that Our
Kingdom, and all such other Papers as We shall hereafter send thither, or
which you shall conceive may conduce to the good of Our Service; and for that
purpose, make use of such Blanks as We have thought fit to entrust you with.

That seeing We perceived by Pickering's Letters, Our Two Houses of Parliament
Scotland, you shall endeavor by all fair Means, to hinder any of Our
Iudicatories to Treat with them, and for that purpose make use of any of the
foresaid Blanks.

That seeing We conceive it would exceedingly conduce to the good of Our or to
such of them in particular as you shall think most fit.



Scottish Army in Ireland, you shall declare Our readiness, to contribute any
thing which is in Our Power for the Maintenance thereof, even to the Engaging
of our Revenues in Scotland, for raising Moneys to be so employed; and to that
end you shall make use of the foresaid Blanks.

Leven, discharging him to obey any Orders whatsoever for that end, until he
know Our further Pleasure.

France or Holland.

31th day of August next.



Lanerick, by your Advices to fill up these Blanks, and to Sign them with Our
Court-Signet; and for his and your so doing, this shall be your Warrant.

C. R.
From Oxford the 21th April 1643.

Besides this, Lanerick told that it was the Kings positive Pleasure, that the
first Breach should not come from his Party; but they should draw out things as
long as was possible, before they hazarded on a Rupture.

As for the Kings Declaration, the first draught whereof is extant, marked and
corrected by the Kings Hand, it being so home and clear, though very long, I
shall not contract it, but set it down at length.

His Majesty's Declaration to all his loving Subjects in His Kingdom of
Scotland.
CHARLES R.

AS there has been no mean left unattempted which the malice and wit of
Rebellion could devise, to infect and poison the Affections and Loyalty of Our
good Subjects of Our Kingdom of England, and to withdraw their Hearts from Us
by the most pernicious and desperate Calumnies, that could be invented to
under-value and lessen Our Reputation with Foreign Princes, by Injuries and
Affronts upon their Public Ministers, and by presuming to send Agents
qualified for Negotiation without Our Consent, and in truth, to expose Us, and
Our Royal Authority to Scorn and Contempt, by assuming a Power over Us; so the
pernicious Contrivers of these bloody Distempers have not delighted in any Art
more than in that, by which they have hoped to stir up Our good Subjects of
that Our Native Kingdom of Scotland to join with them, and to infuse in them a
jealousy and disesteem of Our true Affection, and Our Gracious Intentions
toward that Nation. To this purpose they have used great Industry to convey
into that Our Kingdom, and to scatter and disperse there diverse Seditious
Pamphlets, framed and contrived against Our Person and Government, and have
sent Agents of their own to reside there; and to promote their Designs, one of
whom lately resident there, one Pickering, by his Letters of the 9th of January
to Mr. Pym, assures him of the Concurrence of that Kingdom, and that the
Ministers in their Pulpits, do in downright terms press the Taking up of Arms,
and in another of his Letters to Sir John Clotworthy, says, that the Trumpet
sounded to the Battle, and all cried, Arm, Arm, with many other bold,
scandalous, and seditious Passages, very derogatory from the Duty and
Affection, which We are most confident Our good Subjects of that Our Native
Kingdom bear to Us. To this purpose they traduce Us with raising and making War
against Our Parliament, of having an Army of Papists, and favoring that
Religion; of endeavoring to take away the Liberty and Property of Our
Subjects: and upon these grounds they have presumed by a Public Declaration to
invite Our good Subjects of Our Kingdom of Scotland to join with them, and to
take up Arms against Us their Natural Liege Lord. Lastly, to this purpose they
endeavor, as well in Public as by secret Insinuations, to beget an
apprehension in them, that if We prevail so far here, as by the blessing of God
to preserve Our self from the Ruin they have designed to Us, the same will
have a dangerous influence upon that Our Kingdom of Scotland, and the Peace
established there; and that Our good Laws lately established by Us for the
Happiness and Welfare of that Our Native Kingdom will be no longer observed,
and maintained by Us, than the same Necessity, which they say extorted them
from Us, hangs upon Us, but that We will turn all our Forces against them: a
Calumny so groundlesly and impiously raised, that if We were in any degree
conscious to Our Self of such wicked Intentions, We should not only not expect
a dutiful Sense, in that Our Native Kingdom, of Our Sufferings; but should
think Our Selves unworthy of so great Blessings, and eminent Protection as We
have received from the hands of the Almighty, to whom We know We must yield a
dear Account for any Breach of Trust, or failing of Our Duty toward Our People.

But as We have taken special Care, from time to time to inform Our good
Subjects of that Our Native Kingdom of the Occurrences here, particularly by
Our Declaration of the 12th of August, wherein is a clear, plain Narration of
the beginning and progress of Our Sufferings to that time; so the bold and
unwarranted Proceedings of these Desperate Incendiaries, have been so public
to the World, that Our good Subjects of Scotland could not but take notice of
them, and have observed, that after We had freely and voluntarily consented to
so many Acts of Parliament, as not only repaired all former Grievances, but
also added whatsoever was proposed to Us, for the future benefit and security
of Our Subjects, insomuch as in truth there wanted nothing to make the Nation
completely Happy, but a just sense of their own excellent Condition, a few
discontented, ambitious, and factious Persons so far prevailed over the
Weakness of others, that instead of receiving that return of Thanks and
Acknowledgment, which We expected and deserved, Our People were poisoned with
Seditious and Scandalous Fears and Iealousies concerning Us; We were
encountered with more unreasonable, and importunate Demands, and at last were
driven through Force and Tumults to flee from Our City of London, for the
Safety of Our Life. After which We were still pursued with unheard of
Insolences and Indignities, and such Members of either House as refused to join
in these unjustifiable. Resolutions, were driven from these Councils, contrary
to the Freedom and Liberty of Parliament, insomuch that above four parts of
five of that Assembly was likewise forced, and are still kept from thence; Our
Forts, Towns, Ships and Arms, were taken from Us, Our Money, Rents, and Revenue
seized and detained; and that then a powerful, and formidable Army was raised,
and conducted against Us, (a good part of which was raised and mustered, before
We had given Our Commissions for Raising one Man) that all this time We never
denied any one thing, but what by the known Law was unquestionably Our Own;
That We earnestly desired and pressed a Treaty, that so We might but know at
what price We might prevent the Miseries and Desolation that were threatened;
That this was absolutely and scornfully refused and rejected, and We compelled
with the assistance of such of Our good Subjects as came to Our Succor, to
make use of Our Defensive Arms for the Safety of Our Life, and Preservation of
Our Posterity. What passed since that, Battle has been given Us, Our Own
Person and Our Children endeavored to be destroyed, those unheard of Pressures
have been exercised upon Our poor Subjects by Rapine, Plundering, and
Imprisonment, and that Confusion which is since brought upon the whole
excellent Frame of the Government of this Kingdom, is the Discourse of
Christendom. We are very far from making a War with, or against Our Parliament,
of which We Our Selves are an essential part: Our principal Quarrel is for the
Privileges of Parliament, as well those of the Two Houses as Our Own; if a few
Persons had not, by Arts and Force, first awed, and then driven away the rest,
these Differences had never arisen, much less had they ever come to so bloody a
Decision. We have often accused these Persons against whom Our Quarrel is, and
desired to bring them to no other Trial than that of the Law of the Land, by
which they ought to be tried. As We have been compelled to take up these
Defensive Arms for the Safety of Our Life, assaulted by Rebellious Arms, the
Defense of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, scornfully invaded by
Brownists, Anabaptists, and other Independent Sectaries, (who in truth are the
principal Authors, and sole Fomenters of this unnatural Civil War) for the
Maintenance of the Liberty and Property of the Subjects, maliciously violated
by a vast unlimited Arbitrary Power, and for the Preservation of the Right,
Dignity, and Privileges of Parliament, almost destroyed by Tumults and
Faction: so what has by Violence been taken from Us, being restored, and the
Freedom of Meeting in Parliament being secured, We have lately offered (though
We have not been thought worthy of an Answer) to Disband Our Army, and leave
all Differences to the Trial of a full and peaceable Convention in Parliament,
and We cannot from Our Soul desire any Blessing from Heaven more, than We do a
peaceable and happy End of these unnatural Distractions.

For the malicious groundless aspersion of having an Army of Papists; though in
the Condition and Strait to which We are brought, no man had reason to wonder
if we received assistance from any of Our Subjects of what Religion soever, who
by the Laws of the Land are bound to perform all offices of Duty and Allegiance
to Us; yet it is well known, that We took all possible Care, by Our
Proclamations, to inhibit any of that Religion to repair to us, which was
precisely and strictly observed (notwithstanding even all that time We were
traduced as being attended by none but Papists, when in a Month together there
has not been one Papist near Our Court) though great numbers of that Religion
have been with great alacrity entertained in that Rebellious Army against Us,
and others have been seduced, to whom We had formerly denied Employment, as
appears by the examination of many Prisoners, of whom We have taken Twenty and
Thirty at a time, of one Troop or Company, of that Religion. What Our Opinion
is of that Religion, Our frequent Solemn Protestations before Almighty God, who
knows Our Heart, do manifest to the World; And what Our Practice is in
Religion, is not unknown to Our good Subjects of that Our Native Kingdom. And
as We have omitted no way, Our Conscience and Understanding could suggest, to
be for the promoting and advancing the Protestant Religion; so We have
professed Our readiness in a full and peaceable Convention of Parliament, to
consent to whatsoever shall be proposed by Bill, for the better Discovery and
speedier Conviction of Recusants, for the Education of the Children of Papists
by Protestants in the Protestant Religion, for the prevention of the Practices
of Papists against the State, and the due Execution of the Laws, and true
Levying of Penalties against them; so We shall further embrace any just
Christian Means to Suppress Popery in all Our Dominions, of which Inclination
and Resolution of Ours, that Our Native Kingdom has received good evidence.

For the other malicious and wicked Insinuations, that Our Success here upon
the Rebellious Armies raised to destroy Us, will have an influence upon Our
Kingdom of Scotland, and that We will endeavor to get loose from those wholesome
Laws which have been enacted by Us there, We can say no more, but Our good
Subjects of that Kingdom well remember, with what Deliberation, Our Self being
present at all the Debates, We consented to these Acts: and We do assure Our
Subjects there, and call God Almighty to witness of the uprightness and
resolution of Our Heart in that point, that We shall always use Our utmost
Endeavors, to defend and maintain the Rights and Liberties of that Our Nati^e
Kingdom, according to the Laws established there, and shall no longer look for
Obedience, than We shall govern by the Laws. And We hope that Our zeal and
carriage, only in Defense of the Laws and Government of this Kingdom, and the
subjecting Our Self to so great hazard and danger, will be no argument, that
when the Work is done, We would pass through the same Difficulties to alter,
and invade the Constitutions of that Our other Kingdom. We find disadvantages
enough to struggle with in the Defense of the most upright, innocent, just
Cause of Taking up Arms; and therefore, if We wanted the Conscience, we cannot
the Discretion to tempt God in an unjust Quarrel. The Laws of Our Kingdom shall
be always Sacred to Us; We shall refuse no hazard to defend them, but sure We
shall run none to invade them.

And therefore We do conjure all Our good Subjects of that Our Native Kingdom,
by the long happy and uninterrupted Government of Us, and Our Royal Progenitors
over them, by the Memory of those many large and public Blessings they enjoyed
under Our dear Father, by those ample Favors and Benefits they have received
from Us, by their Own Solemn National Covenant, and their Obligation of
Friendship and Brotherhood with the Kingdom of England, not to suffer
themselves to be misled and corrupted in their Affections and Duty to Us, by
the cunning Malice and Industry of those Incendiaries and their Adherents, but
to resist and look upon them, as Persons who would involve them in their Guilt,
and sacrifice the Honor, Fidelity and Allegiance, of that Our Native Kingdom,
to their private Ends and Ambition. And We require Our good Subjects t^ere, to
consider that the Persons, who have contrived, fomented, and do still maintain
these bloody Distractions, and this unnatural Civil War, what pretense so ever
they make of their Care of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, are in truth
Brownists and Anabaptists and other Independent Sectaries; and though they seem
to desire an Uniformity of Church Government with Our Kingdom of Scotland, do
no more intend, and are so far from allowing the Church Government by Law
established there (or indeed any Church Government whatsoever) as they are from
consenting to the Episcopal: and We cannot but expect a greater sense of Our
Sufferings, since the obligations We have laid on that Our Native Kingdom, are
used as arguments against Us here, and Our free consenting to some Acts of
Grace and Favor there (which were asked of Us by reason of Our necessary
residence from thence) have encouraged ill-affected Persons, to endeavor by
Force to obtain the same here where We usually reside. To conclude, We cannot
think that Our good Subjects there will so far hearken to the Treason and
Malice of Our Enemies, as to interrupt their own present Peace and Happiness;
and God so deal with Us and Our posterity, as We shall inviolably observe the
Laws and Statutes of that Our Native Kingdom, and the Protestations We have so
often made, for the Defense of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, the Laws
of the Land, and the Just Privileges and Freedom of Parliaments.

With these Public Orders His Majesty also sent the Marquis a Patent to be a
Duke, The King sends the Marquis a Patent to be Duke.
as a recompense of the great Services he was then doing and had formerly done
him.

Scarce were these Lords come to Scotland when one Walden an Agent sent from
the Two Houses to Scotland, The Lords pursued as Incendiaries.
upon the pretense of the Treaty about Ireland, gave in a Complaint to the
Council against them, on the account of a Letter that was intercepted, signed
by them all at Latham the Earl of Darby's House in Lancashire, where they were
as they came down; in which they gave the Queen some Informations and Advices
about the State of the Kings Affairs in that County. This was charged on them
as Incendiarism, and Walden desired liberty to pursue them on that Head,
whereupon they first drew some Defenses: but because these would have been
found more guilty of the alleged fault than the Letter it self, they being
made up of a Justification of the Kings Arms in England, they answered this
Complaint by a Petition, wherein they declared, they had never instigated the
King into a Breach with his Two Houses, and that there was nothing on earth
they desired more earnestly than to see a happy Settlement betwixt them;
therefore they entreated, that no Misrepresentations might be received, or
listened to against them. The Church-party saw, this would be a good way to be
rid of the Trouble and Opposition they feared from these Lords, and before
cherished Walden's Motion; but they were told, that they could not fix any
Censure on that Matter, without judging of the whole Business; for if the Kings
Quarrel was just, those Lords acted as became faithful Subjects, whatever might
be in that, none in England could challenge them, for Serving him in it, till
themselves had declared against it, which was not yet done. The force of this
Reasoning constrained them against their Hearts, to yield much more than the
Authority of the Kings Commands, who having got notice of it from the Earl of
Lindsay, wrote down to Scotland, peremptorily commanding them to desist from
any such pursuit if it were begun; requiring also his Advocate to appear for
them in His Majesty's Name if they were pursued.

The Earl of Lanerick wrote to the King what follows.

May it please Your Majesty,
I Shall here Humbly presume to let Your Majesty know, that before any of Your
Scottish Servants, who lately parted with Your Majesty at Oxford, Lan^rick 's
account of Affairs to His Majesty.
could possibly come hither, the Chancellor had made his Report to the Council
and Conservatours of the Treaty, and Mr. Henderson to the Commissioners of the
General Assembly, of their Employments to Your Majesty, where Your Answers to
their Desires were found not satisfactory, and thereafter Your Majesty's
Council, Commissioners for the Treaty and Common Burdens, having joined
together for giving of Security, for such Moneys as should be levied, for the
Maintenance of Your Majesty's Scottish Army in Ireland, they thought fit
(without admitting of any delay until Your Majesty's Pleasure were known) to
call a Convention of the Estates, as their several Acts and Proclamations to
that effect (here enclosed) will more particularly show Your Majesty.

And for the present Your Majesty's Servants, who came lately hither, having
only met with three or four of those whom Your Majesty appointed them to
consult with, have thought fit to advise with some others of the same Affection
and Forwardness to Your Majesty's Service, before they presume to give Your
Majesty any Advice upon the present Occasions, being matters of so great
Weight, and so highly concerning Your Majesty's Service: but they have taken
the readiest and most speedy Course they can think upon, for Meeting and
Consulting with them; and thereafter are immediately to return hither; from
whence they will with all diligence offer unto Your Majesty their humble
Opinion. In the mean time I have dispatched Your Majesty's Letters to such
Noblemen and Buroughs, as Your Majesty was pleased to direct me, showing Your
Resolution of preserving here what you have been pleased so Graciously to
establish in Church and State, not having been able to deliver Your Majesty's
Letter to Your Council, who were dissolved before my coming, and my Lord
Chancellor is gone out of Town, without whose Appointment there can be no
extraordinary Meeting; so that I believe Your Majesty's Gracious Declaration to
Your Scottish Subjects cannot be published before that time; nor till then can I
be able to give Your Majesty any further account of Your Affairs here, though
in the mean time I shall study to serve Your Majesty faithfully, according to
the Duty of Your Majesty's

Most humble and most faithful, and most obedient Subject and Servant, LANERICK.
Edinburgh, 18th May. 1643.

In the end of May, there was a Meeting of about thirty Noblemen, where these
two Questions were proposed; The Lords consult what to advise His Majesty.
First, if it were fit for the Kings Service that the Convention should be
suffered to hold; Next, if it held, whether those who were well-affected to the
Kings Service should fit in it. There were three or four Days spent in debating
upon these Heads: some moved, that since by the calling of this Convention the
other Party had so far encroached upon the King, they should presently break
with them: this Motion came chiefly from other Lords, who would not come to
that Meeting. But it was answered that the King, as he would not give
Commissions for raising an Army in England, till he knew the Parliament had
first done it on their side; so it was his positive Pleasure that his Party
should not make the first Breach, which the King judged so much for his Honor,
that no Consideration could move him to dispense with it: yet these who made
that Proposition, were desired to lay down ways, how it could be made
effectual, since it was Madness, and not Courage, to hazard the Ruin of the
Kings Service and Friends, without at least a likelihood of being able to carry
it through with some Success.

All things being examined, it was concluded that the following Message should
be sent to His Majesty, which was set down in a Paper, dated the 5th of June;
but because of the War in England, they committed it verbally to a Trusty
Bearer, lest it had been intercepted.

A Convention was indicted by the Chancellor, and such others of the Council
as have signed His Majesty's Letter thereabout, with the Advice and Concurrence
of the Committees for conserving the Treaty and Common Burdens to be kept at
Edinburgh the 22th of June: whereby it is conceived His Majesty suffers
exceedingly in His Regal Authority, in the Calling thereof without his Special
Warrant. A Proclamation for the Indicting thereof is likewise issued forth in
His Majesty's Name, expressing a danger to Religion, His Majesty's Person, and
the Peace of this Kingdom, from Papists in Arms in England, which in that
appears to be contrary to His late Declaration sent to Scotland.

Hereupon diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen well-affected to His Majesty's Service
met at Edinburgh, and after three or four days Debate, considering the exigency
of Time, the present posture of Affairs, and the disposition and inclination of
the People of this Country, did not conceive it fitting, that His Majesty
should absolutely discharge that Meeting, (which certainly would be kept
notwithstanding of any Discharge from Him, which would both bring His Authority
in greater Contempt, and lose more of the Affections of the People, whereby the
Power of His Majesty's Servants would be lessened) but rather that His Majesty
should so far take notice of the Illegal Calling thereof, and His Own Suffering
thereby, that the same remaining upon Record may be an evidence to Posterity,
that this Act of theirs can infer no such Precedent for the like in the future;
but afterward His Majesty, or His Successors, may Legally question the same.
And that His Majesty's Servants here may be better enabled, and strengthened
with the assistance of others of His Majesty's faithful Subjects, who truly and
really intend nothing but the Security of Religion as it is here established,
and are altogether averse from and against the Raising of Arms, or Bringing
over the Scottish Army in Ireland, whereby His Majesty's Affairs, or their own
Peace may be disturbed, they conceive it fit, that His Majesty should permit
this Convention to Treat, and conclude upon such Particulars, as may secure
their Fears from any danger of Religion at home, without interessing themselves
in the Government of the Church of England. And in respect that the Two Houses
of Parliament have not sent Supplies for Entertaining the Scottish Army in
Ireland, whereby they may have some color or ground for recalling them, it is
conceived necessary, that this Convention should have a Power from His Majesty,
to advise and resolve upon all fair and Legal ways for Entertaining the said
Army still in Ireland, and for recovering payment of the Brotherly Assistance:
providing always, that in the doing thereof no Resolution be taken for Levying
of Forces, or doing any Act, whereby this Kingdom, or any part thereof, may be
put in a posture of War, or under any pretense to bring over the Scottish- Army
in Ireland, or any part thereof, without special Warrant from His Majesty;
wherewith if such as shall meet at this Convention rest not satisfied, His
Majesty's Servants here are resolved to Protest, and adhere to these Grounds,
and to oppose all other derogatory to His Majesty's Authority, or prejudicial
to His Service.

The Duke by the same Bearer wrote to Mr. Iermine, since Earl of St. Albans,
what follows, which is set down to show how far he was from abusing their
Majesty's, or any about them, with hopes of a good issue of Affairs in Scotland.

Noble Friend,
THere is so much said to this Bearer by word and in writing that I shall add
but little thereto; only this, which I have often said, The Duke apprehends the
Ruin of the Kings Affairs in Scotland.
Time is precicious, and would not be lost while we are quiet: how long that
will be, for my own part I cannot tell, so many unhappy Accidents have
intervened of late that His Majesty's Service is much prejudiced thereby; I
mean not so much your Misfortune at Wakefield, as other Particulars which you
will be informed of. Howsoever think not that I am discouraged, for never was
Man more resolute to oppose all that shall endeavor the Dis-service of the
King than I am, and there are considerable men in this Country of the same
mind. But I ever feared our want of Power, and never more than now; Resolution
we want not, but Means how to put that in execution: and therefore I say, build
no confidence, but that you may receive great Prejudice from hence,
notwithstanding all we can be able to do, which will be as much as you can
expect from Men of Honor, so deeply engaged as we are. Having thus freely
expressed my thoughts to you, it is e^sie to conjecture, what Advice I would
give; you are Judicious, and so I shall conclude in a word, Lose no Opportunity
that is offered to end your business, either by one means or other, and esteem
of me as

Your most obliged Friend, and humble Servant, HAMILTON.
Holyrood House June 5th 1643.

He wrote also the following Letter to Her Majesty.

May it please Your Majesty,
I Had not presumed to have troubled Your Majesty with any thing from me, if
Your Letter I received from Mr. Murray had not encouraged me to hope for Your
Majesty's Pardon; And advertises the Queen of his fears.
I shall then humbly beg, this may rather be believed an effect of Obedience
than Boldness.

Upon Tuesday last I delivered to His Majesty's Council a Letter from Him to
them, wherein was enclosed a Declaration to His Scottish Subjects, which was
unanimously appointed to be Printed and Published: but the Letter they have
written in Answer to His Majesty (a Copy whereof I have presumed to send Your
Majesty) did receive great opposition, and with difficulty was carried.

Since there has been no Public Meeting, but it is like there will be one
appointed upon Wednesday next, where they that came last from His Majesty are
to be accused as Incendiaries.

The great Offers are to be made from the Two Houses of Parliament, are like to
work much upon the Affections of this Country, being seconded with an alleged
hazard to Religion and Government from Papists, pretended to be in Arms in
England and Ireland; a popular (though groundless) Inducement for taking Arms
in this Kingdom; to which though many Noblemen (and diverse of the Gentry) have
hitherto been averse, yet I both doubt the Continuance of their Resolutions,
and the Power of these few who must and will oppose it. The Authority the other
Party receives from the Iudicatories, the absolute Power they have of the
Magazines and Ammunition, the popular Pretenses they have of a danger to
Religion and Liberty, gives them so great advantages, that I cannot but
apprehend great Disservice to His Majesty from hence, if the Differences
betwixt Him and His people of England be not quickly decided either by Treaty
or Force.

The Resolutions about the Convention of the States, of such well-affected
Noblemen and Gentlemen as are accidentally now in Edinburgh, Your Majesty will
know from the Bearer, the Particulars being of that nature, as are not without
hazard to His Majesty's Service to be trusted to Paper, by,

May it please Your Majesty, the humblest and faithfullest of all Your
Servants, HAMILTON.


To which Her Majesty wro^e the following Answer.

Cousin,
I Received your Letter, The Queen writes to the Duke.
and have given an Account to the King of what you tell Me. I hope the Kings
faithful Servants shall be so much the more firm to His Service, that the
wickedness of others appears, and will by their Care and Diligence prevent the
Malice of others. We had here a mischance in one of Our Quarters, by the
negligence of Our People; the greatest loss We have had is known, yet We are
not at all discouraged, and hope quickly to have a Revenge. Our Army consists
(without reckoning the Garrisons) of seven thousand Foot, and 69 Troops of
Horse, besides My two Regiments, so that for all Our mischance We are in no ill
Condition. I have News from the King, that His Army is as strong as Essex's,
and that Essex dares not advance. The King has sent Prince Maurice to the West
with 2000 Horse and a thousand Foot; the Gentlemen of the West have promised to
raise an Army of 10000 Men in six Weeks, so that I can assure you all Our
Affairs go well. And from France (except the Death of the King My Brother) I
have very good News, as likewise from Denmark. If the King does not press me to
go to Him quickly, I hope to see Leeds taken before I part. You will give a
share of these News to all Our Friends, if any dare own themselves such, after
the House of Commons has declared Me Traitor, and carried up their Charge
against Me to the Lords. This I assure you is true, but I know not yet what the
Lords have done upon it. God forgive them for their Rebellion, as I assure you
I forgive them from my Heart for what they do against Me, and shall ever
continue, as I have promised,

Your affectionate Cousin and Friend, HENRIETTA MARIA R.


To this he returned the following Letter.

May it please Your Majesty,
I Shall not presume to take up much of Your Majesty's Time with reading
Particulars, they being so well known to this faithful Bearer: The Dukes Answer
to Her Majesty.
therefore I shall only in the general crave liberty to say, that though the
State of Affairs here be far otherwise than I could wish; yet I was never so
hopeful as at this present, that no Forces will come from hence this Summer
into England, to disturb His Majesty's Affairs. Yet no Means ought to be
neglected in preparing to oppose them, (lest they should do o^herwise,) nor
shall I fail to do the same (whatever Malice may whisper to the contrary) with
all the Power I have, and as freely venture both Life and Fortune in that, as
any living shall. So I humbly beseech Your Majesty to believe, that not only in
this, but in all which does concern His Majesty's Service, my part shall be
such as I have promised, and as becomes

The Humblest, most Faithful, and most Obedient of all Your Majesty's Servants,
HAMILTON.
Holyrood House 10th June.

The King, having received the Letter of Advertisement concerning the
Convention, wrote down the following Answer about it.

CHARLES R.

The Kings Letter about the Convention to the Council,
RIght Trusty and Right well-beloved Cousins and Councillors, and Right Trusty
and well-beloved Councillors, We Greet you well.

We are much surprised at Your Letter of the 12th of this Month, whereby it
seems you have given order for the Calling of a Convention of the Estates of
that Our Kingdom without Our Privity or Authority: which, as it is a business
We see no reason for at present, and that has never been done before but in
the Minority of the Kings of Scotland, without their Consent; so We cannot by
any means approve of it, and therefore We command ^ou to take order that there
be no such Meeting, till you give Us full satisfaction of the Reasons for it.

Given at Our Court at Oxford 22th of May 1643.

With this he wrote another to the Earl of Lanerick, which follows.

CHARLES R.

and to Lanerick.
RIght Trusty, and Right well-beloved Cousin and Counselor, We Greet you well.

We have herewith sent you Copies not only of the Letters We lately received
from Scotland, but also of Our several Letters to Our Chancellor and Council
there, the Originals whereof We leave to your Discretion, to deliver and make
use of as you shall find best for Our Advantage: but for the Business it self,
We have heretofore so fully declared to you Our Own Opinion therein, as We need
say no more of that Subject to you.

We observe in the Letter to Us, that there are but eleven Councillors Names
to it, and that n^ne of those that are best-affected have subscribed it; and We
find that as great, or a greater number of Councillors, Persons of great
Quality, Place, and Trust, have not subscribed to it.

Given at Our Court at Oxford 22th of May 1643

Upon what had past, the Lords whom His Majesty had trusted, resolved to keep
up this Letter to the Council, till a return came of the Message they had sent
to His Majesty. But a few days after that Letter was written, the Earl of
Lindsay came from London to Oxford, The Earl of ^indsay ^s with the King.
to receive the Kings Commands for Scotland; to which he was required to go,
and sit in the Convention of Estates then Summoned. His Majesty asked his
Advice, whether He should give way to its Sitting or not: but he answered, as
he durst not advise His Authorizing of it; so on the other hand, he might
consider if it was like, that they who had called it without His Warrant, would
desert it upon His Prohibition; and if His Majesty thought fit to discharge it,
he would weigh well, what the hazard might be of their Sitting against His
Pleasure. All this being considered by His Majesty, He wrote by him the
following Letter to My Lord Lanerick.

CHARLES R.

RIght Trusty, and Right well-beloved Cousin and Counselor, We Greet you
well.
The Earl of Lindsay coming hither from London, has assured Us, that the Cause
of the Two Houses sending into Scotland, to have the Lords that went hence
sequestered, was, the Intercepting of their Letter sent to Our Dearest Consort,
the Queen, and nothing else.

We perceive by the Copy of the Resolutions you sent Us, with what Prudence,
and Loyal Courage, your Brother Hamilton and the Lord Advocate opposed at
Council there, the Order for Calling a Convention of the Estates for which We
would have you to give them Our particular Thanks. You and others of Our
Council there, know well, how injurious the Calling of a Convention of Estates
without Our Consent, is to Our Honor and Dignity Royal; and as it imports Us,
so We desire all Our well-affected Servants to hinder it what they may; but
shall leave it to them, to take therein such Course, as they shall there upon
advice conceive best, without prescribing any way, or giving any particular
Directions. If notwithstanding Our Refusal, and the endeavors of Our
well-affected Subjects and Servants to hinder it, there shall be a Convention
of the Estates, then We wish that all those who are right-affected to Us,
should be present at it; but to do nothing there, but only Protest against
their Meeting and Actions. We have so fully instructed this Bearer, that for
all other Matters We shall refer you to his Relation, whereto We would have you
to give credit.

Given at our Court at Oxford the 29th of May 1643.

But His Majesty, having after that received the Advice sent him from Scotland,
and His own Thoughts agreeing with it, did on the 10th of June write the
following Letter, to be presented to the Convention.

CHARLES R.

RIght Trusty, and well-beloved Cousins and Councillors, The Kings Letter to
the Convention of Estates.
andc.
We have received a Letter dated the 22th of May, and Signed by some of Our
Council, some of the Commissioners for Conserving the Articles of the late
Treaty, and of the Commissioners for the Common Burdens: and though it seem
strange unto Us, that those Committees should Sign in an equal Power with Our
Council, especially about that which is so absolutely without the limits of
their Commissions; yet We were more surprised with the Conclusions taken at
their Meetings, of Calling a Convention of the Estates without Our special
Warrant, wherein Our Royal Power and Authority is so highly concerned, as that
We cannot pass by the same, without expressing how sensible We are of so
Unwarrantable a way of Proceeding; and if We did not prefer t^ Our Own
unquestionable Right the Preservation of the present happy Peace within that
Our Kingdom, no other Consideration could move Us to pass by the just
Resentment of Our Own Interest therein. But when We consider to what Miseries
and Extremities Our Scottish Army in Ireland is reduced, by reason that the
Conditions agreed unto by Our Houses of Parliament for their Maintenance, are
not performed; and likewise the great and heavy Burdens, which We are informed
Our Native Kingdom lies under, by the not timely payment of the Remainder of
the Brotherly Assistance due from England, contrary to the Articles of the late
Treaty; and withal remembering the Industry, which We know has been used upon
groundless Pretenses, to possess Our Scottish Subjects with an Opinion, that if
God should so bless Us here in England, as to protect Us from the Malice of Our
Enemies, Religion, and the now-established Government of Our Native Kingdom,
would be in danger: We (laying aside all Consideration of Our Own particular)
resolve on Our part, to endeavor by all possible means to prevent all color
or ground of Division betwixt Us and Our good Subjects of Scotland; and
therefore do permit you to Meet, Consult, and Conclude upon the best and
readiest ways of Supplying the present wants of Our Scottish Army in Ireland,
and providing for their future Entertainment there, until some solid Course be
taken for recovering of the Arrears due to them, and for their constant Pay in
time coming, according to the Conditions agreed upon in the Treat^; as also to
advise upon the best way of Relieving the Public Burdens of that Our Kingdom
of Scotland, by pressing, by all fair and lawful means, a speedy Payment of the
Remainder of the Brotherly Assistance due from England; as likewise to prevent
the Practices of such as study to entertain in this Our Kingdom groundless
Iealousies and Fears of Innovation of Religion or Government, the Preservation
whereof (according to Our many Solemn Protestations) shall ever be most Sacred
to Us; providing always, that in doing these things, nothing be done which may
tend to the Raising of Arms, or Recalling Our Scottish Army, or any part
thereof, from Ireland, but by Order from Us, and Our Two Houses of Parliament,
according to the Treaty agreed upon to that effect: and We do require you, to
limit your Consultations and Conclusions to the foresaid Particulars. And as by
this, and many other Our former Acts of Grace, and Favor to that Our Native
Kingdom, it clearly appears, how desirous We are of preserving their
Affections, and preventing all occasions of Mistakes betwixt Us and them; so We
do expect, that your Proceedings at this time will be such, as may show your
tender Care of Us and Our Greatness, which by so many Oaths and Obligations you
are tied to preserve.

Given at Our Court at Oxford the 10th of June 1643.

Meanwhile the Duke and his Brother advertised both their Majesty's, of the
great apprehensions they had of Mischief from Scotland, and besought His
Majesty, The Duke studies to keep Scotland from agreeing w^^h the Two Houses.
that so long as they were idle in Scotland he should be busy in England; for
his good Success there, was that which would engage most to appear for him
here; and they, with those trusted with them, made the Lord Chancellor
understand the hazard he was in, if the Annuities were discharged, and
accordingly filled up one of the Blanks with a Proclamation, discharging them
to all who had Signed the Petition against them, which yet remains, but without
a Date and Signeting. The Lord Chancellor was very sensible of the ruin of
his Fortune, which would follow from the Publishing of that which certainly
would be popular, as being an ease of the Subjects, and therefore promised to
them, to use his utmost Endeavors to put all the stops he could in the
Agreement with England: wherefore with joint consent they resolved to proceed
no further in that Affair for that time, and accordingly the Lord Chancellor
was very instrumental (though covertly) in getting things kept off so long; for
had not much Art been used, the Church-party were inclined, immediately upon
the opening of the Convention, to have engaged in the Quarrel for the Two
Houses.

The 22th of June came, and the Convention sat down, The Convention sits.
(which is a Court made up of all the Members of Parliament, but as they are
called and sit without the state or formalities used in Parliaments; so their
Power is to raise Money or Forces, but they cannot make or repeal Laws.) The
Duke and his Friends, as they answered to their names, declared they were
present, upon the notice they had of the Kings Warranting of the Convention.
After that, Lanerick delivered the Kings Letter of the 10th of June, and it
being read, drew on a great Debate, which lasted four days, whether the
Convention was free or not, and if bound up to the limits of the Kings Letter
or not. The grounds of the Debate were, on the one side it was certain, that by
the Law of Scotland no Assembly of that nature could be called but on the Kings
Writ, and therefore there was a Nullity in the beginning of it; but that now
the King ex post facto allowing them as a Meeting of His Subjects to consider
of some Particulars, they could pretend to no Authority but what that Letter
gave them: therefore they had not the Authority of a Convention of Estates, but
were only a Meeting of so many Subjects to consult of some Affairs. On the
other side it was said, that the Convention was summoned by a Writ under the
Great Seal, which was all that the Subjects were to look for, they not being
concerned to look into the Kings secret Orders, or private Pleasure: so this
was a sufficient Authority for their Sitting; and for the Kings Letter, though
it seemed he was not well-pleased with his Council for it; yet it did not
annull the former Writ, nor indeed could it, and it was essential to all
Meetings of that nature to be free, and not limited in their Consultations; for
if the King calls a Parliament or Convention, their Freedom cannot be
restrained to such Particulars as the King would limit them to, otherwise the
Grievances of the Nation should never be considered: therefore they concluded,
it either must be no Convention at all, or if it was one, it must be left at
liberty to treat of all the Affairs of the Nation. The Duke and his Brother
were the great Arguers on the one side; and when they saw how it was like to
go, they resolved to Protest, and leave them. But the Kings Advocate told them,
that if the Convention were Voted a free Convention, then to Protest against it
was Treason; but they might declare their Judgments, and thereupon take
Instruments, which was equivalent to a Protestation, and more Legal: and they
judging this punctilio of the word Protest of no Importance, resolved to follow
his Advice. So on the 26th of June, it being put to the Vote, a Free Convention
or not, the Duke voted it no Convention, but as regulated by the Kings Letter:
so did eighteen Lords, and but one Knight, all the rest voting it a Free
Convention. Whereupon the Duke rose up and declared, he could no more own that
for a Free Convention, nor acknowledge any of their Acts or Orders, further
than as they kept within the bounds of the Kings Letter. My Lord Argyle asked,
did he by that Protest against the Convention? my Lord Lanerick answered, they
meant not to Protest, but declare and take Instruments, both in the Kings Name
and their own, which accordingly they did, and so removed. Only Lanerick
required them to record the Kings Letter, which was refused; next he craved an
Instrument of his producing it, which was also refused: so having taken witness
of it, he withdrew, and none of these Lords would sit in the Convention any
more. After this some came to the Duke, and asked his Advice if they should sit
or not; he suspected their Intentions were only to betray him, and told them,
that his Practice declared his own Judgment, which he wished the whole
Convention had followed; but for particular Advices he left it to themselves.
Others of their Friends were by them all thought necessary to sit still in the
Convention, to keep up delays in the approaching Treaty with the English; but
diverse of their Friends being overawed with the Power of the Church-party, did
forsake them.

Great Jealousies and Divisions in Scotland.
At the same time some of the Church-party, who feared the Duke more than all
that opposed them, knowing the depth of his Designs, and the smoothness of his
Address, took a strange Course to render him suspected to the Kings Party,
which was to let a Whisper fly out, but so as they should not appear in it,
that he and they kept a Correspondence; which was too easily believed by many,
who were already ill-affected to his Person, and displeased with his Methods:
and the great forwardness of some for appearing in the Kings Service, made them
impatient of all Delays. But the Duke sent diverse Messages by Mr. Murray of the
Bedchamber (who was at that time sent by His Majesty to Scotland) to those of
the Kings Friends, who he saw were displeased with him, to mediate a
Reconciliation, who dealt in it with all possible diligence; but their
Jealousies of the Duke were insuperable. And a little after that, in the end of
July, some of them went to Court to represent to the King, how ill His Affairs
were managed by those He trusted them to, and to offer their Servi^e, if He
would change his Tools and Methods. The Duke upon this wrote to the King, that
he found himself betwixt two Tides, of those who were perverse on the one hand,
and over-forward on the other; yet he wished not only Life and Fortune, but his
Soul might perish, if he left any thing unessayed and undone, that was in his
power for the Kings Service. But all in which he could hope to prevail, was
Delays, which to draw out longer than this Winter he could not promise. And the
Methods he used to draw out the Treaty by Delays, were, to set some on work to
get Scotland to insist on their Demands for the rest of the Brotherly
Assistance, and for what was agreed to by the former years Treaty, to be paid
for the Army in Ireland, before they engaged further, all which amounted to a
round Sum; and he knew it would neither be soon, nor easily advanced. The time
of the Assembly was also approaching, wherefore they advised the King for his
Advocates encouragement to Name him Commissioner for it.

The Convention did little at first, only they begun a new Process against some
alleged Incendiaries, and named many Committees, waiting still for the English
Commissioners who were daily expected. On the first of August came the Kings
Advocat's Commission with his Instructions, and a Letter to the Assembly.

His Instructions were, First, to assure the Assembly of the Kings constant
adherence to the late Establishment, and his willingness to encourage all good
Motions.

He was to oppose all Treaty with England, or Declarations about the Commotions
there.

He was to oppose any new Commission of the Kirk.

He was to hinder any Censure to pass on those who had subscribed the Cross
Petition.

On the second of August the Assembly sat down; The General Assembly sit^.
but no curb could hold them, so high was their Zeal, and so void were they of
respect of Persons, that the opposition the Kings Commissioner gave them was
little regarded, for they went on at a great rate.

The Convention voted an hundred thousand Marks Sterling to be raised by a
Loan: this was a pretty Device to fine all that were not judged well-affected;
for they were appointed to lend Sums upon the Public Faith, which every one
knew would turn to no Security for their Money.

On the ninth of August came the much-longed for Commissioners from England,
Commissioners come from England.
with a large Declaration from the Two Houses, justifying all their Procedure,
and entreating the assistance of their Brethren in Scotland. This was
cheerfully welcomed by the Assembly, and some did run so far back, as to
remember how Queen Elizabeth helped the Lords of the Congregation in the
Scottish Reformation in opposition to the Queen Regent; and therefore it was but
Justice that they should now repay them with the like Assistance.

But that which generally prevailed to engage the greater part of the Nation in
the War, The Arguments that prevailed for entering in a League with them.
shall here be set down with that fullness and freedom that becomes a Historian.
The (now) Duke of Newcastle had raised a great Army in the North of England for
the King, upon which that Country was like to be for some time the seat of the
War; and though Berwick and Carlisle had no Garrisons in them, according to the
Treaty between both Kingdoms, yet it was not to be doubted, but either the one
side or the other would see their advantage in putting Garrisons in these
places: upon which, all in Scotland judged it necessary to raise some Forces,
otherwise the best Counties in Scotland, which lie toward the South, had been
put under Contribution by those Garrisons, and they had been all a prey to the
prevailing Army; yea, and which side soever were either beaten or straightened, it
was not to be doubted but they would send in Parties to Scotland to bring
Provisions, and what else could be had; therefore it was Concluded, that a
Force must be raised for the Security of Scotland. This being laid down, it was
not uneasy to persuade all, that it was better to carry in and maintain their
Army in England, than keep it in Scotland to be a vast Charge upon themselves.
And the Forces that were raised in the years 1639 and 40, had been very heavy
on the chief Nobility and Gentry; nor had the Brotherly Assistance, which the
Two Houses had Voted to be raised for their reimbursement, come to their
Supply, the War of England intercepting it: therefore they had generally a
great mind to Quarter their Army in England. Now this could not be done, they
keeping up the Neutrality they were then in, therefore they must either join
with the King or the Two Houses. For joining with the King many Arguments were
used, both from the Laws of Scotland, that obliged all the Subjects to assist
the King in his Wars; and from the Covenant, wherein they swore to assist Him
in every cause in which His Majesty's Honor was concerned. There were also
private assurances given, not only to the leading Men, but to the whole Nation,
of signal marks of His Majesty's Favor, and Confidence in the disposal of all
Offices, and Places at Court, that every third time they should be filled with
Scottish men, together with other particulars, not needful to be mentioned. But
against all this it was objected, that those who had the Ascendant in the
Councils at Oxford, were either Papists, or men of Arbitrary Principles; and
the Clamours that always follow Generals and Armies where there is no certain
Pay, were carried to Scotland, not without great additions, against the Kings
Forces, to possess people with a deep alienation from them. It was likewise
said, that since the King, notwithstanding the Declining of his Affairs in
England, would not grant what was desired there about Episcopacy, it might be
from thence gathered, what he would do if his Arms were successful, and
therefore all People were possessed with the jealousies of his subverting the
whole Settlement with Scotland, as soon as he had put the War in England to a
happy Conclusion. And though it was answered to this, that the Kings putting
things to hazard rather than sin against his Conscience, was the greatest
assurance possible, that he would faithfully observe what He had granted; to
this, Malicious people said, that it would be easy to find distinctions to
escape from all Engagements; and if the putting down of Episcopacy was simply
sinful according to the Kings Conscience, then that alone would furnish Him
with a very good reason to overturn all, since no Men are bound to observe the
promises they make, when they are sinful upon the Matter. And these Reasons did
generally prevail with the Covenanters, to refuse to join with the Kings Party
in England: therefore they concluded it necessary to Engage with the Two
Houses, both because the Cause was dear to them, it being a pretense for
Religion and Liberty. It was also said often, that they owed their Settlement,
partly to the backwardness of the Armies the King had raised against them in
England, and partly to the Council of the Peers, who had advised the King to
grant a Treaty, and afterward a full Settlement to them. And that Paper which
was sent down in the Year 1640, as the Engagement of 28 of the Peers of
England, for their Concurrence with the Scottish Army that year, was shown to
diverse, to engage them unto a Grateful return to those, to whom it was
pretended they were so highly obliged. For though the Earl of Rothes (and a few
more) were well satisfied about the Forgery of that Paper, yet they thought
that a Secret of too great Importance to be generally known; therefore it was
still kept up from the Body of that Nation. And upon these Pretenses and
Inducements it was, that it came to be generally agreed to, to enter into a
Confederacy with the Two Houses. So Fatal did the Breach between the King and
his People prove, that even when it seemed to be well made up by a full
Agreement, there was still an after-game of Jealousies and Fears, which did
again widen it by a new Rupture, which to these men seemed at this time
unavoidable: otherwise they found the ease of a Neutrality to be such, that the
Men of the greatest Interest in those Councils have often told the Writer, they
had never engaged again, had it not been for those Jealousies with which they
were possessed to a high degree. There was a Committee of Nine appointed to
Treat with the Commissioners: the English pressed chiefly a Civil League, and
the Scots a Religious one; but though the English yielded to this, yet they
were careful to leave a door open for Independency. Thus the Treaty with the
English Commissioners went on, notwithstanding a Letter the King wrote to the
Chancellor, to be communicated to the Council, requiring them not to Treat
with them, since they came without His Majesty's Order; but they who had leaped
over all other matters, could not stand at this.

And now came to light that which had been a hatching these many Months among
the Iunto's, which was the Solemn League and Covenant, which follows;

The Solemn League and Covenant of the three Kingdoms.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, and Burgesses, The Solemn
League and Covenant.
Ministers of the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of Scotland,
England, and Ireland, by the Providence of God living under one King, and being
of one Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of GOD, and the
advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Honor and
Happiness of the Kings Majesty and His Posterity, and the true public Liberty,
Safety, and Peace of the Kingdom, wherein every ones private condition is
included: And calling to mind the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies,
Attempts and Practices of the Enemies of GOD, against the true Religion and
Professors thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms ever since
the Reformation of Religion, and how much their Rage, Power, and Presumption
are of late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable
estate of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the
Church and Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and
Kingdom of Scotland, are present and public testimonies; We have now at last
(after other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations and Sufferings)
for the preservation of our selves, and our Religion, from utter ruin and
destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former
times, and the example of Gods People in other Nations, after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and Solemn League
and Covenant: Wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with
our hands lifted up to the most high GOD, do Swear;

THat we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the grace of GOD,
endeavor in our several Places and Callings, the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, against our common Enemies; the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England, and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Word of GOD, and the example of the best Reformed
Churches: And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of GOD in the three
Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; that
we and our Posterity after us, may as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, (that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be
found to be contrary to sound Doctrine and the Power of Godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
Plagues; and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

We shall with the same sincerity, reality and constancy, in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our Estates and Lives mutually to preserve the Rights
and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms; And to
preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms;
That the World may bear witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's just Power and
Greatness.

We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as
have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his People, or
one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any faction, or parties amongst the
People, contrary to this League and Covenant, That they may be brought to
public Trial, and receive condign Punishment, as the degree of their Offenses
shall require or deserve, or the Supreme Iudicatories of both Kingdoms
respectively, or others having power from them for that effect shall judge
convenient.

And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms denied in
former times to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of GOD, granted unto
us, and has been lately concluded, and settled by both Parliaments, We shall
each one of us, according to our place and interest, endeavor that they may
remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all posterity, and that Justice
may be done upon the wilful opposers thereof, in manner expressed in the
precedent Article.

We shall also, according to our places and callings, in this common cause of
Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing And shall
not suffer our selves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever combination,
persuasion, or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this blessed Union and
Conjunction, whether ^o make de^ection to the contrary part, or to give our
selves to a detestable indifferency, or neutrality in this Cause, which so much
concerns the Glory of GOD, the Good of the Kingdoms, and Honor of the King;
But shall all the days of our lives zealously and constantly contin^e therein
against all opposition, and promote the same according to our power, against
all ^ets and Impediments whatsoever: And what we are not able our selves to
suppress or overcome, we shall reveal* and make known, that it may be fully
prevented or removed: And which we shall do as in the sight of God.

And, because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins, and provocations against
GOD, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers the fruits thereof: We profess and declare before GOD and the World,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially that we have not, as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, to
walk worthy of him in our li^es, which are the causes of other sins and
transgre^sions, so much abounding amongst us. And our true and unfeigned
purpose, des^re, and endeavo^r for our selves, and all others under our power
and charge, both in public and in private, in all Duties we owe to God and
Man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation; That the Lord may turn away his wrath, and he^vy indignation,
and establish these Churches and Kingdoms in Truth and Peace. And this Covenant
we make in the presence of Almighty GOD, the Searcher of all hearts, with a
true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great Day when
the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed; Most humbly beseeching the Lord
to strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for th^^ end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his People,
and encouragement to other Christian Churches, groaning under, or in danger of
Antichristian Tyranny, to join in the same, or like Association and Covenant,
To the Glory of GOD, the Enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the
peace and tranquillity of Christ^an Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

This was offered to the Assembly on the 17th of August, The Censures that
generally were passed on it.
and after it was publicly read, Mr. Henderson being then Moderator, had a
long Speech about it. Then it was read the second time, and many of the most
eminent Ministers, and Lay Elders, were desired to deliver their Opinions about
it, who did all magnify it highly: and though the Kings Commissioner pressed a
Delay, till at least it were communicated to the King; yet the approving it was
put to the Vote, and carried unanimously, and they ordered the Lord Maitland
(the now Duke of Lauderdale) and Mr. Henderson, and Mr. Gillespy, to carry it
up to the Two Houses at Westminster. On the same day it was also approved in
the Convention. Wise Obfervers wondered to see a matter of that Importance,
carried through upon so little Deliberation or Debate* It was thoug^t strange
to see all their Consciences of such a size, so exactly to agree as the several
Wheels of a Clock; which made all apprehend, there was some first Mover that
directed all those other Motions: this by the one Party was imputed to Gods
extraordinary Providence, but by others to the Power and Policy of the Leaders,
and the simplicity and fear of the rest. One Article of it was thought strange,
that one Government of the Church was abjured, but none sworn to in its place
for England; this was not the fault of the Scots, who designed nothing so much,
as to see Presbytery established in England. But the English Commissioners
would not hear of that, and by that General words of Reforming according to the
Word of God, (cast in by Sir Henry Vane) thought themselves well-secured from
the inroads of the Scottish Presbytery; and in the very contriving of that
Article they studied to out-wit one another, for the Scots thought the next
words of Reforming according to the Practice of the best Reformed Churches,
made sure game for the Scottish Model, since they counted it indisputable that
Scotland could not miss that Character.

Those of Scotland would have had Episcopacy abjured, as simply unlawful: but
those of England would not condemn that Order, which had merited so much Glory
in the whole Christian Church, therefore the second Article was so conceived,
that it might import only an Abolition of the present Model of England; and it
was so declared, both in the Assembly of Divines, and in the Two Houses of
Parliament when they swore it. The Scots either perceived not this Change, or
were glad to get it carried on at any rate. But many judged the oddest part of
it all was their Oath to maintain the Privileges of both Parliaments, since
that was never defined, and was scarce capable of a Definition; and the
Privileges of the Parliament of England, were far enough from the knowledge
and divination of the Scottish People, who in this case must believe all that to
be Privilege which they called so.

The Covenant was carried up, by those trusted with it, to the Two Houses, to
be approved by them; and being returned to Scotland, the Committee of Estates
did by their Printed Act of 22th of October, ordain it to be Sworn and
Subscribed by all the Subjects, under the pain of being punished as Enemies to
Religion, His Majesty's Honor, and the Peace of these Kingdoms: and to have
their Goods and Rents confiscated, and they not to enjoy any Benefit or Office
within the Kingdom, and to be cited to the next Parliament as enemies to
Religion, King and Kingdoms, and to receive what further punishment His Majesty
and the Parliament should inflict on them. At this time His Majesty sent Mr.
Mungo Murray to Scotland, (to assure his Friends of his Confidence in them) who
brought the following Letters from the King and Queen to the Duke.

Hamilton,
Letters from the King and Queen to the Duk^.
I Find there has been a great Mistaking about that mark of Favor, which I
thought fit to bestow upon you, the particulars I have commanded Mungo Murray
to tell you: only this I assure you, that my Confidence of you is not lessened,
from what I commanded your Brother to assure you of in my Name, for you shall
find me

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.


Cousin,
AS soon as I had occasion since my Arrival hither, to write to you, I have
resolved to do it, both to assure you of all that I said to you when I was at
York; as also to tell you that I am none of the least sharers in rejoicing at
the Honor the King has put on you. This is a mark of the Confidence He has
in you, which I am assured you will make the World see, was founded on very
good reason. The Bearer is a Person who will tell you more than I can write: to
him I refer my self, and shall say no more but that I am

Your affectionate Cousin, HENRIETA MARIA R.
Oxford, 28th August.

The Kings Friends had gone to the several places where their Interests lay, to
see what likelihood there was of Raising any Force for advancing the Kings
Service by extreme ways; and to put a better color on their Gathering of
People together, they carried with them the following Letter, which was Signed
by His Majesty, and of which Lanerick was ordered to give an attested Copy to
all who were well-affected.

CHARLES R.

RIght Trusty, and Right well-beloved Cousin and Counselor, The Kings Letter
to His good Subjects in Scotland.
We Greet you well.
Since nothing on Earth can be more dear to Us than the Preservation of the
Affections of Our People, and amongst them, none more than those of Our Native
Kingdom, which, as the long and uninterrupted Government of Us and Our
Predecessors over them does give Us just reason, in a more near and special
manner to challenge from them, so may they justly expect a particular
Tenderness from Us, in every thing that may contribute to their Happiness: but
knowing what industry is used, by scattering Seditious Pamphlets, and employing
private Agents and Instructions, to give bad impressions of Us and Our
Proceedings, (under a Pretense of danger to Religion and Government) to corrupt
their Fidelities and Affections, and to engage them in an unjust Quarrel
against Us their King, We cannot therefore but endeavor to remove these
Iealousies, and secure their fears from all possibility of any hazard to either
of these from Us: We have therefore thought fit to require you to call together
your Friends, Vassals, Tenants, and such others as have any dependence upon
you, and in Our Name to show them Our Willingness to give all the Assurances
they can desire, or We possibly grant, (if more can be given than already is)
of preserving inviolably all those Graces and Favors, which We have of late
granted to that Our Kingdom, and that We do faithfully promise never to go to
the contrary of any thing there established, either in Ecclesiastical or Civil
Government: but that We will inviolably keep the same, according to the Laws of
that Our Kingdom, and We do wish God so to bless Our Proceedings and Posterity,
as We do really make good, and perform this Promise. We hope this will give so
full satisfaction to all that shall hear of this Our solemn Protestation, that
no such persons as study Division, or go about to weaken the Confidence betwixt
Us and Our People, and justly deserve the name and punishment of Incendiaries,
shall be sheltred from the hand of Justice; and all such others as shall
endeavor Peace and Unity, and Obedience to Us and Our Laws, may expect that
Protection, and increase of Favors from Us, which their Fidelity deserves. So
expecting your Care hereof, We bid you heartily farewell.

From Our Court at Oxford the 21st of April, 1643.

These Lords appointed at parting to meet again about the end of August, The
Lords whom theKing employed, meet and send Propositions to the King.
which accordingly they did; and when they met, diverse told they found much
coldness among their Friends. Many professed a cordialness to the Kings
Service; but they had neither Arms, nor Ammunition, nor saw they a place of
Security for a Rendezvous, nor of Safety for a Retreat in case of a Misfortune;
so that diverse of the Noblemen said, It was not in their power to bring any
with them to the fields, but their own Domestics. Whereupon it was agreed by
them all, to send one Neal Servant to Mr. Murray of the Bedchamber to the
Marquis of Newcastle, to desire him to seize on Berwick, which was of great
Importance, and was at time without a Garrison, that it might be the Place
whither they might bring what Forces they could draw together which was indeed
the most proper Place for them, since the Counties that lay next it were
best-affected. They likewise desired my Lord Newcastle, to send them such Arms
and Ammunition, as could be spared them out of the Kings Magazins, which were
then in his hands: they also ordered Neal to go forward from him to Oxford, to
give the King an account of their Desires, that they might be presently
supplied. He was dispatched on the 29th of August; but on the 4th of September
my Lord Newcastle wrote back to them a short answer referring them to Neal, who
in a large one, (both which are extant) told them, that my Lord Newcastle said,
he could spare them neither Arms nor Ammunition: and as for Berwick he could
not seize on it without bringing Ruin on himself and his Posterity, unless he
had a Commission for it under the Great Seal of England; it being contrary to
the Articles of the late Treaty of the two Kingdoms, which was ratified in
Parliament.

At this time the Treaty betwixt the Two Houses in England, The Treaty betwixt
Scotland and England is concluded.
and the Convention in Scotland, was closed. Against the 5th of October a
hundred thousand pounds Sterling was to be paid in Scotland, and against the
Twentieth of that Month, an Army of Twenty thousand Horse and Foot, was to be
on the Borders from Scotland, who were to have thirty thousand pounds Sterling
a Month for Pay; only the hundred thousand pounds Sterling was to serve for the
first three Months. The General was to be chosen by the Scots, the Army was to
receive Orders from a Commitee of both Kingdoms; no Peace should be treated, or
concluded without the Scots: and the Public Faith was given by the Convention
of Estates in Scotland, that their Army should return out of England when a
Peace was concluded by both Kingdoms. And so the Convention Adjourned till
January, having chosen a Committee of Estates, to whom they gave full Power in
all matters Civil and Military.

About the middle of September the fairest opportunity of all was lost, for the
Parliament of England, apprehending the hazard of the loss of Berwick sent down
some Ships, by which, Berwick seized on by the Parliament.
with the Concurrence of the Scots, it was presently Garrisoned: and the
Committee of Estates issued out, toward the middle of September, Commissions
for making of Levies through the Kingdom, so that nothing kept them from
Marching, but that they heard not of Money from England.

The Kings Friends were now in the greatest perplexities imaginable, they saw
his Affairs in a ruining Condition, and themselves able to do nothing but
regrate it. All September passed over, ere they had a return from Oxford; and
since the hope of Berwick was irrecoverably lost, nothing remained but Despair.
The Church-party became daily more resolute, and the Kings-party became
fainter. At length in the beginning of October, Mr. Mungo Murray came from
Court, but brought no present Relief, only large hopes of Assistance to follow
quickly. He also brought Letters from the King, both to the Council and the
Conservatours of the Peace: that to the Conservatours of the Peace follows.

CHARLES R.

RIght Trusty, and Right well-beloved Cousins and Councillors, Right Trusty
and well-beloved Councillors, and Trusty and well-beloved, The Kings Letters
to the Conservatours of the Treaty.
We greet you well.
No Industry hitherto could have so far prevailed with Us, as to gain any
belief that Our Scottish Subjects would countenance, much less assist this
bloody Rebellion in England; yet We know not how to understand the Levying of
Forces, both Foot and Horse, within Our Native Kingdom, and their entering Our
Town of Berwick in an hostile manner.

You are particularly trusted by Us and Our Parliament, (and solemnly sworn to
be faithful in the discharge of that Trust) of seeing the Articles of the late
Treaty observed, which here is most grossly violated: therefore We require you,
as you will be answerable to God, to Us, and Our Parliament, to take speedy and
present Order for recalling and suppressing those Forces.

Our most malicious Enemies must bear Us witness, how religiously We have
observed these Articles on Our part, whereof if We had not been more tender,
(than the advisers of the Breach have been of the Public Faith) it is obvious
to any, how easily We could have secured that Town from all Rebels.

We have likewise thought fit to take notice of the private Preparations in
that Our Kingdom, of Raising an Army by a new Authority, to come into Our
Kingdom of England, under the pretense of securing themselves from a Popish and
Prelatical Army, falsely alleged to be upon the Borders; such Forces as We have
there, being only for Protecting of Our distressed Subjects from the Incursion
of Rebels, from their Ships at Berwick, and Holy-Island, and for no other end.
Such then as shelter themselves under that Pretext, will find from thence but a
slender Warrant before God, who knows the integrity of Our Heart, and how
inviolably We intend to preserve all that We have granted to that Kingdom, so
long as they suffer themselves to be capable of Our Protection, and those
Favors.

We do require you not only to oppose and suppress all such unwarrantable
Levies, but by your Public Declaration to disabuse those Rebels in England,
who endeavor to engage you in their Rebellion, and expect Assistance from you;
in all which We look for ready Obedience, and expect a present account thereof.
We bid you heartily farewell.

Given at Our Court at Oxford the 26th day of September, in the 19th Year of
Our Reign, 1643.

The Letter to the Council follows.

CHARLES R.

The Kings Letter to the Council.
RIght Trusty and Right well-beloved Cousins and Councillors, and Trusty and
well-beloved Councillors, We greet you well.
Whereas Our desire of preserving Peace within Our Native Kingdom, and
preventing such Disputes which malicious Instruments might so heighten, as to
divide Us and any of Our Scottish Subjects, moved Us by Our Letter of the tenth
of June, to dispense with the unwarrantable Calling together of the Nobility,
Commissioners of Shires and Buroughs, at Edinburgh the twenty second of June
1643, and so far to give way to the Meeting, as to allow them to take into
Consideration the best ways of Maintaining Our Scottish Army in Ireland, for
Suppressing of that bloody Rebellion there, since Our Two Houses of Parliament
here had failed in the performance of the Treaty, concluded upon betwixt the
Two Nations for that effect, and likewise for such other Particulars as Our
said Letter does more fully contain; expecting they would have limited their
Resolutions thereunto, and paid an equal Gratitude of Duty and Obedience to Us
and Our Just Commands, as We have so lately and so many ways expressed Our
Affection to that Our Kingdom in General, and so many Members of that Meeting
in their own particulars: all which notwithstanding they have proceeded to
Resolutions as unjustifiable as their Meeting, and would engage Our Subjects to
an Obedience of their Arbitrary Commands, beyond the Power of any of the most
Free and Lawful Conventions of the Estates, Our Authority and Consent being so
absolutely contemned, that they have ex^eeded the Bounds We have prescribed,
and proceeded to Conclusions of the highest nature, without so much as
acquainting Us therewith. Such high Indignities to Us and Our Authority, make
Us believe they have forgot they have a King, and their Oaths in preserving Us
in Our Just Power as their King: but God will discover and punish such
undutiful Thoughts, how closely soever they be clouded with pretenses of Safety
to Religion and Liberty, which they know will ever be dearer to Us than Our Own
Preservation. Our good Subjects will likewise suffer with Us by their heavy
Taxes upon them, and possibly by their desperate Resolutions of their Engaging
them in a bloody and unnatural War. Those Injuries to Us, and Oppre^sions upon
them, We expect you (whom We have with Advice of Our Parliament entrusted with
managing the greatest Affairs of that Our Kingdom) will particularly resent:
and therefore We have thought fit to require you immediately after the receipt
hereof, to publish in Our Name a Proclamation to all Our loving Subjects of
that Our Native Kingdom, prohibiting them under all highest pains to give
Obedience to any Act or Ordinance of that pretended Convention, or of any
Committee pretending a Power or Authority from them; but to oppose by Arms, or
otherways, all such Persons, as shall endeavor to put in execution any Acts of
theirs, (but such as We expressed in Our Letter We mentioned of the tenth of
June, which was so much slighted as it was refused to be Recorded) for the
Raising of Forces, or Recalling Our Scottish Army in Ireland, or any part
thereof without Our Knowledge and Consent: and We do likewise require, that no
Taxes imposed upon Our Subjects by that pretended Authority be paid; assuring
all Our Loving Subjects of Our Protection, in the Obedience of these Our
Commands; for which these shall be your Warrant, which We require you to Record.

Given at Our Court at Oxford the 26th of September, in the 19th Year of Our
Reign, 1643.

With these His Majesty wrote to my Lord Lanerick.

CHARLES R.

RIght Trusty, and Right well-beloved Cousin and Counselor, The Kings Letter
to Lanerick.
We Greet you well.
We have sent to Our Privy Council of Scotland Our Letters of Direction what
they shall do, now that the General Meeting there has proceeded to such
strange and undutiful Resolutions, beyond the Matter We prefixed them to treat
upon by Our former Letter. Of those Our Letters We have sent you an exact Copy,
and particular Directions to your self, what you shall do in order thereunto,
when you shall think fit for Our Service to make use of the same. But We leave
it now to your Discretion, and the Judgment of the rest, whom We have entrusted
with the Affairs of that Our Kingdom, to deliver these Our Letters to Our said
Privy Council at that time, and no sooner than you shall conceive to be most
conducible to Our Service, and the Good of that Kingdom; for if you shall find
that no Obedience is likely to be given to those Our Commands, you are to
consider how far you, who are Our faithful Servants there, will be able to
withstand those Insolences, which of necessity must follow upon such
Disobedience, and what the Consequence will be, to anger before We be able to
punish such Offenders. But Our Will is, that you forthwith publish the other,
anent the Proclamation, Precept or Warrant, falsely published in Our Name; and
We further require you, to do whatsoever else you with the rest (whom We have
trusted with the Affairs of that Our Kingdom) shall conceive most to conduce to
Our Service, as you will answer to Us at your peril: and for so doing this
shall be a sufficient Warrant, to you and those others entrusted by Us, as
aforesaid.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, 26th of September, 1643.

The Lords whom His Majesty trusted, judged it not fitting to present the
Letter written to the Council, and suppressed it. But His Majesty wrote another
Letter to the Council about the Proclamation, which was issued forth in his
Name by the Convention of Estates, which follows.

CHARLES R.

The Kings Letter about the Proclamation to the Council.
RIght Trusty, and Right well-beloved Cousin and Councillors, and Trusty and
well-beloved Councillors, We greet you well.
Whereas We were graciously pleased to condescend that this present Meeting in
Our Kingdom of Scotland of Our Nobility there, and the Commissioners for Shires
and Buroughs, should resolve and conclude of such particular Affairs, as We
specified and allowed to them for the Security and Good of that Our Kingdom in
Our late Letters to them, dated the 10th of June last; and for as much as we
have to Our great amazement newly seen a Paper in form of a Proclamation,
Precept or Warrant, in Our Royal Name, dated at Edinburgh the 18th of August,
subscribed

Per Actum Dominorum Conventionis Arch. Primrose Cler. Conven.


Being a Paper most impudently set forth without Our Privity, or any Authority
from Us, and tending to cast Our beloved People of that Our Native Kingdom into
the like and more bloody Combustions and Rebellions, Violation of their
Religion and Allegiance to Us, and Laws of that Our (hitherto) peaceful Native
Kingdom, as has been here practiced by the malicious enemies of Peace and
Government: We have therefore upon good Deliberation, and out of Our Princely
and Gracious Care of Our People, and of the Tranquillity of that Our Native
Kingdom (as it was so lately and well settled by Our Self) thought fit to
Declare, and we do hereby Declare unto you, that We utterly dislike and
disallow it, forbidding all Our Subjects to obey the same, and all other Papers
published in Our Name, which shall not immediately be warranted by Us; and We
do hereby will and command you, forthwith openly to publish these Our Letters,
to let all Our People understand Our Pleasure herein.

And lastly Our Pleasure and Command is, that you cause these Our Letters to be
forthwith recorded in the Books of Our Privy Council of that Our Native
Kingdom, for all which these Our said Letters shall be your sufficient Warrants.

Given at our Court at Oxford the 26th day of September, in the 19th Year of
Our Reign 1643.

He wrote also to the same purpose to the Earl of Lanerick.

CHARLES R.

His Majesty's Letter to Lanerick to the same purpose.
RIght Trusty, and Right well-beloved Cousins and Counselor, We Greet you
well.
Whereas We have thought fit, for the Good of Our Service and Safety of Our
People, to require Our Council, to publish a Proclamation in Our Name to all
Our loving Subjects in Scotland, discharging them to give Obedience to any Act
or Ordinance of the Pretended Convention of the Estates at Edinburgh the 22d of
June, or of any Commitee pretending Authority from them; but to oppose with
Arms, or otherways, all such Persons as shall endeavor to put in execution any
Act of theirs: but if Our Privy Council shall not give present Obedience to Our
Commands, and publish this Our Pleasure, these are to require you to take what
Course you shall think most fit to make this Known to all Our loving Subjects,
either by giving Warrant in Our Name, to Print Our Letter to Our Council, or by
sending attested Copies thereof to all the Nobility, Sheriffs of Counties, and
Majors of Towns, within Our Kingdom of Scotland, a Duplicate whereof you will
herewith receive under Our Own Royal Hand: and We further require you, to do
whatsoever else, you with the rest (whom We have trusted with the Affairs of
that Our Kingdom) shall conceive most to conduce to Our Honor, and the Good
and Advancement of Our Service, as you will answer for it to Us at your peril;
and for your so doing these shall be your Warrant.

Given at Our Court at Oxford the 26th of September 1643.

With these Public Letters the King wrote to the Duke.

Hamilton,
HAving much to say, and little time to write, The Kings Letter to the Duke.
I have commanded this Trusty Bearer to supply the shortness of this Letter,
which though it be chiefly to give trust to what he shall say to you in my
Name; yet I cannot but assure you by my own Hand, that no ill Offices have had
the Power to lessen my Confidence in you, or my Estimation of you, for you
shall find me

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Oxford 28th September, 1643.

The Lords whom the King trusted, seeing no present help of Men, The Kings
Affairs in Scotland decline.
nor relief of Arms, like to come from England, were like men desperate: and
some moved desperate Propositions, that according to what had been (in some
former cases) practiced in Scotland, there should be Orders given out,
requiring all to kill the chief Leaders of the Church-party, wherever they
could find them, setting Prices on their Heads, and that with such Orders some
of the Blanks should be filled up. But the Duke opposed this strongly, and
said, he would take it on him without an Instruction to assure them, that he
knew His Majesty would rather patiently suffer all things, than consent to a
Course so barbarous and unchristian. As for the practices of some former ruder
times, these were to be no Precedents now. Besides, if this were done on the
one side, they might expect the same Orders would be presently issued out
against them from the Comittee of Estates, which would bring on an unheard of
Butchery, and lay all their Throats open to their Servants; whereupon it was
laid aside, only the Proposition with the Precedents is yet extant: and they
resolved to see what Force they could bring together under the pretense of
their Attendants to the Countess of Roxburgh her Funeral, which was to be in
the beginning of November. But there was some Difference about the Methods of
carrying on their designs among these Lords, and diverse others who were called
to their Consultations, besides those who were particularly trusted by His
Majesty, Those whose Fortunes were broken were for brisker Courses, and those
whose Estates were entire, and had the most followers, thought it fitter to
delay an open Breach as long as was possible. This diversity of Opinion raised
some Animosities and Jealousies among them, so that they fell into a mutual
distrust; neither was Secrecy (though not only enjoined but sworn) closely
kept, for all their Designs broke out; and and yet some who were guilty of
this, were among the busiest to fasten it on the Duke. But the Writer designs
only an account of his Affairs, without reflecting needlessly on others; and
therefore here he restrains his Pen. So quickly did their closest Secrets fly
abroad, that when the Duke was returning home from one of their Meetings, a
Covenanter Lord came from Edinburgh to meet him on his way, and told him, to a
word, all had past at their Meeting, as that Lord informed the Writer.

On the 24th of October the Earl of Traquair went to Court, A Message sent to
Court by the Earl of Traquair.
whom the Lords that were trusted by the King, had carried along with them in
all their Counsels, though his Name could not be in the Instructions, by reason
of the Act that was past against him at the former Parliament. With him they
sent the following Instructions, containing the grounds and steps of their
whole Procedure; which is the fullest and clearest Dispatch was sent this year,
(most of the other Messages being verbal) and so will give great light to the
rest.

It is desired it may be represented to His Majesty, that now all He expected
from our Affection and Industry here, is performed, this Summer being spent,
and he having received no other Prejudice from hence, than what might rise from
words, which we did never pretend to prevent, being no ways a Party in the
Iudicatories.

To show our readiness still to venture our Lives and Fortunes in His Majesty's
Service, which we will make good, not only by verbal Expressions, but real
Actions, when we shall see the least probability of Success to His Affairs,
though to our Ruin.

To represent the Reasons that (hitherto) we have not been in Action; which
have been grounded, First, upon our Desire of Protracting time, the chief thing
we had Commission to study, (in which our Endeavors have not been fruitless:)
Secondly, that they (not His Majesty) should be the first Breakers, both a
pious, just, and popular Motive: and thirdly, our expectation of Supplies both
of Men, Arms, Ammunition, and Moneys, which we were confident should have been
provided for us, and without which we never conceived our Strength to be
considerable.

To represent, that we would immediately draw our selves together into a Body,
(being thereto authorized by His Majesty) if we had the least hope of making it
considerable, and if we had any proportion of Arms or Ammunition, a Place of
surety for our Rendezvous, and of safety for a Retreat in case of a Misfortune;
having by diverse Messages represented our Wants, and pressed for Supplies, with
the securing of some Places, now lost, but still without Success, without
which, many who would join with us in this Quarrel of serving His Majesty are
unwilling to hazard; and diverse very considerable, and most affectionate
Noblemen and Gentlemen have declared, that for that reason they cannot bring to
that Meeting more than their Domestic Servants, so that we justly fear, we
cannot draw together so considerable a Body, as could resist, much less offend
our Enemies, and likewise an impossibility, for those and other Noblemen and
Gentlemen (being only so backed) and lying at so great a distance one from
another, and from the Place, which of necessity must be appointed for our
Rendezvous, to join with us.

And considering these necessities, we cannot but be the more tender of going
unto present Action, seeing His Majesty has so wisely commanded us, to weigh
the Consequences of angering before he be able to punish, and the Prejudices
which may thereby arise to His Service, wherein we must proceed as we shall be
answerable upon our Perils: and therefore we dare not presume to advise the
present Engaging of His Majesty, by drawing our selves into a Body; for many
would oppose us (seeing then we would be esteemed Rebels) within this Kingdom,
that would be unwilling to go into England, which probably cannot be done this
Winter, though we dare give no assurance thereof; but do humbly advise, that
present Preparation be made for the worst, and in discharge of our Consciences
and Duties to His Majesty, we cannot but represent our Fears of the great
Disservices He may receive from hence, if he do not timely prevent it, either
by a Royal and considerable Strength, or in his Wisdom think of some other way
of effecting it, and not to trust to the Power of His Party here. And this our
humble Opinion does neither proceed from Fear, nor Disaffection, nor out of any
Intention to desert Him, or His Cause, (wherein we will spend the last drops of
our Blood) but really is our sense of the Condition of His Affairs here, which
we cannot conceal, without betraying the Trust He has reposed in us, and which
we will be ready to make appear to His Majesty, whenever He shall think fit
to call us to an account, at the hazard of losing His Favor, and all that is
dear to us.

About the end of October, All are required to take the Covenant.
all the Lords of the Council received Letters from the Committee of Estates,
requiring them to come to Council against the second of November, and sign the
League and Covenant, from which the Lords (whom His Majesty had entrusted)
excused themselves, not being well-satisfied, neither about the matter of the
Covenant, nor the Authority by which it was imposed; whereupon they were again
summoned to appear upon the 14th of that Month, to do it under the highest
pains in case of Disobedience; but they excused themselves the second time
likewise.

All this while the Duke had been doing his utmost to engage his Vassals, The
Duke's endeavors for serving the King.
and the Dependers on his Family, to a cordial Concurrence in the Kings
Service, and offered to diverse of them, if they would vigorously concur in it,
to dispense with great advantages he had over their Fortunes by his
Superiorities. But that County where his Interest lay, was so prevailed upon by
the Ministers, that no endeavors could divert them from the Course that the
rest of the Country were taking: and so little could he prevail with them, that
all the Authority and Art he and his Brother used, could not get the
Commissioners to the Convention of Estates well chosen, though he bestirred
himself in it as much as was possible; for beside the Clamours against him,
there came out at this time a Book under the name of The Mystery of Iniquity,
which was shrewdly but maliciously penned. The design of it was to demonstrate,
that the King's Intentions ever since his Voyage to Spain, had been for
introducing Popery: but to this old Slander was added a new damnable Calumny,
that the King had given Commission for the Massacre in Ireland under the Great
Seal of Scotland, in October 1641. when it was in the Duke's keeping, and in
the Custody of Mr. John Hamilton, who is by that Pamphleteer called the Scribe
of the Cross Petition. This was sent through all places, and both preached and
printed up and down Scotland, and zealously infused into the Peoples minds,
amongst whom it gained belief; which as it irritated them to more fury against
the King, so it drew the next share of the Odium upon the Duke, whereby he was
much disabled from doing the Service which he desired and designed: with such a
series of sad Trials was God pleased to exercise him almost all the days of his
Life.

The Lords that were for the King met at Kelso.
Their Appointment at My Lady Roxburgh's Funeral was to be carried secretly, as
if their numerous Meeting had been only for gathering a great Company to
solemnize it with the more Pomp, according to the Ceremony used at Burials in
Scotland. The Duke took with him near two hundred Horse, the half of them were
Gentlemen, and the rest were their Servants. But when they came to the Funeral,
all that could be accounted of were about a thousand Horse; but there were such
Jealousies among them, and they were so undetermined either what to do, or who
should Command, and so little assurance had they of the Adherence of those who
were with them, that they parted without coming to any Resolution.

This Attempt gave a Crisis to the Covenanters Proceedings against them, and
therefore, because they came not on the Day prefixed to subscribe the Covenant,
they were declared Enemies to God, the King, and the Country; and it was
resolved, that at least they should be made close Prisoners, of which the Duke
was advertised by the Earl of Lindsay. But this was not all the height of the
Committees zeal, The cruel Orders of the Committee against those who took not
the Covenant.
for on the 17th day of November, by another Act all their Goods were appointed
to be seized on, their Rents gathered up, and their Persons to be apprehended,
wherever they could be found: and a Commission was given to Soldiers to go
take them, warranting them to do it, notwithstanding any Resistance was made,
securing them though they killed those that made Resistance. Southesk was first
wrought upon by those thunderclaps: but the Duke and his Brother, seeing all
was past recovery in Scotland, and there was no standing before this
unparalelled Zeal, prevented their severe Orders, and went to Court; so he and
his Brother left Scotland in the end of November.

All this while his Enemies at Court had been with great Industry
misrepresenting his Actions in Scotland, and for this end made use of the
forwardness of some Scottish Lords who were then at Court: The Duke ill
represented at Court.
yet the King's Affection to him, and Confidence in him, continued firm and
unshaken till the end of September, (if not longer,) as appears by His
Majesty's Letter of that Date, already set down. But the miscarriage of Affairs
in Scotland, together with the Duke's absence, raised some jealousies in the
King's thoughts; nor had the Duke any Friend at Court, who had such credit with
the King, as to be able to justify him, and so Reports went current without
contradiction. But when Mr. Murray came up, and Traquair after him, they gave a
truer representation of Affairs; therefore, to take off the weight of their
Testimony, they were charged with accession to the same Miscarriages, and many
things of a high nature were fastened upon the Duke. And the miscarriage of
Affairs in Scotland seemed to give good colors for casting all the blame of it
upon the Unfaithfulness or ill-management of those who had his Majesty's chief
Trust in that Kingdom, (the usual fate of all Unsuccessful Ministers.) Many
foul Slanders were cast on him, and very scandalous and undutiful Discourses
were laid to his charge. And to crown all, it was represented, that he had set
on foot a Pretension to the Crown of Scotland, and designed to put all once
into Confusion, that so he might fish the better in those troubled waters.

This was the most bloody and pernicious of all the hellish Slanders his
Enemies could invent, and nothing could raise Jealousies in a Court like
Stories of this nature; wherefore they were confidently vented: and it was
said, that after he and his Brother had betrayed the King's Service in
Scotland, they were now coming to Court to be Intelligencers to his Enemies;
therefore it was necessary to secure him upon his first Arrival, and
particularly to hinder his access to the King, since it was to be feared, that
his Majesty's Affection, with his Innocence, which they in their Consciences
knew was unstained, would quickly break through all those Arts that had been
contrived for his Ruin.

The Duke was not ignorant of all that was designed against him, The Duke goes
to Court,
nor so totally destitute of Friends, as to be let perish without sending him
advertisements. Any Loyalty less than his would upon such advices have kept out
of the way till he had sent his Justification before him, and had cleared
himself of all Imputations: but being confident of his own Innocence, he
resolved to go on, and put all to hazard; so on the 16th of December he came to
Oxford. There was at the Ports an Order left to stop him till the Governor
were advertised: but the Captain of the Guard thinking he was in the Coach that
followed, not knowing himself who was on horseback, let him pass without
stopping him. But he was presently followed with an Order from the King, and is
made Prisoner.
confining him and his Brother to their Chambers during his Majesty's Pleasure.
The Duke answered, that as he had ever given a ready obedience to his Majesty's
Commands, so in this he would punctually obey his Order.

At night Secretary Nicholas came to him, and told him, that his Majesty had
received an Accusation of a high nature against him, and that he could not be
answerable to himself, if he had not taken this Course with him; but that he
might expect from him all Favor that in Justice he could grant him, and that
himself would be graciously pleased to hear as much of his Cause as he could,
and that all haste should be used in it.

The Duke answered, that he humbly thanked his Majesty for his Goodness thus in
general to let him know the Cause of his Restraint: and for any favor in that
Charge he desired it not, but trusted to the King's Justice and his own
Integrity, only he entreated he might have a speedy Trial. And for his
Majesty's constant Goodness to him, he had no more to return to him but his
humble Thanks, since he had received greater proofs of it than he had either
merited, or could ever deserve.

Next the Secretary called for his Brother, who was a little indisposed, and
told him, he had the Liberty of the Town, only he might not come to the King's
or Queen's Court without Permission; and after that a Guard was set at the
Duke's Lodgings, with Orders, that none might speak with him except in the
presence of one of the Secretaries. But Mr. Murray of the Bedchamber had been
with him at his first Arrival, and the Duke desired him to give the King a full
account of his Behavior in Scotland, and of the necessities that his Duty had
forced him to when he left the Kingdom: and he desired he might have that
Justice done him, to see the Charge that had been given against him, that so he
might justify himself, since he was absolutely ignorant of it, and his own
Conscience did not charge him with any Guilt in reference to the King's Service.

The Duke gets a Copy of his Charge, and Answers it.
At night Mr. Murray returned to him with a very favorable Message from the
King, expressing his Confidence, that he should clear himself of the Charge
given against him. And by what the Writer could learn, it was he that brought
him a Copy of the Charge that was drawn up against him: for the Duke got the
Copy of it before it was put in the due form of an Impeachment, being liker a
Historical Information presented to the King, than a Legal Accusation. That
Paper was never brought into any Court, nor did any thing ever follow upon it;
for the business went not the length of a Trial; yet it seems too important a
Transaction of the Duke's Life, not to be inserted, with the Answers that were
drawn to it: for as soon as the Duke got it, he sent to the best Counsel then at
Oxford, who drew an Answer to it wholly in point of Law, and himself drew an
Answer as to matter of Fact, and penned a long Speech which he intended to make
at his first Appearance. But those Papers (which do yet remain) were afterward
digested into one full Answer; and therefore that the Reader may not be wearied
too much, I shall insert that instead of all the rest, setting down the Answer
after every Article of the Charge. Only I shall here promise what I copied out
of an Original Letter of one of the most zealous Covenanters (who was a very
considerable man among them and one of the Iunto) to his Correspondent; by
which the Reader may judge what he is to think of the Truth of matter of Fact
alleged in the Charge; I have seen the Charge against the Duke, and though he
has been a great Enemy to our Cause and Work, I cannot but pity him, since he
suffers from their hands whom he has been serving: and after that he adds, he
is in no hazard if he get Justice, for the Accusation is false, and can never
be proved. This will discover both what the secret thoughts of the Covenanters
were of the Duke, and how false the Charge was in matter of Fact. But the most
material Evidences that do clear his Innocence, and justify the Answers to the
Charge, have been already set down in the former parts of this Work, to which
the Reader will find some References marked in the Margent.

The Accusation given against the Duke of Hamilton at Oxford, December 1643.
THat the Duke of Hamilton has of a long time (yea almost ever) since he had
any considerable meddling in Business, Article 1.
endeavored in the way of a constant and continued Design, both by Words and
Actions, to beget in His Majesty's Subjects both a Hate against the Government,
and a Contempt of His Majesty's own Sacred Person; as particularly he himself
using most contemptible and undervaluing Expressions of His Majesty and His
Emissaries, Instruments, or Creatures, suggesting upon the other part all
Prejudices to the People, as that they were now but a Province unto England,
and had lost their Liberty, and that Scotland was now under a Pharaoh that knew
not Joseph.

The Answer to the former Charge.
THe Defendant is charged with many things of a high nature, Answer*
some whereof, if true, will involve him in the guilt of High Treason; other
particulars infer a breach of Trust, and an abusing of His Majesty's Confidence
in him, with several other heinous Aggravations, which, if true, the Defendant
acknowledges that no Punishment could be found equal to his Guilt: and in a
matter wherein his Life, his Fortune, his Honor, and Posterity lie at stake,
it cannot seem strange, if the Defendant plead in Law every advantage his
Learned Counsel have suggested, who, besides many things they have laid before
him from the Privileges of the Peers, do assure him that in Law every
impeachment ought to contain in it the matter of Fact, particularly and
certainly set down, with all necessary circumstances of Time, Place, and
Witnesses, otherwise the Party accused may Demur in Law. Besides, the Charge
given against him is so general and historical, so aggravated with scandalous
Glosses, invective Expressions, groundless Suggestions and Pretenses, false
Collections and Inferences, seeming Probabilities, with cunning Suppositions
and Conjectures, together with the Opinions and Words of his Friends,
Acquaintances, and Enemies, all so ambiguously penned by the Contriver, that he
may Demur in Law upon the whole Charge for matter of Insufficiency and Form,
since many Insufficiencies and Absurdities might be observed in it upon a
strict Disquisition and Dissection of Law: and indeed the Defendant cannot but
desire the last words of the Charge be considered, wherein his Accusers pretend
to be able to prove some of the weightiest points by several Witnesses, and all
the rest by some, and strong Probabilities; which words alone his Lawyers do
assure him are sufficient to invalidate the whole Charge, since no man can be
Arraigned of Treason upon some Probabilities, to which other Probabilities may
be always opposed with equal colors of truth.

Many of the particulars charged upon the Defendant were done before the
Pacification and Act of Oblivion passed in both Kingdoms, by which no
remembrance is to be had of what passed before it; and His Majesty did verbally
express at the last Parliament at Edinburgh, that the Defendant had carried
himself during the former Troubles as became a faithful Subject, and one that
tendered the Good and Happiness of his Country. There was also in that same
Parliament a particular Act passed, declaring he had carried himself during the
former Distractions as a faithful Servant to His Majesty, and a loving Patriot
to his Country; upon which the Defendant may well plead that he is not bound to
answer for any thing charged on him that was done before that Parliament, and
that his Accusers do incur Punishment for going against the Act of Oblivion
then passed: nor is he bound in Law, as his Learned Counsel assure him, to
answer for any Words alleged to have been spoken by him unless questioned for
them within three Months after they were spoken* according to the Laws of this
Kingdom. But though the Defendant has so far complied with his Lawyers as to
have named the former particulars, yet it is not out of any design to escape
either Trial or Justice: therefore he is ready to give an account to His
Majesty of the Actions of his whole Life, in reference to His Majesty's
Service, whenever he shall be called to it; particularly for the Trusts and
Employments his Majesty honored him with, being so confident of his own
constant unstained Integrity and Loyalty, and of His Majesty's Justice, that he
is not afraid of the issue of the whole Matter, himself being so Innocent and
his Judge so Just; therefore he shall answer plainly and particularly to all
the Matters of Fact laid to his Charge, leaving the Plea in Law, together with
the necessary distinction of points of Treason from Misdemeanors, to his
Learned Counsel when they shall be allowed to plead.

Answer to Article 1.
To the first Article the Defendant says, nothing can be more false than that
he ever used any such Expressions, The Answer to the first Article.
he knowing well his Majesty's Affection to that Kingdom, and to the Liberties
and Freedoms of it. There is neither Time, Place, nor Persons expressed to whom
such Words should have been spoken, nor upon what occasion, nor to to the
People of what Kingdom they were used, nor are any of his Actions condescended
on to make out what is charged on him; nor knows he who are meant by his
Emissaries, Instruments or Creatures; if any have used such seditious Speeches
let them be punished for them, but he cannot be answerable for other men,
unless it be proved they acted by his Order and Direction: therefore the
Defendant simply denies what is alleged in this Article, as basely false and
forged.

Charge.
That he has most seditiously endeavored to exasperate His Majesty against
His Subjects of Scotland, Article 2.
by Invectives against them to His Majesty, even before their falling off from
their Obedience: by advising His Majesty to make War against them, affirming
that His Majesty would never be King of Scotland unless He conquered it, which
he likewise then averred would be a Work only of three Months time; and at the
same time encouraging them most treacherously to withstand His Majesty, and
take from Him His Power, and His Rights, particularly, exciting them thereunto,
by vilifying Speeches of His Sacred Person, That if they awed Him, He was such
a Coward they might have of him what they would, but if they gave him his Will,
he would prove a verier Tyrant than ever Nero.

Answer.
To the first branch of the second Article the Defendant says, The Answer to
the second Article.
he appeals to His Majesty how false it is, who knows well that the Commotions
of Scotland were begun a year before he was employed in Scottish Affairs, Comp.
p. 30. and p. 43.
which had been before that trusted to other Persons of Honor in that Kingdom;
and that the Covenant was generally taken, the Courts of Justice removed from
Edinburgh, the Tables formed, Protestations used against His Majesty's
Proclamations before he was engaged. His Majesty also knows well, that he had
never advised these Innovations which gave the rise to these Commotions, nor
engaged in the Affairs of that Kingdom but upon His Majesty's particular
Command, without which he had designed to avoid all meddling in them; See p. 38.
so that nothing can be more notoriously false than that part of this Article
is, That the Defendant did exasperate His Majesty against that Kingdom, or
advised Him to conquer them before they fell from their Obedienee. It is true,
after His Majesty had thought fit to employ the Defendant in those Affairs, he
did give him clear advertisements of the state of Affairs in that Kingdom, not
sparing his nearest Friends, as His Majesty well knows; but gave no advice, but
what he thought agreed both with the Duty of a good Subject and Patriot. He
never advised His Majesty to conquer or subdue that Kingdom, or to govern it as
a Province; for he takes the suppressing of a Party in Arms against the King,
or who were rejecting his Authority, to be very different from conquering the
Kingdom: and therefore as he simply denies the first branch of this Article, so
he refers the clearing of his Innocence in this to His Majesty, (who cannot but
know best what he advised him) and to the Letters he wrote to His Majesty if
they be yet remaining.

The next branch of the Article is of a piece with the former as to falsehood.
He has often seen eminent Proofs both of His Majesty's Courage and Clemency,
and never entertained a dishonorable thought of His Person; and he is able by
many Compurgators to prove, that his Discourses of His Sacred Person have been
always such as became a dutiful Subject, and an infinitely obliged Servant. It
is not to be imagined he could have used such expressions before Witnesses, and
if any single Persons say they heard them from him, he asserts they are Liars,
and dare not say so if he have a sword in his hand.

Charge.
That whilst he was the Kings Commissioner he did palpably foment the
Differences betwixt King and Country, as particularly by these Evidences
following: Article 3.
( viz.) Whilst he might have settled at his first Arrival all those unhappy
Differences, by yielding to the People such things as would have contented the
Country, and which His Majesty had given him Warrant by his Instructions to
condescend unto; as particularly by the removal of the Service Book, Book of
Canons, High Commission, five Articles of Perth, and Episcopacy only limited in
a moderate way; he by the contrary, upon his first coming to Scotland, being
acquainted herewith, having the same represented to him to the full, did in a
fomenting way, so pleasantly deny, as if he would have had some further to have
been sought. And whilst before his coming all his Friends and Followers, and
such as did belong unto him, did resolutely stand out against that Course, no
sooner was he come, but all of them perceiving his strain did on a sudden quit
their former way, and violently join themselves to the other Party: witness
amongst others the late Earl of Hadington, Sir Alexander Hamilton his Uncle,
now Master of their Ordnance; (a main stickler) the Earl of Lauderdale, and his
Son the Lord Maitland, of all men most intimate with him; to omit his
Brother-in-law the Lord Lindsay, a Principal Actor in that Rebellion from the
beginning, and his Cousin-German the Earl of Glencairn, who continuing long
firm for His Majesty, in end (by his secret solicitation as is thought) made
Defection: by which and suchlike he cunningly necessitated the breaking up of
the Assembly at Glasgow, that the Water might be once troubled, and the Country
quite abandoned unto themselves.

Answer.
The Answer to the third Article.
To the third Article the Defendant says, he was so far from fomenting the
Differences betwixt His Majesty and his Subjects of Scotland, that he did all
that was in his power to bring Matters (which were quite imbroyled when he went
Commissioner thither) to a happy Close; and that he did yield to them all such
things as he had power to grant, which he is ready to make appear by comparing
his Actings with his Instructions. It seems the Accusers knew well what would
have satisfied the Country, but understood little what his Instructions were.
The Covenanters in all their Petitions to the Defendant expressed that nothing
would content them without a Free Assembly and Parliament, See p. 40. n. 7.
and the Defendant being neither instructed to do that, nor the other
Particulars which by the Article are falsely said to have been in his
Instructions, See p. 50.51.
he, after he had proclaimed all the Favors he was empowered by His Majesty to
grant, came to Him to this Kingdom, and received new Instructions, See p. 64.
according to which he proclaimed all he had Warrant from His Majesty to grant:
nor did he ever deny or conceal any of His Majesty's Graces to his People, or
provoke them to new Desires, but did all was in his power to make them rest
satisfied with His Majesty's Gracious Concessions. He also stayed with the
Assembly of Glasgow as long as his Instructions warranted him, and did all he
could to keep them from those Extremities which enforced the Rupture; See p.
107.
and in his whole Proceedings he carried along with him not only the Assessors
His Majesty appointed him to advise with, (the Earl of Argyle only excepted)
and the Secret Council, but likewise the Bishops, whose advice he got and
followed: all which he is ready to make out by comparing his Instructions and
His Majesty's Letters to him, See p. 96.97.
and the Letters he got from the Bishops, with his Proceedings at that time,
from which the falsehood of this Article will plainly appear.

Nor can he be charged with the faults of his Friends or his Followers. It is
known how much the places where his Interest lies, were gained to those Courses
before he was Commissioner, and yet many of his friends did stand out against
the Courses others then followed, though they were not able to make head
against the more prevailing Party round about them. For the Earls of Glencairn
and Lauderdale, they continued in their Duty to the King till the Pacification,
nor did they take the Covenant (for ought he knows) till His Majesty allowed
it; for the Earl of Lindsay, he did not join in these Courses after the
Defendant went to Scotland, but engaged in them from the beginning, though much
pains was used by the Defendant to divert him from them. And as the Defendant
is not answerable for the Actions of his Friends, much less is he accountable
for the Thoughts of his Enemies, who may Charge what they please on the
suspicions of his secret Solicitations, which are their own groundless and
malicious Forgeries: therefore this whole Article is false, as the former are.

Charge.
That he traitorously betrayed His Majesty's Service while he was in the Frith,
Article 4.
and had His Majesty's Trust and Command of His Fleet and Forces therein: and
whilst he was thus, as appeared, in Arms for His Majesty, he intended nothing
less, as appears by his Friends and Followers their underhand Dealings,
suggesting that his taking that Charge upon him was out of his love and respect
to his Country, thereby to prevent that some other should not be put upon it,
who might have made use of that Power and Force to their Prejudice, whereas he
never intended any such thing; by which he did not only most basely betray His
Majesty's Trust, but there did also endear himself to the People, and by the
same means exasperate them against their King and Sovereign. And that he was
not only accessory hereto, but really guilty of the thing it self, appears by
his own Discourse to diverse Persons, that if he had pleased he could have
landed his Forces, and done what further he was Warranted by his Commission,
but that he never intended it; which Double-dealing may be yet more clearly
evinced, in that he had frequent private Meetings, Correspondencies, and
Practices with the Counter-party, as particularly by his Ordinary Appointments
upon the Sands of Barnbougal, and other places next adjacent, where he usually
kept his Meetings with some who were most desperate Leaders and Promoters of
these Courses. And the Prime Instruments of the Committee and Cabinet-Counsels
there amongst them, then at the very same time, and in the greatest heat of all
the business, did profess and give assurance both by word and under their
hands, that Hamilton was the greatest Favourer that ever their good Cause had,
notwithstanding of all that the formality of the time obliged him to profess to
the contrary. And not only in Scotland, (where it was generally known to be so)
but even some of the Scottish Commissioners did profess to some of this Kingdom,
that Hamilton had done things which they did not approve; but yet that he had
been much more Friend than Enemy to the Courses of the Country, and had done
much more good than evil: yea Argyle himself upon a private dispute, falling
into heat, delivered, that he and those others did nothing but by Hamilton's
Directions, Knowledge, or private Approbation. As also whilst he was in the same
Expedition, being frequently invited by all His Majesty's good Subjects then in
the Northern parts of Scotland, he most treacherously be^rayed them, and
abandoned the business, as particularly can be instanced by the Marquis of
Huntly, who being appointed to receive His Majesty's Orders from time to time
by Hamilton, whilst he did endeavor at the beginning at Turreff, and other
places, vigorously to suppress that Party, was straightly inhibited to engage;
but by the contrary, by peremptory Orders wille^ to suffer the Malignant Party
to be the first beginners, by which Restraint the Business was totally ruined,
as is notoriously known. After which, the Viscount of Aboyn, being clothed by
His Majesty with Commissions, and to have had some experimented Officers along
in that Employment, the said Duke of Hamilton did break off that probable
Course, and engaged such of his own Election and Trust, who did so evidently
miscarry the Business, as thereafter they were to be accused by the whole
Noblemen and Gentry of that Party. Like-as he having got Orders about the same
time from the King, to send Sir Nicholas Byron's Regiment to assist the King's
Party in the North, who could easily have reduced all that Country to His
Majesty's Obedience; notwithstanding thereof, and of their frequent
Solicitations to have it done, he still shifted the Business, and would never
give way to it, pretending that he had some other Design in hand for them,
though all they had to do was to Die below decks, and be thrown overboard into
the Sea. And how often he might have put Forces great enough to Land, and how
frequently he was invited to it, the whole Kingdom can bear witness.

Answer.
To the fourth Article the Defendant says, The Answer to the fourth Article.
it is most false that he betrayed His Majesty's Trust or Service when he
commanded the Fleet, and that he is ready to justify every step of his Actings
there by His Majesty's Instructions and Letters, which he received every third
or fourth day when hehad that Employment; nor is he answerable for what others
might have said of him. His Majesty knows well that he did not desire that
Employment for himself, See p. 114.
but conscious of his own unfitness entreated to be excused from it; this His
Majesty not allowing, he undertook the Service: and His Majesty likewise knows
what Informations and Advices he sent him, and that he gave punctual and ready
Obedience to all the Orders he received. Nor was his Service there useless, for
besides the great Diversion it made by the huge Bodies were left to guard the
Coast, he took diverse Ships, particularly some coming from Germany with many
Officers, who were returning home to offer their Service to the Covenanters:
and his Carriage was so far from making him gracious to that Party, that none
was more odious to them, which appeared in the Curses and Reproaches were cast
on him as he passed through the streets of Edinburgh to possess the Earl of
Forth of the Castle, See p. 144.
a little after the Pacification; nor had it been possible for him to have
escaped at that time more sensible Affronts, if he had not taken some Leading
men of the Covenanters along with him. When the Defendant was in the Frith, See
p. 124.
he sent His Majesty's Proclamation to those then in Arms, and used all means
possible to engage them to a Compliance with it; nor had he any Conferences
with them in secret when he was aboard, See p. 133.
but had always some Witnesses by when any were sent from the Covenanters to
him, and did immediately give His Majesty an account of all that passed, for
proof whereof he desires his Letters to His Majesty be examined. See p. 131,
133.
Neither had the Defendant any Orders to land his Men till His Majesty was come
to Berwick, but had express Orders to the contrary: and it was thought, that
his lying in the Frith did more amuse the Enemy than his Landing could have
prejudiced them, since they being uncertain where he might land, great Bodies
were kept upon the whole Coast, which, if he had landed, had gathered together
against him, and had been too strong for him, being about four times his
number. Nor did the Defendant make any Appointments on the Sands of Barnbougal,
as is most falsely alleged; nor did he ever set his foot on Land, except on the
Isles of Inchcoln and Inchkeith, all the while he lay in the Frith. It is true
he was once very near the Sands of Barnbougal, but on a very different design:
he chasing a Bark that run her self aground there, was likewise stuck fast, and
had almost been taken Prisoner, diverse Volleys passing betwixt his men and
those on the Land; but his Boat-men with much ado got him off. See p. 138.
Nor had the Defendant any Orders to proceed to Hostilities till two of his
Regiments were called to the Camp, nor could he safely land the other that
remained consisting only of 1700 men. It is true, upon His Majesty's Orders he
was resolved to do the Enemy all the mischief he could, but about thirty hours
after he got these Orders, (in which time he was considering where he was first
to make an Impression, and did go out himself to have fired some Ships, but by
a mischance was run on a Shelve, so that he lost that Tide) they were
countermanded by new Orders: for His Majesty having resolved to Treat with the
Enemy, See p. 139.
commanded him to go on to no more Hostilities, but to come and wait on His
Sacred Person; so that the Defendant having in all things followed His
Majesty's Orders in that Service, was well approved of by His Majesty. Nor can
any thing be charged on him from what the Leaders of the contrary Party might
have said or written of him, either then or since, which might have been done
on design either to encourage their own Party, or out of hatred to the
Defendant, that thereby they might possess His Majesty with jealousies of him.
Nor was the Defendant ever invited by His Majesty's good Subjects to come
North, except by one Letter the Earl of Airly wrote him, See p. 140.
which he got after His Majesty called the two Regiments from the Fleet; and
about that time His Majesty commanded him to stop all Hostilities, and give
attendance on His Person. See p. 123.
He had likewise express Orders from His Majesty not to think of the North,
till some good were done in the South; and it is most falsely alleged, that
when he was there, See p. 117.
he abandoned the Marquis of Huntley, who was taken Prisoner before either he
or his men were Shipped: and the Orders he sent that Marquis were by His
Majesty's express Commands, founded on very good reason, that he should not
make a Rupture till His Majesty's Forces were drawn together, and near the
Borders, lest (as by the event did appear) the Enemy should have overpowered
him if he begun too soon; and as the Defendant has been informed, that
Business was ruined, not by the Restraint these Orders gave, but by the
Treachery of some of the Defendant's Accusers, who were then in Arms against
him, See p 135.137.
and took that Marquis under Trust. And when the Viscount of Aboyn came to the
Defendant with His Majesty's Letters, (which were of a very old Date) he was
supplied to his hearts desire, as himself professed. His Majesty had before his
coming called away two of the Regiments that were with the Defendant, and he
had Orders not to weaken the other; so false is it that he had Orders to send
Byron's Regiment to the North: but he gave the Viscount of Aboyn some
experienced Officers, Arms, Ammunition, and Money. And the Defendant has been
well informed, that the Miscarriage of that Attempt did not flow from those he
sent with that Lord; but that being encountered by Soldiers commanded by some
of the Defendant's Accusers, his Lordship betook himself to his heels: but the
others whom the Defendant sent with him behaved themselves gallantly, and laid
all the blame of their bad success on that Lord. It is also false that Byron's
Regiment was kept to die below Decks, since from the time they went aboard till
they were discharged, there died not ten of their number; so false is this
Article in all its branches and assertions.

Charge.
That in all his demeanor he went about to advance the designs of that People
against the King, Article 5.
as by secret encouraging them to persist in their obstinate Courses, so by
private discouraging of well-affected men to persevere in their Allegiance; and
in particular did advise some Noblemen (who craved his Opinion how they should
behave themselves in these Distractions) to agree with the Country, and go home
and make their own Peace. Like-as after the Pacification at Berwick, continuing
in his wonted strain of incensing, in an underhand way, the People against
their King, being demanded why he denuded himself of his former Commission; his
Answer was, because he knew the King intended to keep nothing of that which at
that time he had condescended unto, otherwise he would not easily have parted
with the Honor of that Service. By which he did so wound the King in the
Opinion of His Subjects, of the sincerity of His Intentions, That as no one
thing did at that time breed more rubs and difficulties to His Majesty's
Service; so is there nothing by which the People are more readily and easily
stirred up to the present Rising in Arms, than the Opinion they then, and by
his continual underhand working, have since drunk in of the King's Intention to
reverse (in case he should prevail in England) all the Acts and Favors he had
condescended unto to His Subjects of Scotland.

Answer.
The Answer to the fifth Article.
To the fifth Article the Defendant says, he ever studied by all the means that
became a good Subject and Countryman to bring the Differences betwixt His
Majesty and His Subjects to a happy Temper; and he desires the Malice of his
Accusers in forming this Article (as all the rest) be considered, wherein base
Discourses and Advices are fastened on him without naming the Persons to whom
they were given: and in this he cannot but commend his Accusers Prudence, who
have named no Person till they have tried upon whom they can so far prevail as
to be guilty of the wickedness of owning such Lies. The Defendant can prove the
contrary by many, in whose Preservation it is to be supposed he is more
concerned than in any they can name, with whom he used his utmost endeavors to
persuade them to adhere closely to His Majesty's Interests, which prevailed on
some, though not on all; nor did he advise any to agree with the Country, till
he knew His Majesty was resolved to end the Business in a Treaty, in which case
it could be no Crime to advise any to make their own Peace; nor did he ever
infuse into any Person a jealousy that His Majesty would void the happy
Settlement of Scotland: sure he is, he said and did all was in his power to
root these jealousies out of the Subjects minds, which he can prove by
innumerable Witnesses and Presumptions; and no man durst say he heard any of
the Discourses mentioned in the Article from the Defendant, if he were in a
capacity to call him to an account for it. Nor did he desire to be freed of
his Commissionon the account that is falsely alleged in this Article, but
finding his continuing in that Place gave a Jealousy not only to the Country,
See p. 146.
but to the Counselors and Officers of State, as if too great a Trust had
been heaped on one Person; and apprehending that the expense and greatness of
that Character continuing long in one man, would breed Envy, and much retard
his Majesty's Service, he desired a fitter Person might be put in that High
Trust, and that he might be suffered to continue about His Majesty's Person,
who he supposes does remember well upon what grounds he desired to be freed of
that Great, but Invidious Character: thus this Article is also entirely false.

Charge.
That in the Petition to His Majesty for discharging the Annuity (which was not
so much pretended for that, Article 6.
as to be a pretext under which a firm Bond and Association might have been
contracted amongst all Loyal Subjects, for the Preservation of the Kings
Person, Honor, and Authority, and a strict Conjunction amongst themselves) he
could not be induced to put his hand to it, until a Clause conceived in favors
of His Majesty to the effect above-expressed, (as too great an eyesore) was
dashed out; and the same thus dashed being sent up to Court, and the desire of
the Petition most Graciously condescended unto by His Majesty, and delivered
unto the Earl of Lanerick, chief Secretary, the same was kept up to the great
amazement of all those Noblemen and Gentlemen who had signed the same, and
total discouragement of others to appear in that or any such Course thereafter.

Answer.
To the sixth Article the Defendant says, The Answer to the sixth Article.
that he sees there is nothing so false but his Enemies have the impudence to
fasten it on him, since he was one of the chief Contrivers and Promoters of
that Petition, as he can prove by hundreds of Witnesses; nor did he dash, See
p. 211.
or cause to be dashed out, any Clause that was conceived in His Majesty's
favors, which his Enemies with their usual falsehood say was too great an
eyesore. It is true, he saw diverse Draughts of a Petition against the
Annuities, and some of them had expressions in them which the Judicatories of
that time would have declared contrary to Acts of Parliament, which by the
advice of good Lawyers, all that were well-affected to His Majesty's Service
rejected; and yet the Draught agreed to will be found to contain very plainly
the Assurances of their Fidelity to His Majesty: and that Draught being agreed
on, the Defendant sent it to all the Places where he had Interest, and procured
very many Subscriptions to it; so unjustly is the Defendant charged in this
Article. But as these Subscriptions were thus procured, the Council stopped all
further Proceedings in that Business by a Declaration, forbidding any to
subscribe it; nor did His Majesty send any Answer to those Petitions to the
Defendant. It is true, by his Instructions he did empower them to discharge the
Annuities to such as had petitioned about them: See p. 220.
if this was not done, it was not only the Defendants deed, but was the
concurring Opinion of the others joined with him in Trust by His Majesty, who
he doubts not shall be able to give a very good account of that, See p. 223.
as of all the other particulars committed to their Trust, whenever His
Majesty shall call them to it, and shall show him very good reasons why they
did not proceed any further in that Affair.

Charge.
That since he left His Majesty at York, Article 7.
he has been still laboring to frustrate the good Intentions of His Majesty's
faithful Subjects of Scotland, and to bring Matters to the Pass they are now
at, which may be clearly evinced by the particulars which follow. First, when
some Noblemen of that Kingdom well-affected to His Majesty's Service,
perceiving the Intentions of some there to engage that Nation in Rebellion with
the Malignant Party here, made offer of all their best Services and ready
endeavors to prevent the same, for themselves, and in the name of all the
Kings greatest and best-affected Party there; he, to disappoint those promising
and evident Courses, thrust himself into the Business, and in a very seeming
plausible way undertook to keep that Kingdom in Peace and Quiet, and from
attempting any thing upon this Nation, or against His Majesty's Service now
depending here, and (to make it appear the more specious) without making use of
any Force, or putting His Majesty to any Trouble or Charges; and withal
solemnly engaged to break off all his Alliance, Ties, and Friendship with the
Marquis of Argyle, (who does make himself so much the Head of that Rebellion
against His Majesty) or otherwise persuade him to acknowledge himself, and
become, a good Subject, and that betwixt and three Months thereafter at
farthest* the effect of all which undertaking had this result, First, that
immediately upon his return to Scotland a Convention of the Estates was
indicted without the King's knowledge or consent, a Precedent whereof can never
be shown in any Records; which coming to His Majesty's knowledge, He did
immediately direct a Letter under His own Hand, willing that Hamilton, and some
other of his Accomplices, who had His Majesty's Trust for the time, should
declare the said Meeting Illegal, and disapprove it in His Majesty's Name.
About the time of the Receipt of which Letter the said Hamilton, and some of
his Cabal, did employ the Earl of Calander from them to speak with a great many
Noblemen of the Kings Party, and take their Advices in what was to be done; and
they who understood nothing of His Majesty's Letter (it being altogether kept
up from them) declared all in one voice, their Judgments were that His Majesty
should disclaim the Convention, and declare it Illegal, and that they would all
be willing to join with Hamilton and his Party, and take their Lives in their
hands to maintain His Majesty's Honor and Authority, and free themselves from
the Slavery of those rebellious Tyrants. It was answered them again by the said
Earl of Calander, (His Majesty's Letter being still suppressed) That the King
would needs approve of the Convention with Limitations; To which it was
replied, That they behooved either to be very ignorant or unfaithful who had
given His Majesty such Advice, seeing those People would never confine
themselves within Limits, or take a part, if it should be left them in their
power to extend themselves and overreach all; and that they would on no terms
assent to any such Course, as being intended for nothing else but a hollow
undermining of His Majesty and all His faithful Subjects. So they parted with
little satisfaction on either hand, and some days thereafter the said Earl of
Calander was again directed to the same Parties, to persuade them still to the
former Overture, but to no effect: yet in end, lest the Service might seem to
suffer by so much difference in Opinion, they desired Calander to show Hamilton
and those of his Party, that since he was only trusted and employed by His
Majesty in the Business, their Affection and Tenderness to the Service should
make them very unwilling to differ with him in the way; and however in their
own Judgments they did no way approve that the King should so far wrong His
Authority, as to allow of any such Illegal Proceedings, which did portend from
bad Causes worse Effects; yet since His Majesty would do it, and they needs
have it so, they should go along, but with one Caveat, which was, That if the
Convention did not observe these Limitations prescribed by His Majesty, in that
case, that they should protest, and withdraw presently from the House; and that
then all who were for His Majesty's Service should immediately join themselves
together, and take the Field. This being solemnly concluded, and with much
attestation, it was resolved, that all who did affect the Kings Service, and
had Vote in the Convention, should be present there, upon certain hopes that
they should be able to balance either by Voices all violent Courses, or at
least to protest against them, and adhere to His Majesty's Service and
Authority in a vigorous way. But all their great Promises and fair Assurances
were either not intended, or very soon forgotten: for whilst it was the first
Act of the Convention, after His Majesty's Letter was read, to Voice themselves
a Free Assembly as any had ever been kept in that Kingdom, notwithstanding of
the Restraints in His Majesty's Letter, and that in that case Protests and
Declarations, and every thing else in His Majesty's behalf were faithfully
assured, they came so short of that, as when Hamilton's Voice was asked, and
all expected he should have made a Protest, he pronounced so doubtful an
Oracle, as Argyle seeming to question of what spirit it came, (though no
question it had been often so concluded among them the more to possess others
with panick fears) desired he should explain himself, if that he meant not
thereby any Protest; who answered, that he never intended to protest against a
National Convention, and that it seemed his words were very much mistaken. To
second this, his Brother Lanerick, the King's chief Secretary, rose up, and had
a Discourse to qualify Hamilton's expressions, and free them from all such
disloyal blemishes, as a Protest in the Kings behalf: so all who were to have
declared themselves for His Majesty, being surprised by so strange and
unexpected a way, withdrew, and retired themselves from the Meeting in a
general Discontent. And yet their Affections being such to His Majesty's
Service, as they were unwilling to leave it on these Terms, however so badly
handled, would not let it rest there, but would yet put him a little further to
it, making again the offer of all their best Endeavors for His Majesty's
Service; desiring that since he was only the Person chiefly employed by His
Majesty, and one who had most interessed himself in the King's Trusts, that
they might be directed by him in the matter of His Majesty's Business, how to
carry themselves, and whether or not it were more fitting for the Service that
they should sit in the Convention, or absent themselves, or do whatsoever else.
He was so far (notwithstanding of his Employment and Trust) from giving
information, encouragement, or advice, as all that he returned them for their
Affection and Faithfulness to His Majesty's Service, was, That they might use
their own Discretions, and do as themselves should think fit; which did so
evidently discover unto them his hollow-hearted Cunning, the Ruin by
consequence of His Majesty's Affairs, the slight and cold way they themselves
were used, and the ticklish condition he had so mired them into, as they seemed
constrained for the most part to keep the Convention, and countenance all those
Illegal and Rebellious ways were taken in it. And it is likewise to be
remembered, that notwithstanding His Majesty's Letter, wherein He declared His
express Pleasure anent the discharge of that Illegal Indiction, that they did
not only suppress the same, and keep it up from the knowledge of the King's
faithful Party there, but also did procure from His Majesty an allowance to
that Illegal Meeting, contrary to His Majesty's Pleasure already expressed unto
them, and the wishes and desires of all the faithful Party in that Kingdom. It
is also to be called to mind, that after all hopes and probabilities of the
Kings Service in the Matter of the Convention, were absolutely deserted and
given over, that Will. Murray, who was commanded by the King to Agent His
Affairs there then, desired a Meeting of those of the Kings Party, who had
already kept these two Appointments with Calander before the Convention, who
(notwithstanding His Majesty's Service had been so grossly and palpably already
miscarried, and they themselves so notably abused in it) being willing to study
rather the Remedies than regrate the Disease, and redeem the Time rather than
complain of its loss, once for all were content to hear what could be
propounded for the recovery of Business; which only proved, that they would
undertake, and join to re-gain that After-game which a few had spoiled, and all
given over. Notwithstanding whereof they gave it Will. Murray back in his
Commission to Hamilton and his Accomplices, that if they would really and even
down put on a Resolution to appear vigorously and to purpose in the Service,
they in that case (to show they should not mingle themselves nor any of their
particulars) would be willing to follow, were it Hamilton or any, in what
should prove to the advancement of the Service: otherwise, if they thought that
too much, that they would be willing to join hand in hand, and put their Lives
and Fortunes and all together at the stake with them; and if that did not
satisfy, but that they esteemed it too rash a Business for men of so much
cunning to engage in, that they would but approve them to put it to a hazard,
and they would willingly take their adventure, which should they carry they
could be very willing that Hamilton and his Party should have the esteem of it,
did they miscarry or succumb, that he and his might take their own Course of
Safety without being concerned in their Misfortunes. This Commission being home
and heartily delivered; it was promised by Will. Murray, that Hamilton and his
Party should be presently put to it, and an Answer returned; for the more hasty
dispatch whereof, they sending along one of their own number to expede the
Return, Hamilton and his Accomplices being several times convened and pressed
upon it, did absolutely refuse to meddle in that kind, which was all their
Answer: so that the other being willing, notwithstanding of all these
hollow-hearted Treacheries, both before, in the time, and after the Convention,
either to follow, join, or hazard alone in His Majesty's Service, would they
but approve it, they refused all either to do alone, join, or suffer others to
do it; after all which there could be nothing resting but an invincible
necessity to know His Majesty's own Mind, since they who had his sole and
absolute Employ and Trust did so much abuse it to His Disservice.

By all which points, circumstances, and cunning fetches, to bring this
Convention to the wished period, it may clearly appear to every undeluded eye,
that he is accessory to that bad Plot of raising this Army in Scotland, to
disturb the Kings Affairs in this Kingdom, that so all being brought to a Chaos
of Confusion, he might the better fish his hopes and ends from amongst so
troubled waters.

Answer.
To the seventh Article the Defendant says, The Answer to the seventh Article.
he does not much wonder that his Enemies have filled this up with many
Falsehoods, since they have the impudence in the former Articles to fasten many
things on him which were known to His Majesty to be Falsehoods: but no wonder
their Malice does culminate in aggravating the particulars of this Article,
they being recent and passed since His Majesty was in Scotland, and since the
Defendant had the Honor of waiting on His Majesty, and giving him more
particular Informations than Letters or Messengers could carry; and the
tragical event of Affairs seems to offer colors (as is usual in such cases)
for charging those who had the chief Trust in them. But the Defendant doubts
not he shall be able to make appear the falsehood of this Article, in all these
particular instances with which he is charged: and First, His Majesty knows
best of any if he did thrust himself into Affairs, and if he did not act only
as he was commanded and employed by him; nor does the Defendant know who those
Noblemen were that made such Offers: His Majesty knows better if any such were
made. The Defendant knows well that some of his Accusers made some Offers to
Her Majesty about eight Months after His Majesty had sent him to Scotland:
Comp. p. 212. with p. 195.
but as these Offers were designed to make His Majesty the first breaker, which
would have been infinitely to the prejudice of His Service, and have given
incurable jealousies to the Subjects of all His Majesty's Concessions, so no
rational Methods were proposed for prosecuting them; and it seemed they flowed
from the desperate State those Lords were in, who had engaged as deep against
the King as any had done; but afterward not meeting that Esteem and those
Rewards which their Ambition and Vanity had designed, and their Fortunes being
ruined, they pretended much zeal for the Kings Service, but offered no rational
appearances of being able to prosecute what they undertook. But the Defendant,
as both their Majesty's well know, laid the whole Matter before them, with his
own Opinion, and the grounds on which he went: and they do also know with what
impudent Falsehood it is alleged, See p. 21^.227, 228.
that he undertook to keep the Kingdom of Scotland in Peace, since both in his
Discourses and Letters he often said, he would undertake for none but himself;
and that he very much feared the Conjunction of that Kingdom with the Two
Houses, and that the utmost of his Hopes was to keep off things by delays for
that year: and in this he appeals to His Majesty, and to all in the Court with
whom he kept Correspondence. And for his Engagements to break with the Marquis
of Argyle if he did not faithfully adhere to His Majesty's Interests, it is
well known how ill an understanding, and how little Correspondence, has been
betwixt the Defendant and Argyle these twelve Months past. His Majesty also
knows, See p. 210.
that when the Chancellor of Scotland was sent up last, the Defendant wrote to
him to look well to him, for it was believed (and it was the Defendant's own
Opinion) that if he went to London he would engage in an Union with the Two
Houses, in name of the Kingdom of Scotland, of which when His Majesty
challenged the Chancellor, he denied it, and said, These were Jealousies
infused into His Majesty by the Defendant; so far was he from abusing His
Majesty with vain Hopes. Nor is it strange that his Enemies charge Falsehoods on
him in Matters pretended to be transacted among few hands, since they are so
impudent in Matters that were public, as to say that immediately upon his
return to Scotland a Convention of Estates was called, Comp. p. 195. and p. 218.
for that was not done but after he had been sent to Scotland almost a whole
year: and all that time the Defendant did render His Majesty such Services,
that he was pleased out of His Royal Goodness not only to write him many
Letters of Thanks, but to confer diverse marks of His Favor on him. And when
the Convention of Estates was appointed to be called, See p. 21^.
the Defendant did all he could to oppose that Resolution, and entered his
Declaration against it, which is yet upon Record, having omitted nothing he
could either say or do to hinder the Calling of it, for which Service he
received a particular Letter of Thanks from His Majesty: and the Defendant
says, See p. 232.
that there was no Letter written from His Majesty to him, to hinder the
meeting of that Convention, nor does he know who are meant by his Accomplices or
Cabal, as they are afterward called, except those Lords whom His Majesty
joined with the Defendant in the Instructions he sent them. The first Article
of these being that they should do all was possible for avoiding Divisions
among His Majesty's Subjects, See p. 219.
and a Latitude being left for them to do what might be most for His Majesty's
Service on their perils, and as they should be answerable, See p. 245.
they were to consider what was most to His Majesty's Service. It is true, His
Majesty did direct a Letter to the Council to forbid the meeting of the
Convention, See p. 230.
but did remit it to the consideration of the Lords whom he had trusted,
whether it were fitter to deliver or conceal it, upon which they were obliged
to consider what was best to be done; nor was it fit for them to divulge that
Letter, till it was considered whether it should be made use of or not. But the
Lords that had His Majesty's Trust did call some meetings of all who were
judged bestaffected, to consider what Advices were to be offered to His
Majesty; and they all did return their joynt-Advices, See p. 226.
with the reasons that prevailed with them, to His Majesty, wherein the
Defendant was but one of seven, and so is not to be charged nor answerable for
the Advice so given; since they only offered Advertisements to the King, with
their Advices and the reasons that prevailed with them; and as His Majesty (who
could only judge what Advices were best) gave Orders, so they did Act: if the
Advertisements sent were false, or their Advices against Law, they are
accountable for them; but are not bound to answer for the good success of every
thing they advised, that being in the hands of God: and neither the Defendant,
nor any other joined with him in Trust, did advise His Majesty to authorize the
Convention, but only to allow them liberty to sit, so they kept within the
prefixed Limits. And there was good reason for offering such Advice, His
Majesty's Affairs not being in so promising a condition that it was fit for
them to begin the Rupture; and it was certain that these who called the
Convention without His Order, would have acted in it notwithstanding His
Prohibition, which must have either affronted His Authority, or precipitated a
Breach, which could not have been done at that time without the Ruin of the
King's Affairs in that Kingdom. The Defendant did at that time desire the Earl
of Calander, that he would use his Endeavors with some of these who pretended
zeal for the King's Service, and are now the Defendant's Accusers, that they
would lay aside all private Animosities and concur in His Majesty's Service,
and offer their Opinions with the Method in which they desired things might be
carried on, and the Defendant offered them all possible satisfaction in every
thing, for which they stood at a distance from him: but that Earl brought
Answers very far different from what they pretend they sent, and all wise men
looked on their Propositions as so extravagant and unpromising, that none could
think them fit to be followed. But the Defendant denies there were any such
Engagements passed as in the Article is falsely alleged, yet when the
Convention sat the Defendant did often and no way ambiguously, See p. 224.
but very plainly, declare he did not own their Authority, nor would give
obedience to any of their Acts that were beyond the Bounds prefixed in His
Majesty's Letter: upon which he withdrew with diverse of his Friends, and did
advise and prevail on many to follow his Example. It is true, some came and
asked his Advice, of whose Fidelity he had no reason to be assured, judging not
without grounds that they came to him on design to trepan him; and therefore he
told them, that for his own part he was resolved not to acknowledge their
Authority, nor give obedience to their Commands, by which they might easily
judge what he would advise, seeing his Practice. It is also false, that the
Defendant procured from His Majesty an allowance to that Convention, since the
Letter His Majesty wrote was so far from allowing it, that it particularly
challenged the Illegality and Nullity of that Meeting; See p. 232.
and the Convention was so far from thinking themselves Authorized by it, that
they refused to stand to it, or so much as to put it on Record. It is also
false that any such Offers, as are vainly and without truth said to have been
made to Mr. Murray, were ever brought by him to the Defendant, or others
entrusted with him: he was indeed employed to deal with them to overcome their
untoward Jealousies and ambitious Vanity, but with no success, as he reported,
and is ready to make good; but they venting their implacable Hatred and
ill-grounded Jealousies of His Majesty's faithful Servants, left the Kingdom in
the Summer, and possessed many with such Prejudices, that they infinitely
retarded His Majesty's Service, and divided the small Party that adhered to
him: yet His Majesty sustained no Prejudice from Scotland all that year, which
was the uttermost that ever the Defendant gave His Majesty any hope of. But it
is most basely false, that the Defendant did bring the Convention of Estates to
the wished period, since he did all that was in his power to hinder its
Sitting, and to get it broken up as soon as it sat down. It is also false that
the Defendant was on the design of raising the Army in Scotland, which he
opposed by all the probable and honest ways were in his power, and was ever
ready upon the least appearances or hopes of Success, to have hazarded his Life
and Fortune to hinder it: and therefore sent frequently to England for those
Supplies, without which their Attempt could signify nothing, but the exposing
the Kings Party in Scotland to the scorn and malice of their Enemies. But the
necessity of His Majesty's Affairs in England did so retard the Answers, that
opportunities were lost, and the other Party had prevailed over all, which
forced the Defendant to fly out of that Kingdom, Order being given for seizing
on his Estate, and taking and imprisoning his Person; and yet Affairs there are
not quite desperate, but the Defendant had many very probable Propositions to
have offered to His Majesty, the Maintaining of whose Prosperity and Authority
has been the constant designofhis whole Life.

Charge.
That he has endeavored to set on foot a Title to the Crown of Scotland,
Article 8.
having Treated with Foreign Princes touching his Claim thereunto, and desired
their Aid and Assistance to his Right, protecting and maintaining such as wrote
Treatises in his behalf, and Claim to the Crown.

Besides all which particulars of his treacherous sowing of Sedition 'twixt His
Majesty and His Subjects, his undervaluing and reviling his own Sacred Person,
his fomenting all the unhappy Differences betwixt King and People, his exciting
of each against the other, his pouring of oil into the fire betwixt them both,
his direct Attempts upon the Crown, and intentions to Vsurp, his late Carriage
does give too evident a Character of his invincible Disloyalty; as particularly
his treacherous Carriage, before, in the time, and at the late Convention, his
juggling in the business of the Counterpetition, and that of the late pretended
Bond, which are so notorious Truths, and so evidently to be instructed by all
His Majesty's good Subjects, but more particularly by those with whom by His
Majesty's special Command he kept a seeming Correspondence. Besides diverse
other circumstances, whereby it may be clearly demonstrated, that he is of the
Party with them that have raised this Rebellion in Scotland, namely, that in
the Instructions given by that Faction to the Earl of Lowthian in his late
French Negotiation, one of the particulars earnestly recommended to him, was to
desire of the Crown of France Restitution of the Duchy of Chastleherault to
him, which in all probability they would never have done in his favor, if they
had taken him for an Enemy to their designs and purposes.

Last of all it is craved, that in respect of his unexpected Arrival here,
there may be liberty to add and amplify this Charge as occasion shall offer.

One particular omitted above, is not amiss to be here inserted, at what time
the business of the Scottish Covenant was at the greatest height, a distressed
Gentleman of Scotland, Sir John Ferguson, desired the Loan of some Money from
Sir John Hamilton of Broomhill, (whose Relation and Interest every way to the
Duke are known to every one who knows them both:) who answered him in flat
terms, he would neither give nor lend him a penny, except he and his Sons would
bind themselves to go home and sign the Covenant, upon which Condition he
offered to lend him what he sought.

We do engage from our faithful respects to His Majesty's Service, without any
consideration or interest else whatsoever, to make good this Charge, some of
the weightiest points by several Witnesses, and all the rest by some and strong
Probabilities.

Answer.
The Answer to the eighth Article.
To the eighth Article the Defendant says, here lies the Masterpiece of his
Enemies Malice and Calumny, to charge him with a point treasonable in the
highest degree, without offering one circumstance to make the Truth of it
appear probable: and such public things as the setting on foot a pretense to
the Crown, the Treating with Foreign Princes touching his Claim to it, the
Authorizing and Protecting of any who wrote in defense of his Title, must have
been notour and known things, and yet no particular is here named; which
clearly shows the Forgery of the whole, on design to beget in His Majesty
Jealousies of the Defendant, who knows of no such Title to the Crown, but
acknowledges His Majesty's and His Posteritie's, (whom he prays God to
preserve) their undoubted Right to the Crown. And as the Defendant
acknowledges the great Honor of his Relation to the Royal Blood, so there is
no more reason to Charge him on that account than to Charge any others who are
more nearly related to His Majesty, as are all the Noble branches of the Prince
Elector Palatin's Family. But as the Honor of that nearness of Blood had no
other effect on the Defendant's Progenitors, but to quicken them to serve His
Majesty's Ancestors with the more zeal, which appeared most signally in the
Reigns of Q. Mary and K. James His Minority; so the Defendant has in that
always traced their steps in the same faithful zealous Loyalty; nor can so much
as a color for any of the impudent Forgeries in this Article be made out. The
Defendant never heard till he saw it in his Charge, that any did ever write for
his Title, nor does he believe it a whit the more for that: but if any such
thing be, let the Authors of such treasonable Books be punished, according to
the merit of so high an Offense; sure he is, he shall neither protect, nor
encourage them. But he does not doubt this is a Forgery as all the rest are.
The other particulars are an Invidious needless repetition of what has been
before falsely alleged in the Charge, and so is already answered. The
particular of the Earl of Lowthian's Instructions can be no Presumption, much
less Proof against the Defendant, since these Instructions were signed long
before there was a Breach betwixt His Majesty and that Kingdom: they were also
brought to His Majesty, who signed them, and not only by His written
Instructions did appoint the Earl of Lowthian to endeavor the Restoring of the
Defendant to his Right in France, but did also recommend it verbally to
Lowthian very earnestly. For the Discourses that passed betwixt Sir John
Hamilton and Sir John Ferguson, the Defendant knows nothing of them, nor is he
accountable for what others, whatever their Dependence on him be, have spoken;
he knows not whether Sir John Ferguson ever took the Covenant or not, but this
he knows well, that he did recommend him to His Majesty, as one that suffered
much for adhering to his Duty to His Majesty, and did procure several Marks of
His Majesty's Favor for him.

And thus the Defendant has plainly, and in as short terms as was possible,
and with all the Moderation such things can allow of, answered all the
particulars Charged upon him; wherein he doubts not but it does appear,
especially to His Majesty, (who knows well how he is able to make out most of
his Answers from His own Royal Commands, Warrants and Instructions) with how
much Falsehood and Malice he is accused, so that little credit will be given to
the impudent, base, groundless, and improbable Forgeries, devised to ruin the
Defendant; who, as he is ready quickly to adduce the main and most substantial
points of his Evidence, so he begs, as an Act both of Justice and Goodness,
that his Accusers have a competent time prefixed them for the bringing in and
finishing their Evidence, that if the Defendant be found Guilty, he may receive
condign Punishment, and if Innocent, that he be exonered of this Charge, and
liberated of this Disgrace, and suffered to accuse his Accusers for the
Falsehoods, Lies, and Calumnies, with which they have studied to abuse His
Majesty.

The Duke having got the Charge, desired Mr. Murray would earnestly move the
King that it might be put to a speedy Examination, and that his Accusers might
be ordered to go about it as soon as might be: they excused themselves, saying,
it was impossible while the Commotions lasted, to get their Evidences brought.
The Duke hearing of this, said it was the saddest thing imaginable to keep him
under such high Imputations to so long and indeterminate a Term: for though no
man wished a speedy end to those Troubles more than himself, yet there were sad
grounds to fear they should prove too lasting; and it was hard to keep him
under so deep a Disgrace, and such cruel Aspersions, to that uncertainty. Much
was also alleged from the Laws of England, and Privileges of the Peers,
against this Procedure. His Enemies fearing these Reasons might at length be
heard, procured an Order in the beginning of January, for sending him, first to
Exeter, on his way to Pendennis, a Castle upon Falmouth in Cornwall, to be kept
Prisoner till his Trial were ready to be gone about.

Lanerick was as active as he could both for his Brother and himself. Lanerick
being also Prisoner, does all he can for their Vindication,
The particulars he was charged with did not amount so high, and were chiefly
his Concurrence with his Brother: for the Affection and Confidence betwixt them
was so entire, that all judged the one could not be Innocent if the other was
Guilty. The two English Secretaries were appointed to examine him, but he
answered them only in some General things, and told them, that for those
particulars of his late Trust, diverse other Scottish Lords were concerned in
them, and it was not an English business; and therefore he desired Liberty to
give His Majesty Satisfaction, but refused to do it to any other Person. And he
seeing the Party made against them was so strong, did earnestly crave Liberty
to go beyond Sea, since he could not be so happy as to serve His Majesty longer
in Britain: and he engaged his word of Honor never to meddle any further in
British Affairs, but that as soon as he should be called home to undergo his
Trial, he should upon the faith of a Gentleman and Christian return, since it
was hard that they should be condemned to the infamy of so long a Disgrace
without any Trial. But to this he had no return; and it seemed that none of
these Messages were faithfully carried to His Majesty.

Next he desired, that since he must continue Prisoner, at least that small
Happiness might not be denied him of being Prisoner with his Brother; but
neither got he any return to this. And the King sent to him for the
Court-Signet, but with this Declaration, that he did not thereby intend to
remove him from the Office of Secretary; which yet remains bearing date, Oxford
the 16th of January, 1644. Signed George Digby, Edward Nicholas. He got also
advertisement sent him, that next day he was to be sent to Ludlow-Castle in
Wales.

and makes his Escape.
When the Earl of Lanerick saw that the malice and power of their Enemies was so
great, that they were not like to obtain a Trial for clearing their Innocence,
and discovering the Forgeries of their Accusers; and fearing a long and cruel
Imprisonment, (some surmises being also brought him of greater Severities) he
made his Escape out of Oxford. The particular way whereof is not needful to be
inserted. Only the malice of his Enemies appeared more signally upon the
knowledge of his Escape, who came and moved, that his Page ( Robert Kennedy) who
had been employed in making it, and stayed behind him at his Lodgings, should
be hanged out at his Window. But the King told them, it was very unjust and
unreasonable to punish a Servant for his Fidelity to his Master, and commanded
him to be set at Liberty. The Earl of Lanerick went to London, and from that
returned to Scotland, where it clearly appeared, that neither the Malice of his
Enemies, nor the hard measure he had met with at Oxford, could overcome his
Love and Duty to the King: for though he was forced to comply in many things
with the Public Counsels, yet he begun very soon to draw a Party, that
continued to cross the more violent and fierce Motions of Argyle and his
followers. But here the Writer is forced to stop, Papers failing him for
prosecuting this Narration.

The Duke was upon his Brother's Escape used with much strictness, his Servants
were put from him, his Money taken away; he was denied all freedom, and the use
of Pen and Paper was refused him, except to write Petitions to the King: yea in
the Room where he stayed he met with disaccommodations, which are not fit to be
named. As Soon as His Majesty knew of this, which was as long delayed as his
Enemies could, that Strictness was changed, but still he continued to be a
close Prisoner. And though he always petitioned for a speedy Trial, yet he was
put off* but for all that severity of Usage, his Majesty's Affection continued
to (...) very great for him, and he sent him many kind Messages. One was
ca^ried by Sir Alex. Frazer, (which he avouched to the Writer) wh^ told him
that His Majesty had an entire Confidence in him, and wa^ resolved to release
him very speedily: how his Majesty was diverte^ from that, the Writer does not
know.

But to give the Narration of the Duke's Exercises during his long and tedious
Imprisonment, is a Task which no Pen but his own could have performed: for that
great Mind which had formerly dilated it sel^ in gallant Designs and Actions,
being restricted to retired Contemplations, spent it self in thoughts worthy of
their Author. Here it was that he instead of a Prison, begun to see a passage
into Liberty and true Freedom: and those better thoughts, which a crowd of
Affairs and the intanglements of Interests had barred free access into his
Mind* meeting now with none of that resistance, but quickened from his present
Misfortune, wrought a great Change on him. And here did the vanity of the
World, and the folly of human Greatness, with all that is splendid on this side
of Immortality, discover it self free from that false Varnish, that had
formerly wrought too much upon human Infirmity, which raised in him a just
undervaluing and loathing of those bewitching, but deceiving Charms: and he
meeting with Reproach and Slander on every side, betook himself to the Rock of
Ages, as to his strong Refuge. He was much pained with frequent returns of the
Stone, which was fed by the lazy rest of his Prison: yet his Converse was so
agreeable, that it took exceedingly with all his Guards and Keepers, which
being apprehended by his Enemies, the place but not the nature of his Restraint
was changed. And in one of the places of his Imprisonment, a Person of Honor
who was Governor of the place, was so much wrought on by the Nobleness of his
Deportment, that as from the first time he was committed to his keeping, he
used him handsomely and with great Civilities, notwithstanding strict Orders he
had to the contrary; so he afterward offered to let him make his Escape, which
the Duke generously refused, both because he would not do any thing which might
turn to the prejudice of the Governor, but chiefly because he would not fly
from his Majesty's Justice, nor stain his Innocence by an Escape. This Story
was avouched to the Writer, by the Person himself that made the Offer to the
Duke.

Some who pretended Friendship to him at Court, wrote to him, that the only way
to clear himself of all Imputations, was to get his Friends in Scotland to
concur vigorously in the King's Service, which was then managed with great
success by my Lord Montrose: but he answered them, that since he was charged
with such heavy Imputations, he did not think it decent to meddle in any thing,
till he were once Legally cleared of these: neither could it be imagined, that
his Letters would signify much in Scotland under that Disgrace, since his
Presence, when under high Characters of His Majesty's Favor, could prevail so
little. And indeed he had small grounds to expect much from Scotland, since
those who governed there had never expressed any resentments of his Usage,
beyond one Act they passed, Declaring it contrary to the Privileges of the
Peers. And from some of his Friends in Scotland he got Letters, upbraiding him
for his Services to the King, telling him, that had he been as faithful in
serving the King of Kings, he had been better rewarded, and that he was
well-served for preferring the one to the other. But his Imprisonment continued
both this year 1644, and the next year, and lasted till the end of April 1646;
that some of the Parliaments Forces brought the Castle of St. Michaels Mount in
Cornwall, where he was then Prisoner, to a Surrender, by which means he had his
Freedom.

MEMOIRES OF THE LIFE and ACTIONS OF James Duke of Hamilton, etc.
LIB. V. Of the Duke and his Brother's Employments after his Enlargement, till
the Year 1648.
Anno 1646. An. 1646.

HItherto the Tract of my Narration has been troublesome and painful, but the
further I engage in it, the Storms grow upon me: for now we enter upon
Transactions so full of horror, that my Heart and Pen begin to fail me; for
who can without pain, and a force put upon himself, recount those dismal
Passages that are before me? For now a Rebellious Party, having laid aside
their former Disguises, did finish all their Designs in His Majesty's Murder,
and the Slavery of the Nations: and in so great a Ruin it was not fit the Duke
should escape safe, it being more suitable that he, that had shared in his
Masters good Fortune, and had also served him faithfully during his Troubles,
should likewise follow him in his Sufferings.

But the Dukes thoughts were fully bent on a Retreat from the World into some
retired corner, The Duke resolves on a retired Life, the Kings Affairs being
desperate.
where he might languish out the rest of his unfortunate Life, for by this time
the Kings affairs were quite ruined. And as he was incapable of concurring with
his Enemies, so both his late Usage, and the desperate posture to which things
were now driven, made him resolve to engage no further; And his Quality was
such, that he could not lie neutral, when both Parties were in so high a
Rivalry one against another. Yet he could not temper himself, so great was his
Affection to the King, from studying to do him the best Services and Offices he
could, both with the Scottish Commissioners at London, and his Friends in the
House of Peers, to engage them to Treat with the King on easy Terms.

On the ^ixth of May, His Majesty seeing Aff^irs brought to a despe^ate pass,
resolved to throw himself into the hands of his Scottish Subjects, The King goes
to the Scottish Army.
that he might make trial of all those large professions of Affection and Duty
they had always made. This Design was communicated to the Earl of Lauderdale
then at London, but he, as he informed the Writer, studied to dissuade His
Majesty from it; assuring him, that he knew the Army, and the Church-party
which then prevailed in Scotland, would not be firm to him, unless he yielded
to their Demands about Religion: but notwithstanding that, upon some slender
Assurances got from Mons. de Montrevil, Agent from the French King, His Majesty
went to the Scottish Army, (the particulars whereof, and of the subsequent as
well as foregoing Public Affairs, not being the chief business of these
Memoires, little more is any-where touched of them, than what is necessary for
making out the thread of the Dukes Concerns, so as it may set them in their
true light.)

The Commissioners are sent to him from Scotland,
As Soon as this was known at Edinburgh, the Committee of Estates, which was then
sitting, sent the Earl of Lanerick and some others to wait on His Majesty, with
great expressions of their Duty and good Intentions, protesting, how dear the
Preservation of His Sacred Person, and His Just Power and Greatness, should
ever be to them; wherefore they expected His Majesty would give full
satisfaction to the Just Desires of His Subjects; and as a preparation to this,
that He would recall any Commissions He had given against the Kingdom of
Scotland. But these Commissioners were ordered to do nothing that might raise
Jealousies betwixt the Kingdoms, and therefore were to Treat jointly with such
Commissioners as should be sent from the Two Houses. And as they of Scotland
sent their Commissioners with these Instructions yet extant, so they emitted a
Proclamation, forbidding any to go out of the Kingdom without Public
Permission; which was done to hinder those of the Kings Party from coming to
him.

What Reception my Lord Lanerick had from His Majesty does not appear to me,
but I find he was very quickly as well seated in the King's Affection and
Confidence as ever. On the 13th of May, the Scottish Commissioners presented
their first Paper, which went not beyond general things, containing a Welcome,
with an offer of their Service according to the Covenant. But in their next
Paper they pressed the King to send a Message to his Two Houses for a Happy
Peace, who press the King to settle matters.
not being satisfied with that Letter he had formerly written to the Speaker of
the House of Peers; since no grounds were laid down for a Pacification, a
Treaty being only in general terms desired. Of all these Papers that passed the
Originals do yet remain.

Next day the King called both for the chief Officers of the Army, The King
complains of the ill usage he met with.
and the Commissioners sent to him out of Scotland, and in presence of Mons. de
Montrevil, did expostulate, That whereas He had come to their Army upon the
Assurances Mons. de Montrevil had given him, that He should be safe in His
Person, Honor, and Conscience, the two last were not kept; for he was pressed
to settle Religion as they desired, wherewith his Conscience was not satisfied:
next, His Subjects had not free access to Him, but Proclamations were issued
out, forbidding them to come to Him; neither was the Ceremony due to Him as
King, suffered to be paid Him at His entry to Newcastle: and lastly, His
Servants were not suffered to wait on Him. And His Majesty attested Montrevil,
if those conditions were not made to Him, who confidently affirmed it in all
their presence, and that he had the authentic Assurances in French. The
Commissioners retired to think of an answer; but when they returned, they
desired His Majesty would put Montrevil to it, to declare what those Assurances
were, and who gave them: but this was not done. Next they said, they would not
Treat with the King in his Presence, nor admit of the interposition of any
Foreign Agents betwixt them and their Native Prince. And the Commissioners of
the Army resolved that no suspected Person should be suffered to wait on the
King, with which His Majesty was highly displeased, and for some days would not
eat in public, but only in his Chamber.

But because there were many in the Army who would have engaged cordially for
the King on any terms, to les^en the apprehension of this, they got a Petition
to be signed by almost all the Considerable Officers of the Army (yet extant)
that His Majesty would settle Religion according to the Covenant, and that He
would enter into it Himself, and authorize it by His Command.

On the 18th of May His Majesty wrote another Letter to the Two Houses,
desiring them to send Propositions for Peace, and in order to that, The King
moves for a Treaty.
He again offered to put the Militia into their hands for 7 years, as had been
offered at Vxbridge. He demanded also a Safe Conduct for sending Orders to stop
all further Proceedings in Ireland, since He was resolved to leave the
management of that War wholly to the Two Houses. He showed His Letter to the
Scottish Commissioners; but because it contained no Offer about Religion, they
were not satisfied with it; yet it was sent. The next thing the Commissioners
from Scotland moved, was, that His Majesty would recall the Commissions He had
given out against the Scottish Nation; for the clearing whereof, somewhat must
be resumed, that passed in those years which I have run over so hastily.

In the beginning of the year 1644. the King gave a Commission to the Marquis
of Montrose, A short Account of Montrose's Affairs.
to see what could be done in Scotland by Force, for diverting the Army that
was then entering into England. He had great hopes of making a strong Party in
Scotland, and doubted not but he should be able, with the Assistance Antrim
undertook to send him out of Ireland, to give the Scottish Army work enough at
home: but his hopes failed him, for all were so overawed by the Power of the
Covenanters, that none would stir till about the end of the year. Some came out
of Ireland, but far short of the number that was promised: and with these, and
a few of the Scottish Nation, he adventured to disturb the Covenanters, the
particular Narration of whose Enterprises is not to be here prosecuted. This
was judged by all a bold and desperate Attempt, for as his Force was small, so
they wanted Arms and every thing necessary. Some of the Wisest of the
Covenanters advised them not to engage with him in any Action, except on terms
full of advantage, but to follow him up and down whither he went, securing the
Country from Spoil and Plunder; for they judged that his Men, being so
unprovided as they understood they were, would not hold out long in the Hills,
but be forced either to lay down their Arms, or break out in Mutinies among
themselves, whereby they should have been starved with small Trouble, except
the loss of some Time which this lingering Course would have cost: whereas if
they fought with them, it was to be feared, that the Irish, with some Scottish
Highlanders, and other Gentlemen that joined with Montrose, being desperate,
would be too hard for such raw Soldiers as would be drawn together to oppose
them; for the Covenanters resolved not to bring any of their Forces out of
England or Ireland, till they were forced to it by necessity. Besides, the
Plague at that time had broken in upon Scotland, and swept away many thousands,
which filled all Places with so much fear and horror, that the hearts and
hands of all did fail them; and so a faint Resistance was to be expected in
such a general Consternation.

But the more forward did not relish these Advices, and many Churchmen being
full of hopes of Success, and the opinion of Gods Favor to their Way, were for
engaging into present Action. This Advice was plausible; for they hoped for a
speedy issue of it, whereas Delays drew a vast expense on the Nation. This
their error cost them dear, and opened a way for a great deal of Honor to
Montrose, who managed his small Force with as much Conduct as Success, and
carried all down before him with a torrent of Victories; till at length, after
his last Victory at Kilsyth, the High-landers loaded with Prey, would needs go
home to their Lurking-holes, which he could not resist, his Authority over them
being but precarious. And instead of retiring with them into the Hills, he came
down into the South-Country, with the little handful that adhered to him, in
hopes that many should have flockt about his Victorious Standard: but he was
generally hated by the Vulgar, so powerfully had the Excommunications and
Thunders of the Church wrought upon them. Besides, many Outrages had been
committed by his Irish and High-land Soldiers, which had been indeed resisted
by him as much as was possible; but having no Pay to give them, he durst not
exercise that severity of Martial Discipline, which had been otherwise
necessary. Yet all was imputed to his Orders by his Enemies, which made him
very odious to the generality of those who knew him not: and hence it was, that
wise men did not hope for a good account of the Kings Affairs from this Design;
therefore he was not assisted with such Forces, as he had promised himself from
the Kings Friends in the South-Countrey. But he was become too secure of
Victory, and began to apprehend, the Fame of his former Conquests was able to
scatter any Force could be brought against him; therefore notwithstanding some
Advertisements he had of Lieutenant General Lesley's coming down with a good
Body of Horse, from the Scottish Army in England, he still remained in the low
Country, till he was surprised and routed of a sudden. Then he went again to
the Hills, but there he saw how groundless it was to expect any real Aid from
those wild and disorderly People: he traversed to and again through the Hills,
sparing neither Labor, Industry, nor Art, to draw together new Forces; but was
never able to effectuat it, a small Body of a few hundreds being all the
Strength he could ever make; only he was in hopes of great matters. And thus it
continued till this time, that the Scottish Commissioners moved the King for
recalling his Commission.

His Majesty was willing to grant this, only he desired, he might have liberty
to send for him with a Safe Conduct, and that he might be suffered to kiss his
Hand, after which he should go beyond Sea, never again to return without their
Consent. But to this they would not hearken, wherefore His Majesty being
constrained to yield to all their Demands, His Majesty call in his Commissions
to Montrose.
did by Proclamation call in his Commission, and sent a Gentleman with Orders
to him, and such as were with him, to lay down their Arms immediately.

To this Montrose answered by a Dispatch, (yet extant dated the second of June)
that as he had proposed nothing to himself in all he had done but His Majesty's
Service; so he was not now to dispute his Obedience to His Commands. Only he
desired, that Security might be granted, for those Gentlemen who had hazarded
their Lives for the Kings Service, that they might not be laid open to the Fury
of their Enemies, but might live at quiet in their own Houses; and as for such
as were counted unpardonable, he desired they might have Passes to go beyond
Seas: and at this it stuck for some time.

When this was done His Majesty began to be importuned from all hands, to
settle Religion according to the Covenant, The King is much pressed to take the
Covenant.
Addresses being made to him for that effect, both from the Army, the
Commissioners sent from Scotland, the Committee of Estates in Scotland, and the
Commissioners from the General Assembly. But to all those the King answered,
That when he was satisfied in Conscience with the lawfulness of what they
desired, then, but never till then, could he grant their Demands, wherefore he
said he was willing to enter in Conference with any they should appoint;
Protesting that if he got satisfaction to his Conscience in those two Points,
the one being, that he judged Episcopacy of Divine Appointment; and the other,
that by his Coronation Oath in England, he was tied to the Defense of the
Church as it was then established, he should not be ashamed to change his
Judgment, and alter his Resolutions. Whereupon Mr. Henderson was pitched upon
as the man of greatest Abilities and Discretion for that task, and during the
Month of June, Papers passed to and again betwixt the King and him; of which
they being so often published I shall say no more, but that from these it
appears, had His Majesty's Arms been as strong as his Reason was, he had been
every way unconquerable, since none have the dis-ingenuity to deny the great
advantages His Majesty had in all these Writings. And this was when the help of
his Chaplains could not be suspected, they being so far from him. And it is
indeed strange to see a Prince not only able to hold up with, but so far to
outrun so great a Theologue, in a Controversy which had exercised his thoughts
and studies for so many years. And that the King drew with his own Hand all his
Papers, without the help of any, is averred by the Person who alone was privy
to the interchanging of them, that worthy and accomplished Gentleman Sir Robert
Murray, who at that time was known to His Majesty; and he discovering in him,
those great parts and excellent qualities, that recommended him to the love and
esteem of all virtuous persons that knew him, honored him with a great deal of
Freedom: and it was believed few were more in the Kings Favor than he was; him
therefore did His Majesty employ in that exchange of Papers, being all written
with his own Hand, and in much less time than Mr. Henderson did his. They were
given by His Majesty to Sir Robert Murray to transcribe: the Copies under Sir
Robert Murray's hand, were by him delivered to Mr. Henderson; and Mr.
Henderson's hand not being so legible as his, he by the Kings Appointment,
transcribed them for His Majesty, and by His Majesty's permission kept Mr.
Henderson's Papers, and the Copies of the Kings, as was signified to the Writer
by himself, a few days before His much-lamented Death.

All this while they were consulting at Westminster, They consult at
Westminster about Propositions to be made to the King.
about the Propositions to be sent to His Majesty, for now the Independent
Party begun to prevail; and as they were certainly the strongest in the English
Army, so they had a great Party in the House of Commons. Their Design was to
perpetuate a Military Power in their own hands, and to set up a Toleration of
all Sects; and so the Propositions at Vxbridge were much altered.

The Scottish Commissioners, The Scottish Commissioners are for making them easy
to the King.
in the Papers they gave in concerning the Propositions, first complained, That
the Settling of Religion was conceived in general Terms, and that no
particulars about Uniformity of Religion were laid down; next, they opposed
much the Propositions about the Militia, desiring that no new ones, differing
from what had been offered at Uxbridge might be made, that so it might appear
they were not taking advantages from the Straits His Majesty was in, to
diminish His Just Power and Greatness, to which they were bound both by
Covenant and Treaties, and which had been often repeated in all their
Declarations: adding, that they could not consent to any Proposition, that
should take from their Sovereign, the Power of Protecting and Defending His
Subjects, which necessarily followed, were the Militia put into the hands of
the Parliament; wherefore they pressed, that the Militia might not be settled
in the hands of the Parliament, but of the King and Parliament jointly, and so
consigned to such Commissioners of both Kingdoms, as should be chosen by the
King and them together.

This they backed with a Paper, Many Papers past betwixt them and the Two
Houses.
containing the Extracts and Citations, of the former Declarations and Papers
emitted by Both Houses, to the same purpose, both about Uniformity of Religion,
and the Maintaining the Kings Authority, even in the matter of the Militia;
which was a long and smart Paper. They also in another Paper, appealed to all
the Treaties that had been betwixt the Kingdoms since the beginning of that
War, wherein the Maintenance of the Kings Just Power had still been laid down
as a ground, on which they were to proceed in order to a Peace. But upon this
the Independent Party begun to say, that the Agreement made with Scotland, An.
1643. was no Treaty, and that the Parliament was not bound to make good what
was agreed to in it. And this drew from the Scottish Commissioners another large
Paper, proving That to be a Treaty; wherein they did show, How that the Kingdom
of Scotland had engaged both in the Irish and English War, upon the invitation
the Two Houses sent them, by Commi^sioners empowered with ample Credentials,
Signed by the two Speakers, which gave them power to Treat, and conclude both
about the Scottish Army then in Ireland, and the Army they invited to come to
their Assistance in England; upon which an Agreement was treated, and concluded
betwixt the Committee of Estates in Scotland, and the Commissioners from
England, and Signed by them, and so transmitted to the Two Houses, who by
frequent Letters to Scotland, expressed their Ratification of that Agreement:
and whereas in some of the Articles then Agreed to, there was an Alternative
concerning the Scottish Army then in Ireland their Stay there, or their
Transportation, upon which the Independents founded their Allegation that
matters were not finally concluded, they did show how false that was; since
that Alternative was emitted, in their Agreement then made, to the
Determination of the Two Houses, who thereupon declared, by repeated Letters,
to what branch of it they agreed. So they made it appear, that no obligation
could be brought on any State, by any Treaty that was wanting in that.

But at length the Propositions were all agreed on, The Propositions are agreed
on.
and the Scottish Commissioners, though they opposed that Article of the
Militia, yet gave way to it, rather than hazard on a Rupture. The Propositions
being so often in Print, need not be at length set down; only the Heads of them
follow, taken from the Original that was delivered to the King, which he gave
to the Earl of Lanerick, and is among his Papers.

FIrst, The annulling of all Oaths, The Heads of them.
and Declarations against the Parliaments and Kingdoms, was desired.

The next five Propositions were about establishing the Covenant, the Abolition
of Episcopacy and Liturgy, and the Kings taking and authorizing the Covenant.

The next five were against Popery and Papists.

The 12th was for the observation of the Lords Day, and against Pluralities and
Nonresidences, and about Universities.

13 That the Militia should be in the hands of the Parliament for 20 years, who
should also have a power to raise Money, and that after those years the Two
Houses might raise what Forces they pleased, by their Bills, though His Majesty
gave not his assent to them, and that the Rights of the City of London should
be confirmed.

14 That all Honors, and other Writs passed under the great Seal, since it was
taken away from Westminster, should be annulled.

15 That the Treaties betwixt England and Scotland should be ratified.

16 Delinquents were to be excepted from the general Oblivion, and those were
put in several Classes, and accordingly several Punishments designed against
them.

17 The late Cessation granted by the King in Ireland to be annulled, and the
management of that War to be remitted to the Two Houses.

The 18 was about the City of London.

19 That all Writs, passed under the Parliaments Great Seal, should be in force.

In July the Duke came to Newcastle, to wait on His Majesty, The Duke waits on
the King, and is well received by him.
and and when he first kissed the Kings Hand, His Majesty and he blushed at
once: and as the Duke was retiring back, with a little Confusion, into the
crowd that was in the Room, the King asked, if he was afraid to come near him:
upon which he came to the King, and they entered into a large Conversation
together, wherein His Majesty expressed the sense he had of his long
Sufferings, in terms so full of affection, that he not only brake through all
of his Resentments, but set a new edge again upon his old Affection and Duty.
He told him, He ever had Judged him Innocent as to the bulk of things, though
he confessed there were some particulars he was not so well satisfied with: but
that his Restrain was extorted from him, much against his Heart; for he had
stood out against all the Importunities of his Enemies, till the very morning
he came to Oxford, in which most of the whole Court came about him, and said
they would all desert him if He yielded not to their Desires. The Duke
professed he was fully satisfied, that His Majesty judged him Innocent, and
that his Heart was still what it had ever been to His Service; but he saw
himself in no capacity of being further useful to His Majesty, since these
Iealousies would be ever hanging over his Head, though His Majesty were free of
them. Things were now brought to great extremities, so that the success of any
Service might be laid on him, seemed not only doubtful but desperate. Besides,
he had no reason to think, that cloud of Misfortunes which did hitherto hang
over all his Actions was yet broken or dissipated, and therefore he had
particular reason to apprehend, cross Events would yet follow his Attempts; but
he knew the World would be so unjust, as to impute them to his Resentments, and
count them not casual, but designed Miscarriages: wherefore he desired
permission to go abroad into some corner of the World, where he might enjoy a
private Retirement.

But the Kings Answer to this, was, that he looked on it as a well-couched
Resentment; adding, he did not expect he would now leave him when he needed his
Assistance most: and this overcame his Resolution for that time, therefore he
frankly desired His Majesty would lay his Commands on him.

And the first of them gave occasion to a very unexampled and sublime exercise
of his Virtue, for at this time the King was in great perplexity about Montrose
his Affairs; The King orders the Duke to do what he could for rescuing Montrose
since to leave him to the fury of his Enemies, for having served him
faithfully, was so contrary to his Honor and Conscience, that the King
abhorred the thought of it: on the other hand, he could not preserve him, for
having recalled his Commission, his further Actings were legally Treasonable;
and there was no way remaining to get him out of their hands, since the King
had no Ships for his Transportation: and the fury against him was so great,
that they would hear of no Conditions, unless he rendered himself to their
Discretion; wherefore the King proposed it to the Duke, to do what in him lay
to extricate him out of this Strait, for the known enmity that was betwixt the
Duke and Montrose would make his Advices in that particular less suspected.

An ordinary Virtue would have judged it sufficient, not to have revenged
Injuries, and to have dispensed with the remembrance of them; but it must be
confessed to be a high Instance of Christianity, to repay Injuries, while the
smart and sense of them was yet so fresh, with so great Generosity. He
recommended the care of this to that Noble Gentleman Colonel Lockhart, who was
in Command under Middleton, that led the Forces which were sent against him,
and had much power over him being his intimate Friend; and did then begin to
show those eminent Qualities which made him afterward be so much esteemed over
Europe, and his death be so Universally lamented. Middleton treated with
Montrose, and took Lockhart with him to the Interview, who told Montrose what
Commands were laid on him by the Duke to serve him. Montrose seeing his danger
was willing to Capitulate with Middleton, that they should lay down their Arms
and retire to their Houses, those only excepted who were attainted by the Acts
of their Pretended Parliament, who should be suffered to go beyond Sea within a
few days after the Agreement. This being done, the Kirk-Party made great
opposition to the Ratification of it in the Committee of Estates; nor could it
have been carried, but by the Interest the Duke and his Brother had there, who
pressed it with much zeal. This has been often owned by Midleton, and was
avouched to the Writer by Sir William Lockhart, who added, That never did the
Duke or his Brother lay their Commands on him in more pressing terms, than in
this particular about Montrose's Preservation.

The King being freed from this troublesome Intrigue, The King is earnestly
pressed to yield to the Propositions.
the next care was, what Answer should be given to the Propositions for Peace
that were every day expected. The Duke pressed him most earnestly, to yield to
them (how unreasonable* soever they might seem) and particularly in the point
of Religion; for without full satisfaction in that, nothing would please the
Scottish Nation, nor the City of London, by whom only His Majesty could now hope
to be preserved: and they would hear of nothing short of the Abolition of
Episcopacy, and the Kings Taking the Covenant. But were those granted, he found
a willingness in them, to interpose for Moderating the other Propositions,
particularly those of the Militia, and about the Delinquents: he therefore
entreated His Majesty, to consider the Danger He was now in; Foreign Aid was
not to be looked for, and he could not apprehend that Scotland would engage for
him, if the case varied nothing by His ^oncessions, since they could not
heretofore be kept in a Neutrality: would His Majesty therefore, for a Form of
Government, hazard the loss of his Crowns? or if He was so Noble, as to despise
any Prejudice Himself might feel, yet he besought Him to consider His Royal
Posterity, who by His stiffness would be ruined, and to have pity on His
Dominions, which lay bleeding in that long tract of Civil Wars: And though His
Majesty had not full clearness in His Conscience about it, yet he was sure, the
matter seemed of small Importance in it self, though it became very great by
the effects it might produce; and he was confident, if it were a sin, God would
never lay it to His charge, since His Inducements to it were so strong and
unavoidable. All this he did not say from his own sense of these Propositions,
since himself thought His Majesty's Concessions were such as might give full
satisfaction; but that he saw things were in that state, that nothing without
satisfaction in the point of Religion could bring them to any Settlement. This
was often repeated to the King, both by him and his Brother, as well in their
Letters as Discourses.

But His Majesty said, His Conscience was dearer to Him than His Crown, But the
King resolves to adhere firmly to his Conscience.
and He would willingly run the hazard of all His Crowns below, rather than
endanger that above; that hitherto He had received no satisfaction to His
Conscience in these two Great Points, at which He stuck, and till that were
done, no Consideration whatsoever would prevail. The Quiet of His Kingdoms, and
the Settlement of His Throne, were indeed to be purchased at any rate; yet the
Peace of His Conscience must be preferred by Him to all things. And on these
grounds did His Majesty still continue unshaken, notwithstanding all hazards.

The Propositions were brought from the Two Houses about the middle of July,
and a speedy answer was craved to them. The Propositions are brought to the
King.
But for an account of His Majesty's Thoughts of them, I cannot give it better,
than by setting down a written account of them, in a Letter sent to the Earl of
Lauderdale at His Majesty's Command, by Sir Robert Murray.

THe Duty which I conceive every good Subject owes, His Majesty's first
Thoughts of them.
to use his utmost Endeavors (how weak soever) for the furtherance of the
happy Peace of these afflicted Kingdoms, has made me take the boldness to talk
with the King upon the Propositions, to see how far he can be induced to yield
to them. And although to every particular I cannot promise you an exact
account, (because there are diverse things in them which neither He, nor I
understand) yet to the main Points I shall, and such as I hope may be a good
groundwork for happy Conclusions. First then for Religion, I find His Majesty
really Conscientious, and not superstitiously Scrupulous; wherefore until He be
better satisfied, the uttermost He can be brought to, is, that He will be
content that Presbyterial Government be generally established within this
Kingdom by Act of Parliament for three years, provided that He, and all those
of His Opinion, may freely enjoy their Consciences, according to the practices
in Queen Elizabeth 's and King James 's Times. Now how to do this would be too
long for a Letter, but as there are Examples, so I doubt not to show you more
than one way to do it, so willing ears may be brought to such a Motion; and I
assure you, His Majesty is most willing to hearken and seek after information,
to the end He may be satisfied, how with a safe Conscience He may give you full
satisfaction herein: but this Proviso that His Majesty grants, will probably be
but temporary.

For the Militia, I can neither see inclinations in His Majesty to relinquish,
nor can I find Arguments to persuade him to it: nevertheless I perceive so
great inclinations in Him to strain to the uttermost to give His Subjects all
just Satisfaction, especially in what concerns the securing of their Fears,
that He will be content for Ten years the Two Houses should dispose of the
Militia by Act of Parliament, in the hands of such, and so many persons as they
shall name; as likewise to change them within the said time, and appoint others
in their Places, as they shall think fit; but after the expiration of the said
Time, to return to the Crown, as Queen Elizabeth and King James enjoyed it.

Concerning Delinquents, His Majesty's Opinion is, that a good Act of Oblivion
is the best way to bind up a Peace, after Intestine Troubles, it having been
the Wisdom of other Kingdoms most usually, and with good success, to grant
general Pardons, with very few or no Exceptions, whereby the numerous
Discontentments of all sorts of People (which are the seeds and fuel to future
Disorders) might be totally extinguished: and His Majesty further conceives,
that He cannot desert so many gallant Persons of Condition and Fortune, who
have engaged themselves with Him, only out of a sense of Duty, without a
perpetual and irrecoverable Dishonor.

As for Offices, though His Majesty judges, that the Disposal of them is a
necessary Flower of the Crown, yet He is content for this time to accept of the
Nomination of them from the Two Houses, to be enjoyed by these persons quam diu
se been gesserint; so that after Vacancies they return to be disposed of as
before.

I unwillingly mention Ireland, because His Majesty's Public Faith being
engaged, how dare I speak to Him to violate that, which is, and must be all our
Security; but even in this will I pawn my Life, He will prove Himself a zealous
Protector of Protestants, and a constant Maintainer of Sovereign Power.

My Conclusion is, that if upon these grounds a Conference may be had betwixt
His Majesty and the Two Houses, I will engage any thing that an Honest man can,
that these Kingdoms will be shortly happy in a firm Peace; which if it should
fail on our part, for our not hearing of our Sovereign, it would be an
unparalelled Misfortune, not without Infamy.

These were His Majesty's private Thoughts, but His public Answer inclined
more to a Denial; which when it was brought to Westminster, was entertained
both with Joy and Sorrow, The King does not yield to the Propositions.
according to the inclinations of the several Parties. The Independents, and
those of the Army, feared nothing so much as the Kings granting them, for in
that case they saw, there could be no color for keeping up an Army: and in the
House of Commons, when Thanks were Voted to the Commissioners that had been
with the King for their pains, one Member whispered another in the ear, that
they owed more Thanks to the King than any body; and in another corner, an
honest Member saying to another, what shall become of us, since the King
refuses these Propositions? the other answered, nay what had become of us if
He had granted them?

The Independent Party upon this moved, The Houses go on to high Resolutions,
but are stopped by the Scottish Commissioners.
that no more Addresses should be made, and that His Majesty's Person should be
demanded, and the Army commanded Northward to see it executed; which had been
infallibly done, had not the Scottish Commissioners given them in some Papers,
complaining of many Violations of the Treaty, and the Arrears due to the Army.
The King had also desired a Personal Treaty near London, and the Scots seconded
it; but the obtaining it was impossible, for all this time the Scottish
Commissioners and the English (whereof the greatest part were of the
Independent Faction) were in no good terms.

As for the Arrears of their Pay, the Two Houses talked of offering five
hundred thousand pounds Sterling, whereof an hundred and fifty thousand should
be paid presently, that so they might be rid of their Army, which they said was
no more necessary in England; and a Complaint being made against some who spoke
and wrote in prejudice of the Scottish Nation, an Ordinance was debated for
punishing them. The Independents Employed all their Strength against it;
Cromwell spoke most vehemently, that it was to discourage their Friends, and to
encourage their Enemies: but Hollis took him up so sharply, for calling base
Libellers Friends, that he was glad to recant. When it went to the Vote it run
near an equality, for 102 were against it, and 132 for it; so quickly were the
Services of their dear Brethren of Scotland forgotten.

At this time the King sent my Lords of Argyle, The King employes Argyle at
London for obtaining a Personal Treaty.
Lowdon, and Dumfermline, to London. Their Instructions were, to deal for a
Personal Treaty near London, to get some of the Kings faithfullest Servants to
be suffered to come and wait on Him. And for the Militia, the Scots had
declared themselves satisfied with the Kings Concessions about it; wherefore He
desired they would stick to Him according to their Promises. As for Religion,
He desired they would represent to those who were best-affected, how dangerous
it would be to insist too much on that at this time, when the greatest hazard
was from the Sectaries, and that His Majesty's consenting to a temporary
Establishment of what they craved, did put them in a fair way to their Desires.
And beside all this, it was recommended to them, to procure a delay of the
Desire for an answer to the Propositions till the 16th of September.

When these Instructions were given them, the King desired their promise,
first, of Secrecy, next, of Fidelity in discharging what was entrusted to them:
for the second they undertook it, but refused the first, except the King also
promised Secrecy. His Majesty presently apprehended their Design was, that the
Duke and his Brother might understand nothing of their Employment; and finding
it was a thing, wherein neither of them was concerned, He thought it unfit to
disoblige Argyle by that Refusal; since he was so able to serve him, if he
should be Cordial in it, and He was secure of the two Brothers, that if they
mistook His Reservedness, it would be easy for Him to clear Himself
afterward. Yet this Secret was ill-kept among them, for the Earl of Lauderdale
had notice of it, as he told the Author, before they came to London; but
opposed much the seeking a Delay to a prefixed day, since he knew that could
not be granted without adding a dreadful Sanction of Deposing the King, in case
a favorable Answer came not against the day appointed; and found it would be
easier to procure a Delay by other Methods, than by asking it. The Duke and his
Brother were much troubled with the Kings Reservedness in that Affair: but
as soon as they understood the ground of it they were satisfied. But what
success that Negotiation had, or how it was managed, does not appear to me from
any of the Duke's Papers.

In the beginning of August the Duke went to Scotland, where his greatest Care
was, to see what could be done to get the Committee of Estates to be satisfied
with the Kings Concessions, The Duke deals with the Committee of Estates, to
get them to acquiesce in His Majesty's Concessions.
representing to them, how they did at once put England in the possession of
the desired Church Government, and set the other out of the way, which was a
great stop to their full satisfaction. He desired they would consider, how
inhumane and unchristian it was to force the Kings Conscience, and how much it
favored of the Violence they had lately condemned in the Bishops. It was
visible, that nothing but Conscience could be imagined to lie in the way of the
Kings Accepting the Propositions; and were His Majesty, like many Princes, to
swallow down all things, and belch them up at their Pleasure, there would be
less ado made: but the Kings sticking at what He could not yield, did
abundantly secure them of His making good to them all that was promised. On the
other hand they were to consider, that if they should now desert the King, and
bring their Army out of England, it would make them odious through the whole
World, and the payment of the Arrears of their Army would pass under a far
worse Character. Besides, England was divided, and the Party that was most
prevalent among them wa^ the Independent, with the other Sectaries, who would
never carry on the Settlement of Religion; and by their present carriage at
London, it appeared what Friendship they had for Scotland: wherefore he moved
earnestly, that their Army should not be brought out of England, till a firm
Peace should be established, according to the first Treaty, Anno 1643.

but was opposed by the Ministers.
This did shake many, but some of the Leading Churchmen were not satisfied with
this, and represented to their Party, that all this was said smoothly, to
engage them to the Kings Quarrel, which they were resolved never to do till the
Covenant were taken by Him. Neither were they well-satisfied with the Duke, for
his being instrumental in the Agreement with Montrose and his Party; and it was
preached to his face, that all the Blood that was lately shed, would lie on
them and their Posterity, who for the pleasing of men had procured such Favor
to the Enemies of God, and of his Cause and People.

In the end of August they sent the Duke with the Earls of Crawford, and
Casilis, and some others, to deal with His Majesty for a speedy granting of the
Propositions, The Duke is sent to the King, to obtain from him the granting the
Propositions.
and to represent to him all the inconveniences that followed, even upon a
Delay, much more upon a Denial. The Duke had no willingness to the Employment,
misdoubting the Success, and knowing his engaging avowedly in such a Message,
would be misrepresented: but there was no avoiding of it, for had he declined
it, he would have been suspected of being an ill Instrument, and of Aversion
from the thing which would have disabled him much from going on with the Kings
Service. They came to Newcastle in the beginning of September, where they
discharged themselves of their Commission to the full.

But the King answered them in the following Paper, yet extant under His
Majesty's Hand.

My Lords,
I Shall begin by answering what you have now said; for I assure you, I had not
thus long delayed My Answer, The Kings Answer to their Desires.
but to weigh fully those Reasons and Arguments which you have laid before Me,
whereby to use the uttermost of My Endeavors to give you all po^sible
Satisfaction: for you having told Me nothing but what I have heard before, the
change of Answer could hardly be expected. And now I do earnestly desire you to
consider, what it is that I desire, which is, To be heard, which if a King
should refuse to any of His Subjects, He would for that be thought a Tyrant.
For this if I had but slight Reasons, it were the less to be regarded; but they
are such, upon which such a Peace as we all desire does depend: for albeit it
is possible that if I should grant all you desire, a Peace might be slubbered
up; yet it is impossible that it should be durable, unless there should be a
right Understanding betwixt Me and My People, which cannot be without granting
of what I desire. Yet I desire to be rightly understood, for though many, like
to Esops Fable, will call Ears Horns; yet let men say what they will, I am far
from giving you a Negative, nay I Protest against it, My only Desire being to
be heard: for I am confident that upon Debate, I shall so satisfy them in some
things, as likewise I believe they may satisfy me in many things, that we
shall come to a most happy Agreement. This I believe is not much nee^ful to
satisfy your Judgments, for I am not ignorant, how really your Commissioners
at London have endeav^ured a satisfactory Answer to My Message; as likewise
what good Instructions have been sent them ^ut of Scotland, so that the force
of Power more than the force of Reason, has made you so instant with Me as you
have been: with which I am so far from finding fault, that what you have done,
I take well, knowing it proceeds out of the abundance of your Zeal to My
Service; therefore as you see I do not mistake you, so I am careful not to be
mistaken by you. Wherefore again I desire you to take notice, that I do not
give a Denial, My Desire being only to be heard; as likewise that you will take
things as they are, since neither you nor I can have them as we would:
wherefore let us make the best of every thing, and now as you have fully
performed your Duty to me, so I cannot doubt, but you will continue to press
those at London to hear Reason. And certainly you can little expect fair
dealing from those, who shall reject so much Reason, and of that sort which you
have, and I hope will offer to them.

Not to stay you too long upon so unpleasing a Subject, I assure you that
nothing but the Preservation of that which is dearer to Me than My Life, could
have hindered Me from giving you full satisfaction: for upon My word all the
dangers and inconveniences, which you have laid before Me, do not so much
trouble Me, as that I should not give full satisfaction to the Desires of My
native Country, especially being so earnestly pressed upon Me. And yet here
again I must tell you, (for in this case repetitions are not impertinent) that
I do not give you a Denial, nay I protest against it; and remember it is your
King that desires to be heard.


To this Paper I shall add another, given by His Majesty to the Committee then
at Newcastle: but by the Copy extant, written with Lanerick's hand, it does not
appear when it was sent them. The Paper follows.

My Lords,
Another Paper of His Masties to the same purpose.
It Is a very great grief to Me, that what I spoke to you Yesterday, and offered
to you in Writing, concerning Religion, has given so little satisfaction; yet
lest the Reasons I then told you, should not be so fully understood, I think it
necessary at this time to set them down to you in this Paper.

I then told you, that whatsoever was My particular Opinion, I did no ways
intend to persuade you to do any thing against your Covenant; wherefore I
desire you to consider, whether it be not a great step to your Reformation,
(which I take to be the chief end of your Covenant) that Presbyterial
Government be Legally settled. It is true, I desire that My Own Conscience, and
those that are of the same opinion with me, might be preserved, which I confess
does not as yet totally take away Episcopal Government; but then consider
withal, that this will take away all the superstitious Sects, and Heresies of
the Papists and Independents, to which you are no less obliged by your Covenant
than the taking away of Episcopacy. And this that I demand is most likely to be
but temporary, for if it be so clear, as you believe, that Episcopacy is
unlawful, I doubt not but God will so enlighten Mine eyes that I shall soon
perceive it: and then I promise you to concur with you fully in matters of
Religion. But I am sure you cannot imagine, that there is any hope of
Converting or Silencing the Independent Party, which undoubtedly will get a
Toleration in Religion from the Parliament of England, unless you join with Me,
and in that way I have set down, for the re-establishing My Crown, or at least
that you do not press Me, to do this (which is yet against My Conscience) until
I may do it without Sinning; which as I am confident none of you will persuade
Me to do, so I hope you have so much Charity, not to put things to such a
desperate Issue, as to hazard the loss of us all, because for the present you
cannot have full satisfaction from Me in Point of Religion: Not Considering
that besides the rest of the Mischiefs which may happen, it will infallibly set
up the innumerable Sects of the Independents, nothing being more against your
Covenant than permitting of those Schisms to increase.

As for the Message which I think fit at this time to send, I have chosen
rather to mention the Point of Religion in a general than particular way, lest
(not knowing all these Reasons, which I have set down to you, which are most
unfit for a Message) it may give less satisfaction than I desire. Nevertheless
I do conjure you, by that Love and Loyalty you have always professed unto Me,
that you make use of what I offered Yesterday in Writing, with these Reasons
which I have now set down to you, and those further Hopes I have now given you
for the best advantages of My Service.

With this particular Explanation, That whereas I mentioned, that the
Church Government should be left to My Conscience, and those of My opinion, I
shall be content to restrict it to some few Diocesses, as Oxford, Winchester,
Bristol, Bath and Wells, and Exceter: leaving all the rest of England fully to
the Presbyterian Government, with the strictest Clauses you shall think upon
against Papists and Independents.

POSTSCRIPT.
I require you to give a particular and full account hereof to the General
Assembly now sitting in Scotland, showing them, that I shall punctually make
good My last Letter to them, and that this is a very great step to the
Reformation desired, not only by the present putting down all Sects and
Independents, but likewise presently establishing Presbyterian Government;
^oping that they as Ministers of Gods Word, will not press upon Me untimeously
the matter of Church Government and Discipline, until I may have leisure to be
so persuaded, that I may comply with what they desire without Breach of
Conscience, which I am confident, they as Churchmen cannot press me to do.




The Duke left nothing unsaid that could be devised, The Duke seeing matters
desperate, resolves to retire out of Britain.
to prevail with the King for satisfying Scotland in the point of Religion,
assuring him, that he found a great willingness in them to serve him in all
other things, should he yield to them in that one: That for the point of the
Militia, they would study to bring it to what the King desired, and in the
point of the Delinquents, they would labor to get it brought to that, in which
the Process of the Incendiaries in Scotland had ended, that they should only be
secluded from Trust: but he assured him, he found it impossible to make them
abate a tittle of the Demand of Religion. Yet His Majesty continued on his
former Grounds, therefore the Duke resolved on a present abandoning of Affairs,
and of retiring from the World.

Lanerick was so angry at this Design, that he spared nothing that either his
Affection or Wit could suggest, to divert him from that desperate Resolution
(as he termed it.) He told him, could he not be Religious, but he must turn a
Monk? and did he not think it best to serve God in that Station whereunto he
had called him, or must he reject the choice of Gods Providence, and turn his
own Disposer? and was he so mean-spirited, as to abandon matters because of the
difficulties that were in the^? But all he could devise was not like to
prevail, for the Duke protested, it was impossible for him to look on and see
His Majesty's Ruin, which was inevitable upon the Grounds he went on.

At this time the Independents, The Independents cajole the King.
fearing the extremity to which the King was driven might force him to consent
to any thing upon which a Settlement might follow, betook themselves to strange
Methods to obstruct it: they therefore gave some hopes that they would be
willing to dispense with the imposing of the Covenant, and consent to a
Toleration of Episcopacy and the Liturgy, provided they might be satisfied in
other points.

This suiting so well with the Kings Inclinations had too good a hearing from
him: but my Lord Lauderdale wrote from London very warmly for undeceiving the
King, But Lauderdale disabuses his Majesty.
assuring him that he infallibly knew, their Designs were the Ruin of Monarchy,
and the Destruction of the King and His Posterity; and though they might cajole
His Majesty with some smooth Propositions, those were meant for His Ruin, that
they might once divide Him from His Parliaments: after which they would destroy
both Him and them, were it in their power. But if the King would now consent to
the Propositions, all would go right, and in spite of the Devil, and the
Independents both, he would be quickly on His Throne: but Delays were full of
danger, for they that wished well to the King, were becoming daily more
heartless, and the other Party grew in their Insolence; and the Earl of Essex
his Death at that time, had given the greatest blow to the Kings Affairs they
could have met with. This he continued to represent by many Letters, both to
the King and those about Him; yet His Majesty was much wrought upon to give
credit to those Offers of the Sectaries, which made Him the less apprehensive
of hazard.

At length, when the Duke saw His Majesty immovable, The Duke obtains His
Majesty's permission to retire.
he begged His permission to retire. But the King resisted that with so much
reason and affection, that in the whole Course of His Favors to him, there had
not been any since the business of Ochiltry wherein He had more obliged him,
than by the tenderness that then appeared in him. Yet the Duke was so
importunate, that at length the King seemed to give way to it, at least the
Duke understood it so: whereupon, with as sad a heart as ever man had, he took
leave of the King, which he apprehended to be his last Farewell; and it proved
to be so indeed* (except a transient view he had of Him at Windsor.) So he left
the King, and carried home with him a heart so fraughted with Melancholy, that
all could be done was not able to rouse him out of it; and neither the tears of
his dying Mother, nor the entreaties of his Friends, nor the constant
persecution of his Brother, (who was much vexed at it) were able to divert him
from his Resolution; for having overcome the Kings dislike of it, which was
stronger than all other things with him, he was proof against every thing else.
But His Majesty quickly repented Him of that tacit consent He seemed to give,
and therefore sent after him this handsome Letter.

Hamilton,
I Have so much to write and so little time for it, that this Letter will be
suitable to the Times, Which His Majesty retracts by His Letter.
without Method or Reason; and yet you will find Lusty Truths in it, which puts
Me again out of fashion, but the fitter for him to whom I write. Now to My
business: but lest I should now forget it, I must first tell you, that those at
London think to get Me into their hands, by telling Our Countrymen, that they
do not intend to make Me a Prisoner: O No, by No means! but only to give Me an
honorable Guard forsooth, to attend Me continually for the security of My
Person; wherefore I must tell you, (and it is so far from a secret, that I
desire every one should know it; only for the way, I leave it to you to manage
it for My best advantage:) that I will not be left in England when this Army
retires, and these Garrisons are rendered, (without a visible violent force upon
My Person) unless clearly and according to the old way of understanding, I may
remain a Freeman, and that no Attendant be forced upon Me upon any pretense
whatsoever. So much for that.

A Discourse yesternight with Rob. Murray was the cause of this Letter, having
no such Intention before, because I esteemed you a man no more of this part of
the World, believing your Resolutions to be like the Laws of the Medes and
Persians. But however he showed Me such Reasons, that I found it fit to do what
I am doing, (for I confess one man's error is no just excuse for another
omission) which is to stay your foreign Journey by persuasion. As for the
Arguments I refer you to Robin, only I will undertake to tell you some positive
Truths: the chief whereof is, That it is not fit for you to go; then, It is
less shame to recant than to persist in an Error: My last is, By going* you
take away from Me the means of showing My Self

Your most assured, real, faithful, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
New Castle September 26th, 1646.

But this Letter will be lame, unless made up with the Cover that went about it
from Sir Robert Murray, which was, as he wrote in his next, almost wholly the
Kings words, and not only his sense: for the King the night before, falling in
Discourse with Sir Robert about the Duke, discovered very fully the Constancy
of His Royal kindness to him: whereupon he laid His Commands on Sir Robert, to
put him in mind of the Inconveniences his obstinacy in that Resolution would
heap upon him; and mentioned them (these are Sir Robert's words) with a
Friendliness, that related not to his own Concernments. Indeed they are such,
as the very apprehension of them cannot but deeply wound a Soul so great as
yours. They are briefly these; The withdrawing your self at this time, will be
believed to proceed from a tacit Joy at the appearance of the bad Success of
his Affairs, or rather out of a design to contribute to it, under the disguise
of a seeming Retiredness and Discontent; Constructions which are not possible
for him to make, but obvious to malevolent humors: That although you should
not be suspected to be any ways accessory to disloyal Courses, it will be said
you are one of those, who could have best hindered them: That your Country and
Friends may say you have deserted them in their greatest Exigences, and that
Differences may be reconciled betwixt His Majesty and His Subjects by the
endeavors of others.

These Commands were both peremptory and obliging, so that they could not fail
of conquering all his Resistance, and carrying his Obedience after them; which
were strengthened from the Letter he had at that same time from Her Majesty,
which follows.

Cousin,
THe account the King has given me of your A^fection for His Interest, and
those marks of it, which from other hands have met me, do so sensibly affect
me, that without any difficulty, or scruple, I do now entertain you with my
Acknowledgments and Resentments of it, before I have heard from you; and I
assure you, of the satisfaction I shall ever have of the Continuance of it from
you, which I shall desire may be as entire and full as the Returns I shall
study to make to you, being resolved to lay hold on all occasi^ns, by which I
may discover my Friendship for you, and to express the Esteem I have of your
Friendship, by all means that may depend on my cares, which I shall employ in
giving you day by day new Proofs that I am, and ever shall be,

Your affectionate Cousin, and Friend, HENRIETA MARIA R.
St. Germans 22th September

Upon these Entreaties and Assurances he was made to change his purpose, though
he could not so easily part with his Melancholy thoughts, which he expressed in
this following Letter.

May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
THe Reasons You were pleased to offer to my Brother, And writes to the King.
and Sir Robert Murray, for diverting my Resolution of leaving Your Majesty's
Dominions at this time, were (I confess) of strength enough, to have fixed me
in any place of the World where Your Majesty's Service was concerned: but now
seeing Your Majesty has honored me so much, as by Your Gracious Letter (Your
Self) to show me still Your dislike thereof, how dare I dispute what Your
Majesty thinks unfit? and now, Sir, the Thoughts I formerly had of leaving (as
it were) the World (because I would not be a witness of, what I feared, Your
Majesty's Fall, since, as I conceive, I could not be instrumental to Your
Service or Preservation, upon the Grounds Your Majesty went on) shall be
changed into a Resolution of being most miserable in Your Dominions, if it
shall not please God to deliver You out of those Difficulties Your Majesty is
in; for I take God to witness, upon Your Happiness depends my greatest worldly
Joy, how unfortunately soever I have (of late) been misunderstood. And though I
cannot promise my self so much good Fortune, as to prove useful to Your
Majesty; yet I dare and do engage for a cheerful Willingness, and perfect
Fidelity in Your Majesty's Service, and trust that God in his Mercy will so
direct Your Majesty, as by timeously granting the (now necessary and most
pressing) Demands of Your Kingdoms, the great Evils will be prevented, that
threaten Your Sacred Self, the Queens Majesty, and Your Royal Posterity; and
likewise that of having any other Guard to attend Your Royal Person, than such
as shall be approved of by You, or Your Majesty's being necessitated to retire
into Scotland, upon the return of the Scottish Army, where I apprehend Your
Majesty's Entertainment will not answer Your Expectation, nor prove at all
advantageous to Your Service. More I will not presume to say, but shall really
study in all things to serve Your Majesty, and ever give such ready Obedience
to Your Commands, as becomes

Your Majesty's most faithful, most loyal, and most obedient Subject and
Servant, HAMILTON.
Kinneel 6th October. 1646.

A day or two after His Majesty received this Letter, He wrote the following
Letter to my Lord Lanerick, the Postscript whereof seems to relate to the
Letter he had received from his Brother.

Lanerick,
BEfore now I had not matter to write to you, and now I have so much that I
shall say the less, leaving this enclosed to speak for me. But thus much I must
assure you of, that I have herein gone the utmost length (as you call it) to
give all possible Satisfaction, for (upon my word) one jot further cannot be
gone by

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newcastle 15th October. 1646. POSTSCRIPT.
Tell your Brother, that it were a fault to him to trouble my Self in
Complementing with him, and indeed to either of you any ways to doubt, but that
you will make the best use you may of what I now send you for my Service.




The enclosed Paper is to be found among His Majesty's printed Messages to the
Two Houses, and therefore it is not inserted here. But the satisfaction the
King had in the Dukes consenting to stay still in Scotland, appears by the end
of the next Letter he wrote to himself.

Hamilton,
THis is rather to perform my Promise to a Lady, than that I believe it to be
needful in respect of you; for I know you naturally so much favor all my
Friends, and know so well the great Estimation I have of the Earl of Brainford,
beside what has been told you concerning him by your Brother Lanerick, by my
Directions, that I am certain without this you will favor his business what
you can: and since I am writing I must say, that there is no particular Man's
business, wherein you can give me so much Contentment as this; of which I need
say no more, but only that you will show his Wife, that my Recommendation to
you of her Lords Affairs, is real and hearty. Nor can I end this, without
taking notice to you of the Contentment I had, that my last Letter to you had
the wished for operation; for besides the obtaining my end, (which several ways
is satisfactorily useful to Me) I see that all men have not forsaken Reason,
or, at least, that I am sometimes in the Right, as I am confident you will make
appear the great Reason I have to be

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.


But to return to Public Affairs, the Duke at his coming to Scotland, The Duke
labors to engage Scotland for a Personal Treaty.
procured new Instructions to be sent to their Commissioners at London, to
press a Personal Treaty, and that the King might be with Safety and Honor in
England, and that it might be declared, that the Government of England should
still continue according to the Fundamental Laws. The chief business at
Westminster was to be rid of their Brethren of Scotland; wherefore they fell
a-treating about the Removal of the Army and the Delivery of the Garrisons. The
Scots demanded five hundred thousand pounds Sterl^ng, and of that Sum two
hundred thousand pound presently: but four hundred thousand were Voted to them,
and only one hundred thousand presently, and upon this they stood long.

The Two Houses having on the 24th of September Voted, that the Kings Person
should be demanded from the Scottish Army, their Commissioners at London gave in
long Papers against that, The Scottish Commissioners at London complain of the
Kings ill Usage, and the harsh Votes of the Two Houses.
which were Printed, and so need not be here inserted. In them they showed,

That the King being Sovereign of both Kingdoms, was not to be disposed by the
Parliament of one Kingdom; That this was destructive to the Relation and
Interest the Scottish Nation had in Him, and contrary to the nature of
Sovereignty, and to the Covenant and Treaties of both Kingdoms: by which it was
agreed, That His Majesty's just Power and Greatness should not be diminished,
which by such a Demand of His Person was very signally done. It was also
agreed, that all things in order to Peace (to which the Disposal of the Kings
Person did relate in a signal manner) should be done by the Joint Councils of
both Kingdoms.

After this, in the Month of October, begun the Treaty betwixt the Scottish
Commissioners and the Committee appointed for that end by the Two Houses of
Parliament, Many Conferences are betwixt the Two Houses and them.
which was managed in the Painted Chamber, in the presence of all the Members
of the Two Houses. The Scottish Commissioners (who were the Earls of Lowdon and
Lauderdale, and the Lord Wariston) declared in all their Papers and Speeches,
that they were not to Treat about His Majesty's Person, nor the Disposing of
it; but only about the Removal of the Army, the Delivery of those Garrisons
that their Army had in England, and the Payment of Arrears due for their Armies
both in England and Ireland: and they continued to press, that whereas the Two
Houses had, in all their former Declarations, laid the blame of the Breach
betwixt the King and them on His Majesty's Withdrawing from His Parliament,
that therefore they would invite His Majesty to come with Honor, Freedom, and
Safety, to some of His Houses in or about London, in which they still insisted
to the last. And so far were they from Treating about the Disposing of His
Majesty's Person, that in the end of their Treaty, when they had finally agreed
on all things, it was expressly declared in the first Article of the Treaty that
passed under the Great Seal, that nothing relating to the Kings Person was
concluded on by it; so that after that was ended, the Scottish Parliament might
have still preserved the King, and brought him with their Army to Scotland.

But the Houses turned the Propositions to Bills, The Houses press a speedy
Answer to their Propositions.
and passed a Vote that new Commissioner^ should be sent to the King, with the
concurrence of those of Scotland, to press a satisfactory Answer: with this
Sanction, that if it were not granted, they should be forced to look to the
Security of His Person. And the English Army fell upon a most destructive
Resolution, of adjourning the Parliament; neither were they overawed by any
thing so much, as the fear of the Scottish Army. The great point now debated in
the Councils of Scotland, was, whether a final Settlement with the King should
be the Condition of the Armies Retiring, or not? The Duke with all his Friends
pressed this vigorously, as that which was agreed on by their Covenant and
Treaties. But the Churchmen still influenced all Counsels, and finding the
King irreconcilable to their Way, were still full of their Jealousies of Him;
and it was said downright, that they ought not to meddle betwixt the King and
the Parliament of England, but leave Him and them to their own Counsels; so
strangely did their Language vary from what it was Anno 1643.

At this time the King sent Mr. Murray of the Bedchamber to London, Mr. Murray
is sent by the King to London.
who carried another Message; but it was so displeasing, that it served only to
put his Neck to a new hazard for the Kings Service, and he durst scarce stir
out of doors all the while he was there.

In the beginning of November a new Session of the Triennial Parliament of
Scotland did hold, The Parliament of Scotland meets.
but little was done for some Weeks; save that there came to them a
Remonstrance from the Assembly, wherein in the first place Complaints were made
of the Committee of Estates, for their Agreement with Montrose and his
Followers, which was represented as a great Crime, especially they being
excommunicated. Next, they complained of His Majesty's constant adherence to
Prelacy, and of the danger Religion was in by the Malignants (for so was the
Kings Party then called) who were beginning to set up their Heads again;
wherefore they recommended to their Care, both the Preservation of Religion,
and of the Treaties with England. Upon this the Transaction of the Committee of
Estates in the Agreement with Montrose was examined, and it was put to the
Vote, Approve or Exoner them only: the former was carried by twenty Votes, but
all the Pulpits thundered against it; wherefore to stop the mouths of the
Ministries, it was enacted, That in any Treaty that should be thereafter with
those who were in Arms, the Commission of the Kirk should be consulted about
the Lawfulness of the Conditions. For at this time both the Marquis of Huntley
was in Arms in the North, and Antrim was also come over to Kintyre in July the
former year, and continued still there. His Majesty sent Mr. Robert Lesley,
with Orders to my Lord Huntley for laying down of Arms, with whom he wrote the
following Letters to the two Brothers.

Hamilton,
A Trusty Messenger requires but a short Letter, and brevity is the more
convenient for Me, who have much to do, and but few helpers: wherefore I shall
say no more, but hear and trust Robin Lesly, for he is come from

Your most assured, real, faithful, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newcastle Nov. 12th, 1646.

Lanerick,
HEaring that Marquis Huntley expects My Commands for his laying down of Arms,
I have thought fit to send this Trusty Bearer, Robin Lesly, to him, but thought
it necessary to address him first to you, that you in My Name might acquaint
the Parliament with this My Intention; which if they approve of, he may go on
accordingly,if not, there is no hurt done. Yet howsoever I have expressed My
Desire for the Peace of the Country: but in case they shall permit Robin to
obey My Commands, then I expect that they give him Power to assure Huntley, of
the same Conditions that he might have had before. All which I command you to
represent to My Parliament in My Name, leaving the particular expressions to
you, having only set down the sense. Other things I have entrusted little Nobs
to tell you, too long for a Letter, but of no small Consequence; by which at
least you will find that according to My Professions I am

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.


His Majesty also expressed His Concerns for Traquair in the following Letter.

Lanerick,
ALbeit I am confident, that you will further all My Friends Affairs, yet I
must not be so negligent in Traquair's behalf, as not to name his business to
you, for admittance to his Place in Parliament; of which I will say no more,
but you know his Sufferings for Me: and this is particularly recommended to you
by

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newcastle 17th November 1646. POSTSCRIPT.
I account writing to you or your Brother all one.




They consult in Scotland how to dispose of their Armies.
But the main Business was, what to do with their Armies that were in England.
The Kingdom was groaning under a heavy and unsupportable Burden for their
Maintenance, so disbanding was a very plausible Motion: and all desired, that
only such Forces should be kept up as were necessary for the Preservation and
Security of Scotland. The Duke and his Brother regrated much, that so many
Gallant Men should be disbanded, who might be very useful for the Kings
Service; therefore they opposed all these Propositions, arguing that till a
final Peace were settl^d in England, they might look for no Security to
Scotland. And in their Letters to His Majesty, they continued to represent the
desperate estate of Affairs, if he did not quickly satisfy them in the
business of Religion: and that the Money for the Pay of the Army, was now
coming in daily at London, and would be quickly ready; and after that was sent
down, they could not keep the Army any longer in England, without a present
Breach, to which they found no inclinations in the Scottish Parliament, as long
as they were not satisfied in what was so earnestly desired. But the King was
firm to his first Resolution.

Master Lesley, at his return to the King, brought him such assurances of the
Affection and Duty of both the Brothers, that the next Dispatch carried the
following Letters to them.

Hamilton,
I Remember yet so much Latin as an old Proverb comes to, which is, quod valde
volumus id sacile credimus. This I apply to Robin Lesley's report of your
Carriage in My present Service: concerning which, I will only say, that you
shall not more certainly make good what he has promised Me in your Name, than
I will to you what he has said in Mine; and even in something (by way of
speaking) beyond My Power, I doubt not but to make it good, as concerning your
French particular. But I shall leave all things not only of this nature, to
this honest Bearers relation, but likewise whatsoever else may concern the
Service of

Your most assured, real, faithful, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newcastle 24th Nov. 1646.

Lanerick,
I Have according to your Advice given a quick Return to this Trusty Bearer,
having instructed him fully in what I conceive necessary to My Affairs,
wherein, in many things, I have given him a Latitude to govern them according
to your Directions; wherefore I will say no more, (because if I should enter
into Particulars, I would not know how to end) but that with Contentment I find
daily more and more cause to be

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newcastle 24th November, 1646. POSTSCRIPT.
I recommend particularly the Earl of Morton's Affairs.




Matters were now ripening unto much Confusion and Mischief, which made His
Majesty think of a full Answer to the Propositions; but before He sent it to
London, He communicated it to my Lord Lanerick in the following Letter.

Newcastle 4th December. 1646. Lanerick,
The Kings Letter about His Answer to the Propositions.
ACcording to My Promise by little Nobs, I send you here enclosed, the Answer
which I have resolved to send to London; wherein you will find a Clause in
favor of the Independents, to wit, the Forbearance I give to those who have
Scruples of Conscience: and indeed I did it purposely, to make what I send
relish the better with that kind of People. But if My Native Subjects will so
countenance this Answer, that I may be sure they will stick to Me, in what
concerns My Temporal Power, I will not only expunge that Clause, but likewise
make what Declarations I shall be desired against the Independents, and that
really, without any reserve or equivocation; yet know, that no Persuasion or
Threatening whatsoever shall make Me alter a tittle of any thing else in it, nor
that neither but upon these Assurances.

The end therefore why I send you this before it go to the English Parliament,
is, to try beforehand how I can procure it to be countenanced by My Scottish
Friends, for which you are to use all possible industry, not seeking a full
Approbation, but taking what you can get; absolutely commanding you not to
hazard it in a Public Way, unless you be sure that I shall receive no rub in
it.

For this, I conceive it were a wrong to you, to use any Arguments to make you
do your best, but to tell you this is Coup de party; assuring you that I shall
not judge you by the Event, but by your Endeavors, which I am confident will
be according to your Professions: and for Gods sake, do not so much as expect,
much less linger after any other or further matter from Me, whereby to serve Me
in this great Business; for upon the Faith of a Christian, you shall have no
more than what is now laid before you. And know that I rather expect the worse,
than the better Event of things, being resolved (by the Grace of God, and
without the least repining at him) to suffer any thing that Injury can put upon
Me, rather than sin against My Conscience, of which upon My credit you see the
furthest Extent in relation to the present Affairs. I say no more but
difficilia quae pulchra, and so God bless your Endeavors.

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
POSTSCRIPT.
In order to that I have written and sent you herein, I have commanded this
Trusty Bearer Sir James Hamilton, to tell you as many things as I can remember;
whom I desire you to return to Me (or some other Trusty Messenger) as soon as
you may with what I am to expect from thence.




The enclosed Paper is marked on the back by the Kings Hand thus; The Answer to
the Propositions, which I have resolved to send to London; which I insert
because it is not among His Majesty's Printed Messages.

His Majesty's Answer to the Propositions, tendered to Him by the Commissioners
from the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England at Westminster, and the
Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland.
CHARLES R.

AS it is His Majesty's chief desire to make such a Return to the Propositions,
The Kings Answer to the Propositions.
as may speedily produce a blessed, firm, and lasting Peace in all His
Dominions; so He has employed His uttermost endeavors, to give a full and
particular Answer to every Branch of them. But the more He considers the nature
of them, together with the high Importance, and variety contained therein, (not
without some ambiguity, as well in the several Propositions, as also in
comparing the one with the other) so much the more He finds it necessary to
desire the help of Explanation, Debate, and Conference, concerning some of
them, (as he touched in His Paper) whereby His Understanding may be informed in
those things, which as yet are not clear to Him, His Reason may be more fully
convinced, and His Conscience so satisfied, that without offense to either of
them He may make such a particular distinct Answer, as may best attain His
Desires of satisfying them: and though for the present His Majesty (at this
distance from His Two Houses) wants the view of many necessary Papers, and
other Assistances; yet at what disadvantage soever, He will apply Himself to
give all the satisfaction that is in His power, desiring He may not be
mis-interpreted in any thing He shall say or omit.

His Majesty's Answer to the first Proposition is, That upon His Majesty's
coming to London, He will heartily join in all that shall concern the Honor of
His two Kingdoms, or the Assembly of Estates of Scotland, or of the
Commissioners, or Deputies of either of them; and particularly in those things
which are desired in that Proposition, upon confidence that all of them
respectively with the same tenderness will look upon those things which concern
His Majesty's Honor.

Concerning all the Propositions touching Religion, His Majesty says, that He
has often and solemnly professed His Opinion concerning Episcopacy, to which He
refers Himself; yet considering the present Distractions about Religion, which
are so great, and of that nature, that Persuasion as well as Power, must be
used to restore that happy Tranquillity which the Church of England has lately
and miserably lost, (for certainly Violence and Persecution never was nor will
be found a right way to settle men's Consciences.) His Majesty proposes, that He
will confirm the Presbyterian Government for Three Years, (being the time set
down by the Two Houses) that is to say, that during the said time, the Church
be governed by Classical and Congregational Elderships, National and Provincial
Assemblies, with their respective Subordinations, with such Forbearance to
those who through scruple of Conscience cannot in every thing practice
according to the said Rules, as may consist with the Rule of the Word of God,
and the Peace of the Kingdom: and that the Office of Ruling-Elders, the Power
of Elderships to suspend from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ignorant and
scandalous Persons, be all settled by Act of Parliament for the aforesaid Term;
as also that the Directory be by the same way authorized for the same time; so
that His Majesty, and His Household be not hindered from using that Form of Gods
Service which they have formerly done: and also that in the mean time, and with
all convenient speed, a Committee be chosen of Both Houses, to have a free
Consultation and Debate with the Assembly ^f Divines, (being also willing the
said Assembly shall be authorized to sit for the space of the said Three Years,
twenty more being added of His Majesty's Nomination) how the Church shall be
settled and governed at the end of Three Years or sooner, if Differences may be
agreed. Also it is to be understood, that those Committees shall have no Power,
but of hearing, debating and reporting, the better to prepare all these
Differences for the Determination of His Majesty and the Two Houses.

To the Seventh and Eighth Propositions His Majesty will consent.

To the Ninth Proposition His Majesty doubts not but to give good satisfaction,
when He shall be particularly informed how the said Penalties shall be levied
and disposed.

To the Tenth His Majesty's Answer is, That He is, and has been always willing
to prevent the Practices of Papists, and therefore is content to pass an Act of
Parliament for that purpose; as also that the Laws against them may be duly
executed.

His Majesty will give His consent to the Act for the strict Observance of the
Lords Day, for the suppressing of Innovations, and those concerning the
Preaching of Gods Word, and touching Non-residencies and Pluralities.

And His Majesty will be willing to pass such an Act or Acts, as shall be
requisite to raise Moneys for the payment and satisfaction of all Public and
past Debts, expecting that His also will be therein included.

As to the Proposition concerning the Militia, though His Majesty cannot
consent to it in terminis as it is proposed: because thereby (as He conceives)
He wholly devests Himself of the Power of the Sword entrusted to Him by God,
and the Laws of the Land, for the Protection and Government of His People, and
places the same (in effect) for ever in the Two Houses of Parliament; thereby
at once disinheriting His Posterity of that Right and Prerogative of the Crown,
which is absolutely necessary to the Kingly Office, and so weakening Monarchy
in this Kingdom, that little more than the Name and Shadow of it will remain:
yet if it be only Security for the preservation of the Peace of this Kingdom
after these unhappy Troubles, and the due performance of all the Agreements
that now are to be concluded, which is desired, (which His Majesty always
understood to be the case, and hopes that ^erein He is not mistaken) His
Majesty will give abundant Satisfaction; to which end He will consent by Act of
Parliament, That the whole Power of the Militia, both by Sea and Land, be in
the Two Houses for the space of Ten Years, and afterward to return to its
proper channel again, as it was in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and King James
of blessed Memory. And now His Majesty conjures His Two Houses of Parliament,
as they are Englishmen, Christians, and Lovers of Peace, by the Duty which
they owe to Him their King, and by the bowels of Compassion which they have to
their Fellow Subjects, that they will accept of these His Majesty's Of^ers,
whereby the joyful News of Peace may be again restored to this languishing
Kingdom. His Majesty will grant the same to the Kingdom of Scotland, if it be
desired, touching the conservation of the Peace betwixt His two Kingdoms.

Touching Ireland, His Majesty will give full satisfaction, as to the managing
of War; and for Religion, as in England.

Touching the mutual Declaration proposed to be established in both Kingdoms by
Act of Parliament, and the Qualifications, Mollifications, and Branches which
follow in the Propositions; His Majesty truly professes, that He does not
sufficiently understand diverse things contained therein: but this He
sufficiently knows, that a General Act of Oblivion is the best Bond of Peace,
and that after intestine Troubles, the Wisdom of this and other Kingdoms, has
usually, and happily in all Ages, granted general Pardons with none or very few
Exceptions, whereby the numerous Discontentments of many Persons and Families
(otherwise exposed to Ruin) might not become fuel to new Disorders or the
seeds of future Troubles. His Majesty desires that His Two Houses of Parliament
should seriously descend into these Considerations, and tenderly look upon His
Condition herein, and the perpetual Dishonor that must cleave to Him, if He
should thus desert so many persons of Condition and Fortune, that have engaged
themselves with Him, only out of a sense of Duty. His Majesty is very unwilling
to enlarge Himself further upon this Subject, but earnestly desires that upon
Conference these Particulars may be better understood and reconciled, wherein
He will condescend to all that in Honor and Justice He may do concerning the
same; and then they may likewise particularly consider, and conclude, of the
best Means to discharge the Public Debts, as likewise those of His Majesty's:
and then His Majesty will apply Himself to the Consideration concerning the
Seals, and any other thing now casually omitted, or to which for the present
(without further Information or Debate) His Majesty cannot give any positive
Answer.

As for the Offices which are mentioned in the 17th Article, albeit His Majesty
judges that the free Disposal of them is a necessary Flower of the Crown; yet
he is content, for the space of these next Ten Years to come, to nominate such,
both for England and Ireland, who after shall be approved of by the Two Houses,
to be enjoyed by these Persons Quam diu se been gesserint, so that after the
said Ten Years, they shall return to be disposed of as formerly.

His Majesty will very willingly consent to the Act, for the Confirmation of
the Privileges and Customs of the City of London.

And now that His Majesty has thus far endeavored to comply with the Desires
of His Two Houses of Parliament, He conceives it seasonable for Him to propose
some things for Himself, which (if consented to) may be a testimony of their
reciprocal Affections to Him.

First, that an Act of Oblivion and General Pardon be passed by Act of
Parl^ament, whereby all the seeds of Discontentments and future Troubles may be
quite extirpated.

Secondly, that the Two Houses would settle upon His Majesty, such a certain
Revenue as may be honorable, and sufficient for the support of Him, His Wife,
Children, and their Families.

Lastly, that this Agreement may be firm and lasting, His Majesty desires to
come to Westminster, with honorable Freedom and Safety, there solemnly to
confirm the same; where He may both give and receive Pledges of mutual Love,
Confidence, and of Trust with them in all things, which shall concern the good
and prosperity of His People.

Newcastle the December. 1646.

To this Letter with the Enclosed Message my Lord Lanerick wrote the following
Answer.

Lanerick 's Answer to His Majesty.
Most Sacred Sovereign,
IMmediately after the receipt of Your Majesty's Commands of the 4th Instant,
by Sir James Hamilton, I imparted under a tie of Secrecy Your intended Message
to the Houses of Parliament to such Persons, as I knew were most tender of Your
Majesty's Honor and Happiness: but I must humbly beg Your Majesty's Pardon, if
my Freedom offend, since I cannot conceal so important a Truth as that. I
cannot find many here satisfied with it, nor dare I promise the least
Countenance to it from this Kingdom; seeing Your Majesty has diverse times
verbally, and now again by Your Letter, assured me of Your Resolution to adhere
to the Grounds contained in this Message. I shall not presume to make any
Objections against it, having (when I had the honor to wait upon Your Majesty
last) represented my sense of that You was pleased to send by Mr. Murray,
whereof this in diverse Particulars comes far short; for besides that it is as
wanting in that Article concerning Religion, Your Majesty offers far less than
you did at that time by the private Instructions Your Majesty then gave Him, in
the Propositions about the Militia, Officers of State, and the Great Seal: yet
I find not Your Majesty's Condition is much more promising at least to vulgar
eyes. That Clause concerning the Liberty Your Majesty would allow to Tender
Consciences, is one of the meanest Particulars, that is misliked in Your
Majesty's Answer to the Proposition concerning Religion: Your Majesty's Preface
to that Article, the Limitation of time to Presbyterial Government, the
addition of Twenty of Your Majesty's Nomination to the Assembly of Divines, the
particular Exception of Your Own Family, and (what is most of all) the total
omission of making any mention of the Covenant, are the most insisted-on
Objections. But as I dare not think upon the sad Consequences (in relation to
Your Majesty's Person and Government) which will presently follow upon the
Return of the Scottish Army, and Your Majesty's declining to allow the Covenant,
without which, though I presume not to press it, all that can be offered will
not satisfy here; so I will not conceal the great advantages which I conceive
the doing of it would bring to Your Majesty, and to those You study to
preserve: for I am confident it might be so managed, as this Kingdom would not
only declare themselves, for Preserving Your Majesty's just Rights in Civil
Relations, but likewise engage themselves for an honorable and speedy
Invitation of Her Majesty to return from France. Besides an easy passing of
all such, who during these Troubles have adhered to Your Majesty in England,
with what else could be expected from faithful and dutiful Subjects. But I have
by my impertinent Expressions exceeded both my Intention and Duty, for which I
humbly beg Pardon for.

Your Majesty's most faithful, most loyal, most obedient Subject and Servant,
LANERICK.
Edinburgh 8th December. 1646.

Upon this His Majesty wrote what follows.

Lanerick,
I Like well of your accustomed Freedom, nor shall I alter My style to you: and
indeed as I am well satisfied with your Proceedings, His Majesty writes more
fully on these Heads.
in order to My Commands sent by Sir James Hamilton, so I wonder much, that My
intended Answer had so ill a Reception among you; for a^beit I could not
expect, that you would approve what I know is so much against your Wishes, yet
I thought that even Common Charity (besides believe Me, there is also the
Interest of the Country, which would be considered) might make you endeavor to
make the best of that y^u saw remediless. Yet since what I sent you is so much
mistaken, the rest is the less wonder to Me; for it amazes Me to hear, that
some amongst you, who know every tittle that Will. Murray carried, say that
this is far short in diverse Particulars, when there is but one (which is the
Militia) for which there is any color, and not that neither but in a much
wrested sense. And is it not so, when private Instructions are the only ground,
which only permit a further Latitude to be made use of in case of absolute
necessity, and not otherwise, it being a new kind of Incivility, that
particular Freedoms should be esteemed Public Obligations; yet if they think,
they have so great a catch of it, so that Scotland will declare for Me, I will
stand to the least tittle of these Instructions (nothing being omitted)
according to their plain Grammatical sense. As for the Officers of State,
certainly My Advocate will clear that Mistaking; for all the Alteration
concerning them is only for the better Conformity of that Paper, which he
brought from London. And for the Great Seal, upon the perusal of all My Papers,
I have not wit enough to find from whence the ground of going less can be
taken: but for Religion, I know not what to say, except endeavoring to be
civil be termed a going less; if so, that fault shall be soon helped. And
indeed I cannot but think it strange, that rather than to comply any thing with
My Conscience, you will (I speak not personally to you, but to the Kingdom in
general) submit to the Wills of those, who at least can never prove your
Friends, and that to the visible Prejudice (I may say more) both of you and Me,
though I express My endeavoring to content you, by showing you more than a
probable way for attaining your Pretensions, which you make altogether
desperate by rejecting My Offer. And truly I am confident not to be single to
think your Exceptions strange; for, first, civil Ingenuity uses not to be
misliked; then, I rather expected Thanks for giving of some time to
Presbyterial Government, than to have the Limitation of it objected against Me,
especially since that without Me it cannot be established. And is it unfit for
Me to have what is granted to all Public Ministers by the Law of Nations? Yes,
I cry you mercy, for Kings use to dispense, not to be dispensed with. And why
will ye not have Twenty Divines of My Nomination, to speak amongst your grave
Assembly? Is it that you misdoubt your Cause, or that you will not have it
disputed? neither of these Reasons can I submit to, a third I cannot find.
Lastly, as for your Covenant, when, and not before, I shall be satisfied in My
Conscience that I may allow it, I will: but I see no way for that satisfaction,
unless by such a Conference as I have proposed. Now for sad Consequences I know
no Antidote so good as a clear Conscience, which (by the Grace of God) I will
preserve, whatsoever else happen to

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newcastle 14th December 1646. POSTSCRIPT.
I have so much work now, that if you had ten Brethren, what I have written is
enough for them all.




A few days after this His Majesty sent His last Message to the Two Houses, to
be presented to the Scottish Parliament, with which he wrote the following
Letters to the two Brothers.

Hamilton,
I Thank you for the timeous advertisement you and your Brother have sent Me by
this Bearer, whom I have returned to you with some Queries, which I desired a
Friend of yours to write more at large to you, than I have now time for; to
which, and to this Bearer referring you, I rest

Your most assured, real, faithful, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newcastle December 19th, 1646.

Lanerick,
SInce I saw by what Sir James Hamilton brought Me from you, what Reception My
intended Message to London was likely, nay sure to have, and since My
Conscience will not permit Me a further Length, (I know not what I may do upon
a full and free Debate at London) I have sent another, the Copy whereof is here
enclosed, which I expressly send you, to acquaint the Scottish Parliament with
what I have done, and to desire their Assistance in it; in which, knowing that
your Fidelity needs no spurs, nor your Ability information what to say, I will
say no more, but that I am

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newcastle 19th December. 1646.

But as for the enclosed Message, it being Printed among His Majesty's
Messages, it is needless to insert it here.

And now came on the fatal Turn of matters in Scotland, which shall be set down
from a Letter of my Lord Lanerick's that follows, but to whom the Writer knows
not, the Direction being lost.

SInce my last, our Debates have been of so great Importance that I cannot
conceal them. Yesterday we spent two Hours in the grand Commitee, (the whole
Parliament being present) and indeed to good purpose; for it was resolved, that
present Instructions should be sent to our Commissioners, to press His
Majesty's coming to London with Honor, Safety, and Freedom, and that we should
declare our Resolutions to maintain Monarchical Government in His Majesty's
Person and Posterity, and His Just Title to the Crown of England. But I confess
this Day is the saddest I ever saw, for after Resolutions were taken of sending
to His Majesty, it is carried that nothing but a Grant to the whole
Propositions must be demanded, and in case of a Refusal the former
Certifications given to His Majesty put in execution, of Securing the Kingdom,
and Settling a Government without Him: and lest His Majesty should have hopes
of engaging this Kingdom on easier terms, or thinking to come to Scotland,
(where though He should lose England, He might exercise the Office of a King)
it is to be Declared, that this Kingdom cannot lawfully engage themselves for
His Majesty's Preservation, albeit He should be even Deposed in England, He not
taking the Covenant, satisfying in Religion, and giving a satisfactory Answer
to the rest of the whole Propositions presented to Him in name of both
Kingdoms. Besides it is to be Declared, that His Majesty will not be admitted
to come to Scotland, where though He were, His Regal Function would be
sus^ended, and even His Royal Person at least be put under Restraint, if not
delivered up to the Parliament. While we were on these Debates, the enclosed
Warning was presented to the Parliament by the Commission of the Kirk, which
though you may think possibly high, yet really it is very moderate in regard of
these Motions have been in Public; for now all Private Meeting is quit by us
in relation to His Majesty's Person, which certainly will not only not be
admitted to come into Scotland, but a joint Course will be taken by both
Kingdoms for keeping him in Restraint in England. And you may be confident,
that will certainly be carried in despite of those that will oppose it. And to
prepare us the better, before we come to a Resolution, we are to morrow to have
a kind of Fast, and hear two Sermons in the Morning, (according to our Custom
at St. Andrews before the Executions) and the rest of the Day is to be employed
in taking a Final Resolution; which (without all peradventure) will be, to send
Commissioners to His Majesty, to demand the whole Propositions, (for Religion
will not satisfy) and to settle both Kingdoms without His Majesty's Regal
Authority, and imprison His Person in England, for He will not be admitted to
come to Scotland. This I thought fit to show you, from others you will hear
what has been every man's particular Carriage in the Debates; and our future
Actions, though they prove not useful to His Majesty, yet shall witness to the
World and Posterity, how we detest such Resolutions. However I shall boldly
say, that some who professed at their parting from His Majesty, as much if not
more than I did, and for ought I know were more trusted, have this day showed
themselves to the World in their natural colors; for truly I never remember to
have seen any thing carried with so much violence and bitterness, as the
Resolution of not suffering His Majesty to come to Scotland, our Declaring it
unlawful to espouse His Interest, and the fitness of Restraining His Person in
England. I dare not advise any thing, only this, whatsoever His Majesty intends
to do, I wish it be done quickly, and I dare say upon my Honor, within few
days He will not be master of Himself, nor His Resolution; an^ then I doubt his
Offers will come too late. I shall conclude, you never saw the stream so strong
in Scotland, nor so desperate an Affliction, as does now possess the heart of

Your most humble Servant, LANERICK.


And with this long account he wrote to His Majesty what follows.

SIR,
I Shall not presume to trouble Your Majesty with the sad relation of our
Carriages here these last two days; the Particulars will be represented to You
by others. Only give me leave to beg, that what Your Majesty intends to do be
quickly done, for our Resolutions here will be sudden and sharp. Whatsoever
other men's Carriage be, I am resolved to die rather than concur with them. This
is the fixed Resolution of

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, most obedient Subject and Servant,
LANERICK.
Edinburgh 17th December. 1646s.

Now were the two Brothers, The Duke and Lanerick oppose things as much as they
can, but in vain.
according to the variety of their tempers, swallowed up with the excesses of
Passion. The Duke was all Melancholy and Despair, and Lanerick was full of Fury
and Rage. But say or do what they could, all was in vain. One rare instance of
the Kings temper appeared at this time, for after he had got this account,
which brought him such ill tidings, he took no notice of it to those about him,
but continued in a Game at Chess, and was as cheerful as before. He was at that
time thinking of making an escape from Newcastle by Sea, but whither he
intended to have gone, does not appear to the Writer: to that Lanerick's
Letters do relate, when they press his speedy resolving on what he intended.
The design was thus laid. Mr. Murray had provided a Vessel by Tinmouth, and Sir
Robert Murray was to have conveyed the King thither in a disguise; and it
proceeded so far that the King put himself in the disguise, and went down the
back-Stairs with Sir Robert Murray. But His Majesty apprehending it was scarce
possible to p^ss through all the Guards without being discovered, and judging
it hugely undecent to be catched in such a condition, changed His Resolution,
and went back; as Sir Robert informed the Writer. This came to be known to
some: and one suspecting the Duke was in it, wrote to him earnestly to concur
in no such design, and that the Kings getting out of their hands again would
ruin all; that no man of Honor and Conscience ought to serve the King, since
he would not serve God according to the Covenant: adding, that it seemed God
had no mercy for the King or His Family, since His Heart was still so hardened
in the matter of the Covenant; so high-flown were men at that time.

At London things went on with great dispatch: for the Retiring of the Scottish
Army another hundred thousand pounds sterling was Voted to be paid presently,
and other two hundred thousand pounds to b^ raised out of the Sale of Bishops
Rents, and Delinquents Estates; whereupon it was agreed, that the Army should
return to Scotland upon the delivery of the Money, which was immediately to be
sent down to Newcastle.

In Scotland upon the evening of the next day, after the Fast mentioned in the
Earl of Lanerick's Letter, these infamous Resolutions, set down in his Letter,
were Voted; and all that could be said by the two Brothers, or any few of their
Friends who adhered to them, had no other effect but to drive it off a few
minutes, the Tide made so strong the other way. The King at this time was much
pressed both by the Queen from France, and by Believre the French Ambassador,
to consent to their Demands; but all was to no purpose, and my Lord Lanerick's
last Letter prevailed no more than the former.

Most Sacred Sovereign,
Lanerick writes again to the King.
BY Monsieur Montrevil, I received Your Majesty's of the 14th Instant, and do
humbly acknowledge Your Gracious Reception of the Freedom I used in my former
Letter. And now when Your Majesty does see to what a height the Public
Resolutions here are grown, Your Majesty will soon find how just my Fears were,
that Your intended Answer to the Propositions of Peace, if published here,
would have received no Countenance nor Assistance hence, Satisfaction in
Religion being still waved; without which as then, so I have always assured
Your Majesty, there would be an absolute impossibility of preventing Your
receiving eminent Prejudices from this Country. I shall not presume to reply to
the Answers Your Majesty makes to the Objections were made here (for I did not
then speak mine own Language) against Your Answer to the Propositions: I never
labored to persuade Your Majesty to grant them, from a sense of their
Iustness, but only out of an opinion of their fitness in relation to Your
present Condition, which (by what Your Majesty will learn from the Bearer) is
more threatening now than ever. I know the representation of Your Danger, in
what horrid shape soever it may with Reason lie before You, will be as
impertinent an Argument as any: yet though Your Majesty should neglect it in
reference to Your Self, pity Your hopeful Children and Posterity, pity Your
Subjects, and suffer us not to ruin our selves, which the Confusions we are
running into will certainly bring upon us; and pity all those who have suffered
for You, who will be exposed to certain Ruin. All possible means have been
used in a Parliamentary way, which is the only mean left to prevent the extreme
Resolutions that are now taken: but all is to no purpose, our best Friends
forsake us upon any Motion, which may infer the least Latitude about the
Covenant and Religion; and therefore as in the presence of God I must discharge
my self to Your Majesty, and show you the Resolutions now taken here in
relation to the restraining of Your Majesty's Person, and Governing the Kingdom
without You, will be infallibly put in execution, if Your Majesty does not
satisfy in the Covenant and Religion to the full, as it is demanded: neither
will it be in the power of any in this Kingdom to prevent Affronts and Danger
to Your Majesty's Person, if You should have any thoughts of coming hither.
Sir, I take God to witness, I write this with a sadder heart than I would
receive a sentence of Death against my self, and shall grieve more at the
performance of that, than I should at the execution of this upon

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, most obedient Subject and Servant,
LANERICK.
Edinburgh, December 22th 1646.

His Majesty's last Message was presented to the Scottish Parliament, His
Majesty's Message rejected in Scotland,
on the 23th of December, by the Earl of Lanerick, and backed by him with the
warmest language that he could use; but nothing that was new being offered by
it, a Compliance with it was not to be expected. It was also sent to London,
and at London.
and first presented to the House of Peers, whereat all, even those who were
best-affected, hung their Heads, and sent it down to the House of Commons
without a word; and there it met with the same Entertainment. The next Debate
was about the Kings Person, and the mildest opinion was, that He should be kept
Prisoner, some being for the excluding Him for ever from the Government. And
for the place of His Restraint, some were for His stay at Newcastle, but it was
carried that He should go to Holmby. And this passed without communicating it
to the Scottish Commissioners. But when He was ordained to be kept in Safety for
His Person, Henry Martin objected, that the King had broken the Peace, and why
must the Parliament bind for His Safety? Some moved to preserve His Person
according to the Covenant, and it was carried, which was thought a great point.
For now it was esteemed, that the Covenant was that which must preserve the
King, though His Ruin had been formerly imputed to it.

In the end of the year the Scottish Commissioners parted from London; and it
being moved in the House of Commons, to send some with a Complement to them
before they went, with the Thanks of the House for their Civilities and good
Offices, those of the Independent Cabal argued much against that, of good
Offices done by them, and reckoned many bad ones since the King went to
Newcastle; and it being put to the Vote, it was carried by 24 Votes, to dash
out good Offices, and only thank them for their Civilities. And so all those
Noble Characters they were wont to give of the Scottish Commissioners, upon
every occasion, concluded now in this, that they were well-bred Gentlemen.

Thus ended this present year, but none saw an end of miseries like to come.

An. 1647.
Anno 1647.
IN the beginning of the next Year Commissioners were sent from the Parliament
of Scotland, Commissioners are sent to the King from Scotland.
to represent their late Resolutions to His Majesty. On the 12th of January
they presented their first Paper, wherein they laid out all they could devise,
for the pressing a satisfactory Answer to the Propositions; expressing with
what earnestness all Men were waiting for it, and that it would be received
with more Joy than had been ever seen at any Coronation in England. But after
they had delivered this Message, and the 14th day was come, wherein the King
promised His Answer, He told them, He must be resolved of two things before He
could give His Answer. The first was, if He was a Freeman or a Prisoner?
adding, That if He were a Prisoner, it was the opinion of many Divines, that
Promises made by a Prisoner did not oblige, though He did not assert that to be
His own sense: the next was, whether He might go to Scotland with Honor,
Freedom, and Safety, or not? They declined long to give an Answer, and in that
Debate three hours were spent; at length being put to it, they delivered all
their severe Message in the following Paper.

May it please Your Majesty,
And deliver the Votes of the Parliament.
WE are commanded by the Parliament of Scotland, to represent to Your Majesty
the many Inconveniences will ensue upon Your Majesty's Denial, or Delay of
Granting the Propositions concerning Religion and the Covenant, and not giving
a satisfactory Answer to the remanent Propositions; and particularly to
represent the Prejudice will thereby arise to the true Reformed Protestant
Religion abroad, and to the Reformation of Religion in these Kingdoms, the
Danger of Your Majesty's Person, and to Your Own and Posterities Government.

England, we are commanded by the Parliament of Scotland to represent to Your
Majesty, That in that case they find it unlawful for them to assist Your
Majesty for Recovery of the Government, Your Majesty not granting the Covenant
and Propositions as aforesaid.

Scotland to represent to Your Majesty, That they find Your Majesty's Coming to
Scotland (not granting the Propositions concerning Religion and the Covenant,
and not giving a satisfactory Answer to the remanent Propositions) dangerous to
the Cause, to Your Majesty, to Your Native Kingdom, and to the Union betwixt
Scotland and England, and that the Kingdom of Scotland will be necessitated to
take Course to prevent Your Coming.



Scotland with Freedom. And in case Your Majesty do come, we are commanded to
represent to Your Majesty, That the Kingdom of Scotland will be necessitated to
put such Attendants and Guards about Your Majesty's Person, as may preserve You
in Safety, and Your Kingdoms in Peace, and may prevent all Tumults,
Insurrections, and Gatherings of Malignants.

We are further warranted to represent to Your Majesty, That if You do not
grant the Propositions concerning Religion and the Covenant, and give a
satisfactory Answer about the remanent Propositions, the Kingdom of Scotland
will be necessitated to continue the Government without Your Majesty, as has
been done these years bypast.

Newcastle 14th January, 1647.

But the Answer they got showed, The King stands firmly to His Conscience.
that the King could not be threatened to the Doing of any thing He judged
contrary to His Honor or Conscience. His Majesty's Answer being returned back
to Edinburgh on the 16th of January, which was Saturday, it was debated in
Parliament, what should be done with His Majesty's Person. It is resolved to
deliver up the King, which the Duke and ^anerick much oppose.
All inclined to deliver Him up immediately to the English Parliament; at which
Proposition the Duke and his Brother expressed their horror, with language so
full both of Reason and Affection, that nothing but violent and enraged Passion
could have resisted it.

They said, Would Scotland now quit a Possession of 1500 Years Date, which was
their Interest in their Sovereign, and do it to those whose Enmity both against
Him and them did now visibly appear? Was this the effect of all their
Protestations of Duty and Affection to His Majesty? Was this their keeping of
their Cov^nant, wherein they had sworn to defend the Kings Majesty's Person and
Authority? Was this a suitable return to the Kings Goodness, both in his
consenting to all the Desires of that Kingdom, An. 1641. and in His late
trusting His Person to them? what Censures would be past upon this through the
whole World? what a stain would it be to the whole Reformed Religion? and in
fine, what Danger might be apprehended both to the Kings Person, and to
Scotland, from the Party that was now prevalent in England.

But notwithstanding all this, the Question was put in these words, Whether
they should leave His Majesty in England to the Two Houses there or not? so
softly did the prevailing Party present that infamous Business to the Vote of
the Parliament. The Dukes Vote was suitable to his Discourse and Temper, being
a Negative uttered with much grave and deep Sorrow; but I shall set down
Lanerick's in the formal terms wherein he expressed it; As God shall have mercy
upon my Soul at the Great Day, I would choose rather to have my Head struck off
at the Market-cross of Edinburgh, than give my consent to this Vote. The Earl
of Lindsay, now Earl Crawford, was President, and so could not debate: but as
in the stating the Vote he expressed much honest Zeal, so when it was carried
in the Affirmative, he dissented from it, and to him those who had voted in the
Negative did adhere. But some of their Friends were accidentally absent, others
on design, and some downright deserted them; so that though there were diverse
who dissented, yet they were far short of being able to balance the Vote. When
all this was done, Lanerick with a deep Groan said, this was the blackest
Saturday that ever Scotland saw, alluding to a great Eclipse that was many
years before on a Saturday, from which it was still called the Black Saturday.

This being sent to the Commissioners at Newcastle, did not at all shake His
Majesty, he being resolved not to yield to that, no not at Holmby, which He had
refused at Newcastle.

The King is delivered, and sent Prisoner to Holmby*
In the end of the Month the English Commissioners and Forces came down, and the
Arrears for the payment of the Army being delivered, the Scottish Army withdrew,
and left the King in the hands of the English, who presently sent him to Holmby.

And this is a free and faithful Relation of that great Transaction, only in
invidious Passages I have spared the Memories and Families of the unhappy
Actors.

which is variously censured.
It was presently the matter of Discourse and Censure of Christendom, and
brought an Infamy on those who acted it, which though an Indemnity could
pardon, yet no Oblivion was able to deface. It was thought strange, since the
King had trusted himself to Scotland, that they should have thus deserted Him.
What grounds Montrevil had for giving the King those Assurances, did not
appear; and certain it is, they were very slight ones, and were only from
single Persons, but not from any Iunto or Judicatory.

But generous minds thought the Kings frank casting Himself into their hands,
was an Obligation beyond any Engagements they could have given. And it was
thought strange madness in those of Scotland to do it at that time, since they
saw the Independents prevailing, whose Designs against the Kings Person and
Monarchy had been faithfully discovered to them by some of their Commissioners
at London, and who were as little Friends to the Covenant and Presbytery as the
King himself was; so that considering their Power, such a Strengthening of them
brought Religion under a hazard of another nature, than could have been
apprehended upon their Accepting of the Kings Concessions. But the
Contradiction that this course had to the Covenant, was so plain that none
could avoid observing it; for to make their King a Prisoner, was an odd Comment
upon their Defending of His Person and Authority: and to do all that because he
would not force his Conscience, was judged a strange Practice from those, who
had so lately complained heavily against any appearance of Force upon Tender
Consciences.

These were the Censures that generally passed on that Transaction: the Kings
stifness was also very much condemned, and most men not understanding the
strictness of a Tender Conscience, thought it was Humor that swayed Him, and
judged that in the posture Affairs were then in, He should have yielded to any
thing, how unreasonable soever, rather than have so exposed Himself, His
Posterity, and His Kingdoms, to such visible hazards; reckoning that no Form of
Government that ever was, deserved to be so firmly adhered to. All persons
looked for dismal effects from these Resolutions, few thinking the Friendship
betwixt Scotland and England would be lasting: and all apprehended some strange
Curse would overtake those who were active in this infamous Business.

Amidst these greater Reflections, there were some who suspected the Duke had
not acted in that Affair with that Candor and Zeal He expressed: and this was
chiefly founded on the base Votes of some of his Friends, chiefly of one who
had served him, but was then a Lord. But as the tract of this Account has
cleared the whole Progress of his Negotiation, so the visible affliction of his
Mind, which drew after it a great indisposition in his Body, did abundantly
refute these Calumnies. And indeed that great Mind which did not succumb under
the hardest Trials, when it employed its utmost strength, was now reduced to
the most pinching Straits, and almost to desperate Resentments; so that he
repented his Stay in Scotland, since he foresaw nothing but imminent Ruin to
King and Country: yet His Majesty's opinion of his Zeal and Affection to His
Service, was at this time proof against all Whispers, which appears by the
following Letter.

Hamilton,
I Know it were needless to recommend this Bearer Will. Murray to you, but that
his Persecution at this instant for My sake is such, that in a manner it even
extorts these lines from Me, to tell you that your hearty and real dealing to
procure his waiting upon Me, is a good occasion, which I am confident you will
not let slip, to show your constant zealous Affection to

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newcastle 29th January, 1647.

Now it was that genuine Melancholy and Horror dwelt in all the Dukes
thoughts, The Duke contrives how to turn Scotland to the Kings Service.
his Brother was too deeply prepossessed with the like apprehensions to
minister much Comfort to him; only he pressed him not to give way to
languishing Sorrow, but to see what could be done for setting things right
again; and for infusing that sense of Shame and Horror in all People for the
late Action, which might prepare them to a Noble Reparation of it by a generous
Engaging in the Kings Quarrel. And upon this much pains was taken to infuse
Jealousies of the Independents in the minds of the Kirk-men, though there were
other violent persons as careful to refute them.

Most of this Year was spent in possessing all men's Minds with these
Apprehensions, so preparing them for what they designed to execute upon the
first Opportunity. The Duke and the Earls of Lauderdale and Lanerick were they,
who united most closely and cordially for the contriving and prosecuting of
that Design. The King was Prisoner at Holmby, without any other Liberty save
that of taking the air sometimes: all his Servants were denied access to him,
and so cruel was the zeal of his Enemies that it reached to his Soul; for they
refused liberty for his Chaplains to wait on him, a favor not denied to the
worst of Malefactors: but God was his Refuge, who supported him in all his
Sufferings and Solitudes. The Two Houses wrote to the Committee of Estates in
Scotland, that they should take such a joint Course with them, as might tend
most to bring things to a happy Peace.

But now the Jealousies betwixt the Parliament and the Army begun to grow
visible and above board, for the Presbyterian Party in the Parliament saw their
Error too late; Disorders rise in England.
most of them seemed to have intended the Kings Good, only they were mistaken,
in Judging that the Parliament, in which they were most numerous, would never
be disobeyed by the Army: but being disappointed in this, they ruined all,
their confidence in their Power in Parliament having been the cause why they
let the Scottish Army go home, for till they were gone, the Independents
crouched under them, and trepanned them into Severities against the King, and
the Dismissing of the Scots; who were no sooner gone, but the Army acted what
had been before projected, but most industriously concealed from the
Presbyterians.

Lauderdale is sent to England.
In April the Earl of Lauderdale was sent from Scotland to London, to insist on
the motion for a Settlement with the King, and chiefly to hinder the adding of
any new Propositions; and he was also Instructed to deal for a permission to
the Duke and the Earl of Dumfernline to go and serve the King in his
Bedchamber. But the Earl of Lauderdale found matters in great confusion at
Westminster, for the chief thing thought on was the Disbanding of the Army,
which was an unnecessary Burden to the Kingdom, many grounds of Fear appearing,
that their Designs were to keep themselves up, and govern the Nation by a
Military and Arbitrary Power: therefore such as were best-affected, judged it
necessary once to disband them, before they engaged in a new Treaty with the
King. But for that private Proposition concerning the Duke and Dumfernline, the
Earl of Lauderdale seeing it would not take, because there was not a Family yet
settled about the King, nor could it be expected that any from Scotland would
be the first they would set about His Majesty's Person, did not present it: and
indeed the Duke's late Behavior in opposing the Delivery of the King, had
forfeited his Credit with those of England then in Power. But it is not my
meaning to go on with a regular History of the irregular Transactions that past
in England this Year: I shall only say so much of them, as will make appear
what reason the Scots had for their Proceedings, and to clear what may have
relation to the Dukes Concerns.

In the middle of May the King sent a new Message to the Parliament of England
in order to a Treaty: but his Offers were the same (upon the matter) they had
been at Newcastle, and so not like to take; and the Two Houses were then busied
about Disbanding the Army. They therefore ordered the Army to be disbanded, and
some of the Forces they kept up to be sent over to Ireland; and all
Satisfaction being offered, The Army refuses obedience to the Parliament,
the time of their Disbanding was named. But the Ringleaders of the Army
disposed them to mutiny against the Parliament, upon pretense of want of
Satisfaction in matter of Money, and Reparation in point of Honor; so the Army
drew to a Body, and erected a Court who were called the Agitators. Meanwhile
Cromwell puts his Party in the House of Commons, on the Recalling o^ their
Declarations against the Army, and goes to the Army, though his Commission was
expired. More Money was offered to the Army, but nothing was accepted; only
diverse of the Presbyterian Officers submitted, and subscribed for Ireland,
whereupon they were by the prevailing part of the Army disbanded. and takes the
King from Holmby.
And the Army to make a sure game for their Party, sent one Ioice (a Tailor by
Trade, but now a Cornet by his Employment) to Holmby, who came at twelve a
clock at night, and forced the King to go with him against his will. Upon which
the Earl of Lauderdale emitted a Declaration, in Name of the Scottish Nation,
against that Force put on the Kings Person, contrary to all their Treaties and
Declarations; and demanded that His Majesty's Person might be presently set at
Liberty, and brought with Honor, Freedom, and Safety, to some of His Houses in
or about London: and after that he went to Newmarket to wait on the King, who
was there with the Army. But the Army begun to abuse His Majesty into some
Confidence in them, And use Hi^ civilly.
and used Him at another rate than had been done at Holmby. They gave free
access to all His Servants to come to Him; they allowed His Chaplains to attend
about Him, and serve in their Office according to the Liturgy, and permitted
Him free Correspondence with the Queen, and every body else: and in their
Discourses intimated their willingness to lay aside the Covenant, and allow the
Toleration of Episcopacy and the Liturgy; all which, though smoothly said, was
meant to cajole Him to his Ruin. As Soon as His Majesty was at Liberty, He
wrote the following Letter to my Lord Lanerick.

Lanerick,
THe present condition of My Affairs is such, He writes to Lanerick.
that I believe you and your Brother may do Me better Service at London than
where you are; therefore I desire that both, or at least one of you, would come
up as soon as you could: the rest I leave till meeting, and so farewell.

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Newmarket 22th June 1647.

To this my Lord Lanerick wrote this Answer.

Sir,
YOur Majesty's Letter of the 22th of June had been immediately obeyed,
Lanerick's Answer.
if our Stay here for some time had not been conceived of more use to Your
Majesty's Service. Your condition is so variously represented here, that Your
faithfullest Servants know not how to carry themselves; therefore the
intimation of Your Majesty's Own Pleasure would be of great use. No sooner
shall the temper of People here (which for the present is strangely inflamed)
be any thing allayed, than one, or both of us, You commanded, shall attend You
according to the Duty of

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, most obedient Subject and Servant,
LANERICK.


His Majesty upon that wrote what follows.

Lanerick,
The Kings account of the usage he had in the Army.
IT is impossible for Me at present to give a Categorical Answer to your (I
confess) necessary Question: all I can say is, that I am now at much more
Freedom than I was at Holmby; for My Friends have free access to Me, My
Chaplains wait upon Me according to their Vocation, and I have free
Intelligence with My Wife, and any Body else whom I please, all which was
flatly denied me before: besides, the Professions are much more frank and
satisfactory to what I desire, of this Army, than ever was offered by the
Presbyterians. And truly, if these People rightly understood their own
Condition and Interests they must do what they profess, which is, that King,
Parliament, and People, may each have respectively what is their own; and yet
it must be their Actions, not Words alone, which shall make Me put Confidence
in them.

Hitherto they have made Me no particular Offers, though daily pressed by Me;
but as soon as I can clearly see through their Intentions, one way or other, I
will not fail to advertise you with My Commands thereupon. In the mean time,
having truly, though shortly, set you down the true estate of My present
Condition, I leave you to judge, and do what you shall find best for My
Service. So I rest

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Casam 12th July 1647. POSTSCRIPT.
I have entrusted this trusty Bearer with several Particulars, which I thought
too long for a Letter.




And the day after that he wrote again.

Lanerick,
THis is, first, to recommend this honest Bearer to your Care, to further him
in passing of those small Favors I have bestowed upon him; next, that you
would do your best, for the relief of those Gordons who were lately taken; both
which as to you were needless, but that I know it is fit for Me at all
occasions to express the Care I have of those that wish Me well. So farewell.

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Casam 13th July 1647. POSTSCRIPT.
Send me word if you have yet remembered your Promise to Me concerning the late
Archbishop of St. Andrews his Book.




To which my Lord Lanerick wrote this Answer.

May it please Your Majesty,
YOurs of the 12th I received yesterday. Lanerick's Answer.
We are joyed for what you write of the Civilities you met with, but are full
of doubts and fears of their Continuance, especially since we are informed,
that notwithstanding all Public Professions, strange Demands are preparing to
be offered to Your Majesty. I ever hated thralling of Consciences, yet I shall
be sorry, there were no other price of Spiritual Freedom than Your Majesty's
loss of all Temporal Power. This Kingdom will be easily induced to venture
their Lives for the last, but none will hazard the first; since they will not
declare for Your Majesty, but clogged with the Covenant. It was thought fit to
delay all Resolutions until the 5th of August next, expecting against that
time, either from the nature of the Demands we hear are now to be made to Your
Majesty, or from the carriage of the Army to Your Sacred Person, grounds will
be given either to rest satisfied, or to resent it as becomes Loyal Subjects.
It is wished Your Majesty's true Condition and positive Pleasure may be made
known (from Your Self if possible) against that time, when certainly the sense
both of this Church (seeing the General Assembly will be then sitting) and
State upon the present Differences in England, as they have relation to, or can
have influence upon Scotland, will be made known. It is wished Your Majesty's
Prudence may prevent further Prejudice, by going at first the full length You
intend, in granting what Conditions shall be demanded; or if You find them
absolutely destructive to You, to put Your Self in that Condition, that our
Persons and Lives may be of use to Your Majesty, which shall be the constant
care of

Your Majesty's most faithful, most loyal, most obedient Subject and Servant,
LANERICK.
Edinburgh 21th July, 1647. POSTSCRIPT.
I have not as yet been able to put Your Commands in execution concerning the
Bishop of St. Andrew's Book, in regard the Copy I have is both uncorrect, and
wanting in many essential things; but I have already taken a Course to have
that supplied from a true Copy of the Original, now in the possession of our
Commissioners at London.




His Majesty's Answer follows.

Lanerick,
YOurs of the 21th Instant I received yesterday, having before resolved to have
written to you, though I had received none from you, to show you from time to
time what My Condition is. And yet for easing My pains, I have thought fit to
refer you to the Bearer John Chisley, to tell you the true State of Affairs,
with My Opinion thereupon, to whom I have largely and fully spoken My Mind:
wherefore I will only say this one word, that whatsoever you resolve on, you
must not think to mention (as to England) either Covenant or Presbyterial
Government; for it will ruin you, and do Me no good, experience of which was
clearly seen at Newcastle. So desiring you to trust this Bearer, I rest

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Wooburn 27th July, 1647.

The Army forces the Parliament.
The Army drew nearer London, declaring they came to restore the King, and to
reform the Parliament. This was Popular, and took with many, wherefore the
Parliament, to undeceive both King and People, Voted His Majesty's coming to
Richmond for a Personal Treaty, and that the Army should not come within thirty
miles of London. But the Army refused obedience, and carried the King with
them, and sent threatening Messages for Recalling of those Votes: and they
designed next to model the Two Houses; whereupon a frivolous general Charge was
drawn against 11 of the most considerable Members, who withstood their Designs,
and they pressed their Suspension from the House. But it was Voted in
Parliament to be against Law, to suspend any Member upon a general Charge,
without bringing in, and proving special matter. And the Two Houses did choose
a Committee of Safety to Treat with the City of London, for Raising a new
Militia for their own Security, and some of the Trained Bands were drawn
together under Presbyterian Officers. Upon this the Army came to London, forced
the Houses to recall their Votes, and disband their Forces, and drove away the
eleven Members. And thus having over-^wed both Parliament and City, they began
to levy new Forces: but as soon as they withdrew from London, the Citizens of
London came in great numbers to Westminster, and petitioned to have their
Militia settled again according to their former Votes; which being granted, the
Parliament next day was at liberty, and the Secluded Members returned. About
the end of July, the Earl of Lauderdale going to wait on His Majesty, who was
then at Wooburn, was not only hindered access, but by the Violence of the
Soldiers carried away; and say or complain what he would of the Violation of
the Treaty with Scotland, and the Law of Nations, by that Affront put upon a
Public Minister of another Kingdom, he could not prevail, but was forced to be
gone. After this the King was Voted to come to London. But the Army, instead of
Obedience, came thither again, and by the interposition of some treacherous
People got the City surrendered to them: whereupon they marched through it in
Triumph with Laurels in their Hats* and came to Westminster, bringing with them
the two Speakers, and some other Members of their Party, who had run away from
the Parliament, pretending Fear, though no appearance of it had been in the
Proceedings of the Parliament. Fairfax was declared Captain General of all
England, Constable of the Tower of London, and Commander of all the Garrisons,
and then they fell to the Purging of the House. And besides the forcing the
eleven Members to flee, seven of the Lords were also impeached; and all Orders
that past in the absence of the Speakers were repealed; yet this was not
carried but upon a fortnights Debate. Diverse of the City of London, with the
Mayor and some Aldermen, were likewise charged and imprisoned: and all this was
upon a general Accusation of their designs to raise a new War.

Those in Scotland being advertised by their Commissioners of all that passed,
failed not to make good use of it, This is resented in Scotland.
to stir up the Affection and Duty of all to appear for His Majesty; which
prevailed generally, and even the Ministers begun both from their Pulpits, and
by their Remonstrances, to complain of the Prevailings of the Sectarian Party,
and of the Force that was put on the Kings Person. But the old language of the
Covenant and Presbytery was still in their mouths; yet all were pretty forward
for a real Resentment of the late Disorders in England. Only Mr. George
Gillespie, who was indeed of good parts, but bold beyond all measure, withstood
these Inclinations, and represented, that the greatest Danger to Religion was
to be feared from the King and the Malignant Party. He was suspected of
correspondence with the Sectaries, which some Letters in my hand written in
Cipher give good grounds to believe. Certain it is that he proved a very ill
instrument, and marred that great Design, by which all former Errors might have
been corrected. Thus as the Duke and his Friends designs began to appear, there
was a violent Party no less careful to withstand them. Therefore it was not
judged fitting the Duke should leave Scotland, his Service in it being greater
than any he could do in England: besides, his being a Peer in England, made him
more obnoxious to their fury than any other Scotchman could be. But His
Majesty's Concessions about Religion pinched them much, and the Liberty offered
to Tender Consciences did very much disgust the Scottish Clergy; for in Scotland
a Toleration was little less odious than Episcopacy, and nothing but Presbytery
would satisfy them.

In the end of August they sent Mr. Lesley to His Majesty, to represent the
State of Affairs in Scotland, according to the following Instructions.

The Duke sends a Message to the King.
YOu shall show what Endeavors have been used to incense this Kingdom against
the Proceedings of the Army under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax: witness
George Windram 's Relation, the Declaration of the General Assembly, and the
Voice of the daily cries from the Pulpit.

You shall represent what Industry was used to precipitate a present
Engagement, upon the grounds of the Covenant; and for Settling Presbyterial
Government in England, who were the pressers, and who were the opposers of it.

You shall show what Pains were taken by the moderate Party here, to procure
the sending of Commissioners to His Majesty and the Parliament, thereby to
procrastinate and delay all Resolutions, till their return, or a report from
them; which will probably consume the rest of this Summer, and for this Year
prevent a new War, except upon eminent advantage.

You are therefore to represent how necessary it is for preventing Prejudices
from hence, that a free Passage and all other Encouragements be given to those
who are now to be employed; if that shall be refused, or the Law of Nations in
their Persons violated, a Breach betwixt the Kingdoms cannot be longer
prevented.

You shall show, that if it had not been for His Majesty's Commands to the
Moderate Party here, a Scottish Army had e're this time been in England; which
so long as His Majesty is well used, they are hopeful to prevent, but if His
re-establishing be delayed, a greater Army than ever Scotland raised will own
His Quarrel.

You shall show, that the Instructions now given to our Commissioners, who
Treat with the Parliament, are only Generals; the chief whereof is, That His
Majesty be again invited to come to London with Honor, Freedom, and Safety;
the delay whereof is exceedingly ill taken here, and nothing would give so
general satisfaction to this Kingdom, nor more stop the mouths of Incendiaries
than that His Majesty were so at London.

You shall show, that the Message that was to be sent to His Majesty, was only
to represent to Him the constant Affection of this Kingdom, their longings to
see Him re-established in His Throne, their Resolutions never to withdraw
themselves from under His Government, and their Desires to know immediately
from Himself in what Condition He is, since the Safety of this Kingdom so much
depends upon the Safety of His Person.

You shall show that the Disorders in the High-lands are now composed, and our
Army is to be scattered in several quarters through the whole Shires of the
Kingdom.

With these Instructions My Lord Lanerick wrote what follows to His Majesty.

Sir,
SInce eminent Advantages for Your Majesty's Service could not at this time be
procured, but at the old rate of satisfaction in Religion and the Covenant, our
Study has been to prevent Prejudices and Disservices, wherein our endeavors
have not proved unsuccessful, though ^ven in that we met with extraordinary
Opposition. The Particulars will be showed to Your Majesty by the Bearer, with
the humble sense and advice (upon the whole as it now stands in relation to
this Kingdom) of

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, most loyal, and most obedient
Subject and Servant, LANERICK.
Edinburgh, 23th August, 1647.

To which His Majesty answered.

Lanerick,
I Very much like and approve of Robin Lesly's Discourse and Instructions; but
I do not so well understand your Letter of the 23th of this Month, as not
agreeing fully with what Robin has said, and shown to Me; wherefore I have the
more reason to desire you to hasten your Coming up. In a word, every minute
that you stay, it is so much the worse for the Affairs of

Your most real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Hampton Court 29th August 1647. For Particulars I refer you to Robin.




The King was then so filled with Hopes from Assurances given Him by the Army,
The King is abused by the Army.
that He was out of doubt of getting things carried by Treaty, and therefore
continued to press Lanerick's Coming up. The Earl of Lauderdale wrote also to
Scotland, that some Person of Eminence might be sent to concur with him in the
great Transactions that were coming on; whereupon the Lord Chancellor and
Lanerick were appointed to go up; upon which a Pass was signed by Fairfax, for
the Earls of Lowdon and Lanerick (according to the desire sent from Scotland)
to come and wait upon the King.

But their Coming up was delayed, the occasion whereof is given in the
following Letter written by my Lord Lanerick to the King; which though I set
down in the due Style, yet both it, and almost all the Letters written this
Year, being in Cipher, run in the third person: but for making the Narration
smoother, I have presumed to change their phrase a little.

Sir,
THe difference betwixt Robin's Relation and my Letter of the 23th of August
last, I shall easily reconcile, The Reasons that stopped Lanerick 's Journey for
some time.
when I shall have the happiness to see Your Majesty; for I can hardly speak
truth and sense, without running a hazard of making my self useless, and
incapable of speaking at all. Those of the Chancellor's Friends, who were
against his being employed at this time, take occasion to press a Delay to his,
and my present Going to London, or Court, from the Two Houses their not yet
answering a Letter the Committee here wrote to them, for Reparation of the
Affront done to the Earl of Lauderdale, and for Assurances to all Commissioners
employed from this Kingdom: so until a satisfactory Answer be returned to that
Letter, it is alleged that their Going will be useless, since (except they be
allowed by the Two Houses) access to Your Majesty may still be denied them, and
so their Endeavors to serve You frustrated. This is the rather urged by reason
of many informalities in the Pass sent them by Sir Thomas Fairfax, by which
they were only warranted to come to Your Majesty at Hampton Court: and if You
chance not to be there, it does not warrant them to wait upon Your Majesty in
any other place; especially since it bears not at all a liberty for them to go
to London, where their Endeavors probably would be of the (...) use. If the
Earl of Lauderdale had not been affronted, they would not have desired any
Assurance at all; but that being unrepaired, (for they are not at all satisfied
with Sir Thomas Fairfax his Answer to the Two Houses Letter in that particular)
if they shall have occasion to move any thing in Your Majesty's Favors, which
shall be disliked by the Parliament or Army, they may chance to meet with the
same or worse Usage that Lauderdale did. I was not so scrupulous, but willingly
would have hazarded through these (or any) Difficulties, being required, as I
am, by Your Majesty to haste thither; but the Chancellor's Stay would have made
my single Going (I being only employed to Your Majesty) useless: yet if it
shall be thought fit, and I again commanded to it, want of Formalities or
Passes will not fright me from my Duty. In the mean time Instructions are this
day sent to our Commissioners at London, to delay their concurrence in sending
the Propositions of Peace to Your Majesty till the Chancellour's Coming; for
the Committee resolved to adhere to their former Instructions, in pressing Your
Majesty's Coming to London with Honor, Freedom, and Safety, for confirming so
far as You have already granted, by Your Message of the 12th of May last, and
there to Treat upon the rest of the Propositions. Thus begging Pardon for this
tedious account, I expect Your Majesty's further Commands, which shall
immediately be obeyed by

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, and most obedient Subject and
Servant LANERICK.
Edinburgh, 4th September 1647.

His Majesty's Answer follows.

Lanerick,
The Kings Answer to Lanerick.
YOu had reason not to come up without the Chancellor, but I do not understand
why you did both stay; for is this a time for Scotland to vie punctilio's of
Honor with England, and thereby neglect (even almost to loss) the Opportunity
of redeeming that Fault which they committed at Newcastle; certainly you are
not yet in the right way. But seriously I write not this for you, but to you,
that others by you might learn more wit. In a word, Time is not altogether
lost; redeem it for shame, and be not startled at My Answer which I gave
yesterday to the Two Houses; for if you truly understand it, I have put you in
a right way where before you were wrong: remember the Proverb, Ill bairns are
best heard at home. I say no more but make what haste you can, with your
Colleague, to

Your most assured, r^al, constant Friend, CHARLES R.


In the mean while a Message was sent from Scotland to the Parliament of
England, for such a full Pass as was demanded, Lowdon and Lanerick with
difficulty are permitted to wait on the King.
which drew on a great Debate: for Haslerig, Martin, and others of that Cabal
argued much against it, saying, why should Lanerick be sent up, who was a known
Incendiary? and the Latham Letter mentioned in the account of the Year 1643,
with many other Particulars were remembered. Next, they excepted against it,
that by the Pass that was demanded it appeared, they were to go first to the
King, as if they had been to Treat without the Parliament of England. But old
Sir Henry Vane took them up sharply for remembering things which were long ago
buried; yet the Heat was so great, that it was referred to a Committee to
consider of it, but in end it was granted.

All this while the Earl of Lauderdale went not near Westminster, because he
got not Reparation for the Affront put on him by the Army; but was extremely
v^xed to see the King possessed with such a good opinion of the Army, and used
all the ways he could think of to undeceive Him.

In the beginning of October the Earls of Lowdon and Lanerick came to London;
The Scottish Commissioners wait on the King,
and with them the Earl of Lauderdale went to wait on the King, who was then at
Hampton Court; and after they had learned from Him the State in which His
Affairs were, and had expressed the Sense and Affection of His Subjects in
Scotland, who judged all their happiness to depend upon His Settlement on his
Throne, they fell upon their Treaty with the Parliament. But the Army was
beginning to take off their Mask, and change their Style: for having now seated
themselves in the Power, they begun to contrive how to execute what they had
always designed, which was the Ruin of the King, and the Subversion of
Monarchy. And a new Party among them called the Levellers, did avowedly own
Principles contrary to all Order and Government, so that there was great ground
to apprehend Danger to the Kings Person. My Lords of Lowdon, Lauderdale, and
Lanerick, represented to the King, that if He would give satisfaction in the
point of Religion, he was Master of Scotland on what terms as to other things
He would demand: but without that, they feared their Design of serving Him
should meet with great Opposition; yet they resolved once to rescue Him out of
the hands of the Army, or to perish in the Attempt.

and offered to rescue Him from the Army.
A little after this, His Majesty being to hunt at Nonsuch, the Earls of
Lauderdale and Lanerick came thither on pretense of waiting on His Majesty,
accompanied with 50 Horse, which struck no small terror in the little Guard
that was about the King: whereupon these Lords told His Majesty, that they were
come to rescue Him from His Captivity, and they, with all these they brought
with them, were resolved to die at His feet; wherefore they entreated Him to
make His Escape. But the King told them, He had engaged His Honor not to leave
the Army without giving them Advertisement; and till He freed Himself of that,
He would die rather than break His Faith. But the Leading men of the Army were
now weary of the Kings being with them, and wished to have Him in some secure
Place under a good Guard: whereupon they made reports be brought to Him, that
the Levellers were designing against His Life. The King therefore called again
the Earls of Lauderdale and Lanerick to Him some days before His Escape, and
told them, He had freed Himself of the Engagement He had given not to leave the
Army; The King advises with Lauderdale and Lanerick what to do.
He therefore desired their Advice what to do. The Earl of Lauderdale said,
things being driven to such extremities, it was not safe to give Advice; but
would His Majesty suggest any thing, he would with all candor deliver his
Opinion about it. The King first spoke of His Going to Scotland; the Earl of
Lauderdale said, that except He resolved to comply with their Desires about
Religion, He might expect no better Usage from the Church-party there, than He
had met with at Newcastle. Next the King moved His Going to London: the Earl of
Lauderdale answered, that formerly that had been a safe Course, but now the
City was so overawed by the Army, that he durst not advise His trusting His
Person to them; for the Tumults there were already great, and would undoubtedly
grow upon His coming. The King asked, if He came, was He sure of the Scottish
Commissioners that they would stick to Him in Name of the Scottish Nation? the
Earl of Lauderdale answered, that all of them to a man should wait on Him, and
own His Service at all hazards; but without Instructions from Scotland they
could do nothing as Commissioners, but only in their own Names as His Subjects;
and they had great reason to fear, the Church-party in Scotland would not own
Him, nor order them to do it. Next the King spoke of His going to Berwick;
whereupon the Earl of Lanerick, who till then had stood silent, begged of His
Majesty, that for Gods sake he would follow that Motion: for if He left England
the Army would pretend He was deserting His Kingdom, and so depose Him; but
Berwick was a strong Place, which at that time lay ungarrisoned, the Country
about it was generally well-affected, and so He might easily get a good
Garrison to go in with Him: and by that means he was near Scotland, for the
encouragement of those who resolved to serve Him. This was also backed by
Lauderdale, and the King seemed fully resolved on it; so they left Him: of this
the Author had his Information from the Earl of Lauderdale.

A few days after this, His Majesty went to the Isle of Wight, The King goes to
the Isle of Wight;
and on the 16th of November sent a Message to the Parliament, which is Printed
with the rest of the Messages, declaring the reason of His Going to that Place,
and inviting them to a Treaty, As for Religion he insisted on His Judgment
about Episcopacy, as a Government settled by the Apostles; but was content it
should be limited, so that the ^ishops should act nothing in Ecclesiastical
matters without their Presbyters, whereby they should be no burden to Tender
Consciences; and that they should be obliged to reside, and labor, and preach
in their Diocesses. Besides He continued His Offer for the Settlement of
Presbytery for Three Years, till things were freely debated and considered,
adding a Liberty to all Tender Consciences, except Popish Recusants. As for the
Militia, He offered to yield it up to the Parliament during His whole Reign,
and in other Particulars insisted on His former Concessions: and some days
after that he wrote what follows to my Lord Lanerick.

Lanerick,
AS My coming hither will be variously scanned, so I believe that My Message to
the Two Houses will have diverse Interpretations, for neither of which I mean to
make any Apology; and wr^tes from thence to Lanerick.
for honest Actions at last will best interpret themselves: only I must observe
to you, that what I have sent to London, the end of it is to procure a Personal
Treaty, for which if I have striven to please all Interests with all possible
equality (without wronging My Conscience) I hope no reasonable man will blame
Me. Nor am I so unreasonable as to imagine that this My Message can totally
content My Own Party: but for the end of it (a Personal Treaty) I hope that all
the reasonable men on all sides will concur with Me, as I expect your Scottish
Commissioners should do, though I know you must dislike many Passages in it.
And yet I must tell you, that in substance it differs very little from My
Message of the 22th of May. This I thought necessary to write to you, that you
might assure your fellow-Commissioners, that change of Place has not altered
My Mind from what it was when you last saw Me. So I rest

Your most assured, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Carisbrook, 19th November 1647. POSTSCRIPT.
This is a safe Messenger, wherefore you or any other of My Friends may write
to Me by him, desiring much to hear from you.




To this Letter the three Commissioners from Scotland wrote jointly this Answer.

May it please Your Majesty,
The Scottish Commissioners write to the King.
YOur Message left behind You at Hampton Court gave great hopes, that Your
Majesty was gone to some Place where you might be safe and free from Your
Enemies, and where Your Majesty's Friends might have access to You. But as the
Place to which You are gone, so Your Majesty's Message of the 16th has
infinitely disabled us to serve You; for what You offer in matter of Religion,
comes far short of Your Majesty's Message of the 12th of May: besides, it
grants a full Toleration of Heresy and Schism for ever. And as for Your
Concessions in things Civil, more is granted than was expected by some, or
wished by others: and although we know not how effectual Your Majesty's Message
may prove for a Personal Treaty, yet our Endeavors shall be really contributed
for that end, as we have done in part already. If this Message be rejected, a
Personal Treaty denied, the new Propositions pressed by the Two Houses, and
Your Majesty in no better Security than formerly, You would advise us in time
what to do, and wherein we can be useful to Your Majesty, who are resolved to
serve You as becomes

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, most loyal Subjects and Servants,
LOWDON, LAVDERDALE, LANERICK.
22th November. 1647.

Next day His Majesty wrote what follows to my Lord Lanerick.

Lanerick,
His Majesty's Answer to Lanerick.
I Wonder to hear (if that be true) that some of My Friends should say, that My
Going to Jersey had much more furthered My Personal Treaty than My Coming
hith^r, for which as I see no color of Reason, so I had not been here if I had
thought that Fancy true, or had not been secured of a Personal Treaty, of which
I neither do, nor I hope shall repent; for I am daily more and more satisfied
with this Governor, and find these Islanders very go^d, peaceable, and quiet
People. This Encouragement I have thought not unfit for you to receive, hoping
at least it may do good upon others, though needless to you, from

Your most assured, real, faithful, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Carisbrook 23th Nov. 1647.

But in the end of November the Two Houses passed the four Bills without the
consent of the Scottish Commissioners, which was a manifest Breach of Treaty.
The Two Houses pass the four Bills.
In them the Covenant was not so much as mentioned, for they related wholly to
Civil matters, as the perpetual Power of the Militia, the unlimited Authority
of Parliament, and in effect the Giving up at once the Kings Authority. But the
Scottish Commissioners complained and Remonstrated against this with open mouth,
and gave in a large Remonstrance against the four Bills; Declaring, The Scottish
Commissioner^ protest against them,
that contrary to all the former Treaties and Declarations, the Propositions
made to His Majesty were still altered, the Propositions sent to Newcastle, to
which notwithstanding their dislike of them, yet for Peace sake they had
yielded, were now quite changed. They also protested, first, against the
sending of Propositions without a previous Treaty, which they earnestly
pressed, as the likeliest Course for removing all Mistakes, and bringing things
to a Final Settlement; and therefore they insisted on their former Desires for
a Personal Treaty in or about London. Next, they excepted against the Bills,
both because the Covenant was quite omitted, and the Settling of the Uniformity
of Religion was turned to a Desire for a vast Toleration. The Treaties with
Scotland were not desired to be confirmed, but only the making of them to be
approved, which was rather an Indemnity for making them, than a Confirmation of
them. Next they remonstrated, that the Kings Legislative Power was quite taken
away, by an unlimited Power they desired to be put in the Hands of the Two
Houses, and that their Demand about the Militia did put the King out of a
capacity of Protecting His Subjects. In fine, they complained of the making
Propositions without the concurrence of the Scottish Commissioners; wherefore
they remonstrated against the Bills, and resolved to follow the Commissioners,
whom the Two Houses were to send to Wight, and protest against these Bills;
upon which diverse Papers passed betwixt the Two Houses and them.

The Earls of Lowdon, Lauderdale, and Lanerick wrote their sense of these Bills
to His Majesty thus.

May it please Your Majesty, and write to the King concerning them.

IT is of no advantage to expostulate about what is past, either the carrying
Your Majesty into that sad Place, or the Prejudice Your Service, and we suffer
by Your Majesty's Message; for while You study to satisfy all, You satisfy no
Interest.

We shall insist on the grounds we went on at Hampton Court, and shall
constantly press a Personal Treaty at London: but not as the new Propositions
do hold forth, which if Your Majesty agrees to, You divest Your Self, and Your
Posterity of the Militia for ever; You settle this Army (and Entertainment for
it) over Your Self, and Your Majesty's People perpetually; and by giving leave
to Adjournment, You and Your Parliament shall be carried about at the Armies
Pleasure, as their Sub-Committee. If Your Majesty will further enable us, we
shall by our Actions give more real testimonies, how entirely we are

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, and most loyal, Subjects and
Servants, LOWDON, LAVDERDALE, LANERICK

25th November, 1647.

With this Lanerick sent to His Majesty the Papers they gave in against the
Bills, and the other late Votes, upon which the King wrote the following Letter.

Lanerick,
ALbeit that Letters can ill dispute at this distance, yet I cannot but tell
you, His Majesty is well satisfied with their Papers.
that many things may be fitly offered to obtain a Treaty, that may be altered
when one comes to Treat; and there is a great difference betwixt what I will
insist on, and what I will permit for the obtaining of a Peace. Likewise it is
nece^sary in many respects, that I should seek to satisfy (as far as I can
with Conscience and Honor) all chief Interests. All these things impartially
and duly considered, I will boldly say, My Message will not be found much
amiss; which recommending to Your better consideration, I must now desire You
to give hearty thanks in My Name to your fellow-Commissioners (of which though
you take a large share to your self, they will not want) for their Paper of the
17th of this Month* which was sent to the Two Houses: for seriously it is as
full to My sense, as if I had penned it My Self. And let me tell you, that it
will turn to the greatest Honor (I say no more) that ever befell you;
wherefore I conjure you by all that is dear to wise or honest men, that you
adhere close and constantly to it; and as the Song says, I ask no more. So I
rest

Your most assured, faithful, real Friend, CHARLES R.
Carisbrook 29th November 1647.

To which, with another of that Date which His Majesty wrote to the three
Lords, which is not in the Writers hands, they wrote the following Answers.

Sir,
They write again to the King.
IN answer to Your Majesty's of the 29th of November we shall first humbly
acknowledge Your Favor, by conferring so great a Trust on us, and do engage
our selves to the exactest Secrecy. As for a Personal Treaty, we are resolved
still to insist on it, and that London may be the Place: but as to Your coming
hither in Person, Your Majesty not having signified to us Your Resolution of
declaring or concealing Your being here, or upon what assurance of Safety you
can do either as Affairs now stand, we dare not presume to gi^e a positive
Advice herein; but leave it to Gods Direction, and Your Wisdom, though we wish
from our Souls, You were out of those hands you are now again in. And albeit we
can no ways join with Your Majesty's Message, yet whatever Success our
Endeavors for a Personal Treaty shall have, or what Place soever Your Majesty
puts Your Self into; You may be confident, that you shall still have the
reallest Assurance and faithfullest Services of

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, and most loyal Subjects and
Servants, LOWDON, LAVDERDALE, LANERICK.

1st Dec. 1647.

Sir,
Just now we received Your last of the 29th of November. The first of that Date
we answered by James Cunningham, and can now say no more, as to Your coming to
London, than we did by him: for though nothing is so much wished by us, as Your
being out of their Power in whose hands You have put Your Self; yet we know not
in what Safety Your Person could be here at London, considering the present
Temper of the Two Houses, the Distempers of the Army, and the irresolution of
the City. But not knowing what grounds Your Majesty goes upon, we cannot judge
of that Design: yet since You are pleased to command us to offer our sense of a
better, if we approve not of this, we shall presume to propose to Your Majesty
Your Town of Berwick, as a Place both of Safety to Your Person, and of
advantage for prosecuting Your ends of Peace, whether by a Treaty, or otherwise
of restoring Your Self to Your Power, and Your People to their former
Happiness. The Prejudice of abandoning Your Kingdom of England, (while Your
Parliament is Sitting) will thereby be evited: Your Friends whether at home, or
abroad, will have free access unto You; and if You shall think fit to make use
of the Affections of Your Scottish Subjects, You already know upon what terms
You can engage them, either to restore You, or fall with You. And as to the
Safety of Your Person, besides the Affection of these Northern Places, (which
is very great) and the Strength of the Place it self, (which upon Your Arrival
with a few of Your English Friends may be possessed by You) Scotland has not
only 1200 Horse now together upon the Borders, but will be ready to employ
their whole Power for Your Personal Preservation in case of danger. If Your
Majesty approves of this Motion, You will think upon the best, speediest, and
safest way of executing it; and either in this, or what else You command, we
will constantly show our selves

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, and most loyal Subjects and
Servants, LOWDON, LAVDERDALE, LANERICK.

Dec. 4. 1647.

On the 6th of December His Majesty sent a new Message to the Two Houses, with
which he wrote to the Scottish Commissioners.

AS I heartily thank you for your Freedom, The King sends a Copy of His Message
to the Scottish Commissioner^
thereby perceiving your hearty endeavors for My Recovery; so there are so
many Particulars, that I cannot at this time give you a positive Answer, but
shall within few days. In the mean time I earnestly desire you to use your
uttermost Endeavors, for procuring a Personal Treaty, which for the present
will be the most acceptable Service you can do to

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
POSTSCRIPT.
I have sent you a Copy of a new Message (here enclosed) to the Two Houses, not
doubting but you will second it; also desiring you speedily to advertise Me of
any Resolution, that shall be taken to My disadvantage by the Houses: and of
this I pray you be very watchful.




The Message being among the Printed Messages, is not inserted here, the Reader
being referred to that Collection. The substance of it was, An Expostulating
that no return had been made to his last Message, notwithstanding which His
Majesty's constant tenderness to the Welfare of His Subjects, and the sad
condition they were now driven to, did so far prevail upon Him, that he
vehem^ntly pressed a Personal Treaty as the best means of Peace: so that the
blame of retarding so great a Work, must fall somewhere else than on His
Majesty, who as He had already offered to divest Himself of much of His
Authority; so He did not doubt, but if they met Him with the same Resolutions
with which He would meet them, the Kingdom should at last enjoy the Blessings
of a long-wished Peace.

At this time the Two Houses were designing to make His Majesty a close
Prisoner, of which the Scottish Lords gave the King notice in the following
Letter.

Sir,
They discover to him Designs against Hi^ Person.
WE are this day certainly informed, that the Committee appointed for Your
Majesty's Papers (whereof Mr. Lyle of the Isle of Wight has the Charge, and
whereof Mr. Martin Scot and that Cabal are Members) have resolved that present
Order should be given, for making Your Majesty a close Prisoner; and to remove
Ashburnham, Berkeley, and Leg from You, and commit them to close Prison, with
Resolutions to proceed to Extremities against Your Majesty's Person. The
knowledge of this came to us from Jack Denham: besides, a Member of that
Committee this day assured My Lady Carlisle, that within 24 hours Your Majesty
would be a close Prisoner. And to our certain knowledge there are Debates
amongst the eminent Persons, by one mean or other to destroy Your Majesty's
Person; and Consultations have been here, and in the Armies for this effect.
Our information comes from some who were present at both: we could not be at
quiet till we had advertised Your Majesty of this, nor can we propose any
better Remedy than we did express by Andrew Cole. If Your Majesty does not
resolve and act speedily, we fear our Endeavors to serve You will be too late,
which would be the greatest Affliction could come to

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, and most loyal Subjects and
Servants, LOWDON, LAVDERDALE, LANERICK.

8th December. 1647. POSTSCRIPT.
Jack Denham's Intelligence is from the Clerk of the Committee.




At this time the Earl of Traquair came to wait on the King, Traquair waits on
the King.
and gave Him great hopes of the Fidelity of some of the most rigid of the
Church-party in Scotland. He was sent by His Majesty to the Scottish
Commissioners with the following Letters.

THe coming of Traquair has much eased the pains, which otherwise I must have
taken in performance of that Promise I made you i^ My last Letter by And. Cole;
but I care not so much for the saving of My labor, as the inevitable loss of
so much precious Time, which must have been spent, had I written so long a
Discourse as that Promise required: wherefore I have freely and fully imparted
My Mind to Traquair, as well concerning your Propositions to Me, as the making
of some from Me to you. Having no more to say, but to desire you to give an
entire belief, a willing ear, and a speedy answer to what he shall impart to
you, I am

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Carisbrook 8th December, 1647.

Lanerick,
NOtwithstanding My Ioynt-Letter, I think it most fit to write to you alone, to
assure you that (if I have any Judgment) Traquair is right set for My Service;
wherefore in a most special way I recommend him to you, to whom referring you,
I rest

Your most assured, real, faithful, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Carisbrook December 8th, 1647.

The Message trusted to Traquair, The Kings Message by Traquair.
was, that as to matters of Religion His Majesty was unmovable; but as for
other things, wherein the Honor, or Interest of Scotland might be concerned,
he was ready to give them the greatest and fullest Concessions that could be
demanded: in answer to which the three Commissioners wrote what follows to His
Majesty.

SIR,
WE have heard Traquair's Relation, whom last night we had dispatched to Your
Majesty with our sense upon all the Particulars; The Scot^sh Commissioners
their answer to it.
but this morning he has conceived his going at this time unfit, which forces
us upon this tedious way. And the receipt of Your Majesty's of the eleventh
Instant, makes us the more earnestly beg, that You would not suffer us longer
to walk in the dark, but give us under Your Royal Hand an assurance that You
will perform what is contained in that Paper concerning Religion; and withal
insert, what You have scraped out of the Paper which we gave Your Majesty at
Hampton Court: and we shall oblige our selves to endeavor, that Scotland shall
engage themselves for Your Restoration, and Civil Interests, as was expressed
in those Papers. Without this Assistance we are absolutely unable to serve Your
Majesty; and although Doctor Goff showed us Your unwillingness to allow of that
Clause concerning the Covenant, yet we should but abuse Your Majesty if we gave
You the least hopes that Scotland would be engaged at an easier rate: therefore
we again beseech Your Majesty to haste to us Your clear and positive Answer,
lest we forfeit our Trust with those that sent us hither, and You (which to us
would be more bitter) perish by Delays. Our informations concerning the
Restraint intended to be put upon Your Majesty's Person, and some of those with
You, are still confirmed; therefore Your Majesty would speedily resolve to
satisfy Scotland, and engage their Power for Your Assistance. Concerning the
Duke of York, there is nothing we desire with more earnestness than to serve
Your Majesty in what You would have done; but being Public Ministers, we
cannot be the Actors of it, without absolutely disabling us to do Your Majesty
any other Service; and none else will engage in a matter of this nature upon
any desire from us, without a positive Command from Your Majesty: therefore if
You continue in that Resolution, we conceive it fit, You make choice of some
such trusty Person as Your Majesty would employ in acting of it, and that You
write to him for that effect, without taking any notice of us at all in Your
Letter to him. We pray the Lord to preserve and direct You, who are unchangeably

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, and most loyal, Subjects and
Servants, LOWDON, LAVDERDALE, LANERICK.

13th December, 1647.

After this His Majesty wrote these Letters to the Scottish Lords.

The King commands them to come to the Isle of Wight.
THough no time has been, nor shall be lost for My Going from hence; yet
contrary to expectation, it will be ten days before the Ship can be ready. And
I confess that this had been too late, if the Governor would have permitted
Forces in hither; wherefore I am most confident that I shall not be surprised
for time. And therefore I earnestly desire all you three (or at least one of
you) to come hither without delay, for the full Conclusion of all things
betwixt us; for upon second thoughts I judge it less dangerous to go to London
than to any Place else, except I were totally accorded with you. To conclude,
if you will not counsel Me to go to London, without being publicly invited,
make haste hither, as you love His Service, who is

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Carisbrook 14th December. 1647.

TIme was never more precious to any than it is at present to Me, and therefore
I am glad to take occasion upon Doctor Goff's long Dispatch (which I received
yesternight after I had written to you) to return you by him such a draught of
Articles betwixt us, as your Signing it will make your Journey hither
unnecessary: and I am to take what Course you will propose in order to My
Safety. I am confident the necessity of this Accord in diverse respects is so
well known to you that all Arguments are needless. Also I hope that the
particulars are so well worded, that you will make no difficulty to pass them
as they are: but if contrary to My expectation, you should scruple at any
expression, then necessarily all, or at least one of you, must come hither with
all expedition. So desiring you to believe what Doctor Goff will say to you in
My Name, I rest

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Carisbrook 15th December. 1647.

With this last Doctor Goff brought a full account of His Majesty's thoughts:
but the Scottish Commissioners finding it impossible to adjust matters, (which
were of such importance) without waiting on His Majesty, resolved to go to the
Isle of Wight.

And that their Going might give less Jealousy, they resolved to go after the
Commissioners whom the Two Houses were sending with the four Bills, that they
might Protest against them.

At this time the Marquis of Huntley being in Arms in Scotland, and not able to
resist the Forces that came against him, was taken Prisoner; which His Majesty
understanding, he expressed his Concern for him, in the following Letter he
wrote to Lanerick about him.

Lanerick,
HEaring that the Marquis of Huntley is taken, and knowing the Danger that he
is in, I both strictly command you as a Master, and earnestly desire you as a
Friend, that you will deal effectually with all those whom you may have any
Interest in, for the Saving of his Life. It were I know lost time to use
Arguments to you for this; wherefore I judge these lines necessary to add to
your Power, though not to your Willingness, to do this most acceptable Service
for

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Carisbrook 17th December. 1647.

About this time the Queen wrote to my Lord Lanerick.

Cousin,
YOu will perceive by this that you cannot make more haste in obliging Me, A
Letter from the Queen to Lanerick.
than I shall on My part in witnessing My Acknowledgements of it. I ascribe a
great deal of the good Inclinations your Commissioners do now express, to the
good Offices you do, of which I entreat the Continuance. The testimonies of
Friendship, which I receive from those of your Family, surprise Me less than
what I met with from other Hands; and I promise My Self to see further effects
of it. And as I have all the esteem of you that you can expect, so you owe Me
the Justice of believing, that I shall give evidence of it upon every occasion
that shall be offered to Me: nor shall I rest satisfied with that, but shall
diligently search out every opportunity of expressing it. Therefore I entreat
you to believe that I am,

Cousin, Your very good, and very affectionate Friend and Cousin, HENRIETA
MARIA R.


Toward the end of December the Earls of Lowdon, Lauderdale, and Lanerick, The
Scottish Commissioners go to His Majesty.
followed the English Commissioners to the Isle of Wight: and after they had
protested against the Bills, they concluded their Treaty with His Majesty, to
engage for his Rescue, and Re-establishment on his Throne, and to bring in an
Army into England, as soon as it were possible for that effect. An Agreement
with the King to bring an Army for His Service.
The King on the other hand engaged to them, for all the Assistance they could
demand from the Queen or Prince, or any other who would obey His Authority; and
that the Prince should come to Scotland as soon as they found it convenient to
invite him; and that His Majesty should grant all the Desires of Scotland,
which with a good Conscience he could grant. And the Commissioners having
advised and agreed with His Majesty, both about the Methods of carrying on
their Designs, and the ways of keeping Correspondence with him, they resolved
to return home to Scotland: and so they left His Majesty at Wight in the end of
the Year.

But upon the Kings refusing to pass the Bills, he was made close Prisoner; and
a Vote passed in both Houses against all further Addresses to him.

MEMOIRES OF THE LIFE and ACTIONS OF James Duke of Hamilton, etc.
LIB. VI. Of the Dukes Engagement for the Kings Preservation, and what followed
till His Death.
Anno 1648. An. 1648.

THe former Book has given the Reader a just and full Representation of His
Majesty's Imprisonment, and the Danger his Person was in; of the Force put on
the Two Houses by the Army, and of the breach of former Treaties with the
Scottish Nation: and now it cannot but be imagined, that such Illegal and Unjust
Proceedings must have inflamed the Resentments of all good Subjects, and more
signally of such who had formerly been carried away in the crowd to act against
the Kings Interests, but now seeing how fatal the Breach between the King and
his People was likely to prove to both, were much concerned to correct all
former Errors, and expiate all past Faults by a vigorous appearance for the
Kings Rescue out of his Imprisonment. In order to this Design the Duke was not
idle in Scotland, The Dukes endeavors in Scotland.
but by all the Art and Diligence he was Master of, did study to rouse up and
work upon the Fidelity and Loyalty of that Nation; representing, that now an
Occasion was in their Hands to witness to the World the sincerity of their
Intentions for their King, when he was under so base a Restraint, and Designs
were hatching against his Life: Would they now look on and see the King
murdered, the Parliament of England overawed, the City of London oppressed,
the whole English Nation enslaved, the Treaties with Scotland so unworthily
violated, the Covenant and Religion so neglected, and swarms of Sectaries
overrun all? Now or never was the time for declaring themselves; and if Duty
did not move them, yet the apprehension of their own Danger might provoke them
to look to themselves; for did they think to escape the fury of the Sectaries,
if they were so tame as to suffer them to prevail in England? therefore all
Laws Divine and Humane did oblige them to look to themselves, and to those
Enemies of theirs. And there was good reason to hope for success, since besides
the Blessing of God, which might be expected upon so just and Noble
Enterprises, the People of England were groaning under this Usurpation, and
would be ready to assist them: and they had reason to expect a welcome from the
City of London, and the better part of the Two Houses. These things did prevail
much on the most of the Nobility and Gentry.

Three Parties in Scotland.
But at this time Three Parties begun to appear in Scotland. The one was, of
those who would hear of no Proposition for the Kings Delivery, unless he first
gave satisfaction in matters of Religion: and this was made up of the
Preachers, and a few of the Nobility, and the Western Counties. Others were for
a direct Owning of the Kings Quarrel without any restrictions; and for taking
all Persons who had been in Arms for the Kings Service within it. The Earls of
Traquair and Calendar were the chief of these, and many Noblemen were of it,
who called themselves the Kings Party: but their Power in the Country was not
great. The Duke was as much for that in his thoughts as any of them, but saw it
impossible to effectuate the Kings business at that rate; and therefore judged
it best to go on in so great a Design by degrees.

The present Strait was that he first looked to, which was the Rescue of the
Kings Person; and he doubted not, if they once got a good Army engaged upon
that account, though all were at first clogged with many severe Restrictions,
yet it would be easy afterward to carry things that were not to be then spoken
of: and this way took with almost the whole Gentry of Scotland.

The Scottish Commissioners spent much of the month of January at London, The
Commissioners return to Scotland.
establishing a good Correspondence with the Kings Friends in England: and they
had Letters from St. Germans in France, in which the Queen and Prince undertook
to make good to them all that had been promised by the King in their Name. And
in the Commissions the Prince gave to Sir Marmaduke Langdale and others, for
Levying of Forces in the North of England, he commanded them to receive their
Orders from the Earls of Lauderdale and Lanerick, and follow their Commands.
Thus having laid down the best Methods they could think of with their Friends
in England, they set out for Scotland about the end of January.

At their coming to Scotland they found a general dissatisfaction with the
Kings Message (in November) about Religion. And though all the Duke's Friends
were ready to have hazarded their Lives for His Majesty's Preservation, on
these, or on easier terms; yet it was long debated amongst them, what the
Consequences might be of engaging in so great a Work, not only without
Unanimity, but with the Opposition of the Church, and most of those who had
been of greatest Eminence and Power during the late Troubles. Wherefore they
resolved to give very extraordinary Complyances to their Desires, whereby they
might either gain their Concurrence, or at least mitigate their Opposition, and
determined to go a greater length than otherwise their Loyalties could allow
of. But the Churchmen, by the insinuations of Mr. Gillespie and others, were
possessed with an opinion of their bad Intentions, and that their Resolutions
(if they were blessed with Success) were to overturn all that had been formerly
established: and so they resolved not to be satisfied with any Security or
Proviso they might grant, believing that nothing they offered was really meant
to be kept, and that all they intended was but Cajolery; therefore they
determined to oppose them with their utmost Zeal and Industry.

A few days after the three Lords returned to Scotland, the following Letter
came to them from His Majesty.

UPon Saturday I received yours of the twenty fourth of January, A Letter from
the King.
and have written to Lee as you desired. Let no reports of any Personal
Threatening against Me stagger your Confidence of My Constancy, nor hinder
Scotland in what shall be best for Kingly Authority: lose no time in your great
and honest Designs, for him who is

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
Monday 7th February, 1648. POSTSCRIPT.
I resolve within these two or three Days to write to you by a trusty
Messenger, however I hope not to fail by these ways you mention.




To which they returned the following Answer.

May it please Your Majesty,
THis day we received Your Majesty's of the 7th Instant: Your Letter to Lee we
hope may be useful. Our Resolution to serve Your Majesty cannot be shaken, with
which we will go through or perish. The Clergy cannot be satisfied with what
Your Majesty offers in Religion, for the reason expressed in our last of the
15th, yet we hope to engage them in the Work. We wish Your Majesty could
further enable us in that Particular, as the only mean to procure Unanimity. In
the mean time we will set up our rest on the procuring a speedy Engagement,
though without that we cannot do it so much to Your Majesty's advantage. Sir
Marmaduke Langdale is come hither, and our first care shall be to secure
Berwick and Carlisle, which ere this we had done, if our Forces had not been at
too great a distance, scattered in their Quarters. They have now Orders in
private to draw together, and we intend to act and speak both at a time.

POSTSCRIPT.
We want Arms and Ammunition exceedingly, and do earnestly desire the Queen may
be pleased to endeavor the supplying us from France and Holland speedily.




The Lord Chancellor (though at first the most forward of them all for an
Engagement, Lowdon falls off to the Church-party.
yet) was quickly wrought upon to abandon his generous Resolutions; and not
only turned over to the violent Church-Party, but some Months after was made do
Penance by a solemn Acknowledgment in the High-Church of Edinburgh, for his
sinful compliance with these unlawful Courses, as they were termed. Traquair
played his old game a great while with both hands, and studied to make a
Reconciliation with some Lords of the Church-party, if by any means they could
have been engaged in the Design: and Mr. Murray of the Bedchamber, who was
sent to Scotland from France, treated also long with the Heads of the
Church-party, whom he thought more powerful in the Country, and so more able to
deliver the King; but finding them so backward, without positive Concessions
about Religion and the Covenant, he, and the rest of these called the Kings
Party, were forced to unite with the Duke and his Friends.

The first thing was to engage all the Officers of the little Army then
standing, which was carried very successfully; and their next care was to fix
on one to command. Those who united for engaging in the Kings Quarrel, designed
that David Lesley, now Lord Newark, should command the Army to be raised; and
he at first undertook the Service very cordially: but some of the Churchmen
fell upon him very furiously, and prevailed so far on others who had a great
Ascendant over him, that he being of an easy nature, struck off, and refused
the Service. Whereupon finding it necessary that a Person of Eminence and
Integrity should command the Army, They resolve the Duke should be General,
which he oposed much.
they resolved on making the Duke General, which he opposed to a high degree;
saying, that he was resolved to hazard his Life with the first, yet he would
decline all Command, knowing with what Calumnies he had been aspersed, and what
Jealousies many had still of him, as if his Designs were for himself, and to
the Kings Prejudice. And many yet alive, with whom he lived in the greatest
Confidence, know with what earnestness he pressed them to set their eye on some
other Person; but there were none to choose fit for the Trust, wherefore it was
agreed by them all, that the Charge must be laid on him, to which he submitted
with great Aversion.

The Parliament meets in Scotland.
In the beginning of March the Parliament sat. Their first trouble was from the
Remonstrance, which the Commission of the Kirk sent them against Association
with Malignants, and of the danger Religion was in; which Paper they intended
to have printed, but with much difficulty this was stopped.

There were Commissioners sent down from the Two Houses (with whom Mr. Stephen
Marshal came) for Justifying their Proceedings, and keeping a good
correspondence with the Scottish Nation: and notwithstanding all the Injuries
done by them last Year, yet some of the Clergy, and of the Lords of their
Party, were in a very good understanding with them. But first of all the
Carriage of the Scottish Commissioners in England was approved in Parliament;
next, there was a Committee of Eighteen appointed for preparing business, and
to confer with the Commissioners of the Kirk, for giving them satisfaction;
which was a long and slow Work.

On the 14th of March the English Commissioners complained, that they heard
there were Designs among some Malignants to seize Berwick, which they desired
these in Scotland would oppose; whereupon the Parliament referred it to the
Committee of Eighteen to see to the Security of the Kingdom in that Affair,
from which all the Members, who were of the Church-Party, dissented: and
against this Vote the Commissioners of the Kirk sent in another Remonstrance,
because they knew that Committee was so chosen that they would send Orders for
the securing of Berwick.

On the 22th of March the Committee of the General Assembly, commonly called
the Commission of the Kirk, gave in their large Paper consisting of a long
Preamble and Eight Articles.

THe first was, That before they went on to a War, and find great opposition
from the Ministers.
the Grounds and Causes of it might be well cleared. Secondly, that the
alleged Breaches of the Covenant and Treaties might be condescended upon, and
Reparation of them first sought. Thirdly, that there might be no such Grounds
of War, as might break the Union of the two Kingdoms, and disoblige the
Presbyterians of England. Fourthly, that none of the disaffected or Malignant
Party might be admitted to Trust, but on the contrary that they should be
opposed and suppressed. Fifthly, that the Kings late Concessions might be
declared unsatisfactory. Sixthly, that they should engage not to restore His
Majesty to the exercise of His Royal Power, till He should by Oath bind Himself
and His Successors to consent to Acts of Parliament for confirming the League
and Covenant, and settling Presbytery, the Directory, and the Confession of
Faith. Seventhly, that none might be trusted, but such as were of known
Integrity and good affection to the Cause. Eighthly, that the Church might have
the same Interest in carrying on this Engagement, which they had in the Solemn
League and Covenant.

These Demands run in so high a strain, that those of the Church-Party judged,
either they would be rejected, and so the Church would pretend somewhat for
their breaking with the Parliament; or if they were yielded to, it would so
alienate the Hearts of the King, and all His Friends in England from them, that
they would hate them as much as they did the English Parliament or Army. The
Committee of Parliament found the Strait they were in, and saw what an unhappy
practice it had been to give the Churchmen so great an interest in Civil
Affairs. Some were for brisker Courses, and for clapping up in Prison all the
more turbulent Ministers; but the Duke apprehended great trouble from that,
fearing it should raise stirs among the people, which might retard the design
of the Kings Delivery, upon which all his thoughts were bent.

The hazard of intercepting Letters made the Intercourse by them so slow, that
the Lords that corresponded with His Majesty had no Return from him before the
beginning of April; and then they got that which follows.

I Was as glad to see the constancy of your Resolutions, as I was sorry to
understand the great Opposition you find in Your Undertakings. The King writes
to his Servants in Scotland.
But as for any Enlargement concerning Church Affairs, I desire you not to
expect it from Me, for such expectations have been a great cause of this My
present Condition, which I assure you, I am still resolved rather to suffer
than to wrong My Conscience or Honor; which I must do, if I enlarge My Self
any thing in those points. But I take very well the freedom of your Advice,
because I see it flows from your Affection, being also confident that you will
cheerfully and resolutely go on according to your Engagements to Me, who am

Your most assured, real, constant Friend, CHARLES R.
17th March, 1648.

And to this the Earls of Lauderdale and Lanerick wrote the following Answers.

SIR,
WE have received Your Majesty's of the 17th of March. Nothing but the cruel
slowness of Proceedings here would have made us so long silent, and that was
occasioned by the great Opposition we have met with from the Ministers, and the
rigid Persons, who strongly pretend Your Majesty's not satisfying in matters of
Religion; and upon these grounds have gained upon many, and obstructed any
Engagement. Yet we, and those we have interest in, are so sensible of our
Duties, our Honor, and of Your Majesty's sad Condition, (which goes nearer our
Hearts than any earthly thing) that although an Engagement upon the terms we
parted on be impossible; yet we shall either procure Scotland's Undertaking for
Your Majesty's Person, or perish, let the hazard or opposition be what it can.
We can boldly say we have the Major Vote of the Parliament clear, and if we
were blessed with Your Majesty's Presence the work were done. We dare not presume
in this troublesome way to express the particulars of our Difficulties or
Resolution, but hope shortly to give a more satisfactory account, having vowed
to live and die

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, and most loyal Subjects and
Servants, LAVDERDALE, LANERICK.

22th March. 1648.

Lanerick also wrote what follows, taken from an imperfect Copy under his hand.

SIR,
I Have been long silent, and possibly should have been so a little longer, had
I not received Your Majesty's of the 17th of the last Month; but lest I be
involved in other men's Guilt, I must first speak and then perish, or do my
Duty. Sir, at our first returning to Scotland, we met with a general
Dissatisfaction with what you offered concerning Religion, from the Ministers
and their Party; though all I have Interest in would have cheerfully hazarded
their Lives for Your Majesty's Preservation, upon these or easier terms: but
after long Debate upon the Consequences of engaging in so great a Work, not
only without Unanimity, but with the Opposition of the Church, and most of
those who have been of greatest Eminence and Power during these late Troubles,
this moved us to a willingness for a very extraordinary Compliance with their
Desires, providing we might be assured of an Engagemennt. But now when we have
gone a greater length than even our Loyalty can allow us, we find that nothing
is intended by them, but either a Conjunction with those that seek your Ruin,
or at least a dull and stupid Suffering, and enduring of those destructive
Resolutions to Religion and Government, which are now designed by the Enemies
of God and Your Majesty.

After this there was a new Committee of 24 chosen by the Parliament for a
Conference with the 12 Commissioners of the Kirk, who had many Meetings with
them, and gave them satisfaction to all their Demands, so that all back-doors
were shut, and they were ashamed that they had asked no more; wherefore being
driven from all their Pretenses they fled to the last starting-hole of
Jealousy, and said that their Designs were contrary to their Professions. This
was a tedious Affair, and cost many Conferences. In end great Offers were made
to satisfy the Church-party, but nothing did prevail; whereupon the Committee
drew up a large Declaration of all the Violations of the Covenant and Treaties
made by the Two Houses, together with an account of their own Intentions,
suitable to the Propositions made by the Ministers; only they stood much upon
the sixth Article, that seemed most contrary to their Duty to their Sovereign,
and it took them up many days; at length they yielded even to that: but for
this the Reader is referred to the Declaration printed with the Acts of that
Parliament.


On the 25th of April the great Business was carried, The Parliament vote an
Engagement for the King.
of putting the Kingdom into a posture of Defen^e; but the account of the
Procedure of the Parliament in this matter shall be set down from some of the
Earl of Lanerick's Letters, which the Writer chooses rather to insert than any
Discourse of his own. The first was written to a Friend at London, but to whom
it appears not.

I Had given you an account of the Condition of Affairs here long ere now, Some
of Lanerick's Letters.
had I known how to have addressed my Letters; and however this be an uncertain
way, yet because possibly it may come to your hands, first, I shall acknowledge
the receipt of yours the of the last Month, which I have in part obeyed, and
to that end have written to Ireland, to those I have interest in; and I am
confident that our Army there, will follow our Advice in order to the Kings
Service: but our Difficulties here are greater than you can imagine; for the
same disloyal spirit that has governed these years past, is yet so powerful as
to obstruct, though I hope they shall not be able to destroy, our Designs of
serving the King; and the same Instruments the Devil has hitherto made use of,
are still the rigid Opposers of all dutiful Motions. Many amongst us pretend to
Loyalty, but have such faint Hearts, and love their Fortunes so well, that they
dare not act where there is danger: others have both Courage and Affection, but
their Ambition will not allow them to act if they be not absolute; and they
have no power of themselves, without a Conjunction with some of greater
Eminence than themselves. Thus while we are tearing our selves in pieces
through Factions and Self-interests, perit Saguntum, our King is forgot, and
may God forget them that do so. But though the Chancellor has made a foul
Defection, and these that pretend Affection to the King are not so united as
they ought to be; yet I despair not but that with Gods assistance, in despite
of all opposition, we will force an Engagement or perish. I cannot descend to
the Particulars, only this I will assure you, that all you have interest in are
entirely right and resolute. Adieu.

The next of Lanerick's Letters that are in the Writers hands, was to His
Majesty, dated the 13th of April, 1648.

Our last was of the fourth of this Month, to be conveyed to you by Doctor
Frazer. In it did we show you in general, what extraordinary Opposition we met
with here in our Desires to serve You, but some of them we are now got over:
for to morrow it will be resolved that the Kingdom shall be presently put in a
Posture, and the whole Forces, or such parts of them as shall be appointed, are
to be ordered to be ready to march when they shall be required; and while this
is doing, we have voted the sending of three Demands to the Parliament of
England, having found all the Articles of the Covenant, and diverse of the
Treaties, highly violated. The first is concerning Religion, wherein we are
very high and full, knowing it will be refused, and we thereby obliged to
resent it: besides, our Design is rather to fix the Denial thereof on them than
on Your Majesty. The second is, that Your Majesty may come to some of Your
Houses, in or near London, with Honor, Freedom, and Safety, where the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms may make their Applications to Your Majesty for
obtaining a well-grounded Peace. The third is, that the present Army under the
Lord Fairfax be disbanded, to the end that all the faithful Members of both
Houses may with Safety return to attend their Charges, the Parliament may Sit
and Vote in Freedom, both Kingdoms, without their interposition, may make
their Addresses to Your Majesty, and the Settlement of Religion, and a common
Peace, be no longer hindered nor obstructed. These Demands are to be sent by a
Messenger, who is to have a few days limited him for his Return. We are forced
to move by these steps, which certainly will either speedily procure Your
Majesty's Freedom, or an Engagement. Our Opposition from the Ministers does
still continue; but many, formerly of their Party, are ashamed of their
unwillingness to all Duties, and particularly Balmerino who is Lauderdale's
Convert.

By the power of Persuasion our Army in Ireland has offered their Service to
us, which may be of excellent use many ways.

Thus, Sir, you have the true Condition of Affairs: but as we proceed (which I
confess is in a most horrid dull pace) I shall still presume to give You an
account of it as a part of our Duty.

Great Endeavors are used by some, that we may again send our Desires
concerning Religion to Your Majesty; for their zeal will not allow them to
hazard their Lives for Your Person, who will (as they say) no sooner be at
Liberty, than you will destroy all that they have been doing (with the hazard
and expense of so much Blood and Treasure) for Religion. But this is as yet
waved, and forced Concessions (such as certainly those must be while Your
Majesty is in Prison) are alleged, can bring but small Security to Religion.


The next of the 18th of April was to a Friend at London.

I Had resolved upon eternal Silence, since I could not but be wrapped in the
guilt of others for their disloyal Delays, nor should the receipt of yours of
the 10th Instant have invited me to have broke that Resolution, had not this
days Proceedings in Parliament revived my languishing Hopes. I shall not
mention any thing of my last Dispatch upon Friday by Fisher; but this day we
have past in Parliament the great Act of putting this Kingdom into a posture of
Defense, under pretense whereof we mean to raise our Army: the Colonels and
Committees of War in several Counties are to be named on Friday next. Besides
this we have presented to the Parliament a large Declaration to be emitted to
the Kingdom, containing the Breaches of Covenant and Treaties, the Demands
which upon them we mean to make to the Houses, and our Resolutions in case of a
Refusal. I confess it is clogged with many Impertinencies, to which we are
necessitated for satisfying nice Consciences; yet it drives at a right end.
Argyle and the Minsters are still incapable of Satisfaction, and with horrid
violence oppose all Loyal Motions: and though the Chancellor has entirely
deserted us, and not only joined with them, but endeavors by all means
imaginable to divide us among our selves; yet we are both fixed to our
Principles and Friendships, so that in despite both of Apostasy and Knavery we
carry on the Work. I confess it is neither in so quick nor so prudent a way as
is fit, and that we have already lost our greatest advantages; yet we can never
move so late, but that we will make our selves considerable. We hear there are
strong endeavors to separate His Majesty from our Interests: I confess we
deserve no better from him, yet possibly he may find it not unfit to own us,
even though we do not him as we ought. This I swear, I urge more out of my Duty
to Him, than kindness to our selves.


The next was of the 24th of April. 1648.

SInce my last to you I have received yours of the 18th and 22th of the last
Month. We have made an indifferent good progress in our Parliament here, for
we have stated all the Breaches of Covenant and Treaties: we have resolved upon
some Demands to be sent to the Houses of Parliament, for Religion, for His
Majesty, and for Disbanding of the present Army of Sectaries; and we have
pressed a Declaration, containing the Grounds of our Resolutions. In order to
all these, we likewise Voted the present putting of this Kingdom into a posture
of War, and this Week we are to nominate and make choice of all the Officers of
our Army. The Church does still violently oppose us, and threatens us with
cross Declarations, if not the extremity of Church Censures. Argyle and his
Party maintain them in their Obstinacy, or rather they do him in his
Disloyalty: but neither the fear of their Curses, nor want of their Prayers can
fright us from our Duty, so soon as we are ready to act, which possibly may be
sooner than you imagine.


The next was of the 28th of April to His Majesty.

MY last to you was of the 13th of this Month by the Conveyance of Doctor
Frazer. Since that time we have perfected what was then designed: for we have
made choice of all the Officers of our Forces, wherein we have been forced to
spend much time; and the next Week we intend to model our Army for England,
which we hope shall be upon the Borders against the 21th of the next Month;
which is the time limited for the Return of our Messenger from London, who this
day parts from hence with the three Demands to the Houses of Parliament, whereof
my last made mention, and with a positive Command to stay only 15 days for his
Answer. We intend likewise in the beginning of the next Week to dispatch Sir
William Fleming to the Queen and Prince, to give them an account of our
Proceedings, and to know his Highness's Resolution concerning his coming
hither, and to desire the present sending of Arms and Ammunition to us, whereof
we are absolutely unprovided; so that if the Queen or Prince of Orange (to whom
we beg Your Majesty would write) do not supply us, it will infinitely retard
the Service. We have passed a Declaration, which is full of many rude
Restrictions both in order to Your Majesty, and Your faithful Servants.

But we are forced to them for the satisfaction of the Nice Consciences of the
Clergy, and their Proselytes, whom we find still so inflexible, that nothing
can persuade them to a Conjunction with us in the Work; on the contrary we meet
with all imaginable Opposition from them: yet as we have carried the
Declaration and all that is yet done, against their strongest Endeavors; so we
hope, in despite of them, to be Instruments in accomplishing the chief end it
drives at, which is Your Majesty's Rest and Restoration. Our next will
certainly bring you the Knowledge of some Acting in order to that which we dare
not hazard to this Cipher, lest there may be more Copies of it than what we
have with Your Majesty.


The slowness of their Motions in Scotland begun to give great Jealousies of
their Proceedings everywhere. Jealousies of the Scottish Proceedings.


At Paris the Prince was much courted to go to Ireland, but he resolved rather
to go to Scotland, and designed to go first to Holland. Yet there were some
about him, who studied to give him ill Impressions of all that passed in
Scotland, grounding them on the old Calumnies that had been cast on the Duke,
and on the slowness of their Procedure at that time in Scotland, together with
the extraordinary Cajolery they gave the Church-party: all which were made use
of for alienating his Highness from that Resolution. But he resolved to obey
the Kings Commands, and sent them new Assurances of that by Sir William
Fleming; and to oblige the Duke the more, a Book being dedicated to his
Highness, containing some passages much to the Dukes dishonor, he refused to
accept of it, and ordered it to be called in.

While things were thus preparing in Scotland, His Majesty in the Isle of Wight
was contriving an Escape, being resolved if it succeeded to have come to
Scotland; but the means failed oftener than once, which being discovered made
his Prison the straiter. He was also courted under hand with new Propositions
from the Parliament of England, but refused to enter into any Treaty without
the Concurrence of the Scottish Nation. Yet it troubled him much to hear no more
of the progress of their Designs, on which all his Hopes were then set; for in
that disorderly time, it was not easy to transmit frequent and clear accounts
of all that passed. At length having understood from Scotland what advance was
made in that Affair, he was satisfied with the Fidelity of those he had
employed there.

At London there went various Constructions on the Scottish Actions. The
Commissioners of the Two Houses that were at Edinburgh, wrote up, that the
Church-party would undoubtedly keep the Duke and his Party in play at least
that Year, and that the zeal of the Ministers would make the Levies go slowly
on; they either believing this themselves or at least designing that others
should do so. At this time there was a great Inclination all over England to
shake off the Armies Arbitrary Yoke; Great Disorders in England.
Stirs were rising in every place. The Duke with his other Friends in Scotland
dealt earnestly with their Correspondents in England, to get all kept quiet
till they were ready to march, that so there might be an universal Rising at
once, which would have undoubtedly divided the Army that was against them into
so many Fractions, as might make way for their easier Overthrow. This Design
was zealously promoted by many, who saw the great advantage it might produce;
but many were too jealous of the Scottish Designs, and so did precipitate their
own Ruin. Others apprehended from their Declarations, that the Bondage would be
the same, only the Masters changed if they prevailed; and this made the Kings
Party resolve rather to perish than receive any help from the Scots on these
terms. Their slowness made others despair of their Sincerity, and the reports
of the Power of the Church-party, made all suspect their Strength: so the
untimely Rising in England was the Ruin of this Years Design, for they rose
only to be destroyed, and to animate the Army with those many Victories they
obtained over them. And as these Defeats did much discourage the Scottish Army,
so it forced them to march into England before they were ready, and e're they
had looked well to the Security of Affairs behind them. The first Rising was by
Poyer in Wales, to whom Langhorn came within a little, and Commanded most of
the Country.

At Westminster, as they understood the state of the Scottish Affairs better
than the Rabble did, so they did more apprehend the Danger of it. And first,
great pains were taken to reconcile the Presbyterian and Independent Parties,
at least to unite them against the Scots; wherefore they Voted, that the
Government should be by King, Lords, and Commons: yet the Independents opposed
this, so that it was carried but by 45 Voices. They also appointed that the
Propositions offered at Newcastle should be the Grounds of settling the
Kingdom, and they Voted that it should be lawful, notwithstanding the Vote of
Non-Addresses, to make new Applications to His Majesty. Their Design in this
was visible, for they hoped the Scots could not pass from these Propositions,
and they were assured the King would never consent to them, particularly to
that of Religion, which was so dear to Scotland. But Cromwell was not at all
pleased with these Votes, and as little with the City: and if the Stirs over
England had not given him other Employment, he would have made a Journey to
London with his Army, for the Purging the House anew.

They in Scotland were much straightened with want of Ammunition and Money,
therefore they sent Sir William Bellandin to Holland, to see what could be had
from the Prince of Orange: they likewise wise sent Sir William Fleeming to
Paris, to the Queen and Prince, with the following Letters.

May it please Your Majesty,
ALL verbal Assurances would justly appear too low and mean testimonies of our
Fidelity, Letters to the Queen and Prince from the Duke and his Friends.
since Actions are now the only touch-stones of Loyalty; which we hope e're
long shall be better, than what we can in this Common way speak of our real
Affections to His Majesty's Service.

We have presumed from the Encouragements we have received from Your Majesty,
to hope the Prince his Highness will countenance our Endeavors for his
Father's Rescue with his presence amongst us, which would certainly give an
extraordinary vigor and life to all our Motions. For that end, we have
instructed this worthy Bearer with our humble desires therein to Your Majesty,
and to his Highness, and with such other Particulars as are necessary for
enabling us to carry on the Work; to whom we beg Your Majesty would be pleased
to give Trust, and further to believe that nothing was ever more absolutely
fixed than are our Resolutions, either to perish, or eminently to show our
selves

Your Majesty's most humble, most faithful, and most obedient Subjects and
Servants, Hamilton, Lauderdale, Crawford, Lanerick, Roxburgh, Calender.

May 1st. 1648.

May it please Your Highness,
THe deep sense we have of His Majesty's sad Condition, invites us to these
Actions of Duty and Loyalty, to which we are by so many Relations and Ties
bound and obliged; and having diverse Encouragements from His Majesty, and from
the Queen, to hope for your Highness's Presence amongst us, in countenancing
our faithful Endeavors for His Majesty's Rescue, we have presumed humbly to
address our selves to your Highness, that from your Self we might know your own
Inclinations, that accordingly such public Assurances and Invitations may come
from hence, as your Highness shall think fit to require; being confident that
before we can receive your Highness's Directions herein, we shall be in some
condition to evidence our Loyalties otherwise than by Words. So until we give a
more real testimony thereof, we shall only beg to be esteemed of by your
Highness as Persons that have vowed themselves to this Service, and who are
faithfully

Your Highness's most humble, most faithful, and most obedient Servants,
Hamilton, Lauderdale, Crawford, Lanerick, Roxburgh, Calender.

May 1st, 1648.

Next they modelled the Army, which will better appear by the following Letters
written to the King.

SIR,
YOu now find the effects of what my last of the 28th of April promised: we are
now engaged, and Sir Marmaduke Langdale's successful Attempt upon Berwick and
Carlisle will be resolutely seconded by Your Servants here. Letters to His
Majesty.
To morrow Sir William Fleeming and Mr. Murray part for France; the last
acknowledges the baseness of his new Friend Argyle. We hope the Prince will now
countenance with his Presence our Endeavors for Your Majesty's Rescue, since
the Duke of York is escaped, for he will give an extraordinary life and vigor
to all our Motions. The Kirk has this day declared against our Declaration and
Engagement; but all it has procured is a Vote of thirty thousand Foot, and
near six thousand Horse, which is this day remitted to the Consideration of the
several Bodies, and I hope will pass the House to morrow.

2d May. 1648.

SInce my last we are far advanced in our Designs of serving Your Majesty; our
new Army is modelled, which I hope will be more considerable than any Army that
ever went out of Scotland; the Old General has laid down his Charge, and the
Duke of Hamilton is to Command in chief, who joys to meet with so happy an
occasion to vindicate his Loyalty. He will be found active in his Trust, and
seconded by the most gallant and eminent persons of the Kingdom; his Election
was carried very unanimously in Parliament, Argyle and only six with him
dissenting. Calender with the same Unanimity, and the same Opposition, is
chosen Lieutenant General, and David Lesley Lieutenant General of the Horse;
but he has not as yet accepted of his Charge. Middleton is appointed
Major General of the Horse, who is most eminent for his Loyalty and forward in
this Service. Our Army will be on foot about the end of the Month, and that
the Raising of men may the more actively be gone about, we have adjourned the
Parliament till the first of June. We have sent Commissioners with Instructions
and Money, to invite our Army in Ireland to come and join with us in this
Service. Our Opposition from Argyle and the Ministers is still as great as they
can make: we are undone for want of Arms, and a little Money; if we be not
supplied from France or Holland, this glorious and most hopeful Undertaking
that ever this Nation had, may be in hazard to miscarry. Sir William Fleeming
and Mr. Murray went ten days ago for France, and this day we have dispatched
Sir William Bellandin to Holland. We are much dejected because we have not
heard from Your Majesty since the 17th of March, which makes us fear You
involve us in the Guilt of the bypast deadness, and slowness of their Motions
here: but we take God to witness, we are as free thereof, as we shall be
faithful to the Vows we have made of perishing, or of serving Your Majesty in
such a loyal and dutiful way, as has been professed by

Your Majesty's, etc.
17th May.

The Differences that were among the Lords were adjusted, The Levies are much
retarded by the Ministers.
and most of the Officers were also well named; yet the Levies went on dully,
though many of the Lords were so cordial, that they who had allowance from the
Public but for 80 Horse, raised Regiments of five or six Troops on their own
expenses. And though it is not to be imagined, that the public Expense of so
great a Design was not likewise great, yet there was a sad want of Money; which
the Duke and his Brother did all they could to supply, as far as their Credit
could go, and raised above two and twenty thousand pounds sterling for
prosecuting of the Engagement; and were on all public occasions so liberal of
their own Money, as if some Bank had been put into their hands.

The Curses the Ministers thundered against all who joined in this Engagement,
made the Soldiers very heartless, being threatened with no less than Damnation.
This obliged the Lords to use Force in some places, for carrying on their
Levies: and indeed the Ministers counter-acting the State was such, that it is
hard to judge, whether their Boldness or the Parliaments Patience was most to
be wondered at. The Lords resolved to chastise them to purpose in due time, but
judged the present time improper for it; and to carry on the Levies the better,
the Parliament adjourned for three weeks. So the Lords went to the several
places of their Interests, leaving a Committee behind them at Edinburgh; but
before their Adjournment they wrote the following Letter to the Presbyteries.

The Parliaments Letter to the Presbyteries.
THe many Scandals that are t^rown on our Actions by the favorers of Sectaries,
and haters of the Person of our King and Monarchical Government, invite us to
this extraordinary Address to you, conjuring you as you will answer the Great
God, whose Servants you are, not to suffer your selves to be possessed with
unjust and undeserved Prejudices against us, and our Proceedings, who have
(since our late Meeting in Parliament) preferred no earthly thing to Religion,
and the promoving all the ends of our Covenant, and have constantly used all
real Endeavors to have carried on these Duties, to the satisfaction of the
most tender Consciences; and especially by our great Compliance with the many
Desires from the Commissioners of the General Assembly, we have proceeded to
greater discoveries of our Resolutions in the ways and means of managing of
this present Service, than possibly in prudence we ought to have done, having
so near and active Enemies to oppose us: neither can it with any Truth or
Justice in any sort be alleged, that we have in the least measure wronged or
violated the least Privileges and Liberties of the Church, or taken upon us
the determination or decision of any matters of Faith or Church Discipline,
though we be unjustly charged with making an Antecedent Judgment in matters of
Religion, under pretense whereof great Encroachments are made on our
unquestioned Rights; for what can be more Civil than to determine what Civil
Duties we ought to pay to our King, or what Civil Power he ought to be
possessed of? and if we meet with obstructions and opposition in carrying on
these Duties* are not we the only Judges thereof? is there any other Authority
in this Kingdom but that of King and Parliament, and what flows from them, that
can pretend any Authoritative Power, in the choice of the Instruments and
Managers of our Public Resolutions? is it a Subject for the Dispute of
Church-Iudicatories, whether His Majesty have a Negative Voice or not? These
things certainly cannot be pretended to by any Kirk-man, without a great
Usurpation over the Civil Magistrate, whereof we are confident the Church of
Scotland, or any Iudicatory thereof, will never be guilty, nor fall into the
Episcopal disease of meddling in Civil Affairs; and if any have already in
these Particulars exceeded their bounds, we expect the ensuing General Assembly
will censure it accordingly, and prevent the vilifying and contemning the
Authority of Parliament by any of their Ministers, (either in or out of their
Pulpits) who shall offer to stir up the Subjects of this Kingdom to disobey, or
deny to give Civil Obedience to their Laws, it being expressly prohibited by the
2 and 5 Acts of King James the sixth, his eighth Parliament Anno 1584. That
none of His Majesty's Subjects under pain of Treason impugn the Authority of
Parliament. And therefore, seeing the Cause is the same for which this Kingdom
has done and suffered so much, and that we are resolved to proceed for the
Preservation and Defense of Religion before all wordly Interest whatsoever, and
to carry on sincerely, really, and constantly, the Covenant and all the Ends of
it, as you will find by our Declaration herewith sent to you, we do confidently
expect that as the Ministers of this Kingdom, have hitherto been most active
and exemplary in furthering the former Expeditions: so now you will continue in
the same Zeal to stir up the People, by your Preaching and Prayers, and all
other ways in your Calling, to a cheerful Obedience to our Orders, and
Engageing in the business; that you will not give so great advantage to the
Enemies of Presbyterial Government, and bring so great a Scandal on this
Church, as to oppose the Authority of Parliament, or obstruct their Proceedings
in their necessary Duties, for the good of Religion, Honor and Happiness of
the King and his Royal Posterity, and the true Peace of His Dominions.

Signed by Order of Parliament. Alex. Gibsone Clerk Regist.
Edinburgh, May 11, 1648.

The Parliament having resolved to raise an Army for the Kings Relief, The
Parliament sends for the Scottish Army in Ireland.
found it expedient for increasing the number and strength of their Forces, to
send to Ireland for a part of their Scottish Army there; (which, as was told An.
1642, had been sent from Scotland thither by Commission from the King under the
Great Seal, and upon a Treaty, and Establishment betwixt the two Nations for
suppressing the Irish Rebellion) and for persuading them to desert, for so
Noble an Undertaking, their Interest in Ireland which was very considerable,
(for there was above seven hundred, and seventy thousand pound sterling of
Arrear resting to them, upon a stated Account fitted by Persons entrusted by
the Parliament of England, and Commissioners from them, preceding the 16th of
June, 1647 besides a year more until June 1648 not at all reckoned) they sent
over three of their number, two Knights, Sir James Macdougal, and Sir William
Cocheran, (now Earl of Dundonald) and Mr. Crawford Burgess of Linlithgow, with
Letters and Instructions to that purpose. They were kindly received by such of
the Officers as had chief Power there; but most unwelcome to a contrary Party,
who had notice how averse the Kirk, to which they were addicted, had declared
themselves from the Designs of that Parliament; nevertheless it was quickly
agreed to, that about twelve hundred Horse, and two thousand and one hundred
Foot, should be provided and regimented, and transported to Scotland, to be
conducted by Sir George Monro, in the quality of a Major General, and to be
joined with the Dukes Army.

At Westminster they were in great Confusion, fearing that the General
inclinations over England should prove too hard for them: but Mr. Marshall,
Great Disorders in England.
who was sent back from the English Commissioners in Scotland, comforted them
the best he could, giving them all assurance that the Designs there would meet
with vigorous Opposition: wherefore it was moved that some of the Forces might
be presently sent down, before the Army were drawn together, who might hope for
good Assistance in Scotland. But he also told them, that nothing would be so
likely to divide them in Scotland, as to declare for the Covenant, and the
Propositions sent to Newcastle: and indeed this was much dreaded by the Duke
and his Friends, since there was nothing so popular in Scotland, as that the
Parliament and Army of England had fallen from the Covenant; but they resolved,
though that were granted, to accept of no Treaty till the Army were presently
disbanded, for which the former Years Transactions did furnish them with very
good reasons. Mr. Marshall did what he could to reconcile the Presbyterians and
Independents in London; and that they might not fall out about Religion, it was
Voted, that the Kingdom should be first settled before Religion was fallen
upon. The City of London was generally well-affected to the Scottish Design,
though some studied to alien^te them from it, by telling them that those in
Scotland were in Correspondence with the Cavaliers in England. The City was
inconstant, and the Citizens feared the Armies falling on them to plunder them,
so that they were easily overawed; and at that time the Agitators of the Army
were upon the Fining of the City in a Million of English Money.

A general Answer was returned to the Scottish Demands by the day they had
prefixed, with the Promise of a more particular one to follow shortly; which
was looked on as a Design to shift them off by Delays. At this time the Two
Houses were much lifted up with a Defeat given to Langhorn in Wales, which was
represented to be greater than indeed it was. But to allay their Joy, there
came in Petitions from many Counties of England for a Personal Treaty with the
King, and for being disburdened of the Army: one came from Essex, which was
subscribed by twenty four thousand Hands; and eight thousand men came out of
Surrey with their Petition, upon whom the Soldiers fell barbarously, and
killed about Twenty of them, wounding above an Hundred. Next the Kentish men
rose in a formidable number; but it was more terrible that the Navy was
staggering, and many of the Captains of the Ships declared against their
Proceedings. This was sad News for London, by reason of their Trade, which was
like to be blockt up. And now Cromwell, to please the City of London, drew the
Forces out of it, and left the Militia of London in their own Hands; only he
got Skippon, who was of their own Cabal, made Major General of their Trained
Bands: and there was no small Disorder in the Army, the Agitators being for the
most part Levellers, and against Cromwell, as was by some supposed.

With all this Tragical visage of things they at W^stminster were not a little
mortified, A Fast at Westminster.
so they appointed a Day of Humiliation; and when they were naming the reasons
for the Fast, one of the Members had a singular opinion, that notwithstanding
the Self-denying Ordinance they had past, yet they had engrossed all Places of
Power and Profit to themselves, by which Juggling God was mocked; wherefore he
moved that they might divest themselves of these: but the rest were not of his
mind. And if three Sermons and a great many long Prayers would reconcile God to
them, they would be at the cost; but were resolved to quit none of their Power
nor Places. All these Tumults in England, as they had hindered the Two Houses
from sending down their Forces to Scotland; so they called aloud for hasty
Relief from the Scottish Army, which from all places was called for. But the
Oppositition the Clergy and their Party made, had so fore-slowed their Levies,
that they could not overtake this fair opportunity; but were forced to leave
the poor People in England to be knocked down by the insulting Army.

The Parliament of Scotland re-assembled in June, The Parliament adjourns.
and after few days Sitting, and the emitting of new Declarations both for
Scotland and England, but of a milder strain than their former of April had
been, (being now weary of their hopeless courting of the Clergy) they adjourned
for Two Years, having chosen a Committee of Estates sure to their Designs; and
they were drawing their Army together with all possible diligence.

But the great matter now debated in Scotland was, A present March is dissuaded
by some,
whether they should first make all sure at home, or leave things in that
disordered posture, and make haste into England. Lanerick was for taking order
with the Opposite Party, and the Lords that headed them, before they stirred
out of Scotland, lest otherwise as soon as they were gone, the Ministers might
blow up the People into Sedition, which would either force them to send back a
part of their Army for curbing them, or lose Scotland totally by their Tumults,
while their Army should be struggling with an uncertainty in England. Besides,
they were neither well-furnished with Arms, Ammunition, nor Money, but had good
Assurances of large Supplies from the Queen and Prince, by Sir William
Fleeming; and the Prince (though much dissuaded by these who were both Enemies
to the Scottish Nation in General, and the Duke in particular) continued still
firm to his first Resolutions of going to them, when all things were brought to
that Posture, that it were fit for him to hazard himself amongst them: and
therefore in the middle of June, Sir William Fleeming was dispatched again from
his Highness to Scotland with the following Letter, directed,

For the Lord Duke Hamilton, and the Earls of Lindsay, Roxburgh, Lauderdale,
Lanerick, and Calender.
My Lords,
YOu will receive by Sir William Fleeming, who is amply instructed, the full
account of My Intentions; and he is not more particularly charged with any
thing, than to let you know the sense I have of Your Affections: yet I thought
fit to reserve unto My Self the assuring you, that as I conceive I am not
capable of being more obliged than I have been by you; so I shall be most
exactly just in the discharge of my Acknowledgments, when it shall please God
to make My Condition fit for it. In the mean time I have nothing to say, but to
desire you to be entirely confident of it, and that I am most truly,

My Lords, Your Affectionate Friend, CHARLES P.


Sir William Bellandin met with more Opposition in Holland, for Judgments were
passed on the Scottish Proceedings from their Declarations; and all he could say
was not able to take off those Impressions, so that no good was expected from
Scotland. The States of Holland had no great inclination to the Kings Party,
and the Prince of Orange was at that time much influenced by the Dukes Enemies;
yet Bellandin got many promises made him of a large supply of Money and
Ammunition.

Upon these Expectations the Earl of Lanerick was against a speedy March into
England; but much pressed by others.
but this was opposed by the Earl of Lauderdale, who pressed a present
Dispatch. They were called upon so earnestly from their Friends in England,
that to linger still was to lose the Kings Party there: for now the Kentish men
were broken, and some of them had passed over unto Essex, where many rose with
them, and carried Colchester, and made a good Body both of Horse and Foot, but
were not able to hold out long against the Army; yet they gave them diverse
foils. But that of the greatest Importance was, that most of the Navy had
declared for the King, and desired a Correspondence with Scotland, and
Willoughby, who was made Vice Admiral by the Prince, was a great Friend to the
Scottish Nation. The Earl of Inchequin also, with his Army in Ireland, had
declared against the Parliament, and sent to Scotland a very kind Message for a
good Understanding with that Parliament: and finally, a part of the English
Army, being much solicited by the Church-party in Scotland, who complained
that they were now exposed by them to Ruin, was coming Northward, under the
Command of Lambert; and Langdale had written to them, that he could not be able
to stand long before Lambert if he were not speedily relieved, and that
Carlisle also would be in great hazard: neither was the hazard only the loss of
Carlisle, of which they made less account; but the Army which was with
Langdale, whose Wives and Children were in Carlisle, did threaten to leave him
and Capitulate if that Place were not preserved. Besides all this, they at
Westminster, to temper the general Hatred against them, had called back the
Secluded Members of both Houses, and were Levying new Forces, and had Voted a
Personal Treaty with the King; at which time also one Osburn avouched, that
there were Designs against the Kings Person, and that himself had been
solicited to assist in the poisoning him. All these Considerations were
pressing, and could admit of no delays; wherefore Lauderdale insisted for a
present March, and that the Dukes Carriage might show it was the Kings Service,
and not a Faction, he was designing, nor Resentments against these who
withstood him in Scotland: for so did Lauderdale mistake Lanerick's advice for
curbing of the Church-party, and punishing their Leaders.

The Duke saw great reason on both sides, and is resolved on.
and though his own Judgment went along with his Brothers Advice, knowing well
it was easy for him to have forced all Scotland very soon into a Compliance
with their Design; (which being once done, he could have marched into England
upon greater advantages, and with a far better Army) yet he was content to be
overruled, believing that if they were prosperous in England, upon which
depended all their hopes, it would be no great Work to Master any Opposition
might be made in Scotland. And thus did the unripened forwardness of those in
England force the Duke on a fatal Precipitation of Counsels. The resolution was
taken, and a General Rendezvous appointed to be at Annan, near the Borders of
England, on the 4th of July.

All this while my Lord Lanerick had not forgotten the Kings Commands about the
Marquis of Huntley, but the ill Opinion the Churchmen had of them, was such,
that to have proceeded roundly in that matter, would have given greater grounds
of Jealousy to that Party: therefore the Iunto sent him word to the Castle of
Edinburgh, where he was then Prisoner, that though at that time it was not fit
to set him at liberty by an Order, yet they were willing he should make his
Escape, and they offered their Assistance for conveying him safe away. But he
said he was brought thither by Order, and he would not steal out as a Thief:
and from this fatal stiffness they could not get him removed, yet they resolved
to liberate him openly when they should be better able to avow their Actions.

The Opposition the Churchmen made to the Raising of the Army, An Insurrect^on
at Mauchlin.
did still retard the Levies and discourage the Soldiers, though the Officers
were generally resolute. Some Forces were sent Westward, under the Command of
Sir James Turner, to keep that Country quiet, who found a little Authority
vigorously managed did quickly tame some of the most unruly. But at Mauchlin
there was a great Gathering under the Color of an Assembly to a Solemn
Communion, and many went thither Armed, pretending hazard from the danger of
that time. Turner got notice that an Insurrection was designed there, and
advertised the Duke of it, who ordered Turner not to stir till the Earls of
Calander and Middleton should come to assist him; who came to Pasely on the
Saturndy before that Communion, they drew out the Forces that lay there,
consisting of two Regiments of Foot, and fourteen Troops of Horse, and marched
to Steuarton, where the Earl of Glen^airn and others of the Nobility met them.
Some advised a March of the whole Forces, others thought a few Troops were
sufficient for dispersing that Multitude; whereupon Middleton was commanded out
with six Troops, who found them near two thousand strong, Horse and Foot; but
being ill-commanded, they were soon disordered. Middleton and Hurry gave the
Charge, and were briskly encountered; so that they were made to retreat with
the loss of some men, and both Middleton and Hurry got slight Wounds: but the
Party that had given them this rude Shock, having cleared a way for themselves,
made their Retreat. The report of this Disorder was brought hot to Calender,
who leaving the Foot at Kilmarnock, went with the eight Troops he had with him
to assist Middleton; but upon his appearing all run away. The Horse were not
pursued, sixty Foot Soldiers were taken, and five Officers, and some
Ministers, who were all dismissed: only the Officers were condemned to dye by a
Council of War, but were afterward pardoned by Calander.

Some Forces were sent toward the Borders.
After this, before a General Rendezvous was possible, the Duke for animating
those of Carlisle who began to be sore put to it, sent Colonel Lockhart with
some Regiments of Horse to lie at Annan, and Colonel Turner with five or six
Regiments of Foot to lie at Dumfrice, hoping thereby to hinder Lambert from
coming near Carlisle, wherein his expectation did not fail him; for no sooner
came Lockhart to Annan, but Lambert drew his Troops nearer, and Sir Marmaduke
Langdale got air a while, for Provision both for his Men and Horses, and
against the day appointed the General came from Edinburgh to Annan with
Calander, Middleton, and Baylie, and several Regiments of Horse and Foot. The
Army enters England.
Turner also came to him from Dumfrice with the Regiments that lay there, and
some Ammunition, and abundance of Meal, that had been sent from Edinburgh: but
before I go further, a little must be premised of the state of the Army, and of
those who commanded it.

The chief Officers of the Army.
The Duke was General, of whom I find an old experienced Soldier, who served
under him, passing this judgment, His Conduct of Forces was as good as that of
any under his Command, without exception; but it was his Fate (I dare not say
his Fault) in Military matters, as was his Masters in Political Affairs, not to
trust to his own Judgment, but to the Judgments of others, though inferior,
(as all the World knew) to their own: and to this Character all with whom the
Writer ever spoke, who served in that Army, did agree.

Calander's Character.
The Lieutenant General was the Earl of Calander, who was bred from his youth a
Soldier in the Wars of Germany, and the Low Countries, where he long commanded
a Regiment of Scottish Foot, and had gained (deservedly) the reputation of a man
of great Courage; and understood well the Dutch Discipline of War, which he
observed with a strictness that seemed not free of Affectation. The promptness
of his Deportment, and the Authority he usually took on him, being judged far
beyond his skill in the Conduct of an Army, he was made Lieutenant General of
the Scottish Army, that went against the King under General Lesley, Anno 1640:
and joined with Montrose and the other Noblemen and Gentlemen, who signed the
Bond mentioned in the account of that Year: and from that time he continued for
some Years in a great Friendship with Montrose, which as it did alienate the
Church-party from him, so it set him at a distance from the Duke, of whom he
was ready both to receive and give ill Impressions. Yet he having made great
and constant Professions of Loyalty, and having got himself to make a
considerable figure among some Noblemen who were called the Kings Party, a
Conjunction with him being also earnestly recommended by the Queen in her
Letters to the Duke, he and some of his Friends (though many condemned the
choice) were easily induced to such an opinion of the Reality of Calander's
Loyalty, and Military Conduct and Courage, as to accept of him for
Lieutenant General of the Army, though the Duke had no reason to have any
confidence in his Friendship. But as he left nothing undone to overcome all
Obstacles that lay in the way of this loyal Expedition, so he complied with
diverse things that were uneasy to him, whereof this was none of the least;
because he would leave no ground for Calumny it self to charge him with
Slackness in attempting to do this signal Service to God, the King, and his
Country. The Lieutenant General was quickly observed to design a Faction in the
Army for himself, and to oppose all that the General suggested; which he did so
peremptorily, that he usually pressed all his own Propositions with such warm
Language, as that the Kings Service was ruined, if other Courses were followed:
and this never failed to overrule the Duke, and in effect he gave away almost
his whole Power to him.

But if he expected little Friendship from Calander, he had as much confidence
in Middleton, Lieutenant General of the Horse, who was a Person of great
Courage and Honor; and none had been more gallantly active in carrying on this
Expedition than he was; for which and other Great Services he was by His
Majesty that now reigns, created Earl of Middleton: nor had he less assurance
of Baylie Lieutenant General of the Foot, who had given many signal
demonstrations of Valor and Conduct. The Inferior Officers stood all divided
according as their Affections led them, either to the General or
Lieutenant General: and thus was the Army modelled.

The Regiments were not full, many of them scarce exceeded half their number,
and not the fifth man could handle Pike or Musket. The Horse were the best
mounted that ever Scotland set out, yet most of the Troopers were raw and
undisciplined. They had no Artillery, not so much as one Field-piece, very
little Ammunition, and very few Horse to carry it; for want of which the Duke
stayed often in the Rear of the whole Army, till the Countrymen brought in
Horses, and then conveyed it with his own Guard of Horse. Thus the
precipitating of Affairs in England, forced them on a March before they were in
any posture for it: but now they were engaged, and they must go forward, an
account whereof follows, but not drawn, as the former Parts of this Work have
been, from the Dukes Papers, and little Notes he used to take on all occasions:
for if any of these were taken by him in this Expedition, they were either
destroyed by himself, or fell into the Enemies hands when he was made Prisoner;
so that the Writer was forced to seek help from others for supplying this
Defect, and procured diverse Relations from very worthy Gentlemen, who were
Eyewitnesses or Actors in the whole Affair, upon whose Informations he must
rest, and therefore offers them as follows.

UPon the Armies march to Carlisle, Lambert drew back and we advanced to
Crofton-Hall, where we lay about eight or ten days; The account of the March of
the Army.
from thence we went toward Penreith: but the Duke sent out a Party of some
three hundred Horse, who discovered the Enemies Main-Guard of Horse, and gave
the General notice of it; who thereupon commanded the whole Cavalry to march,
purposing to fall upon the Enemy that very night, and he sent orders to Baylie
to hasten the advance of the Infantry. A full discovery being made of the
Enemy, our Cavalry was drawn up in their view, where expecting the advance of
the Foot, we stood in Arms till night; but about midnight the Enemy drew off
quietly. Next morning betimes a great rain falling, we advanced to a Bridge a
mile beyond Penreith, with design to engage the Enemy; but missing our hopes,
were forced for our accommodation in Quartering to return to Penreith. Next day
my Lord Levingstoun commanding a Party of Horse, discovered the Enemies
Main-Guard, within a mile of Appleby-Castle in Westmoreland, consisting of
about three hundred Horse, of which having sent advertisement to the General,
he ordered the Army to march immediately toward the Enemy; and Middleton
commanded the Captain of the Generals Troop to charge, who beat back the
Enemies Horse into the Town of Appleby. That evening our whole Cavalry made a
stand for several hours, expecting the advance of Langdale, who being marched
up, did presently with his Foot engage with the Enemy into the Town till it was
dark. Our Infantry Quartered that night on the Moor, near Appleby; but before
the next morning the Enemy marched away both Horse and Foot, leaving only a
Garrison in Appleby-Castle; and did cut the Bridge, so that it was impossible
to follow, for the rains had fallen in such abundance that the Waters were not
to be forded: whereupon we went to Kirby-thure in Cumberland, where we lay
three Weeks, expecting the rest of our Forces, who came up to us, yet far short
of the Numbers appointed by the Parliament, of which there was wanting more
than a third part; so that in all we were about Ten thousand Foot, and Four
thousand Horse. This is the true account of the Strength of our Army. Turner,
who being our General-Adjutant did often muster the Infantry, avers on his
Honor they were no more; and both Middleton and Lockhart did also assert there
were not above Four thousand Horse; so far short was our Number of what was
appointed by the Parliament, and generally given out to be the Strength of our
Army.

We also waited for the Irish Forces, which Monro had brought over. In the mean
while Langdale besieged Appleby, and lest Lambert had faced about, Turner was
ordered to lie near him with two Brigades of Foot till the Castle capitulated,
which it did in a very few days.

Here I shall add a Letter of Sir Marmaduke Langdale's to the Earl of Lanerick,
written from this Place.

Langdal^ 's Letter.
My most honored Lord,
GIve me leave to give your Lordship many hearty and humble Thanks for your
Favors, and to beg so much trouble to you, as to give your Brother Thanks for
me, who is as careful of me, and all those under my Command, as if they were
his own, furnishing us with Arms and Ammunition, and upon all occasions with
his own Forces to assist us. All I can render to so great a Person, considering
my Condition, is to be thankful; and I hope neither my self, nor none that join
with me, will ever be so ungrateful or ungracious, as to forget his particular
Favors, besides the general good to the whole Nation; wherein what we have, or
are like to enjoy, is by his Endeavors, with the hazard of his own Person and
Friends, and all they can call dear unto them. These are Benefits can never be
forgotten by Gentlemen, whereof one with many more is,

Your Lordships most humble devoted Servant, MAR. LANGDALE.
Appleby, 1st August 1648.

We next marched to Kendal, and from that to Hornby, where it was hotly
debated, whether we should march to Yorkshire or Lancashire. The General and
Baylie, and Turner, were for Yorkshire, but Lancashire was resolved on, which
many blamed, that County being so disaffected, that little go^^ Intelligence
was to be hoped for there; whereas Yorkshire was well-affected: but Calander
and Langdale pressed it earnestly, alleging it would ease our Friends, and
weaken our Enemies.

By this time the Irish Forces had come over, The Irish Forces come over.
consisting of the number abovementioned, all well-trained, and experienced
Soldiers. They met with some danger and difficulty in their Transportation,
for the Parliament of England (apparently fearing by their utter neglect of
that Army, that some such Course would be taken by them,) sent two Men of War
to guard the Passage betwixt Scotland and Ireland, who intercepted about Three
hundred Foot of Dalyel's Regiment, whom they disarmed and kept two days, but
for want of Victuals were willing to dismiss them again. The rest made use of
small Vessels, and the Nightime, by which means and the narrowness of the
Sea, they arrived all safe (albeit diverse were chased) upon the Scottish Shore;
and as they landed in parcels, they were ordered to march straight toward
Carlisle. But as they went through the Shire of Galloway, and Stuartry of
Kirkudbright, they were unfavourably used, for none of the Country-Gentlemen,
excepting one or two, did own them: so being left to themselves, without any
person to appoint orderly Quarters for them, and being railed at from the
Pulpits, and Curses denounced against them, and that whole Engagement cried out
to be unlawful, and the Ministers in every Parish discharging their
Parishioners to have any meddling with, or accession thereto, it was no wonder
if Abuses were committed, but nothing answerable to the great Clamours,
purposely spread abroad against them by those of that Country.

It was at Kendal in Westmoreland where Sir George Monro had the first Meeting
and Conference with the Duke, who was upon his March with the Army toward
Preston in Lancashire. Sir George and those with him followed upon his Rear to
Kirby-Lumsdale, near the Border of that Shire. The Duke had a great mind to
have joined them to the Army, for they were resolute and well-trained,
especially the Foot, and he was well assured both of Officers and Soldiers:
but Monro had no mind to take Orders, either from Calander or Baylie; and this
made Calander unwilling to bring them up. He also saw that most of their
Officers depended on the Duke, and so he had no kindness for them: therefore
though the Duke pressed much the bringing them to the Army, yet Monro was sent
back with Orders from the Duke in writing to stay at that Place, and wait for
some Cannon coming out of Scotland, and to conduct them to the Army; but
withal in case it should happen he were attack't by the Enemy, not to Engage,
but to make his Retreat back to Appleby-Castle or Carlisle, and there to secure
himself till further Order. As he stayed at that Village, Sir Philip Musgrave,
and Sir Thomas Tilslie, the one Lieutenant General, the other Major General to
Sir Marmaduke Langdale, with two Regiments of Foot then raised in the Northern
Counties, joined him.

Our March into Lancashire being concluded, the Van was led by Langdale, who
undertook to provide Guides and Pioneers, and to get us Intelligence; but the
want of this helped us to our Ruin, for he was well-nigh totally routed,
before we knew that it was Cromwell who attack't us. And here the Cavalry
complaining of scarcity of Forage in these Parts, and th^^^ Officers
pretending a necessity to enlarge Quarters, desired liberty to advance before
the Infantry, against which the General gave many Reasons: yet to prevent a
Mutiny he yielded to it, not apprehending how near the Enemy was, of which we
were secure, resting on Langdale's Intelligence; which was only, that one
Ashton had raised two or three thousand Presbyterians together to stop our
March, and amuse us, pretending it was because we came out of Scotland without
the approbation of the Kirk. Calander and Middleton went on with the Cavalry to
Wiggan, some Regiments of Horse being only reserved for a Reer-guard to the
Infantry, and we marched forward to Preston.

Preston fight.
Upon the day after our Army was thus divided, being the 18th of August,
Calender got some hint of Cromwell's joining Lambert. Upon this Calander thought
it fit to bring the Cavalry nearer the Infantry, intending to go himself that
night to the General; whereupon some Regiments of Horse were drawn into the
Moor near Wiggan, and commanded to stay there till further Orders, which late
at night they got to return home to their Quarters: then Calander went to the
General, and Middleton stayed with the Horse, which was the Ruin of the Army;
for all judged that Calander ought to have brought the Horse with him, since he
had reason to apprehend the approach of so powerful an Enemy; yet when he came
to the General, he spoke nothing to him of the Advertisement he had got.

Next day about Noon we all drew up in Battalia upon the Moor, but had not
ground enough: from us the General went and passed the Bridge to view the Field
for a convenient Leaguer, and before his reurn, Calander ordered Baylie to pass
the Bridge with the Foot, to the place where the Leaguer was to be. The General
returning, and thinking to have found the Foot still in the Moor, met Baylie on
the Bridge, who told him he had received Orders from Calander to draw over the
whole Body of Foot; but hearing that Langdale was hotly engaged with the Enemy,
he had halted there, till he saw what the event of the Action might be: which
the General approved, and ordered him to halt, wishing they had stayed still on
the Moor. Meanwhile Calander came up, and asked why they did not March: Baylie
gave him the Answer he had given the General, with which Calander was
unsatisfied, and went away in a chafe. The General seeing him in passion
studied to allay it, telling him that Baylie had stopped upon his Order:
Calander answered, his Grace might do what he pleased, but he had given former
Orders to march, which he conceived most fit to be done, pretending the
necessity of having the Horse and Foot on one side of the River, to which the
General gave way; and so Baylie marched over, and the Duke and Calander
returned back to the Moor, where the Rere-guard of the Horse, together with two
Brigades of Foot, stood all the while. By this time they got sure intelligence,
from some Prisoners whom Langdale had taken, that the Enemy he engaged with was
Cromwell; and the General ordered Turner to send out commanded Parties to
Langdale's Relief, who sent about seven hundred Foot with a good quantity of
Ammunition, of which the English stood much in need, and were sore put to it,
Cromwell gaining hedge upon hedge of them. But Langdale being overpowered by
the growing numbers of the Enemy, sent to the General for a further Supply, who
ordered Calander to send it: and he undertook to do it, yet did nothing.
Langdale wondering at the delay, sent a second more pressing Message; and Sir
James Hamilton showing the General how necessary it was to send a speedy
Supply, lest Langdale being beaten back the Enemy should fall in betwixt the
Rear-guard of the Horse, and the Foot, who could not be now brought back, the
Duke ordered him to draw out an hundred Horse from the Regiments that stood
there, and charge with them. But Calander coming up, as he was advancing, asked
who commanded that Party, and finding it was Sir James Hamilton, who had no
Charge in the Army, but rode in the Generals Troop a Volunteer, he ordered the
Horse back to their Regiments, and went to the General, complaining that he
gave Command to those who had no Charge, and all this on pretense that the few
Regiments which stood there were not to be weakened. But the General showing
him Langdale's extreme Danger, and the necessity of sending him Relief,
Calander undertook with a Brigade of Foot to second him, though this could not
be performed, the Foot being now so far from us: yet upon that color he went
along the Bridge, ordering his Wagons that lay in Preston, to be drawn over to
the other side; which being done, he stayed on the other side. Mean while
Langdale beat back the Enemy two or three Closes, still expecting Relief; but
that failing, he was totally routed, and retired disorderly, and fell in
betwixt our Infantry and the Moor, where the General stood with the Horse still
expecting Calander: but now seeing a necessity of joining himself to his
Infantry, he got into the Town of Preston with his Guard of Horse, and Langdale
and other Officers with him, with intention to pass the River below it, which
at that time could not be ridden by reason of the Rains which fell continually;
for all this while there were such deluges of Rains not only over England, but
over all Europe, that every Brook was a River, which made the March very heavy
both to Horse and Foot: nor was it possible for the Foot to keep one Musket
fixed, most part of the time we were in a Body in England: but the Enemy
pursued us fiercely into the Town; whereupon Turner endeavored to rally some
of the Musketeers who had fled, and to line the hedges with them for keeping
off the Horse. But the General perceiving they did small Service, did himself
charge those who pursued him, being followed by all the Officers and his own
Guard, and put two Troops of the Enemy to a speedy Retreat, and then turned to
get to the Ford: but as soon as we turned, the Enemy faced about and turned
again on us, and the General charged the second time, and put them again to the
flight; but being pursued the third time, he charged the Enemy so home, that he
set him a good way off, and they could not soon overtake us. In all which he
showed as much Daring resolution and Courage, as any man could be Master of.

But Langdal^ and Turner perceiving the Enemies Foot advance, who would have
lined the Hedges, and from them fired on us, pressed the General to think
rather of retiring to his Army than staying in a Place where all he could do
was to give proof of his Personal Valor: whereupon he yielding to their
Advice, we took the Ford and swimmed over, and got safely to the Place where
our Infantry lay, whom Baylie had very advantageously drawn up on the top of a
rising Hill, among fensible Enclosures. The Regiments that stood on the Moor
were put to the rout by the Enemy, and got off disorderly in Parties. Calander
Congratulated the Generals safe Escape from so eminent a Danger; who returned
him thanks, but passionately regrated the bad fortune of that unhappy Day,
whose sad effects he said he very much apprehended. Before his Arrival,
Calander had sent six hundred Musketeers to maintain the Bridge, which was
done without consideration; for they were to march through an open field of a
quarter of a miles length, that lay betwixt the Hill we stood on and the
Bridge, in which there was no shelter, and the Enemies side was all a Descent
to the Bridge, that was full of Hedges, from which their Fire-men played
uncessantly on our Musketeers, who could do them no harm again. The General
and Baylie observing this, did by Calander's advice, who saw his Error, send
Turner with some Musketeers to make their Retreat, and bring them off; but he
met them rather flying than retiring: nor did the Enemy pursue eagerly, but
diverse of our Men were killed, and now Cromwell was Master of the Bridge.

This was the issue of that Day wherein our loss was great, many were killed,
and many were taken Prisoners, and we lost more who run away; two Brigades of
Foot were totally routed, and either killed, taken, or dispersed; nor did we
ever hear any more of Monro, and the Irish Forces, nor of the Rear-guard of
Horse that was on the Moor; so that we begun to look on our selves as broken,
being in a Country where we might look for nothing but Unfriendliness and
Treachery. Upon this sad Juncture, the General called a Council of War of all
the chief Officers in the Army: there was one of two things to be done, we were
either to wait for the Cavalry, or to march to them. Diverse Messages had been
sent to Middleton to come up with the Horse, yet he appeared not. Calander
pressed a Retreat, and to him agreed almost all the Officers, except Baylie and
Turner, who urged their staying till Middleton came up, which might be expected
in a few hours. The General expressed much indifferency in that Particular, and
if they had stayed they could not have forced Cromwell to fight, who knowing
their wants would have let them alone till Hunger had forced them away. So
Calander's Authority prevailed for a March: the greatest Prejudice thereof was,
that they could not carry their Ammunition with them, for the Country People,
whose Horses carried it, had fled away; so that there was a necessity of
leaving it behind them. To have fired it would have discovered their March, and
so done them Mischief; therefore it was appointed to be blown up by a Train,
which being neglected by him to whom it was trusted, it fell into Cromwell's
hands next day: all the Soldiers could carry with them was only their Flasks
full. Our March was very sad, the way being exceeding deep, the Soldiers both
wet, hungry, and weary; and all looked on their business as more than half
ruined. The next morning we came to Wiggan, and found almost the half of our
Foot had fallen off by the way, whom we saw no more. But our Misfortunes grew
on us; Middleton's Gallantry.
for Middleton upon the advice he got, had marched to the Bridge of Preston
another way, where he found the Enemies quiet, our Fires burning, and none by
them but some Sutlers; wherefore hearing we were gone to Wiggan, he followed
our tract, and was hotly pursued all the way by the Enemies Horse, with whom he
skirmished all along till he came within a Mile of us: and indeed he made that
Retreat, which was seven Miles long, very gallantly, and was well seconded both
by Coll. Lockhart and Coll. Hurry, the last getting a dangerous shot in his
Head, which occasioned his being taken Prisoner. The Enemy lost several Men,
and among others one Colonel Thornly, accounted one of their best Officers. We
meeting with our Cavalry drew up in Battalia in the Moor, and some thought of
Fighting; but we found it impossible, the Place not being large, and environed
with Enclosures, which we could not have maintained long for want of
Ammunition. So we were resolved to march all night, and designed for
Warrington-Bridge, where we hoped we might either maintain the Bridge, or cut
it, and so have gone whither they pleased; yet many of us apprehended we might
be routed e're we got thither. Marching all night we got a false Alarm, which
put us in no small Disorder; and Turner and Lockhart laboring to recover us,
the one was wounded, and the other was trodden down, to the great danger of his
Life: yet no Enemy came in the Rear, for they had taken up their Quarters for
that night; but next morning they pursued us, yet we passed Warrington-Bridge,
Warrington-Bridge.
the Enemy being close in our Rear. We maintained it some time against the
Horse, but were driven away from it when the Foot came up. And here Calander,
and most of the Officers of the Cavalry, pressed the General to March off, and
leave the Foot to Capitulate; their Reasons were strong, they had marched two
nights, both under an extraordinary Rain, and in very deep way, and were wet
almost up to the middle, and had scarce eat any meat all that while; they had
no Ammunition, the Powder in their Flasks being all wet; so that to study to
preserve them was to attempt an impossibility and to lose all. The Horses were
also so weary with their long ill March, that they were for no present Action,
but they getting off; and turning either back to Scotland, or joining with
those who were in Arms for the King in England, might still prove useful for
His Majesty's Service. Upon which the General was moved, though with great
reluctance, to leave the Foot and Baylie to Capitulate; and in an account of
this Business drawn by Baylie, which the Writer has seen, he says, Calander
ordered his Capitulating, and Middleton advised it; but says nothing of any
Orders he had from the Duke for it. Baylie upon this occasion lost some of the
Patience he was usually Master of; but having recovered himself as much as he
could, he sent Major Fleeming to Cromwell with Articles, who not agreeing to
those, desired a Parley with Baylie himself: and they met on the Bridge, and
agreed that the Infantry should lay down their Arms, and both Officers and
Soldiers be Prisoners of War to the Parliament. Here Cromwell left Lambert with
four Brigades of Horse to pursue our Cavalry, and himself marched after Monro.
But I shall go through with the Tragedy of our Army before any further account
be given of that March.

Our Cavalry rode diverse miles toward Westchester, with intention, as was
supposed, to have gone to Wales; but putting on another Resolution, we stayed
all night at Malpas in Shropshire. And here it was debated, whether we should
go to Yorkshire, or to Herefordshire, where we had intelligence, that Sir Henry
Lingen had put himself in a considerable posture for the King: but this being
contradicted, that very night we resolved for Yorkshire, designing to try if
we could clear a way for our selves to Scotland. But next day many of the
County Trained-Bands appeared against us, who were soon dissipated by
Middleton without any bloodshed, and that day we made a great March, and
lodged all night in the Fields; next day we marched betimes, and at noon made
a great halt at Stone in Staffordshire.

After this as we were marching, Middleton rode in the Rear, for making it
good against some Troops of the County-Militia; but unfortunately his Horse
fell under him, and he was taken Prisoner. Thus the remnant of our unfortunate
Army sustained an irreparable loss by the taking of that brave Man. The rest of
that day we marched to Vtoxater, The Horse came to Vtoxater.
and the vveather being rainy, vvindy, and tempestuous, we came thither in
great Disorder. On the next day we had not marched a mile, when both Horses
and Men being extremely weary, many of the Officers and Troopers expressed an
unwillingness to march further, neither were we well-resolved whither to go
that night; and many surrounded the General in a Confusion next to a Mutiny,
desiring he would return to Vtoxater, from which he was very averse, and
represented to them that it was better Capitulating with Sword in Hand in an
open Field, than to be cooped up in a Town: but both he and Calander were
forced by their importunity to return to Vtoxater, purposing to spend the rest
of that day and the next night there, for refreshing Men and Horses, and after
that to continue their March. And here Langdale, and some of the English
Officers that were with us, seeing all hopes were gone, and knowing their own
Danger if taken with us, left us. A T^umpeter came to us from the Governor of
Stafford, commanding the General to render himself, and these with him, to him
and the County-Committee: and many such Letters came to him from impertinent
Commanders of the County-Militia, at which he was nothing moved, and as low as
he was he undervalued them. But now our Misfortunes must be completed by our
own Madness, and the Mutiny of our Soldiers, A Mutiny.
among whom it was given out, that the General Officers intended an Escape from
them, though they had often protested that they should never leave them, but
live and dye with them. The Soldiers set double and treble Sentinels, both
about the General's, and Lieutenant-General's Lodgings, and other chief
Officers; all which was done in the sight of the Stafford-Trumpeter. Next
morning as soon as we could see, Colonel Turner by the General's Order called
out at the Window to them, and asked if they were not ashamed of the ignominy
of that Action, and of the base and unworthy Usage they had offered their
General, and the Contempt they had shown to all Discipline. He advised them, if
for no other reason, yet for their own Safety, to return to their Duty, remove
their Guards, go home to their Lodgings, and refresh themselves; which they
instantly did, cursing those who set them on to mutiny, but named none.
Calander protested he would hear of no Treaty, but prepared to be gone, with
all who would follow him, who were at least half our number. The General
pressed his Stay, that a joynt-Course might be followed, at least that night,
and that he would not divide the Forces; and the next day they should either
March, Fight, or Treat, as should be agreed on in a Council of War, where he
might freely deliver his mind. But all was in vain, for he marched away with as
many as had good Horses to follow him, who quickly dispersed themselves; and
Calander got secretly to London, and from that to Holland, so that his Escape
proved more fortunate than any Officers (of the Army) was.

Now we concluded it impossible to return in a Body to Scotland, and the
County-Militia was everywhere rising, our Horses were beaten, and our Troopers
both heartless and disposed to mutiny; so that we all told the General, there
was a necessity of Capitulating, for though we might possibly have cleared a
way for our selves, through those who then surrounded us; yet in every part of
England we would find a fresh Enemy before us, and it was impossible to cut out
our way through all these Difficulties: to which, seeing it was unavoidable,
the General yielded, and on the 25th of August sent three Colonels, Lockhart,
Fowls, and Turner, to Capitulate with the Governor of Stafford, who had
environed us with about three thousand Men. They Treated in a House three Miles
from Vtoxater, where Mary Queen of Scotland had been long kept Prisoner; they
found those they treated with no Enemies to Monarchy, and so they had reason to
expect good Conditions from them: but that Treaty was interrupted by a Message
from Lambert, who was now advanced very near Vtoxater, and sent them word that
if they would Treat it must be with him, which was no good News to our
Colonels. Yet they went to him, and found him very discreet; he appointed
Lilburn, Hains, and Manwaring to Treat. They demanded of us the delivery of
Berwick and Carlisle; and undertook if we would engage to deliver those Places,
we should not only be permitted to go back to Scotland, but conveyed thither.
Our Commissioners answered, they had only Warrant to Treat about the General,
and those with him, and had no power to Treat about those Places: so our
Commissioners were sent to know the Generals Pleasure about Berwick, and
Carlisle, who answered, he neither could nor would engage for the performance
of what was not in his power, since in that condition he was in, he had no
reason to expect obedience to his Orders from the Deputy-Governours; adding,
that he did not set that value on himself, or his Liberty, as for the Procuring
of it, to do any thing might so far prejudice the Kings Service, as the
Delivery of these Towns would do; whereupon he dismissed the Colonels with
some very sad expressions. During this Treaty the Lord Gray of Grobie came
toward Vtoxater, to whom the General sent Colonel Ker to tell him, he was in
Treaty with Lambert; and those who were appointed to Treat, agreed on the
following Articles.

The Articles of Rendition.
THat James Duke of Hamilton his Grace, with the rest of the Officers and
Soldiers under his Command, now at Utoxater, shall render themselves up
Prisoners of War, (with their Horses, Arms, and all other Provisions of War,
Bag and Baggage whatsoever, (except what is mentioned in the ensuing Articles)
to Major General Lambert, or such as he shall appoint, without spoil,
concealment, or imbeazelment, by four of the Clock this Afternoon, upon
Utoxater-Heath, or some convenient Field near unto it.

Hamilton, with all Officers and Soldiers of the said Scottish Forces at
Utoxater, shall have their Lives and Safety of their Persons assured to them,
and shall not be pillaged or stripped of their wearing Clothes, or what they have
about them, or otherwise wronged, beaten, or abused, upon the delivering up of
their Arms, or afterward, and shall have civil Usage during the time of their
Imprisonment.

Lambert for their Stay; each Colonel in Command to have one Horse for his
Servant to ride with him, and each Commission-Officer that is sick or wounded,
and not able to go on foot, to have one Horse provided for himself to ride on,
and that a safe Convoy shall be provided to conduct the Prisoners to the Places
they shall be sent to; and if any that are sick or wounded do desire it, they
may have liberty to stay at Utoxater till further Order from Major General
Lambert.

Hamilton shall have six of his Servants, such as he shall choose, allowed to
wait on him, and each of them an Horse to ride with him, till they come to the
Place of Stay, and have none of their wearing Clothes or what they have about
them taken from them.

Scottish Army at Utoxater, shall be delivered up to such Persons as
Major General Lambert shall appoint.

Signed, Rob. Lilburn, Hezekiah Hayns, Edward Manwaring, William Lockhart,
James Fowls, James Turner.


Lambert desired them to sign the Articles quickly, and he would go to Vtoxater
to save the Duke from Gray of Grobie's Men: but before he came they had fallen
in, not regarding the Treaty nor the Cessation of Arms, and had taken the Duke;
yet Lambert would not look on him as a Prisoner till the Articles were signed,
which he ratified, and disclaimed Gray of Grobie's taking him, as done in time
of Treaty and Cessation, against the Law of War and Nations: neither was the
Lord Gray empowered by the Parliament, so that Lambert having Authority from
them, they were obliged by his Treaty and Articles. The Articles were also
signed, though not sent back, some time before Gray himself came up.

The Duke was carried to Derby, from that to Longhburrough, The Duke in Prison,
from that to Leicester, and from that on the 28th of August to Ashby de la
Zouch, where he continued Prisoner till the beginning of December that he was
carried to Windsor. He was kept under strict Guards, and in a close Restraint,
not being permitted to go without the Castle, and but seldom to walk in the
Court; for the second night after he came thither, when he was taking a turn in
the Court after Supper, he had not walked half an hour, when a Sergeant came
and commanded him to his Chamber, though many Soldiers were looking on: he
immediately went to his Apartment, and said to the Lord Bargany, who was
Prisoner with him, that the Sergeants carriage was a notable instance of the
vanity of worldly Greatness, and the instability of man's Condition in this
Life; since he, who but a few days ago commanded so many thousand men, was now
himself commanded by a private Sergeant. and examined, but discovers nothing.
Soon after his Imprisonment the Parliament sent two of their number, and Hugh
Peter's waiting on them, to examine him in order to the discovering those in
England, who had confederated and corresponded with him in this Engagement: but
the Examination held not long, for they could draw nothing from him, and found
none of their Arts could prevail (though they spared neither Promises nor
Threatenings) to make him think of redeeming either Life or Liberty at so base a
rate, his Honor and Conscience being much dearer to him. He told them, he
could not say he knew any thing worth their pains, but if he did, nothing, no
not Torture it self, should ever draw it from him.

Thus ended that Expedition, The Censures passed on the Engagement.
the miscarriage whereof occasioned much Censure and Reproach; but those who
did impartially reflect on the whole progress of that Army, ceased to wonder,
when they saw the ruin of a raw, undisciplined Army, which without either
Artillery or Ammunition sufficient, was precipitated by an overhasty March
into an Enemies Country, harassed and wearied with a sad March, in such bad
vveather and way, and encountered by so strong an Enemy; who as he had a
vvell-disciplined and trained Army, so he had the whole Country on his side:
and vvhere-ever any censurable Miscarriage was to be fastened all that were
impartial did confess the Duke free of blame, except for yielding too much to
other more experienced Soldiers, who upon every inclination he expressed of
differing from their Counsels, told him he was ruining the Kings Service. And
just observers, when they considered how little care he expressed for
preserving himself, and how much for preserving the Army, how ready he was
to hazard his own Person, how he would not abandon the broken Remainders of
his Army, but stayed and run the same Fortune with them, when others were
more careful of their own Preservation; how he would not preserve himself at
the rate of delivering up Berwick or Carlisle, judging those Places of more
importance for His Majesty's Service than his Liberty could be, or the Liberty
of that handful was with him; and in fine, how he abhorred so mean a thought
as the ransoming himself by betraying others with whom he had corresponded;
did very much condemn the too great forvvardness of some in believing those
base Reports which were spread of his betraying that Army.

But in Scotland things changed no less strangely. The Clergy during the Armies
March, continued animating the People into an opposition to the Engagement: but
the Committee of Estates secured the Peace of the Kingdom, by some Troops they
kept in suspected places, and seemed to connive at many things, which they
resolved to punish to purpose when they had a good account of their Army. About
the end of July Mr. Murray came to Scotland from the Queen and Prince, with
full assurances of their Friendship and Kindness to them, and told them that
the Prince was ready to come as soon as he were sent for, appointing them to
send to him to Holland whither he was then going; whereupon the Earl of
Lauderdale was sent by the Committee of Estates to invite his Highness to come
and Command their Army, Lauderdale is sent to bring the Prince to Command the
Army.
giving him the Public Faith of the Kingdom for his Honor, Freedom, and
Safety, both during his stay with them, and for liberty to leave them when he
would. He was also to desire his Highness would land at Berwick, and for
satisfying the People as much as could be, that he would bring none with him
who were hateful to the Nation, and would, as the King had always done in
Scotland, conform himself to their Forms of Religious Worship.

On the fifth of August he set sail first for Yarmouth-Road, where he heard the
Prince was with the Fleet, but that being contradicted, he held his Course for
Holland; and as he was sailing into the Brill the Pilots Boat assured him, that
his Highness was gone from thence, but he knew not whither: wherefore seeing a
Man of War, who as they told him, belonged to the Prince, he turned his Course,
and followed him, but he could not overtake him. At last a Frigate of the
Prince's came a-stern of him, and told him he was in the Downs; so he sailed on
with the Frigate, and came to the Downs on the 10th of August, where he found
his Highness, and Prince Robert, with some others of the Nobility, and of his
Council, and a very good Fleet of about eighteen sail, commanded by the Lord
Willoughby as Vice Admiral. His Highness gave him a very kind Reception, and
expressed a great sense of the Loyalty and Duty of the Scottish Nation; all that
were about him were likewise very well-affected to that Nation. The Prince
called the Earl of Lauderdale to his Council, where he appointed him to deliver
his Message, which he did; and the Prince after a days consideration, gave him
a very Gracious Answer to every particular, and resolved to go quickly to
Berwick, and from that to make all the haste he could to the Army; but he was
first to go to Holland, where he intended to stay some few days. The Earl of
Lauderdale had got Instructions from Scotland to go to the Prince of Orange,
and the States General, to give them an account of their Affairs, and to crave
their Assistance in Money, Arms, Ammunition, and Shipping; to see also what
Money could be borrowed upon the Public Faith of Scotland for the prosecuting
the Engagement, and to desire from them the three Scottish Regiments that were
then in the States Service, and to settle a firm Alliance with them: and from
them he was to go to France, with Letters to the Queen, and to treat with the
Queen Mother of France for the Assistance of that Nation, according to the
ancient Alliances between the Crowns of France and Scotland. All these
Instructions being communicated to his Highness, he judged the Employment might
be of good use, but would not let the Earl of Lauderdale leave him, intending
to carry him with him to Holland, and was very well pleased that Sir Robert
Murray was appointed to go to France, in case the other went not: yet he
resolved to carry him along likewise to Holland. Upon which the Earl of
Lauderdale sent advertisement to Scotland, to make ready for his Highness
Reception. This was done on the 20th of August, and as the Prince was making
ready, the sad news of the Defeat of the Army was brought him: so that Design
vanished.

But in Scotland the news of the routing of the Army was received by the
opposite Party, with all the insultings of Joy, they adding infamous opprobries
to their Invectives. Some observing that the Division of the Duke's Army, which
was its Ruin, was on the 17th day of August, the day in which the Covenant was
first made, which from thence some used to call Saint Covenants day; this
Conjuncture of Affairs was held a visible Declaration of Gods Displeasure, (for
their breaking the Covenant and their Juggling in it,) by those who took upon
them to expound all Gods Providence. The Western Counties were commanded, and
animated to an Insurrection by the Lord Chancellor and the Earl of Eglinton,
together with their Ministers, who came leading out whole Parishes with such
Arms as could be had, and when these failed, with Staves, and Pitch-forks, and
Sythes.

When the Resolutions for raising an Army were taken in the Parlialiament,
diverse of the Nobility did dissent from them, An Insurrection in Scotland.
the chief of whom were Lowdon, who was then Lord Chancellor, and Argyle: and
now Lowdon upon the notice of the misfortune in England, gave out Orders for
raising the Western Counties, and all others who would zealously own the
Covenant against the late Engagement. Those that were raised were at first
commanded by the Earl of Eglinton, and the Marquis of Argyle made all the haste
he could to come down with his Highlanders: the Earl of Cassilis was slowest
with his men, for though he had dissented from the Engagement, yet he was long
unsatisfied with the Tumultariness of the Insurrection, but after some times
consulting about it, he came up to them at Linlithgow.

This, together with the sad account of Affairs from England, did not a little
disorder the Committee of Estates, who as they drew a few Troops that were kept
in the Country for their Guard nearer them, so were not well resolved what to
do. They looked on the business as desperate by the ruin of the Army in
England; Many in the Committee of Estates incline to yield to them.
and though it was easy to scatter the confused Bodies were coming from the
West, yet they apprehended, that certainly they finding their own weakness,
would call for the Assistance of the English Army, before which they knew they
could not stand. Most of the Committee were men of good Estates, who
apprehending certain ruin to their Fortunes, were resolved to see to their own
Preservation the best way they could. Others were much addicted to the
Ministers, and though they had gone along with the Service, notwithstanding the
opposition of the Clergy; yet now that they knew they were resolved to
excommunicate all who were for the Engagement, their hearts failed them. Many
of the Ministers did also represent to them, and some of their Friends, that
their Designs being blasted by God, why should they fight any longer against
him? and assured them, that if they would lay down Arms, and accommodate
matters without Blood, all should go well; that they would all own the Kings
Quarrel, according to the Covenant: but if on the other hand they persisted in
their opposition to the Church, the English Army would be called in, which
would undoubtedly destroy both the Country and them. These things prevailed
with most of the Committee of Estates.

But the Earl of Lanerick opposed all these Resolutions, judging it base and
dishonorable to treat with those Rebels, and abandon so good a Cause because
of a Misfortune. He thought it therefore necessary to recall Sir George Monro
with his Forces, and secure themselves of Sterlin and St. Iohnstoun, and then
to raise all the North, by which they might gather a new Army; and the time of
the Year told them, that Cromwell durst not stay long in these Parts: so that
upon his going to London they might make themselves Masters of Scotland, and
force a new Army into England the next Year. Yet in this he was almost alone,
and many of the Committee of Estates plied him hard, especially with one
Argument, that if more Blood were shed in Scotland, their Enemies would
undoubtedly revenge themselves on his Brother; and then all the World would say
his Ambition to succeed him, had made him contribute to his Ruin. But on the
other hand the Ministers and their Adherents gave great Assurances, that they
should procure his Brother's Liberty, if matters were packt up. This being
constantly pressed on him, he yielded to be passive, and let them be doing; and
so after some days Debate they resolved to prosecute the Engagement no more,
and to pack up the business if it were possible: therefore they sent the Lords
of Lee and Humby to the Western Forces, (who were come in their March the
length of Hamilton) to see what their Demands were, and to propose a Cessation
in order to a Treaty; they also sent Orders to Sir George Monro to return to
Scotland. But here I shall stop a little, to give account of the motions of his
Army in England.

The account of the Irish Army.
Musgrave had got intelligence that Cromwell with his Army was upon his March to
stop the Duke's progress, and had advanced the length of Skipton-Castle in
Yorkshire; which Advertisement was instantly dispatched to the Duke at Preston,
and a small Party of about forty Horse was sent under the Command of one
Galbreath, to examine the truth of these Reports; who returned with this
Account, That having concealed their Party within a Hedge near that Place, some
of them came to a House of their acquaintance, from which they sent a Servant
to Skipton, who brought them assurance of Cromwell's being there with an Army of
about ten thousand men, and that he had commanded those of that Garrison
excepting a few, to be ready to march with him next day.

Sir George Monro being thus informed, sent Advertisement to Preston by diverse
Messengers of both Sexes; but neither did this Intelligence, nor any sent
before, ever come to the Duke's Army, which is attested by many Persons of
Honor then in Command there; and indeed those of the Army rested wholly on
Langdale's Intelligence. But Monro considering that Skipton was equally distant
from Kirbie Lumsdale where he lay, and Preston, judged that Cromwell's first
Design was upon him; which upon, and in pursuance of the Duke's Orders, he
retired softly upon the way toward Appleby about fourteen miles back: but the
second day, having notice that Cromwell had taken the road to Preston, he
returned to his former Station, where he kept both Horse and Foot night and day
in readiness.

Two days after that toward the morning, a small Party of Horse sent out from
the Watch upon the Preston-road, were unexpectedly ala^med with the noise of
Horse-feet, as it were at a good distance; but those were presently discovered
to be the scattered Troops of the Duke's Army. Some of them were Officers of
Foot, who as they declared, were Commanded out from Preston to the assistance
of Sir Marmaduke Langdale, whilst he and Cromwell were engaged in a Hedge-sight:
but before they were able to give him relief, Cromwell had forced them to
retire, and had got in after Sir Marmaduke betwixt them and the Town, and so
had separated them from the Duke's Army. There were also some Troops of Horse
who were the Rear-guard, of whom mention was made in the account of the
business of Preston, in all about twelve hundred, belonging to diverse Regiments
of Horse: they were earnestly solicited by Sir George Monro, to stay with him
till they should hear what had become of the Duke and his Army. But they
objected their Men and Horses were very weary, and that there was a great want
of Horse-shoes amongst them; and so excused themselves, and said they should
only go to some of the nearest Villages, where they might be refreshed: but
they went straight to Scotland through Westmoreland and Northumberland,
spoiling and plundering all these Counties as they past; which made great
out-crying, and was charged upon the Forces Commanded by Sir George Monro, (who
not long after followed them,) but very unjustly.

At Kirbie-Lumsdale Sir George Monro and the Gentlemen who were with him stayed
a few days, to learn the certainty of the Duke's Condition, the reports whereof
changed hourly: but fearing the worst of the Duke, and the danger of being
surprised, they retired to Kirbie-Steven; and getting no certain advertisements
of the Duke or his Army, thought it fit to send for advice to Scotland, and to
be still drawing Northward through Northumberland. When they came to Morpeth,
Colonel Hamilton, General of the Artillery, came to them from Edinburgh, with
Orders from the Committee of Estates to take New Castle, or at least to
fortify themselves where they were, and attend the Duke's coming, whose Army
they still judged to be safe, and that it was like he would return through
Yorkshire: but they got soon after that the certainty that the Duke's Army was
wholly lost, and that Cromwell with a great part of his Army was on his March to
fall upon them. Upon this they took their way for Berwick, and met new Orders
from Scotland, giving notice of a great Insurrection in the West, and thereupon
requiring them with all possible speed to hasten to Cockburns-path, where the
Committee of Estates was to meet them. They also ordered them to suffer none of
the English Forces to come to Scotland with them, which was executed at
Berwick; great Complaints being made by the English Gentlemen of that inhumane
Usage. Upon the way from Berwick, it was told Sir George, that he had need to
look to himself, and those with him, since the Committee of Estates, even after
they had called for him to their assistance, and were forced, by the multitudes
of Armed men drawing from the West toward Edinburgh, to fly to him for Safety;
yet had passed an Act not to prosecute the Engagement any further, and that
they had entered already upon a Treaty with the other Party, and had employed
the Lords of Lee and Humby to go to them with Propositions. He reflecting on
these News, and the Orders he had received not to let any of the English Nation
cross Tweed, The Irish Army returns to Scotland,
thought there was no more intended but to make use of him as an Engine for a
safe off-coming: but though Argyle sent his Brother to him, inviting him to his
Party with great offers; yet he rejected that Proposition, and hasted forward
to Cockburnspath, where he found no body. He lay a night or two there, and got
Orders to march to Hadingtown, where the Earls of Crawford, Glencairn, and
Lanerick met him, who had got together some of the scattered Troops belonging
to the Regiments that had left the Duke at Preston. And at Gladesmoor, all the
Forces were put in Order, which upon Rendezvous were above three thousand
Horse, and two thousand Foot; from thence they advanced to Musselburgh, near
which a Party of seven or eight hundred Horse of the Western Army were come
from Edinburgh to view the fields. They, upon discovery of the March of the
Forces from Gladesmoor, retired, leaving a Troop at the Bridge, who at the
approach of sixteen Horsemen run away in all haste, and so escaped with the
loss of some few that were taken Prisoners.

These Earls lodged that night at Inneresk, and agreed next day to march by
Edinburgh upon the South Side, to shun the danger and Straits of the way by
Leith, which was beset by that new Army from the West, though Monro offered
with his Forces to clear the way to them; but the greatest part of the
Committee were resolved not to engage in blood. The Western Army was now some
way modelled, and Commanded by the Earl of Leven as General, David Lesly as
Lieutenant General, and Robert Montgomery and Sir John Brown, as
Major-Generals. Some of the Ministers were earnest for fighting, not doubting
but their Enemies would fly before them; but the Military men understood well
enough their own weakness, and therefore would not engage. All this while the
Lords of Lee and Humby were very diligent, posting night and day betwixt those
in Edinburgh and the Committee of Estates, to mediate an Accommodation betwixt
both Parties, but hitherto without any effect.

The Committee of Estates took their way by Pentland-hills, where they lay that
night: next day they did march by Collingtown and Christorphen, and so toward
Linlithgow, purposing to hinder the Conjunction of some new additions of Forces
from the West, led by the Lords of Cassilis, Kirkubright, and Argyle: as also
to fix themselves at Sterlin, as a secure place, and convenient for maintaining
their Army, and for raising the whole Country on the north of Forth, or
fighting if occasion should offer.

At Linlithgow the Earl of Cassilis, with about four or five hundred Horse, was
almost surprised; but by the darkness of the night he escaped toward
Burroughstownness, and the Queens-ferry, and so to Edinburgh.

Lieutenant General Lesley with his new Army followed upon the others Rear near
Linlithgow, but was loath to engage, having little Confidence in his Men,
although he was hard pressed to it, for preventing the danger Argyle might fall
into at Sterlin; and Sir George Monro would willingly have turned upon him, but
that he was earnest once to be at Sterlin, where he hoped to fall upon Argyle
and his Party, and therefore hasted forward.

At Larbour he was assured that Argyle with about sixty Horse, and a thousand
Foot all Highlanders, was in the Town of Sterlin, and fell on Argyle at
Sterline.
keeping a Committee, and treating with the Castle (wherein was the Kings
Garrison commanded by Norman Levingstoun) for a Surrender; upon that Sir George
hasted on with the Cavalry, commanding the Foot to follow in order as fast as
they could, which they did at a good pace. A Gentleman coming from Sterlin met
Sir George about St. Ninians, and told him that the Barras-port was shut and
manned, and that he must pass through the Park, round about the Castle, to gain
the Bridge, and prevent Argyle's Flight: and as he came near the Castle, the
Governor displayed the Kings Colors upon the Walls, and caused the Cannon to
play upon the Bridge, where he perceived some of Argyle's People withdrawing.
The difficulties Sir George met with in opening the Park-Gate, and breaking
down some Stone-walls to make a passage for the Horse, gave time to the Marquis
of Argyle to get himself and his Troopers mounted. They passed the Bridge in
haste, a very little before Sir George, who with five Horsemen pursued them a
good way: the Highlanders marching close together, to pass after their Lord,
were assaulted by the first Troop that came up after Sir George: they made some
sort of confused resistance, but were instantly trod down, and scattered, and
forced to call for Quarter; about a hundred were killed and drowned attempting
to swim the River, the rest taken Prisoners, being betwixt eight or nine
hundred.

Upon this Orders were dispatched from the Committee of Estates for raising all
the sensible men in the Northern Shires, to join with those at Sterlin, and
Lanerick went to Perthshire to invite the Nobility to join. Upon which the Lord
Ogilvy and the Lord Drummond came with some Propositions to the Committee of
Estates; yet all means were essayed to bring the Matter to a Treaty. The Earls
of Crawford and Glencairn had drawn the Earl of Buckleugh, and Mr. Robert
Douglas and Mr. Robert Blair, two leading Ministers, from Edinburgh to a
private Conference with them, where Crawford and Glencairn moved, that the
Committee sitting at Edinburgh might come and reside there for perfecting of
the Treaty, whilst their Forces should continue at Sterlin; A Treaty is pursued.
which was flatly denied them.

Here the Ministers were very earnest with these Lords, that matters might be
accomodated. The Lords moved, That nothing might be done to derogate from the
Authority of Parliament, and Committee of Estates; That the Officers and
Soldiers then in Arms by their Authority, might be provided for and
entertained; That at least, if there was no further use for their Service, the
Articles agreed to by the Parliament for these Forces that came from Ireland,
might be duly kept to them, and that some consideration might be given to the
rest of the Forces that were to be disbanded; That none who had entered into
that Engagement might be questioned for it, but enjoy still their Offices,
Honors, and Fortunes, and other Civil Places; That an effectual Course might
be agreed on for the Relief of their Friends, detained Prisoners in England;
and finally, That the Committee might sit with Freedom in the ordinary Place,
and by advice of the Church consider of the dangers of Religion, of his Majesty
and his Posterity, and and of the Peace and Safety of his Kingdoms, that so by
joint advice such ways might be taken as would best secure Religion, preserve
his Majesty and his Posterity, and quiet the Distempers of the Kingdom.

The Ministers on the other hand proposed That all Armies, whether in the
Fields or in the Garrisons of Berwick or Carlisle, should be presently
disbanded; That the securing the Interest of Religion might be referred to the
General Assembly, or their Commissioners, and all Civil Differences to the
Determination of a Parliament to be speedily called; That in the mean time
there should be a Committee of Estates, in which none should be admitted that
had concurred in the late Engagement: but withal they gave them good
assurances, both for the Prisoners in England and for themselves, that no
Prejudice should follow on any for their accession to the Engagement; and when
the Earl of Glencairn said, perhaps nothing would be kept of all that should be
agreed to; Mr. Douglas answered, that if but a tittle of the Agreement were
broken, all the Pulpits in Scotland should declare against it.

But now Argyle, having escaped from these who pursued him, was joined to the
Western Forces, commonly called Whiggamores; and he being irritated with what
befell him at Sterlin, was for severer Methods. They resolved to invite the
English Army to their Assistance, to which Cromwell was not backward, both that
he might recover Berwick and Carlisle, and destroy all the Kings Friends. The
Whiggamores did also know well how averse the Committee of Estates were from
Engaging into Action, and that they intended to make Peace on any terms:
therefore they grew high in their Propositions, and at Sterlin the other Party
was much divided; for most of the Committee of Estates were for a Treaty, and
most of the Officers of the Scottish Forces were Capitulating for themselves.

The chief Arguments proposed to persuade the necessity of this Agreement, were
the improbability, if not impossibility, of resistance if Cromwell should join
the Enemy, who had already invited him to Edinburgh by a Message sent him to
Berwick by Argyle, Elcho, and other two Commissioners, which they doubted not
but he would accept; The fear this Conjunction would beget in the Country would
hinder their Rising, and drive their Army either to a want of Subsistence, or
to destroy their Friends, and turn them Malcontents first, and then Enemies:
but above all, some pretended the fitness of preserving the Kings Friends and
Favorers to a better opportunity for his Service, which they hoped would
quickly offer it self.

It was objected against the Treaty, That the Relief of their Prince from such
a cruel Captivity, was a just cause; That they had Law and Authority upon their
side, and so ought not to be diffident of success, or fearful that lawless
Rebellion, how strong soever, should prosper; That their Enemies joining with
Cromwell and his Army of Sectaries, would make them the more hated, and quickly
discover that it was not Religion and Reformation they intended, as they always
gave out, but that they sought the Government and Worldly ends, whereupon many
of both Nations would fall from them; That the Kings Safety, and the
Preservation of their Friends then Prisoners in England, depended much upon
them, and their Continuing in Arms; That they were bound to continue in their
Duty, and wait for what Change God would bring about, and that suppose good
Conditions were granted, what assurance could be given for the performance of
them? Those who opposed the Treaty were the Earl of Lanerick, and most of the
Irish Officers. In end Lanerick was prevailed with to give way to it, which he
did not only then declare was against his Heart, and done merely to prevent a
Rupture that had otherwise followed among themselves; but he continued to his
Death condemning it, whatever seeming colors of reason might be given for it.
The Officers of the Army brought from Ireland, seeing they would be infallibly
ruined if they were deprived of the Authority of the Committee of Estates, were
likewise forced to give way to a Treaty; so the following Articles were agreed
on and sent to the Whiggamores.

WE being Servants to the State, Articles offered for a Treaty.
and unwilling to engage in a Civil War, do conceive our selves obliged to
remit the ways of prosecuting of all Duties to Religion, and to our King, to
the determination of Church and State; and let them move in it as they will be
answerable to God, our Lives shall ever be ready to be exposed to all hazards
for the good of both: and if all duties for them, and for our friends Release
in England, shall now be deserted, let the blame before God and Men lie upon
the obstructers of it. And if no further use be made of our Service, we do
demand,

That Security be given to all who are or have been engaged in this Service,

That in regard of our extraordinary Charges and Loss, one Months Pay Irish
Forces, and that Boats and Ships be presently provided for their Transportation
to Ireland; and for preventing all Disorders upon their March through the West
Country by free Quartering, we do desire that a regular Course may be taken for
their Entertainment during their abode, which shall be no longer than Wind and
Weather shall serve, and Boats be provided to transport them.

That one Months Pay be provided for the Scottish Forces, and that they Irish
Forces be transported, or that sufficient Pledges be delivered for performance
of what is desired, and that their Disbanding and Transportation be done by
Authority of the Committee of Estates.

These reasonable Demands being performed, we the Irish are ready instantly to
march toward any part of the West-coast, which shall be thought most fit for
our Transportation into Ireland, and we the Scots instantly to disband;
otherwise rather than expose our Lives and Fortunes to the mercy of any by the
want of fitting Assurances for what is past, or the loss of our Honors by
deserting the Interest of those commanded by us, or who join with us, we are
resolved to sacrifice our selves at the dearest rates we can, and take God to
witness how free we are of the Guilt and Consequences that may follow thereupon.

We have appointed our Commissioners to stay no longer than six a clock at
night to morrow the 19th, and that the Treaty shall then end, and the Cessation
to expire eight hours thereafter, unless the Desires abovementioned be fully
granted.

Signed by the Warrant and at the Command of the Officers, and others now in
Arms, by Authority of the Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, IO. SPALDING.
Sterlin 18th September 1648.
To these they had the following Answer returned them.

WE have considered the Desires of the Officers and Soldiers at Sterlin, The
Answer sent to these offers.
and do return this Answer:

That the Imputation of neglecting all Duties to Religion, and to the King,
mentioned in the Preface to the Articles, cannot be charged upon us, who have
never been wanting in the use of all lawful Means to prosecute the Ends of our
Solemn League and Covenant; but upon those who joined in the prosecution of the
late unlawful Engagement against our Neighbour-Nation of England, which has
been destructive to all those Ends.

Touching the first Article we refer you to the Answer given in our former
Papers; and do here again declare, that we shall not challenge any of your
number for their Lives and Estates, but shall endeavor to secure them so far
as we can, without approbation of their Actions, or breach of the Covenant and
Treaties. And for that which concerns Exemption from Church Censures, we cannot
meddle therein without breach of Covenant, but must refer you to the
Iudicatories of the Kirk, to whom you may make your own Address, and receive
Answer.

Concerning the second and third Article, we refer you to the Answer given by
our Commissioners to the Commissioners on your side, which was, that we held it
unreasonable that they should desire any thing from us, or any other who adhere
to us, for satisfaction of their Officers and Soldiers, because we will not
involve our Selves in any thing which may import any accession to the late
Engagement, or may be the ground of a Quarrel to England against this Kingdom:
but if they had real inclinations to Peace, they and their Adherents, might
without our accession thereunto take course amongst themselves for giving
satisfaction to their Officers and Soldiers; and therefore we did desire, and
do now again renew the same, that all their Forces, and the Forces of those who
adhere unto them, may be disbanded betwixt this and the 25th, at furthest the
28th, of this Month September, and that none of them be found together after
that time, in Troops, Companies, or Regiments; and we shall betwixt this and
the said day disband all our Forces, and none of them after that time shall be
found in Troops, Companies or Regiments; for the punctual observance whereof on
both sides mutual Pledges are to be given, and further we cannot say in answer
to these Articles.

If you shall not agree to the Desires made in our last Paper of the 16th of
this Instant, and not rest satisfied with these Answers, but shall continue in
Arms to the disturbance of the Peace of this Kingdom, and persist in the Causes
in the which you are now engaged, contrary to the Declaration of the General
Assembly and their Commissioners;

We do hereby certify you, that all who have been Active in the late
Engagement, as well those in England, as those in this Kingdom, and all such as
have or shall hereafter join with you, are to be declared Enemies to both
Kingdoms, and that this Kingdom will be necessitated to concur with the Kingdom
of England, for punishing them accordingly as breakers of the Covenant and
Treaties.

We leave it to you seriously to consider, whether the Ways and Courses you are
upon be really for the good of the King and this Kingdom, or a safe way for the
relief of your Friends that are Prisoners in England.

Signed, By Warrant and Command of the Noblemen, Officers, and Gentlemen now in
Arms for the Covenant, THO. HENDERSON.
Edinb. 20th Sept. 1648.

After some days treating upon the Heads wherein they differed, the Treaty was
finished upon the 26th of September, those at Sterlin yielding to the
Propositions made by the Whiggamors.

And it was agreed that the Irish Army should be suffered to march to Ireland,
and should have free Passage thither; that none should be questioned for what
was past; only that all who had been in the Engagement, should lay down their
Offices and places of Trust, and not be permitted to sit in any Judicatory, and
that all Public Matters should be referred to the Determination of the
Parliament, and the General Assembly.

It was very soon after the closing of the Treaty remarked, how small regard
was had to it; for the Troops being once dissipated, and those who were to go
to Ireland, being on their March thither, there came News that the Garrisons of
Carrick-Fergus, Belfast, and Culrain, belonging to the Scottish Army in Ireland,
under the Command of Major General Robert Monro, were basely betrayed under
Trust by his own Officers, and Contrymen, into the hands of General Monk for
the Parliament of England.

This being spread about, the people of the West Country fell upon those who
were returning to Ireland, plundered, abused, and dispersed them in their way
betwixt Glasgow and Air: and after a few days a Proclamation was issued out at
Edinbourgh, commanding all persons, who had been in the Army, designed by the
name of the unlawful Engagement, to remove at least twelve Miles from Town
under pain of Imprisonment, Cromwell being on his way thither.

And thus ended the design of the Engagement, gallantly undertaken and well
contrived, but unfortunately and fatally brought to nothing. The Whiggamors
having now possessed themselves of the Power, their Leaders did constitute
themselves into a Committee of Estates, for hitherto they had acted in no Legal
Character. There were diverse among them, who were by Authority of Parliament
commissionated to be of the Committee of Estates, but with this express
Provision, that they should not be capable of Sitting there till they had owned
the Resolutions and Declarations of the Parliament; for diverse of those who
dissented, were named to be of the Committee, that so there might be a fair way
for bringing them off from their Opposition. But now all these without
regarding that Provision, pretended they were a Quorum of the Committee of
Estates, and that so they were warranted by Authority of Parliament to Act in
that Supreme Authority. They sent a Message to the King in their usual style,
and were very careful to give no Umbrage to the Parliament of England; and so
not only entertained Cromwell with all the expressions of Friendship and
Confidence imaginable, delivering Berwick and Carlisle to him, but sent
Commissioners with the following Instructions to the Two Houses.

YOu shall repair to London, and deliver our Letter to the Honorable Houses of
the Parliament of England. Their Instructions to the Two Houses.


You shall excuse the long delay in sending to them, and in the mean time let
them know, we hold Correspondence with the Commander in Chief of their Forces.

You shall give them a Narrative of our whole Proceedings according to the
Declaration of the Kirk, and our own; particularly you shall acquaint them with
our Proceedings in opposition to the late unlawful Engagement, and what
Industry was used on the other part, for the Election of Malignants to be
Members of Parliament, and how unlawfully some were admitted to sit in
Parliament; and great numbers of Malignants were brought in from England, to
overawe the honest Party, and how many of the Army were corrupted.

And you shall further represent particularly the great Sufferings and
Oppressions of honest men, and that before they heard any thing of the Defeat
of the Forces under Duke Hamilton in England, they had resolved on the manner
and time of their Rising in Arms here in this Kingdom, against the Promoters
and Abettors of that Engagement, and their Adherents. You shall also show them
the result of the Treaty betwixt us and those Armies about Sterlin, and how
useful their Forces have been to us by being at so near a distance.

You shall endeavor to take away all Misinformation or Mis-constructions of
any of our former Proceedings, and settle a good Understanding betwixt them and
the honest protesting Party in Scotland: and you shall show them the continued
evil Principles, Malice, and Designs of the Malignant Party in this Kingdom,
yet to trouble our Peace and interrupt theirs, and as they call it, not to live
and outlive the not carrying on so pious and loyal an Engagement: and that some
of them are going to Holland with an intention, as we are informed, to bring
over Forces if they can: therefore we have caused deliver Berwick to be
disposed of for the Good of both Kingdoms, and given the like Warrant for
Carlisle; and that it is also surrendered, or presently to surrender for the use
foresaid. So we agree during these Troubles, until the Peace of this Kingdom be
settled, that the Honorable Houses may keep some Forces upon the Borders, and
sufficient Garrisons in them both, upon a twofold assurance: First, that in
case any new Troubles be raised in Scotland by the Malignants, both they and
the Forces about Newcastle have Directions from the Parliament to come unto
Scotland, to pursue the Common Enemy when they shall be desired by the
Committee of Estates, as it is now constituted of the Protesting Party in
Scotland: and Secondly, that the Parliament shall remove all Garrisons out of
those two Towns, and from our Borders, and put them in the Condition agreed on
by the Treaties betwixt both Kingdoms, whenever the Troubles are at an end,
and the Peace of the Kingdoms settled.

You shall show how desirous and willing we are to harken to any good Overture
that may conduce to prevent any suchlike Breaches again betwixt the Two
Nations, and that it may not be in the power of Malignants again either to
seduce, or to enforce upon the People the like Sin and Snare; and for mutual
Consultation, we think it expedient, both that they should have some honest
Noblemen, Commissioners, here to reside at Edinburgh, and that we shall have
some at London, that by Commutation of Counsels, our Common Peace may be the
better settled and continued.

You shall try if the Treaty betwixt the Kings Majesty and the Two Houses of
Parliament be like to take effect, and shall study to preserve the Interest of
this Kingdom in the matter of the settling of the Peace of these Kingdoms: and
if you shall find there are real Grounds to hope an Agreement betwixt the King
and the Two Houses, in respect both Kingdoms are engaged in the same Cause and
Covenant, and have been, and still are under the same Dangers, and to the end
our Peace may be more durable, you shall endeavor that before any Agreement of
Peace be made, we may be first acquainted therewith, An. 1649.
that we may send up Commissions in relation to the Treaty with the King, upon
the Propositions, and in relation to mutual Advice, for the settling of the
Peace of these Kingdoms, and accordingly as you find the Two Houses inclined
therein, you shall give us Advertisement.

You shall according as upon the place it shall be found expedient, present the
same Desires to the Two Houses of Parliament in name of this Kingdom, touching
the Work of Reformation, as shall be presented to them from this Kirk.

You shall assist Mr. Blair in this Employment, and take his advice and
assistance in yours, and give us Advertisement weekly how all matters go.

You shall publish all Papers either concerning the Proceedings of the Church,
or of the Protesters, which are necessary to be known.

You shall endeavor to keep a good Understanding betwixt us and the City, and
the Assembly of Divines; and strive to remove all Iealousies betwixt us and
them, or betwixt honest men amongst themselves.

You shall endeavor that honest men who have suffered for opposing the
Engagement be not prejudiced, but furthered in payment of the Sumes assigned
unto them before the Engagement, out of the two hundred thousand pound
Sterling, and Brotherly Assistance, for public Debts or Losses.

You shall acquaint the Speakers of both Houses with his Majesty's Letter to
this Committee, and our Answer sent to Him.

You shall desire that the Noblemen, and Gentlemen of Quality, and considerable
Officers of the Army that went into England under the Duke of Hamilton, and
which are now there Prisoners may be kept as Pledges of the Peace of the
Kingdoms, especially to prevent a new Disturbance in this Kingdom, or Trouble
from this Kingdom to England, until the Peace of both be settled.

You shall acquaint the Two Houses with our Answer to that of L. General
Cromwell 's, of the sixth of this Instant, and make use of the Grounds therein
mentioned as you shall find occasion.

Their next Care was to look well to Lanerick, Lanerick appointed to be
secured, but escapes to Holland.
and the other Engagers, lest they should attempt somewhat against them; the
account of which shall be set down in a Letter Lanerick wrote to the Lord
Chancellor when he left Scotland. For in the end of January, the Earl of
Lauderdale came from Holland, being commanded by the Prince to see what might
be done there: but he found all so discouraged and overpowered, that no good
was to be expected; and he got advertisement from the Lord Balmerino, that they
designed to secure both Lanerick and himself, and, as he believed, would
deliver them up to the Parliament of England as Incendiaries; whereupon they
both resolved to go beyond Sea, in the same Ship in which Lauderdale came, and
to offer their Service to the Prince. The Letter follows.

My Lord,
ALbeit the Proceedings of the late Committee, constituted of Dissenters,
against me, was without president in Confining me a free Subject, (who was
neither Guilty, nor so much as accused of any Guilt or Breach of the Laws of
the Kingdom) for declining to sign a Declaration and Bond, which even they
themselves conceived (in Justice) they could not enjoin me to sign: yet I did
submit, and went not without the Bounds limited for my Confinement, until I was
certainly informed that upon Wednesday last, at a private and select Committee
it was resolved, I should instantly be Committed, and the little Liberty left
me taken from me; for it seems that these private persons (I speak not of
Iudicatories) who procured the severe Instructions given those employed to
London, against my Brother the Duke of Hamilton, and the many Noble and Gallant
Persons who are now in Bonds with him for their Loyal Endeavors to have
rescued His Majesty from being murdered, are not satisfied, or think
themselves secure, while any enjoy their Liberties, who would have been
Instruments in that pious Duty to our Sovereign; therefore I am forced to seek
shelter and protection abroad, since Innocence and Law, and even Treaties and
Public Engagements, prove now too weak Grounds for securing me at home. And
though this rigid and unparalell^d Procedure against me might have tempted the
dullest and calmest nature to some Desperation, yet I have still preferred the
Peace and Quiet of Scotland to all my own Interests; and I do ingeniously
declare upon my Honor unto your Lordship, that I neither have had, neither do
I know of any Design from abroad or at home of interrupting the same: and now
in whatsoever corner of the World it shall please the Lord to throw me, as I
shall endeavor (by his assistance) to maintain my Loyalty to my Prince
untainted, so I shall still preserve a perfect affection to the Peace and
Happiness of my Country. My prayers to God shall be, that it may yet be
instrumental of advancing the Work of Reformation, and so fixing the Crowns of
these Kingdoms upon the Head of our Sovereign Lord the King, and of His Royal
Progeny after Him, that Faction and Rebellion may never be able to shake or
interrupt their Government; that Loyalty may lose the name of Malignancy, and a
good Christian may with Safety and without Scandal be and profess to be a good
Subject; that the Acts of unquestionable Parliaments, and the Decrees of other
Sovereign Iudicatories of this Kingdom may be Security sufficient to the
Subjects to govern their Civil Actions by; that they may be free of arbitrary
Exactions and Impositions, and may enjoy with Truth and Peace their Estates and
Liberties, without the tyrannous Encroachments of great men, and other
empowered persons: and I am confident that the God of Heaven, who will Judge
all the Judges on earth, will avenge the wrongs of the oppressed, and in his
own time restore me again to my Country, who am now forced by unjust
Persecution to flee from it. This I shall patiently wait for, and give your
Lordship no more Trouble, but desire you to make what use of this you think
fit, from,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant, LANERICK.
Dirleton 25th January, 1649.

But now I return to prosecute what remains to be said of the Duke.

Anno 1649.
ON the 4th of December Orders were sent to bring him to Windsor, and he came
thither the 11th of that Month. He was lodged in the House of one of the poor
Knights of Windsor, and kept under strict Guards; yet on the 21th of that
Month, as the King was carried through Windsor, he prevailed so far with his
Keepers as to permit him to see his Majesty: and as he passed he kneeled down,
and with a transport of humble Sorrow kissed his hand, and had only time to
say, My dear Master; the King embraced him very kindly, and said, I have been
so indeed to you: but they were parted, and suffered to have no discourse. It
may easily be imagined, with what sorrow he followed the King with his eyes as
far as he could see him, knowing he was to do so no more: nor did he much
regrate his present Trouble or imminent Danger, all his thoughts being
swallowed up in sorrow at the Consideration of his Master's Ruin, which was
then no more to be doubted; the Army and House (as it was then modelled, or
rather forced) having avowed their Design against his Person, and thrown off
the Disguise with which they had long masked themselves.

The Parliament of England had upon the matter condemned the Duke to perpetual
Imprisonment, Much pains is taken to draw discoveries from him, but in vain.
by setting an hundred thousand pound sterling for his Ransom, which sum could
not be raised by him, at a time when by the Debts he had contracted in the
Kings Service his Fortune was fallen so low. Cromwell came several times to him,
to draw from him some Discoveries of his Correspondents in England, and gave
him great assurances of Life, Rewards, and Secrecy; but he rejected the
Proposition with horror and disdain, though often repeated; and apprehending
they might get his Brother into their hands, sent him at that time the
following Note, which I set down though unfinisht, and written with the Juice
of a Lemmon.

I Under the power of the Sword, and merciless men, no favor to be expected,
often examined, but nothing discovered, being ignorant; perhaps you will abide
the same Trial, beware if you do.

The thirtieth of January was that fatal and never-to-be-forgotten Day wherein
His Sacred Majesty, after the Pageantry of a Trial, to add the appearance of
Justice to so base and barbarous a Murder, was beheaded, to the Amazement of
all Europe, by an unexampled practice in any Monarchy. But the particulars of
his Royal Constancy and Christian Patience, being so punctually related by
others, I shall not stand to repeat what is already known: but having proposed
to my self nothing more in this whole Work, than to let the World see the great
Piety and strictness of Conscience that Blessed Prince carried along with him
in all his Affairs, and to publish such Remains of his Pen as had not been
formerly seen or known. I shall therefore insert a Copy of Verses written by
his Majesty in his Captivity, which a very worthy Gentleman, who had the honor
of waiting on him then, and was much trusted by him, Copied out from the
Original, who avoucheth it to be a true Copy; but I shall first present that
Royal Martyr to the Readers view, in the Posture which was most familiar to
Him, and then set down those Verses, in which the mighty sense and the great
Piety will be found to be beyond all the finest sublimities of Poetry, which
yet are not wanting here.

An. 1648.
Romans VIII. -- more than Conqueror.
Bona agere, and mala pati Regium est.
Alij diutius, Imperium tenuerunt, nemo tam fortiter reliquit. Tacit. Histor.
Lib. 2.c.47:p417.

MAJESTY in MISERY: OR, An Imploration to the KING of Kings.
Written by His late Majesty King CHARLES the First, during His Captivity at
Carisbrook Castle, Anno Dom. 1648.

The Potency and Power of Kings,
Record the Royal Woe my Suffering sings;

Its faculties in Truths Seraphick Line,
To track the Treasons of thy foes and mine.

(The only Root of Righteous Royalty)
With this dim Diadem invested me,

The Holy Unction, and the Royal Globe:
Yet am I levelled with the life of Job.

Upon my Grief, my Gray Dis-crowned Head,
Are those that owe my Bounty for their Bread.
The Cause,
Whilst sacrilegious hands have best applause,
Plunder and Murder are the Kingdoms Laws;
Taxation,
Revenge and Robbery are Reformation,
Oppression gains the name of Sequestration.
An. 1649.
My Loyal Subjects who in this bad season
Attend me (by the Law of God and Reason)
They dare impeach, and punish for High Treason.

Pious Episcopacy must go down,
They will destroy the Crosier and the Crown.

Mechanics preach, and Holy Fathers bleed,
The Crown is crucified with the Creed.
England does all Faction foster,
The Pulpit is usurpt by each Impostor,
Ex tempore excludes the Pater noster.
Presbyter and Independent Seed
Springs with broad blades; to make Religion bleed,
Herod and Pontius Pilate are agreed.

With such a bloody method and behavior,
Their Ancestors did crucify our Savior.

So many Princes legally have come,
Is forced in Pilgrimage to seek a Tomb.
Britain's Heir is forced into France,
Whilst on his Father's head his foes advance:
Poor Child! He weeps out his Inheritance.

In the King's Name the King himself's uncrown'd:
So does the Dust destroy the Diamond.

My Peoples ears, such as do Reason daunt,
And the Almighty will not let me grant.

To make Me great, to advance my Diadem,
If I will first fall down, and worship them;

Distress my Children, and destroy my bones,
I fear they will force me to make bread of stones.

That in my absence they draw Bills of hate,
To prove the King a Traitor to the State.

They are allowed to answer e're they die,
It Is death for me to ask the reason, Why.

Thee to forgive, and not be bitter to
Such, as thou know do not know what they do.

As to contemn those Edicts he appointed,
How can they prize the Power of his Anointed?

Preserve my Issue, and inspire my Mate,
Yet though We perish, bless this Church and State.
Vota dabunt quae bella negarunt. But I go on from this sad subject to the
tragical Conclusion of the Duke's Life.

The News of that Murder sunk the Duke's thoughts into a deep Sorrow, which he
carried with him to his Grave: he well saw his own Danger, knowing that those
who had broken all the bonds of Loyalty and Duty, were not to tie themselves to
the faith of a Capitulation or Articles, though granted by a person empowered
by them; and therefore he designed an Escape from Windsor that night, which was
contrived by his faithful Servant Mr. Cole, afterward one of the Kings
Quirries, who during his imprisonment had liberty to go and return from London,
which he did very frequently, bringing him an account of what passed. And the
Duke having gained his Keeper, ordered Mr. Cole to send a trusty Servant with
two Horses to Windsor, which accordingly he did; advertising the Duke not to
come to the City till seven a Clock in the Morning, and then Mr. Cole was to
come to him near London, and bring him to some secure House in the City;
whereupon at night about the time of shutting the Gates, The Duke makes an
Escape from Windsor,
the Duke made his Escape freely out of the Castle, without suspicion, and came
to the Place appointed, where his Servant and Horses waited for him. But he
fatally went from the Resolutions he had laid down with Mr. Cole, and would
needs go in the night to Southwark, thinking to have got to Mr. Owen's House,
who was acquainted with the business; not considering what had been told him of
the Guards were about the City all the night, so that there was no coming to it
but in the day: and all things concurring to hasten him to his Grave, there was
that night a Party of Horse and Foot in Southwark searching for Sir Lewis
Dyves, and another who had escaped the night before. but is re-taken in
Southwark,
Some of them meeting the Duke in the Streets about four in the morning, where
he had long knocked at a door, took him, and examined him: he told them a very
formal Story of himself and his business, which at first satisfied them; but
they observed, that as he took a pipe of Tobacco by them, he burned several
great Papers to fire it; whereupon they searched him, and found such Papers
about him as discovered him. It was not before the next morning that he was
missed at Windsor, for that night he made his Escape there came an Order from
Cromwell to the Governor of Windsor to make him close Prisoner, and put all his
Servants from him, who thereupon ordered the Captain of the Guard to go about
it; but he hearing the Duke was a-bed, delayed it till next morning, and then
found he was gone. It being discovered that Mr. Cole had ordered the Duk's
Escape, many advised him to go out of the way; but he resolved rather to die
than to leave his Master at such a time, and made a shift to come at him that
same evening. When the Duke saw him, he lifted up his hands, and said, It was
Gods will it should be thus. That night Mr. Cole was also taken, and Sir
Hardress Waller examined him, but drew nothing from him, whereupon he was made
close Prisoner; yet when the Duke was brought to his Trial he procured his
Liberty, for the Averment of some particulars of his Plea.

The Duke being thus unfortunately retaken, he was committed to Prison at St.
James's, and is kept in St. James's.
in the same Room where the Earl of Norwich, the Lord Capel, and Sir John Owen
were Prisoners, and then all saw in what danger his Life was: whereupon great
endeavors were used and strong applications made in Scotland to the Marquis of
Argyle, who had then the chief Power there, that the Committee of Estates would
so far study his Preservation, as to own that what he did was by the Authority
of that Kingdom, that so whatever other Punishment they would lay on him, his
Life might not go for it: And it had been faithfully promised by all the
Leaders of that Party, at the Pacification at Sterlin, either to save his Life,
or to make his Death a National Quarrel. But the Marquis of Argyle would not
interpose, These who had the power in Scotland refuse to move for him.
and though the Dukes Daughter, the present Duchess of Hamilton, left no means
unessayed to prevail on him; yet all was in vain, for he pretended that since
those in England had murdered their King, notwithstanding their Commissioners
protesting against it, it was not to be expected their interposition in other
things could be of any weight; nor was it fit they should any more address to
the Murderers of their Sovereign. So all hopes of any Mediation that way
failed; and not only that, but Lambert being prevailed on by the offer of a
good Sum, to claim the Duke as his Prisoner, some Letters came from Scotland
about it, upon which Lambert was advised not to insist on that Demand. This was
vouched to the Writer from several hands, who had it both from Lambert himself,
and some other considerable men in the Two Houses.

But now his Majesty's Blood not having satisfied the Cruelty of the New
Usurpers, their next design was against those who had served him faithfully;
and therefore the Duke was brought to his Trial, and honored to be the first
of those who followed his Master in that Glorious Martyrdom.

The Usurpers ordained the pretended Court of Justice to proceed against him:
so in the 6th of February, he was brought to a Trial. It will not be hard to
persuade the Reader, without further inquiry, that those who embrued their
hands in the Blood of their Sovereign, thereby breaking loose from all Ties
Sacred and Humane, could not stand much at the effusion of meaner Blood; no,
their Consciences were feared with their former Crime, so that nothing could be
so wicked but they were stout enough for attempting it: yet they chose to
varnish over their perfidious Cruelty with some Colors and Appearances of
Justice; but the Disguise was so thin, that it served them to no other purpose,
but to add hypocrisy to their former Villainy: which will evidently appear from
the following Trial, drawn partly from the Journal of the Court, and partly
from Notes of what passed, taken by some Eyewitnesses. Steel and Cook, the
Counsel for the People of England, did exhibit on the 6th of February, being
Friday, the following Charge.

That the Earl of Cambridge about the 19th of July last, Traitorously invaded
this Nation in a Hostile manner, The Charge given against him.
and levied War to assist the King against the Kingdom and People of England,
and had committed Sundry Murders, Outrages, Rapines, Wastes, and Spoils, upon
the said People; and particularly about the 20th of August, near Preston did
make War, join Battle and fight against the Forces of the Parliament, and
therein did murder, and kill Colonel Thornley and others.

To this the Duke put in the Declinatour and special Plea following, The Dukes
Plea.
intending at last to answer the Charge, if the Plea was not sufficient; having
first told the Court, he was better known by another name than the Earl of
Cambridge. His Plea consisted of three ^^ads. First, he pleaded this his
undertaking that Employment, was by Command of the Parliament, and Supreme
Authority of the Kingdom of Scotland, for such ends as he conceived were good
and justifiable, and in no way derogatory to the Peace and Happiness of these
Dominions; That he did earnestly endeavor to decline it, but that not being
accepted of, he could not disobey their Commands without incurring the severest
Censures. Secondly, that he was born in Scotland before the Naturalization of
his Father in England, therefore he conceived himself an Alien, and not triable
in England. Thirdly, that he had rendered himself Prisoner upon Capitulation and
Articles with those who had Major General Lamberts Commission; and that by
these, he was, first, a Prisoner of War; next his Life and the Safety of his
Person was secured to him by the Articles, which were signed by the
Commissioners of both sides, before he was their Prisoner, and that they could
fasten neith^r a Breach, nor nonperformance on him. Upon this the Counsel of
the People caused the Act of his Fathers Naturalization to be read, and spoke a
little to aggravate and set out his Fact; but he desired a convenient time to
procure Papers, Witnesses, and other Evidences material to his Plea, which he
said was seldom denied to any in that condition; and it was well known to many
there, how that since the beginning of this Parliament, many weeks were granted
to an Eminent Man upon his Trial (by whom he meant the Earl of Strafford, who
had time allowed him to send to Ireland.) The Court adjourned to the next day
without giving him any satisfactory Answer. But the Dukes Carriage and
Discourse that day gained much on all the Spectators, being so serene and calm
that his very Enemies did applaud it.

The Second Appearance.
Saturday the 10th in the Evening his Grace was again brought to the Bar, and
he desired Counsel which was granted; and it was refered to him, whether the
Court or himself should name them, which he then passed over, and without much
speaking on either side the Court adjourned, notice being given him that he
must appear again on Tuesday the 13th; but no Order being issued forth for
Counsel, some Counsel who were dealt with did decline the Employment.

The Third Appearance.
Tuesday the 13th his Grace being brought again to the Bar, desired a longer
time, since notwithstanding serious means had been used, no Lawyer would be his
Counsel without the Courts Orders. This was granted by the President after some
Expostulation, and upon his Graces Nomination, Mr. Chute, Mr. Hales, Mr.
Parsons, and Dr. Walker were assigned him for Counsel, to have free access to
him, in the presence and hearing of some of his Keepers, and to be ready
against Teursday following to maintain his Plea, upon which the Court adjourned
till the 15th.

The Fourth Appearance.
Thursday the 15th his Grace being again brought before the Court, declared
that their Order being offered to his Counsel, they all found themselves unable
to plead for him, or to do what was otherwise fitting, and so had refused to
come and speak with him at St. James's. The Court objected the time they had
already granted, and alleged this was a mere delay: but his Grace protested it
was true, and offered one of his Servants to attest it. Doctor Walker in Court
declared, he would not be of his Counsel, by reason of his Employment under the
Parliament. His Grace desired a convenient time as was usual in the like Cases,
not only in respect of his Lawyers, but that he might send to Scotland, and
other remote Places for Witnesses, and Evidences, necessary for his Defense;
since no prejudice could come by that Delay, and this was denied to none in
Trial for Life, and had been granted to Mac-Guire and Mac-Hun two Irish Men.
But for his Counsel the Court Ordained, that any of the Six he should name
might be Authorized to advise with him in private, and to speak in Court in the
matter of Law arising out of the Fact of the Plea, after the matter of Fact was
handled, which his Grace was to maintain next Saturday. And for the Time he
craved, they said, he looked on the unreasonable time was granted to Strafford
and Canterbury, those grand Offenders, with whom he had been too familiar, as
Precedents; but those were Precedents without a Precedent, and none were to
expect the like at this time, especially since there were now so many Prisoners
to be Tried.

Saturday the 17th His Grace was brought to the Court with some Witnesses, his
Counsel being near, but not present; The Fifth Appearance.
and in order to the Parts of his Plea, he first produced Duplicates of the
Commission, and Orders from the Parliament of Scotland and Committee of Estates
there. The Court demanded Evidence for both; his Grace answered, were time
granted he would not only sufficiently prove these, but many other points
belonging to his Justification: but the Court answered, that unless they were
presently attested viva voce, they would not suffer them to be read. Witnesses
examined.
Whereupon his Grace desired that his Servant Mr. Lewis might be examined,
whose Testimony was accepted, and the Papers he produced were received for
Evidences and read. Next, the Declaration containing the ends of the Engagement
was read, and being proved by the same Witness was left in Court with the
former Papers. Then the Court upon his Grace's desire produced the Original
Articles of Capitulation, which were read; and Mr. Cole proved he saw them
delivered to his Grace about nine in the Morning, before the Lord Gray came in.

The L. Gray deposed, That two several Summons, which were sent by him to his
Grace to yield upon Mercy, were both answered negatively in respect of the
Cessation and Treaty; That by a Letter from Cromwell, dated Warrington August
20th, he was enjoined to pursue the Scottish Forces with all vigor; That he had
received Letters from the Staffordshire-Gentlemen with whom the Cessation
begun, intimating that they had condescended to it, on purpose to gain a few
days time to strengthen themselves, in regard the Scots were so numerous; and
that he dispatched away Wait and Peter's that morning in which the Treaty ended
to protest against it.

Peter's was next examined, and answered, That going that morning to protest, by
order from the Lord Gray, he came accidentally to the Duke, where he found the
Hostages in his Chamber, and asked if he was willing to be the Lord Gray's
Prisoner, who answered, he could not, in regard of the Treaty; but if he were
afterward to be disposed of, he had rather be his Lordships Prisoner than any
others, being of his acquaintance; That he had seen the Summons, and the
negative Answer to them; That this was about five in the Morning; and that
Wait and he went apart of the way toward the place of Treaty, where he heard
the Articles were concluded.

Lilburn was next examined, who deposed, That the Articles were signed by
himself, and the other Treaties, about five in the morning, and were to be
ratified by the Duke and Lambert; and that his own meaning of Preserving the
Dukes Life (he knew not how the rest meant) was only to preserve him from the
violence of the Soldiers, and not from the Justice of the Parliament. At this
Peter's rose up, expressing great dislike of Lilburn's Gloss, saying, that much
tenderness was to be used where the Life of so eminent a person was concerned;
That he had seen many Articles of War, but had never heard of such ambiguity,
and that it was clear by those Articles the Duke held his Life secured, as well
from the Parliament as the Soldiers; and wished to God that if their
Commissioners had meant otherwise, it had been so expressed in the Articles, it
being most necessary that Articles were in a concernment of Life. The President
answered, You say well for the future, but it is now too late.

His Grace resumed what had been said, and spoke much on the Articles for
weakening Lilburn's Gloss.

The Duke is falsely accused by the Governor of Windsor-Castle.
Next the Governor and Marshall of Windsor were examined about his Escape from
Windsor-Castle: the Governor deposed, that the Duke said to him he needed not
fear his Escape, he would be a true Prisoner, and not go away though the Gates
were opened. The Marshall said, he only heard this from the Governor.

The Duke expressed a deep r^sentment of this Injury done him by the Governor,
who wounded his Honor so much, which he valued above all earthly things: and
did show how unlike it was that any such thing was either demanded or granted,
since that is only done for a little more Liberty, whereas he was all the while
kept under strict Guards; nor had he the liberty of walking in the Park, but
was always guarded by two Keepers, the one lying all night in the Room next
him, and the other every night locking the Door, and carrying the Key with him;
That the Governors Testimony in this matter was not to be received, he being a
Party, and now in hazard for his negligence, for he was told that if he
escaped, he should die for it: adding, that if he were not a Prisoner, he would
desire right of the Governor for that Scandal cast on him, and choose no other
place for it but Westminster Hall. But to all this the Governor made no Reply;
only the President said, that though he could not blame the Earl of Cambridge
for what he said, yet for all that the Governor was not to be discredited.

The Duke pleads for himself from the Articles granted him.
After this the Duke spoke a little to all the three Branches of his Plea,
reserving the fuller enlarging upon them to his Counsel. He insisted most on
the Articles, which he doubted not were sufficient to protect him; he desired
them to consider, how Sacred Articles of War were reputed in all Places, and
among all Nations, and how inviolably they were kept, all Princes and States
being most careful to observe them, not only to Strangers, but to Subjects;
having great regard to Articles, though only for Quarter, much more when there
was a Capitulation for Life, adding the following Instances. Elisha the Prophet
would not suffer the King of Israel to kill the Syrian Captains, saying,
Would thou smite those whom thou have taken Captive with thy Sword and thy
Bow? The Blood of Abner lay on Ioab's head, who killed one that had the Kings
Safe Conduct. The Gibeonites also, though they used Joshua deceitfully, yet
were preserved according to the Articles given them; and not only Readiness House,
but the whole Land suffered for the violation of them. That Prince Robert and
the Lord Cottington, though excepted from Life or Pardon by Act of Parliament,
were notwithstanding that, upon the Articles of the Rendition of Oxford,
permitted to go beyond Sea, and never questioned for Life; and the like Justice
was done the Earl of Bristol and the Lord Paulet, upon the Articles of the
Surrender of Exeter, though both were excepted from Pardon; and that the Lord
Fairfax and the Officers of the Army were most careful to see Articles always
kept, in which they judged their Honor deeply concerned, and had often written
to the Parliament to that end: therefore he did not doubt the like Justice
would be done him. By this time it was late, and the President appointed Monday
next for the Duke to finish his Plea in matter of Fact, ordering his Counsel to
be in the Court for their better Information; and so they adjourned.

Monday the 19th the Duke and his Counsel were brought to the Bar. The sixth
Appearance.
Colonel Wait was examined, who deposed, that the Duke rendered himself to be
the Lord Gray's Prisoner, and desired Wait to protect him from the Multitude,
who thereupon left a Guard at his going away. But during his Deposition Peter's
said, he lies, he lies; and Peter's, Spencer, and other Officers who were with
Wait at Vtoxater, being examined, did totally falsify his Deposition. Diverse
were also that day examined about the place of the Duke's Birth, who all swore,
they heard it always said that he was born at Hamilton, and that it was not a
thing to be doubted of: others were examined about the Signing of the Articles,
who all Witnessed, that they were signed long before the Lord Gray came; and
Major Blackmore deponed, that the Duke's being the Lord Gray's Prisoner, was by
an Agreement betwixt him and Lambert, whose occasions pressed him to go
suddenly Northward.

After this the Duke spoke a little, to show how little weight was to be laid
on Wayt's Testimony, which was so evidently disproved. Next his Counsel asked
the Courts Directions, how they should proceed; and the Court answered, that
after the matter of Fact was handled, they might plead in Law upon all the
parts of the Plea: and they told the Duke by the next Wednesday to finish his
Evidence.

He desired a Warrant for bringing some Gentlemen, then Prisoners in
White Hall, who were his material Witnesses: but the Court adjourned, and
promised to consider of that Motion in the Painted Chamber; yet they granted it
not.

Wednesday the 21st the Court sat, The seventh Appearance.
and the Duke was brought to the Bar. Some were interrogated about the time of
his Birth, to prove him post-natus: but it was not proved, one person only
swearing, that he heard him say he was some years younger than the King.
Evidence was also brought of his Conjunction with Langdale, which they
accounted Treason; yet even that was not clearly proved, though it was much
labored. Some Letters of his to Langdale had been taken, and were brought into
Court: but as the Letters proved no Conjunction, so it did not appear that they
were his Letters: only Peter's asserted they were like his hand. Then a Vote of
the Two Houses was read, repealing a former Vote of setting an hundred thousand
pounds Sterling upon him for Ransom; and proof was brought, that
notwithstanding Articles were given, yet some had been forced to take the
Negative Oath, and thereby they studied to evince that the Parliament did not
hold themselves bound to stand to Articles.

After this his Grace resumed the substance of all those Evidences, and showed
that it was not proved he was a post-natus, nor that he joined with Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, who neither received Orders nor the Word from him, but
marched and quartered apart; and that though he had done otherwise, it could
not be criminal in him, since he had no Orders to the contrary from the
Parliament of Scotland, but was commanded by them to join with all who would
concur with him for prosecuting the ends of the Engagement, of which Sir
Marmaduke approving, he had no reason to refuse Concurrence with him; neither
could this be made Treason by the Law of England: of all which it seemed the
Parliament was once well-satisfied, since by a Vote they had fined him in an
hundred thousand pound Sterling, as the price of his Liberty; by which it
appeared they looked not on him as a Traitor, but as an Enemy who had Life
granted him by Articles.

Upon this the Court adjourned till Thursday the 22d, and his Counsel were
appointed to plead, and he was to close his Evidence. The Duke was brought to
the Bar, The ei^ht Appearance.
and by diverse Witnesses it was proved, that there was no Rendition made to the
Lord Gray, but a plain Refusal, and that the Treaty was ended, the Articles
signed, and Lambert come up, before the Lord Gray came thither. There was also
produced an Order of Parliament, made four years before, that No Quarters
should be given to any of the Iris^ in Arms, which inferred that others might
have them; and another Order was read of the 14th July last, declaring all the
Sco^s who entered England Enemies, and all the English and Irish who assisted
them Tr^ytors, and with this he closed his Evidence: and since he was not to be
suffered to speak any more, he enlarged on all the parts of his Plea, and spoke
at length as follows.

That he was sent by the Kingdom of Scotland, which was a free Kingdom, The
Duke pleads largely for himself.
and independent on England; That he having had his Birth, Honor, and Fortune
there, was bound to give obedience to their Orders; That for himself he had
lived much out of business, and was seldom in Public Trust in that Kingdom,
nor very desirous of any; but that being commanded to undertake the Charge of
General, for ends which he conceived lawful, and no way contrary to the Peace
or Interest of England, he was obliged to follow their Orders; and that by some
Papers emitted by the Parliament of England against that Expedition, they
declared they looked on it as a National Breach, whereby Scotland had violated
their Leagues and Treaties with them, so that it was no private Act of his;
That the entering of the Scottish Army into England Anno 1640 was accounted no
Invasion, nor Treason, but on the contrary was acceptable to this Kingdom,
which gave a Brotherly Assistance for it: and that the late unfortunate Army
was designed fully for as good Ends, and would have been so looked on had it
prospered. And for his joining with Sir Marmaduke Langdale, he answered it as
was before set down. Therefore he being taken Prisoner in such a War, he
conceived it without a Precedent that he should be Tried for his Life, for
serving his Native Kingdom in an open War. As for his being an Alien, he
referred that to his Counsel, but said it was undeniable he was born in
Scotland, nor was he proved a post-natus* he was also born before his Father's
Naturalization, and so not included in it, and his own Naturalization had been
in agitation in the beginning of this Parliament: That his sitting in
Parliament did not conclude him an English Earl, for if questioned, he might
probably have been expelled out of the House of Peers, as his Countryman Mr.
Walter Stuart was out of the House of Commons: and that his being an Earl did
not naturalize him, that being the King's single Act, where as Naturalization
was only by Act of Parliament. As for the Articles, it was clear, that Lambert
being a General Officer, commissionated by Parliament, was empowered to
Capitulate both by the Parliament and by Cromwell, the L. Gray having no
Authority from the Parliament, but only from Cromwell's Letter: that he became
the Lord Gray's Prisoner only by Lambert's Order, and that he made no Surrender
till the Articles were signed and delivered: that though the Lord Gray had
protested against it, (and yet only an intention to do it was proved) he was
not concerned in it, nor bound to take notice of it, Lambert being the
Parliaments Officer, and sent against him by them. That Articles were to be
expounded by their plain meaning, and not by any mental reserves pretended by
the Commissioners; That by the first Article, he was a Prisoner of War, and
that it was seldom known that the Life of any such was taken; and that by the
second Article, Life and Safety of Person were expressly secured without any
exception: That if Articles were now violated, it would make the sequel of the
Wars, if any more followed, a downright Butchery, since none would any more
trust to a Capitulation, which Mischief he prayed God to avert. That his Escape
out of Prison was no Breach, he being only bound by the Articles to deliver
himself Prisoner, which he did, but not to continue so: and he concluded, that
he was confident, had he no better Plea, his Articles were sufficient,
according to the Laws of all Nations to preserve his Life.

Then the President asked him, if he had any thing to say as he was Earl of
Cambridge: whereupon he and his Counsel moved, that if what he had said and
proved was not satisfactory for the Averment of his Plea, he might answer the
Charge exhibited, which he had not yet done. But to this, neither the Court,
nor their Counsel would yield, though they gave no reason for it, save only
that it employed a desire of Delay: but the reason, as was said, was, that they
knew had they yielded to that the Charge had been overthrown, since the Law of
England does not admit that to be Treason which they charged on him, that he
had assisted the King against the Kingdom and People by levying War. Then the
Court told his Counsel, that Saturday was the longest time they allowed them
for performing their part: but the Counsel answered, that it was impossible for
them to undertake it, and discharge their Consciences to their Client, having
so short a time allowed them; there being a necessity of searching diverse
Records for Precedents, which required a competent time, as had been allowed in
former cases: but the Court refused to promise it, only they said they would
take it into their consideration. The Counsel insisted, and said plainly, they
declined the Employment on those terms, and would be forced to declare it.

Monday the 26th the other two Officers that had signed the Capitulation for
the Duke and his Troops, The ninth Appearance.
who had been sent for a great way off, were examined, who agreed with the
former Witnesses in matters of Fact, and also with Lilburn, that by signing the
Articles, they only meant the Duke should be preserved from the Violence of the
Soldiers, and not from the Justice of the Parliament. Then the Counsel began
to Plead, and all four spoke on the several Heads of the Plea. Mr. Heron spoke
cursorily and elegantly, but not very materially: Mr. Parsons, a young man,
spoke boldly, and to good purpose: Mr. Chute the Civilian spoke learnedly and
home: and Mr. Hales (since the much-renowned Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench) elaborately and at length. The Heads of their Arguments follow.

The Duke's Counsel at Law plead for him.
The Duke being, as was granted, a born Scotch-man, his Tie of obligation and
subjection to that Kingdom, was indispensable and indissoluble, so that his
late Employment could not be refused when laid on him by the Authority of that
Kingdom; no more than a Native of England, living in it, can disobey the
Commands of this Parliament; whereas any Subjection the Duke owed the
Parliament of England was only acquired, and dispensable: That since no man can
be a Subject of two Kingdoms, whatever Tie lay on him to the Kingdom of
England, it was not to be put in Competition with what he owed Scotland, it
being a Maxim in Law, that Major relatio trahit ad se minorem, and that Ius
Originis nemo mutare potest: That there was an Allegiance due to the King and
another to the Kingdom, and no Treason could be without a Breach of Faith and
Allegiance due to them against whom it was committed, for these Kingdoms were
two distinct Kingdoms; and though the Allegiance due to the King was the same
in both Kingdoms, yet that due to the Kingdoms was distinct: nor was the Actual
administration of the Kingdoms in the Kings Person when the Duke got his
Employment; therefore, as his Allegiance to the Kingdom of Scotland was
ancienter and stronger than any Tie that lay on him in England, so what he did
by their Order might well make him an Enemy to this Kingdom, but could not
infer Treason. Yet all this of the Allegiance due to the Kingdom was founded on
no Common or Statute Law, as Mr. Hales himself confessed afterward: but he
urged this well against those who asserted it, it being the universally
received Maxim at that time.

That whether he was a Post-natus, or Ante-natus did not appear: but though he
were, it did not vary the Case, nor his obligation to the place of his
Nativity; and so though he were Post-natus, or accounted a Denizen by his
Fathers Naturalization, his Offense could not be Treason, but Hostility at
most, and by that supposed Hostility, he could only lose his Privilege of a
Denizen, but could not be made a Traitor, there being no Precedent where ever
any man was attainted of Treason for a hostile Invasion, and it was
questionable if this Offense could amount to that: nor could any case be
alleged, where one born in another Independent Kingdom, acting by a
Commission from that Kingdom, and residing there when he received his
Commission, and raising the Body of his Army in that Kingdom, and coming into
this, in an Open Hostile manner, was ever judged guilty of Treason.
Naturalization was intended to be a Benefit, and not a Snare, so that one might
well lose it, but was not to be punished for it. And so when France and England
were under one Sovereign, diverse of both Nations were naturalized in the other;
yet when Hostility broke out betwixt them, many so naturalized fought on the
side of their Native Kingdom, for which none were put to death, though diverse
were taken Prisoners. And in Edward the third's time, though he claimed France
as his by Right; yet when the Constable of France invaded England, and was
taken Prisoner, he was not tried, nor put to death, but sent back to France, as
being a Native of that Kingdom. And when David Bruce King of Scotland invaded
this Kingdom, and was taken Prisoner, great endeavors were used to find a
Legal ground for his Trial, he being Earl of Huntington in England; but this
Plea was waved, for it was found that it could not be done justly, that being
but a less degree of Honor, though King Edward claimed a kind of Homage from
the Crown of Scotland. That if the Duke were on that account put to death, it
might prove of sad consequence, in case there was War any more betwixt the
Kingdoms; since most of the present Generation were Post-nati, and all would be
so quickly; and yet if the Lord Fairfax, who was both a Post-natus, and had his
Honor in Scotland, were commanded to lead an Army thither, and being taken
were put to death, it would be thought hard measure. For the Duke's Father's
Naturalization, it was true, by the Statute of the 25 Ed. 3. provision was
made, that Children born without the Kingdom, whose Parents were then in the
King's Allegiance, should be Denizens: but the Duke was born before his
Father's Naturalization, which can never reach him, none but the Issue after
his Father's Naturalization being included within it; and the word Haeres in
the Act is only a word of Limitation, and not of Creation: nor did his making
use of the assistance of some English Forces make him a Traitor. It is true, if
an Englishman conduct a Foreign Army, or if a Foreigner come of his own head,
or in a Rebellious way, to assist an English Rebellion, it will amount to
Treason: for the Act of such an Alien is denominated from the crime of those he
assist here, where he owed a local Obedience, which was the Case of Shirley the
Frenchman, and of Lopez: but if an Alien come with a Foreign Force, though he
make use of English Auxiliaries, that only infers a Hostility, but no Treason;
and was the case of the Lord Harris a Scotchman 15 Eliz. and of Perkin Warbeck,
both having English help: and though Warbeck was put to death, it was by no
Civil Judicatory, but only by the Will of Henry the 7th, who erected a
Court-Marshall for that purpose. The present case was yet clearer, where the
Alien had Authority from his Native Kingdom, and was commanded by them to make
use of English help: so that though Langdale's assisting the Duke did make
himself a Traitor, yet the Duke's accepting of it only infers an Act of
Hostility. And whereas it was objected, that the Parliament had already by
their Act which constituted this Court for his Trial, declared him a Traitor;
it was not to be disputed what the Parliament had Power to do, but no
Parliament had ever done the like before: and the meaning of the Act must be,
that he should be tried whether guilty of Treason or not, since if the
Parliament have already declared him a Traitor, further Trial was needless. And
it was clear, the Parliament by their Act in July last, which declared all the
Scots who entered England, Enemies, considered not the distinction of Post-nati,
nor judged that inferred Treason, since most of them all were Post-nati; That
many of the Officers of that Army, who had been taken Prisoners, though clearly
Post-nati, were ransomed, others banished, others still in Prison; why then
should the imputation of Treason be fastened on the Duke when the rest were used
only as Enemies?

And for the Articles they made it appear, they were the Public Faith of the
Kingdom, when given by persons publicly Authorized, upon the observing of
which inviolably, depended the whole Intercourse of all Nations, and their
mutual Confidence, which is founded on all States being bound by the Acts of
their Public Ministers; That this was not a pure Rendition, but a Paction
concluded upon Deliberation, wherein the Parliament lost nothing, but on the
contrary were Gainers; That the Parliament had ratified this upon the matter,
by Voting a hundred thousand pound Sterling Fine to be the price of the Dukes
Liberty; That the secret sense the Treaters pretended was not to be considered;
since all Compacts are to be understood according to the clear meaning of the
Words, and the universal sense of Mankind, who look on Articles wherein Life is
granted as a sufficient Security, not only from the Soldiers, but from the
Civil Powers; and that these Treaters, when the Articles were agreed, should
have made known their secret meaning, otherwise it was not to be regarded: and
it was a most dangerous Precedent to admit of collateral Averments of secret
meanings against express words, much more in a Case of Life, and yet much more
in Military Agreements, wherein the Concernments of Armies and Nations were
included, and which concerned the Honor and Security of all Soldiers; and for
this diverse Precedents were cited. The Argument ended thus; That as the Court
consisted of Gentlemen and Lawyers, and of Martial men; so the Plea consisting
of three Branches, was the more proper for their cognizance, a part of it being
drawn from the Law of England, another part from the Civil Law, and a Third
part from the Martial Law: and if the Plea, in any of the three Branches, was
made good (and they doubted not but it would be found so in them all) the Court
would be satisfied, there was Reason and Justice for preserving the Dukes life.

The Tenth Appearance.
The Court adjourned till Friday the second of March, and the Duke being again
brought to the Bar, the Counsel for the People pleaded, but so poorly that all
who heard them were ashamed: But they had one advantage, that neither the Duke
nor his Counsel were allowed to speak after them, nor to discover their
impertinent Allegations, which made the Dukes Counsel obviate all they could
imagine they might say, though they said a great deal so far out of the way of
Reason, that none could have thought of it; and yet it was so weak that it
needed neither be obviated, nor replied to.

Yet at the end of every Branch of their Pleading, I shall add the Answers
against them, as they are set down in some Notes taken by the Dukes Counsel.

The Counsel for the People plead against the Duke.
They begun with Alienage, and studied to make it appear, that though he was a
Scotchman born, yet he was no Alien, having enjoyed all the Privileges an
Englishman was capable of, as being a Peer, a Privy-Councellour, possessing
Lands and Inheritances, and Marrying in England. But Naturalization cannot be
but by Act of Parliament, and not by the Kings single Deed; much less by those
Privileges of which any Stranger might participate.

Next they urged his Fathers Naturalization, and since his Name was not in that
Act, as was in other Acts of Naturalization, that proved him to be no Alien,
otherwise his Name had been put in. From that it rather appeared he was an
Alien, since others found it necessary to insert their Childrens Names, which
his Father not doing, proves the Son an Alien still.

They also urged his being Post-natus, which must be held true, since he
brought no Evidence to the contrary; and it being so, his Tie of subjection was
as great in England as in Scotland: That Allegiance was only due to the King,
and not to the Kingdom: That there was a King when he entered into England, and
that though he was secluded from the Government, yet all Writs were issued in
his Name, so that this Expedition was a breach of the Allegiance he owed the
King. This was the oddest part of all their Plea, since his Charge was, that he
assisted the King against the Kingdom; and now they did plead he owed no
Allegiance to the Kingdom, but to the King, whom they had so lately murdered,
the Dukes coming with his Army being only to relieve him from the Barbarous
Usage he had met with.

They also urged at large, That an Englishman's Children in what place of the
World soever they were born, were Denizens of England, and cited many
Precedents. But the Mis-application of them was gross and palpable, those being
of Persons who were Englishmen before their Children were born, whereas the
Duke's Father was naturalized after he was born: so that he could not
communicate that Privilege to him, which he did indeed transmit to his
Children born after his Naturalization.

Next, they pleaded, that the Parliament of Scotland had no power to
commissionate him to enter into England, and that if some of them were there,
they ought likewise to suffer for it, and it was fit he suffered for his
Masters, who employed him; That it was pity the King had not suffered sooner.
They also produced many Precedents of Strangers being condemned as guilty of
Treason, for Treasons committed in England, as the Queen of Scots, Lopez,
Perkin Warbeck, the Lord Harris, Shirley the Frenchman, and the Spanish
Ambassador. All this was obviated in the former Argument, where distinction
was made betwixt secret Practices, and an open Invasion with a foreign Force.
They added, That Scotland belonged to the Crown of England, and so was to be
looked on as some of the Counties of England. But Scotland had no subjection to
the Crown, but only to the King of England, whom they had murdered, and so they
had no Power to judge any Scotchman.

As for the Articles, they pleaded it was not in the Power of the Army to
absolve any from the Justice of the Parliament, which being above them, was not
tied to their Articles: and therefore, though they confessed the words ought to
have been less ambiguous, yet they said, the Exposition of those who Signed
them was to be admitted, since every man was to be the Expounder of his own
words; and pleaded some Precedents about the Exposition of ambiguous words. But
the words here were plain and not ambiguous, only a treacherous Equivocation
was invented to break them.

Cook by a strange subtilty said, The Articles only secured his Life during
Imprisonment, so that his breaking of Prison, and being retaken, put an end to
the Obligation of the Articles: Though he broke not not Prison, but went out at
Door and Gate, which was no Crime.

Thus did the Counsel of the People plead against him, to the conviction of all
who looked on, that they thirsted for his Blood, and were only seeking colors
of Justice for it: which yet were so slight that they could serve for no
Disguise, but only to abuse those who were blinded with Prejudice.

The Court adjourned to Tuesday being the sixth of March: And then the Duke was
brought to the Bar, and the Judges sat in Scarlet; they rejected the Dukes
Plea in all its Branches, The last Appearance, in which Sentence was given.
and found him guilty of the Charge whereof he was indicted. But before
Sentence, Bradshaw the President resumed all, and spoke long for aggravating of
every particular, justifying every thing their Counsel had pleaded, as if it
had been all both good Law and good Reason: then he caused read the Earl of
Essex his Commission, to show how little Power was given him: (But spoke
nothing of Fairfax or Lambert their Commissions, which had been more pertinent,
but the reason was they were, ampler; and yet the Parliament had never refused
to ratify any Articles Essex gave.) He confessed the Dukes Articles were
fuller than any others, therefore he would insist the more to invalidate them.
He said, It was true, if there had been a War proclaimed, and prosecuted
betwixt a Foreign Nation and Enemy, and England, then by the Law of Nations,
to which their Law was consonant, Articles signed by the Commissioners of both
Parties should have been kept inviolable: but the Prisoner was no Enemy, for
when the ordinary Course of Justice was obstructed by the late Kings prevailing
Party, so that neither Constables nor Sheriffs, nor other Civil Officers, could
lay hold on such Delinquents as he was, or bring them to Punishment, the
Parliament was forced to raise an Army, Commissionating their Generals to bring
such to condign Punishment. This being the end and substance of their
Commission, it was not in their Power, who were but the Sword of Justice in the
Parliaments hand, to give Articles for securing any from the Justice of the
Parliament, since it was never intended their Acts should limit that Power that
gave bounds to them. He added also, that the Court was fully satisfied, that
the Duke was naturalized. The President laid out also the Case of the other
Prisoners then at the Bar, and spoke many hours; at last Sentence was given
against them all, That their Heads should be severed from their Bodies on
Friday next being the ninth Instant: yet it was remitted to the Parliaments
Consideration, what Mercy should be showed to any of them, and so the Duke was
carried back.

The rest of that day, and the next day, the Duke was earnestly solicited to
preserve himself by making Discoveries. And Mr. Peter's who appeared concerned
for him during his Trial, did now insinuate himself on him to draw somewhat
from him: but all was in vain, there being no choice to be made betwixt a
Glorious Death, and an Infamous Life.

On the Eighth of that Month, it being put to the Vote of the House, whether he
should be Reprieved or not, it was carried in the Negative.

The Duke prepares for Death.
That day the Duke spent in fitting himself for Death by Prayers and Spiritual
Conferences, and that he might discharge himself of all worldly Cares, he wrote
the following Letter to his Brother.

Dear Brother,
SInce it has pleased God so to dispose of me, and writes to his Brother,
that I am to be in this World but a few hours, you cannot expect that I can
say much to you; nor indeed is it necessary, for I know you will do undesired
(as far as is in your Power) what I now briefly mention. First, That you will
be a Father to my poor Children, and that they be not forced to marry against
their Wills. The Debts I owe are great, and some Friends are bound for them;
but the Estate I leave you is such as will satisfy what I owe, and free my
Cautioners from Ruin. You are Just, and I doubt not of your performing this. I
cannot forget to recommend my faithful Servants to you, who have never had any
thing from me, in particular, Cole, Lewis, and James Hamilton. I have given
something to them during their Lives, which I hope you will see paid to them.
I shall say no more, but the Lord of his Mercy preserve you, and give you Grace
to apply your self aright to him, in whom there is only fullness of Joy. Dote
not upon the World; all is but vanity and vexation of spirit: grieve not for
what is befallen me, for it is by the appointment of him that rules in Earth
and Heaven: thither the Lord Jesus be pleased to carry the sinful Soul of

Your most loving Brother, HAMILTON.
March 8th, 1649.

At night, the Duke, the Earl of Norwich, the Lord Capel, and Sir John Owen,
were all brought to one Room, where they lay all night: it was very late before
they went to Bed, every one having his Friends to wait on him. The Duke's
Servants asked leave to stay all night in the next Room, and it was granted,
the Duke ordered Mr. Cole to come to him about three a clock in the morning,
which he did; but he with the rest were all fast asleep, and Mr. Cole returning
after half an hour found him awake. He made him sit down, and gave him many
Directions to be carried to his Brother, with an extraordinary composure, as
Mr. Cole vouched to the Writer. About five a clock all of them were ready, and
spent the time very devoutly, in secret Prayers and pious Conferences, and
other holy Exercises, all of them expressing great Joy in their present
Condition, and absolute Submission to the Will of God. The Duke expressed his
more particularly in the following Letter he wrote to his Daughters.

My most dear Children,
IT has pleased God so to dispose of me, as I am immediately to part with this
miserable Life for a better; and to his Children.
so that I cannot take that care of you which I both ought and would, if it had
pleased my Gracious Creator to have given me longer days: but his will be done,
and I with alacrity submit to it, desiring you to do so, and that above all
things you apply your Hearts to seek him, to fear, serve, and love him, and
then doubt not but he will be a loving Father to you while you are on Earth,
and thereafter Crown you with eternal Happiness. Time will permit me to say no
more, so the Lord bless, guide, and preserve you, which is the Prayer of

Your most loving Father, HAMILTON.
St. James's 9th March 1649. Let this remember me to my dear Sisters, Brothers,
and other Friends, for it is all I write.




He did also apprehend, that they might either be hindered to speak their
Consciences freely on the Scaffold, or that the noise and disorder there might
make him be ill-heard, or perhaps occasion disorder from the Soldiers, which
might provoke Passion or Discomposure; and therefore delivered the following
Speech before all in the Room, which his Brother published from the Original he
sent him.

I Know you that are here to be true and faithful to me, I will therefore in
your hearing say somewhat in order to my self, His Speech before his Death.
and to my present Condition, and give you also this Copy of it, which after I
am gone may perhaps be thought necessary to be published, as the last Testimony
of my Loyalty to my King, for whom I now die, and of my Affection to my
Country, for the pursuance of whose pious and loyal Commands I am now to
suffer.

That my Religion has always been and still is Orthodox, I am confident no man
doubts; I shall not therefore need to say much to that particular, only that I
am of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, as it is professed in the Church
of Scotland.

I take God to witness, that I have been constantly a loyal and faithful
Subject and Servant to his late Majesty, (in spite of all Malice and Calumny:)
I have had the honor, since my Childhood to attend and be near him, till now
of late: and during all that time I observed in him as eminent Virtues, and as
little Vice, as in any man I ever knew; and I dare say he never harbored
thought of countenancing Popery in any of his Dominions, otherwise than was
allowed by the Laws of England, and that among all his Subjects there could not
be found a better Protestant than himself; and surely also he was free from
having any intent to exercise any Tyranny or Absolute Power over his Subjects:
and that he has been so unfortunate, I rather impute the Cause of it to the
sins of his People than to his own.

For my own part, I do protest never to have swerved from that true Allegiance
which was due to him, and that has constantly been paid (to my Comfort I
speak it) to his Progenitors by my Ancestors, for many Ages, without spot or
dishonor, and I hope shall be still by my Successors to his Posterity.

I do heartily wish well to and pray for his Royal Issue, and shall die a true
and loyal Subject to his eldest Son Charles the Second, the unquestionable King
by right of all his Father's Kingdoms. I hope (though I do not live to see it)
that God's Justice and Goodness will in his own time establish him on the
Throne of his Father, which I doubt not some of you will see come to pass; and
I am confident, till then, and so long as men deeply plunged in Guilt and
Self-interest usurp Power and Government, these Kingdoms will fall short either
of Peace, or any other permanent Happiness.

I speak this from my just Affection to the Royal Race, and much Compassion to
his Majesty's Subjects; but not from any Malice, Anger, or desire of Revenge,
against any, for what I have, or am to suffer; for I forgive all men.

It is well known what Calumnies and Aspersions have been thrown upon me, by
men of several Parties and Interests, not excepting those who would seem to
carry much Affection to his late Majesty, as if I had expressed Disservice or
Disloyalty unto him; the which how malicious and groundless they were, I appeal
to God, who with my own Conscience clearly bears witness of my Innocence
therein; and I shall beg Mercy from him, to whom I am now to give an account of
all my Thoughts and Actions, as I have still had a faithful and loyal Heart to
my Master.

It has been a General Complaint, that I persuaded His Majesty to pass the Act
of continuing this Parliament. I dispute not, whether the doing of it at that
time might have been reputed good or bad, but surely it was not I that did
persuade it.

Neither did I at all deal with His Majesty for his Consent to the Bill of
Attainder for taking away the Life of the Earl of Strafford, whose great Parts
and Affection, it is known I highly valued: yet some have been pleased to
attribute to me the cause of that Concession; but were His Majesty now living,
I am confident he would publicly clear me in both these, as He has been
pleased many times in private formerly to do.

And truly I am not conscious to my self (though I have been for many years a
Privy-Councellour to him) of ever giving him any Advice that tended to other
ends (as I conceived) than the Good and Peace of His Majesty and His Dominions.

It has been rumoured since my last Imprisonment, that I should confess my
self to be the greatest Instrument under His Majesty (by making use of his
Scottish Great Seal) for authorizing the War in Ireland: a Report so false and
simple, as in my opinion judicious and honest men will not believe it. And
truly as I am free from having hand therein in any manner of way, so I am of
nothing more confident, than that His Majesty was also absolutely free thereof,
and that he was not in any case a Causer or Countenancer of those Irish
Troubles.

I have been often examined touching Persons of several qualities within this
Kingdom, that (as is supposed) did invite into England the late Army from
Scotland, or promised Assistance after their coming; and of late much
Persuasion has been used with me to that purpose, as that upon my Discovery
thereof depended the only means of my Preservation. I will not say that I had
any thing to reveal which would have been satisfactory, but this I desire you
to attest to the World, that I have not accused or said any thing that may
reflect on any man, of what degree soever, within the Kings Dominions: and
indeed it was so contrary to my Conscience, and so derogatory to my Honor,
that if I had been able, yet should I never have prejudiced any in that nature,
though it had been to save me a hundred Lives.

Touching that foul and senseless Slander, that I betrayed the Army under my
Conduct, the care and pains I then took to prevent the loss of it, and the near
approach of my suffering for it, will, I suppose, abundantly contradict this
Aspersion. I was satisfied with the Justness and Necessity of that Engagement,
upon the grounds of the Declaration of the Parliament of Scotland, fearing then
the sad Confusions which have since followed here, both in Church and State;
and particularly the fatal Fall of my Master, to the Preservation of whose
Person I was by Obligation, and Natural Affections as passionately tied, as I
could be by Duty and Allegiance.

And now I confess, I am void of all rancour or displeasure against any, though
I am within few hours to die, adjudged by a lawless and arbitrary Court, of
purpose erected (as is said) to destroy my Master and some of his Servants, and
for a great part composed of men Mechanic, and unfit to be Judges, my Death
being decreed (right or wrong) as is reported, before ever the Trial begun.
And though my Death is no less than Murder, yet I forgive all, and pray to God
to do it, and that my Blood be not laid to their Charge, or to some powerful
and eminent men's, who, as is thought, upon some sinistrous Ends have many
Months since contrived my Destruction, which now is ready to take effect.

And though I have answered to that Count, in regard of the Justness of my
Defense, which I thought would have weighed with them: yet I never thought, nor
do I acknowledge any Jurisdiction or lawful Authority in the same,
notwithstanding I do with all Christian Humility submit to the Punishment,
which for my other Personal Sins the Lord has justly brought upon me.

I should have spoken more, yet would not have said so much, but for fear lest
either my Memory might slip it on the Scaffold, or that the rudeness of some
People, by noise or otherwise, might have interrupted me speaking on this
Subject. So I thank God I am well prepared. God bless you, remember me to all
my Faiends.

I know I have been a great Sinner, yet through Faith I have an assurance, that
God will forgive me, and have Mercy upon me, through the alone Suffering and
Intercession of Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

About nine a clock the Officers called to them to prepare themselves to go:
they were to be carried in Sedans, and great Guards of Horse and Foot to attend
them to Sir Robert Cotton's House. The Duke is led out to the Execution.
But after the Duke had gone through two Rooms, he reflecting on the faithful
Services of Mr. Cole, and judging they deserved a more particular Resentment
than was in the Letter he had written to his Brother the day before, called for
Pen, Ink, and Paper, and wrote the following Note to his Brother.

Brother,
THere is nothing more certain than that a faithful Servant is an humble
Friend: this Bearer I have found such, and therefore recommend him to you in
that quality. I need say no more for him, nor can I of worldly business, being
so near par^ing out of it; but as I have loved you all my life, so I do now at
the end of it. The Lord of his mercy preserve you from dangers of Soul and Body.

Yours, H.


This will more clearly discover the serene and composed Temper he was then in,
than can be done by any Testimony of Spectators, who could only see the
outside, which, as many of them have witnessed to the Writer, was very calm
and resolute. When he came to Sir Robert Cotton's, three or four Officers were
sent from Cromwell to him, desiring that he would discover what had been often
asked of him, and he should not only be preserved, but be made a Great man: but
he rejected their Offers, with the same language he had formerly used on the
like occasions; and said, if he had as many Lives as hairs in his Head, he
would lay them all down rather than redeem them by so base means; which an
Ear-witness vouched to the Writer. Then all went to Prayers, and they had some
excellent good Preachers waiting on them, and praying with them. Some Wine was
brought, and they all drunk one to another, and did embrace and kiss each other
with much tenderness.

The Duke was first led away to the Scaffold: on the way other Officers came
from Cromwell, Continued offers of Life if he would make Discoveries, but they
are rejected.
renewing the former Offers if he would make Discoveries; but all to no
purpose, he rejecting them with scorn. Those many Offers as they were great
temptations, which would have shaken any man whose Soul was not fully at Peace
with God, and wellprepared for Death; so they discovered the baseness of those
men's Designs. But as malice did ever pursue the Duke with the unjustest
Slanders, so his Enemies, hearing that Messengers came often to him, did
strangely misrepresent it, as if he had been even then in some Treaty for his
Life. Being come to the Scaffold, the Earl of Denbigh desired to speak with one
of his Servants, and Mr. Lewis was sent to him: the Duke asked Mr. Cole what
might the matter be, who answered, he judged it was to know what Order he had
given about his Children; the Duke answered, he might satisfy him if that were
the matter.

The Duke was during his stay at St. James's visited sometimes by Doctor
Sibbald. Doctor Sibbald encourages the Duke on the Scaffold.
Him he chose now to accompany him in his last minutes, who encouraged him, to
look to that fountain of the Blood of Christ in which he must be purged from
all his Iniquities; the effusion whereof was for the Salvation of all, who by a
true and lively Faith rested on him: he was the only Rock on which he was to
build his Hopes, and though the waters of Jordan did run an impetuous Current,
he was the Ark of the Covenant, that was to lead him through them to that sure
Refuge, against which neither the Powers on Earth, nor the Gates of Hell could
prevail. He desired him, to lift up the eyes of firm Confidence to the
Crucified Christ, and with St. Stephen to behold him sitting at his Father's
right hand, ready to receive his Soul: adding, who would be in love with Life,
if they could but beforehand consider what it would prove? all being a heap of
Cares, Anxieties, and Miseries, with which every rank of Men, and state of Life
was beset: it was therefore a Happiness to be with much Joy welcomed, when we
found a quick and easy Passage for escaping these swelling Billows, and
getting into that blessed harbor of eternal Happiness. We must pass through a
Sea, but a Sea of our Savior's Blood, in which never any Shipwrackt; and
through which we are carried by the soft winds of the Divine Spirit, which can
scatter all contrary blasts.

When the Doctor had thus ended his Discourse, the Duke perceiving a greater
silence than he expected, though he had resolved to make no Public Speech, and
therefore had, as was already told, expressed himself in private; yet being
invited by the Attention he observed, he spoke to the People: but as he had not
premeditated it, so no Copy of it remains, except what was printed from the
Notes of the Hearers, and therefore I shall only set down the Heads of it. He
addressed himself to the Sheriff, The Duke's last Speech.
and told him, he judged it not very necessary for him to speak much, his Voice
was so weak and low, that few of the crowd that looked on could hear him; nor
was he ever so much in love with speaking, or with any thing he had to say,
that he took much delight in it: yet since this was his Last, he being by the
Divine Providence of Almighty God brought justly to that End for his Sins, he
would speak a little to the Sheriff, for his Voice could not reach others. He
was now to suffer as a Traitor to the Kingdom of England, a Country which he
had ever loved equally with his own, not having intended either any general
Prejudice to it, or to any particular Person in it: his late Actings were the
Commands of his own Country, which he could not disobey. It is true, it had
pleased God so to dispose of the Army under his Command that it was ruined, and
he for being clothed with a Commission to be General stood now ready to dye.
He would not repeat what he had pleaded for his own Defense, God was just; nor
would he say any thing of his Sentence, but that he did willingly submit to
Gods Providence, acknowledging that on many accounts he deserved Punishment in
this Life as well as in the next, for he confessed himself a great Sinner: yet
for his Comfort he knew there was a God in Heaven who was very merciful, and
that his Redeemer did sit at his right Hand; and he was confident that he was
mediating for him at that very instant, being hopeful through his All
sufficient Merits to be pardoned all his Sins, and to be received into his
Mercy, trusting only to the Free Grace of God through Jesus Christ. He declared
he had never been tainted in the Religion professed and established in the
Land, in which he had been bred from his Infancy: it was not this nor that mode
or fancy of Religion that was to be built on, but one that was right, and sure,
and came from God. Here he observed some taking Notes, and upon that said, he
had not expected that, else he had digested what he had said into a better
Method: but desired that what he had said might not be published to his
disadvantage, since he had not intended to speak any thing when he came to that
place. Then he went on, and said, Many dreadful Aspersions had been cast on
him, as if his Intentions had not been such as he pretended; but he thanked
God, he was unjustly blamed: That for the King, he had ever loved him, both as
he was his King, and his Master, with whom he had been bred many years, and had
been his domestic Servant; and that there was nothing the Parliament of
Scotland declared for the King, that was not really intended by himself: and as
he hazarded his Life for him one way, so he now was to lose it another; and
that his Design of leading in the Army to England was really that which was
published in the Declaration, in so far as concerned the King: he was not then
to speak of the rest of the Declaration, which had many other particulars in
it. And for what he said of his Duty to the King there was no reason to suspect
him of Flattery, or any other end in saying it, (God having now so disposed of
His Majesty) but though he could gain nothing by it, yet he owed the freeing
himself of that Calumny to Truth, by which all men shall gain for ever. There
had been many Discourses founded on a part of the Scottish Declaration, which
mentioned an Invitation to come to England, upon which he had been much
labored for discovering the Inviters; but he had, and did still remit himself
to the Declaration, without any other Answer. He was ever willing to serve this
Nation in any thing was in his Power, which was known to many worthy Persons in
it; and he would still have continued in those Resolutions, had those in whose
hands the Power was then, thought fit to have preserved his Life. But since he
was to be thence-forth of no more use, all he could do was, to wish the Kingdom
Happiness and Peace, and to pray that his Blood might be the last should be
shed: and though perhaps he had some reluctance within himself at his Suffering
for this Fact, yet he freely forgave all men, and carried no rancour with him
to the Grave; but did submit to the Will of him who created Heaven and Earth,
and himself a poor sinful Creature then speaking before him. He conceived it
could contribute to no end for him to speak of State-business, of the
Government of the Kingdom, or things of that nature; his own Inclinations had
been still for Peace, he was never an ill Instrument betwixt the King and his
People, nor had he acted to the prejudice of the Parliament. And as he had not
meddled much in those Wars, so he was never wanting in his Prayers to Almighty
God for his King's Happiness: and he earnestly prayed God, to direct his
Majesty (that now Reigns) that he might do what should tend to his Glory, and
the Peace and Happiness of the Kingdoms. He said he was of the Established
Religion, which he had professed in his own Country where he was born and bred:
but for particular opinions he was not rigid, he knew many godly men had
scruples about diverse things, wherein he had never concerned himself; nor did
Difference of opinion (which was never more than at that time) move him, his
own was clear. He prayed the Lord to forgive him his Sins, as he freely forgave
even those against whom he had the greatest grounds of Animosity, remembering
that Prayer, Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us. And to this purpose he spoke, if the Writers did him right in what
was published in his Name: but how true the printed Papers were, the Writer is
not able to judge, for he has three printed Relations of it before him, all
varying somewhat one from another. As he expressed himself thus, he discovered
a great composure by his Looks and manner of Expression; and when he was
desired to change the Posture he stood in, since the Sun shined full in his
Face, he answered pleasantly, No, it would not burn it, and he hoped to see a
brighter Sun than that very speedily.

After the Duke had done speaking, he called for the Executioner, and desired
to know how he should fit his Body for the Blow, and told him his Servants
would give him satisfaction. Then he called to his Servants, and commanded them
to remember him kindly to diverse of his Friends in England, particularly to his
Mother-in-law the Countess of Denbigh, to whom he had ever paid a Filial
respect, and to the old Countess of Devonshire, who as the lived to a great
Age, and to the Honor of her Nation, so was on all occasions a constant and
true Friend to him. He bade tell her, she would no more question his Loyalty,
(which she had done sometimes in raillery) since he was now to seal it with his
Blood; then he kneeled down, and prayed in these words.

His Prayer.
MOst blessed Lord, I thy poor, and most unworthy Servant come unto thee,
presuming in thy infinite Mercy, and the Merits of Jesus Christ who sits upon
thy Throne; I come flying from that of Justice to that of Mercy and Tenderness,
for his sake who shed his Blood for Sinners, that he would take Compassion upon
me, that he would look upon me as one that graciously hears me, that he would
look upon me as one that has Redeemed me, that he would look upon me as one
that has shed his Blood for me, that he would look upon me as one who now
calls and hopes to be saved by his all-sufficient Merits: for his sake,
Glorious God, have Compassion upon me in the freeness of thy infinite Mercy,
that when this sinful Soul of mine shall depart out of this frail Carcass of
Clay, I may be carried unto thy everlasting Glory. O Lord, by thy free Grace,
and out of thy infinite Mercy, hear me, and look down, and have Compassion upon
me; and thou Lord Jesus, thou my Lord, thou my God, and thou my Redeemer, hear
me; take pity upon me, O Glorious God, and so deal with my Soul, that by thy
precious Merits I may attain to thy Joy and bliss: O Lord, remember me so
miserable and sinful a Creature. Now, thou O Lord, thou O Lord who died for me,
receive me, receive me into thy own bound of Mercy. O Lord, I trust in thee,
suffer me not now to be confounded. Satan has too long had possession of this
Soul, O let him not now prevail against it; but let me, O Lord, from
henceforth dwell with thee for evermore. Now, O Lord, it is thy time to hear
me, hear me, Gracious Jesus, even for thine own Goodness, Mercy, and Truth. O
Glorious God, O blessed Father, O holy Redeemer, O Gracious Comforter, O holy
and blessed Trinity, I do render up my Soul into thy hands, and commit it to
the Mediation of my Redeemer, praising thee for all thy Dispensations, that it
has pleased thee to confer upon me; and even for this, Praise and Honor, and
Thanks, be to thee from this time forth and for evermore.

His Death and Burial.
After this, Doctor Sibbald entertained him with some pious Discourses, and then
the Duke prayed a short Prayer by himself. After which, he with a cheerful and
smiling Countenance embraced the Doctor, and said, Truly, I bless God I do not
fear, I have an assurance that is grounded here (laying his hand on his Heart)
that gives me more true Joy than ever I had: I pass out of a miserable World to
go to an eternal and glorious Kingdom, and though I have been a most sinful
Creature, yet I know Gods Mercy is infinite; and I bless my God I go with so
clear a Conscience, that I know not the man I have personally injured. Then
embracing his Servants that were there present, he said to every one of them,
you have been very faithful to me, the Lord bless you. He turned next to the
Executioner, and after he had observed how he should lay his Body, he told him
he was to say a short Prayer to his God, while he lay all along, and should
give a Sign by stretching out his right Hand, and then he was to do his Duty,
whom he freely forgave, as he did all the World. And then he stretched himself
out on the Ground, and having placed his Head aright, he lay a little while
praying with great appearance of Devotion within himself, and then gave the
Sign; upon which the Executioner at one blow severed his Head from his Body,
which was received in a Crimson-taffety skarf, by two of his Servants kneeling
by him, and was together with his Body immediately put in a Coffin, which was
ready on the Scaffold, and from thence conveyed to a House in the Mews; from
whence it was, according to the Orders he had given, sent down by Sea to
Scotland, and interred in the Burial-place of his Family, where it lies in the
hopes of a Blessed Resurrection to eternal Life.

THE CHARACTER OF James Duke of Hamilton, etc.
THus lived and died JAMES Duke of Hamilton, who was born at Hamilton the 19th
of June, His Birth and Parents.
1606. His Parents were James Marquis of Hamilton, and Lady Anne Cunningham
Daughter to the Earl of Glencairn. He was of a middle Stature, his Body
well-shaped, His Person and Constitution of Health.
and his Limbs proportioned, and straight; in his last years he inclined to
fatness; his Complexion and hair were black, but his Countenance was pleasant,
and full of Life, and showed a great Sweetness of Disposition; his Health was
regular, suitable to his Diet, and free of sickness or pain, only in his last
years he was a little subject to the Stone. But when his Body was opened, all
his Inwards were found sound and entire, so that had not that fatal stroke
brought his days to a too early Period, he might probably have been very long
lived.

His Education.
At the time of his Fathers coming to Court, the Duke of Buckingham (being then
in great favor with King James, and desiring to strengthen his Family with
Noble Alliances) agreed a Marriage betwixt him and the Lady Mary Feilding,
Daughter to William Earl of Denbigh, and the Lady Susanna Villiers Sister to
the Duke of Buckingham, upon which his Father sent for him to Court, to be
married when he himself was fourteen years of age; and the Lady designed for
him but seven. This broke off the Course of Studies in which he had been
educated till then in Scotland: and though he was sent afterward to the
University of Oxford, yet the interruption, that his stay at Court put to his
Education in Letters, was such that he never recovered it. After the years of
Consummating the intended Marriage were come, he was forced to it, not without
great Aversion, occasioned partly by the disproportion of their ages, and
partly by some other secret Considerations.

His Marriage.
He lived with his Lady for some years in no good terms, and that concurring
with other Motives, made him leave the Court upon his Fathers death: but her
excellent qualities did afterward overcome that Aversion into as much
Affection as he was capable of; and it was no wonder, for she was a Lady of
great and singular worth, and her Person was noble and graceful like the
handsome Race of the Villiers's. But to such as knew her well, the virtues of
her mind were far more shining. She was educated from a Child in the Court, and
esteemed and honored by all in it, and by none more than the late King, who as
he was one of the Chastest men (not to say Princes) so he was a perfect
honourer of all virtuous Ladies. She was Lady of the Queens Bedchamber, and
admitted by her Majesty into an entire Confidence and Friendship; and not only
was her Honor unstained, but even her Fame continued untouched with Calumny,
she being so strict to the severest Rules, as never to admit of those Follies
which pass in that style for Gallantry. She was a most affectionate and dutiful
Wife, and used to say, she had the greatest reason to bless God, for having
given her such a Husband, whom as she loved perfectly, so she was not ashamed
to obey. But that which crowned all her other Perfections was the deep sense
she had of Religion: she lived and died in the Communion of the Church of
England, and was a very devout person. Many years before her death, she was so
exact in observing her Retirements to her Closet, that notwithstanding all her
Avocations, and the Divertisements of the Court, (as the Writer was informed by
one that lived with her) no day passed over her without bestowing large
portions of her time on them, beside her constant attendance on the Chapel.
She bore first three Daughters, and then three Sons; her Daughters were Lady
Mary, Lady Anne, and Lady Susanna; her Sons were Charles, James, and William:
but all her Sons and her eldest Daughter died young.

A year before she died she languished, which ended in a Consumption, of which
after a few Months sickness she died: so that she prepared for Death timeously.

About a Month before her death she called for her Children, and gave them her
last Blessings and Embraces, ordering them to be brought no more near her, lest
the sight of them might have kindled too much tenderness in her, which she was
then studying to raise above all created objects, and fix where she was shortly
to be admitted.

She died the tenth of May in the year 1638, and left her Lord a most sad and
afflicted person: and though his Spirit was too great to sink under any burden,
yet all his Life after he remembered her with much tender Affection. She died
indeed in a good time for her own Repose, when her Lord was beginning to engage
in the Affairs of Scotland, which proved so fatal both to his Quiet and Life.

But the Distractions of the following years concurring with the affectionate
Remembrance of his Lady, which rather increased than abated with time, kept him
from the thoughts of re-engaging in a married life. Neither did the death of
his Sons shake him from that purpose, since he had so noble a Successor secured
for his Family in the person of his Brother; and next to him he had two
Daughters who were dear to him, far beyond the ordinary rate of Children, on
whom he got his Dignity and Fortune entailed, in case his Brother died without
Sons.

His Religion was Protestant and Reformed; and as he was a Zealous Enemy to
Popery, so he was no less earnest for a good Correspondence among all the
Reformed Churches, His Religion.
in particular betwixt the Lutherans and Calvinists, and therefore was a Great
Patron and Promoter of the designs of Mr. Dury, who bestowed so much of his
travel, and so many of his years in driving on that desired Union: for I find
by many of Dury's Letters to him, that as he owed a great part of his
Subsistence to the Money and Places were procured for him by the Duke, both
from the King and my Lord of Canterbury, so his best Addresses to the Swedish
Court and the Princes of Germany, were those he had from him; and therefore he
continued giving him an account of his success, as to his Patron and Benefactor.

As for our unhappy Differences which have divided this Island, he judged
neither the one nor the other worth the Blood was shed in the Quarrel; and the
excess he had seen on both hands cured him from being a Zealot for either. He
was dis^atisfied with the Courses some of the Bishops had followed before the
Troubles began, and could not but impute their first Rise to the Provocations
had been given by them: but he was no less offended with the violent spirits of
most of the Covenanters and particularly with their opposition to the Royal
Authority. As long as the King employed him for the preservation of Episcopacy,
he served him faithfully; and though afterward he pressed him much for his
consent to the Abolition of that Government in Scotland, it was not from any
Prejudice himself had at it, but flowed only from the Affection he had to His
Majesty, since he saw it could not have been preserved at that time without
very visible hazard both to King and Country: and so he took the National
Covenant at the Kings Command, Anno 1641, in the Parliament of Scotland.

He was all his life a great honourer of true Piety wherever he saw it,
notwithstanding any mistakes that might have been mingled with it; so that
whatsoever particular ground of Resentments he had at any who (he judged)
feared God, the consideration of that did overcome and stifle it: but his first
Imprisonment in the year 1643 was the happiest time of his Life to him, for
there he had a truer prospect of all things set before him, which wrought a
Change on him discernible by those who knew him best. This made him frequently
acknowledge Gods great Goodness to him in that Restraint: for then he learned
to despise at the foolish pleasures of Sin, and the debasing vanities of a
false World, which had formerly possessed too great a Room in his thoughts. It
is true he chose to be Religious in secret, and therefore gave no other vent to
it in his Discourse than what he judged himself obliged to, which was chiefly
to his Children, to whom he always recommended the Fear and Love of God, as
that wherein himself had found his only Joy and Repose. The following words are
a part of one of his Letters to them, which he wrote a little before his last
going to England.

IN all crosses, even of the highest nature, there is no other remedy but
Patience, and with alacrity to submit to the good will and pleasure of our
Glorious Creator, and be contented therewith; which I advise you to learn in
your tender Age, having enjoyed that Blessing my self, and found great C^mfort
in it while involved in the middle of infinite Dangers.

He was a constant Reader of the Scriptures, and during his Imprisonment they
were his only Companions, other books being for a great while denied him; and
he making a virtue of that necessity became a diligent and serious Reader of
those holy Oracles, and studied to take the measures of his Actions from them,
and not from the foolish Dreams, and Conjectures of Astrology, though the
enquiring after, and taking notice of these, be among the injurious Imputations
Obloquy fastened upon him. But so far was he from any regard to them, that an
Astrologer coming to him in Germany with a Paper, wherein he said he should
read a noble Fortune, he, after he had sent him away, threw it into the fire,
without once openin^ it: and indeed he was so far from flattering himself with
the hopes of great success in any of his Undertakings, that he rather
apprehended himself under some inauspicious Star, that crossed all his
Attempts, which made him in his latter years long for some secret Retirement
out of the noise of business. And in his last Expedition into England, he was
so far from promising himself great matters, that the night before he marched,
when he was taking leave of one of his Friends, he said, he not only knew that
such Attempts were doubtful, but apprehended that what he was then engaging in,
might prove not only dangerous, but destructive to himself; nevertheless he was
resolved either to go through with it successfully, or to perish in the
Attempt, and never survive it; adding, that the last was what he looked for,
and therefore he took his leave as never to meet again.

But notwithstanding all the Misfortunes that either lay upon him, or did hang
over him, he preserved the greatest calmness in his mind that could be
imagined: which appeared in an unclouded serenity that dwelt always on his
looks, and discovered him ever well pleased. And though the greatness of his
mind, and the sweetness of his Natural Temper might have contributed much to
that Tranquillity; yet certainly it took its rise from another Source, and
flowed chiefly from his Considence in God, and the Security he had in the
innocence of his own Heart.

His Accomplishments were great, His Accomplishments.
though cultivated only by his own thoughts, and improved by Experience; for he
was no great Scholar, neither was he bred abroad: his Judgment was profound,
his Foresight great, his Style was smooth and without affectation, for he spoke
with a native Eloquence. One advantage he had beyond all he engaged with in
debating, that he was never fretted nor exasperated, and spoke at the same rate
without clamouring or eagerness. He had seen so much of the baseness of many
men, that it inclined him in the end to Jealousy: which made him reserved with
most people: and of this I find diverse complaining in their Letters.

For his Affection and Duty to his Prince it has appeared so much in his
History, that little remains to be said in his Character. His Loyalty.
It is true some were pleased to say that he treated with foreign Princes, for
seconding him in his own pretensions to the Crown of Scotland: but this Forgery
was so ill-grounded, that he had signal proofs to the contrary. When he first
engaged in the German Design one wrote to him from the Spanish Court in the
name of the Ministers of that Monarch, making him great promises if he would
desist from it: but his Answer was, that Duty, Gratitude, and Inclination
concurred to tie him inseparably to his Masters Interests, and that no
consideration either of Hope or Fear was able to shake him from his fidelity to
them. Neither did any thing obstruct his being more employed and trusted in
Germany, than his constant adhering to the Kings Pleasure and Interest; for had
he given himself up to the will of the Swedish King, he would have been quickly
put in another capacity, and might have had about him one of the best Armies in
Germany; since all the Scottish Officers, who at that time were many and
considerable, inclined to have formed an Army apart, and served under him, had
the King of Sweden given way to it.

When he was claiming his Estate and Rights of Chastleherault in France,
Cardinal Richelieu appointed Sir James Hamilton, whom he had sent over to
negotiate that Affair, to tell him that he should be not only settled in that,
but have more likewise, if he would enter into a close Correspondence with him,
and be a faithful Servant to the French Crown. His answer was, that he owed
indeed the greatest Duty and Dependence to the King of France, of any Prince
next his own King; and therefore would faithfully serve all his Interests after
the Kings. But nothing was to be expected from him that might upon any
consideration prejudice his Masters Service, neither would he engage in any
Correspondence without his knowledge and allowance: adding, that he was
confident his Eminence was too faithful a Minister to that Monarch whom he
served, to like him the worse for his Honesty to his own Master. These
Instances will evince how far he was from pretending to any Interests in his
Correspondence with foreign Princes different from the Kings, whom he served
with as much Affection as Duty. And indeed the Love he bore his Person was no
less than the Duty he paid to his Authority, for he did not deny but the
former made him digest some things, which perhaps otherwise he had not born so
well. This kept him far from vilifying His Majesty's Person, or speaking
unhandsomly of him, as some accused him. It may be supposed that had he been
guilty of that, it would have appeared more to his Friends than Strangers,
since Prudence would have taught a reserve to them, though Duty had not
enjoined it: but those who conversed most with him, saw so much of his
Affection and Esteem for that Prince, that many of them have told the Writer he
was the furthest from it that could be, since he studied by all means to infuse
that value in others for him, which possessed his own mind. It is true his
Calmness made many, who knew not how natural that Temper was to him, suspect he
was not in earnest, because he did not bluster out in heats of Passion upon
every occasion; for as he was not easily inflamed, so he could not well
personate a Passion when he was free of it. All his Advices to the King were
for settling matters without hazarding on a bloody Decision, knowing well, that
no Quarrels are so mortal, as those that follow upon the closest Ties;
therefore he was far from acting that infamous Office of Incendiary, which some
fastened on him. And it was his suggesting and pressing gentler Methods, which
engaged some fiery Spirits into such opposition to him: and from hence it was,
that when he was put to a Review of those Advices he offered to his Majesty, he
said, He would not study to justify them all, since he was far from the vanity
of magnifying his own Counsels; but all he could answer for, was his good
Intention, which was not to be measured by Success.

As for his disclosing the Kings Designs to his Enemies, Hell could have
devised nothing further from Truth: for not only does the silence of all his
Letters that are in my hands refute that, but when afterward some who had been
Leading men in the Covenant broke with him, with such Animosity, and when by
some of those much pains was taken, to possess the King with Jealousies of him,
it is not to be doubted but if there had been a shadow of truth for those
Imputations, some Particular would have appeared, or some Letters had been
preserved to have justified these Insinuations. But nothing was so much as ever
pretended for this, beyond Whispers and general Stories.

If all his Friends were not at all times so fixed to their Duty as they ought
to have been, that left no Blame upon him; for no man can be liable for his
Friends, nor charged with the faults of other men: but when any of them strayed
from their Duty, his Friendship made him not the less but the more severe to
them; and many of them being yet alive, have witnessed with what honest zeal he
always studied to engage them to a Cordial adherence to the Kings Service. But
to sum up all, those who after they see how in his last Speech delivered at his
Death, he begs Pardon and Mercy from God, as he has been a faithful Servant to
his Master, and do still retain their Jealousies, are beyond the cure of any
Persuasion; for none but a desperate Atheist could have adventured so far with
a defiled Conscience. Neither can it be alleged here, that all in those times
pretended to be for the King: for perhaps many thought the methods they took
were the best, for securing and settling his Throne. But had the Duke been
faulty as the World accused him, it must not have been a Mistake in his
thoughts, but a Crookedness of his Heart, a betraying of his Trust, and a
falsifying of his Engagements: and who can suppose, that the Parties who were
prevalent both in England and Scotland at the time of his Death, and pursued
him and his Memory with all the excesses of Malice, would not have discovered
such Treachery to load him with the greater Infamy, if there had been any
grounds for it, since they were the persons who mus^ have known it best?

As for that ridiculous and Devilish Forgery of his pretending to the Crown of
Scotland, never any were alleged to have heard a hint of it from himself, no
not in raillery; and c^^tainly if so great a Design had ever been discovered to
any person, it must have been to his Friends, and he must have taken pains to
have made some Party sure for it: but for this nothing was ever whispered but
Surmises, and those hanging so ill together, that they retained not so much as
the shadow of Probability.

For his Country, His love to his Country.
as he had as great Interest in it as any Subject, so his Affection yielded to
none. And it is certain, that if his Counsels to the King seem at any time to
fall short of the higher ways of Authority, nothing but his Affection for his
Country gave him the bias; for he confessed, the thing in the World at which
he had the greatest horror, was the engaging in a Civil War with his
Countrymen.

He was far from any Designs of engrossing either Power or Places of advantage
to himself, or his Friends; nor was he ever the occasion of any Burden to the
Country, for the Assignments he had on some Taxations, were only for payment of
the Debts he had contracted by his Majesty's Command for his Expedition to
Germany. And so little fond was he of being the Kings Commissioner in Scotland,
that in diverse of his Letters he proposed others to his Majesty for that Trust,
protesting it was a Place which of all other he hated most; and when he saw
Jealousies taken at his being so long in that Trust, as if the King had been to
govern Scotland by a Commissioner, he pressed his Majesty to change him; so
careful was he to avoid every thing which might be a Grievance to his Country,
and retard the Kings Service.

He was the great Patron of all Scotishmen in the Court, which drew on several
occasions a large share of Malice upon him: as appeared particularly in the
Case of one Colonel Lesley, whom Colonel Sanderson's Friends were pursuing in
the Court, alleging that Lesley had killed that Colonel unworthily in
Muscovia. The Crime was not committed in the Kings Dominions, and Lesley was
Legally acquitted from it in Russia, who upon a National account being a
Scotishman, laid claim to the Dukes Protection; but this irritated Colonel
Sanderson's Brother (who pretends to have written the History of King Charles
the First) into so much Rage against him, that forgetting the Laws of History,
he breaks out on all occasions into the most passionate Railings, that his
spiteful, but blunt and impotent Malice could devise. And the best of all is,
he bewrays his Ignorance as well as his Passion, in all the Account he gives of
the Scottish Affairs; so that it is hard to say, whether his Folly in attempting
to write a History on such slender Informations, or his Impudence in forging or
venting Lies with such Confidence, deserves the severer Censure.

And since I mention this Lesley I shall only add, that though Sanderson tells
a formal Story of the signal Judgments of God on him in his Death, he was alive
many years after that Book was published, which can be well proved by many who
knew him.

His Temperance.
The Duke was very sumptuous and magnificent in his way of Living, but abhorred
that debauched custom of Entertainments by Drinking, and was an example of
Temperance; which cost him dear in Denmark, where he refusing the ordinary
Entertainments of that Court in drinking, was not only ill used, but made pay a
great Sum under the pretense of Passage-dues. Temperance was particularly
recommended to him by his Majesty, when he went to Germany; and his returning
from that Court without once transgressing these Laws, was such an evidence of
his observing them, that afterward few would tempt him to those Excesses.

His Ingenuity.
Of all Virtues he esteemed Ingenuity and Candor most, as that which was the
Ground of all Confidence, and the only Security among men; and therefore
recommended it chiefly to others, and studied to observe it most himself. I
confess when I consider his whole method of framing and carrying on his
Designs, how straight and candid they were, if I often admire his Invention, I do
much more esteem the Ingenuity of his proceedings; for I never find him vailing
Truth with a Lie, nor carrying on business with a Cheat: and to speak freely,
the greatest departing from these Rules appeared in the Declaration emitted in
April 1648; where among other things the Parliament declared, they would not
admit His Majesty to the exercise of His Royal Authority, till He by Oath
obliged Himself to swear, and ratify the Covenant. The Duke stuck long ere he
would give way to this, at length finding the violent Party that crossed the
Engagement implacable, and being desirous to withdraw from them all colors or
pretenses for opposing that Design, he yielded to it; and at that time said to
a Friend of his, that the Preservation of the King went so near his Heart, that
he could refuse nothing which might make way for that. But it was far from his
thoughts to seclude the King from the exercise of his Royal Power, and
therefore it was excused at the same time, both by the Letters his Brother
wrote to the King, and in the Instructions sent by Sir William Fleeming to the
Queen and Prince, and by Sir William Bellenden to the Prince of Orange. I have
also a Journal which he took with his own hand of what passed in that
Parliament, wherein he wrote, when that Act was put to the Vote, that (though
he gave his Vote to it) it was not his own Opinion. And thus I lay open both
his Fault, and the Temptation that led him to it, so that if ever any Officious
Lie was of a venial Guilt, sure this was: yet who knows if among the holy and
wise Counsels, for which God might have permitted that Armies Miscarriage as a
Punishment for our other Sins, we not being ripe for a Deliverance, this
departing from the severe Rules of Ingenuity and Virtue might not have been one
procuring cause? but this is the only Instance of this Nature I have met with
in the whole Survey of his Actions and Papers.

As for the mildness and gentleness of his Nature, His Temper.
no day went over him without giving new discoveries of it. For it was very
hard to provoke him, but no less easy to appease him: he was not unequal in his
Humor, but as one left him they found him, being always cheerful and ever the
same. And whatever Aspirings might have been in his mind, his Carriage was the
freest of Haughtiness that could be both to Equals and Inferiors: he was both
easy to address to, and affable in his Converse, and labored to oblige all
people. And in his Command he was far from the common Practice of many, who are
very careful to raise all the Money they can, and to oppress the Countries
where they march or quarter. It is true the Earl of Calander did draw as much
Money as was possible from the Places they passed through with their Army, but
the Duke would meddle with none of it: and when Calander offered 450 Pound to
his Stewart, he would not touch it till he spoke with his Master; who charged
him strictly not to meddle with it, and acknowledged he had done like a
faithful Servant in not taking it.

It was so impossible for him to resent Injuries, that when some of his Vassals
had offended him, so that he was resolved to make them sensible of it whenever
it lay in his way, it no sooner came to be so, but their first Address broke
through all his Displeasure: and never did the settled Composure of his mind
appear more than at Vtoxater, when in the midst of all that Disorder he
preserved his usual Temper. The Generosity of his mind made him so tender
toward all in trouble, even though deserved, that he was scarce capable of
punishing any even for their Faults. A pretty Instance of this was, that a
Woman having stolen some of his Plate, and being quickly found with it, he was
asked what should be done with her; to which he answered, it seemed she wanted
Money, wherefore he ordered to give her a Piece, and send her away. And when in
the year 1648, a zealous Woman threw a Stone at him, as he passed through the
Streets, all he said was, he wondered what the Woman ailed, for he was never an
enemy to the Sex: nor would he suffer any severe Sentence to be executed on
her, but when her Hand was ordered to be cut off, he procured her Pardon, and
said, The Stone had missed him, therefore he was to take care that their
Sentence might miss her.

To conclude, I shall not offer to tell how much his Death was lamented by all
who knew him, for then I should never get off: I shall therefore only set down
two Letters, the one of Condolance from the Queen Mother, another from his
Majesty who now Reigns to the Earl of Lanerick, then by his Brothers death Duke
of Hamilton, which expresses the value his Majesty had of the Engagement.

Cousin,
INtending every day for a great while to have dispatched Rainsford, I have not
hitherto done that which my sense of the Loss of my late Cousin-the Duke of
Hamilton should have drawn from me long ago, which was to express the concern I
had for his Death: and though my own inexpressible Loss has made me incapable
of feeling any thing else that can befall me in this World, yet it has not made
me insensible of your Brothers Death, both on his own account and on yours. For
Consolation, it is not easy for me to offer you any, being incapable of taking
it to my self. We must turn us to God, and receive it of him, for this World
cannot afford it: yet if to bear a share in your Affliction, may in any way
lessen some part of your Grief, I am assured you shall find an allay to it; and
I desire you may believe, that no person wishes you more Happiness than my
self, who shall study on all occasions to make it appear, that I am with all
sincerity,

Cousin, Your very good, and affectionate Cousin, HENRIETA MARIA R.
Paris 22th April, 1649.

My Lord Hamilton,
I Am very sorry that I could not have your Advice in my late Proceedings with
Mr. Winram, who is now returned with my Letters (the Copies whereof I send you
herewith;) but the Treaty being appointed so near you at Breda, I shall desire
your Presence at it, and shall much depend upon your Advice, assuring you that
I will take care of your Interests, and of all those honest men that engaged
with your Brother, equally with that which concerns my self. I hope the calling
them a Committee of Estates, with such cautions as I use in the Letter, will
bring no prejudice to you nor to your Friends. And I will be careful to
establish your Interest by the Treaty, without which I conceive I cannot have
much assurance. I pray use your best endeavors to your Friends in Scotland, to
make their Demands moderate and reasonable; and then I shall not doubt of a
good Issue, and such as may enable me to express, how much I am,

Your very affectionate Friend and Cousin, CAARLES R.
Jersey 24th of Jan. 1649.

WILLIAM DUKE of HAMILTON and Castle Herald Marquis of Cliddisdale Earl of
Arran and Lanerick Lord of Aven and Innerdale one of his Ma most Hon.ble Privy
Council and Knight of the most Nobleorder of ye Garter Borne Anno 1616 and
died of his wounds After Worcester Fight An^o 1652. An^o AEtat. 35.

portrait THROVGHE
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE
blazon or coat of arms



MEMOIRES OF THE LIFE and ACTIONS OF William Duke of Hamilton, etc.
LIB. VII. A Continuation of Affairs till Worcester-Fight.
Anno 1650.
TO this account of JAMES Duke of Hamilton's Actions, it may be expected I
should add the remaining Memoires of his Brothers Affairs. But the time he
survived was so full of Disorder and Confusion, that few Papers were preserved,
and these so imperfect, that without fuller Supplements than the Writer hopes
for, no clear account can begiven of those Times; therefore there shall be only
added somewhat by way of Character, with a general Relation of the following
Passages of his Life.

William Duke of Hamilton was born at Hamilton on the 14th of December in the
year 1616. being ten years younger than his Brother, The Character of William
Duke of Hamilton.
and of the same Parents. He was of a middle Stature, his Complexion black, but
very agreeable, and his whole Air and Mien was noble and sprightful: his Youth
discovered with an extraordinary Capacity so much Ingenuity, that Candor seemed
in him not so much the effect of virtue as nature, since from a Child he could
never upon any tentation be made to lie.

When his Father died he left him very young to the care of his Mother, and the
kindness of his Brother, with a very small Provision: but he confessed he never
missed a Father in his Brother, who kept him not only at the University of
Glasgow, where he was educated, but likewise in his Travels at a rate, and with
an Equipage, suitable to his Quality. He traveled some years in France, where
he was very much esteemed, and invited to stay in that Court with very
honorable Offers. He had a good foundation of Literature, though he was no
great Scholar; and what he once acquired, was rather improved than lost by him.

His appearance at Court.
He returned from his Travels when he was one and twenty years of Age, and was
looked on both by the King and Queen as a rare and highly promising Gentleman;
and now that he was of an Age capable of it, his Brother and he entered into an
entire Friendship. And finding him so rarely accomplished, and fitted for the
greatest Affairs, he kept him with himself at Court; and though he depended
wholly upon his Brothers Generosity for his Subsistence, yet he was far from
making him feel that, either by upbraiding him with his Favors, or by
disparaging him with any neglect, (Faults too commonly incident to Elder
Broth^rs, when the Younger are obliged to stoop to them.) But as Lord William
was too high-minded to have endured the least appearance of those, so his
Brother was not capable of giving him any such hard Usage, but allowed him all
things suitable to his rank, and carried toward him with Respect as well as
Affection.

He continued in the Court some years, being much esteemed by all sorts there:
for as his Address was becoming, so his Converse was full of Life and Wit, and
he was a great Master in all his Exercises. But his Brother was more careful to
think of a Fortune for him than himself was, and therefore provided a Marriage
for him, that had the expectation of a vast Fortune, Lady Elizabeth Maxwel,
eldest Daughter to the Earl of Dirleton, (who had no Sons, and but one other
Daughter.) It was not without reluctance that he was engaged that way, but his
Brothers Authority over him was absolute; so he was married to her in the year
1638, and continued still at Court. He had by her four Daughters that survived
him, L* Ann, L. Elizabeth, L. Mary, and L. Margaret.

Afterward he pretended to be made Master of the Horse to the Queen, He is
made Secretary of State.
but Her Majesty was engaged to another, which was much resented by him, and
made him resolve on leaving the Court and going into France. This grieved his
Brother extremely, and both the King and Queen sent him a promise, that if he
would give over thoughts of that Journey, he should be preferred to whatever
Place fell, that were fit for him. And a little after that, the Earl of Sterlin
died, who was Secretary of State for Scotland, and the Queen moved the King to
advance him to that Trust, to which his Majesty did willingly consent: for as
he was glad of all opportunities of expressing his kindness to his Brother, so
he saw in himself that which made him judge him both worthy and capable of any
Employment; and thereupon he made him Secretary, and created him Earl of
Lanerick. He had every thing but years to recommend him to the highest Trust,
being Witty, Considerate, Brave, Generous, and resolute to the highest Degree.
He saw his Engagement in Affairs fell to be in such a disordered time, that he
could not have appeared on the Scene with more disadvantage. He had no
experience at all in Scottish Affairs, but for that he resolved to trust to his
Brothers Informations and Advices; which did not only continue till he came to
understand Persons and Affairs better, The Friendship betwixt his Brother and
him.
but that Noble Pair were all their lives united with bonds of Friendship
straiter than those of their Blood. Calumny got no access to their Ears, nor
Emulation and Jealousy room in their Hearts; and as their Friendship was never
broke off with a Discord, so it was not so much as marred by a Mistake. They
had both Interests, Friends, and Quarrels in common; they were pleasant in
their Lives, nor was their Friendship divided in their Deaths, as appeared from
the interchanged Preferences they gave one another Children in their Last
Wills.

Both of them had peculiar Excellencies; yet even in those things, wherein the
one was excelled by the other, there remained enough to term them both eminent.
The Elder had the greater Temper and Command of his Passions, but this made him
sometimes fall short of that Acrimony and Authority which such Times and
Services required. The Younger was more forward and resolute, yet sometimes
this left his Temper behind it. The Elder as he had the advantage of Years and
Experience, so he had the deeper Apprehensions, and the greater Foresight; but
the Younger had more Vivacity of Spirit and Readiness of Apprehension. The
Elder was readier to forsee a Danger, and invent Objections, and the Younger
quicker at Answering them, and finding Salvoes for all Difficulties. The Elders
Converse was smoother, but more reserved; the Younger as he was the brisker, so
he was the more frank, and was no less beloved: and in fine, the Elder spoke
more gracefully, but the other had the better Pen.

He was most assiduous in his Employment, His diligence in his Employment.
to procure not only favorable Answers, but speedy Dispatches to all those who
made their Addresses by him to the King. He frankly told every one whether he
would serve them or not, for where he meant no Assistance he never disguised it
with general Assurances: but where he promised Service he needed no new
Applications, either to refresh his Memory or quicken his Diligence; and he was
wont to say, he was sure there was no Person, whose sight His Majesty had so
little reason to desire as his, since he never saw him, when there was any
possibility of speaking to him apart, but he moved him in one Suit or another.
But his Confidence was grounded on this, that he gave the King no trouble with
any desires of his own: his Reality this way obliged his Friends exceedingly,
who used to complain, that though his Brother as far as his own Kindness could
go was most obliging, yet he was averse from doing them such Services with the
King as they desired of him.

He had a Vivacity of Apprehension beyond any about him, His Abilities.
with a great conception of things, and quickly penetrated into men's Thoughts
and Designs. His discourse was short, but nervous, witty, and full of Stings,
when he had a mind to reflect on others; but he was soon heated, and kept his
Fire pretty long. There was not a mean thought lodged in his Breast, all his
Designs being noble and aspiring, which with the fervor of his Nature, made
him pass for a very proud man among his Enemies. He was indeed gallant and
generous to all degrees, and none alive was capable of a higher sense of Honor
and Gratitude, nor more unable to stoop to anything that was sordid or mean.

For his Religion he was a true zealous Protestant, His Religion.
and his Opinions about our unhappy Differences at home were the same with his
Brothers. He had a great dislike of Church-mens pretending to meddle in Civil
Affairs, finding it hurtful on all hands; and therefore was much for confining
them to their own Work. In those Times when things were like to run a risque in
the Committee of Estates, most commonly the sense of the Commission of the
General Assembly was brought in to declare how far Religion and the Covenant
was concerned in any Particular that was under Debate; and this swayed some,
and overawed others: but nothing was more odious to him than this Practice,
and he wisely foresaw, and often said, that nothing could bring such a stain on
Religion, in the minds of those who were too inclinable to receive bad
impressions of it, as the officious and over-meddling Tempers of hot and
indiscreet Churchmen. His Practice in Devotion, in some of his last years,
showed him to be sincerely Religious.

He had for many years great Convictions on his Conscience of the true
excellence of Religion, but humane infirmity prevailed too much over him, and
he was not free of Blemishes: yet he found he had to do with a merciful God,
who gave him such a Victory over those Snares, and such tender impressions of
his Love, that long before his Death he was come to have that assurance of the
Divine Goodness, that he was not only ready and willing but longing for Death.
But his prospect of it will appear better from his own Pen than any thing I can
add, when he was entertaining himself in cold Blood with the serious
Apprehensions of that grave Object, and penned his Latter Will, which shall be
set down in its own place.

His troubles proved happy to him.
The Afflictions he lay under in his last years, contributed not a little to the
raising that sense of things in him, these having been the saddest years
Scotland ever saw, in which he was overlaid both with public and personal
Troubles. Those which went nearest his Heart, and wounded it in its most
sensible part, were first the Kings Murder, and then his Brothers; neither was
he capable of so mean a thought, as to receive any allay to the last by the
Dignity and Fortune which thereby descended on him. The Friendship betwixt them
had continued to the end sacred and inviolated, and as the Elder transmitted
not only his Estate and Honor, but left also his personal Estate, Jewels,
Plate, and Pictures (which were of great value) to his Brother, giving only
Portions to his Daughters, trusting even the Writings for these to his Brother,
to lessen them as he found the Estate might bear it; so the Younger judged
himself bound in Honor and Gratitude to return such of those as were still in
his power, (many of them having been either disposed of for defraying his
necessary Expense in that troublesome Time, or lost in the Invasion of
Scotland) again to his Brothers Daughter, whereby he prosecuted his Brothers
first Design, who had provided the Honor and Fortune to descend on his own
Daughters if his Brother had no Sons. And so much did he honor his Brothers
Memory, that Injuries done himself raised not such irreconcilable Resentments
in him as those had been done his Brother: neither was any Address so welcome
to him, as that which came with a respective Remembrance of his Brother; and he
entailed his Friendship for him on his Daughters, who have desired me to
acknowledge to the World, that in him they met with the tenderness of a Father,
the kindness of a Friend, and every thing that was generously noble and
obliging. And so desirous was he to have his Niece enjoy her Fathers Estate and
Dignity, His care of his Brothers Daughters.
that at his going to England he professed he was glad he had no Sons to lie in
her way to it; adding, that if he had forty Sons, he rather wished it to her,
than he could do to any of them. And for proof of this, though many Evidences
might be given, yet I shall only add one Letter he wrote to her; and the Orders
he gave to all that depended on him, discovered it to be no Complement, for it
was as really performed as it was generously offered.

Dear Niece,
AMongst all my just Afflictions there is none lies so heavy upon me, as that I
am still made incapable of paying that Duty to you which I owe you. It is the
greatest Debt I owe on Earth, and which would most joy me to pay, as well from
Inclination as from Nature and Obligations; but all Happiness being denied me,
I cannot hope for that which would be the greatest.

Before this I hope you are settled in Hamilton, where you have, as is most
just, the same Power your Father had, and I beseech you to dispose as
absolutely upon every thing that is there. All I have interest in, so long as
they will acknowledge me, will obey you; and I shall earnestly beg, that if
there be any failings (either from persons, or in providing what you shall
think fit to call for, which that Fortune can procure) to advertise me thereof,
and if it be not helped (so my Fortune can do it) let me be as infamous as I am
unfortunate. I will trouble you no longer, but pray the Lord to bless you with
Comfort and Health.

Dear Niece, Your real Servant, HAMILTON.
Campheer, the 10th of June 1649.

As for those Princes whom he served, His Duty to the King.
he had even as much Justice from Fame as his heart could wish, since none did
ever fasten any ill Characters on him in that particular, except that little
which was done at Oxford. But he who of all living knew his Brother best,
acknowledged that in this he had the better of him only by Fame, and that the
longer he lived he discerned the more wisdom in his Designs, and honesty in all
his Counsels: but that which made the difference was, that his Temper was more
forward, and he often spoke out those Resentments which his Brother either had
not with so much Passion, or chused to bury in his Breast.

Nothing did so much support his spirit under the heavy Pressure that lay over
it, as the desire he had to preserve his Life for His Majesty's Service, of
which he was prodigal, when he saw it useless to his Master, for his Life had
been of a great while burdensome to him: and indeed it was no wonder to see
Death so welcome to one who had so little reason to desire to live, and so much
ground to hope in Death; for when the Tossings, and unjust unmerciful Usage he
met with in those years he survived his Brother, are well looked into, it is a
wonder they forced him not unto the horridest Resolutions imaginable, (I use
his own words) and to pursue private and public Injuries with a mortal
Resentment: yet his zeal for the Kings Service, and the Countries Quiet,
overruled all other thoughts. From Scotland he went to Holland where he was
scarce landed when he heard the sad and dismal news of the Kings Murder, nor
had he recovered of the extreme Grief that raised in him, when he heard
likewise how his Brother was murdered, which afflicted him beyond expression;
nor did any thing grieve him more than his laying down Arms at Sterlin, for
when he saw too late how they had been abused in it, he censured it more
severely than any of his Enemies could do.

He was ill used by his Enemies, and the Preachers.
In Scotland the Parliament (if that Meeting could ever deserve that name,
wherein there were scarce any of the Nobility present) not only condemned the
Engagement for the King, but passed an Act against all the Engagers, ranking
them in several Classes, whence it got the name of an Act of Classes, whereby
they were excluded from all Offices, public Trust, and Vote in Parliament: nor
were they ever to be admitted to Trust, till they had satisfied the Church by a
public profession of their Repentance for their accession to the unlawful
Engagement, as it was then called, and were by them recommended to the favor
of the State; and those that ruled were resolved to readmit none, but such as
would depend on them, and adhere to their Interests. They were also
particularly severe to the Duke, for breaking Confinement, and leaving Scotland
without their Pass. The Duke upon his arrival in Holland offered his Service to
his Master, (our Gracious Sovereign who now Reigns) which he received and
entertained with so much Royal Goodness, as if the Affection and Confidence of
their Masters had been the Inheritance of these Brothers; and what the late
King was to the Elder, his Majesty was to the Younger, who continues to this
day to honor his Memory with the highest Commendations. And indeed his Royal
Favor was not misplaced on one that was either unsensible or ungrateful, for
never Subject served Master with more Honesty, Zeal, and Affection; so that no
consideration either of Hope or Fear wrought so much on him, as the Affection
he bore his Master: neither expressed he anxiety for any thing at his Death,
save for His Majesty's Person, fearing lest he might fall into their cruel
hands, whom he knew to be thirsting for his Blood.

He stayed in the Netherlands till His Majesty came to Scotland; He advises
the King to settle with Scotland.
and though those that governed there were so much his Enemies, that they would
have the King stand to their Act of Classes, and made that one of the Articles
of their Treaty at Breda: yet the Duke seeing the desperate posture the Kings
Affairs were in, and that no visible hope remained unless His Majesty settled
fully with Scotland, was not only satisfied to consent to that severe Demand,
but did earnestly press His Majesty to agree with that Kingdom, whatever might
become of him. Many were for extremer Methods, and pressed the Duke to concur
for making a forcible Impression upon Scotland: but he well foresaw the
mischief of that Course, and how little could be promised from it; for as no
great Concurrence could be expected in the condition things were then driven
to, so all that could follow, even on a little success, was to expose the
Country to the rage of a prevailing Army from England, against which Scotland
entirely united would have had work enough, though it had not been weakened by a
Civil War; and therefore he was against all Divisions, which might also have
tempted the prevailing Party to join with the English Army.

The Treaty with the Scottish Commissioners was held at Breda, where things
stuck long, their Demands being very high and uneasy to the King. The chief of
the Commissioners was the Earl of Cassilis, who did truly love the King and
Kingly Government; so that when the Usurpation proved sucessful by the Conquest
of Scotland afterward, though Usurper studied by the greatest Offers he could
make to gain him to his Party, considering the high esteem he was in for his
Piety and Virtue, could never prevail so far as to make him advance one step
toward him, even in outward Civilities: yet he was a most zealous Covenanter,
but of so severe a Virtue, and so exactly strict to every thing, in which he
judged his Honor or Conscience concerned, that he would not abate an ace of
his Instructions, but stood his ground so that nothing could beat or draw him
out of it. But he did it with so much Fairness and Candor, that the King,
though troubled enough with the difficulties that bred him, yet was much taken
with the Openness of his Proceeding with him, and conceived so high an Opinion
of his Fidelity to him, that nothing could ever change or lessen it: so so
excellent a thing is Ingenuity that it begets an esteem wherever it is to be
found, even when we are most displeased with the Instances in which it appears.
The next in the Commission was the Earl of Lothian, who though he was deeply
engaged in Friendship and Interests with the Marquis of Argyle, yet was of a
Noble Temper, had great Parts, and a high sense of Honor. The other
Commissioners depended on them, and went easily along with them in what they
agreed to.

The Commissioners, seeing the good Offices the Duke did, were willing he
should return with his Majesty to Scotland Anno 1650, and enjoy the common
Privileges of Scotchmen, only be secluded from all public Trust, and from his
Vote in Parliament. But the leading-men in Scotland judged it necessary for the
Peace of that Kingdom, that the Duke might not return with His Majesty, and
sent Orders for stopping his Voyage. These Orders came not to Holland, before
most of the Commissioners were aboard, only the Earls of Cassilis and Lothian
were ashore when they got them; they were much troubled to get such severe
Commands, obliging them to break the Treaty they had so lately signed. But
since most of their fellow-Commissioners were gone, But is put from His Majesty
at his return to Scotland.
and they without them made not a Quorum, they could do nothing, so that the
Duke was suffered to return to Scotland with the King. But at His Majesty's
Landing, one appointed by the Parliament to put him from the King, required him
to withdraw: and when the King pressed the Commissioners with the Articles of
their Treaty, they said they could not oppose an Order of Parliament. The King
was much offended with this, and was inclining to resent it, both as an
unworthy Usage and as a Breach of Treaty: but the Duke told him, that at that
time Argyle was the person who was most able to render him considerable Service
in Scotland; therefore though he knew he designed nothing so much as his Ruin,
yet he advised His Majesty to use all possible means to gain him absolutely to
his Party, and to neglect himself as much as Argyle desired, and not at all to
seem much concerned in him; adding, that he knew when His Majesty's Affairs
were in a better posture, he would not forget his faithful Servants. (This
particular His Sacred Majesty vouchsafed to tell the Writer.) It was in vain
for him to claim either the benefit of the Treaty at Sterlin, or Breda,
Interest and Jealousy prevailing more with these who then ruled than any other
Tie; so the Duke was forced to retire to the Isle of Arran, And goes to Arran.
where he stayed till the end of January 1651: nor could his Petitions with the
Intercessions of his Friends prevail for allowing him the liberty of coming to
fight for his King and Country, so that he was forced to stay at Arran till the
best half of Scotland was lost.

Cromwell enters Scotland.
But God who had suffered the Church-party to prevail long, did blast their
Force and Success at once; for Cromwell upon the Parliament of Scotland's
bringing home their King, entered it with his Army. The Church-party as they had
no mind to invade England on the Kings account, so were very careful to declare
that their Arming against Cromwell was not on the Kings account, which they
excluded from the state of the Quarrel by an Act of their Committee; and
declared that they stood only to their own Defense, against that Hostile
Invasion which was contrary to their Covenant and Treaties. They were also very
careful to model their Army, so that neither Malignant nor Engager that had
been of the Kings Party, should serve in it; for though when His Majesty came
to their Army at Leith, the Soldiers were much animated by his Presence, and
with the coming of two thousand brave Gentlemen with him to the Army, yet the
Leaders of that Party pretended, that since the Malignants were in their Army
God would be provoked to give them up to the Enemy, and therefore forced the
King to leave the Army. They also forced away all those Gentlemen who came and
offered their Service. I shall not pursue this account further, but only add,
that notwithstanding all their Confidence of their Army, and though they had
the Enemy at great disadvantages, so that he and all his Officers
gavethemselves for gone; yet they were with very little Opposition broken and
routed near Dunbar on the third of September 1650, Dunbar-Fight.
and even those who two years before had insulted over the Misfortunes of the
Engagement, were now themselves taught, how ill an Argument Success was to
evince the Goodness of a Cause.

The King is better used in Scotland.
This procured a great change in the Counsels of Scotland, for by that time the
honester, and better part of the Clergy were by the Murder of the King, and
the other Proceedings in England, filled with distaste and horror at them, and
began to think how defective they had hitherto been in their Duty to the King,
and therefore resolved to adhere more faithfully to it in all time coming.
Others of the Church-party did also see, that as Cromwell was setting up a
Commonwealth in England, so they found many of the forwarder amongst themselves
very much inclined to it in Scotland. This divided them from the other violent
Party, and made them join more cordially with the King, and be willing to
receive his other faithful Servants to oppose the Common Enemy; therefore it
was brought under debate, if the Act of Classes that excluded them from Trust,
should not be rescinded, and all Subjects allowed to enjoy their Privileges,
and suffered to resist the Common Enemy: after long debate it was carried in
the Affirmative, yet none were to be received but upon particular Applications
and Professions of Repentance. The Church-party divided.
The Commission of the Kirk being also asked their Opinions, declared, that in
such an Exigency, when the Enemy was Master of all on the South of Forth and
Clide, all fensible persons might be raised for the Defense of the Country.
This was called the Resolution of the Commission of the General Assembly, and
was ratified by the subsequent General Assembly. But against this many
Ministers protested, and from thence arose great Heats and Divisions among
those of the Kirkmen, who owned the Public Resolutions, An. 1652.
and those who Protested against them, the one being called the
Publick-Resolutioners, and the other Protesters. And now all Churches were full
of pretended Penitents, for every one that offered his Service to the King, was
received upon the Public profession of his Repentance for his former
Malignancy, wherein all saw they were only doing it in compliance to the
peremptory Humor of that time.

It was about the end of January that the Duke was suffered to come and wait on
the King; The Duke is suffered to wait on the King.
but at that time Cliddisdale, with the other Places where his Interest lay,
were in the Enemies hands, who had put Garrisons in Hamilton, Douglas,
Carnwath, Boghall, and other Houses of that Country. Yet the Duke got quickly
about him a brave Troop of about an hundred Horse, made up of many Noblemen and
Gentlemen. who rode in it, among whom were diverse Earls and Lords, whose Lands
being also possessed by the Enemy, they could do no more but hazard their own
Persons in his Majesty's Service; the rest were his Vassals and Gentlemen of
his Name: and they were commanded under him by a gallant Gentleman, Sir Thomas
Hamilton of Preston, whom he sent with 18 Horse to Cliddisdale, to try if the
Enemy could be catched at any disadvantage, and the People of the Country
raised for the King. The Enemy kept so good Guards, and was so strong at
Hamilton, that he could not fall in there; therefore he went to Douglas, where
he took about 80 Horse that belonged to the Garrison, but could not surprise
the House, for it was too strong to be taken without Cannon. He likewise took
all the Horse that belonged to the Garrison at Boghall, and killed twenty
Soldiers. This made the Enemy keep closer at Hamilton, upon which the Duke
resolved to raise ten Troops of Horse, and appointed Sir Thomas Hamilton
Lieutenant-Collonel; but the Enemies Garrisons gave great interruptions to his
Designs.

At that time the Enemy landed at Innerkeething in Fife, The King marches to
England.
and the great Loss the King had there, did both raise the Enemies boldness,
and much daunt his faithful Friends: for now Cromwell was betwixt His Majesty
and the Northern Counties of Scotland, which were both most affectionate to his
Service, and from whence he was to expect Provisions and Supplies; so that it
was not possible for the King to maintain the War any longer in Scotland, and
therefore he resolved on a March to England, being put in hopes of great
Accessions of force to his Army from the Royal Party there: and this gave a
trial to the Fidelity and Courage of many of the Scottish Nation: but too many
looking on the Attempt as desperate, being more careful of their Lives and
Fortunes than to hazard either in the King's Service, shrunk away, though
diverse of them had Charges in the Army. Against these base Deserters of their
King and Country, the Duke was moved with such just Indignation, that he vowed
if ever he returned with Life and Liberty, he should make these in whom he had
interest answer for it.

But the Duke's thoughts of this March, and his sad apprehensions of the whole
Business, will appear from the following Letter he wrote to his Niece that
succeeded him.

Dear Niece,
INdeed I know not what to say to you, I would fain say something more
encouraging than my last was; but I cannot lie, our Condition is no better, and
since that time we have a thousand men (I fear twice that number) run from our
Army. Since the Enemy shuns Fighting with us, except upon advantage, we must
either starve, disband, or go with a handful of Men into England. This last
seems to be the least Ill, yet it appears very desperate to me, for more
reasons than I will trouble you with: I fear your own Reason will afford you
too many. Dear Niece, it is not your Courage I will desire you to make use of
in this Extremity, look for Strength to bear it from a higher Power, all your
Natural Virtues will not resist it; therefore look to him who has in former
times assisted you to resist a great Affliction, and can do it again if you
seek to him aright; you have already lost so much, that all other Earthly
Losses were drowned in that. Those you meet with now are Christian Exercises,
wherewith oftimes the Lord visits his own to wean their Affections from things
here below, that we may place them upon himself, in whom we have all things;
and if we could, as we ought, set our Hearts upon him, we should find our
selves very little concerned in most things which bring us greatest Trouble
here on Earth, where we are but for a minute in our way to Eternity. O consider
that word Eternity, and you will find we struggle here for that, that is even
less than nothing; why trouble we our selves for Earthly Losses? for when we
have lost all we have, there are thousands as dear to God as we, as poor as we.
We are rich though we lose the whole World if we gain him: let us set before
our eyes the example of those, who to give testimony to the Truth, rejoiced to
lay down their Lives; nay, let us with humble presumption follow the Pattern of
our Blessed Savior, who for our sakes suffered more than man can think on, the
burden of all our Sins, and the Wrath of his Father: and shall we then repine
to lay down our Lives for him, when he calls for it from us, to give us a
nearer admittance to him, than we can hope for while we are clogged with our
Clay-Tenements. Dear Niece, I should never be weary to talk with you, though
this be a Subject I confess I cannot speak of well; but even that Happiness is
bereft me, by the importunity of a Crowd of Persons that are now in the Room
with me, grudging the time I take in telling you, that while I am,

I am Yours, etc.
Sterlin, 28th July, 1651.

The Duke waited on the King in the whole March, and gave Order that the Troops
which he had levied should follow with all possible haste. Seven of them came
up, and joined the Army at Moffet, but the interruptions the Enemy gave, made
that the rest could not be raised; nor were these Troops full. The Duke
welcomed them with great affection, and assured them they should be as dear to
him as his own Life, and that if God blessed the King with Success, he should
be very careful to see them rewarded as they should deserve: but seeing they
made in all but betwixt two and three hundred, he feared too many Standards
would make them look like the remains of a broken Army; and therefore he set up
only his own Standard, and so turned his small Regiment into a great Troop, and
marched on with the Army.

When the Army came to Warington-Bridge, An. 1651.
and beat Lambert from it, the Duke Commanded the Brigade (where his Horse
were) that was in the Rear of the Foot; Lambert is beat from Warington-bridge
but that and the other Brigade of Horse being commanded to halt, he sent his
Major to the Lieutenant General, for Orders to March, that the Enemy might be
vigorously pursued: but the Lieutenant General would have the Foot led over
first, and so that occasion was lost, which he with many others did infinitely
greater with great demonstrations of Grief. Then it was debated, which way the
King should hold: the Duke pressed that they should March straight to London,
which was the desire of the whole Army, and that which Lambert apprehended, for
in his Retreat he took the London-Road. There were also many other reasons used
to enforce it, but the English Nobility and Gentry, who were in the Army, and
the Earl of Derby, who with many Gentlemen came to the Army that night, gave
many reasons against that March. The Duke seeing them so much against it,
though his Reason could not go along with theirs; yet that he might not oppose
so many brave and LoyalGentlemen, went out of the Kings Tent, for he would not
by his Presence seem to consent to that which he apprehended would prejudice
the Kings Service: but was so far from disparaging the other Counsels, and
enhancing the value of his own, that he went and labored with all the Officers
of the Army, to engage them to a cheerful Concurrence in the Resolutions that
were taken, and studied even to persuade them to assent to that which had not
yet prevailed on his own Reason.

The Resolution being taken to go to Worcester and storm it, The King entered
Worcester.
the Army marched, and when they came near the Town, some Horse and Dragoons
which were sent thither by Lambert two days before, retired to Gloucester; and
the King entered Worcester with two Bodies of Foot, the rest Marched through the
Town over the Severn. The day after the King came to Worcester, the Duke with
many of the Nobility and Gentry went to the Cross, and himself read the Kings
Proclamation, and caused the Major of the Town to proclaim it; but God having
designed to set his Majesty on the Throne of his Ancestors by his own Immediate
Hand, all hopes of supplies from Wales, or other well-affected Places,
vanished. Cromwell also followed the King from Scotland in great Marches,
having left General Monk (since the famous Duke of Albemarle) there with an
Army to subdue the little strength that remained for maintaining his Majesty's
Interest in that Kingdom. The day after Cromwell came before Worcester, the King
called a great Council of War, to consider what was to be done, where the Duke
spoke first, and after he had in as short terms as was possible opened the
state of Affairs, he said one of three things must be done; Either they were to
March out and fight, to lie still and provide for a Siege, or to March to
London, the other side of the Severn being then free. He proposed the
Difficulties of all these, yet said one of them was to be done, and desired
that his Majesty might put it to the debate, which of them was fittest. None
proposed a fourth Expedient. But the Duke did afterward suggest, if the
Marching into Wales might be advisable; but as they were in the debate, before
the half of the Council of War had delivered their opinions, there came an
Alarm to the door that dissolved the Meeting. This was four days before the
Fight, the Enemy grew daily stronger, and raised the whole Country to his
Assistance; and as the Kings small Army was utterly disproportioned to their
Strength, so the Courage of the Soldiers did daily abate; and the Duke as he
clearly foresaw the ruin of the Kings Affairs at that time, and the Captivity
of his Country that would follow; so he desired not to outlive it, The Duke
apprehenns and prepares for Death.
which he plainly told to some of his more intimate Friends, though for
encouraging others, he put on a great appearance of Cheerfulness on his looks:
but apprehending that his End drew nigh, notwithstanding all the Attendance he
was obliged to at Court, and with the Army; yet he set off large portions of
his Time for reviewing his Life, and fitting himself for Eternity; and when his
Employment all day denied him the convenience of such long and serious
Retirements as that Work required, he took it from his sleep in the night,
being more solicitous for rest to his Mind than to his Body And the night
before the often fatal third of September, which was the day of
Worcester-Fight, though he had stayed very late in the Court; yet when he came
to his Lodgings, the apprehensions he had of what was before him kept him awake
and serious, as will appear from the following Paper which he wrote, and was
found in his Pockets when they were searched after his Death.

A Meditation on Death, and a Prayer.
WHEN sadness for any Worldly Cross lies heavy upon thee, remember thou art a
Christian, designed for the Inheritance of Jesus; or if thou be an obstinate
impenitent Sinner, as sure as God is just thou must perish; if this be thy
Condition I cannot blame thee to be sad, sad till thy heartstrings crack. But
then why art thou troubled for the loss of Friends, Fortune, or for any Worldly
want? what should a damned man do with any of these? did ever any man upon the
wrack afflict himself because his Mistress slighted him, or call for the
particulars of a Purchase upon the Gallows? if thou do really believe thou
shall be damned, I do not say it will cure all other Sadness, but certainly it
will, or ought to swallow it up.

And if thou believe thou shall be saved, consider how great is that Joy, how
infinite is that Change, how unspeakable is the Glory, how excellent is the
Recompense for all thy Sufferings in the World. So let thy Condition be what it
will, compared to thy future possibility, thou can not feel the present smart
of a cross Fortune to any great degree, either because thou have a far bigger
Sorrow or a far bigger Joy. Here thou art but a Stranger traveling to a
Country, where the Glories of a Kingdom are prepared for thee; it is therefore
a huge folly to be much afflicted, because thou have a less convenient Inn to
Lodge in by the way.

Let us prepare our selves against Changes always expecting them, that we be
not surprised when they come. O death, how bitter art thou to a man that is at
rest in his Possessions; to the rich man, who had promised himself ease and
fullness for many years, it was a sad Arrest that his Soul was surprised the
first night. But the Apostles who every day knocked at the Gate of Death, and
looked upon it continually, went to their Martyrdom in peace and evenness.
Anytus and Miletus may kill me, but they cannot hurt me: we are troubled on
every side, but not distressed; perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but
not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed: and who is he that will harm you,
if ye be followers of that which is good?

Consider that Afflictions are oft-times the occasions of great Temporal
Advantages, and we must not look upon them as they sit heavy us, but as they
serve some of Gods ends, and the purposes of Universal Providence: and when a
Prince fights justly, and yet unprosperously, could he see the reasons for
which God orders it, he would find it unreasonable, nay ill, to have it
otherwise. If a man could have opened one of the Pages of Divine Counsel, and
seen the event of Joseph 's being sold to the Merchants of Midian, he might
with much reason have dried up the young man's Tears. The case of Themistocles
was not much unlike that of Joseph, for being banished he likewise grew in
favor with the Persian King, and told his Wife, he had perished unless he had
perished. God esteems it one of his Glories to bring good out of evil, and
therefore it were but reason we should leave God to govern his own World as he
pleases, and that we should patiently wait till the Change come, and likewise
not envy the Prosperity of the wicked. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for
him; fret not thy self because of him who prospers in his way, because of the
man who brings wicked devices to pass; for evil doers shall be cut off, but
those that wait upon the Lord shall inherit the Earth. Theramenes, one of the
Thirty Tyrants of Athens, escaped when his house fell upon him, but was shortly
after put to Death by his Colleagues in the Tyranny.

The last great Trial is Death, for which should we grieve, of all griefs it is
the most unreasonable: for why should we grieve at that which is absolutely
unavoidable? and it is not so much to be cared for how long we live, as how
well we live, for that Life is not best which is longest. The shortning of our
days is an Evil wholly depending on Opinion, for if men did now naturally live
but Twenty years, then we should be satisfied if they died about 16 or 18. We
call not that Death immature in any who live to Seventy, and yet this Age is as
far short of the old Period before and since the Flood, as he who now dies of
eighteen is of Seventy. Let us still be ready for it, and it cannot come too
soon, for let us die young or old, still we have an Immortal Soul, and do lay
down our Bodies for a time, as that which was the Instrument of our Sorrow and
Trouble, and the Scene of Sickness and Diseases: let us not then fear that
which rids us of all these, for by fearing it we shall never the more avoid it,
but make it the more miserable to us. Fanius who killed himself for fear of
Death, died as certainly as Porcia who eat burning Coals, or Cato who tore out
his own Bowels. To die is necessary and natural, and may be honorable; but to
die poorly, basely, and sinfully, that alone is that which can make a man
miserable, for no man can be a Slave but he that fears pain, or fears to die;
to such a man nothing but peaceable times can secure his Quiet, for he depends
upon things without him for his Felicity, and so is well but during the
Pleasure of his Enemy, a Thief or a Tyrant: but blessed is he who willingly
resigns his Soul and Body into Gods hands, as unto the hands of a blessed
Creator and Redeemer.

O Blessed Jesus, thou did die for me, grant that I may with Joy submit unto
thy Summons, when thou shall call me to Death, for thou art my Advocate as well
as my Judge, and came into the World to save sinners, whereof, O Lord, I
acknowledge I am the greatest: but thy Mercies are infinite, O God of Mercy and
God of all Comfort, with much mercy look upon the sadness and sorrow of thy
Servant; my Sins lie heavy upon me, and press me sore, by reason of thy hot
displeasure; my Miseries are without comfort, because they are the punishments
of my Sins: my Sin has caused my sorrow, and my sorrow does not cure my Sin,
and unless thou for thy own sake, and merely because thou art good, pity me, I
am as much without Remedy as without Comfort. Lord pity me, let thy Grace
refresh my spirit, let thy Comfort support me, thy Mercies pardon me, and let
not my portion be among helpless and accursed Spirits, for thou art good and
gracious, and I throw my self upon thy Mercy; suffer me never to let my hold
go, anddo then with me what seems good in thy own eyes. I cannot suffer more
than I have deserved, and yet I can need no Relief so great as thy Mercy is,
for thou art infinitely more merciful than I can be miserable. Lord, make me
the object of thy Mercy, both in my Life and in my Death; and if even this day
thou shall think fit to remove me from this valley of miseries, either by the
violent hand of this merciless Enemy, or any other way which in thy Providence
thou have ordained, when my Soul shall go out from the Prison of this Body, may
it be received by Angels, and preserved from the horror and amazements, and
the surprise of Evil Spirits, and be laid up in the Bosom of our Lord, till at
the day of thy second Coming it shall be reunited to the Body; which is now to
be laid in the dust, yet I hope shall be raised up in Joy to live for ever, and
behold the Face of God in the Glories of our Lord Jesus, who is our Hope, our
Resurrection, and our Life, our Blessed and ever-Glorious Redeemer, to whom
with the Father and the Holy Spirit be all Honor and Glory, for ever and ever.
Amen.

In these Exercises he continued till it was almost morning; and then he threw
himself down on the Bed, where he did not lie above two hours when he was
called on to make ready, and as soon as he was Dressed and Armed, he waited on
the King into the Field.

The Dukes Regiment charges gallantly at Worcester-Fight.
The Account of that Engagement is not here to be offered, since nothing belongs
to this Work but that wherein the Duke was concerned. His Regiment was
commanded to charge a Body of Horse and Foot, that stood near two piece of
Cannon not far from the Severn: but there were two great Bodies of Foot
standing on each side of the Lane, through which they were to go, and these
firing on them as they pas^ed, they received great Loss; but having got through
the Lane, there was no coming to the Enemy, who stood in a close Ground, but
through aGap in the Hedge, through which theLieutenant Colonel with a very
inconsiderable Number Charged, and the Enemy gave ground, and left the Cannon
in their hands, the Horse retiring to Hacker's Regiment, who came up and
Charged, and was gallantly received by the Lieutenant Colonel and the Dukes
Regiment: but some Foot brought to line the Hedges on their Flanks, Fired so on
them that they were forced to retire. The Duke being near the Kings Person, and
observing all that passed, inquired who they were, and being told it was his
own Regiment, His great Valor.
he thought it unworthy of him to be too far from Danger, when they were so put
to it, and galloped all alone from the King to the place where they were; where
he found them retiring, and did all he could either by words or threatenings to
make them keep their Ground. But the Enemy did still bring up more Foot, and
Fired uncessantly on them, and most of the Officers were either wounded, or had
their Horses killed under them; particularly the Lieutenant Colonel, who had
all the while Charged very gallantly, had his Horse shot under him, and so they
were beaten back. The Duke himself kept in the Rear, with such as were in a
Condition to wait on him, to the great hazard of his Person, and gave signal
demonstrations of a high Courage: but the Enemy following him close in great
Bodies, he commanded some Foot to make good the Hedge against them, and rode up
and down among them, and encouraged them to stand and die for the Service of
their King, and the Honor of their Country; An. 1652.
and did several times Charge down to the Hedges, so that all were astonished
at such daring and unusual Valor. But the Enemy pressing on, he rode again
with his Pistol in his hand to the Hedge, where he received the fatal Shot that
quite disabled him. He is wounded
His Majesty hearing of the extreme Danger he exposed himself to in these
Charges, and knowing well how great a loss he would suffer, if so brave a
Commander and such a wise and faithful Counselor were killed, sent once and
again to call him away from that Hazard he was in, but he choosed to prefer his
Majesty's Service to these most obliging Commands; yet being disabled by the
Wound he got, he was forced to retire to the Town. And taken.
The total routing of the Army quickly followed, and by the taking of Worcester
that night he fell into the Enemies hands.

When he came to his Lodgings his Wound was searched by the Kings Surgeon, Mr.
Kincaid, who found that by a slug-shot the Bone of his Leg, a little below the
Joint, was crushed, and so broken that many Splinters with the Bullet were
taken out at first dressing, and many more fragments were at several other
dressings separated from the Bone; and the Surgeon told him, the only way to
save his Life, was to lose his Leg. But Trappam, Cromwell's Surgeon, being sent
by him to wait on the Duke, assured him there was no hazard. Two days after the
Duke was wounded, the Kings Physician, Sir Robert Cunningham, being found out
among the Prisoners, was brought to him, who found he had lost much blood by
his Wound, and therefore opened a vein in his Arm, which diverted the Course of
the Blood. Then the Duke asked his opinion about him, who told him plainly,
there was no hope of saving his Life but by cutting off his Leg, and if that
were done some hopes remained; but Trappam having assured him there was no
hazard, he was not willing to submit to so severe a Sentence, till he were
further satisfied of its being absolutely necessary: therefore he sent to
London for Mr. Dickson, who was an expert Surgeon, in whom he had great
Confidence, and he came to him with all possible haste; but it was too late,
for the Dukes Strength and Spirits were so wasted that they durst not adventure
on the Operation. During these few days of the Dukes Life, he expressed great
Composure of mind, and a cheerful willingness to welcome his approaching End,
which drew on a-pace; nor showed he anxiety or concern in any thing but his
Majesty's Preservation, for which as he prayed constantly, so he still enquired
News concerning him, and blessed God that he heard none, judging from that that
he was safe and had escaped. On the 8th of September, finding his Strength
failing him, and looking on himself as a dead man, he sent his last thoughts to
his Lady and Neeces in the following Letter written with his own Hand.

Dear Heart,
YOU know I have been long laboring, though in great weakness, to be prepared
against this expected Change, He writes to his Lady.
and I thank my God I find Comfort in it, in this my day of Trial; for my Body
is not more weakened by my Wounds, then I find my Spirit Comforted and Supported
by the infinite Mercies and great Love of my Blessed Redeemer, who will be with
me to the end and in the end.

I am not able to say much more to you, the Lord preserve you under your
Trials, and sanctify the use of them to the Comfort of your Soul.

I will not so much as in a Letter divide my dear Neeces and you; the Lord
grant you may be constant Comforts to one another in this Life, and send you
all Eternal Happiness with your Savior in the Life to come: to both of your
Cares I recommend my poor Children, let your great Work be to make them early
accquainted with God, and their Duties to him; and though they may suffer many
wants here before their Removal from hence, yet they will find an inexhaustible
Treasure in the Love of Christ. May the Comforts of the Blessed Spirit be ever
near you in all your Straits and Difficulties, and suffer not the least
repining to enter into any of your Hearts for his Dispensations toward me, for
his Mercies have been infinitely above his Justice in the whole Pilgrimage of,

Dear Heart, Your Own, HAMILTON.
Worcester, Sept. 8. 1651.

His Death.
ON the 11th of September the Dukes Pulse failed quite, which he discerned first
himself, and called for his Physician to whom he said he felt no pain nor
sickness, but could not discern his Pulse to move, and no more did his
Physician; but imputing it to malignant vapors rising from his Wound, he gave
him some Cordials which made no Change upon him: and then his Spirits quitting
all their Natural operations retired to his Brain, and his Intellectual
Faculties, his Memory, Reason, and Expression continued in their vigor for the
space of twelve hours; after that, his Voice was likewise entire and strong.
The total cessation of the Arterial Motion, together with a Marmoreous
coldness, that was creeping up by degrees from all his extremities, made his
Physician warn him that Death was approaching; the Duke answered, that from the
beginning he apprehended his Wound would prove Mortal, but he could not think
Death was so near him, since he found neither sickness, pain, fainting, nor
oppression trouble him. He had been during his Sickness often waited on both by
the Ministers of Worcester, and the Ministers who waited on the Kings Army,
whom he called for; and as they Prayed and ministered Divine Consolations to
him, so they were much comforted and edified with the Christian Courage and Joy
he expressed in these his last and closest Conflicts. From six in the morning on
the 12th of September he lay quiet speaking little, but was observed all the
while by these who looked often to see what he was doing, that he was well
employed in mental Prayer and devout Ejaculations. About nine a Clock being
asked by his Physician how he was, he answered his Heart was free of Sickness;
but added, That he should tell his Relations in Scotland, that he died
believing, that through the Merits of the Mediator the Lord Jesus Christ, the
Lord his Righteousness, and through the infinite Mercies of his God, it should
fare with him as with the idle Laborers, in the Parable of the Vineyard, who
went in at the 11th hour and yet received the penny; so he believed, that though
in the last hour of the day he had entered into his Masters Service, yet he
should receive his penny. From that time he lay quiet, and about twelve a Clock,
after three groans, without any other struggling or passion of Death, he
breathed out his Soul, and his Body was interred in the Cathedral Church of
Worcester; An. 1651.
for though according to his Orders for burying him with his Ancestors at
Hamilton, his Servants did move earnestly that they might have leave to carry
his Body to Scotland, yet it was flatly denied.

When the news of his Death was carried to Scotland, his Will was opened, which
follows.

In the Name of God, Amen.
I William Duke of Hamilton, etc. being, I thank God, in perfect Health; yet
considering the uncertainty thereof, and the many Dangers that all men are
subject to, and few more than my self, am desirous to leave my Worldly Affairs
at the time of my Death in the best order I can, as it shall please the Lord to
direct me, to whose Providence and Dispensation I humbly and wholly submit my
self, falling down before the Throne of his Mercy, who is both the just
Inflicter of Death upon us, and the merciful Savior of us in it, and from it;
who is the fountain of Eternal Life, and in whom there is no shadow of Death.
Thou, O my Savior, who knows what it is to die with me as a man, make me to
know what it is to pass through Death to Life with thee, my God: make me
content to leave the World's Nothing, that I may come really to enjoy All in
Thee, who have made Christ to me in Life gain, and (trusting only in his
Merits, and Mediation) will in Death be advantage. Charge me not, O Lord, with
the Sins of my Parents, nor with the multitude and hainousness of my
Transgressions, which I acknowledge before thee. Remember thy Compassions of
old, and thy Loving kindness which have been for many Generations. Be merciful
unto me, O Lord, for my Soul trusts in thee; though thou should kill me,
yet will I trust in thy Mercy, and my Savior's Merits, for I know that my
Redeemer lives: though thou leadest me through the valley and shadow of Death,
yet shall I fear none Evil, falling into the Arms of thy tender and Eternal
Mercies. O withdraw not thy Favor from me, which is better than Life; be not
far from me, for I know not how near Death is to me. Lord, let thy Servant
depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation.

My Body I bequeath to the Grave, and desire to have it buried in the ordinary
Burial-place of my Ancestors at Hamilton, and that no Ceremony nor Pomp at all
be used at the interring of my sinful Carcass, which has so much offended and
dishonored God; yet through Faith I hope it shall be sprinkled with the
precious Blood of Jesus Christ, and being reunited with my Soul, shall
together rise in Glory, reconciled with the Father, to enjoy Eternal Happiness
with him in Heaven.

After this follow the Particulars of the Will, which he concludes in the
following Words.

And now, O Lord, pity me in my low Condition, and bring me out of my Troubles;
though the number of my Enemies be great, yet thou can disappoint their
Counsels; keep them, Lord, from prevailing, and turn them back that persecute
my Soul. If it be thy Will, O Lord, restore me to my Country, that there in
peace I may finish the course of my Pilgrimage in thy fear, and live loyal and
obedient to my Gracious King Charles the Second, and faithful and dutiful to my
Country: and as I trust that through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ,
An. 1652.
thou have forgiven all the errors of my Life, so I beg and hope thou will save
me from the terrors of Death. Let not, O Lord, at that last hour my Soul be
desolate and forsaken; let not those saving Truths I have formerly learned then
fail my Memory, nor the sweet effusions of thy Spirit which I have sometimes
felt, then be wanting to my Heart; be with me at that time, O Lord, in a
special manner, and send the blessed Comforter to assure me of Salvation, that
I may die with Joy, and leave this World with Contentment, since I shall be
confident of the Remission of my sins through Christ Jesus, and of my going to
that place of eternal Happiness, which thou have prepared for all them that
fear thee in Christ; to which place bring me for his sake, to whom with thee
and the blessed Spirit of Grace be all Honor, Praise and Glory, for ever and
ever, Amen. Written by my self at the Hague in Holland the 21th of March 1650.

HAMILTON.


To which shall be added a Letter that was Sealed up with his Will to his Lady.

Dear Heart,
ALthough a very short stay in this place may possibly endanger my Life* yet
seeing these may chance to be the last words you are ever to receive from me,
no hazard shall keep me from letting you know how sensible I am of the great
Love and Kindness you have always had for me, for which the Lord reward you,
unto whose Protection I leave you: and as I do recommend you to God, who will
be near unto all that call upon him, and fulfill the desires of them that fear
him, and preserve all them that love him; so I do recommend you unto your self,
that you would labor to serve, fear, and love the Lord God, and set him before
your eyes in all your ways. Continue (as I have often been a witness to) your
daily practice in reading the Word of God, which will be a Lamp unto your feet,
and Light unto your paths. Look not with prejudice upon any of the Messengers
of his Word, but reverence them for their Message sake: be not too confident of
your own Opinions, but examine them by the Touchstone of Gods Word, and refuse
not to hear the admonition of his Servants. Repine not at Gods ways or
dispensations to you, but be patient in Affliction, that you may say with
David, I held my tongue, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. For you
may have this Comfort that whom God loves he Chastens, and really if God had
not said it, man would hardly believe that Affliction comes from his Love. But
if we admit his Truth, and consider Experience, we shall find that he often
afflicts them most, whom he loves most, and who most love him. As for those
whose eyes stand out with fatness, and have more than their hearts can wish, he
sets them on slippery places, and feeds them as Oxen to the Slaughter. He is
nearer to us in Affliction than in Prosperity, and wear nearer unto him: it is
his menage to bring us home from our Wanderings, at least I have looked upon it
so as to my self, which makes me thus desire you may so receive his
Visitations. Be frequent in Prayer, and limit not the Spirit in you to the
conceptions of other men: shun all vain and idle Company and Conversation, and
pray to the Lord to set a watch before your mouth, and to keep the door of your
lips. Forget and hate the empty pleasures of a licentious Court, or of London,
and with David pray, Turn away my eyes from beholding vanity, An. 1651.
and quicken thou me in thy way. Be not hasty nor passionate, keep not anger in
your heart against any, have Charity for all men, even for them whom you may
look upon as your Enemies, and study still rather to put the best than worst
construction upon the Actions of any. Examine your self every night what good
you have done the preceding day, and remember still that you are one day nearer
that in which you must give an account to God of all your Actions, on whose
Mercy to you let your earliest and latest thoughts be always fixed. Sweet Heart,
much more I would say, but you know I am pressed by time; but seek to God, and
in him you will find all things.

The next Duty I shall recommend to you, is, that which you must pay your King:
I know you need no Incitements to this Duty, else I would insist longer upon
it; but I conceive it mine to recommend it to you as the Earthly thing which in
the first place you ought to study.

Next unto that prefer your Duty to the preservation of the House of Hamilton
to all things else in this World, and make no difference in the testimonies of
your kindness to it, whether the Lord shall think fit to continue the memory of
that House in your own or my dear Brothers Issue. And I do conjure you, if you
have any respect to my desires, not to suffer any difference or mistakes to
arise betwixt you and them; but remember him who preferred me to them, and what
consequently my Duty and yours is to his.

Next I recommend to you the care of the Education of our Children: for the
Lords sake study to get them acquainted with God in their young years, and to
imprint his fear in their tender hearts, keep all light and idle company from
them, and labor to make them rich in Piety and Virtue, Loyal to their King,
and dutiful to the House of Hamilton.

As I hope all my Friends and Kindred will be dutiful to you, so I entreat you
for my sake continue your respects and kindness to them.

Be careful to keep none but pious and discreet Servants in your Family, that
the Lord being served and worshipped in it according to his Will, may delight
to dwell in it, and to bless every member of it.

And now, Sweet Heart, seeing you know that these diverse years my Life has
been a burden to me, receive my Removal as a Mercy from God, with that
moderation which he commands, and the hope of a Joyful meeting in our
Resurrection persuades; being confident that the Lord has placed me in
Eternal Happiness with himself in Heaven, where he has already laid up some
pieces of my self, little James and Diana. The Lord who has wounded you, bind
up your sores, and pour the Balm of Gilead in your Heart; even the Comforts of
the Holy Spirit, in the assurance of the Remission of your sins, and peace with
him in Jesus Christ, that his Grace in you may shine to the World in a godly
and virtuous Life, which having finished in his fear, you may hereafter enter
with him into that Glory, which I trust in the Mercies and Mediation of Jesus
Christ my Redeemer I shall be shareing of, when you shall be reading these last
words and expressions from, Dear Heart,

Your HAMILTON.


THe Dispositions which you made to me of your Lands in England, I do here
again return to you, to be disposed upon by you as you shall think fit, being
confident that you will not wrong the House of Hamilton, or your Children, in
the Disposal thereof.

The Conclusion.
I shall conclude this Work with these Papers, which, though some nice Palats
may think not so fit for the Public, and better for private Closets than the
World, yet I could not be of that opinion; for in an Age in which the sense of
Piety and Religion is so much decayed, I thought such testimonies to the Power
of it were not to be suppressed; by which it will appear, that a high-spirited
and Great Person, who had tasted of all the Follies that bewitch the greatest
part of men, did in end, in the vigor of his Years and Spirits, abandon them
with all the seriousness of a hearty and lively Repentance, and found in God
and true Religion such solid satisfaction and joy, as did wholly overcome him,
and engage him into a course of strict Piety and of a holy Life. I wish this
may work some effect upon a loose and debauched Generation, and if the World
becomes either better or wiser through my pains, I have gained my chief end and
design in this Work.

THE END.
THE CONTENTS.
Lib. I. Of what happened from his Fathers Death till the Year 1638.
Anno 1625.
THe Marquis of Hamilton dies, Page 1. His Son succeeds him, ibid. His Father's
Character, ibid. King James dies, p. 2.
An. 1626.
The Marquis goes into Scotland, ibid. The King writes to him, p. 3. and
invites him to Court, ibid. but he lives retired, ibid. The Earl of Denbigh
goes for him, p. 4.
An. 1628.
He comes to Court, ibid. His Preferments there, ibid. The State of Germany
ibid.
An. 1629.
The Q. of Bohemia writes to him, p. 5. The K. of Sweden desires a League with
the King, ibid. Who appoints the Marquis to treat with him, p. 6. The Marq.
sends Coll. Hamilton, ibid. and David Ramsay to the King of Sweden, ibid.
An. 1630.
Articles signed by the K. of Sweden, p. 7. The Prince of Wales is born, p. 8.
The Marq. made Knight of the Garter, ib. Articles with the K. of Sweden signed
by the Marq. p. 9. Ramsay deals with the Lord Reay, p. 10. and Negotiates with
the States of Holland, ibid. Farensbach's Treachery, ibid. The K. of Swed.
presses the Marq. to come to Germany, ibid. And desires a League with the King,
p. 11.
An. 1631.
Reay accuses Ramsay, ibid. And L. Ochiltree accuses the Marq. ib. The Marq.
Innocence appears, p. 12. L. Weston is his Enemy, ibid. But the K. will receive
no ill Impressions of him, ibid. And makes him lie in his Bedchamber that
night, p. 13. Ochiltreeis tried, and punished for his false Accusation, ibid.
Reay and Ramsay desire to fight, p. 14. The Kings Letter about that matter, ib.
The Marq. sails to Germany, p. 15. And goes through the Soundt, ibid. The King
writes to him, ibid. He lands in Germany with 6000 men, which did the K. of
Sweden great Service, p. 16. The Marq. goes to the K. of Sweden. ib. The K. of
Sw. sends him to guard some Passes on the Oder, ibid. The Plague breaks in upon
his Army, ib. He relieves Crossen, p. 17. And takes Guben, ibid. He is called
to besiege Magdeburg, ib. Sir H. Vane Ambassador to the King of Sweden, p. 18.
The King's Letters to the Marq. ibid. The Marq. goes to the K. of Swed. p. 19.
Magdeburg is brought to a Parley, ib. but is relieved by Papenheim, p. 20. who
draws out the Garrison, and leaves it, ibid. Two Letters of the King's to the
Marq. p. 20, 21.
An. 1632.
The K. of Swed. proposes unreasonable terms to the King, p. 21. The Marq. Army
comes to nothing. ibid. The K. of Sw. will not give him a new Commission, p.
22. The King writes to him about a new Employment for him, p. 23. The Treaty
between the King and the K. of Sweden breaks up, ibid. The passion of the K. of
Swden, p. 24. The Marq. returns to England upon the King's Commands, ibid. The
K. of Sweden's Death, p. 25.
An. 1633.
The King is Crowned in Scotland, ibid. The King assigns a Taxation to the
Marq. for repaying the expense of his Army, p. 26.
Lib. 2. Of what passed when he was the Kings Commissioner in Scotland, in the
Years 1638, and 1639.
An. 1637.
THe Marq. employed in the Affairs of Scotland, p. 27. A recapitulation of the
State of the Church from the Reformation, p. 28. The Ministers were popular and
factious, ibid. King James sets up Episcopacy, ibid. but it receives great
Opposition, ibid. The King prosecutes his Designs, p. 29. Prejudice conceived
against the Bishops, ibid. They are charged with Popery, ibid. And Arminianism,
ibid. And breach of Sabbath, ibid. The Nobility grow jealous of them, p. 30.
Their Clergy dislike them, ibid. The Liturgy is appointed to be used, ibid. A
Tumult at the first reading of it, p. 31. Traquair's Letter about the occasion
of the Troubles, ibid. New Tumults, p. 32. The Kings Proclamation does not
quiet them. ibid.
1638.
The National Covenant is sworn, ibid. Traquair goes to Court, p. 33. And
procures a new Proclamation, p. 34. which they Protest against, ibid. The
Council sends the King an account by the Lord Iustice-Clerk, ibid. His
Instructions, ibid. Traquair and Roxbrough write to the King, p. 36. The
Councils Letter to the Marq. p. 37. The King names the Marq. Commissioner for
Scotland, p. 38. Articles sent up by the Covenanters, p. 39. Complaints sent up
by the Bishops, and their Clergy, p. 41. The King resolves to redress their
Grievances, p. 42. Some Discourses that passed in the Kings Closet between the
Marq. and the Bishops, ibid. The Kings Proclamation, p. 43. Another
Proclamation, p. 44. The Archbishop of St. And. his draught draught of a
Proclamation, p. 45. Queries of the Marquis's to the King, with the King's
answers, p. 46. The Instructions the King gave him, p. 50. He goes to Scotland,
p. 51. Great jealousies of him there, p. 52. He finds things in an ill posture,
ibid. Of which he gives the King an account, p. 53. He goes to Edinburgh, p.
54. and treats with the Covenanters, ibid. The King writes to him to proceed
warily, p. 55. The Multitudes scatter, p. 56. The King writes to him about his
preparations, ibid. The Session brought back to Edinburgh, p. 57. The
Covenanters desire a speedy answer, ibid. Many advise him to accept of an
Explanation of the Covenant, p. 58. Which he proposes to the King, ibid. The
Arch-B. of St. And. draught of the Explanation, ibid. The King writes to him
about his Artillery, Money, and other designs, p. 59. The King will hear of no
Explanation of the Covenant, p. 60. The Marquis asks leave to come to Court, p.
61. The King grants it, ibid. The B. of Ross's Letter to the Marq. about his
conduct in Scotland, p. 62. The Session sat at Edinburgh, p. 64. The Kings
Proclamation published, ibid. And Protested against, ibid. The Inconstancy of
the Council, ibid. The Marq. takes Journey, p. 65. He gives the King an Account
of Affairs, ibid. And gets new Instructions, ibid. The Kings Letter to the
Council, p. 67. And Declaration, ibid. The Covenanters are busy in Scotland, p.
68. A Debate between them and the Doctors in Aberdeen, ibid. The Covenanters
Resolutions, p. 69. The Marquis makes the Kings Pleasure known, ibid. The
Covenanters are not satisfied with it, p. 70. The Marq. goes again to Court,
ibid. An advice offered to the King, ibid. for renewing King James his
Covenant, p. 71. The Kings reasons against it, p. 72. But at length he gives
way to it, ibid. And gives the Marquis new Instructions, ibid. Other
Instructions about the Bishops, p. 74. An Assembly to sit at Glasgow, p. 75.
The Kings Covenant, ibid. And the Bond joined to it, p. 77. The Bishops are
jealous of the Marquis, p. 78. Iealousies begin among the Covenanters, p. 79.
The Marq. calls the Council to let them know the Kings Concessions, p. 80. The
Covenanters move for a delay, ibid. but after a long debate the Council is
satisfied with them, ibid. They are proclaimed, ibid. The Covenanters protest
against them, ib. The K. is well satisfied with the Marq. ibid. The Marq.
apprehends the danger Episcopacy was in, p. 82. Which the King did not think so
great, but is highly displeased with the Covenanters, ibid. A pretended
Prophetess, p. 83. A Jesuit turns Presbyterian, ibid. The Marquis prepares for
the Assembly, p. 84. The King is for punishing those that did Protest against
his Proclamation, ibid. The Covenanters oppose the signing of the King's
Covenant, p. 85. The Elections for the Assembly, p. 86. The Bishop and Doctors
of Aberdeen subscribe the King's Covenant with limitations ibid. Some are for
proroguing the Assembly, p. 87. But the K. disapproves of that, p. 88. The
Bishops are cited to the Assembly, ibid. Many Lords of the Session sign the
Kings Covenant, and some of them refuse to do it, p. 89. The K. gets the Castle
of Edinburgh into his hands, but it is in an ill case, ibid. The Marq. spares
no cost in the Kings service, ibid. The K. wants money, ibid. The K. writes by
the Bishop of Ross to the Marquis, p. 90. And sends by him his Observations on
the Bishops Declinatour, p. 91. The Marq. goes to Glasgow, p. 92. The Bishops
write to him, ibid. The strictness of the Kings Conscience, p. 93. The Assembly
sits down, ibid. The Marq. Speech at the opening of it, p. 94. The Kings offers
to the Assembly, p. 95. The Bishops advise him how to proceed, p. 96. The
Members of the Assembly, p. 98. The Marq. sends full advertisements to the
King, ibid. To which the Kings writes Answer, p. 99. The Marq. displeased with
the Assembly, ibid. Three Letters of the King's to the Marq. p. 100. The Marq.
resolves to dissolve the Assembly, p. 101. His Speech at the Dissolution, ibid.
Mr. Henderson answers him, p. 105. The Marq. replies, ibid. He dissolves the
Assembly, p. 106. But they sit still, ibid. The Council approves of what the
Marq. did, ibid. But Argyle joins with the Assembly, ib. The Mar. goes back to
Edinburgh, p. 107. The King approves of his carriage, ibid. Two Letters from
the Archbishop of Canterbury, p. 108, and 109. The Assembly proceeds, p. 110.
The Marq. issues out a Proclamation against them, ibid. But they end their
business, and write to the King, p. 111. The Marq. is indisposed, ibid. He goes
to Court, ibid.
An. 1639.
The State of Affairs in Britain, p. 112. The King is highly displeased with
the Covenanters, ibid. And resolves on a War, p. 113. The Design of it, ibid.
The Covenanters prepare for it, p. 114. And are Animated by the Ministers, p.
115. They become Masters of all Scotland, ibid. The K. emits the Manifesto, p.
116. The Covenanters begin the War, ibid. They take the Castle of Edinburgh,
ibid. The King goes to York, p. 117. Huntley is taken prisoner, ibid. The Marq.
makes ready to go to Sea, p. 118. The K. is angry with Traquair, ibid. Berwick
and Carlisle possessed by the King, p. 119. The King writes about his
Proclamation, p. 120. Hopes from Ireland fail, ibid. The King sends ^is
Proclamation to the Marq. ibid. And orders the Marq. to sail to the Frith,
ibid. The Marq. puts his Soldiers aboard, ibid. Some alterations in the
Proclamation, p. 122. The King orders the Marq. not to go to the North, p. 123.
The Marq. sails into the Frith p. 124. He sends the Kings Proclamation to
Edinburgh, ibid. The Covenanters write to him, p. 125. To which he answers, p.
126. Some come and treat with him, p. 127. The Kings Advices to him, ibid. A
Proposition about the Ferries in Scotland, p. 128. The Earl of Rothes writes
sharply to the Marq. p. 129. The Marq. Answers him, p. 130. The Marq. sends
some proposals for a Treaty to the King, p. 131. Which the K. is pleased with,
ibid. The state of the Covenanters Forces, p. 132. The K. sends for two
Regiments from the Marq. p. 133. A Conference between the Marq* and some
Covenanters, ibid. The K. sends some Lords to the Marq. p. 135. And the
Viscount of Aboyn, p. 136. The K. is willing to enter on a Treaty, p. 137. And
is well satisfied with the Marq. ibid. Some on the Borders gained to the Kings
Party, p. 138. The K. Orders the Marq. to proceed to Hostilities, ibid. Who
sets about it, ibid. But gets new Orders, and goes to Court, p. 139. A Treaty
is begun, p. 140. and concluded, p. 141. The Kings Declaration, ibid. The
Articles of the Treaty, p. 142. It is variously censured, p. 143. And not like
to take effect, ibid. The Castles are delivered to the K. p. 144. The Marq.
offers advice to the K. p. 145. The King thinks to send him again Commissioner,
ibid. But he gives many reasons against it, p. 146. Traquair is made
Commissioner, p. 148. The K. writes for many Covenanters, ibid. Some only come,
ibid. The Kings Order to the Marq. about them, ibid. Montrose is gained by the
King, p. 149. Traquair's Instructions, ibid.
Lib. 3. Of what passed after he laid down his Commission, till July 1642.
THe Marq. retires from Public Affairs, p. 153. Traquair goes to Scotland,
ibid. The King writes to the Scottish Bishops, p. 154. Their Declinatour of the
Assembly, p. 155. The Assembly sits, and are very high, p. 156. The King sends
further directions to Traquair, ibid. A new explanation of the Covenant, p.
157. Traquair signs the Covenant, p. 158. The King is much displeased with him,
ibid. The Parliament sits, p. 159. But is Prorogued, ibid. The Covenanters send
up their Complaint to the King, p. 160. Whom Traquair incites to a War, ibid.
The Earl of Lowdon put in the Tower, ibid. and the reason of it, p. 161.
A new War resolved on, ibid.
An. 1640.
The Covenanters preparations, p. 162. Lanerick is made Secretary of State,
ibid. Lindsay writes to the Marq. to prevent a War, ibid. The Marq. answers him
by the King's Orders, p. 163. The Grounds of the Covenanters confidence, p.
165. A short Parl. in England, p. 166. The Privy Councillors lend money, ibid.
And so does the Marquis, ibid. The Parl. in Scotland sits without any
Commissioner from the King, ibid. And send up their Acts to the K. p. 167. With
which the King is much offended, p. 168. A Memorial of Lowdon's, p. 169. An
Agreement between the Marq. and him in two Papers, p. 170, 171. He is set at
Liberty, ibid. Lanerick writes by him in the King's name to the Committee in
Scotland, ibid. Their Answer to that Letter, p. 172. The Scots Complaints, p.
173. They come into England, ibid. The K. declares them Traitors, ibid. They
beat the Kings Forces at Newburn, ibid. And pass Tine, and take Newcastle, p.
174. They write again to Lanerick, ibid. And send a Petition to the K. p. 175.
The K. answers it, p. 176. They send another Letter, p. 177. The K. appoints a
Treaty, p. 178. The Marq. presses a Pacification, ibid. A breach between the
Marq. and Montrose, p. 179. The Treaty begins at Rippon, p. 180. and is carried
on at London, ibid. The Kings Answer to the Remonstrance of the Two Houses,
ibid.
An. 1641.
The King yields to the demands of the Covenanters, p.181. The E. of Strafford
writes to the Marq. p.182. Many complain of the Marq. p.183. The E. of Rothes
dies, p. 184. The Parl. proceeds against Incendiaries, ibid. Montrose is put in
Prison, ibid. The K. goes to Scotland, ibid. The Members of Parl. there
subscribe the Covenant, p. 185. The Marq. is vindicated by Act of Parl. from
the Calumnies some did cast on him, ibid. But the K. grows jealous of him,
ibid. An account of the Incident, p. 186. He again recovers the Kings favor,
ib. The Rebellion in Ireland, p. 187. The Marq. Friendships designed for the
Kings Service, ibid. The K. returns to London, ibid. Some design to impeach the
Marq. in England, ibid. But that is prevented, p. 188.
An. 1642.
The Scottish Commissioners stickle in England against Episcopacy, ibid. The
King is offended with them for it, p. 189. And requires them to do so no more,
ibid. He writes about it to Lowdon and Argyle, ibid. The Scottish Army is sent
to Ireland, p. 191. The Marquis's sickness, p. 192. The Treaty between Scotland
and England, ibid. New Calumnies on the Marquis, ibid. But he clears himself,
p. 193. The K. thinks of going to Ireland, ibid. The Marq. waits on the King,
p. 194. And is sent by him to Scotland, ibid.
Lib. 4. Of the Duke's and his Brother the Earl of Lanerick's Negotiation in
Scotland, till their Imprisonment.
IN Scotland they favor the Two Houses, p. 195. The Marq. sends the K. an
account of it, p. 196. An Assembly in Scotland, ibid. They declare against
Episcopacy, ibid. Motions for a meeting of the Conservators of the Peace, p.
197. The K. writes about Uniformity in Religion, ibid. The Scots keep a
Resident at London, ibid. Mr. Murray's Letter about the Affairs of Scotland, p.
198. Lanerick's Letter about Affairs in England, p. 199. The Marq. studies to
gain many to the King, p. 200. The Kings Letter to the Conservators, ibid. They
incline to serve the K. p. 201. And to invite the Queen back, ibid. But the K.
did not approve of it, p. 202. Yet is sensible of the Marq. fidelity, ibid. The
Earl of Louthian is sent to France, ibid. An Extraordinary Letter of the Kings
to the Marquis, p. 203. The Marquis and Argyle at Enmity, p. 204. Great debates
in the Council, ibid. The King has a great sense of the Marq. Services, p. 205.
An. 1643.
Many Petitions come in to favor the Two Houses, p. 206. The Cross Petition,
ibid. It is condemned by the Ministers, p. 209. Commissioners are sent to Treat
between the King and the Two Houses, ibid. The King rejects their Mediation, p.
210. And answers the desires of the Ministers, ibid. A Petition against the
Annuities, p. 211. signed by many, ibid. Montrose proposes to the Queen to
begin a War in Scotland, p. 212. The Marq. opposes it, ibid. The Kings Answer
about the Mediation of the Scottish Commissioners, p. 213. They are called home,
p. 215. The Marq. writes to the Queen about it, ibid. They take leave and come
home, p. 216. The King sends his Friends to Scotland, p. 217. The Queen writes
to the Marq. ibid. They agree in Scotland to summon a Convention of Estates, p.
218. And write to the King about it, ibid. The Kings Instructions to the Marq.
and others, p. 219. The Kings Declaration about the War in England, p. 221. The
Marq. is made a Duke, p. 224. Some of the Kings Party accused as Incendiaries,
ibid. Lanerick gives the King an account of Affairs, p. 225. The Kings Friends
consult what to do, p. 226. And send a Message to the King, ibid. The Duke
writes of the great danger he saw things in, to Mr. Jermin, p. 227. And to the
Queen, p. 228. The Queens Answer, p. 229. He writes again to Her, ibid. The
Kings Letter forbidding the Convention, p. 230. He writes to Lanerick, ibid.
Another Letter by the Earl of Lindsay, p. 231. The King's Letter to the
Convention, p. 232. Means used for the Kings Service, p. 233. The Convention
sits, ibid. After much debate they vote themselves a free Convention, ibid. The
Duke leaves them, p. 234. Great Iealousies and Divisions among the Kings Party,
ibid. The General Assembly sits, p. 235. Commissioners come from England, ibid.
The Arguments that prevailed to make a League with them, ibid. The Solemn
League and Covenant, p. 237. The Censures that passed upon it, p. 239. The King
and Queen write kindly to the Duke, ibid. The Kings Letter to his good Subjects
in Scotland, p. 241. The Kings Friends send Propositions to the King, p. 242.
The heads of the Treaty between Scotland and England, ibid. The Kings Letter to
the Conservatours, p. 243. His Letter to the Council, p. 244. His Letter to
Lanerick, p. 245. His Letter about a Proclamation, p. 246. His Letter to
Lanerick about that, ibid. He writes with great confidence to the Duke, p. 247.
The Kings Affairs in Scotland decline, ibid. A Message sent up by Traquair, p.
248. All are commanded to take the Covenant, p. 249. The Duke's endeavors for
the Kings Service, ibid. A meeting of the Kings Friends, p. 250. They part
without doing any thing, ibid. The Committee sends out severe Orders against
such as took not the Covenant, ib. The Duke ill-represented at Court, ibid. He
goes to Court, p. 251. and is made Prisoner, ibid. He sees the Charge given
against him and Answers it, p. 252. Charge against the Duke, Article first, p.
253. A General Answer, ibid. Answer to the first Article, p. 254. The second
Article, ibid. The Answer to it, p. 255. The third Article, ibid. The Answer to
it, p. 256. The fourth Article, p. 257. The Answer to it, p. 258. The fifth
Article, p. 260. The Answer to it, ibid. The sixth Article, p. 261. The Answer
to it, ibid. The seventh Article, ibid. The Answer to it, p. 264. The eighth
Article, p. 267. The Answer to it, p. 268. Laner. presses for a present Trial,
p. 269. But could not obtain it, p. 270. He makes his Escape, ibid. And draws a
Party for the K. in Scotl. ib. The Duke is hardly used, ibid. And continues a
Prisoner, p. 271. He is set at liberty, p. 272.
Lib. 5. Of the Dukes and his Brother's Employments after his Enlargement till
the Year 1648.
THe Kings Affairs grow desperate, p. 273. The Duke resolves to retire, ibid.
The K. goes to the Scottish Army, p. 274. Commissioners are sent to him from
Scotland, ibid. They press him to settle matters, ibid. The K. complains of ill
usage, ibid. The Army petition him about the Covenant, p. 275. The King
proposes a Treaty, ibid. An Account of Montrose's Affairs, ibid. The King
recalls his Commission, p. 277. The K. is much pressed to take the Covenant,
ibid. The King scruples, ibid. His Conference with Mr. Henderson, ib. Debates
about the Propositions to the King, p. 278. The Papers given in by the Scottish
Commissioners about them, ibid. The Propositions are agreed to, p. 279. The
heads of them, ibid. The Duke is well received by the K. ibid. The K. employs
him to preserve Montrose, p. 280. He does it, ibid. The King is much pressed to
grant the Propositions, p. 281. But resolves to adhere to his Conscience, ibid.
His first thoughts of the Propositions, ibid. His denying them much resented,
p. 283. The Scottish Commissioners serve him, ibid. The K. sends Argyle to
London, ibid. The Dukes endeavors in Scotl. p. 284. He is much opposed by the
Ministers, ib. The Duke and others sent to deal with the King for his granting
the Propositions, p. 285. The Kings Answer to them, ibid. Another Paper of the
Kings to the same purpose, p. 286. The Duke resolves to go beyond Sea, p. 288.
The Independents cajole the King, ibid. But Lauderdale disabuses him, ibid. The
Duke obtains the Kings leave to retire, p. 289. The Kings Letter recalls that,
ibid. The Queen writes to him, p. 291. The Dukes Letter to the King, ibid. The
Kings Letter to Lanerick, p. 292. And to the Duke, p. 293. The Scot. Commis.
serve the King at London, ibid. Conferences between the Two Houses and them, p.
294. A Parliament in Scotland, ibid. Huntley is in Arms, p. 295. The King
writes about it, ibid. And about Traquair, p. 296. The Consultations in
Scotland, ibid. Two Letters of the Kings, p. 297. The Kings Letter about the
Propositions, p. 298. His Answer to them, p. 299. Lanerick's Letter to the King
about it, p. 302. The Kings Answer to him, p. 303. Two other Letters of the
Kings, p. 305. An Account of the Resolutions in Scotland, p. 306. Which the
Duke and Lanerick oppose, but in vain, p. 307. Lanerick writes to the King, p.
308. Resolutions taken about the Kings Person, p. 309. The Scottish
Commissioners leave London, ibid.
An. 1647.
Commissioners sent to the King from Scotland, p. 310. Who deliver to him the
Votes of Parl. ibid. In Scotland they resolve to deliver up the King, p. 311.
The Duke and Lanerick oppose it much, ibid. But in vain, ibid. It is variously
censured, p. 312. The Kings Letter to the Duke, p. 313. The Duke and Laner.
begin a new design for the King, ibid. New Disorders in England, p. 314. The
Earl of Lauderdale is sent to London, ibid. The Army revolts, ibid. And take
the K. from Holmby, ibid. They use him civilly, p. 315. The K. writes to
Lanerick, ibid. Lanerick's Answer, ibid. Two Letters of the Kings to Lanerick,
p. 316. Lanerick's Answer, p. 317. Another Letter of the Kings, p. 318. The
Army forces the Parliament, ibid. Lauderdale is ill used by them, p. 310. This
is resented in Scotland, ibid. But many are intractable, ibid. Instructions
sent by Mr. Lesley, p. 320. The Kings Answer, p. 321. The King is abused by the
Army, ibid. Lanerick's Letter about the delay of his coming to wait on the
King, ibid. The Kings Answer to it, p. 322. The Scottish Commissioners come to
the King, p. 323. They intend to rescue him, p. 324. The King consults with
them, ibid. He goes to the Isle of Wight, ibid. And writes to Lanerick, p. 325.
The Scottish Commissioners write to him, p. 326. The Kings Answer to Lanerick,
ibid. The four Bills are passed, p. 327. The Scottish Commissioners protest
against them, ibid. And write to the King about them, ibid. The King is
well-pleased with their Papers, p. 328. They write again to him, ibid. Another
Letter to the King, p. 329. The Kings Answer to them, ibid. Designs against the
Kings Person, p. 330. Traquair is well with the King, p. 331. The Scottish
Commissioners advise the King, p. 332. The King sends for them, ibid. The Kings
care of Huntley, p. 333. The Queen writes to Lanerick, p. 334. The Scottish
Commissioners agree with the King, ibid. The King is made Prisoner, ibid.
Lib. 6. Of the Duke's Engagement for the Kings Preservation, and what followed
to his Death.
THe Duke's endeavors in Scotland, p. 335. Three Parties in Scotland, p. 336.
The Commissioners return, ibid. The Churchmen are jealous of them, p. 337. The
King writes to them, ibid. Their Answer, ibid. Lowdon forsakes them, p. 338.
The Duke is designed General, ibid. The Parliament sits, ibid. Commissioners
from England, ibid. The Remonstrance of the Ministers, p. 339. The King writes
to the Lords, p. 340. Their Answers to him, ibid. and p. 342. Satisfaction
offered to the Ministers, ib. Lanerick's Letters about their Affairs, ibid. And
about their Demands to the Two Houses, ibid. And about the Declaration, p. 343.
And putting the Kingdom into a posture of War, ibid. And the modelling their
Army, p. 344. The Prince resolves to come to Scotland, ibid. The King designs
an Escape, ibid. Great disorders in England, p. 345. Letters to the Queen and
Prince, p. 346. And to the King about the Officers of the Army, ibid. The
Ministers oppose the Engagement, p. 348. The Parl. Letter to the Presbyteries,
ib. The Parl. sends for the Scottish Army in Ireland, p. 349. The Confusions in
England, p. 350. A Fast at Westminster, ibid. The Parl. of Scotl. adjourned, p.
351. Some are against a present March, ibid. A Letter of the Prince's, ibid.
Others press a speedy March, p. 352. And it is resolved on, p. 353. An
Insurrection at Mauchlin, ibid. Some Troops are sent to the Borders, p. 354.
The whole Army enters England, ibid. The Chief Officers of it, ibid. Calander's
Character, ibid. The Condition of the Army, p. 355. An Account of their March,
ibid. Lambert retires, ibid. A Letter from Langdale, ibid. The Army marches
into Lancashire, p. 357. The Scottish Army comes out of Ireland, ibid. The
Cavalry leave the Foot, p. 358. Preston-Fight, ibid. Middleton's Gallantry, p.
361. At Warrington-Bridge the Foot Capitulate, ibid. The Horse come to
Utoxater, p. 362. A Munity, ibid. They treat with Lambert, p. 363. The Articles
are signed, p. 364. L. Gray of Groby comes up, ib. The Duke is made Prisoner,
p. 365. And examined, but discovers nothing, ibid. The Engagement variously
censured, ib. Lauderdale was sent to bring the Prince to Scotland, p. 366. The
Prince intended to go, ibid. But the loss of the Army stopped him, p. 367. An
Insurrection in Scotland, ibid. Many in the Committee of Estates incline to
submit to them, ibid. But Lanerick opposed that long, p. 368. An Account of the
Irish Army, ibid. They are called back to Scotland, p. 369. And join with the
Committee of Estates, p. 370. And defeat Argyle at Sterlin, p. 371. A Treaty is
carried on, ibid. Cromwell is invited to Scotland, p. 372. Different opinions
about the Treaty, ib. Articles offered for a Treaty, p. 373. The Answer sent to
these Offers, p. 374. The Treaty is concluded, p. 375. But not at all kept,
ibid. Instructions sent to the Two Houses, ibid. Lanerick goes out of Scotl. p.
377. His Letter to the Chancellor, ibid. The Duke is brought to Windsor, p.
379. Often examined, but in vain, ibid. The King is murdered, ibid. Majesty in
Misery, in a Copy of Verses written by the King, p. 381. The Duke escapes out
of Windsor, p. 384. But is taken in Southwark, ibid. And kept in St. James's,
ibid. Argyle refused to interceed for him, p. 385. He is brought to his Trial,
ibid. The Indictment against him, ibid. The Duke's Plea, ibid. The second
Appearance, p. 386. The third Appearance, ibid. The fourth Appearance, ibid.
The fifth Appearance, Witnesses examined, p. 387. The Duke pleaded the Articles
given him, p. 388. The sixth Appearance, more Witnesses, p. 389. The seventh
Appearance, more Evidence led, ibid. The eighth Appearance, the Duke pleads for
himself at great length, p. 390. The ninth Appearance, his Counsel plead, p.
392. The tenth Appearance, the Counsel for the People plead against him, p.
394. The eleventh Appearance, Bradshaw's Speech, p. 396. Sentence is given
against him, ibid. The Duke prepares for Death, ibid. And writes to his
Brother, p. 397. And to his Children, ibid. His Speech before his Death, p.
398. He is led out to his Execution, p. 400. And writes a note to his Brother,
ibid. New Offers of Life made upon base Conditions, and rejected by him, p.
401. D. Sibbald encourages him on the Scaffold, ibid. The Duke's last Speech,
p. 402. And Prayer, p. 404. His Death, ibid. And Burial, p. 405. His Character,
p. 406.
His Birth and Parents, ibid. His Person, ibid. His Education, ibid. His
Marriage, ibid. His Lady's Virtues, p. 407. and Death, ibid. His Religion,
ibid. His Abilities, p. 409. His Loyalty, ibid. His love to his Country, p.
411. His Temperance, ibid. His Ingenuity, p. 412. His Good Nature, p. 413. His
Death much lamented, p. 414. A Letter of the Queens, p. 415. Another of the
Kings, ibid.
Lib. 7. A Continuation of Affairs till Worcester-Fight.
THe Character of William Duke of Hamilton, p. 417. His first Appearance at
Court, p. 418. He is made Secretary of State, and Earl of Lanerick, ibid. The
Friendship between his Brother and him, ibid. His Diligence in his Employment,
p. 419. His Abilities, ibid. His Religion, ibid. His troubles prove happy to
him, p. 420. His care of his Brothers Daughters, ibid. His Duty to the King, p.
421. He was ill used by his Enemies, p. 422. He advises the King to settle with
Scotland, ibid. The Treaty at Breda, ibid. The Duke returns with the King, p.
423. But is put from the King, ibid. And lives in the Isle of Arran, ibid.
Cromwell enters Scotland, p. 424. Dunbar-Fight, ibid. The King is better used in
Scotland, ibid. The Church-party divided, ibid. The Duke comes to the King, p.
425. The King marches into England, ibid. The Duke's Letter about their March,
p. 426. Lambert is beat from Warrington-Bridge, p. 427. The K. comes to
Worcester, ibid. Cromwell follows ^im, ibid. The King is in great straits, p.
428. The Duke apprehends his own Death, ibid. And prepares for it, ibid. His
Meditations before the Fight, ibid. And Prayer, p. 429. Worcester-Fight, p.
430. The Duke's Regiment c^arged gallantly, ibid. The Duke's great Valor,
ibid. He is wounded and taken, p. 431. His wounds prove mortal, ibid. His
Letter to his Lady, ibid. His Death, p. 432. And Burial, ibid. His last Will,
p. 433. A Le^ter with it to his Lady, p. 434. The Conclusion, p. 436.
A Rational Method for proving the Truth of the Christian Religion, as it is
professed in the Church of England: in Octavo.

The Royal Martyr and the Dutiful Subject, in two Sermons, Quarto: both Written
by Gilbert Burnet, Author of Duke Hamilton 's Memoires: and Printed for R.
Royston.

Several Chirurgical Treatises, by Rich. Wiseman, Sergeant-Chirurgion to His
Majesty. Fol. New.

THE END.

