Dr. Burnet AGAINST Mr. Thevenot and Mr. Le Grand.

A LETTER TO Mr. THEVENOT.

Containing A CENSURE of Mr. Le Grand's HISTORY OF King Henry the Eighth's
Divorce.

To which is Added, A CENSURE of Mr. de Meaux's HISTORY OF THE Variations of
the Protestant Churches.

Together with Some further Reflections on Mr. Le Grand.

Both Written By GILBERT BVRNET, D. D.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey and Richard Chiswell. MDCLXXXIX.

A LETTER TO Mr. THEVENOT, Containing a Censure of Mr. Le Grand's History of K.
Henry the Eighth's Divorce.
SIR,
INstead of offering you all those expressions of Respect, which on many
accounts are so justly due to you, I shall satisfy my self at present, with
this one, which is, That I consider you as a Person of so much Probity and
Sincerity, that notwithstanding all the difference of Persuasion that is
between you and me, yet I can make an Appeal to you, and refer my self to your
Decision, in the Contests that are like to be between Mr. le Grand and me, in a
Subject that has a great Relation to Matters of Religion. Matters of Opinion,
and the Inferences and Speculations that arise out of Matters of Fact, appear
indeed differently to Men, according to their various apprehensions of things:
While Matters of Fact have but one face, and appear the same to all who desire
to find out Truth: And therefore, since our Dispute is like to run wholly on
Matters of Fact, I know I run no hazard when I apply my self to you as an
Arbiter. While I was last at Paris, I was so happy as to have the Honor of
waiting sometimes on you, and saw how just a Title you had to the Esteem and
Admiration which is so universally paid you. I had, in my own particular, all
possible Reason to acknowledge the high Civilities that you put on me, and
among others, the trouble that you put your self to, in bringing Mr. le Grand
and me to a Conference before your self and Mr. Auzout. I confess I
apprehended, that I had a man to deal with, from whom nothing was to be
expected but fair dealing: A Man, that lived in the House of one, that was no
less Eminent for his Sublime Virtue, than for those high Employments through
which he has gone; one that was much with that Learned and Worthy Gentleman Mr.
Bulteau, and that saw often the Famous Mr. Baluze, whose Sincerity is equal to
his Learning, which is one of the greatest things of the Age, and that valued
himself on Mr. Thevenot's Friendship, seemed to be such an Antagonist, as one
would have wished for. I will not put you on so uneasy a thing, as the
remembering the poor and inconsiderable things that were proposed in your
hearing, of which you were both so weary, and for which you owned your selves
so much ashamed, not only to me when Mr. le Grand was gone, but to a great many
others. You seemed fully fatisfied, that all he proposed deserved not to be
mentioned, and that such as it was, it was fully answered by me: Mr. Auzout
indeed desired me not to boast much of what had past; with which it was very
easy for me to comply: for to tell you freely, I did not find that my
Antagonist was such a Person, that a Victory over him afforded matter for a
Triumph, and in the account that I found it convenient to give of a part of our
Conversation, in my Remarks on Mr. Varillas, I managed Mr. le Grand with all
the Respect that he could have expected from me, but if hereafter I touch him a
little more sensibly, he has none to blame for it but himself. I can very
easily bear all his Reflections on me, p. 30.
for my Ignorance and want of Capacity, and in particular for my Ignorance of
the History and Laws of England. p. 2, and 3.
This comes soon after a very high and undeserved Commendation that he had
given of me; and it seems he himself thought I did not deserve it, since he
changed his Style so soon: It is too common Artifice to pass upon me, to give a
Man a good Title to reproach another, by introducing those Injuries with high
Commendations. But I must be contented with my small measure of Knowledge, and
the low degree of Capacity, that belongs to me; and I have the more Reason to
bear with my own defects at present, since I have to do with one of so moderate
a Talent, as Mr. le Grand shows himself to be.

I wish only that those who desire to be rightly informed of the famous
Transaction now in Dispute, will be at the pains to read Sander's History and
mine, and next to examine Mr. le Grand's History, and then I am confident that
they will conclude, that there must be some Error in the Printing of the Title
Page, in which there is mention made of a Defense of Sander's, and a Refutation
of my History: for the bulk of his work, does so agree with mine, except in
some places, where he uses an Art for which I do not envy him, that I am
tempted to think, that in Writing it he intended to make good his offer made in
your hearing, that he would furnish me with a vast number of Papers, for the
Confirmation of my Work. I have yet only seen his first part, so I cannot
imagine how he can justify Sanders, having given him quite up in the whole
thread of his History. The whole Story of Anne Bullen, and all the Branches of
it are abandoned, which yet was the chief thing aimed at by Sanders; as being a
nullity in Q. Elizabeth's Title, and by consequence an encouragement to
Rebellion. The Decretal Bull is confessed; the Behavior of Sir Thomas More is
not insisted on by our Author: In short, if one will examine about eighty
Errors, for which I have charged Sander's History in my Appendix, he will find
above seventy of my contradictions of Sanders, confirmed by Mr. le Grand, which
will be easily made appear, if this Work of his is judged of that importance,
as to deserve a more particular censure.

I say nothing of his manner of Writing, for that will offer it self to every
Reader, who must needs find in him more of the Style of one that pleads a
Cause, than of one that undertakes to relate Matters: An earnestness in
proving, and an injuriousness of Style, are indecencies that are scarce to be
forgiven to one that pretends to be an Historian: And there is somewhat that is
Sacred even in the Ashes of Crowned Heads, that claims a Modesty of Style: So
that even when they are censured, softer words than Lies and Impostures ought
to be sought for. And the chief point in this whole Matter being, whether the
King's Cause ought not to have been judged rather in England, and by his own
Clergy, than at Rome: The supporting the Pope's pretensions in opposition to
this, as it agrees very ill with the Principles of the Gallican Church, so it
seems a little strange at this time, in which the Thunders of the Vatican are
so little regarded at Versailles: And when an Appeal from a Pope to a General
Council, is, after so long an intermission, again made use of in so critical a
time: It might have been expected, that this Matter should have been handled
with a little more decency, at least, unless this is one of the Artifices of a
sort of Men, whom Mr. Talon has mentioned more freely than I will do, who
perhaps intend to blast what Lewis the Great is doing, by representing Henry
the 8th in ill Colors. But perhaps our Author is not a Man of so much
Intriegue, as to have such remote Speculations; and this being his first Essay,
it is possible he thought that less application was necessary, since he
reckoned that he had to do with a Man of so small a Capacity as mine is. I will
at present only single out six of the Errors that he has committed, which are
a very small proportion as to their number, since you will find a much longer
List, if I enter upon a more Crititical Enquiry into this History; but as these
are all of great consequence, so I have limited my self to this number, that I
may not enlarge at present beyond those narrow bounds, to which I restrain my
self in a Paper of this Nature.

1. He questions much the Contents of the Decretal Bull, Page 89. 10 92.
that Cardinal Campegio brought over, and thinks, that since it was only shown
to the King and Cardinal Wolsey, no body can affirm what it was; and if it was
a Bull that determined the whole Matter, he does not see how there could be any
more occasion for the Legates; and he fancies that upon a Bull, the King would
have proceeded to a second Marriage, without giving himself any further
trouble, as Lewis the 12th had done.

If Mr. le Grand had given himself the trouble to have Read the Decretal Bull
which I have Published, Collect. 2. lib. Number. 10.
he would have seen that all this Discourse was to no purpose. The Bull was
drawn in England, and sent to Rome, and though some few Clauses were altered, yet
by all the Letters that passed between Rome and England, it appears, that it
was upon the Matter the same Bull that was sent over by Campegio. Now the Bull
declared indeed the justice of the King's Pretensions; and empowered the
Cardinal Legates to examine the Truth of these Pretensions; and upon the Proofs
of that, it Authorized them to Judge the Cause: so that though the Pope did by
this Decretal give a definitive Sentence, in case the Pretensions were found to
be true, yet here was still matter left for the Legates to proceed upon: To
wit, whether the King had himself desired the Marriage? whether there was any
danger of War at that time between England and Spain? whether the Dispensation
was not annulled, by the Protestation the King had made, when he came of age,
against the Marriage? and whether those Princes, or any of them, upon whose
account the Dispensation was granted, dyed before the Marriage took effect? And
till all these things were found true, the Bull dissolving the Marriage, that
was granted upon that supposition, could have no effect: So that all his
Reasoning upon this matter is in the Air. P. 85.
But since I have named Cardinal Campegio, I acknowledge that Mr. le Grand
seems to be in the right as to his Son, whom I had called a Bastard, but he
proves him Legitimate from Sigonius's Life of Campegio, which I confess I never
saw, and Sigonius is so good an Author, that I acquiesce in his Authority. But
Mr. le Grand ought to have taken notice, that I cite an Author for what I say
of that Bastard. Pelerin Iuglese, which was a Discourse writ by Sir William
Thomas, a Clerk of the Council at that time, and it seems he took Cardinal
Campegio's Son for his Bastard. So if Mr. le Grand had pleased to have looked
to the English Edition, he might have rectified this Error with less acrimony
of Style, since it is no forgery of mine; and indeed this is the only omission
that seems to be well grounded, of all those for which he accuses me.

2. Mr. le Grand makes much ado to shake the credit of the Decision made by the
Sorbon, P. 179. to 184.
in Favors of King Henry; though after all, the Printing the Decision it self
the next year, and its passing for genuine, no Man having in that Age pretended
that it was a Forgery, is so concluding a Proof for it, that no Insinuation to
the contrary can be received. Neither Cardinal Pool who was at Paris when it
past, nor any other Writer of the Roman Communion, accused the King of an
Imposture in this Matter. And as the Bishop of Tarbe's continuing to advance
the King's Interests in the Court of Rome, when he was promoted to be a
Cardinal, and his not disowning the share that King Henry laid on him in
public before the Legates, of his Scruples concerning his Marriage, is an
evident confirmation of it, notwithstanding all our Author's suggestions to the
contrary: So the Sorbonnes never disavowing this matter, p. 135.
is an evident proof that the Judgment was truly given by them, and all the
presumptions that our Author offers to the contrary, amount to no more but that
great opposition was made; and that Beda behaved himself very factiously in it:
It is also to be considered, that as the whole Gallican Church was highly
dissatisfied with Francis the 1st, for his having destroyed their Liberties by
the Concordat, so the University of Paris was too much concerned in that
matter, which stuck still deep with them, not to be full of Malcontents: and
perhaps this might have contributed to make the opposition the greater, since
the King supported King Henry's Concerns with much Zeal; yet after all, our
Author owns, that in the Scrutiny there were fifty three for the Divorce, and
only forty two against it, and five were for the referring it to the Pope: so
here was enough for justifying the Judgment, as it is Printed, which bears
only, that the greater number gave it for the Divorce, and against the
lawfulness of the Marriage: And this justifies likewise those words of the
first President's Letter, that it would rather prejudice than advance the
King's Affair, since the whole Bodies in other Universities had judged for the
King, whereas it was carried only by a plurality of Voices in the Sorbonne.

3. Mr. le Grand pretends to give an Abstract of the Reasons that were brought
against the Marriage of King Henry, Page 189. to p. 2^^
and yet he does not mention that which was the strength of the Cause, which
was that according to the main hinge upon which all the Decisions in the Roman
Church turn, Scripture expounded by Tradition, is that by which all
Controversies ought to be decided: So here they brought a Series of Councils,
Provincial and General, of many Popes, of all the chief Fathers both Greek and
Latin, particularly of the four great Fathers of the Latin Church; whereas on
the other side, there was not one Father nor Doctor alleged: And though Mr. le
Grand pretends only that the Canons of some Provincial Councils against
Incontinence, and some passages out of Tertullian, S. Basil, and S. Jerome upon
Virginity, and against second Marriages were alleged. Here I am sure the
Reader will censure him, for the want of somewhat that is more important to an
Honest Man, than great Capacity: For the Canons of those Councils, and Passages
of those Fathers, speak expressly of the degrees of Marriage forbid in the Book
of Leviticus: And though he names only three Popes whose Letters were cited to
the same purpose, he passes over the chief of them with Relation to England,
Gregory the Great, in whose time the Saxons were Converted to the Christian
Faith, who gave an express Instruction to Austin the Monk, to annul all
Marriages with a Brother's Wife: And this being a Rule settled in England, when
the Christian Religion was received in it, it was considered as one of the
chief supports of the King's Cause, and therefore if Mr. le Grand had desired
to have the Reputation of a sincere Writer, he ought not to have passed it
over, nor ought he to have passed over all that was said against the Pope's
Dispensing even with the Laws of the Church, and much less with the Laws of
God: Nor that other Branch of the King's Plea, that the Church of England,
according to the Council of Nice, ought to judge this Matter, and that it did
not belong to the Pope. If Mr. le Grand is a true Son of the Gallican Church,
he cannot disown those Principles, and at least, if he would be esteemed a
sincere Historian, he ought not to have passed them in silence. But if he was
defective in his account of the King's Plea, he adds as much of his own to the
Queens: For he has picked up a great many instances in History, that were never
mentioned in the Books to of that time; and yet they all amount to no more, but
show that these Rules of the degrees of Marriage, were not at all times
observed with the same exactness. But the Church is Governed by Rules, and not
by Examples: And all that he says of the Law in Deuteronomy, appointing the
Brother to Marry his Sister-in-Law, when his Brother dyed without Children, had
been ever looked on in the Christian Church, as an exception from the general
Law, that belonged only to the Jewish Nation, with relation to their
Succession; which being taken away under the Christian Religion, the Laws in
Leviticus, which have been ever considered in the Church as Moral Laws, must
now take place Universally. In short, if any man will be at the pains to
compare the Books that were Written upon this matter, and the Accounts that are
given of them, by Mr. le Grand, and by my self, he will soon see which of us
have Writ with the greatest sincerity, and I will not envy Mr. le Grand's
Opinion of his own Capacity, so long as an unbiassed sincerity is acknowledged
to belong to me.

4. p. 222.
Mr. le Grand tells us that the Parliament abolished the Oath which the Bishops
were bound to swear to the Pope, at their Consecration, and drew a new one,
which they should make to the King. Here he gives me just Reason, to say
severer things than he may be willing to hear: for in the Parliament, the two
Oaths that the Bishops swore, both to the Pope and to the King, were Read; and
it appearing that they contradicted one another, they being both of the nature
of an Oath of Homage, which can only be made to one Superior, all that the
Parliament did, was to Repeal the Oath to the Pope, and to let the other to the
King remain in its full force. I have given an undeniable Instance, that the
Oath to the King was in all former times made by the Bishops, in a Record which
I put at the head of my Collection of Instruments, and which Mr. le Grand may
have seen, for though these Instruments have not yet appeared in the French
Translation, yet Mr. Bulteau has my Work in English, where all these Records
are. In that Cardinal Adrian not only renounces all Clauses in his Bull, that
were contrary to the King's Prerogative, or to the Laws of England, but swears
fidelity to the King in the same terms, in which our Kings have continued ever
since to have Homage Sworn to them, by their Bishops. And the Oath to the Pope,
as it was a Novelty not known before the twelfth Century, so it contains in it
so many wide and indefinite Clauses, that it seems very hard to reconcile the
taking of it, either with the Doctrines of the Gallican Churches, or with that
Subjection which all Bishops owe their Lawful Prince, since it is plain that is
an Oath of Homage to the Pope.

5. Mr. le Grand sets himself with no small force, p. 244. to 257.
though not with equal success, to give Cranmer the worst Character that he could
make for him: He accuses me for endeavoring to make him pass for a Gentleman,
but though I knew he was one, yet I said not a word of it, for I thought that was
too inconsiderable a thing to have a place among the Honors that belong to the
Memory of that Great Man. He cannot believe that he was in Germany, when by
Warham's Death he was named to the Archbishopric of Canterbury. And thinks
that he could not have stayed seven weeks there, after he had the News of his
intended Promotion; since he was present at the King's Marriage with A. Bolen.
Nor can he allow my saying, that the thing was slowly set forward, since there
passed but three Months between September and January, in which he was
preconised at Rome: Nor can he believe the Provincial Synod of Canterbury,
judged the matter of the King's Marriage. Here are Errors enough for Mr.
Varillas himself. In Cranmer's Printed Trial he appeals to his Judges, who were
all Witnesses of that Matter, that he had unwillingly accepted of that See; and
that he had delayed his return out of Germany, after he had the News of the
King's Intentions, for seven Weeks; and this was passed over by the Bishops
that judged him, without any answer, which was a plain acknowledgment of the
Truth of it. 2. There were twelve Weeks between Warham's Death, that fell out
the 23 of August, and the King's Marriage on the 14th of November: So allowing
two weeks for the Currier to go to him, there is room enough for his seven weeks
delay. But our Author to turn five Months into three, shuts out both September
and January out of the account, though both ought to be included. And the
Sentence of Divorce bears expressly, that both the Provincial Synods of England,
had judged the King's Matter: but after all, our Author cannot enough aggravate
Crammer's taking the Oath of Obedience to the Pope, at his Consecration, with
the Protestation that limited it, with several restrictions: Which he also
reports upon the credit of some spiteful Authors, quite contrary to what
appears upon Record. For he made the Protestation to be twice Read at the
Altar, when he was Consecrated: So it is plain he had no mind to equivocate;
for he owned publicly all that he did. And Protestations, renouncing all
Clauses that were in Bulls, contrary to the King's Prerogative, having been
ordinarily made by Bishops, it seems the Canonists who were accustomed to
double dealing, prevailed so far on Cranmer, as to make him take the method of
Swearing the Oath, and then limiting it by a Protestation made at the same
time: In which it is plain, that if he committed an Error, it was rather a
mistake in his Judgment, than a want of Sincerity.

6. Mr. le Grand says that the King pardoned More and Fisher the business of
the Maid of Kent, p. 280. to 282.
and though he owns that More calls her in a Letter the silly Nun, yet he takes
no notice of that long Letter of Mores which I published among the Instruments
of my second Volume, in which he treats that matter as one of the horridest
Impostures that ever was, and for which Fisher, though our Author denies it, was
Condemned for concealing Treason: To this he adds, that the Chancellor having
asked Fisher and More, what they thought of the Acts of the last Parliament,
they answered nothing, but said, that being cut off from all Civil Society,
they thought of nothing but our Savior's Passion, and this cost them their
life.

This is such a corrupting of History, that I forbear to give it its true name:
And indeed a prevarication in this matter is the less excusable, because our
Author might have found advantage enough, by representing the matter truly as I
had done, from the Records. They were Condemned first in a Praemunire, that
imports loss of Estate and perpetual Imprisonment, for refusing to swear the
Oath for the Succession by the King's Marriage, Enacted by Parliament: And
after that, they were prosecuted for having spoken against the King's
Supremacy; and there is one Incident in More's Process, which perhaps would be
thought enough at present, for Condemning a Man as Guilty of High Treason; for
he said, that as the Parliament could make a King, so it could likewise Depose
him.

But I limited my self to six Heads, and I will not go beyond them. The
abundance of Matter that is before me, makes it uneasy for me to pass over
many important things, which our Author has left out of his History, though they
are in that Collection of Letters published by Camusat, and which I never saw,
till he himself not only showed it me, but did me the Honor to present it to
me: He does not tell us that the Pope promised to Cardinal de Tournon, Melanges
Hist. 1532. folio 8. M.
that he would do all that was in his Power for the King of England, and that
the thing should be done, though he must take such a Method in the point of Form,
as not to seem too partial to him: And that the Cardinal thought he was sure of
the Pope in that Matter. The same Cardinal writes the 17 of Aug. 1533. that
though the Cardinals of the Imperial Faction forced the Pope to what he had done,
fol. 9. N.
yet if the King of England would save his Honor, he would with all his Heart
do what he desired, and did not doubt but he should propose Expedients for
this, at the Interview that was to be at Marseilles. fol. 19. O.
By another Letter it appears, that Francis the First owned to the English
Ambassadors, that the Pope had said to himself, that he knew the King's Cause
was just, and he only stood upon a Procuration: For the King being cited to
appear at Rome in Person, or by Proxy, the King would take no notice of this:
fol. 177.
and so Karne was sent over Excusator, to excuse the King's Appearance: But it
appears by that Collection, that he was sent over in the Name of the Nation,
and not in the King's Name: So the King's refusing to appear, being thought a
great Contempt, the Pope promised to grant the Divorce, if the King would so
far acknowledge his Authority as to appear at Rome by a Proxy upon his Summons:
And in this Francis the First thought the King was in the right; and he
approved of his Marriage so far, that he ordered his Ambassador to Christen
the Child in his Name, fol. 140. P, Q, R. fol. 174, 175, 176, 177.
if it proved a Son. The French Ambassador at Rome, did also in many Letters
to the Court of France, write that the Pope would do all that was desired for
the King of England, and much more if he durst: but he was so hard pressed by
the Imperialists, that against God and Reason, and even against the Opinion of
many of the Imperialists themselves, he was forced to do whatsoever the
Cardinal Dosme asked of him: And that they wanted much the Cardinal Grandmont
who was Bishop of Tarbes, for no man durst speak Truth to the Pope. It is true,
the Ambassador who was then the Bishop of Auxerre, says that he expected no
good of the Pope, and that all was but dissimulation: Yet to show that crafty
Ambassadors change their Style, so that it is hard to know how much one ought
to trust to their Letters, the same day, in which he had writ the former Letter
to the Legate that was in France, he wrote another to the Great Master, in
which he tells him, that the Pope had said, that the King of England 's Matter
had been now four years in his hands, and was not yet touched by him; and that
if he could do as he would, it should be as they all would. And he writes that
he spoke this in such a manner to him, that he believes he said what he
thought. fol. 177. S.
These Letters bear all Date the 7th of February 1532. But the 13th of July
thereafter, he writes, that the Pope said to him, that he resolved to put off
the Business to a good time, and he saw clearly what he meant by a good time:
and adds, that if the thing had been then judged, the Old and Learned Cardinals
would have been for the King of England, but the Imperialists were so much the
stronger Party, that it would have been carried clear against them: And though
Mr. le Grand speaks doubtfully of that Critical Matter, that a Currier came
from England, within a day or two after the Sentence was given, and passes over
the haste in which it was given, as a thing of which he knew nothing; yet in
that Collection, there is a Letter writ from Lions by Pompone Trivulce, fol.
177. T.
Cardinal Trivulce's Brother, Dated the 16th of April, in which he gives an
account of the Bishop of Paris's passing through that Town, who told him how
precipitated the Sentence was; that the Pope was indeed for a delay, and if
that had been granted only for six days, the King would have submitted, but the
Imperialists would hear of none: though when the Courier came a day after, they
were sorry for the have they had made. By all these Indications it appeared
plainly, that the Court of Rome was governed in this matter, only by Political
Motives and Maxims: and therefore according to the Maxims of the Gallican
Church, set forth lately with so much Zeal by Mr. Talon, in a matter of much
less moment, the King of England had no Reason to have any great Regard to the
Judgments or Thunders of that Court.

But as I hold my self infinitely obliged to Mr. le Grand, for the Present he
made me of so valuable a Book, which affords me so many Confirmations of the
most important parts of my History, so I am extreme sorry that he has been so
far wanting to himself, as to suppress them: and that he has put me on so
uneasy a thing, as to make use of a Present that he made me, so much to his
disadvantage. But in this case I must say, magis amica veritas. And though he
thinks me to be extremely jealous of the Honor of my Writings, p. 2.
yet if the Concerns of Religion did not enter in this case, I could more
easily abandon my own: But I will not pursue this Censure further at present:
nor am I yet sure whether I will write more upon this Subject or not, for till
I see his other three parts, and till I know what effects this has, I can form
no Resolution as to that matter. In the mean while I beg your Pardon, both for
giving you so great a trouble, and for addressing it to you in so Public a
manner. For since I Censure a Book already Printed, I thought it was necessary
to do it in this manner. I am, Sir, with all possible Respect,

At the Hague, the 10th of May, 1688. Your most Humble and most Obedient
Servant. G. BURNET.

A CENSURE OF Mr. DE MEAUX's HISTORY OF THE Variations of the Protestant
Churches: Together with some further Reflections on Mr. Le Grand*
SIR,
YOU ask my Opinion of Mr. de Meaux's long expected Work: And I will give it
freely. It seems he intends to let the World see, that he can set forth the
Reformation, with as much Sincerity as he had formerly showed in setting forth
his own Doctrine; and that he can show as much Art in making the one appear
Black, as he had done to make the other appear Fair. Some of my Countrymen have
of late exposed him in so severe a manner, that his Credit in England was so
much sunk before this new attempt that he has made upon it, that there was no
need of this Work to destroy it quite. The truth is, great Respect is due to
his Age, and Character: But if he will lay himself too open, and take so much
pains to make himself be known, he will compass it at last. A Man of his Wit
and Softness of Expression, should have held himself to general Speculations,
in which a lively Fancy and a good Style, might have helped him out even when
Truth failed him. But of all the Men I know, he should have avoided the most to
meddle with Matters of Fact. For the gentlest Censure that can be past on his
Performances, that way, is, that some others furnish him with Extracts, which
he manages to the best advantage, but without examining them. Yet when Mr.
Larogue had showed him, or at least had showed it to all the World, if he would
not see it, that there was not one single Passage, of all those which he had,
with so much Pomp, produced for justifying the taking away the Chalice, that
was either sincerely or pertinently made use of by him; and it seems Mr. de
Meaux himself was convinced of it, since I have not heard that he has yet said
one word to justify himself. He should not have ventured again, though he has
returned with a particular degree of assurance, to say in this Work, that in
the Primitive Church, Men received the Sacrament, either in the one or the
other Species. He may now perhaps say, that he never Read Larague's Book, with
the same Truth, that he writ to England that he had never seen F. Crasset's.
The Truth is, Reason is a tame thing, which bends easily to a Man of Wit and
Fancy: But Facts are sullen things, they are what they are: Wit has no place
there, but Boldness and Confidence can supply all defects. Yet since Mr. de
Meaux found that his under-work-men had dealt so ill with him, he should have
been more cautious in trusting them for the future: And since even his most
solemn Protestations have been laid open to the English Nation, as having more
of an Air of assurance, than of a scrupulous Regard to Truth in them, he ought
to have taken a little more care of himself, and of his Friends in England, who
have ill Success enough already in what they themselves have writ, and in some
small aid which he has sent them, and therefore it is too cruel in him, to give
new occasions to those who will be sure to make the best of all that is given
them, for showing the weakness of a Cause, which how prosperous soever it may
be in the hands of Dragoons, yet has never had worse success than of late in
England. The Calumnies of Cochlee, Florimond de Raimond, and other Writers of
the last Age, were already revived and put in more Modern French by Maimbourg
and Varillas, who have not failed to tell the Tale over again in the best
Language, and with the best Grace they could; so that it was a little below Mr.
de Meaux's Greatness to come after them, in a design which has succeeded so ill
with them. It is true, he has much more Wit, and gives a better Air to the
Malice that he bears the Reformed Churches, who have done nothing to provoke
him, if it was not that they choose rather to take that to be Doctrine of his
Church, which they found both in the Decrees of their Councils, the Public
Offices, and the Chief Writers of Controversy, that have explained those
Matters, ever since the Dispute was first set on foot, than the new Tour that
he has thought fit to give it. In short, he is in ill Humor, because his
Exposition was not successful enough to save his Church the Infamy of the
Dragoons* Hinc illae lachrimae, and therefore he has now gathered together all
that the Writers of the last Age had set forth, and added to that all the
Extracts that his tools could furnish him with, that so he might Triumph over
us with as much Scorn as Malice. He mixes all along with it the Flowers of a
melting and declaiming Eloquence; but though these figures pronounced with a soft
Voice, and in a languishing Air, may have perhaps wrought on some who slave
come to him with a Design to be deluded by him; yet when they are on Paper,
they are but bleak and feeble strains: And the affectation that appears in
them, is too gross to pass even on Men that are already Partial in his Favors.
Indeed they ought rather to Biass a Man the other way. He has called it the
History of our Variations, but the truer Title had been the History of the
Progress of the Reformation. If all that he has said were true, it will amount
to no more than this, which we grant, without his being at so much pains to
prove it, which is, that neither were our Reformers Inspired, nor our Sinods
Infallible. But after all, it gives no small Provocation to Humane Nature, to
see a Man that is of a Church, whose History is one continued Thread of
Variations, and that in so many Essential points, from what it self was in the
Primitive time, keep such a stir with a few inconsiderable Changes, that have
been made among the Reformed. If all was not at first discovered, the Changes
that the Reformers made, was a Progress and not a Variation; but after that
their Confessions, were once formed, we all know that they have stuck to them
perhaps with too much stiffness; so that it were a much easier thing, to show
that they ought to have varied, than to prove that they have done it. In short,
we are but Men, and ought not to be ashamed to own that we grow in Knowledge,
and that we no sooner discover Errors than we forsake them. Here is then a
great Book writ to as little purpose as can be, since it concludes only that we
are neither Inspired nor Infallible, to which we never pretended. If a Man of
Mr. de Meaux's Wit, would at his rate of Writing, pretend to give the History
of the first Variations of the Christians, and would begin with the Sect of the
Iudaisers, and after that tell us of all the Schisms at Corinth, of the
Scandals of their Lives, and the enormous disorders in their Worship; some
Feasting in their Churches till they were Drunk, before they went to the
Sacrament; others, that had even the extraordinary gift of Tongues, affecting
to gratify their Vanity by showing it in their Public Assemblies, while false
Apostles studied to supplant the Respect that was due to the true Apostles, and
some false Teachers denied the Resurrection: If one will go through the Epistles
writ to the other Churches, and bring together all the disorders that he finds
among them, if to these he will join the Epistles in the second and third
Chapter of the Revelation, and from these pretend to give us the Character of
the Christians of the first Age; and if from that he should go to bring into
the Picture all the Abominations of the Gnostics, all the Follies of the
Valentinians, and all the Extravagancies of the other Heresies. If, I say, a
Heathen that had as much Wit, and as much spite as Mr. de Meaux has showed in
this Work, would undertake this, he might write Historical Essaies, that would
be as little to the Honor of the Christian Religion, as Mr. de Meaux's Work is
to the Honor of the Reformation. And if a Man will examine either S.
Athanase's Life, Cyril of Alexandria's, Liberius's, Osius's or Damasus, with as
much diligence as Mr. de Meaux had showed, in bringing together all the
weaknesses of Cranmer, (whether real or pretended) and would carry down such a
Critique on all the other Saints, the Calendar would be cleared of a great many
Rubricks. Gregory the Great's Infamous Courting both of Phocas and Brunichild,
would likewise degrade him from Saintship: and if one will examine the
pretended Saint Clovis, by such strict Rules, not only his Saintship, but even
his Christianity would be doubted: And we should conclude, that S. Remy had
rather brought a Reproach, than an Honor on our Christian Religion, by
Baptizing him. If one will sum up all the Blemishes even of David's Life, and
pretend to give his Character, by laying these together, instead of concluding
him a man according to God's own Heart, one should rather conclude him to be
one of those whom God abhors. In short, there are few men so bad, but one may
find enough of good in them, that if that alone were laid together, they might
pass for not only good Men, but even for extraordinary Men: If we had only
preserved the beginnings of what Suetonius writes of Tiberius, Caligula, and
Nero, those Monsters would have passed for Patterns. On the other hand, there
are few Men so good, but that if all the Weaknesses of their Life, were set out
in Bas-Reliefs, as Mr. de Meaux has dealt with Cranmer, without making the due
mixture of Light and Shadow, of the Good as well as the Bad, they would make a
very ill appearance.

And it is certain, that a Man of Wit, can make either Panegyric or Satyr
where he will, and even keep himself within the bounds of Truth as to the main
strokes of his History. So after all that Mr. de Meaux has said of Cranmer, I
do not doubt, but if a Man, even biassed with the ill Characters that he has
given of him, will be at the pains to read over my History, he will return to
high thoughts of him, in spite of all those malignant Colors in which he has
set him out. The Ages in which Men have lived do very much extenuate some
things, as well as other times aggravate the same faults. Men of Modest
Tempers, have often an oppression on their Spirits, which looks like fear. And
some Men have an ascendant over other people, that those who are strong against
all other Considerations, yet cannot resist them: And this was the case of
Cranmer toward Henry the Eighth, who as he was always soft and gentle, so his
Modesty carrying on it the weight of great obligations, made that he was not at
all times so firm as was necessary, against so imperious a King: And indeed one
of the Clergy of France reproaches Cranmer for this with a very ill Grace, in
an Age in which, if we may believe the Answerer to Mr. Talon, they have showed
not only a compliance with Lewis le Grand, but have vied one with another in
their Admirations and Panegyricks, notwithstanding so many and high Invasions
of the Rights of the Church, in the most Sacred things; and of the great steps
made toward a breach with that which they call the Holy See. The prejudices of
Education hang long about men: and the notion of adhering to the Unity, till
one can make a general Reform, is plausible, and the complying with the Rites
of a Religion, that was antiquated by the Death of Christ, in which the
Apostles themselves went so far, seemed to warrant, or at least to excuse a
Man, especially when the degrees of his Knowledge were yet imperfect, suitable
to the Age in which he lived, if he did not all of the sudden emancipate
himself: All these things might induce Cranmer to continue in the exercise of
many Rites, to which he had been long accustomed, after they were softened with
some Corrections and Explanations; hoping at last to engage the whole Nation
into an unanimous Reformation. If in all these things the grounds he went on,
are not so sure as to warrant all he did, yet in that dawn of Light, a
compliance upon such Considerations is not so heinous a thing, but that he who
was guilty of it, may yet be well reckoned among the greatest Men that have
been in the Church. Since the Judgments that we make of Men, ought to be
formed, neither upon some slips they may have made on the one hand, nor upon
some great Actions on the other, but upon the whole thread and course of their
Lives. And as to Cranmer, there appeared in him so much Candor and Sincerity,
so great a contempt of the World, and such a neglect of his Family, such a
Spirit of Gentleness and Charity, both to those who differed from him, and even
to his Enemies, such a simplicity of Spirit, that he would never enter into the
Intrigues and Factions of Court. Such a constant application to the finding out
of Truth, and such a plainness in acknowledging Mistakes, and submitting
himself to the Correction of others; so much Humility and Modesty during one
and twenty years Greatness, and such an unblemished Purity as to his Personal
Deportment, that even the Libels of that time durst not attempt upon it. All
these, of which I had such copious Discoveries, appeared so extraordinary to
me, that I was not afraid to mix with them all the instances of Humane Frailty
that I found in him. If I had writ as most of those in the Church of Rome do,
that publish Lives, I should have assumed the Impudence to have denied some
things, and to have passed over others: And at least I should have suppressed a
great many things that were never known before I published them. But I write
not for Parties or Persons; I write for Truth's Sake; and so was not afraid to
show even the weak sides of our Reformers. This is one of the unsearchable
depths of Divine Providence, to let the Man appear even when God shows himself.
And with how much indignation soever Mr. de Meaux rejects the consideration
that I offered of S Peter's Denial, to soften the Censure of Cranmer's fall,
yet I return to it, and take the Liberty to say, that considering it was in our
Savior's own Presence, who had so lately warned him of it, and who had parted
with his Disciples in so ravishing a manner, giving them such elevating
Instructions, and ending these with so inflaming a Prayer, who was also upon
the point of Offering up himself a Sacrifice for the Sins of the World: And
whose ill usage from his Persecutors, ought in a most particular manner to have
softened and melted his Disciples, who saw it. Besides that, nothing could more
betray the Reputation of our Savior's Innocence, than his being denied by one
of his Disciples, which looked as if he was ashamed of him. And after all, that
the Temptation was so weak, the Accusation of a Maid and some that stood near
her, and that the Denial was confirmed with Oaths and Imprecations; I still
doubt if Cranmer's Fall is capable of so many aggravations, and therefore as
the meanness of Man, and the greatness of God and of his Grace, appeared in S.
Peter's Fall and in his Repentance, and his being afterward restored to that
sublime Dignity, from which he had fallen; so I doubt not but that God suffered
Cranmer in his old Age, after a long and hard Imprisonment, and that he had
seen some of his Brethren burnt before his Eyes, to fall; that so he might by
his Mighty Power raise him again, and in him teach us to cease from Man, for
wherein is he to be accounted of; and that such as glory might glory in the
Lord and not in Man. As for the difference that is alleged as to the Time,
that the one was but for a moment, and that the other lasted longer, it is to
be considered that our Savior looked presently at Saint Peter, and the
Authority of that look, together with the Divine Virtue that might accompany
it, and the Crowing of the Cock, were such extraordinary Motives, that it had
been a wonder indeed, if Saint Peter had resisted them; and we may Charitably
believe, that if Cranmer had been blessed with such awakening Motives, he had
likewise Repented sooner than he did. So that upon the whole matter, I do not
see any one Action in all Cranmer's Life, unless it be his consenting to the
Divorce of Anne of Cleve, in which it does not appear that he adhered strictly
to a Principle of Conscience, though it is a question if that Principle was
always well measured or not: But that is nothing to the probity of the man, so
long as he adheres to that which he thinks right: And even in that of Anne of
Cleve, as it was the body of the Popish Clergy that did it, so that his part
was only a giving a too feeble consent; so he, believing that Marriage was no
Sacrament, might think it subject to Political Regulations; especially when it
was not consummated; so that the rights of Nature did not seem concerned:
Whether this is to be defended or not, I will not determine: But certainly this
is not so odious a matter, as Mr. de Meaux would make it appear to be. And for
his dissolving the Marriage of Anne Bullen, the Record of that Sentence is
lost, so that we do not know what it was that she confessed; and therefore here
Mr. de Meaux studies to defame Cranmer upon conjecture; and yet I suppose that
he himself would think that he met with hard measure, if he were censured, much
less condemned, upon Reports, Presumptions, or Conjectures.

As for all the good Characters that Mr. de Meaux gives of our Sinods, I shall
only crave leave to tell him, that if one would examine not only the Councils
of Trent and Florence, or to go a little higher, the second Council of Nice,
and some antienter Assemblies, as he has done ours, they would find not only
Intrigues, Weaknesses, and Passions, but down right Impostures in them. In
short, it has appeared that Man was Man even in the best Ages, and in the most
Celebrated Assemblies of the Church; and I will not stick to own it freely,
that if I had not a great Veneration for the first four General Councils, for
the sake of the Truths that they decreed, I should never pay them much, when I
consider their Method of Proceeding, which appears but too evidently to those
who have read the Journals of the third and fourth: and if we Judge of the
first, by the mutual Complaints which they exhibited to Constantine, and which
he to their Reproach destroyed; or of the second, by their way of treating St.
Gregory of Nazianze, who was one of the greatest Men of the Age, and that had
done the most for the Truth in the former Persecution under Valens, we will not
form a very favorable Opinion neither of the one nor the other of those two
great Assemblies.

But since I have named that Great Man, I will let Mr. de Meaux see how easy
it is, to give an ill Character even of the greatest Men. I will not mention
his indecent Invectives against Julian, nor his high Eloges of Constance. But
if we consider his Life after he was a Bishop, he despised Zasim where he was
first settled, and was offended with his Friend S. Basil for putting him in it;
and in the end he forsook it, for it was a mean place, and a Town full of
disorders, as being situated on the great Road. After that he came and assisted
his old Father at Nazianze; but upon his Death he left that; and without any
Canonical Vocation, he came to Constantinople, where he acted long as Bishop:
And in conclusion, when he saw it was like to be questioned by the Council, he
withdrew indeed: But as appears by his Letter to Procopius, he grew upon that
so disgusted at all Councils, that he could neither think nor write of them
with patience. Here are many Blots in a Life of which we have very little left
us; and yet after all this, he was one of the greatest Men, that not only his
Age but the Greek Church ever produced.

But here Mr. de Meaux will complain, that I am doing that which he apprehends
so much, and that I am recriminating: He had Reason to apprehend this; for the
Subject is Copious, and the Matter is Obvious: only with this difference, that
a just Recrimination destroys the whole bottom on which the Roman Church is
founded, for the certainty of Tradition, and the Infallbility of the Church,
being their Foundation, if Variations are proved among them, these are shaken;
and so their whole Fabric falls: but Variations even proved among us, signify
nothing, they only prove that the Reformers were Men, subject to mistakes; that
in some things they might bend matters too far, in opposition to that which
they saw Reason to Condemn, before they had so clearly discovered the Truth
that was wrapped up in so much Corruption; that it was to discern the Truths,
which might have carried Cranmer in opposition to the Ecclesiastical Tyranny,
to raise the Power of the Civil Magistrate too high: In other points they
thought they might retain some received expressions, giving them sound
Explanations; and so change the Ideas of things, without changeing the
Language: And thus though they retained the Real Presence, with some other
Phrases that were consonant to it, yet they gave it another Sense: And Mr. de
Meaux ought not to make so much as he does of their Submission to some Princes;
when, not to mention the base compliances of some Bishops in this Age, who are
indeed a Reproach to their Character, nor what was mentioned formerly of
Gregory and Remy, even the Apostle of France, S. Martin himself, complied with
the Tyrant Maximus in such a manner, that, as Sulpitius Severus sets it out, it
does little Honor to his Memory: Only in this he differed from the Bishops of
this present Age, that he interposed vigorously to hinder the Persecution of a
Sect, that had neither Laws nor Edicts in their Favors, and that are
represented in History as a very odious sort of Men, and indeed not worthy to
live; whereas in our days, we have seen Bishops not only pushing on a Prince to
an Infamous violation of Edicts, and to an unheard of Cruelty, but making
Panegyricks upon it, while others were most Impudently denying it, even at the
same time that they were writing private Letters in defense of it. These are
indeed unworthy and scandalous Compliances, and yet those who are guilty of
them, have the Face to Reproach us for things that are not to be once named in
comparison with them: So true does the Character of a Pharisee remain to this
day, of warning others to take the Mote out of their Eye, while there is a Beam
in their own. Among all the Compliances in Henry the 8th's Reign, is there any
one that carries with it such a Reproach to Religion, as it is for the Bishops
of a whole Church, (one or two perhaps only excepted) to see Men required to
Receive the Sacrament by the force of Royal Edicts, (in particular, by that
Famous Monument of the Impiety and Inhumanity of the Age, against those who
refused to receive it in their Sickness.) By which those from whom the
violences of Dragoons had extorted a Signature, are required to do that, which
in the Opinion of all Christians, is a high Profanation of the Sacrament, but
in the Opinion of that Church, is a Profanation without a name, and beyond all
that can be set out in words. This is an Edict relating to the Sacredest of all
the Acts of Worship, and is a higher Invasion of the Sanctuary, than any that
can be found in all King Henry's Reign: And yet those who Reproach us so
severely, have not had the Honesty nor the Courage, to interpose and require
their Clergy not to give the Sacrament to any but to such as were duly
prepared for it, that believed their Doctrine, and came to Receive it with that
disposition of Mind which became them. The Silence of those Bishops upon so
Sacrilegious an Attempt, is an indication of a Slavish compliance, far above
all that they can Charge on Cranmer: As for those Tragical Exclamations that
Mr. de Meaux makes on the Supremacy, that was declared to be in our Kings, as
well in Queen Elizabeth's time, as in King Henry's, and King Edward's, this is
also very unjustly urged by a Clergy, that suffer under a much greater Invasion
of the Rights of the Church, than any that we can complain of. By the
Concordate, the Kings of France have Invaded the Liberties of that Church, and
have assumed to themselves the Nomination of all the Bishops of France; and by
the Pretensions to the Regale, they have assumed also a right of conferring
Spiritual Employments, to which a care of Souls is annexed, and that pleno
jure. Their Courts of Parliament are the last resort even of all Spiritual
Matters; and receive all Appeals under the pretense of some abuse in the
Sentence, so that the whole Exercise of the Episcopal Power is subject to the
Secular Court. And whatsoever they may talk of their Union with the Holy See,
even in this they are also Subject to the Secular Court, since no Bull or Breve
can be Executed in France, without an approbation from thence. And yet these
are the men that complain of the King's Supremacy among us: though there is
nothing clearer, than that this Servitude lies much heavier on them than it
does on us. For after all, we live under a Legal Government, by which even our
Kings are bound, so that any Order that comes from them, whether in Matters
Temporal or Spiritual, that is not founded on Law, or that is contrary to it,
is null of it self. The King's Supremacy among us, amounts to no more, than
that the Execution of the laws that relate to Religion, and to the Persons of
Church men, belongs to our Kings. And all the difference between the French
Constitution and ours, as to this, is, that whereas the French King Acts
Arbitrarily in those Matters, ours are limited by Law. So that if a Clergyman
is legally proved to be guilty of a Crime, our King indeed orders the Law to
pass upon him in his Courts of Justice: But the King can shut up no Clergymen
in Prisons, or detain them there during Pleasure. We do not know what those
Letters of the Cachet are, nor the Exiles or Imprisonments which go according
to the Pleasure of a King, and the Directions of a Father Confessor. We retain
the Freedom of the Elections of our Bishops, there being only a Temporal
punishment laid on us by Law, if we do not follow the King's Recommendation.
And except in Matters of Marriages, an Appeal from the Spiritual Court is
scarce ever heard of in England: And even when an Appeal is brought, it is to
be Judged by Delegates, that are named by the King's Authority, a considerable
number of whom are always Bishops. Nor have our Parliaments or our Princes
meddled any other way in Matters of Religion, but that they have given the Civil
Sanction to the Propositions made by the Church, and this is that which all
Christian Princes do in all places; so that after all the Clamor that is made
on our being Subjected to the Civil Power, it is certain, that the Gallican
Church is much more Subject to it than we are. And yet these Men, who have
abandoned all the Immunities of the Church, Reproach us with Thomas Becket,
though there is not one of them that dares make any one of those steps which
procured to him his Saintship. These Men do also swear the Oath that is in the
Pontifical to the Pope, of which Mr. Claud put Mr. de Meaux in mind long ago;
but he is Wiser than to take any notice of a thing which he knows he cannot
answer, for I would gladly see how they observe any one of all the Articles
that are in that Oath. Mr. de Meaux is offended at Cranmer for the Protestation
that he made, explaining to what degree he thought himself bound to observe it;
and yet though he and his Brethren swore it, it does not appear that it makes any
great impression on their Consciences: They are resolved to have no regard to
it, only they cannot endure Cranmer's Honesty for protesting to that purpose:
But if they fail in this part of their Oath, they have been most exactly true
to another Branch of it, which obliges them to Persecute Heretics to the
utmost of their Power.

Thus it appears, how just it was for Mr. de Meaux to apprehend that we should
Recriminate: And that in all points, the Recrimination falls much heavier on
their Church, than the Charge it self can fall on ours. He takes notice of an
Objection that he finds I made upon the Subject of those prejudices, which is,
that if we enter on a Personal Dispute, concerning the Reformers, the worst
things that even their Enemies can lay to their charge, come far short of those
Enormous Crimes, of which even their own Historians confess their Popes to have
been Guilty; and that, some times in a Series of many Ages together; in which
not so much as one good Pope Interveened; so uninterrupted was that Succession.
Now Popes being, according to the general Doctrine of that Church, the
Infallible Oracles of Truth, and the Universal Bishops; and according to all
the rest of their Communion, they being the Heads of the Church, Christ's
Vicars, and the Centers of Unity, they are much more concerned in all that
relates personally to their Popes, than we are in the Lives of our Reformers:
All that Mr. de Meaux says to this, is, that the Reformers are the Authors of
our Sect, and that therefore we are more immediately concerned in them. But it
seems Mr. de Meaux understands the Principles of the Reformation very ill. We
own no Sect, but that of which Jesus Christ is the Author: And we have no other
Interest in the Reformers, but that they were Instruments by whose Means the
World was awakened to Read the Scriptures, and to examine Matters of Religion:
And that they discovered many things of which the World was formerly ignorant,
and in which the Clergy studied still to keep them in a blind Subjection to
them; and since they found too much advantage in those Corruptions to be
willing to part with them, the Reformers went on in their Discoveries, and at
length by the Blessing of God, and the Labors of the Reformers, as well as by
the Persecution of their Enemies, this Work had so great a Progress, that it
will still be reckoned one of the wonders of Providence. But after all, the
Reformers were only the Instruments of opening this Light, but not at all the
Authors of our Sect, so that we are no other way concerned in them, but that we
gratefully acknowledge their Labors, and honor their Memory: And what
Mistakes, Weaknesses, or Passions soever may have mixed with their Conduct,
this proves nothing, but that they were Men, and were Subject both to Sin and
to Error.

Mr. de Meaux is also at a great deal of pains, to show how unsteady the
Protestants have been in settling some Notions, in particular the manner of
Christ's Presence in the Sacrament, and the true Notion of a Church, on which
he enlarges himself very copiously: But is it possible that he is so ignorant,
either of Antiquity, or of the Age of the Schoolmen, as not to know how long
they were before they settled on almost all the Notions of Divinity? F. Petaw
can inform him, how dark the Fathers of the first three Centuries were even in
their Idea's of the Trinity; and it were easy to show, that even after the
Definition of the Council of Nice, it was long before they settled on the same
Notion of the Unity of the Divine Essence, with that which has been received
now for many Ages in the Church. It were easy to show, how even the so much
cited and admired Saint Austin differed from himself, in his Disputes with the
Manicheans, the Donatists, and the Pelagians; and that one sees in his works
very different Notions, not only of the Freedom of the Will, but even of the
Nature of the Church. When he writ against the Donatists, who had contrary to
all Reason broke the Peace of the Church, he raised the Unity of the Church,
and the submission to the visible Authority that was in it, very high: But when
he writ against the Pelagians, the invisible Assembly of the Elect was the
Church. Any Man that has been at the pains to Read all that he has writ on
these Heads from end to end, and that has not only picked up here and there some
quotations that are drawn out of him, must needs find so much confusion in him,
that they will easily pardon others, if any such disorder appears in the
Writings of the Reformers: And for the Notion of the Presence in the Sacrament,
there has appeared of late such a History of the Disorders of the Schoolmen,
before they came to settle on the Notion of Transubstantiation, and even in the
explanation of that after the fourth Council of the Lateran, that it will give
no great Reputation to any Man, that will take advantage from the Variations
that may have been among us; when it appears that there have been Changes of
another Nature among them.

Mr. de Meaux is so pleased with this Prospect of the Variations among us, that
he will even make the suppressing of a more copious condemnation of the
Corporal Presence, that had been made in King Edward's time, but was left out
in Queen Elizabeth's, to pass likewise for one. The Matter of Fact was this, in
King Edward's time, both Transubstantiation, and the Corporal Presence, were
expressly rejected in our Articles, and it was declared that Christ was present
only in a Spiritual Manner, and that he was received by Faith alone: when Queen
Elizabeth came to the Crown, it was thought enough to reject both
Transubstantiation, and the Adoration of the Sacrament; it was also declared
that the Wicked did not receive Christ's Body or Blood in the Sacrament: That
he was present only after a Heavenly and Spiritual manner, and that the Means
by which he was Received, was Faith: only the rejecting the Corporal Presence
with the Reasons upon which it was rejected, was left out. The Church did not
at all change its Doctrine, but it being fit to put nothing in the Articles of
the Church, but what is necessary, it had been an unseasonable rigor, to put
in them a long explanation of a Negative Article. The positive Articles can
only be necessary; and though some Negative Articles ought to be kept in
Confessions, if the Error rejected by them, is very dangerous; yet no Man can
say that all Negatives ought at all times to be proposed: So that this is a
matter of Discretion and Prudence, and therefore the Adoration of the
Sacrament, being according to us Idolatry, and Transubstantiation leading
Naturally to that, these were still Condemned; that so the Purity of the
Worship might be secured; but this being done, if our Church had carried the
matter further, and had imposed on every one the more particular and disputable
Opinions concerning the Presence, she had approached too near to the Rigor of
that Church, from which she had separated her self. And therefore she showed
that Regard both to Lutherans and others, who might have peculiar Notions of a
Corporal Presence, as not to put such a Definition in the body of her Articles,
as might drive them out of her Society: And if she went too far in King
Edward's Time, we are so far from being ashamed of the Moderation that she
showed in Queen Elizabeth's Time, that we rather Glory in it. We are neither
afraid nor ashamed to follow Saint Paul who Circumcised Timothy, that by such
a compliance he might gain the Jews, and that went to Purify himself in the
Temple, in which there was always a Sacrifice of one sort or another, which he
did long after the Virtue and the Obligation of those Rites was extinguished;
and if he went so far in positive Compliances, the Silence of our Church in a
Negative Article, when done upon the considerations of Charity and Prudence, is
rather an Honor than a Reproach to it. Indeed, it is no wonder to see those of
a Church, that has thundered with her Anathema's upon the smallest Matters, and
has followed these with all the Cruelties, that either the Rage of Dragoons, or
the Fury of Inquisitors could invent, it is no wonder, I say, to see them
censure us for our Gentleness; since by this it appears, that ours is the true
Mother, that cannot see her Children cut to pieces.

But here I stop, I will not go further upon a Subject that is like to be
handled by so able a Pen, that I am only sorry that such a man should employ so
much time upon so Barren a Subject, since it it must be confessed that this Age
has scarce produced a Book that has been writ with so much pains, but to so
little purpose, and with so little sincerity. Yet since one has resolved to
undertake it, who I know will manage it with much force as well as with great
Truth, that so his Book may be in all Respects, the reverse of that which he
answers; I will not anticipate further upon him: But will now add only a little
in Vindication of the short Account which I gave of the Troubles of France, on
design to justify the Assistance which Queen Elizabeth gave to the Protestants
there, upon which Mr. de Meaux thinks that he has great advantages. He
Reproaches me for my Ignorance of the Affairs of France, which he shows first
in my calling the Union of the Cardinal of Lorrain and the King of Navarre, the
Triumvirat, but this could have only made a Duumvirate; yet I named the
Constable, whom he has thought fit to pass over, and I said not one word of a
Triumvirat, but only mentioned the Union of these three with Queen Catherine.
It is true the Translator has thought fit to add, beyond what I had said, par
une espece de Triumvirat, which shows, that as I am not at all concerned in
this matter, so even my Translator himself, had a mind to distinguish this from
the famous Triumvirat. He also charges me for having accused the Duke of Guise
as having designed the Business of Vassy, but in my English there is not a word
of any premeditated Design, and I am only accountable for the English; nor is
this plain in the Translation, though there is more in it than in the Original:
Executer leur dessein, does not import, that the Business of Vassy was
premeditated, but only that the Design being laid, the occasion offered at
Vassy was laid hold on. It is true, I do not know how I came to say, that the
King of Navarre was declared Regent, I had reason to say, that the Regency fell
to him by Law, and that appeared, as Mr. de Thou observes, in the Famous
Decision, in the Case of Philip le Valois. I had also Reason to say, that the
Power of the Regent was limited, and so I only erred in setting the word
Regent, for Governor or Lieutenant of the Kingdom. I am not ashamed to own
mistakes, when I am convinced that I have made them. But it will soon appear,
whether he or I have committed more Errors in Treating of the Affairs of his
own Country: For in this I will frankly acknowledge my Error, without
pretending to excuse my self, from the term in which Mr. de Thou had expressed
the King of Navar's Employment praeses regni, now this seemed to answer to the
English term, of Protector of the Kingdom, in whom the true Regency lies, though
there is another Employment among us, in the Minority of our Kings, of him who
is the Governor of his Person, which is independent on the other: And has been
often in another hand, upon which a Famous Dispute arose, between the two
Brothers in Edward the 6th's Minority: Yet I confess frankly, that this is only
an excuse, and not a justification.

But whereas Mr. de Meaux reproaches me for citing the Opinions of the Lawyers
of France, against the Regency of a Woman, and charging it as an impudence, in
pretending that the Kings of France were not Majors till they were twenty two
Years of Age, against an express Ordinance of Charles the Fifth, 1474. which
has ever been held for a Law, through the whole Kingdom, without contradiction,
as he assures us; In this he shows how little he has examined the Matters of
that time, and how carelessly he has Read Mr. de Thou: It would indeed appear,
that he has only turned to that place which opens the Business of Ambaise; for
he cites Mr. de Thou's Words, relating to the Opinions that were given by the
Lawyers of France and Germany, and the Resolutions of the Protestant Divines,
which is in his twenty fourth Book. But if he had Read his twenty third Book,
in which the Administration of Affairs under Francis the Second is set forth,
he had found all that which I cited, concerning the Opinions of the Lawyers of
France: For he gives us a large Abstract, of a Book that was writ in the end of
October 1559, against the share that Women and Strangers had in the Government;
proving also that the Kings of France were not of Age, till they were 25 years
Old; and that though Charles the Fifth had made a Constitution for his Son's
being Major at fourteen, and had also by his Will named Lewis of Bourbon to be
his Regent, in our English Sense, the Government of the Kingdom being left to
the Duke of Anjou; yet no Regard was had to this, for the young King was put
into the hands of the Duke of Anjou, and the very name of the Regency was taken
from the Duke of Bourbon, and the King was not declared to be Major, till he
was twenty two years of Age: And the Historians of that time do expressly say,
that the States declared him Major at that Age, because of the Gracefulness of
his Person, and the Love that was generally born him. The Reader may, if he
pleases, Read the rest of the Extract that Mr. de Thou gives, both of that
Book, and of Mr. du Tillet's Answer, and of the Reply made to du Tillet, and it
is plain, that Mr. du Thou favors the side of the first Book, and Censures Mr.
du Tillet as much as became so Impartial an Historian to do: And in Conclusion,
he says, that upon the occasion of the Disputes that followed in Charles the
Ninth's Minority, the Chancellor Hospital took care to have the Decree
inserted among the Royal Edicts: And thus it appears, that Charles the Fifth's
Edict was of no Authority according to the Constitutions of France, as long as
their Ancient Laws were in force. But it may now pass for a Law, in a Nation,
where tell est nostre plaisir, is the measure of the Government: And by this it
may be judged, whether Mr. de Meaux or I have read Mr. de Thou, or reported
this matter, according to the Laws of France more exactly. But Mr. de Thou is
too Impartial a Writer, for a man of Mr. de Meaux's Temper, and indeed the
French Nation has gone in, so entirely into all the Notions of Slavery in this
Age, that they seem not only to have forgot their Ancient Liberties, but even
to be uneasy, when any others put them in mind of them.

I will now put an end to all that I was to say at present with Relation to Mr.
de Meaux: But since he has thought fit to insinuate, what performances were
expected from Mr. le Grand, I will add somewhat relating to him; though I cannot
yet give him such a Copious Answer as I find is expected from me.

Both my Books and Papers are in England, so I cannot do what I intend, till I
am furnished with some helps that I hope to receive e're long; yet to let Mr.
le Grand see, that I have not forgotten him, I will give you here some Essaies
of his Sincerity. He has Published a Volume of Letters and other Pieces, which
he gives as the proofs of his Work, though not above a third part of them belongs
to the Subject in hand: In short, he got many Letters in his hand writ from
England, which he resolved to Print, that so he might raise both the Bulk and
the Price of his Book: A big Book makes an Impression, and People think when
they see much Bulk, that there is much said: And yet even of these Letters,
some were Published by me, and others were Printed before: And the greater part
has no Relation, neither to the Affairs of the Divorce, nor any other of the
Affairs of England, but contain only Advices concerning the Affairs of Europe,
and the Commerce between the two Crowns in their common Concerns. He has also
given, for the most part, only the Letters that were writ to the Great Master,
without giving us those that were writ to the King, or the Secretary of State,
in which we might hope to find the Copious Accounts of the State of Affairs;
whereas the Letters writ to other Ministers, contain only private Advices that
are offered to them; but whether Mr. le Grand ever saw these to the King, or
not, I do not know, though it is probable that those who preserved the one, would
likewise have taken care of the other. He has not given us the Series of the
Letters that were writ from Marseilles during the Interview, which he ought not
to have suppressed, if they fell under his Eye.

But besides all the Defects and the Excesses of that Volume, Mr. le Grand is
liable to a severer Censure, for the Abstracts that he pretends to give from
them: I shall name but three. In the first of all that he has put in his Volume
of Proofs, one should have expected some exactness, for many are apt to read
the first, that will not give themselves the trouble to go further: And
therefore he ought to have taken a little more care of this than he has done,
and not have given such an unfaithful Extract of it: I pass over that which he
says of Pace's having neither regard to the Vulgar Latin, Hist. de Di^. p. 46.
nor to the Seventy, but only to the Hebrew: There being nothing in the Letter
to that purpose, for he only corrects the Notion of some, who from the Title of
the Book of Deuteronomy, inferred, that this according to the composition of
the Greek word, signifying a second Law, and that therefore the Laws of
Leviticus were abrogated by those in Deuteronomy: and let the Reader judge, if
this is a disparaging either of the Vulgar or the Seventy. But he commits a
fault of another Nature, when to represent the Corruptions of the Divines of
England at that time, he says that Wakfield (souhaitoit que Sa Majeste luy
ecrivit Elle-meme ce qu'Elle vouloit qu'il fit, and s'il devoit defendre le
pour ou le contre; and qu'alors selon les Ordres qu'il receveroit, il donneroit
des eclaircissemens, ou pour, ou contre, qui passeroient la capacite de tous
les Anglois) desired, that the King himself would write to him, what it was
that he would have him do, and if he would have him write for him or against
him, and that according to the Orders that he should receive from him, he would
give him such Informations, either for or against him, as should exceed the
Capacity of all the English.

Now because this seems so extravagant a Proposition, I will set down the words
of the Latin Letter, with their Translation in English: And then I will leave
it to every Reader, to think what Judgment he ought to form of Mr. le Grand
upon it, D. R. Wacfeldus nunc me rogavit ut sibi significarem, a placeret tibi
veritatem hac in re intelligere? i. utrum staret a te a contra te? ei ita
respondi, te nihil velle quod esset alienum a Nobile Principe, and singularibus
virtutibus praedito: Illumque Maj. tuae, rem gratissimam facturum, si laboraret
ut puram veritatem tibi declarat: Tum ille nescio quo ductus timore, negavit se
hoc posse facere, nisi Maj. tua, id sibi injungeret and mandaret: Et si
mandares, se producturum in medium, tam contra te, quam pro te, illa quae nemo
alius in hac tuo Regno producere posset. The English of this is, D. R. Wakfield
desired me earnestly to let him understand, whether your Majesty desired to
know the Truth in this Matter? that is to say, whether the Truth was for You or
against You? To whom I answered thus, that you desired nothing that was
unbecoming a Great and an Eminently Virtuous Prince: And that he would do a
most acceptable thing to your Majesty, if he would declare to you the Verity.
But he, upon what fearfulness I know not, said that he could not do that,
unless Your Majesty would Command him to do it: And that if you did lay your
Commands on him, he would lay before you, both what made for and against you,
beyond what any Man in the Nation could do. Now whether Mr. le Grand's Errors,
here flow from a want of Sincerity, or from his Ignorance of Latin, I do do
not know: But certainly, never was a Letter worse handled than he has done
this; since the Matters contained in it, are highly both to the King's Honor,
and to Wakfield's; which yet he has turned so maliciously. Mr. le Grand has
thrown out upon me all the Reproaches, with which a Clounish Temper, and a Mean
Education could furnish him; not forgetting the common Figure of a brazen
forehead. But I do not envy him those Beauties of Style, only if I were to make
use of a Figure for him, I must seek it from other Bodies that are more
impenetrable than Brass, for it will grow red before a fire; but I do not know
whether such a Discovery as this will set him a Blushing or not.

His second Letter is produced, to prove, in contradiction to me, that Cardinal
Wolsey desired that the Pope would make him his Vicar General during his
Imprisonment, and that this was long before the time that I make him pretend to
it; Hist. de Di^. p. 60.
and this he thought so important, that he comes over it twice. This is no
great matter, if it was true; and would only prove that he had found out some
Papers, which I never saw: But it is somewhat extraordinary to see him produce
a Letter for proving this, that does not so much as contain one word relating
to it. The Letter which is the second among his Proofs, is indeed an address
made to the Pope by five Cardinals, desiring him to give them a Power, to
supply his absence by a Commission from him, suamque absentiam demandata
Authoritatis presentia supplere. But there is not so much as an Insinuation of
recommending Cardinal Wolsey to it, nor is there any mention made of a Vicar
General, much less of all that long Extract that Mr. le Grand gives of it: But
by these Indications, I suppose, you will conclude how little regard there is
to be had to his Extracts, even when he makes them with the greatest
Confidence. But the third Instance, is yet both more notorious and more
important. It relates to the Decision made by the Sorbonne. Indeed, the
Abstract that Mr. le Grand gives of that whole Matter in his History, differs
so much from the account given in the Letters which he brings to prove it, that
he must have a strange Opinion of his Readers understanding, and think that it
is of a piece with his own Sincerity, if he expects that much credit will be
hereafter given to any of his Extracts. For the account which he gives of
President Lizet's Letter, is somewhat extraordinary even for Mr. le Grand.

By the Letter it appears, Preuves p. 480.
that he sent the Act to the King, and after he had mentioned that, he adds
this, with Relation to the management of the Business, he prays the Great
Master, that as to the Account which the Bishop of Bayonne had drawn up of that
matter, they would suspend their judgment for the Reasons mentioned in his
Letters to the King; till the King had heard from him, how the matter was
managed, and then perhaps it would appear, that the Information would rather be
a prejudice than an advantage to the King of England. It is plain that these
last words belong not at all to the Act it self, but to the conduct of the
matter; Hist. de Di^. p 18*
and the Caballing that had been about it: But Mr. le Grand will apply these
words to the Act it self in his History, in these words, yet he [the President]
took out the Act, and sent it to the King, without communicating it to
Messieurs de Bellay, and advertised his Majesty, that this would hurt the King
of England much more than it would serve him. By this sincerity the Reader may
judge of the rest; when he makes the President's Reflections on the Conduct of
the Matter, fall upon the Act it self: And would make that an* Evidence, to
prove that the Act which was Printed in England, cannot be this which is
mentioned by the President, since it is entirely for the King. But Mr. le Grand
has now furnished us with a proof, that an Act was passed in the Sorbonne: Now
is it Credible, that if an Act which had passed with so much opposition, was
falsely Printed in England, that either the whole Body of the Sorbonne, or
at-least that Beda and those who opposed it, would not quickly have discovered
the Imposture: So that Mr. le Grand without thinking on it, has given us a
proof of the Authenticalness of the Decision, that was Printed in the name of
the Sorbonne.

I will enlarge no further in Reflecting on the rest of the proofs that he has
given us, only a digression that he has made upon one of them, to tell us of
the Dignity of the Family of Verjus, p. 5^^.
and that F. Verjus was of it, looked so affected, that I could not forbear
enquiring a little after it: And I will give this account that I have of it:
Mr. le Grand has let some Jesuits of the Court of England know, what great
Services he could do them in destroying the Credit of my History, but in order
to that, he hoped they would make his Fortune at the same time: So a powerful
recommendation was obtained, which is lodged in F. Verjus's hands, Secretary to
F. de la Chaise, to be made use of as occasion offers it self: And therefore he
bestowed this Complement on that Jesuit, to quicken him, in order to his
Advancement. I have been also informed, that this is the Reason that made his
Book stick so long in the Press, that so he might manage the Matter to the best
Advantage. It is also said, that all the foul Language that he bestows on me,
comes from the same Consideration; and was put in, to make the Work so much the
more acceptable to those that are to recommend him. I confess, I wondered at
first, to see a Man use me so ill, with whom I had lived Civilly, and to whom I
had given no cause of offense. But since I am told that he was hired to it,
though I cannot highly esteem him for that, yet I will do all that I can for him,
which is heartily to forgive him: And perhaps the Reproaches that he must
suffer, by the discoveries that I am forced to make of his Mistakes, may
contribute to heighten his Pretensions, and to supply the want of Merit. In his
Defense of Sanders, he charges me for not consining my self to the first
Edition, and for fastening my Censures on what was added in the subsequent
Editions: But it is not yet known, whether the following Editions were not
fuller Copies of Sanders's own Composing, in which he added much to the first
Fable that he writ, or if they were added by others afterward: And there is
reason to believe, that the first Impression was from an Imperfect Copy, and
that soon after a more complete one appeared, and all the Editions of that Book
since that time, as well as the Translations of it, and in particular the late
one by Maucroix, which gave the first occasion to my Writing, having been made
according to that second Edition, I had Reason to follow it: But after all, I
marked in general, a great difference that was between the first and the
succeeding Editions: It is true, I did not think it necessary upon every
passage, to mark in which of them that was to be found. I had indeed prepared a
Sanders for another Impression, in which I intended to have marked in a
different Character, the variations in the several Editions of that Book; but
our Booksellers had no mind to meddle with a Book which they told me I had
rendered unsaleable: by this the half of the Defenses which Mr. le Grand makes
for Sanderus, because the Articles to which I excepted, are not in the first
Edition, are blown up; since I was obliged to destroy the Credit of the Book
that had been for almost an Age received for Sanders's.

But after Mr. le Grand had entertained his Reader with an Account of Sanders,
Def. de Sand. p 9. and 20. Art. 62. Ref. de Bur. p. 18.
he accuses me for a passage that I had cited out of an Answer that was made to
Sanders, which he tells me he did not find in it, and this he thought so
important, that he comes over it again and again, and requires me almost in the
form of a Challenge, to make it good.

The matter is this, I had said that Bonner had spoke so vigorously to the Pope
at Marseilles, that the Pope thought either to burn him, or to cast him into a
Cauldron of Boiling Lead. For which I had cited a Book, in which Mr. le Grand
says he does not find it. It is true, there were two Books writ against
Sanders, both Printed in the same Year, and in the same form, by Day 1573. And
both commonly bound together; the one is the Book which I cited, and the other
is Antisanderus: Now it seems I mixed my Extracts out of both these together,
so that indeed, the words are not in the Book which I Cited, but they are in
the other, p. 195. Bonnerus tam audacter asseruit nullum esse' Pontifici jus in
Ecclesias Anglicanas, ut de eo vel igne cremando, vel in plumbum liquefactum
mittendo deliberaretur. Def. de Sand. p. 51
Mr. le Grand probably knew this, for he cites Antisanderus, as if he had Read
it. A little after this, Mr. le Grand studies to let his Reader see how ill he
understands Latin, for he pretends that Bacon gives the same Account of P.
Arthur's Age with Sanders, and sets down both their words, the former says,
erat annorum circiter quindecem; now circiter is either on this side or beyond
fifteen, so this is true, though he was some Months past it; but Sanders's words
are, decimum quintum aetatis annum vix dum attingens, which necessarily import
that he was not yet fifteen: This is indeed of no great consequence, only it
shows Mr. le Grand's good Sense in bringing Proofs for what he says. But the
next I shall mention, Def. de Sand. Art. 37. Ref. de Bur. Art. 18.
which he likewise Repeats twice, as he does most things in which he thinks he
has an advantage against me, is another Proof of his Candor. I had said, P.
Julius the Second, had such a Hatred to France, that he was thereby the more
easily induced to grant the Bull for King Henry's Marriage, by which a League
against France might be made the stronger; and upon this he insults upon the
Poor Mr. Burnet, that he Poor Man, had heard that Pope Julius was a great Enemy
to France, and thereupon he fancies he was so from the beginning; whereas he
assures him that the Cardinal of Rouen helped him to the Pontificate, and that
so at first he was in the Interests of France. But Mr. Burnet, Poor Man as he
is, takes this from Raynaldus, who says expressly, and which is more, Ad An.
1503. Number. 11. and 22.
cites Authors to prove it, that the Cardinal of Rouen himself had aspired, but
that Julius was preferred to him; and the same Author says, that he granted
the Bull for the King of England's Marriage, which was proposed to him as a
mean for bearing down the French, and for strengthening the Party against them,
ad deprimendos Gallos confirmandasque adversus eos vires communes. Upon the
occasion of the Bull, I had said that Isabel of Castile, is called Elizabetha
in it. I neither said more nor less upon this, nor made I any reasoning upon
it, and my Design in it, was occasioned by a Discourse that I had once had with
some who pretended that these were different names; Hist. de Div. p. 125. Def.
de Sand. Art. 35. Rej. de Bur. Art. 11.
and yet in three or four places, Mr. le Grand, according to his usual
Sincerity, and with his cold Railery, of calling me an able Man for it, has
said, that I have made that an Argument, to prove that the Bull was a Forgery.

Mr. le Grand Reproaches me, for saying that the Count of Toulouse was the
first that felt the effects of the fourth Council of the Lateran, and shows me
that he was Censured and Deposed before that Council. But this shows how unfit
he is to Write upon Critical Matters; Ad. Con^. Lat. 4. p. 233.
what I said is justified by Cossart's Annotations, who says expressly that till
then the Dominions of the Count of Toulouse were only sequestered, but that a
Decree was made in that Synod, translating a great part of them to the Count of
Monfort for ever; and for this, he not only Cites Petrus Vallisarnensis, but
sends his Reader to Dachery's Spicilegium for the Decree it self. It is true,
the Count of Toulouse was Deposed before that time, but by the Feudal Law, upon
his Deposition, either his Heresy was to be accounted only a Personal Crime,
and then the Fee was to go to the next Heir, or if it was to be made equal to a
Crime of Treason, then the Fee was to return to the Superior Lord, and so in
this Case it was to have fallen to the Crown of France; but it was the fourth
Council of the Lateran, that first gave the Pope the Power of transferring the
Dominions of Heretics to others, whereas before that he could only Depose
them. It is also plain, that Mr. le Grand treats this whole Matter very mildly,
and not with that Detestation that some Writers of that Church affect, when we
reproach them with the Deposing Power.

After all, if I have many reasons to complain of Mr. le Grand, I confess there
is one, for which I am much beholden to him; and that is the pains that he is
at to prove the constant Tradition in Catholic States, to proceed Capitally
against Heretics. This Book was writ by him chiefly for the English Nation,
and if this one thing does not hinder it, it will probably be put in English:
But as we are beholden to those who set on the Persecution of France, and must
acknowledge, that we owe our Preservation in a great measure to it, since the
Allarm which that gave this whole Nation, was a stronger Argument than any that
we could have invented for showing them their danger, for sensible and
barbarous things affect all the World: But now the Men of the Mission think fit
to disclaim the Persecution of France, and throw it on the King's Bigotry, yet
taking still great pains to clear Father de la Chaise of it, as if he had
always opposed it, so that we are forced to justify Lewis le Grand in that
matter, and to show that he has acted in all things Conform to the Doctrine and
Spirit of his Church. This our Missionaries deny, and endeavor to persuade us,
that Liberty of Conscience is the Principle and Doctrine of their Church: And
that therefore we need not apprehend any mischief from them; that they not only
abhor all Capital Proceedings, but even the Fining of Men, or the excluding
them from Employments on the Account of Religion; that they cannot forgive
those lesser Severities practiced by Men of the Church of England, and that all
Men of all Persuasions may expect to live easy and happy under them. But Mr. le
Grand has spoiled all this, and thus they see what it is to employ Men in their
Cause, that are not yet Initiated into the Mysteries of the Society, though a
little common Prudence had preserved Mr. le Grand from committing such an
Error. But it is not just to expect from Men that which they have not.

I will not carry this Censure further at present, for I have not near me the
Books and other Documents that are necessary for a fuller Answer: And those in
England, to whom I sent for the Resolution of some things, have so much work
given them at present, by those, whose Favor Mr. le Grand is Courting, that it
is not to be wondered at, if they have not leisure to send me the Materials
which I wanted. They are in a Storm, which all the World knows; though they are
not yet reduced to that which the Reverend Father Petre has threatened them
with, in that Modest and Savoury Expression of his, That the Church of England
shall be made to eat its own Dung. This is indeed a true Essay of the Charity
of the Order, and it is that which we have Reason to expect from it. But I will
now put an end to this long Letter. I am Sir,

At the Hague, the 10th of September, 1688. Your most Humble Servant, G. BURNET.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Have seen Mr. le Grand's Annotations upon my Letter to Mr. Thevenot. I
perceive clearly by it, that this hot Summer, and his extraordinary
Application, have so dried his Brain, and given him such an over flowing of the
Gall, that all the answer I can bestow on him, is to wish his Friends to look
to him, and keep him from running about the Streets, for he is in a fair way to
that. They will do well to Bleed him over and over again, to give him some
inward Refrigeratives, and now and then a few Grains of Laudanum, and to take a
special care of him at New and Full Moons. Pen, Ink, and Paper must be kept
from him as poison, for these things set his Head so a going, that his Fits
redouble upon him at every time that he gets them in his hands. But above all
things, care must be taken not to name me, nor the Bibliotheque Universels to
him, for that will certainly bring on him a most violent Paroxisme; and he
being Young, and so mightily in love with himself, good Air and good Keeping,
may at last bring him out of this Raving Distemper. So to be sure I will have
no more to do with a Man that writes like a Lunatic: Yet as soon as some
Materials which I expect shortly from England are brought me, I will answer
every thing that he has said, that looks like Sense: And will not do as not a
few of that Nation have done of late, who write on without ever justifying
themselves, or confessing the Errors into which they have fallen; for I will
justify my self to a tittle, or acknowledge my Mistakes, as soon as I find
that I have made any.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Chiswell.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts.

Dr. Cary's Chronological Account of Ancient Times. folio.

B. Wilkin's Real Character, or an Essay about a Philosophical Language, folio.

Lord Bacon's Advancement of Learning. folio.

Hooker's Ecclesiastical Polity. folio.

Rushworth's Historical Collections, in 3. vol. folio.

Bishop Sanderson's Sermons, with his Life. folio.

Sir Walter Raleigh's History of the World* with his Life. folio.

Bishop Nicholson on the Church Catechi in. 4to.

Bibliotheca Norfolciana, sive Catalogus Libr. Manuscript. and impress. in omni
Art and Lingua, quo^ Hen. D^^ Norfolcia Regiae Societati Londinensi pro
scientia naturali promovenda donavit. 4to.

The Spaniards Conspiracy against the State of Venice. 4to.

Dr. Salmon upon the London Dispensatory. 4to.

A Discourse of the Nature, Ends, and difference of the two Covenants, 1672. by
William Allen. 8vo.

Certain genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon in Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural,
etc. with a large account of all his Works, by Dr. The. Tennison. 8vo.

Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderation of the Church of England. 8vo.

Dr. Henry Bagshaw's Discourses on select Texes. 8vo.

Mr. Seller's Remarks relating to the State of the Church in the three first
Centuries.

The Country-mans Physician; for the use of such as live far from Cities or
Market Towns.

Markam's Perfect Horseman, in fifty years practice. 8vo.

Dr. Sherlock's Practical Discourse of Religious Assemblies. 8vo.

-- Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation. 8vo.

Sir Rob. Filmer's Patriarcha, or Natural Power of Kings. 8vo.

Hodder 's Arithmetic, 12mo.

New-Englands Psalms. 12mo.

An Apology for a Treatise of Human Reason, written by M. Clifford, Esquire 12mo.

The Queen-like Closet, in two parts*

Valentine's Devotions. 240.

An Historical Relation of the Island of CEYLON in the East Indies: Together
with an Account of the detaining in Captivity the Author, and diverse other
Englishmen now living there, and of the Author's miraculous escape:
Illustrated with fifteen Copper Figures, and an exact Map of the Island. By
Captain Robert Knox, a Captive there near 20. years. folio.

Mr. Camfield's two Discourses of Episcopal Confirmation. 8vo.

Dr. Salmon's Doron Medicum, or supplement to his new London Dispensatory, 8vo.

Sir James Turner's Pallas Armata, or Military Essays of the Ancient, Grecian,
Roman, and Modern Art of War. folio.

Mr. Tanner's Primordia: or the Rise and Growth of the Church of God described,
D. Spenceri Dissertationes de Ratione Rituum Iudaicorum, etc. folio.

The Fifteen Notes of the Church, as laid down by Cardinal Bellarmin, examined
and confuted. 4to. With a Table to the whole.

Preparation for Death, being a Letter sent to a young Gentlewoman in France,
in a dangerous Distemper, of which she died. By William Wake, M. A. 12mo.

The Difference between the Church of England and the Church of Rome, in
opposition to a late Book, Entitled, An Agreement between the Church of
England and Church of Rome. 4to.

A Private Prayer to be used in difficult Times.

An Exposition of the Ten Commandments: By Simon Patrick, D. D. Dean of
Peterborough. 8vo.

A True Account of a Conference held about Religion at London, Sep. 29. 1687.
between A. Pulton, Jesuit, and Tho. Tenison, D. D. as also of that which led to
it, and followed after it. 4to.

The Vindication of A. Cressener, Schoolmaster in Long-Acre, from the
Aspersions of A. Pulton, Jesuit, Schoolmaster in the Savoy, together with some
Account of his Discourse with Mr. Meredith.

A Discourse showing that Protestants are on the safer side, notwithstanding
the uncharitable Judgment of their Adversaries; and that Their Religion is the
surest way to Heaven. 4to.

Six Conferences concerning the Eucharist, wherein is showed, That the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation overthrows the Proofs of Christian Religion.

A Discourse concerning the pretended Sacrament of Extreme Unction; with an
Account of the Occasions and Beginnings of it in the Western Church. In Three
Parts. With a Letter to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom.

A Second Letter from the Author of the Discourse concerning Extreme Unction,
to the Vindicator of the Bishop of Condom.

The Pamphlet entitled, Speculum Ecclesiasticum, or an Ecclesiastical
Prospective-Glass, considered in its false* Reasonings and Quotations. There
are added, by way of Preface, two further Answers, the first* to the Defender
of the Speculum; the second, to the half-Sheet against the Six Conferences.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CODNOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.] By William Wake, M. A. 4to.

A Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England; against
the Exceptions of Mons. de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his Vindicator. By
William Wake, M. A. 4to.

A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England*
against the new Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of Condom, and his
Vindicator. The FIRST PART: in which the Account that has been given of the
Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, is fully vindicated; the Distinction of Old and
New Popery Historically asserted, and the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, in
point of Image Worship, more particularly considered. By* W. Wake, M. A. 4to.

The Incurable Skepticism of the Church of Rome: by the Author of the [Six
Conferences concerning the Eucharist.] 4to.

Mr. Pulton considered in his Sincerity, Reasonings, Authorities: Or a just
Answer to what he has hitherto published in his True Account; his True and
Full Account of a Conference, etc. His Remarks; and in them his pretended
Confutation of what he calls Dr. T's Rule of Faith. By Th. Tenison, D. D.

A Full View of the Doctrines and Practices of the Ancient Church relating to
the Fucharist, wholly different from those of the Present Roman Church, and
inconsistent with the Belief of Transubstantiation: being a sufficient
Confutation of Consensus Veterum, Nubes Testium, and other late Collections of
the Fathers pretending to the contrary. 4to.

The Lay Christian's Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures.

An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately Printed, concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. With a Vindication of the said Answer: In two Parts.

An Answer to a late Pamphlet, Entitled, [The Judgment and Doctrine of the
Clergy of the Church of England concerning one special Branch of the King's
Prerogative, viz. In dispensing with the Penal Laws. 4to.]

A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist in two great Points of the Real Presence,
and the Adoration of the Host; in Answer to Two Discourses lately Printed at
Oxford on this Subject: with a large Historical Preface relating to the same
Argument. by W. Wake.

Two Discourses; Of Purgatory, and Prayers for the Dead. By W. Wake. M. A.

An Answer to the Popish Address presented to the Ministers of the Church of
England. 4to.

An Abridgment of the Prerogatives of St. Ann, Mother of the Mother of God,
with the Approbations of the Doctors of Paris, thence done into English, with a
PREFACE concerning the Original of the Story.

The Primitive Fathers no Papists, in Answer to the Vindication of the Nubes
Testium, to which is added a Discourse concerning Invocation of Saints, in
Answer to the Challenge of F. Sabran the Jesuit; wherein is shown, That
Invocation of Saints was so far from being the Practice, that it was expressly
against the Doctrine of the Primitive Fathers. 4to.

An Answer to a Discourse concerning the Coelibacy of the Clergy, lately
Printed at Oxford. 4to.

The Virgin Mary Misrepresented by the Roman Church, in the Traditions of that
Church concerning her Life and Glory, and in the Devotions paid to her as the
Mother of God. Both showed out of the Offices of that Church, the Lessons on
her Festivals, and from their allowed Authors.

Dr. Tenison's Sermon of Discretion in giving Alms. 12mo.

A Discourse concerning the Merit of Good Works.

The Enthusiasm of the Church of Rome, demonstrated in some Observations upon
the Life of Ignatius Loyola, (Founder of the Order of Jesus.)

A Vindication of the Answer to the Popish Address presented to the Ministers
of the Church of England. 4to.

The Texts which the Papists cite out of the Bible for Proof of the Points of
their Religion Examined, and showed to be alleged without Ground. In twenty
five distinct Discourses. viz.

Popery not founded in Scripture. The Introduction.

Texts concerning the Obscurity of Holy Scriptures. -- Of the Insufficiency of
Scripture, and Necessity of Tradition. -- Of the Supremacy of St. Peter, and
the Pope, over the whole Church. In two Parts. -- Of Infallibility. -- Of the
Worship of Angels and Saints departed, In two parts. -- Of the Worship of
Images and Relics. -- Of the Seven Sacraments, and the Efficacy of them: In
two Parts. -- Of the Sacrifice of the Mass: In two Parts. -- Of
Transubstantiation. -- Of Auricular Confession. -- Of Satisfactions: In two
Parts. -- Of Purgatory: In two Parts. -- Of Prayer in an unknown Tongue: In two
Parts. -- Of Coelibacy of Priests, and Vows of Continence: In two Parts. -- Of
the Visibility of the Church. -- Of Merit of Good Works. Two Tables to the
whole will shortly be published.

A Brief Declaration of the Lords Supper: Written by Dr. Nocholas Ridley,
Bishop of London, during his Imprisonment, with some other Determinations and
Disputations concerning the same Argument, by the same Author. To which is
annexed an Extract of several Passages to the same purpose, out of a Book
Entitled Diallaction; written by Dr. John Poynet, Bishop of Winchester, in the
Reigns of Ed. 6. and Q. Mary. 4to.

An Historical Discourse concerning the Necessity of the Minister's Intention
in Administering the Sacraments.

A Discourse concerning Penance, showing how the Doctrine of it in the Church
of Rome makes void true Repentance.

A Continuation of the state of the Controversy between the Church of England,
and the Church of Rome: Being a full account of the Books that have been of
late written on both sides. By William Wake, M. A. 4to.

A Discourse of the Pope's Supremacy, Part I. in answer to a Treatise entitled
[St. Peter's Supremacy faithfully discussed, according to the Holy Scripture,
and Greek and Latin Fathers; and to a Sermon of St. Peter preached before the
Queen Dowager on St. Peter and St Paul's day: by Tho. Godden, D. D.]

IVLIAN the Apostate: Being a short account of his Life, the Sense of the
Primitive Christians about his Succession, and their Behavior toward him:
Together with a Comparison of Popery and Paganism: By Sam. Johnson.

Iulian's Arts to undermine and extirpate Christianity: Together with Answers
to Constantius the Apostate, and Iovian, by Sam. Johnson.

The Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance explained by diverse Judgments and Resolutions
of the Judges; with other Observations thereupon. By William Cawley, Esquire fol.

Books Written by Dr. Gilbert Burnet.
-- His History of the Reformation of the Church of England, in II. Vol. fol.

-- Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England, 40.

-- History of the Rights of Princes in disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices
and Church Lands, 120.

-- Life of William Bedell Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland, together with the
Letters betwixt Him and Wadsworth, about Religion.

-- A Collection of Seventeen Tracts and Sermons, written betwixt the years
1678. and 1685. to which is added Two Tracts, by another Hand, Viz. The History
of the Powder Treason, and an Impartial Consideration of the Five Jesuits
dying Speeches, who were Executed for the Popish Plot, 1679.

Lately Published.
-- Reflections on the Relation of the English Reformation, put out by Ob.
Walker at Oxon.

-- Animadversions on the Reflections upon Dr. Burnet's Travels, 120.

-- Reflections on a Paper, entitled, his Majesty's Reasons for withdrawing
himself from Rochester.

-- Enquiry into the present State of Affairs, and in particular, whether we
owe Allegiance to the King in these Circumstances? And whether we are bound to
Treat with Him, and call Him back or no?

-- His Sermon before the Prince of Orange 23d. December. 1688.

-- His Thanksgiving Sermon before the Commons for the Deliverance of the
Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary Power, by the Prince of Orange's Means.

-- A LETTER to Mr. THEVENOT. Containing a CENSURE of Mr. Le Grand's HISTORY of
King Henry the Eighth's Divorce. To which is added a CENSURE of Mr. de Meaux's
HISTORY of the Variations of the Protestant Churches. Together with some
further Reflections on Mr. Le Grand.

-- A Collection of Eighteen Papers relating to the Affairs of Church and
State, during the Reign of King James the Second: Seventeen whereof written in
Holland, and first Printed singly there; now published here by the Author, to
distinguish them from those falsely attributed to his Name.

Dr. John Lightfoot's Works, in II. Vol. fol. together with his Life.

An Explication of the Catechism of the Church of England, viz. The Creed,
Lords Prayer, Ten Commandments, and the Sacraments, in 4. Volumes Folio. By
Gabr. Towerson. D. D.

Disquisitiones Criticae de variis per diversa Loca and Tempora Bibliorum
editionibus, 4o.

Dr William Cave's Lives of the Ancient Fathers in the IV. first Centuries, in
II. Vol.

-- Primitive Christianity; or the Religion of the Ancient Christians in the
first Ages of the Gospel.

-- A Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church, by Bishops,
Metropolitans, and Patriarchs.

Dr. William Burton's several Discourses of Purity, Charity, Repentance, and
other Practical Subjects, in 2 Vol. Oct.

Reflections upon the Books of the Holy Scripture, to establish the Truth of the
Christian Religion, in Two Parts, Oct. By. Mr. Alix.

Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Historia Literaria a Christo nato usque ad
Saeculum XIV. Facili Methodo digesta. Qua de Vita illorum ac* Rebus gestis, de
Secta, Dogmatibus, Elogio, Stylo; de Scriptis genuinis, dubiis, suppositiis,
ineditis, deperditis. Fragmentis; deque variis Operum Editionibus perspicue
agitur -- Accedunt Scriptores Gentiles, Christianae Religionis Oppugnatores;
and (...) Saculi Breviarium. Inseruntur suis locis Veterum aliquot Opuscula and
Fragmenta, tum Graeca, tum Latina hactenus inedita. Praemissa* denique
Prologomena, quibus plurima ad Antiquitatis Ecclesiasticae studium spectantia
(...) Opus Indicibus necessariis instructum. Autore GVILIELMO CAVE, SS. Theol,
Profes. Ca^^ico Windesoriensi. Accedit ab Alia Manu Appendix ab (...) Saculo
XIV. ad Annum usque MDXVII. Fol. 1689.


