A LETTER, Containing some REFLECTIONS On His MAJESTY'S DECLARATION For LIBERTY
of CONSCIENCE.
Dated the Fourth of April, 1687. SIR,
I. I Thank you for the Favor of sending me the late Declaration that His
Majesty has granted for Liberty of Conscience. I confess, I longed for it with
great Impatience, and was surprised to find it so different from the Scotch
Pattern; for I imagined, that it was to be set to the second part of the same
tune: nor can I see why the Penners of this have sunk so much in their style;
for I suppose the same men penned both. I expected to have seen the Imperial
Language of Absolute Power, to which all the Subjects are to obey without
reserve; and of the cassing, annulling, the stopping, and disabling of Laws set
forth in the Preamble and body of this Declaration; whereas those dreadful
words are not to be found here: for instead of repealing the Laws, His Majesty
pretends by this only to suspend them; and tho in effect this amounts to a
repeal, yet it must be confessed that the words are softer. Now since the
Absolute Power, to which His Majesty pretends in Scotland, is not founded on
such poor things as Law; for that would look as if it were the gift of the
people; but on the Divine Authority, which is supposed to be delegated to His
Majesty, this may be as well claimed in England as it was in Scotland: and the
pretention to Absolute Power is so great a thing, that since His Majesty
thought fit once to claim it, he is little beholding to those that make him
fall so much in his Language; especially since both these Declarations have
appeared in our Gazettes; so that as we see what is done in Scotland, we know
from hence what is in some peoples hearts, and what we may expect in England.

II. His Majesty tells his people, that the perfect Enjoyment of their Property
has never been in any Case invaded by him since his coming to the Crown. This
is indeed matter of great Encouragement to all good Subjects; for it lets them
see, that such Invasions, as have been made on Property, have been done without
His Majesty's knowledge: so that no doubt the continuing to levy the Customs
and the Additional Excise (which had been granted only during the late Kings
Life,) before the Parliament could meet to renew the Grant, was done without
His Majesty's knowledge; the many Violences committed not only by Soldiers, but
Officers, in all the Parts of England, which are severe Invasions on Property,
have been all without His Majesty's knowledge; and since the first Branch of
Property is the Right that a man has to his Life, the strange Essay of
Mohammedan Government, that was showed at Taunton; and the no less strange
proceedings of the present Lord Chancellor, in his Circuit after the Rebellion
(which are very justly called His Campaign, for it was an open Act of Hostility
to all Law) and for which and other Services of the like nature, it is believed
he has had the reward of the Great Seal, and the Executions of those who have
left their Colors, which being founded on no Law, are no othet than so many
Murders; all these, I say, are as we are sure, Invasions on Property; but since
the King tells us, that no such Invasions have been made since he came to the
Crown, we must conclude that all these things have fallen out without his
Privity. And if a standing Army, in time of Peace, has been ever looked on by
this Na^ion as an Attempt upon the whole Property of the Nation in gross, one
must conclude, that even this is done without His Majesty's knowledge.

III. His Majesty expresses his Charity for us in a kind wish, that we were all
Members of the Catholic Church; in return to which we offer up daily our most
earnest prayers for him, that he may become a Member of the truly Catholic
Church: for Wishes and Prayers do no hurt on no side: but His Majesty adds,
that it has ever been his Opinion, that Conscience ought not to be constrained,
nor people forced in matters of mere Religion. We are very happy if this
continues to be always his sense: but we are sure in this he is no obedient
Member of that which he means by the Catholic Church: for it has over and over
again decreed the Extirpation of Heretics. It encourages Princes to it, by the
Offer of the Pardon of their Sins; it threatens them to it, by denouncing to
them not only the Judgments of God, but that which is more sensible, the loss
of their Dominions: and it seems they intend to make us know that part of their
Doctrine even before we come to feel it, since tho some of that Communion would
take away the Horror which the Fourth Council of the Lateran gives us, in which
these things were decreed, by denying it to be a General Council, and rejecting
the Authority of those Canons, yet the most learned of all the Apostates that
has fallen to them from our Church, has so lately given up this Plea, and has
so formally acknowledged the Authority of that Council, and of its Canons, that
it seems they think they are bound to this piece of fair dealing, of warning us
before hand of our Danger. It is true Bellarmin says, The Church does not
always execute her Power of deposing Heretical Princes, tho she always retains
it: one reason that he assigns, is, because she is not at all times able to put
it in execution: so the same reason may perhaps make it appear unadviseable to
extirpate Heretics, because that at present it cannot be done; but the Right
remains entire; and is put in execution in such an unrelenting manner in all
places where that Religion prevails, that it has a very ill Grace, to see any
Member of that Church speak in this strain: and when neither the Policy of
France, nor the Greatness of their Monarch, nor yet the Interests of the
Emperor joined to the Gentleness of his own temper, could withstand these
Bloody Councils, that are indeed parts of that Religion, we can see no reason
to induce us to believe, that a Toleration of Religion is proposed with any
other design but either to divide us, or to lay us asleep, till it is time to
give the Alarm for destroying us.

IV. If all the Endeavors, that have been used in the last four Reigns, for
bringing the Subjects of this Kingdom to a Unity in Religion have been
ineffectual, as His Maj. says; we know to whom we owe both the first beginnings
and the progress of the Divisions among our selves; the Gentleness of Q.
Elisabeth's Government, and the numbers of those that adhered to the Church of
Rome, made it scarce possible to put an end to that Party during her Reign,
which has been ever since restless, and has had credit enough at Court during
the three last Reigns, not only to support it self, but to distract us, and to
divert us from apprehending the danger of being swallowed up by them, by
fomenting our own Differences, and by setting on either a Toleration, or a
Persecution, as it has happened to serve their Interests. It is not so very long
since, that nothing was to be heard at Court but the supporting the Church of
England, and the Extirpating all the Nonconformists: and it were easy to name
the persons, if it were decent, that had this ever in their Mouths; but now all
is turned round again, the Church of England is in Disgrace; and now the
Encouragment of Trade, the Quiet of the Nation, and the Freedom of Conscience
are again in Vogue, that were such odious things but a few years ago, that the
very mentioning them was enough to load any man with Suspicions as backward in
the King's Service, while such Methods are used, and the Government is as in an
Ague, divided between hot and cold fits, no wonder if Laws so unsteadily
executed have failed of their effect.

V. There is a good reserve here left for Severity when the proper Opportunity
to set it on presents it self: for his Majesty Declares himself only against
the forcing of men in matters of mere Religion: so that whenever Religion and
Policy come to be so interwoven, that mere Religion is not the case, and that
Public Safety may be pretended, then this Declaration is to be no more
claimed: so that the fastening any thing upon the Protestant Religion, that is
inconsistent with the Public Peace, will be pretended to show that they are
not persecuted for mere Religion. In France, when it was resolved to extirpate
the Protestants, all the Discourses that were written on that Subject were full
of the Wars occasioned by those of the Religion in the last Age, tho as these
were the happy Occasions of bringing the House of Bourbon to the Crown, they
had been ended above 80. years ago, and there had not been so much as the least
Tumult raised by them these 50. years past: so that the French, who have
smarted under this Severity, could not be charged with the least Infraction of
the Law: yet Stories of a hundred years old were raised up to inspire into the
King those Apprehensions of them, which have produced the terrible effects that
are visible to all the World. There is another Expression in this Declaration,
which lets us likewise see with what Caution the Offers of Favor are now
worded, that so there may be an Occasion given when the Time and Conjuncture
shall be favorable to break through them all: it is in these words, So that they
take especial Care that nothing be preached or taught amongst them, which may
any ways tend to alienate the Hearts of our People from us or our Government.
This in it self is very reasonable, and could admit of no Exception, if we had
not to do with a set of men, who to our great Misfortune have so much Credit
with His Majesty, and who will be no sooner lodged in the Power to which they
pretend, than they will make every thing that is preached against Popery pass
for that which may in some manner alienate the Subjects from the King.

VI. His Majesty makes no doubt of the Concurrence of his Two Houses of
Parliament, when he shall think it convenient for them to meet. The Hearts of
Kings are unsearchable; so that it is a little too presumptuous to look into
His Majesty's Secret Thoughts: but according to the Judgments that we would
make of other men's Thoughts by their Actions, one would be tempted to think,
that His Majesty made some doubt of it, since his Affairs both at home and
abroad could not go the worse, if it appeared that there were a perfect
understanding between Him and his Parliament, and that his People were
supporting him with fresh Supplies; and this House of Commons is so much at his
Devotion, that all the world saw how ready they were to grant every thing that
he could desire of them, till he began to lay off the Mask with relation to the
Test, and since that time the frequent Prorogations, the Closetting, and the
Pains that has been taken to gain Members, by Promises made to some, and the
Disgraces of others, would make one a little Inclined to think, that some doubt
was made of their Concurrence. But we must confess, that the depth of His
Majesty's Judgment is such, that we cannot fathom it, and therefore we cannot
guess what his Doubts or his Assurances are. It is true, the words that come
after unriddle the Mystery a little, which are, when His Majesty shall think it
convenient for them to meet: for the meaning of this seems plain, that his Maj.
is resolved, that they shall never meet, till he receives such Assurances, in a
new round of Closetting, that he shall be put out of doubt concerning it.

VII. I will not enter into the dispute concerning Liberty of Conscience, and
the Reasons that may be offered for it to a Session of Parliament; for there is
scarce any one point, that either with relation to Religion, or Politics,
affords a greater variety of matter for Reflection: and I make no doubt to say,
that there is abundance of Reason to oblige a Parliament to review all the
Penal Laws, either with relation to Papists, or to Dissenters: but I will take
the boldness to add one thing, that the Kings's suspending of Laws strikes at
the root of this whole Government, and subverts it quite: for if there is any
thing certain with relation to the English Government, it is this, that the
Executive Power of the Law is entirely in the King; and the Law to fortisy him
in the Management of it has clothed him with a vast Prerogative, and made it
unlawful upon any pretense whatsoever to resist him: whereas on the other hand,
the Legislative Power is not so entirely in the King, but that the Lords and
Commons have such a share in it, that no Law can be either made, repealed, or
which is all one suspended, but by their consent: so that the placing this
Legislative Power singly in the King, is a subversion of this whole Government;
since the Essence of all Governments consists in the Subjects of the
Legislative Authority; Acts of Violence or Injustice, committed in the
Executive part, are such things that all Princes being subject to them, the
peace of mankind were very ill secured if it were not unlawful to resist upon
any pretense taken from any ill Administrations, in which as the Law may be
doubtful, so the Facts may be uncertain, and at worst the public Peace must
always be more valued than any private Oppressions or Injuries whatsoever. But
the total Subversion of a Government, being so contrary to the Trust that is
given to the Prince who ought to execute it, will put men upon uneasy and
dangerous Inquiries: which will turn little to the Advantage of those who are
driving matters to such a doubtful and desperate issue.

VIII. If there is any thing in which the Exercise of the Legislative Power
seems Indispensable, it is in those Oaths of Allegiance and Tests, that are
thought necessary to Qualify men either to be admitted to enjoy the Protection
of the Law, or to bear a share in the Government; for in these the Security of
the Government is chiefly concerned; and therefore the total extinction of
these, as it is not only a Suspension of them, but a plain repealing of them,
so it is a Subverting of the whole Foundation of our Government: For the
Regulation that King and Parliament had set both for the Subjects having the
Protection of the State by the Oath of Allegiance, and for a share in places of
trust by the Tests, is now plucked up by the roots, when it is declared, that
these shall not at any time hereafter be required to be taken, or subscribed by
any persons whatsoever: for it is plain, that this is no Suspension of the Law,
but a formal Repeal of it, in as plain Words as can be conceived.

IX. His Majesty says, that the Benefit of the Service of all his Subjects is
by the Law of Nature Inseparably annexed to and inherent in his Sacred Person.
It is somewhat strange, that when so many Laws, that we all know are suspended,
the Law of Nature, which is so hard to be found out, should be cited; but the
Penners of this Declaration had b^st let that Law lie forgotten among the rest;
for there is a scurvy Paragraph in it, concerning self Preservation, that is
capable of very unacceptable Glosses. It is hard to tell what Section of the
Law of Nature has marked out either such a Form of Government, or such a Family
for it. And if His Majesty renounces his Pretensions to our Allegiance as
founded on the Laws of England; and betakes himself to this Law of Nature, he
will perhaps find the Counsel was a little too rash; but to make the most of
this that can be, the Law of Nations or Nature does indeed allow the Governors
of all Societies a Power to serve themselves of every Member of it in the cases
of extreme Danger; but no Law of Nature that has been yet heard of will
conclude, that if by special Laws, a sort of men have been disabled from all
Employments, that a Prince who at his Coronation Swore to maintain those Laws,
may at his pleasure extinguish all these Disabilities.

X. At the end of the Declaration, as in a Postscript, His Majesty assures his
Subjects, that he will maintain them in their Properties, as well in Church and
Abbey-Lands, as other Lands: but the Chief of all their Properties being the
share that they have by their Representatives in the Legislative Power; this
Declaration, which breaks through that, is no great Evidence that the rest will be
maintained: and to speak plainly, when a Coronation Oath is so little
remembered, other Promises must have a proportioned degree of Credit given to
them: as for the Abbey Lands, the keeping them from the Church is according to
the Principles of that Religion Sacrilege; and that is a Mortal Sin, and there
can no Absolution be given to any who continue in it: and so this Promise being
an Obligation to maintain men in a Mortal Sin, is null and void of it self:
Church Lands are also according to the Doctrine of their Canonists, so
immediately Gods Right, that the Pope himself is only the Administrator and
Dispencer, but is not the Master of them; he can indeed make a truck for God,
or let them so low, that God shall be an easy Landlord: but he cannot alter
Gods Property, nor translate the Right that is in him to Sacrilegious Laymen
and Heretics.

XI. One of the Effects of this Declaration, will be the setting on foot a new
run of Addresses over the Nation: for there is nothing how Impudent and base
soever, of which the abject flattery of a Slavish Spirit is not capable. It
must be confessed, to the reproach of the Age, that all those strains of flattery
among the Romans, that Tacitus sets forth with so much just Scorn, are modest
things, compared to what this Nation has produced within these seven years:
only if our Flattery has come short of the Refinedness of the Romans, it has
exceeded theirs as much in its loathed Fulsomness. The late King set out a
Declaration, in which he gave the most solemn Assurances possible of his
adhering to the Church of England, and to the Religion established by Law, and
of his Resolution to have Frequent Parliaments; upon which the whole Nation
fell as it were into Raptures of Joy and Flattery: but tho he lived four Years
after that, he called no Parliament, notwithstanding the Law for Triennial
Parliaments: and the manner of his Death, and the Papers printed after his
Death in his Name, have sufficiently showed, that he was equally sincere in
both those Assurances that he gave, as well in that Relating to Religion, as in
that other Relating to Frequent Parliaments; yet upon his Death a new set of
Addresses appeared, in which, all that Flattery could Invent was brought forth,
in the Commendations of a Prince, to whose Memory the greatest kindness can be
done, is to forget him: and because his present Majesty upon his coming to the
Throne gave some very general Promise of Maintaining the Church of England,
this was magnified in so Extravagant a strain, as if it had been a Security
greater than any that the Law could give: tho by the regard that the King has
both to it and to the Laws, it appears that he is resolved to maintain both
equally: since then the Nation has already made it self sufficiently ridiculous
both to the present and to all succeeding Ages; it is time that at last men
should grow weary, and become ashamed of their Folly.

XII. The Nonconformists are now invited to set an Example to the rest: and
they who have valued themselves hitherto upon their Opposition to Popery, and
that have quarrelled with the Church of England, for some small Approaches to
it, in a few Ceremonies, are now solicited to rejoice, because the Laws that
secure us against it, are all plucked up: since they enjoy at present and
during pleasure leave to meet together. It is natural for all men to love to be
set at ease, especially in the matters of their Consciences; but it is visible,
that those who allow them this favor, do it with no other design, but that
under a pretense of a General Toleration, they may Introduce a Religion which
must persecute all equally: it is likewise apparent how much they are hated,
and how much they have been persecuted by the Instigation of those who now
Court them, and who have now no game that is more promising, than the engaging
them and the Church of England into new Quarrels: and as for the Promises now
made to them, it cannot be supposed that they will be more lasting than those
that were made some time ago to the Church of England, who had both a better
Title in Law and greater Merit upon the Crown to assure them that they should
be well used than these can pretend to. The Nation has scarce forgiven some of
the Church of England the Persecution into which they have suffered themselves
to be cosened: tho now that they see Popery barefaced, the Stand that they have
made, and the vigorous Opposition that they have given to it, is that which
makes all men willing to forget what is past, and raises again the Glory of a
Church that was not a little stained by the Indiscretion and Weakness of those,
that were too apt to believe and hope, and so suffered themselves to be made a
Property to those who would now make them a Sacrifice. The Sufferings of the
Nonconformists, and the Fury that the Popish Party expressed against them, had
recommended them so much to the Compassions of the Nation, and had given them
so just a pretension to favor in a better time, that it will look like a curse
of God upon them, if a few men, whom the Court has gained to betray them, can
have such an ill Influence upon them as to make them throw away all that Merit,
and those Compassions which their Sufferings have procured them; and to go and
court those who are only seemingly kind to them, that they may destroy both
them and us. They must remember that as the Church of England is the only
Establishment that our Religion has by Law; so it is the main body of the
Nation, and all the Sects are but small and straggling parties: and if the Legal
Settlement of the Church is dissolved, and that body is once broken, these
lesser bodies will be all at Mercy: and it is an easy thing to define what the
Mercies of the Church of Rome are.

XIII. But tho it must be confessed, that the Nonconformists are still under
some Temptations, to receive every thing that gives them present ease, with a
little too much kindness; since they lie exposed to many severe Laws, of which
they have of late felt the weight very heavily, and as they are men, and some
of them as ill Natured men as other people, so it is no wonder if upon the
first surprises of the Declaration, they are a little delighted, to see the
Church of England, after all its Services and Submissions to the Court, so much
mortified by it; so that taking all together it will not be strange if they
commit some Follies upon this occasion. Yet on the other hand, it passes all
imagination, to see some of the Church of England, especially those whose
Natures we know are so particularly sharpened in the point of Persecution,
chiefly when it is levelled against the Dissenters, rejoice at this
Declaration, and make Addresses upon it. It is hard to think that they have
attained to so high a pitch of Christian Charity, as to thank those who do now
despitefully use them, and that as an earnest that within a little while they
will persecute them. This will be an Original, and a Master piece in Flattery,
which must needs draw the last degrees of Contempt on such as are capable of so
abject and sordid a Compliance, and that not only from all the true Members of
the Church of England, but likewise from those of the Church of Rome it self;
for every man is apt to esteem an Enemy that is brave even in his Misfortunes,
as much as he despises those whose minds sink with their Condition. For what is
it that these men would thank the King? Is it because he breaks those Laws that
are made in their Favor, and for their Protection: and is now striking at the
Root of all the Legal Settlement that they have for their Religion? Or is it
because that at the same time that the King professes a Religion that condemns
his Supremacy, yet he is not contented with the Exercise of it as it is
warranted by Law, but carries it so far as to erect a Court contrary to the
express words of a Law that was so lately made: That Court takes care to
maintain a due proportion between their Constitution and all their proceedings,
that so all may be of a piece, and all equally contrary to Law. They have
suspended one Bishop, only because he would not do that which was not in his
Power to do: for since there is no Extrajudiciary Authority in England, a
Bishop can no more proceed to a Sentence of Suspension against a Clergyman
without a Trial, and the hearing of Parties, than a Judge can give a Sentence
in his Chamber without an Indictment, a Trial, or a Jury: and because one of
the Greatest Bodies of England would not break their Oaths, and obey a Mandate
that plainly contradicted them, we see to what a pitch this is like to be
carried. I will not Anticipate upon this illegal Court, to tell what Judgments
are coming; but without carrying our Iealousies too far, one may safely
conclude, that they will never depart so far from their first Institution, as
to have any regard, either to our Religion, or our Laws, or Liberties, in any
thing they do. If all this were acted by avowed Papists, as we are sure it is
projected by such, there were nothing Extraordinary in it: but that which
carries our Indignation a little too far to be easily governed, is to see some
Pretended Protestants, and a few Bishops, among those that are the fatal
Instruments of pulling down the Church of England, and that those Mercenaries
Sacrifice their Religion and their Church to their Ambition and Interests; this
has such peculiar Characters of Misfortune upon it, that it seems it is not
enough if we perish without pity, since we fall by that hand that we have so
much supported and fortifyed, but we must become the Scorn of all the world,
since we have produced such an unnatural Brood, that even while they are
pretending to be the Sons of the Church of England, are cutting their Mother's
Throat: and not content with Judas's Crime, of saying, Hail Master, and kissing
him, while they are betraying him into the hands of others; these carry their
Wickedness further, and say, Hail Mother, and then they themselves Murder her.
If after all this we were called on to bear this as Christians; and to suffer
it as Subjects; if we were required in Patience to possess our own Souls, and
to be in Charity with our Enemies; and which is more, to forgive our False
Brethren, who add Treachery to their Hatred; the Exhortation were seasonable,
and indeed a little necessary; for humane Nature cannot easily take down things
of such a hard digestion: but to tell us that we must make Addresses, and offer
Thanks for all this, is to Insult a little too much upon us in our Sufferings:
and he that can believe that a dry and cautiously worded promise of maintaining
the Church of England, will be Religiously observed after all that we have
seen, and is upon that carried so far out of his Wits as to Address and give
Thanks, and will believe still, such a man has nothing to excuse him from
believing Transubstantiation it self; for it is plain that he can bring himself
to believe even when the thing is contrary to the clearest Evidence that his
senses can give him.

Si populus hic vult decipi decipiatur. POSTSCRIPT.
THese reflections were writ soon after the Declaration came to my hands, but
the Matter of them was so tender, and the Conveyance of them to the Press was
so uneasy, that they appear now too late to have one effect that was Designed
by them, which was, the diverting men from making Addresses upon it; yet if
what is here proposed makes men become so far wise as to be ashamed of what
they have done, and is a means to keep them from carrying their Courtship
further than good words, this Paper will not come too late.



FINIS.

