AN ANSWER TO THE Animadversions ON THE HISTORY OF THE Rights of Princes, etc.

By GILBERT BURNET, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXII.

AN ANSWER TO THE ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE HISTORY OF THE Rights of Princes, etc.
WHen I first met with the Animadversions on my Book of the Regale, I was not a
little surprised to find so many things laid to my charge, of which I never so
much as suspected my self guilty: and thought it very strange if I had so
unhappily expressed my self in that Book, that I had given any just occasion to
such severe accusations. I knew well my intentions were innocent and sincere,
and I thought my style was not so dark or perplexed as to lead a Reader into
such mistakes concerning my meaning. But what darkness soever might be in my
expressions, I was very well assured I had none of those ill intentions, with
which these sheets charged me. What faults soever I may be guilty of, I am sure
want of Integrity or Ingenuity in my Writings is none of them, and for false
Inferences, I may through weakness of Judgment perhaps draw them: But I am
sure I neither affirm nor suggest any thing falsely; and do think a lie in a
Book is so much a greater sin than in discourse, as it may last longer, and
deceive more. And upon this point, as I venture my Soul in relation to another
World, so I cheerfully venture my reputation, which is the valuablest thing I
have in this, if it can be made appear that I have showed either in that
Criminal-book, or in any other I ever writ, the least disingenuity, want of
integrity, or falsehood.

Finding my self so severely accused from the Press, in a way so public, as
that of two sheets sold about the streets, and with care conveyed to such
persons, whose ill opinion might have a particular ill effect on me, I could
not be so over-charitable as not to think that the Writer or Publisher of this,
or both, were not acted by so charitable and candid a Spirit as became men of
their profession. I found these sheets first in a Stationers shop, and some
hours after, that I might not want the comfort of them, they were left at my
house by the Penny Post: I wondered much to see a man that professes a zeal for
the Christian Religion, act so manifestly against some of the plainest precepts
of it. For besides the railing and ill language in it, and the uncharitable
Inferences and Judgments that are made to my prejudice, the manner of doing it
is so directly contrary to our Saviors rule of speaking to our brother first
in private, and then in the presence of a few, before we proceed publicly
against him; that in Charity to the Animadverter or the Publisher, I am bound
to think that he made no reflection on that precept while he wrote or published
these sheets. I speak of the Writer and Publisher as of two different persons,
because he who is generally supposed to be the Author, did very seriously
protest to one of the Right Reverend Fathers of the Church, that whosoever was
the Author of those sheets (which he did not directly acknowledge was himself)
he did not intend to publish them till I had first seen them, but that he had
put them in the hands of another to have them communicated to me, who without
his knowledge published them; and he expressed over and over again some trouble
by reason of their being Printed in such a manner. This I take as it was told,
without making any reflections on it. It cannot be denied, but his friend
showed an officious keenness in this matter, and it is hard to tell whether in
publishing them without his leave, he showed himself less his friend than mine,
and it was a strange piece of forwardness to Print such Animadversions without
the Authors consent, especially he being here in Town.

I had indeed upon another great occasion, showed how ready I was to receive
corrections of such mistakes as I had made, and how willing I was not only to
submit to so kind a censure, but publicly to own to the world both my own
Errors, and the obligations I lay under, to that friendly and learned person
who discovered to me some faults in the first Volume of my History of the
Reformation of this Church. I confess the style of these Animadversions had
nothing of the gentleness and good breeding which was in the other
Animadversions, and as much as the one exceeded the other in the matter, being
really well founded, so much did it also in all respects show the worthiness,
the exactness, and the candor of the Writer, which, I confess, do not appear
so very evidently in this: And I must say, if it was intended I should have
seen it first, and so have been gained by it to have retracted what was amiss,
the style was not well considered: For he that reproves and corrects as a
Brother, with design to gain ground on him to whom he offers such admonitions,
ought to gild the pill, and do somewhat to temper the aversion that is too
natural to all men for such discoveries.

As soon as I went home, and had got among my Books, I turned to the places for
which I was accused, and quickly found there was no cause given for all those
Tragical complaints; and that notwithstanding the discipline that was so
liberally bestowed on me, there were only two places in which there was the
least color of advantage against me. The one was, that I cited a Capitular of
Charles the Great's that was not full to the point, and forgot to refer to
another that was much fuller. The other was, that I had taken Zonaras's words
too large, and that what he had said was neglected by the greater number of the
Bishops, I cited as if all the Bishops had neglected it. These being the only
two passages for which I could censure my self, I did take heart a little, and
presently writ a particular Answer to the Animadversions, in which there was
mixed such a sharpness of style, that how much soever I had been provoked to
it, yet I could not think it any way becoming my profession to publish it with
so much acrimony, which I thought might be more easily forgiven in that Paper,
that was intended to be seen only by some few, and in particular by him that
was supposed to be the Author of them, for I was not unwilling that he might
see what I could in Reason and Justice say in my own defense, and in answer to
him, though upon other reasons I did not think it convenient to publish it to
the world in that style.

In the beginning of his Paper I am told that there are so many things that
seem amiss in my Book, that it would be extremely tedious to set them all down,
and that therefore some general hints, and a few instances are only picked out.
This, I confess, I look on as an artifice too common to work much on any
person, and therefore I do believe the Animadverter has done his worst: yet
lest I should fall asleep upon this confidence, I am told in the end that if I
do not speedily correct in a second Impression what is amiss in the first, I
may look for some rougher hand; but what hand can be rougher that keeps the
Kings Peace, and does not use a Cudgel or a Brick-bat, I do not imagine: For
how I can be used more sharply in words, than when I am taxed with want of
Integrity and Ingenuity, of falsehood and sedition, and being an Enemy to the
Government both in Church and State, I cannot readily apprehend. But, I thank
God, I have learnt to bear ill language and unjust dealing without making the
ordinary returns. I will not pretend with the Philosopher to say, If an Ass
kick, shall I kick again; but, I hope, I may be allowed to learn of our
Savior, who when he was reviled, reviled not again: and since he has commanded
his Disciples to pray for them that despitefully use them: I shall make no
other return to all those reproaches, but to pray God to inspire both the
Animadverter and the Publisher with a better temper, and to make them consider
well when they bring their gift to the Holy Altar, whether before they offer or
consecrate it, they ought not to do somewhat previous to it, for the
satisfaction of one, whom, without any cause that I know of, they have treated
not as a Brother, but as an Enemy.

I once intended to publish no answer at all, but to rest satisfied with the
Vindication which I offered to a few of my Friends, and to the sight of such as
desired it, having laid my answer in a Stationers shop, where any that were
curious might find it. I was firmly resolved against saying any thing in Print
at all, for I thought in a time of common danger we had something else to be
busied about than the engaging in personal matters, by which the Enemies of the
Church might have the diversion of seeing us employ the Press one against
another, and I had some time ago freely, and of my self promised to some of my
superiors, that if any thing in my Book should draw forth an Answer from any
of the friends of the Church, I should sit silent, and leave what I had written
to stand or fall according to the strength that was in it. This I meant only of
such a fair answer, as might have been expected from a Scholar, or a Divine,
and therefore I did not conceive my self bound by it, when I was so openly, and
violently traduced, yet I was so exact to what I had seemed to promise, that I
would say nothing of this matter, till one of the Right Reverend Fathers of the
Church told me it was necessary for me to free my self of those imputations;
and he undertook that my superiors should not be ill satisfied with it, if I
wrote without reflection or sharpness of style. Upon this Encouragement, I now
publish my answer, and shall observe that caution so carefully, that I will
rather give the Reader cause to complain that I write flat, than sprinkle it
with that Salt, which is thought necessary to give some relish to this dull
sort of writing. And if those that read what I wrote first, thought it too
sharp, I am confident they will rather think this is too much in the other
extreme. I do not affect Satyr, nor am I so much concerned in what censures
may pass upon me, as to endeavor to redeem my self from them, by any methods
which are not suitable to the gravity and gentleness that become my Profession.
I now come to the Animadversions themselves.

The first thing objected to me is, that the greatest part of the instances in
the former and latter parts of my book are borrowed from De Marca, and that I
disguise them as if I had taken them from the Originals: I do not deny that I
read De Marca very carefully, but he must needs know, if he has compared the
Quotations, that I have searched the Originals themselves: And indeed I do not
remember of any one Quotation in that whole book, taken from second hand, which
I do not cite as from that hand. For this he first cites page 27, 28, 29, 30.
compared to De Marca, page 383. In all which there are but ten Quotations, of
which four are not mentiond by De Marca, so that here are but six Quotations
that he can pretend are from him. He again cites Page 205. 210. and refers me
to De Marca 439. and 442. Page 205. there are four Quotations, of which three
are not cited by De Marca, and for the fourth, if he will come to my closet he
may see my mark on the book from which I vouch it. Page 210. there are but two
Quotations, one is from Balusius notes upon De Marca, and the other is from
Goldastus, which though I have not by me, yet I compared it exactly, so this
charge comes to nothing.

His next charge is, that page 16. I had asserted with De Marca, that there was
no set quantity for the Christians oblations; but forgot to observe from him,
that Irenaeus said they exceeded the tenth part of their Revenues. I assert no
such thing from De Marca, but from St. Paul, that he set no rate on them: And
it was not necessary that I should vouch Irenaeus from De Marca, when in that
very page I cite his own words, that the Christians did not give less than the
Jews, who gave Tithes, but converted all they had to Religious uses; and I do
not see how necessary it was for me to say that De Marca had observed this.

The second head of my Accusation is of those passages, wherein I have mistaken
the words or the sense: I shall not criticize about the mistaking of words,
which may be miscited, but not mistaken. He tells me he could at least produce
40 examples of this, but in great tenderness for me, he gives 7 for the
specimen; so the other 33 are to be judged by these.

The first is page 13. He accuses me for saying that mention is made of
Elections by the People in the Second and Sixth Canons of the Council of Nice;
and affirms that mention is made of them in neither of those Canons. I see no
way of conviction, but to consider the Canons themselves. In the Second,
mention is made of some things that were done against the Ecclesiastical Canon
(...), through the urgency of men; and they instance it in two particulars, the
one is that they brought those who were newly converted from Heathenisme to be
baptized; the other is, that as soon as they were baptized they used (...), to
promote or bring, or advance to a Bishopric, or Presbyterate. Now though these
words alone might perhaps be wrested to another sense, yet if we compare them
with the History of that time, they can admit of no other sense; especially if
we compare them with the citations from Nazianzen, page 32. And for the Sixth
Canon that common suffrage of all (...), which was to take place,
notwithstanding the opposition of two or three, can only be understood of the
Election by the People: For that suffrage which the Bishops gave, when they
approved of it, and proceeded to ordain the elected person, was not determined
by the Majority: For the Metropolitan had a Negative. So that the Election
where the Majority prevailed, must be only understood of the decree, that was
made by the people. I did never deny that the Bishops had a power to confirm or
reject this Election, but do expressly assert that they were Judges of the
fitness of the person chosen.

Page 18. He accuses me for citing Cyprians words, Epist. 66. wrong, and to
make this pass the better he puts those words which I had set down as my own,
in Italica, to make it appear that I had set them down as a part of Cyprians
words, and had rendered quae nunc ratio and forma tenetur, instead thereof. If
the scope of Cyprians Epistle is considered, it will appear to how little
purpose these words are cited. St. Cyprian is arguing against Churchmens
meddling in Secular affairs, and he brings the instance of the Priests and
Levites among the Jews, who were well provided for by Tithes, that they might
have no tentation lying on them, to entangle themselves with the cares of this
World. Which reason and form, says he, is observed in the Clergy: The reason
was that they being well provided for, might be freed from these distractions,
and the form was their receiving their share out of the Basket, as a Tithe of
the fruits of the Earth.

In the end of this Paragraph, he accuses me for saying that Origin affirmed
that First Fruits were only to be paid under the Gospel: and says that he
mentions Tithes as due under the Gospel. By this it appears that either these
Animadversions were writ in have, or that the writers thoughts went too quick,
for all I said was that Origin concluded that First Fruits only were to be
brought to the Priest. And it is certain that he does not speak one word of
paying Tithes to the Priest; but all along repeats that of the first fruits: So
that it does not appear that he thought it necessary to bring Tithes to the
Priest. But I never said that he affirmed that first fruits were only due under
the Gospel. There is a great difference between what was to be paid to the
Priest, and what Christians ought to set off for Charitable and Pious uses.

Page 52. He accuses me for saying that Charles the Great subjected the Church
Lands to the common services, such as building of Bridges, etc. And I do not
deny that the Capitular there cited does not clearly prove it; but it proves
this, that those that were obliged to those services were to be required by
such as the Bishop and the Count should name, and who these were appears by an
ancienter Capitular of Pepins the younger An. 793. cap. 20. by which all
persons were required according to ancient custom to repair Churches, to make
Bridges and mend Highways, and none were to pretend immunity: Which is clearly
a carrying on of Honorius and Theodosius his Law cited from Justinians Codex.
Here I confess at the first view he seems to have some advantage, but what it
amounts to, I leave it to him self to judge.

Page 71. He quarrels with me for citing some formularies concerning the
endowments of Churches: and tells me those are the endowments of Monasteries
and not of Parish Churches; But I did not name Parish Churches; this was put in
by him, otherwise he had lost his Objection. I hope he does not deny that
Cathedrals are Churches, though possessed by Monks. I cite but four of these, and
of the first it does not appear what sort of Church it was; of the second it is
clear it was the Cathedral, where St. Martins body lay; and it mentions Rectors
as well as the Abbot. The third and fourth that I cite, are general forms of
endowment, for Churches that had either Abbots or Rectors in them, and were to
be filled up according to the constitution of the Church, to which the
endowment was made.

Page 116. What I had set down concerning Abraham with a perhaps, and an it
seems, he cites, as if I had positively asserted it, with this kind
Animadversion, that I wrest the Scripture to undermine the Clergy's
maintenance. If to commend the Princes that provided so I berally for the
Clergy, and to condemn as a great wickedness the taking away or detaining that
which is so dedicated to holy uses, be an undermining of the maintenance of the
Clergy, I acknowledge my self guilty of it; but if this imports the quite
contrary, then he was too inconsiderate in his censure. Nor will it serve his
turn to say that some Eastern Kings did take Tithes; that being begun when the
Kings and Priests were one person: For Samuel that is the ancientest Author
cited for it, lived some ages after those two Offices were divided: And St.
Paul Heb. 7. ver. 2. after that he had said that Abraham gave a tenth part of
all to Melchizedeck, adds, He being first by interpretation King of
Righteousness, and after that also King of Salem; and ver. 4. he says consider
also how great this man was, unto whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave a tenth
of the spoil. I leave it to any impartial man to consider if this will not
justify my exposition, guarded with a perhaps and an it seems. It is true St.
Paul argues afterward upon the supposition of Tithes being due to Priests, but
this was to the Jews to whom he wrote: But if he had intended to bring the
Christian Church under the like obligation, it is not very accountable why he
did not say one word about it, this being so proper a place for it.

Page 143. He challenges me for saying that the 14. Canon of the Council of
Chalons obliged the Bishops in their visitations to confirm, and not to prey
upon their people, and tells me that the Canon did only oblige, that when they
did visit to confirm, they should not oppress their people: But the Canon in
general speaks cum Episcopi Parochias suas peragrant, and si quando peragrandae
parochiae necessitas incumbit, and charges them that they should confirm,
enquire what was to be amended, Preach the word of God, and that they should
use their industry rather in the gaining of souls, than in the robbing and
spoiling of their Subjects, and scandalizing of their brethren: Now I am not
quick sighted enough to divine what can be made out of this.

Page 192. He challenges me for citing Zonaras, saying that there were no
Stewards in the East in his time, and alleges that he says that many Bishops,
and some Abbots did not regard the Canon that enjoined the use of them. But he
says that the greatest part did not observe it, (...), in which it is true I
enlarged the expression too generally, and put no for few, yet he contracts it
as if it only signified many: But the whole matter is of no consequence. And
now if the rest of the forty places be to be judged of by these as the sample,
I shall not much apprehend the censures of Learned and impartial men; but if a
man has before hand resolved to find fault, it will be no hard task to write
severe strictures, on much better books than I can pretend mine to be.

But now I come to the third head of this accusation, of my omissions of many
passages which the Animadverter thinks were as obvious to me as those I have
cited; and he judges that they were past over by me, lest they should look too
favouorably on the Clergies power or their right to the Tithes. But he does not
know if these were as obvious to me, as it seems they were to himself; and he
must know me better than he does yet, before he can judge what my intentions
are.

Page 40. He quarrels with me for not citing a part of the 23. Canon of
Antioch, and the 13. Canon of the African Code, which speak of the Election of
Bishops. By the Metropolitan and the other Bishops of the Province. But this
was not at all necessary to be mentioned, for I had laid it down as a thing
undisputed, over and over again, that the Bishops had a power of judging, after
the people had pitched on the person; nor was it ever imagined by any that I
know of, that the Bishops met merely as tools for ordaining those that were
nominated by the People; though violence was sometimes used, for which see what
I have said page 7, 8, 9, 12, 13. therefore having laid that down as an
unquestionable truth, there was no need of accumulating more proofs: So there
was no cause to charge this on me as a designed omission.

Page 72. He charges me for leaving out the clearest and firmest proofs for
Tithes, of the Fathers of that age; and yet as there are none more eminent than
Chrysostom, Ierom and Austin whom I cite; so I do not remember to have fallen
on any thing more express for them in Doctor Combers History of Tithes. It is
very strange that he does not observe a difference between the advising People
to set off more than a tenth for Charities, and a rule obliging them to pay in
a tenth, as a Rent due to the Priest. And that this was never set up in the
Greek Church, nor authorized by the Roman Law, seems some inducement at least
to a man of no extraordinary sagacity, to believe that the Divine right of
Tithes payable to Priests, antecedently to humane Laws, was not the Doctrine of
that age.

Page 119 He challenges me for not citing all the Laws made by Charles the
Great, for the payment of Parochial Tithes, and is not satisfied that I cite
two. But my purpose was to show it was settled by him; and I do not see the
great need of telling how often this was repeated by him: And after that I had
said that Alfred had settled the payment of Tithes in England, I do not see why
he should object to me the not mentioning the latter Laws that came afterward:
For either those were only confirmations of the former, and so they signify
nothing; or all that could have been drawn from them was to represent the
unwillingness of the People to submit to them, and who knows but he would have
made this criminal in me.

Page 127. His next exception is that I say before Caroloman and Pepin, there
had been no Synods in France for 80 years, that is from 662. till 742. and this
still holds good, notwithstanding the four he mentions; for by Synods it is
plain, my meaning was Assemblies for regulating the affairs of the Church. Some
meetings indeed there were in that interval, which seem rather to have been
Assemblies of the Estates or Parliaments, than Ecclesiastical meetings: For in
some of them the Privileges of Monasteries were confirmed, and in other
Bishops were condemned to be beheaded. But that which he cites from Binnius at
Chalons is not in my Edition, nor will I enter into dispute with him whether
Vtrecht belongs to France or Germany. But for justifying what I said, Boniface
his letter to Pope Zachary is a sufficient authority, for (cap. 2.) he writes
to him that the Franrks, as ancient men then said, had had no Synod for above
eighty years. This serves to acquit me and hereafter he may deal with Boniface
as he pleases.

Page 129. He accuses me for passing over some words in a Canon at Akin which
show that Charles the Great believed that Tithes were due by a Divine right.
But he cannot think I intended to disguise this matter, for page 113. where I
first enter upon it, I do largely set out the Churches pretending to a Divine
right for them; and it was needless to repeat this at every time, though I do
expressly speak of it again page 140. and 141.

Page 180. He accuses me for leaving out that provision made for the Emperors
power of annulling Elections by the Clergy and People, in the Popes concession
of the investiture to the Emperor. But if this is not plainly enough
insinuated in these words, that when a Bishop was canonically elected by the
Clergy and People, he should not be consecrated till the Ring and Staff were
given him by the Emperor, I am to seek as to the true use and sense of words:
For this clearly expresses that the Emperor had a Negative, and by consequence
the power of annulling Elections: and they are the very words of the Popes
concession.

The fourth Head is of the contradictions he finds me guilty of, of these he
reckons up three, but with what success I now come to examine.

Page 52. and 169. I had affirmed that Church Lands in England before the
Conquest were subjected to the service called Trinoda Necessitas, for
Fortifying Castles, building Bridges, and a rate for an expedition, and yet
from Matthew Paris I assert that they* held their Lands in Frank Almoin, and so
were free from all secular service. He acknowledges I have cited Right from
Matthew Paris; so all his quarrel must be for what I say of the Trinoda
Necessitas. I my self have seen it in some Original Charters in the Saxon time,
which I am ready to show him as soon as I certainly know his name. If there is
a contradiction between these two things, I am not to be blamed for it, having
good authority for all I affirm: And if there should fall to be a contradiction
betwixt Original Charters, and Matthew Paris, who was a Monk, and so ready to
speak in favor of their privileges, one would think it were not very
difficult to determine the controversy. But if they can be both reconciled,
then the contradiction and objection both are out of doors. They were exempted
from all constant and personal services, and so were free from the bondage of
the feudal tenure, yet upon great emergents they might be obliged to bear a
share in the public burdens.

The two other contradictions are a little odd. He tells that whereas page 117.
I had made this distinction betwixt the Levitical Priesthood and Church men
under the Gospel, that whereas the former had not the charge of Souls, the
latter had it; and yet page 323. I say the distinction of with cure and without
cure is ill grounded, and savours too much of the niceties of the Canonists.
Now where to find out the contradiction here, is really above my skill; I had
asserted that Churchmen under the Gospel have the care of Souls; and pursuant
to this, I rejected the distinction of benefices with and without cure, (the
word benefice was left out, for it would have spoiled this imaginary
contradiction.) If the quarrel to me is, because I am displeased with those,
that whatsoever be the nature of their Benefice, are sure to make them sine
cures, I must submit to his indignation, for I cannot easily change my mind in
that particular.

The next contradiction is no less strange, page 126. I blame Bishops for
turning Soldiers; and yet page 131. I relate how they were forced to go to the
Wars. Now if it is impossible to force a man to do a thing unbecoming his
profession; here is a contradiction with a witness: But he may as well call it a
contradiction to blame men for apostatizing from the Faith, and yet showing how
they were forced to it by Persecution.

Having thus far examined the contradictions objected to me, I now come to
consider another part of my charge that falls under the fifth head, of my odd
and mistaken assertions, false reasonings, weak suggestions, which only show
ill will to the power and rights of the Clergy; and of this he gives ten
instances.

Page 18. I tell that St. Cyprian gathered 100000 Sesterces for redeeming
Captives, and yet page 21. I seem to think it Poetry in Prudentius, when he
mentions the Christians offering thousands of Sesterces: whereas I made no
reflections on the quantity of the sum, but upon that acusation of the
Heathens, that the Christians sold their Lands, and brought in the prizes of
them, and of this all I say, is that it is hard to determine how much of Poetry
may be in it.

Page 65. He accuses me, that in imitation of Mr. Seldom, I cite Canons that
were made to prevent abuses, and were frequently established upon one or two
ill practices, to prove abuses crept into the Church, which he calls a false
and disingenuous way of arguing. This I had said when I began to treat of the
Canons of the Council of Chalcedon, and eight of these Canons do expressly
mention abuses crept in: Now one would think that this might suffice to acquit
me of falsehood or disingenuity. The maxim is not more common than true, Ex
malis moribus oriuntur bonae leges, and few Lawgivers have the foresight to
prevent abuses, though all that are good have the zeal to condemn them when
they appear.

Page 72. He accuses me for saying that in St. Chrysostom's time there was no
rule set for the Charities of Christians, and says that my own instances prove
they thought it a sin to give less than a tenth; yet St. Chrysostom expressly
says he did not pretend to make a Law in that matter: and there is one
distinction that he seems resolved never to observe, between the setting a rate
on what the Christians were bound to pay into the Church, and the directions
that were given them for their Charities.

Page 80. He condemns me for what I say against converting fines to Secular
uses, and says that since the money raised out of Tithes may be applied to the
maintenance of ones family, which is a Secular use, why may not fines raised by
Leases be applied to the same purpose? But it is clear I was speaking of those
Fines that were raised to the prejudice of ones successors or of the Church, so
in this case I plead for the Rights of the Church. There is indeed no reason to
blame the levying of fines, if the Leases do last but ones own life; but I
cannot see why an Incumbent should have a consideration for those years in
which his Successors may enjoy the Benefice.

Page 113. He says I applaud the distinctions found out to diminish the payment
of a full tenth part, whereas I neither applaud them nor condemn them, but
barely relate matter of fact: He also accuses me for calling it the heaviest
tax that any Nation ever came under, as if I forgot that this is all that men
give for the provision of Ministers to look to their Souls, which insinuates
that he thinks it still too little; And says, that I do not consider that the
Jewish Nation was put under a double Tithe by God himself. This last he knows I
have considered, and showed the difference between Jews and Christians: The
former having their soil given them immediately by God, who might therefore lay
what charge on it he pleased, which is not the case of Christians. A tenth in a
cold climate, upon a moderate computation, will rise to a fifth, if not to a
fourth part of the revenue. Now the People of this Nation are estimated at six
millions, and the Clergy are about ten thousand; the six hundredth part of the
whole. It will be necessary therefore that the proofs be very clear, before it
can be easily believed that the six hundredth part of a Nation have by Divine
Right, a title to a fourth or fifth part of its Revenue. One would think that
the Taxes for the preservation of the State ought in reason to be much higher,
the necessary expense of Government being much greater; and yet no Nation in
Europe, unless it be France of late, has paid a half of the full tenth of the
growth to the public treasure. He also goes on confidently in one mistake,
though I have taken some pains to rectify it in my Book, that the Tithes are
the Priests portion alone, whereas I have fully proved that at first it was
appointed that they should be divided between the Clergy and the Poor: I
confess, I have great prejudices to any Doctrine, which if true, puts a whole
Nation in a state of damnation, and brings them under so heinous a guilt as the
sin of Sacrilege must draw after it. He asserts the Parochial Right of Tithes,
and that he that blesses the People has a right to them; and if this is true,
then the King, and all the Nobility and Gentry that are impropriators, all the
Bishops, the Cathedrals, Hospitals and Colleges who have impropriated Tithes
in their Revenues, and all Non-residents who farm out the blessing of their
people to their Curates, and yet raise the Tithes, must be every one of them in
a state of damnation. For the last of these I am not very sollicitous, but for
the former, I will not easily drink in such a damning Doctrine.

Page 117. He accuses me for gathering some odd pretenses to give reason why
Tithes were easier to the Jews than to us: He says, I urge the vast number of
the Priests, and one would think that the thirtieth part of a Nation (which was
the lowest proportion of the Tribe of Levi) had a right to a greater portion
than the six hundredth part. He also says that I urge the fruitfulness of their
Land and the barrenness of ours, which, he adds, I drew from the Quakers Books,
but I can assure him, if he will believe me, I never read one of them on this
Argument. I think it is no such Mystery but that any Man might have hit on it,
that a fruitful Land may pay a greater Rate than a barren: But I have given no
advantage to the Quakers for their unjust Robbery of Churchmen, or rather the
robbing of God, in detaining that which the Law provides for them; which it
might well do, tho there were no antecedent divine Right making it necessary:
and the Law, which is the Measure of Property, having determined this, the
denying to pay it is as much Injustice, as robbing on the Highway: the Sin of
which is not one Jot the less, tho no Man can make out his Title to his Goods
from a divine Right. And the Sin of this is so much the greater, as the robbing
God must be greater than the robbing a private Person.

Page 118, he accuses me for affirming falsely concerning us and the Jews, that
the same Rule was applied to all: tho I grant that the Jews Tithe was but a
fifth Part, and know that the Christians was but a tenth. So here I lie against
my Conscience. I will not say this is a willful Mistake in him, but I am sure
it is a gross one; for the all, to whom I say the same Rule was applied, does
not belong to Jews and Christians, but to the Northern and barren Climates,
where the Returns are not above ten, five, and in some not above three. And for
the kindness of his Censure, I leave it to his own Conscience to consider, how
far he is bound to ask God Pardon for it.

Page 172. He condemns me for my Criticism about the Term Bishopric Anno 1077,
and says, that I bring Proof that it was earlier used: and yet all that Proof
is the Title of a Chapter, where it is once used; and every Body knows that
Titles we reset before Books or Chapters some Ages after they were written.

Page 199. He accuses me for saying that Kings might begin the Seizure of the
Goods of deceased Bishops, as representing the People, who before might make
those Seizures: and whereas the Poor at first made them, he argues that the
Kings could not be supposed to represent the Poor. But since I pretend only in
this Matter to proceed upon Conjecture, any Error I may be guilty of, ought to
be easily forgiven me: and I tell what might have fallen out in Fact, and not
what is to be defended in Right. It is probable, as long as the Bishops were
poor, the poor only spoiled their Goods; but when they grew rich, it is like
enough others might have mixed with the poor in these Spoils, and that might
have invited the Officers of Princes first to seize on them.

Page 320, He accuses me for saying that there was nothing so dedicated under
the New Testament as was under the Old, and cites that of Ananias and Saphira.
But certainly great Difference is to be made between a voluntary Dedication,
and a divine Appointment, and between the Laws of God, that cannot be repealed
but by the same Authority that first enacted them, and human Laws, that are
still subject to the supreme legislative Power.

But his last Instance makes Amends for all the Defects in the former. This
Nation has been under great Apprehensions of Popery: many Expedients have been
proposed, and the Dangers have been much considered, and nothing has been more
seriously examined by both King and Parliament for some Years, but none of them
were so wise as to foresee one Danger, with which he frights me: Because I
determined, that a Popish Prince may extend the Regale to all Churches in his
Dominions, and this he thinks an unseasonable Assertion to publish here in
England, as our Case stands with respect to the next in Succession. But if this
be all the Danger he apprehends, he may go to bed and sleep very securely, for
the Regale is already in the Crownhere, and has been for some Ages extended to
all the Churches in England. So the next Prince can add nothing to what the
Crown is already vested with.

The sixth Head, for which I come under his Discipline, is the many gross
Reflections on the Clergy, both ancient and modern, which he thinks
prodigiously strange, and especially in this Age, and that the rather, that the
Ground of many of the Accusations is false, and to bring this to Instances he
complains, that

Page 26, I inveigh against the Corruptions of the Church in the Beginning of
the fourth Century, and yet acknowledge that the better and sounder Part did
still prevail in public Synods: from which he inferrs, that if the major Part
was good, there was no Ground for that Invective: Yet any that reads that
Passage will hardly find much of Invective in it, and it is far short of what
might have been cited from Nazianzen and Chrysostom, whose Credit he would be
sure to magnify, if it made for him. The running backward and forward as they
did, in the fundamental Points of Faith, will justify a far severer Character
than I give of them: and may not a Church be corrupted, tho the Majority
continues sound? Nor can we judge of the Majority of a Church, by the Majority
of a Synod, for all Bishops did not come to every Synod. And I may likewise
add, that many will be guilty of ill Practices, that have not the Face to
defend them, when they come to be examined.

Page 33, He accuses me for calling Constantius a superstitious weak Man, upon
the Credit of Marcellin a Pagan Writer. How judicious a Writer he is, all
learned Men know: and that Passage, I refer to, has been cited by many of the
greatest Men of this and the former Age. Nor was it quoted by me as a Proof,
but as an excellent Saying. The Law Constantius made for Churchmen, by which
the driving of Trade and Merchandise among Clergymen was set on, and
encouraged, was severely censured by St. Jerome, one of the best Men of that
Age, who saw the ill Effects it had. But he says, I represent Martel as a brave
Man, who robbed the Church. Do I say any Thing in Commendation of him for his
Virtues? I only speak of his good Conduct and great Success in his Wars; and if
this raises his Spleen, I must conclude that he is very much subject to Vapors.

He, in the next Place, accuses me for representing Pulcheria as superstitious;
and cites two Authors that say, she was a prudent and pious Woman, but in this
he shows no great Judgment of Church-Historians. The first is Zonaras, that
lived almost seven Ages after her Time, so that he might have cited Baronius,
or the VVriters of this Age, as well as one that lived so long after her. And
for Socrates, he does not bring his History down to her Reign nor can I find a
Word of her in him; tho in this I cannot be positive, having only cursorily
run over his last Book. If he had quoted Book and Chapter, I could have sought
it out, but the naming the Page, without he had also named the Edition, helps
me little: yet I do not deny that she was a very pious and prudent Woman, nor
do I call her superstitious; but say that she was, even to Superstition, set on
raising the Authority and Greatness of the Church: which is a far milder
Expression than that he fastens on me.

Page 54 He accuses me for thinking that the Strength of our Separatists lies
in the ill Lives of the Clergy: But in what does he think their Strength lies?
Is it in their Cause, or their Arguments? I am sure if I had said this, he
would have charged it home upon me, and with Reason. But after all I only say
the chief Advantages that the Donatists then took, were from the Corruptions of
the Clergy: and this he must either know to be true, or he is a great Stranger
to all St. Austin's VVritings against them: and that Discourse I conclude with
this general Expression: That in those Prejudices, with which the Vulgar are
possessed, from the Disorders which they observe in the Persons and Conduct of
Churchmen, lies the Strength of all Dividers from the public Constitutions:
which I set down as a general Maxim, without applying it to our Separatists.

Page 59, To show his great exactness in Chronology, he says, that before the
fourth Council at Carthage the African Churches had been lately oppressed by
the Vandals; but Baronius and the Collectors of the Councils, place this Anno
398, and the first mention of the Vandals invading Gaul is Anno 406. Nor did
they invade Africa till the Year 427, 28 Years after this Council. The other
Parts of this Remark are not worth the answering.

Page 120 He says I boast of an odd Discovery of the Weakness or Disingenuity
of the Bishops, in making two contrary Decrees in one Day: but adds, that if we
compare de Marca with Baluzius, both these make good Sense in one Law, and have
no Contradiction in them. Baluzius speaks not a Word of the Canon, and only
sets down the Edict: nor does de Marca offer to reconcile them, but only says
that the Bishops made the Canon according to the Ecclesiastical Rules; and that
in the Assembly of the States they would not strugle against the King's
Inclinations. But if the Annulling of Ordinations made by Authority, without
the regular Way of Election, which is in the Canon, be not plainly contradicted
by the Proviso that is in the Edict, for excepting from this Rule those that
were chosen out of the Palace, I must learn again the Use of the Parts of
Speech.

Page 141 He accuses me of speaking, without any just Ground, contemptibly of
the divine Right of Tithes, and for calling Arguments for it irksom Stuff: and
all this is, because I speak slightly of those who run it up to Adam, and say
that Abel was a true Tither, and Cain a false one; of this I shall say nothing,
but refer it to every good Judge. He also complains that I with Satisfaction
relate (Page 196, and 200) that all was thought well gotten by Princes, that
could be got from the Clergy; tho I express no Satisfaction at that, but on the
contrary great Regret at the Scandals of Churchmen, which made Princes and
others lose that esteem that former Ages had for them.

Page 166 He accuses me, that here and in many other Places I industriously
search for those Canons, that may reflect most on the present Bishops and
Clergy, and omit many that were more pertinent to the Regale: when he discovers
these Omissions I shall be beholden to him, but till then, I must look on these
as so many angry Words; nor are any of the Bishops that I know concerned in
those he refers to.

But his Displeasure against me rises higher in the seventh Head, in which he
represents me as a Criminal against the State; and the Care that was taken to
convey these Animadversions by the Penny-Post to a great Minister, who is known
to have much Goodness for me, shows well on what design this was writ.

Page 97 He says I enlarge the Words of Gregoras, but wisely adds, if his
Edition is right; so he is safe till I know his Edition: but let the Reader
take them in Greek, and then see what can be objected to my Translation: (...).

Page 199 He accuses me for saying that Princes do commonly assert a Right for
any Thing which their Ancestors have once practiced; and to this he answers
that of late Parliaments in England have done this oftener than Kings. But what
am I concerned in this? I did not blame Princes for Building upon Prescription,
but was only historically showing, that the Practice of the Regale was confessed
to be an Abuse at first, but after a whiles Continuance, it was claimed as a
Right.

Page 244 He shows first great Unacquaintedness with French Constitutions, in
calling the Court of Parliament at Paris the Parliament of France: And when
Francis the first had delivered up the best part of the Liberties of the French
Church to the Pope; he insinuates as if it were Sedition in me to reflect on
the Arbitrariness of that King, and the ill Effects of that Temper: nor do I
know what relation this has to late Proceedings, except he will presume to
fasten the Imputations of Arbitrariness upon his Majesty. But as it was
observed to be a Mark of good Times under the Romans, when Men might safely
speak against the Tyranny of former Princes; so his Majesty's mild and
gracious Inclinations are so well known, and his Resolution to govern according
to Law has been so often and so lately declared, that I am not at all afraid
of incurring his Displeasure by speaking against Arbitrariness.

Page 250, 251 He mentions a large Encomium I give of stiff Parliaments, which
he says he needs not transcribe, nor tell what it aims at: nor need I tell what
he aims at in this. But it seems he cannot tell what I aim at; for he Mistakes
the Thing, and does not rightly distinguish between their Courts of Parliament
in France, which answer to our Judges; and their Assembly of States, which
answers to our Parliaments. The Ground of that Contest was, Whether they should
deliver up their Liberties to the Sea of Rome? and if he condemns me for
commending the Firmness of Judges in this Point, it is plain enough what he aims
at,

And for a parting Blow he concludes, that the whole Discourse is so very
partial for Popular Elections, and strains all Places to make it seem they had
more Right than indeed they ever had, that it seems writ to court the Favor of
the People. But if he would temper his Acrimony a little, he would see that I
have overthrown the Argument for popular Elections much more effectually, than
if I had entered into a long Wrangling about Matter of Fact. I show that they
began not upon any divine Right, but upon the Circumstances in which the Church
was during the first three Centuries: And that as soon as the Government became
Christian, the Town-Councils and Possessors of Lands took it out of the Hands
of the Rabble; which had not been observed by any that writ before me, that I
could fall on: so that I think I have effectually overthrown any Argument that
can be drawn from the Practices of that Time. One thing I must observe that on
which Side soever I may seem to write, I must fall under his Displeasure; for
when I assert a Prince's Prerogative of extending the Regale to all the
Churches of his Dominions, he tells me of the Danger of a Popish Successor:
and if I acknowledge Matter of Fact as to popular Elections, he says I write for
the People. I see I am irrecoverably lost with him; but a Man must bear his
Misfortunes with a patient and constant Mind.

The eighth Head is of diverse Errors in Chronology, which he is pleased to
suppress: tho it appears by his Inquiries into the History of the Vandals that
he has a peculiar Talent in that. Some Men always love to be tossing great
Names, and therefore he is ever frighting me with the Authority of Dr.
Beveridg, whom, for his great Learning and rare Worth, I esteem as much as any
Man I know: and he, to his other excellent Qualities, adds so generous and
worthy a Disposition of Mind, that he is not at all offended with those, who
cannot in every Point agree with him. Therefore as long as I use that Liberty
to which all that converse in Books have a Right, of following what I think
best grounded, notwithstanding the learned Performances of worthy and great
Men, I am not at all afraid of incurring his Displeasure.

His last Exception falls on the Compositors and Correctors, and therefore I am
little concerned in it.

When he had thus performed this Piece of Discipline upon me, in which if I
have escaped without any harm done me, I have somewhat else than him to thank
for it; he dresses up a new Scene that he may fall on me again; and as if all
that had been said, were nothing, he begins anew. He leaves it to his Friend to
communicate it to me or not, when between them it was resolved to send it to
the Press. Then he makes his Conjectures about my Temper, and says, Perhaps I
will despise it, and study Revenge for this modest Admonition. I confess I
cannot admire it, but I heartily pity him for writing it, and do earnestly pray
to God to inspire him and all Church men with a better Temper: and this is all
the Revenge I shall return on him. But sure he has a peculiar Dictionary of
English Words for himself, when he calls this a modest Admonition. Yet,
whatever he thinks of me, it is very evident from what follows, that he thinks
well of himself. But to drop some Crumbs of Comfort, as a little Oil after a
severe Whipping, he says he is loath to believe that I should directly design
Mischief to the Church, and is willing enough to believe that this Piece was
writ in haste; and then he tells me on what Terms he may be confirmed in this
favorable Opinion: yet, lest this Tenderness should make me too wanton, he
adds, that if this modest Admonition does not work on me, I must expect a
rougher Hand. But to this I gave my Answer in the Beginning of this Paper.

As for the Books that he enjoins me to read, if this is all the Penance he
will lay on me, I hope I may recover his Favor. I have read and do much admire
Dr. Beveridg his Vindication of the Apostolical Canons, and am fully convinced
by him, that there was an Ecclesiastical Rule or Canon received in the Church
before these Councils that met in the Beginning of the fourth Century. But if I
am not yet persuaded that that was put in Writing, and in the same Form in
which we now have it, and instead thereof think it consisted rather in a
Tradition, and constant Practice, I hope that excellent Person will be more
favorable to me, than to think the worse of me for it.

He next directs me to some Authors that have writ of the Right of Tithes: but
I wonder he did not name Dr. Comber his late celebrated Book on that Argument,
for whose Person and Writings I believe he has a singular Affection and Esteem;
yet I can assure him that tho that Book came into the World too late for
instructing me before I writ concerning the Regale, yet I have read it perhaps
with as much Care, and more impartiality than he used in reading mine; and do
look on it as a very learned Work: and hope that worthy Doctor will not make
War with me, if I cannot be in all Things of his mind. I think I have now said
enough to satisfy all disinteressed Persons, and even the Animadvetrer or the
Publisher themselves, that there was no just Cause given by any Thing in my
Book, for such severe Censures as he fastens on me; and I hope he is freed from
the Apprehensions he seemed to be under, lest Papists and others should take
Advantage from any Faults in this Book to weaken the Credit of my other Pieces:
which honorable Compellation is bestowed on some Volums in Folio, that have
had the Luck not to be ill-received in the World. But I hope the Credit not
only of those Pieces, but even of my Piece of the Regale, shall not suffer much
by the Performance of this Piece of his Animadversions.

So much I have thought fit to say in my own Vindication. I hope all along I
have not forgot the Caution that was given me, of tempering my style so, that
nothing of resentment should appear in it: If any Thing has escaped me, that
savours of it, it has fallen from me unawares; and I humbly beg Pardon for it
of the Person concerned.

FINIS.

