Spiritual Bondage and Freedom.

OR, A TREATISE Containing the Substance of several SERMONS Preached on that
Subject from JOHN VIII. 36.

By the late Reverend Mr. NATHANAEL BALL, M. A. Late Pastor of Barley in
Hartfordshire.

Isa. 61. 1. The Lord has sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the
opening of the prison to them that are bound.

LONDON: Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1683.

To the Right Honorable and truly Virtuous, the Lady Archer, of Coopersail in
Essex.
Madam!
IT is too notorious, That the most usual pretensions of Epistles Dedicatory,
are patronage from, and their real Scope flatteries of the Persons to whom they
are directed. For the former, it is an apparent vanity; in that a Worthy Work
needs it not, and an Unworthy neither deserves, nor is capable of it. For the
latter, as it ill becomes the entrance of so serious and searching a Subject,
as that of this Book, and the impartial simplicity of a Minister of Divine
Grace and Truth: So I am confident, it would be entertained by your Ladyship
with distaste and contempt. Madam, To say my errand in short, I do but pay to
your Ladyship the Legacy of my reverend Brother, and your dear Friend in, and
Minister from the Lord Jesus, who is now at everlasting rest; A Legacy worthy
his bequeathing, and your Ladyships accepting. Yet it is not only a Legacy of
Love, but also a Debt of Justice, both which Obligations* he was not insensible
of, when he designed and ordered the offering of this excellent Service more
peculiarly to your Ladyship, than to any other. You were not so little
acquainted with him, as not to know him to be a Person immured* in his Study,
and strongly (I wish, I could not say too strongly) inclined to solitude and
privacy. Otherwise, his large Talents of Grace, and Ministerial Abilities,
might have rendered him conspicuous, and met with very large acknowledgments
from the truly godly and intelligent, not only to himself alive, but to his
Pious and Desolate Widow, and his Children after his Decease. Madam, I must beg
your pardon (if it be a fault), that I omit not to confirm what I said of the
Justice of this Dedication; for what can be more just, than to render those
labors (next to Gods) primarily to your Service, who did so bountifully
minister to the reverend Authors subsistence in his greatest straits, equally
to, if not beyond any other mortal; so that this work is in no small respects
your own, and a reaping the blessing you have sowed. But to make it your own
beyond the interest a mere Dedication can give you, a sensible remembrance of
the Spiritual Bondage, and a gracious experience of the Spiritual Freedom
treated of in this excellent Discourse, will exceedingly conduce.

Madam, I shall not undertake the unnecessary task of commending the Book, it
being commendation enough to its self, where it meets with a Spiritual and
Judicious taste. Only I shall say, That the Author speaks like one that has
felt and experienced what he speaks, in his own Soul. I shall add no farther,
only commend you to God, and to the word of his Grace, which is able to build
you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them that are sanctified; and
subscribe my self,

Your Ladyships Humble Servant, and an unworthy Minister of the Gospel, JOHN
FALDO.

(...) shall be captivated unto the obedience of his Truth. These Worthies of
Christ have been very careful to avoid Scandals, and giving Offense, that their
Ministry might not be justly blamed.

Hence in all things they have approved themselves as the Ministers of God, in
much Patience and Affliction, in Necessities and Distresses, in Stripes and
Imprisonments, in tossings to and fro, and in labors, in watchings and
fastings, by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, by kindness, by the Holy
Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of truth, by the Power of God, by the
armor of Righteousness on the right hand, and on the left; by honor and
dishonor, by evil report, and good report; as deceivers and yet true; as
unknown, and yet well-known; as dying yet living [even to a miracle]; as
chastened and not killed; persecuted but not forsaken; cast down but not
destroyed; being reviled, they bless; being defamed, they entreat; they bless
and curse not.

Touching the Reverend and Blessed Author of this Book; it will not be
unacceptable to give some short Account of him, who was an Interpreter, one of
a thousand, an able and faithful Minister of the New Testament, not of the
letter, but of the Spirit; a Minister, as of great abilities, so of great
success in his Ministry. The Lord himself has erected Monuments to his dead
Saints, and took care for the embalming their memories unto posterity. Whilst
the name of the wicked does rot, the memory of the just shall be blessed.
Whilst the ungodly are forgotten, or if remembered, it is with a note of Infamy;
as, This is that Ahaz! This is Jeroboam that made Israel to sin! the righteous
are had in everlasting remembrance: Remember them which have the rule over you,
who have spoken to you the word of God, whose faith follow; considering the end
of their conversation.

This holy man of God, Mr. Nathanael Ball, was born in the year 1623. at
Pitminster near Taunton Dean, in the County of Sommerset. His Parents were
godly, and of the number of them who in those days were nicknamed Puritans.
They gave him Religious Education; he received it from their instructions and
examples. Parents are either the best or worst Copies to their Children; none
can do more either to hinder or further their Childrens Conversion. They have
the greatest advantages for the sowing Seeds of Grace in their very many were
convinced and converted by him. He seldom spread the Net of the Gospel, but
this Fisherman of Souls caught some Soul or other for Christ. He not only
preached publicly, but visited the Families of his Congregation, particularly
examining and instructing the ignorant in private, and was never satisfied till
he had wrought upon them a deep and awakened sense and feeling of their woeful
estate by nature, the necessity of closing with the offers of Salvation tendered
by Christ Jesus. He left powerful impressions upon their consciences (which
stuck as so many daggers in their hearts) of the reality of things Invisible,
That there is a God and Devil, a Heaven and Hell; That they had precious and
immortal Souls, which must be saved or damned; and that as God was merciful, so
also was he a just and terrible God, that would by no means acquit the guilty,
and that it was impossible for them to escape the damnation of Hell, if they
did neglect so great Salvation, as was now offered them in this day of their
Visitation. He put all Masters of Families in their own Persons upon the
performance of Family Duties, of prayer and reading the Scriptures, of Singing
and Catechizing, that so their Families might be Bethels, not Bethavens; little
Churches of God, not Synagogues of the Devil. And when some objected their want
of gifts for prayer; he gave them such Directions and Instructions both for
matter and manner, that in a short time the blessed fruits and effects thereof
was very visible; many being able to pour out their Souls in prayer unto God
with proper Words, and melting Affections. He always charged them to be upon
their knees in prayer; Gods familarity with us, should not make us saucy
toward him, but to engage us to keep our distance, and to serve him with a
more holy fear, and filial reverence. The Lord gave him a large seal unto his
Ministry; in so much that he was the Spritual Father of many, whom he begat to
Christ in the Gospel.

When he altered his condition, he sought and found a meet help for him every
way; a neighbor Ministers Daughter, to whom he was Married, and with whom he
lived Religiously and comfortably to his dying day, and the blessing of God was
upon his Marriage, giving him, by his virtuous Wife, ten Sons and three
Daughters. She is now left a desolate Widow, like the chaste Turtle mourning for
the loss of her Mate, and her Children Orphans; but he laid up for them
Treasure in Heaven, a stock of prayers to the God hearing prayer, and they have
the Promises. God is the Husband and Judge of his Widow, and Father to the
fatherless, out of his holy Habitation; their Fathers God will be their God,
and his seed will be blessed after him: Leave thy Fatherless children unto me,
and let thy Widows put their trust in me, says the Lord.

In the government of his Family, he was very exact, and showed a rare example
of piety to his whole Family. He began with God first in his own closet, and
suffered none under his roof to live without secret prayer. When it was a
convenient time for the whole house to meet together, he came from his Study,
and summoning them to Duty, he expounded one or two Chapters, and examined his
Children and Servants what they did remember, encouraging the diligent,
reproving the negligent; which being done he called upon God for them, and with
them. In prayer he was always fervent, vehemently wrestling with the Lord for
his blessing. In his daily prayers, he begged hard for Mercy for King and
Kingdom, for Church and State; he sought the prosperity of Zion earnestly, and
would not brook a denial. Duty being ended, he retired shortly upon it into his
Study, where he commonly abode till Dinner; and when he craved a blessing upon
his meat, it was in the presence of his whole Family: he was very sparing in
his diet, and at Table ever turning his discourse Heavenwards, and would lead
his guests and family from their mercies to the God of Mercies. At every meal
he preached as it were a short Sermon; and Thanks being returned unto God, he
hastened again into his Study; allowing himself no recreation, but what arose
from reading, praying and instructing others. He spent most of his time in
studying the Scriptures, searching out the Mind and Will God in them; Well
knowing, that all humane writings had their defects, but the Book of God was
perfect and infallible. He common-plac'd all his reading; this was a
storehouse for present and after uses. At night he carefully kept good hours
for Evening-prayer, so that his family did not serve God between sleeping and
waking. A Chapter being read, and prayer offered up unto the Lord, he withdrew
himself again into his Study; where, as he began, so he closed the day with
secret Devotion. When he lay down in his bed, it was with some heavenly
discourses, which took up his time till he fell asleep. His first thoughts in
the morning were of God. His meditations before his uprising, were improved
heavenward. He rose early, and would discourse in the day, how his reins
instructed him in the night season. It Is a thousand pities, that so many
precious thoughts as Gods Saints have of God, should be lost, and not recorded.
A godly Gentleman of the Inner Temple, told a Reverend Minister, that he would
not lose his morning-thoughts of God, for all his worldly estate, which yet was
a very fair and great one.

But his observation of the Lords day was most strict and religious. The fourth
Commandment is the hedge and mound about the whole Law. Break down this, and you
violate all the rest. The Jews styled the sabbath the Bride of the Synagogue.
This holy man of God decked himself up for it, as a Bridegroom to meet his
Bride. The Sabbath was his delight, and he was exceeding careful, not only in
his own person, but that all in his family and under his charge, should
sanctify it unto the Lord. He had no worldly business, no worldly discourses
on that day; but he and his whole household spent the whole day in the Service
of God. Blessed is the man that does this, and the son of man that keeps the
Sabbath from polluting it. In his house, 'twas the Lords day indeed, the Queen
of days, all his children, servants, and whosoever lodged within his gates, were
wholly taken up in reading, hearing, repeating, meditating, praying, and
singing of Psalms that day. On the Sabbath evenings he examined his childrens
and servants proficiency by the Sabbath-ordinances, and labored mightily to
awaken their consciences, and to put them upon early seeking of God.

He was very communicative of his knowledge. As a Fountain freely yields its
water, and the field its corn, and the garden herbs for the use of man; so did
his heart and tongue disperse abroad his spiritual gifts and experiences to the
edification of others. He would talk with any child or servant, that so he
might drop into them something of the mystery of godliness. Frequently would he
take his younger children into his closet, and offer up particular
supplications for them; he would not indulge any of them in a sinful action.
'Twas his judgment, that a Father might wink at any thing, saving sin against
God. Therefore in his use of the Rod he designed their good. He first convinced
them of the dishonor they had done the Lord, the danger they had brought upon
themselves; and professed that as God their heavenly Father had not, so neither
had he any pleasure in chastising them; that sin being bound up in the heart of
a child, 'twas the Lords Ordinance, that the rod of correction should drive it
out; and therefore he always accompanied the rod with prayer that so they might
have the spirit and blessing of the rod, and correction might be seconded with
conversion, and crowned with universal reformation.

He seemed by his indulgence and kindness to his servants, a Father rather than
a Master. He was very compassionate on their Souls, and pressed them powerfully
to secure the main, their interest in Christ. And some of them have cause
everlastingly to bless God, they came under his roof, and stood related to so
pious and good a Master.

The tenderness of his conscience, and great zeal for the purity of
Gospel Worship, kept him from conformity. Hereupon with some thousands of his
brethren, he was slain by that fatal Axe, the Act of Bartholomew-day. O! when
will the living God give them resurrection? Lord, revive thy work in the midst
of our days, in the midst of judgment, remember mercy. These Abels, tho dead,
are yet speaking. The Bush burns and is not consumed. Certainly God has some
great work for them, who tho sentenced unto death, are yet alive. We hope in
the living God, who quickneth the dead, who has delivered them* from many and
great deaths; we hope, I say, that he will yet deliver them from this death
also.

For sometime after his silencing, Mr. Ball lived in the same Parish, where he
had been formerly Minister; and when the Oxford Act came forth, he removed five
Miles farther. Where he peaceably behaved himself, and won upon many of a
different persuasion by his moderation, sweetness of deportment, and holy, and
unblameable conversation. He bore a singular love to all that looked heavenward,
tho of a different persuasion from himself, and therefore kept up a brotherly
and Christian correspondence with that worthy Conformist in whose Parish he
lived. He judged it his duty to preach, and that necessity was laid upon him; a
woe unto him if he did not preach the Gospel. Hereupon be neither could nor
would be idle, but preached frequently, and studied to preach in such times and
places, as were least offensive to authority. It grieved him to hear his
spiritual children complain they wanted Bread, when he had it for them.

Very many reaped the fruit and benefit of his labors since he was outed his
public Ministry, as Cambridg, Epping, and Bayford, and other places to which
he was related. He spent himself in doing good to Souls; for maintenance he
relied upon that providence which feeds the fowls, and clothes the Lillies;
and was of blessed Mr. Hierons mind, That God who feeds the Ravens, would not
starve his young Hierons. And indeed his numerous family were maintained to a
miracle. He sought not the world, but his God. He did his masters work,
trusting to his bounty for wages; and would often say, he never lived better
than when he knew not how to live. He lived by faith upon Gods promises;
committed his ways unto God, and had a firm persuasion that the Lord would
provide for him and his, which was verified.

He kept a Diary of Gods providence to himself and family, of mercies and
afflictions, of supports and deliverances. This quickened him unto thankfulness;
these experiences strengthened his faith, and made him abound in hope, in the
Lord his God. When his goods were seized on for preaching contrary to Law, this
holy man took that spoil patiently, and joyfully, knowing that he had a better
and more enduring substance reserved in the Heavens and that those losses
sustained for Christ and a good conscience, would prove gains at last, and work
out for him a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. If he was
concerned, it was for his enemies, whom he pitied from his Soul, and for whom
he prayed, as his Lord and Master, that they might be forgiven, because they
knew not that they did the Devils work.

His great labors in his Masters Vineyard, shortened his days, but drew him the
nearer and sooner to his rest. In his sickness his patience was most exemplary,
bearing his pains with a Christian fortitude, and resigning himself for life
and death unto his Lords disposal. For him to live, was to glorify Christ, and
to die gain. So he might be farther useful and serviceable in his Ministry, he
was well contented with life; but to be dissolved and to be at home with
Christ, being better for him, in case of unserviceableness this was earnestly
desired by him. To such as visited him in his languishing, he gave serious
counsels of providing in health for sickness, in life for death, in time for
eternity. He was much in prayer for the afflicted Church of God, bitterly
lamenting the case of England; mourning for those great sins committed in the
midst of us, and trembling at the thoughts of those heavy Judgments hanging
over our heads. He sadly and sorrowfully laid to heart the unnatural breaches
among Protestants, the divisions of Reuben, the quarrels and enmities among
Joseph's Brethren; especially, now the Canaanite was in the Land. He was
grieved at the heart for the unbecoming lives of many Ministers, and of
multitudes of professors of so pure a Religion, whose lives indeed are a flat
contradiction to it, and for whose abominations God would certainly visit
(unless there were speedy, sincere, and extraordinary humbling and reforming)
with seven worse plagues than ever. But the Lord took him from the evil to
come, after he had languished for some time in a Consumption, and breathed
ardently after Heaven and Glory. He was called upon as the Witnesses, to come
up hither. He had long waited for his blessed charge, and that salvation he had
believed, prayed and expected, the Lord his Master, whom he had faithfully
served, put him into the possession of at last. He left this life for a better,
this vale of tears for a Paradise of joys, for rivers of evelasting pleasures,
the eight day of September, and in the year of our Lord 1681. and the 58th year
of his age. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord from henceforth; yea,
says the Spirit, for they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

Spiritual Bondage AND FREEDOM.
John 8. 36. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.
CHAP. I.
The Text opened: The Doctrine inferred thence. The first Branch of it handled.
FOR the making of our passage clear to this Text, we must look back a little
upon the foregoing Verses; where we shall see that Christ is a preaching to the
people, and what the success of his preaching was. In his preaching, amongst
other things, I would desire you specially to take notice of Two things that he
delivers concerning himself; which I mention, because I would by no means have
you to let them pass, because they are of great moment to your Souls. One is
that in ver. 12. a very precious place; Christ was sent to give light to the
World, i. e. to bring them out of that darkness which they are in by nature.
It Is just as if a man stood in some dismal dark place, where he can see
nothing, knows not where he is, nor whither to go, and one comes to him with a
light, and if he does but follow it, it brings him into the open view of
things: So Christ, those that follow him, he leads them into the light of life,
into the light of spiritual life, that he shall see spiritual things, which no
man does, or can, that does not follow Christ; and into the light of Eternal
life, where, at last, he shall see, and be with God for ever. So that all that
live without Christ, they live without light; they are dark men and women in
their Souls. Another thing that Christ preaches to them, is in ver. 24. (the
Lord open your hearts in the reading of it) I said therefore unto you, that ye
shall die in your sins. Dying in ones sins is the saddest death that a man can
die: that person dies to die. As the children of God die to live, so these,
they die to die again. When they die the natural death, they die the Eternal
death; they die to be damned, to be separated for ever from the Lord, as those
that he will never have any thing to do with more, but in a way of tormenting
them for their living and dying in their sins. And these of all that die out of
the World, are the persons whose death is to be most lamented. If God takes
away any of your Relations, or Friends, or Neighbors, if you have but good
hopes that they died in Christ, it is comfortable; but this same dying in sin,
Oh! that is the terrible, that is the lamentable death: as you say of some
persons sometimes that died in some horrible way, Oh! such an one he came to a
sad end; so do all that die in their sins. A sad end, the Lord knows. One were
better never to have been born, than to die such a death. But I pray mark here,
what is it that will bring people to such a death? Why, says Christ, If ye
believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. If ye abide Unbelievers,
if you don't come to me, own me, give up your selves to me, as sure as can be,
says he, this will be your case, ye shall dye in your sins. There be some that
die to their sins; that is a good death; and all Gods Children dye so. There be
some that die in their sins; that is a sad death, as you have heard, and all
Reprobate Sinners die so. There be some that die for their sins eternally, and
such are all they that die in them; and the way to die in them, and for them,
is to live in them.

These, and such kind of things Christ is here preaching. I have but named that
which I conceive to be most needful for you. Well, now what is the success of
Christ's preaching to his Hearers? Why, you may observe it was this; That of
those that heard him, some were complying, and some were cavilling. The Lord
grant that all of you may be of the first sort, and none of the second. Some
were complying Hearers. This kind of Doctrine took upon their Souls, v. 30. As
he spoke these words, many believed on him. Oh that there might be such a
presence and power of God in our Assembly here, that as we are speaking, you
might be believing, applying, taking home the Truths of the Gospel, so as to be
converted to Christ. Now these kind of Hearers Christ encourages, and bids them
go on as they had begun, and they should have a Threefold Privilege. The first
of them is in v. 31. They should be Disciples indeed, not in name, and in show
only, but in reality: q. d. I Will own you for sincere ones, such as Nathanael
was, concerning whom Christ said, John 1 48. Behold an Israelite indeed, in
whom there is no guile. You have some that do offer toward Christ, begin as if
they would follow his Rules and Doctrine; but they don't continue in his Word;
and so show that they are not Disciples indeed, none of the right kind of
Professors.

The other Two Privileges which Christ says these shall have, are in v. 32.
1. Ye shall know the Truth; i. e. have experimental knowledge of the Truths of
God. God and Christ would reveal themselves further and further to them in the
matters and mysteries of salvation: He promises inward and sound illumination
to them, that they should have another manner of knowledge of spiritual things
than they have who have nothing but what swims in the brain. 2. That the Truth
which they should have an understanding of, should make them free; not like
those that abide in slavery and bondage; but they should have a state of
Freedom.

Now amongst these Hearers, some, as I said, were cavilling Hearers. And this
is the sad success that the Word has upon some, that it sets them but a
cavilling at what is delivered. And thus the Gospel is the favor of life to
some, and the savor of death to others. Now the carnal and unbelieving Hearers
take occasion unjustly to cavil at Christ, from those last words which he spoke
to his complying Hearers in the Text, shall make you free. As if they should
say, Why then, pray what do you make of us? We perceive, that you count us
Slaves, or Bond people. Your Disciples and Followers shall be taken out of the
company of such as are in thraldom: why then be-like we are no Freemen. Here
they thought they had a great advantage against Christ; see v. 33. They
answered him, We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any man: How
say thou, Ye shall be made free? This that they said was not true in the
letter and as to the outward bondage (that they had never been in bondage to
any man): for had they not been in bondage in Egypt? and in bondage in Babylon?
And they were at this present under Tribute and subjection to the Romans. Note,
that a cavilling Spirit is a lying Spirit too: They that are given to the one
sin, are given also to the other. But Christ did not mean this in the letter,
or of any outward bondage; but of bondage by sin that they were in. And so v.
34. he does explain himself; Whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin,
i. e. is in bondage to it; and so will find himself to be at last, v. 35. when
he shall see that he must not abide any longer among the Children and Sons of
God; but shall be sent away as the Servant, or he that is bound to his Master,
is afterward sent out of the house, while those that are the sons, and Free
ones, are kept in, as those that have a Right, and a Privilege to stay, as I
that am Gods natural Son do, and shall abide for ever in my Father's house,
together with all his adopted Children who believe on me.

This 36th Verse, to which I am now come, is Christ's drawing a conclusion from
all this, applying this that he had been speaking about Bondage and Freedom, to
their case, that they, if they had had Grace, might have made a saving use of
it for their own everlasting good. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye
shall be free indeed: i. e. If I, who am the Son of God, and therefore am free,
and can give freedom to others, if I make you free, ye shall be free indeed.
Wherein you have,

1. The name by which Jesus Christ calls himself, the Son of. God; or, as it is
in the Greek, that Son; that is such a Son, as none is: for tho all the Saints
are Sons, yet none of them is such a Son as Christ is. He has in all things
the pre-eminence. I cannot now stand upon this, how far this Son goes beyond
all the other Sons of God, 1. In respect of the manner of his being the Son of
God, by an unconceivable, eternal Generation. The Saints are the Sons of God by
Faith, and by Grace, and by Adoption; but Christ by Nature. It Is the natural
Privilege of Christ, to be the Son of God; whereas we by nature were the
Children of Wrath. 2. In respect of his whole carriage toward his Father. He
never grieved, or displeased, or disobeyed his Father, v. 29th of this 8th of
John, I do always those things that please him. But there are many wry
treadings that the other Sons have cause to mourn for in their best walkings.
In many things we offend all. There Is no child of God upon earth so good a
traveller to Heaven, but that he sometimes stumbles and falls, tho through
Grace he rises again by Repentance. You have that description of a true child
of God, whereby he is differenced from the wicked, tho he has his sins and
failings too, Jer. 8. 4. 3. In respect of his equality with his Father,
according to his divine nature. He is so the Son of God, as that he is God
equal to him, Phil. 2. 6. The Saints are the children of God, and partakers, by
Faith, of the Divine Nature; but yet there is an infinite distance between God
and them: they are Creatures still, tho they be renewed: Tho they are united to
God, yet they are not changed into God: But this Son is as holy, as glorious,
as great as his Father.

2. You have here what this Son can do for poor sinful men: And that is, he can
make them free, set them at perfect liberty, knock off all their chains and
bolts wherewith they are bound and fettered. If the Son shall make you free: i.
e. I can do it, if you will but be willing.

3. The nature of this Freedom that he can give to poor sinners: i. e. Freedom
indeed; ye shall be free indeed; or as the Greek word is, you shall have a
Freedom that is real: that is, a substantial Freedom; (...); it shall not be an
imaginary thing, as that which you now think you have; but it shall be a
Freedom that has Truth and Being in it, to go as near as I can to the Original
Language. Well, now the point is this, That,

Doct. The Lord Jesus Christ does offer a most excellent Freedom to sinners
that are in Bondage; and that it is every ones duty to look after his particular
share in it.

The Branches of this Point are Five in number, all of them clearly arising
from this Text, as you may easily see.

The 1. Branch, for order sake, as to my handling of it, is, That sinners are
in Bondage. For to be made free, does suppose that sinners are not free. Christ
speaks to them, as persons that were not yet free. If the Son therefore shall
make you free: i. e. yet you are not made free, for you commit sin; and
whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin.

2. Branch, That Jesus Christ does offer Freedom to poor sinners that are in
the house of Bondage. If the Son shall make you free. You see he speaks as one
that offers it.

3. That it is every ones duty to look after this Freedom, that they be in the
number of those that are brought into liberty: And that is in these words, [you
free]. You and you should labor to obtain it.

4. That this Freedom comes by Christ. It Is Christ that gives it: Whoever is
made free, is made free by Christ. -- If the Son shall make, etc.

5. That the Freedom which Christ offers to sinners, and gives to believers, is
a most excellent Freedom. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be
free indeed. As no Bondage is like that Bondage, so no Freedom is like this
Freedom. Of these Five Branches of the Doctrine, I intend, God willing, to
speak in their order.

The first Branch of the Doctrine is this, Tbat sinners are in Bondage.

I shall labor to open this Bondage to you in some Particulars.

1. It Is a real Bondage; it is as sure as any thing in the World, that sinners
are in Bondage. It Is as true as the Word of God it self is true: For the Word
of God tells us so. As the liberty that Believers have by Christ, is a Freedom
indeed; so the Bondage that sinners are in, is a Bondage indeed. Mark how Peter
speaks to Simon Magus, who was one of these sinners, Acts 8. 23. For I perceive
that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity. q. d. It may
be thou do not think, that thou art there; but there thou art. Now that this
Bondage is a real thing, appears by Two things, to name no more:

1. By the description that the Scripture gives of the state of sinners. Look
into them, and you shall see, that they are said to be Captives, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
to be in Prison, Isa 42. 7. to be under the power of darkness, Col. 1. 13. to
lie in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. to be all their lifetime subject to bondage,
Heb. 2. 15.

2. By the wonderful awakened sense that those sinners have of their condition,
to whom it pleases God to show mercy. Oh how sensible they are! and what a
World of danger do they apprehend themselves to be in, and what haste do they
make to get out of it, as a man that sees he stands upon a sinking ground, that
if he does not get off presently, 'twill swallow him up. It sets them all on a
trembling, to see where they are, Acts 16. 29, 30. Now why have they such real
deep apprehensions of their condition? Why, surely because they see it is a real
Bondage.

2. This Bondage is a natural Bondage; a slavery that we have by nature, which
is contracted by the Fall of our first Parents. We were born in bondage: The
Fall of Adam was the beginning of this Bondage: there he, and we in him, lost
our Freedom, viz. that holy image of God in which he made us. Pray labor to
lay this Fall to heart more: for here was the inlet to all our misery. Many are
apt to think of the Fall of Adam and Eve, as if there were little or nothing
that concerned them in it: Whereas, alas! in that very sin, all our Freedom
went away, unless it were a freedom to sin; that staid with us still. And,
Beloved, let me tell you, you are not thoroughly humbled for sin, if you be not
humbled for this Original Sin, this Bondage by nature, Psalm. 51. 5.

3. It Is an universal Bondage, that includes all that are out of Christ, over
the whole World. Not one unconverted sinner is a Freeman. Now Beloved, if any
of you should go into a very large Prison, that has a great many Rooms in it,
and Holes, and Dungeons; and wherever you go, you should see all over, the
Prison full, and some of them seem to be men of good fashion, and yet
notwithstanding Prisoners too; why, when you go out, you would be ready to tell
the next body you were acquainted with, If you had been where I have, you would
wonder to see what abundance of Prisoners there be: The House was even stopped
with Prisoners; and you would have wondered to see what brave proper persons
some of them were; and how some went in such Clothes, that one would not have
thought that they had been Prisoners, and yet they were Prisoners too. Methinks
the World is much like this: The World has a great many wide Rooms, and Holes,
and Corners: There Is such a House, and it may be a great many live in that; but
then there is such a Town, or Parish, and many more live in that; but then
there is such a Shire, or County, and many more live in that; but then there is
such a Nation, or Kingdom, and many more live in that; but then there is the
whole World, and many more live in that; and generally up and down, the most of
these are Prisoners upon a Spiritual account; and how richly are some of these
clothed, and how deliciously do they live in the World! and yet many of them
Prisoners too, walking Prisoners, laughing Prisoners, learned Prisoners. In a
word, we were all Prisoners by nature; and all that are out of Christ are so
still. It Is an universal Bondage, reaching to every one of them, Gal. 3. 22. --
all under sin.

4. This Bondage is a cruel Bondage. We read in Scripture of cruel Bondages, as
that of the Children of Israel in Egypt, and in Babylon, where they were in the
Iron Furnace; and yet these were but a shadow of this. These things that I
shall now name, you will say your selves, will make a very cruel Bondage, and all
of them are in a Sinner's Bondage, above any Bondage that is. For I would stay
a little upon this.

1. To be set to the basest work; to be made a very drudg of, that there is not
the mo^^ nasty stinking Employment that is, but that shall be cut out for one.
The hard Bondage of the Children of Israel, is set out by this, that they were
made to work in Mortar, and in Brick, etc. Exodus 1. 14. base dawbing work, that
they could never keep themselves clean. Thus it is with sinners: What does the
Devil employ them about? Why, they have such filthy work, that they are called
filthy persons, unclean persons. In this John 8. 44. Ye are of your father the
devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. Their work is to do the Devils
lusts; whatever comes into his filthy mind, that they must go upon; or whatever
filthiness he suggests to their minds, they must do it: yea, and they will do
it, says Christ. He has such a power in them, and such a conquest over them,
that he has brought their very Wills into obedience. They will do what the
Devil will have them do: therefore 2 Timothy 2. 26. they are said to be taken
captive at his will.

2. To have such a Master as hates one The cruel Bondage of the Children of
Israel. is set out by this, Psalm. 106. 41. Thus it is with sinners, they serve
the Devil, and they work as hard as they can, (see Jer. 3. 5. Micah 7. 3.) and
yet he hates them: While they do his work, he seeks their ruin; while they are
serving of him, he is slaying of them: For do what you will, or can for the
Devil, you can never make him your friend. He is, and he will be an enemy to
all Mankind. He will not do that which the World does: the World will love its
own, but the Devil will not love his own.

3. To have many Masters at once. But you will say, Christ himself says, that
no man can serve two Masters. Ans. No, he cannot, if they be contrary one to
another: So you are to understand that place, Mat. 6. 24. but if they be
subordinate one to another, he may; and a sinner does; he serves many Masters
at once; he serves the Devil, and that while he serves the World; and the
Creature, that he worships; and he serves diverse Lusts and Pleasures, Tit. 2.
3. he is hurried to such a sin, and such a sin. The Devil he is tempting, and
the World that is alluring, and the Flesh that is craving, and Lust that is
raging, and all at one and the same time. What a cruel Bondage is this!

4. To be allowed no Rest. Get you unto your burdens, said Pharaoh, in that
Bondage in Egypt; see Exodus 5. 4, 5. He could not endure that they should have
any rest. So the Devil allows no rest; he is a restless Spirit himself; he is
described as one always at work, Job 1. 7. He comes from going to and fro in
the earth; and walking up and down in it. And after this, he goes and does a
great deal of mischief presently by Gods permission: He stirs up the Sabeans to
plunder Job of Five Hundred Yoke of Oxen, and Five hundred She-Asses, and to
slay the Servants that were with them, all but one, v. 14, 15. And then he was
permitted to burn up Seven thousand Sheep, and the Servants with them, all but
one, v. 16. And then he got the Chaldeans to come and carry away Three thousand
Camels, and kill the Servants with them, all but one, v. 17. And yet he cannot
rest. Then he gets the House to fall upon Job's Children, and killed them, v.
19. Now one would have thought when he had done all this mischief, and
especially to one man, he should have been quiet; but he is at work still
otherwhere, after all this, cap. 2. 2. Going to and fro in the earth, etc. and
now he comes again, to beg that he may do more mischief to Job yet; and so he
does, when God had given him leave, v. 7. he smote Job with sore boils, from
the sole of his foot unto his Crown. Now I say, he is a restless Spirit
himself, always doing mischief: and so he desires that all that serve him
should be always at his work too. It Is an expression concerning those that are
the Devils Slaves, that they cannot rest, Isa. 57. 20. He makes them work in
their very Beds, Micah 2. 1. What a cruel Bondage is this!

5. To be paid for all ones drudging in nothing but counterfeit Coin. Now all
that the Devil gives his Servants, is but Brass money. If it looks well, it is
but washed over: not any of it has Gods Image or Superscription upon it. It Is
not like the wages God gives his Servants: it is all dross within. They have
pleasure, but it is counterfeit pleasure: They have peace, but it is counterfeit
peace: They have hope, but it is counterfeit hope, 2 Cor. 11. 3. The Serpent
beguiled Eve -- He paid her all in counterfeit Coin. The best wages that the
Devil gives for his work, is but deceit, Rev. 12. 9. He is said to deceive the
World, and the whole World. There is not one that works for him, that is not
deceived by him. What a cruel Bondage is this, to be working so hard, and to be
put off with a cheat!

But yet further, there are two things more, that make this Bondage to be more
cruel than any other Bondage: And they are,

1. That tho the Devil's Servants do their Tasks, yet they shall be beaten. You
read of that cruel Bondage in Egypt, That when they did not do their Tasks,
they were beaten, Exodus 5. 14. but here they are beaten tho they do them. It Is
a fruit and effect of the Devils Service, that the more one serves him, the
more one is beaten, the more lashes, and the more stings of Conscience one
shall have. To serve the Devil, it is the way to be beaten black and blew; see
Mat. 27. 3, 4, 5. Judas had done his work the Devil set him about; he had done
out his Task: and then is the time that Judas must be beaten: Then Conscience
fell upon him, so that he hangs himself.

2. This also makes this Bondage more cruel than any other Bondage, that in
this Bondage the Souls of sinners are in Bondage. Other Bondages are upon the
Body, and the outward Man; but this is upon the Soul chiefly. Indeed the
Members of the Body are under this Bondage too. The eye, that is an Instrument
of sin, and the ear that is another, and the tongue, and the hands, and the
feet, and all the Members are employed about evil, Romans 6. 19. But above all,
the Soul, and the Faculties of that, are in this spiritual thraldom. The
Understanding, bondage is upon that, by reason of darkness, and ignorance: the
Will, bondage is upon that, by reason of that stubbornness and disobedience
that is in sinners against God: the Affections, Bondage is upon them, by reason
of their disorder: the Mind and Heart, Bondage is upon them, by reason of their
being defiled, and hardened: the Conscience, bondage is upon that, by reason of
its searedness. So that the very Seat and Throne of the Devil is within them, 2
Cor. 4. 4. In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them that
believe not, etc. The Bondage is within them. Ephesians. 2. 2. He works in the
children of disobedience. Now what a cruel Bondage is this, to have the
precious Soul in the hand of the Devil, to be a Slave inwardly to all
unrighteousness! This is the Fourth thing in the Description of this Bondage.
It Is a cruel Bondage that sinners are in. And then

5. As it is a cruel Bondage, so it is a cursed Bondage: The wrath and curse of
God belongs to this Condition. When the Children of Israel were in their cruel
Bondage in Egypt, yet notwithstanding they were beloved of God. The Scripture
says, That God had respect to them, Exodus 2. 25. He cast an affectionate look
upon them. But he has annexed his high displeasure, and threatened his
vengeance against all that shall abide in this Bondage. He threatens to cast
them off for ever. This you have implied in that Gal. 4. 30. out with them: A
little while hence (if they don't now get their Freedom) God will send them to
their own place: from their Prison of Sin, to the Prison of Hell. And therefore
amongst other parts of their Bondage, they are said to be in Bondage to the
Law; or to be under the Law; which because they have broken, and have no surety
to stand up for them, denounces all its Plagues, and all its Curses against
them, let them live never so much in the outward Righteousness of the Law, Gal.
3. 10. As many as are of the works of the law, are under the curse.

6. Yet tho this is a cruel and a cursed bondage that sinners are in, it is not
a bondage without hope. We don't know what a merciful purpose the Lord may have
concerning some of you that are yet shut up in this house of bondage: whether
he may not deal with you as he did with Israel. Pray read that precious place,
Exodus 6. 5, to 9. I (says God to Moses) have heard the groaning of the
children of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage; and I have remembered my
covenant. Wherefore say unto the children of Israel, I am the Lord, and I will
bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out
of their bondage: and I will redeem you with a stretched-out arm, and with
great judgments. And I will take you to me for a people. and I will be to you a
God: and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God, which brings you out from
under the burdens of the Egyptians. And I will bring you in unto the land
concerning the which I did swear to give it to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob,
and I will give it you for an heritage: I am the Lord. If it may but be thus
with you now! why, who can tell? There is a way of deliverance out of this
bondage, if you will but hearken after it; as I shall show upon the second
branch of this Doctrine, That Jesus Christ does offer Freedom to poor sinners
that are in the house of bondage. But before I come to that, I will make a
little Application of this, That sinners are in bondage.

Use 1. And are they so? Then 1. This may serve to cast an everlasting contempt
and reproach upon all the ways of sin, in that it brings into and keeps all
that walk in them, in bondage. Oh what a thing is sin now! What do you think of
sin, Sirs, upon this account? Is not this an Enemy that you should all rise up
against, and never be quiet till you have got it rooted up out of your hearts?
Is this a thing to be loved and pleaded for, and to be let alone as if there
were no hurt in it? Oh! now methinks I might hope that there is none of you
that would speak one word on sins side. Why, behold what it has done: It has
brought the whole World into slavery. As soon as ever we began to have any
thing to do with it, it took us Prisoners. It made our first Father, and all
his Children miserable creatures. It set up the Kingdom of the Devil in every
one of us. Yea, beloved, there is not a sin that any of you commit, but would
undo you to all eternity, if infinite mercy do not come between you and the
mischief that would follow upon it. I cannot express the evil that is in sin to
you. It Is a thing of a dreadful nature, and of dreadful effects. As for the
nature of it, it is the transgression of the holy Law of God; it is opposition to
his Will; it is emnity against his blessed and holy Majesty; it is that which
does, as it were, rend his sacred Image all to pieces. As for the effects of
it, it separates God and man from one another; it robs him of likeness to him,
and communion with him; it hardens his heart against all that is good, and
inclines him to all manner of disobedience; it is that which fills the World
with sorrow, and is the cause of all miseries in this life, and that which is
to come. Oh that I could tell how to bring you out of love with sin. Why, Sirs,
if God should deal with you according to the desert of one sin, you would never
live a comfortable day. I cannot part with this Use, but I must endeavor a
little to leave an everlasting brand of reproach upon a sinful life; and
therefore consider Four things of which it is made up; viz.

1. Innumerable Wickednesses. 2. Abominable Filthiness. 3. Lamentable
Deceitfulness. 4. Unspeakable Wretchedness.
1. Innumerable Wickednesses. A sinful life is a Sea of sin. As abundance of
waters do meet in the Sea, so abundance of wickedness does meet in a sinful
life. It Is a life to which all manner of sins flow: Adultery, Blasphemy,
Covetousness, Drunkenness, Envy, False dealing, Gluttony, Hypocrisy, Idleness,
Lying, Murder, Pride, Quarrelling, Railing, Swearing, Theft, Uncleanness,
Witchcraft, etc. Amos 5. 12. I know, says God, your manifold transgressions.
It Is not to be reckoned up what Volumes of wickedness one unsanctified heart is
full of. Oh what has every Christless Soul to give account for, when as all
the Faculties of the Soul, and all the Members of the Body, are sinning, and
sinning, and sinning against God continually? And yet as many as they are, God
keeps an account of them every one. I know them, says he. They are forgotten
by them that commit them, but they are remembered by him that forbids them. Hos.
7. 2. They consider not in their hearts, that I remember all their wickedness.
Mark, he remembers all; and, without repentance, he will make you to remember
them again, tho now you have forgotten them; Psalm. 50. 21. he will set them in
order before your eyes.

2. A sinful life has in it Abominable Filthiness, Psalm. 14. 3. The Psalmist
speaking of the children of men, with respect to their sinfulness, says of
them, that they are altogether become filthy. They that live in their sins, are
a polluted people. Hence the Scripture says they are defiled; that the wicked
is loathsome. It compares them to Ethiopians, or Blackmores. They are so
filthy, that God charges all his people to come out from among them, and be
separate, and touch none of their unclean things. Their sins make them deformed
creatures in the sight of God and good men. A sinner is so filthy, that till he
be washed, he is fit for no Company but his own, and the Devil's. God will not let
him come near him, Psalm. 119. 119. Thou put away all the wicked of the
earth like dross. Gods people don't care to be familiar with them, v. 115.
Depart from me ye evil doers. And yet this is not Pride in them, but it is their
duty to keep at a distance from the wicked in their sins, Ephesians. 5. 11. to have
no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness.

3. There is in it Lamentable Deceitfulness. Says the Apostle, We our selves
were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, etc. Tit. 3. 3. The lusts to
which they give up themselves, are called deceitful Lusts, Ephesians. 4. 22. and Heb.
3. 13. there is express mention made of the deceitfulness of sin: Exhort one
another daily (says the Apostle), lest any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. There are many that are wise to sin, but yet they are not
wise enough to avoid the deceits and snares that are in sin. While they nibble
at the Bait, they don't see the Hook. When the Devil comes to tempt us to sin,
he comes with his wiles and devices; he plays the Serpent, and the old Serpent:
he will tell a man, that that which is a sin, is no sin; and so make him
believe he is serving God, when he is sinning against him. Our Savior
foretells his Disciples, that the time comes, that whosoever kills them, shall
think that he does God good service, Joh. 16. 2. Accordingly the Apostle Paul
professes, Acts 26. 9. That he verily thought with himself, that he ought to
do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth. He will tell a man,
that he may do such and such a thing, for none sees him; and the poor deluded
sinner thinks that he is hid, because he sins in secret, or in the dark;
whereas the eyes of the Lord are upon the ways of man, and he pondereth all his
goings, Prove. 5. 21. He will tell a sinner, that there is time enough to repent,
when he may die the next hour. He will tell a sinner, that God is merciful, of
purpose that he may miss of mercy. He will promise pleasure, when 'twill end in
pain; and peace, when 'twill end in trouble; and profit, when 'twill end in the
loss of the Soul. He will tell us, that we are justified, when we are not
sanctified; and that we are real Saints, because others count us so; that our
Gifts are Graces, and that we have communion with God in Duties, because we
have good Expressions in our mouths. Oh, Sirs! take heed to your Souls: watch
against all the delusions of your spiritual Enemies. There are Four great
Deceivers that you are in great danger by: 1. a deceitful Devil. 2. Deceitful
Sin. 3. A deceitful World. 4. Your own deceitful Hearts.

4. There is also in a sinful life Unspeakable Wretchedness, Romans 3. 16.
Destruction and misery are in their ways. Sin makes one more wretched than any
affliction, or any suffering in the World can do. Look into that Ephesians. 2. 12.
and tell me if a sinner is not a wretched creature, Ye were without Christ,
being aliens from the Common wealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants
of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. Mark, without Christ.
There Is enough, if there were no more. To be out of Christ! why, it is to be
amongst them that are lost, among them that are unpardoned, among them that are
unsanctified. Aliens from the commonwealth of Israel; to wit, from them that
God owns. Strangers from the covenants of promise. Is not that a woeful thing,
to have none of the promises, and all of the threatenings of the Word belonging
to one? Having no hope. Is not that a sad condition to have no hope?

Object. But wicked men are full of hopes.

Ans. But alas! what hope is it? No true hope, upon no good ground. They call
it hope, but God calls it no hope. -- without God in the world! what a wretched
condition is that, that whatever they have, they have not God in it? God out of
any thing is a misery; God out of the Creature, God out of Affliction, God out
of Ordinances. And after all this wretchedness, to be wretched for ever, to
suffer the torments of Hell World without end, without a change of our
condition, Psalm 9. 17. All this considered, is not sin, and all the ways, and
all the works of sin, worthy of everlasting contempt and hatred?

Use 2. But more particularly to you that are in this bondage, I must tell you,
That this bondage of yours is an unexcusable bondage. Perhaps you may think
now, that this will lessen your guilt: Why, how can I be good? or how can I
serve God? or how can I leave my sins? why, I am a person in bondage; and what
freedom has one that is in a Prison?

Ans. I answer, This were something, if it were against your wills; but you are
willingly in this bondage. You are like that servant, Exodus 21. 5. I love my
Master -- I will not go out free. Do you remember what Christ says? John 5. 40.
you will not come unto me that you might have life. Now consider but Three
things, and you must needs say this is a willing bondage, and therefore
inexcusable. For, 1. You have sold your selves into this condition, as those a
Kings 17. 17. sold themselves to do evil in the sight of the Lord, to provoke
him to anger. Pray how came you into this bondage? Is it not your own doing?
You were not made thus by God. He may say as it is in Jer. 2. 21. I had planted
thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed: how then art thou turned into the
degenerate plant of a strange vine? Our corruption is from our selves, and our
destruction is from our selves. By nature we yield up our Members, as
instruments of unrighteousness That Is the Scripture Expression. It Is our own
voluntary act. 'Twas not possible that Mankind could ever have come into such
thraldom, had they not given up their consent, and joined with Satan against
God.

2. It Is a willing bondage, if we consider the cheap and low terms upon which
all this is done. Sinners did not stand out to have any great rewards in
consideration of their woeful slavery; but the Devil gets them to be his
Servants at an easy rate. I don't mean in respect of themselves; for 'twill be
a dear bondage to them, without mercy from the Lord; but in respect of what
Satan does for them: In lieu of all that they do for him, alas! he feeds them
with a few painted pleasures, that carry more stings than sweetness in them for
the present, and that will be turned all into bitterness in the latter end, Job
20. 12, 13, 14. It Is a brand that is laid upon profane Esau, that for one
morsel of meat he sold his birthright, Heb. 12. 16. So what have sinners for
their Souls? What have they for all their wearying themselves with the
fulfilling of their lusts, but a wickedlife, and a wretched death? See Isa. 52.
3. Ye have sold your selves for naught.

3. It Is a willing bondage, because you do not groan under it. You are
contented with your Chains, and you are contented with your Prison. Where be
your prayers? and where be your tears? and where be your cries to God, that you
may be delivered? If it were thus with you, you would show that you were
unwillingly where you are: and this would be the way to be delivered, as it was
with the children of Israel in their bondage in Egypt, Exodus 2. 23, 24, 25. But
you sit still.

Use 3. Something to you that God has brought out of this bondage, and then I
have done with this Branch. Three things I leave with you, as your duty.

1. Pity poor sinners that are in this bondage. Can you look upon them, or
think of their condition, without compassion? Here be Objects of pity, if there
be any in the World! Here Is matter of prayer for you, to speak to God on the
behalf of these poor wretched creatures. Here Is matter for your larger hope to
work upon. Oh Friends! if you saw one of the saddest creatures that ever your
eyes beheld, for worldly distress, you would bestow some pity and some help
there. But oh, the pity and the help, and the bowels that these do need, whose
souls are in the bondage of sin! I beseech you, don't see men and women live
without the fear of God; and such multitudes of sinners flocking and posting to
everlasting perdition, as there be, and yet not be affected with their case.
What Paul says in another sense to the Colossians, cap. 4. 18. Remember my
bonds. I say to you, Remember sinners bonds. Prayer may do that in this case,
which is like to Acts 12. 5, 6, 7.

2. Be thankful for your own deliverance. Oh what cause have you to praise God
for his great mercy to your souls! Time was, that you were in bondage, as they
are; were the Servants of sin as they are, and yet you have been graciously
visited, and by a mighty hand, and a stretched-out arm God has brought you out
of this house of bondage: he has taken off the yoke of your spiritual
captivity, that now you can say, as in Gal. 4. 31. We are not children of the
bondwoman, but of the free. Well now, what high admiring thoughts should you
have of this Grace that is bestowed upon you through Jesus Christ! Let me
commend that Scripture to you: it fits your case exceedingly, Psalm. 106. 1, 2.
then verse 10. to 17.

3. Love, and live to your Redeemer: Abide steadfast with Christ in your
Liberty, Gal. 5. 1. Stand fact in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. You know when God
had delivered his people out of Egypt, Pharaoh and all his Host went after
them, if it were possible, to bring them back again: So the Devil, he follows
redeemed souls to have them again if he could. Oh, how he tempts them to get
them back! And if that will not do (as it shall not with Gods Elect) yet he does
what he can to make them live as if they were not delivered, as if they were
not purged from their old sins. Oh take heed of this! I tell you, Christ
expects now, that you should do his service, as before you did the service of
sin. And as the serving of sin is an Evidence of being in that bondage; So it is
only the serving of Christ that will be an Evidence that you are come to this
Freedom. I conclude with that 1 Cor. 6. last words of ver. 19. and the 20th
verse, Ye are not your own: For ye are bought with a price: Therefore glorify
God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods, and show by your walking,
that you don't forget this mercy, and that you don't make light of it. Deuteronomy. 15.
15. Thou shall remember that thou wast a bondsman in the land of Egypt, and the
Lord thy God redeemed thee: therefore I command this thing to day, All God's
commands to you, are grounded upon his redeeming-kindness. Because you are
redeemed, be obedient, and watch against being defiled by new sins.

CHAP. II.
Wherein is handled the second branch of the Doctrine; namely, That Jesas
Christ does offer freedom to poor sinners that are in the house of bondage.
I Come now to the second Branch of the Doctrine; which is, Thht Jesus Christ
does offer freedom to poor sinners that are in the house of bondage. If the Son
shall make you free. It carries an offer of Freedom in it. I shall show,

1. What is to be observed in this offer, from this kind of Expression, If the
Son shall make you free. 2. Where Christ does offer this Freedom. 3. Upon what
accounts he does offer it in respect of himself.
To the 1. From this kind of Expression, If the Son shall make you free,
observe Two Things.

1. That this Offer is real. Christ does not deceive, or dissemble with
sinners, but really he does desire they should have Liberty. Men sometimes make
offers of good things to one another, but they are not sincere in them. But it
is not so with Christ: He is a real well-wisher to sinners souls. He has
expressed it all the ways that can be desired. Would you believe his reality, if
he does woo sinners? Why, so he does, Luke 14. 23. compel them to come in,
viz. by importunate entreaty. Would you believe his reality, if he does wait
for sinners? Why, so he does, Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the door, and
knock, etc. Would you believe his reality if he does weep for sinners? Why, so
he does, He wept over Jerusalem, Luke 19. 41, 42. Would you believe his reality
if he does dye for sinners? Why, so he did, Romans 5. 8. While we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. Nay, would you believe his reality if he should be
damned for sinners? Why, so he was, tho not in respect of the place, yet in
respect of the pains of Hell: He was made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. What
would you have Christ to say or do more than he has said and done, to convince
you, that he would have sinners to be partakers of this Freedom. Has he not
said so in his word? Has he not sealed it with his blood? Has he not accepted
and embraced from time to time, whoever came unto him? Does he not engage
himself by his faithful promise, to do so still to the end of the World, That
he will in no wise cast out such as come to him, John 6. 37. And yet what a
wonder is it, that the World is so unbelieving still? and so hard to be
persuaded, that Christ has any loving thoughts or purposes toward them? Oh
this cursed unbelief, and hardness of heart, that is in men and women, that
makes them, that they will not come to Christ that they might have life!

2. If the Son shall make you free]. Observe from it, That this Freedom is
needed by sinners. Spiritual Freedom is one of their greatest wants. This is
implied in Christ's offer. There is a Two fold need that we have of things.

1. There is a need for convenience, That tho one could make a shift to be
without such a thing, yet it would be more convenient a great deal, to have it.
They could do better with it, than without it. Now it is true, That sinners have
this need of Christ, and the benefits of his Redemption, it would be highly
convenient for them. Christ is so fit and suitable to their condition, that the
least that can be said of it is, That to be sure they can do better with him
than without him. If they had Christ, and had the Freedom that he offers them,
it would not at all be inconvenient for them. He would be no hindrance to them:
It would be more for their profit, and more for their good, than it can be now.
If they had him, he would be no clog nor burden. Let them look to it how they
can do well without him: I am sure they might do better with him. No soul
receives him to his loss. It will be to our loss to refuse him, but it cannot
be to our loss to receive him. Can it be to ones loss to become a child of God?
See John 1. 12. As many as received him, to them gave he power (right or
privilege) to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe on his name.
Why, therefore I warrant thee, poor sinner, if thou had Christ, he would not
hurt thee; he would be convenient enough for thee. But alas! this is too low:
This is not worthy of Christ, to speak merely in this kind of way. Therefore,

2. There is a need for necessity, for absolute necessity, That if one has not
such a thing, there is no shift can be made, in the world, without it. You may
bring this and that, and try whether 'twill serve instead of it, but all wont
do. If you had but that, that would do alone, but nothing will do without it.
Now such need there is of Christ, nothing will do without him: There Is not
salvation in any other: for there is none other name under heaven, given
amongst men, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4. 12. There be many that have
tried to get their freedom, and pardon, and salvation in another way, but all
in vain. Some have gone to an outward Profession for it; some have gone to this
and that Opinion for it; and some have gone to Duties, and to the Righteousness
of the Law for it: but all would not do. No: why, it is Christ that is the one
thing needful. Oh beloved! labor to press and urge this upon your souls; You
must have Christ; and therefore ask thy soul, Soul, why do stand a dallying,
and a trifling? and why art so hard to be persuaded to close with him? Why,
have him I must, and therefore have him I will. I know there is this and that in
my way to hinder me; but through Gods help, nothing shall hinder me; I Will break
through all difficulties. I, poor soul, the Lord grant thou may: and I am
confident, that if thou once come to this, the Lord will give him thee. He
never denies Christ to them that will take no denial. If they will have him,
they shall have him. It Is a very observable and encouraging Scripture, in that
discourse of our Savior with the woman of Samaria, John 4. 10. Jesus answered,
and said unto her, If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says to
thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked of him. The Greek word
signifies, thou would have asked like an importunate beggar, that must have
what he came for: And what follows? and he would have given thee living water.

3. If the Son shall make you free]. Observe again in this Offer, That Christ
prevents sinners with his mercy. He is aforehand with them. They do not say to
Christ, Pray, will you make us free? but he makes the first mention of Freedom
to them. Free Grace is the most condescending thing that ever was. Never did
any creature so stoop to another, as God stoops to sinners. He comes and knocks
at their door, before ever they knock at his, 2 Cor. 5. 12. God was in Christ,
reconciling the world to himself. Mark, the World was not reconciling it self
to God, nor God to it self; but God reconciling the World to himself, God's
love is always the first love: It Is the Fountain, and the Cause of our love to
him, 1 John 4. 19. We loved him, because he first loved us. It Is true, that the
Lord is sought unto for mercy by them to whom he intends to show it; but it is
the Lord that stirs up their hearts to do it: He sets them a crying, and then
they cry. They come to Christ, but it is the Father that draws them. There could
be no desires, or breathings in us after God, if they were not begotten of his
Spirit. Alas! our corrupt nature wont afford one good desire, till God give it.
It will go further from God, but it wont come nearer to him of it self. And
therefore the mercy of God toward poor souls, is a very wonderful thing, not
only in that it is so large, but in that it is so early. It is up before the
soul is up, Isa. 65. 1. I am sought of them that asked not for me: I am found
of them that sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that
was not called by my name. Oh, how much are we beholding to Christ, for coming
to us first!

4. If the Son shall make you free]. If he shall. Observe this next, That it is
much to be feared, whether some that have the Offers of Grace, will ever close
with them. Here you see they had an Offer of Freedom; but Christ puts a
doubtful word upon it, as to their acceptance: If he shall, etc. As if he
should say, It may be some of you will hear of this, and yet never partake in
it, but live and die in the bondage that you are in. In this very Chapter,
where Christ is offering this Freedom, he tells some of them in ver. 21. that
they would die in their sins. Now beloved, oh what a joyful thing would it be,
if you would all accept of this Freedom, and close with this Grace that is
offered to you! Why, truly it would be such a joyful thing, if but one amongst
you should accept of it, that it would be enough to set all Heaven a rejoicing,
Luke 15. 7. 10. And why should I not hope, but that it may be thus with some or
other of you? yea, perhaps with many of you. The Lord grant, that there may not
be one amongst you, that shall turn his back upon Christ. Whoever that man or
woman shall be, woe be to them. And yet now it is much to be feared, that Christ
will be rejected by some, to whom he has been offered. The Apostle Paul tells
the Corinthians, that he was with them in weakness, and in fear, and in much
trembling, 1 Cor. 2. 3. Why, what made Paul fear and tremble so, that while he
was a preaching, he was, as 'twere, all of a trembling? What, was it because he
was afraid to preach? No: but he was afraid what his preaching would come to,
in respect of some of them, whether ever it would profit them, whether ever it
would prevail with them. Now give me leave to acquaint you a little, what
things, as to some persons, may be grounds of fear, whether ever they will
close with Christ's gracious offer of Freedom.

1. In that there be so few, in comparison, in all Ages of the World, that have
done it. Beloved, Christ's flock will be but little, when he has gathered all
his sheep. Heaven would hold a thousand times more than ever will come there.
No doubt but there be some that seem now, as if they had closed with Christ,
and yet will be found at last not to have done it. They have mistaken their
whole work, and their hearts have deceived them from the beginning to the end.
A right closing with Christ, is a very exact thing: It Is not every one can hit
on it, Mat. 7. 14. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to
life, and few there be that find it. And therefore may it not be feared, that
this present Generation; yea, and this present Assembly, may have some amongst
them that will never close with Gospel Offers?

2. The little good news that there is up and down where the Gospel comes, of
the conversion of souls. People flock to Meetings; but who believes our report,
or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? Sinners abiding in an unconverted
condition, is a great ground of fear, what will become of their souls. If you
have not yet closed with Christ, as unregenerate persons have not, we cannot
but fear you may lose him. If a man be in a very dangerous sickness, is there
not cause to fear he will die? So if a man be still out of Christ, why,
certainly this is something to question, whether ever he will be in him, Acts
8. 22. Peter puts it as a doubtful case, whether ever Simon Magus would be
pardoned his sins, because he was still in an unrepenting condition.

3. When men do set light by Christ, and the Offers of Grace. There Is great
hopes of those souls, that tho they have not closed with Christ, yet they begin
to have good thoughts of him and his mercy, and love, and salvation, is
somewhat commended; if they acknowledge, yea truly, this is the rich goodness of
God, that ever such Offers should be made to me. I confess I do look upon
Christ, and the Freedom that he holds forth to poor sinners, as an excellent
thing. God forbid that I should say to the contrary. I know the pardon of sin,
and the love of God, are great Privileges; happy is that soul that has them:
and I would I might be one of them. Ay, why, this is something. Methinks it is a
kind of Language that would give one some hope concerning such a soul, as the
young man in the Gospel, when he did approve and commend of what Christ said in
Mark 12. 32, 33. Well, master, thou have said the truth, etc. is answered by
Christ, v. 34. -- Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. But now when a man
shall look upon all that Christ offers to him, as nothing, and set himself to
despise and disgrace his invitations, as if Christ had done him no kindness in
sending all his messages of love to him; and let Christ go where he will, and
his salvation go where it will, for his part, he does not care for them. This
is a great ground of fear, that such a person will never close with the Offers
of Grace. See Mat. 22. 3. Those who in the Parable were called to the
Marriage-Supper, it is said, first they would not come: then ver. 4. being
invited again, ver. 5. they fell a slighting of it, or, as in the Greek, they
set it all at naught: and ver. 6. they dealt with his Servants, as if he that
had sent them had been their Enemy. Why, see ver. 7. what becomes of these
persons; they were destroyed, and their City burnt; and compare with it, Luke
14. 24. for it is all to the same purpose: they were not to taste of the supper.

4. Another ground of fear, that some will never close with Christ, is, when
they turn back again from that forwardness to good things which they began to
put forth. They seemed to have a love, and a zeal, and a desire toward Christ:
But it may be they are now grown dead, and cold, and careless. They had fine
and hopeful buds a while ago. One might see how they were convinced, and
stirred. Oh, what hope was there, that such a one would prove a Convert and a
Saint! But it may be all is gone, and worn off. Their goodness was but like a
morning cloud, and as the early dew it passed away, Hosea 6. 4. It Is thus,
beloved with many that make a Profession: They promise fair at the first, and
for a while, but then there comes something, and turns off such a one, and then
there comes another thing, and turns off such a one, and Christ and they are
parted for ever. And therefore I beseech you, as you love your so^^ take heed
of growing loose, and vain, (...) lukewarm, after you have begun to have set
out for God. Oh! consider what a serious thing Religion is: and if you begin to
own it, why, stand to it, charge your hearts against backsliding. It Is a great
sin to fall off from good beginnings, and exceeding dangerous to the soul; see
2 Pet. 2. 20, 21. If after they have escaped the pollutions of the world,
through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again
entangled therein, and overcome; the latter end is worse with them than the
beginning. For it had been better for them not to have known the way of
righteousness, than after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment
delivered unto them.

5. Another ground of fear of this, is when persons are grown old, and are
ready to go out of the World, and yet have not closed with Christ; that they
have let it alone all their life hitherto, and now their life is even spent by
course of nature. I would discourage none, tho they be stricken in years, from
looking out for Christ. I know God is not bound to any time: He saves whom he
will, and calls when he will But oh, you that have put off closing with Christ
till old age, why, why did you not mind it sooner? I ask you, Is this the
fittest time for such a work? or the likeliest time for such a work? Do you
think there is not some reason to fear, lest you should die Christless, as you
have lived thus far without him? I dare not say that your condition is
hopeless; but I will say, that the condition of young ones is more hopeful:
Christ has said, They that seek me early, shall find me, Prove. 8. 17. I am
certain, it is the great design of the devil to do what he can to hinder persons
from being good while they are young, because he hopes that then they will not be
good when they are old.

5. If the Son shall make you free.] Shall make you; observe one thing more
from this kind of Expression, viz. That upon whomsoever Christ bestows this
Freedom, he takes in the consent and will of that person in the doing of it.
Tho at the first, there is an unwillingness in the Soul, and Christ has a
cross piece to deal with, and there is somewhat to do to get its consent (as
there is sometimes in a person, to whom a man goes with a desire to take her
for his wife, she is hard to be won) yet at last, the free and the full consent
comes: So that when Christ has put the question, Soul, shall I make thee free?
and has pressed it home with plentiful and powerful Arguments (as he knows how
to do it) the Soul is brought to make this answer, Thou shall make me free;
much like to that, Genesis 24. 57, 58. where Rebekah being asked, Whether she would
go with Abraham's servant, answers, I will go. The match between Christ and the
Soul, it is not a forced business altogether; not but that he puts forth an holy
violence in the work, else he would never obtain his suit: he compells them to
come in; but it is such a compulsion that carries such love with it, as that
the Soul neither can nor will finally stand out against him, but it casts it
self at last into his arms and bosom, and it is glad it is there, Cant. 2. 3. And
unless Christ should take in the will of the Soul, the Soul and Christ could
never live comfortably together; and that is the great design of Christ, that
the Soul should live comfortably with him, that it should have a husband that
she can rejoice in. Yea, the soul is made so willing, that it would have Christ
upon any terms. If Christ should, to try the truth and the constancy of her
love, make as if he would not have her, and seem to cast her off, oh the
thoughts of this would wound her, and grieve her so, as that she cannot but
faint under it: nothing will satisfy her but his person and presence, Cant. 1.
2, 3, 4. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better
than wine. -- Draw me, we will run after thee. -- We will be glad and rejoice
in thee, we will remember thy love more than wine. You see how sweetly the Soul
comes off to him; she resolves to run after him, and resolves to love him, and
resolves to rejoice in him.

Hence then you may know, when there is like to be a match betwixt Christ and
your Souls. How do your wills come off to the business? Are your affections
turning toward him, and prizing of him? That Is a sign that Christ has laid
some good hold upon you, if he holds you by the heart. God has undertaken,
that Christ shall have the free consent of those whom he is to make his own,
Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. Isa. 55. 5.
-- Nations that knew thee not, shall run unto thee. It is therefore this
willingness that we pray that God would work in you; and when that is once
wrought, let all the devils in hell keep you from Christ if they can.

The second thing proposed to be inquired into, upon this second Branch of the
Point, is, Where Christ offers this freedom. And I answer, Where ever the
Gospel comes. You that live under the Gospel, and the preaching of the Gospel,
you live under a Dispensation, where Soul-freedom is to be gotten. You shall
find, that when the preaching of the Gospel is spoken of, it is set forth as a
Dispensation, under which poor sinners that are in bondage may come to Freedom.
Thus Act. 26. 17, 18. Christ says, that he sent Saul to the Gentiles, to turn
them from the power of Satan unto God. So, 2 Cor. 10. 4. Paul speaking of his
Preaching, he says, 'twas for the casting down of strong holds; that is,
whatever holds a sinner in his spiritual Bondage, why this same Gospel which
was preached by him, is a Dispensation for the pulling of it down, that by it,
through the power of God going along with it, the imprisoned, inslaved soul,
may be come at, and set free. So 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. when Paul speaks to Timothy
about his preaching the Gospel, he bids him instruct in meekness them that
oppose themselves, etc. -- and that they may recover themselves out of the
snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him at his will, etc. showing,
that the Gospel is a Dispensation where Freedom may be gotten. And hence you
may see, that this great Ordinance of preaching Christ to you, is set up and
appointed by God for the bringing to pass of great things. It Is the Lords
mighty Engine, to work sinners out of the kingdom of the devil; which when once
it is done, oh how will a poor soul admire Gods goodness to it, and be thankful!
So was it with the Apostle Paul, Col. 1. 12, 13. Giving thanks* unto the
Father, which has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of saints in
light: Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has translated us
into the kingdom of his dear Son.

And you, Sirs, that are yet out of Christ, that come hither and hear the
Gospel preached, you must know that this is one of the Places and Assemblies in
which Christ offers Freedom to you: and therefore, the great end of your coming
hither should be, that you may get your freedom. Don't come for Fashions sake,
but for Freedoms sake; that you may not any longer remain in this cruel, cursed
Bondage, which I have showed you are in.

Obj. But you said, that Christ offers this Freedom: I don't see that Christ is
here.

Ans. It Is true, he is not here personally: Time was that Christ in his own
person was in the World, and offered this Freedom; he spoke these words here in
the Text with his own mouth, If the Son shall make you free, you shall be free
indeed. If you had lived in those days in which Christ was upon Earth, and in
any of the places to which he came, you might have heard Christ himself preach,
and inviting and encouraging poor sinners to come unto him, and take this
Freedom: for when he was here, he made it his business to offer it up and down
where ever he came. But that was but for a while; that bodily presence of
Christ was quickly withdrawn; after that he died and rose again, and ascended
into Heaven, and there he sits at the right hand of God, till he shall be
revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, etc. 2 These. 1. 7,
etc. But in another sense he is here still; and it is as well for the getting of
your Freedom, as if he were here in person.

1. He is here by his Ambassadors; what we do in his Name, that he does by us.
You never have any Ministers of Christ preaching to you, but Christ is by them
offering Freedom to you; and in this Work and Ministration that we are about,
you should be carried beyond those weaknesses and infirmities which you see in
us, and you should consider whom we represent, as the Apostle tells the
Galatians, that they did so at his first preaching the Gospel to them: See Gal.
4. 13, 14. Ye know how through infirmity of the flesh, I preached the gospel
unto you at the first. And my temptation which was in my flesh ye despised not,
nor rejected, but received me as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus. And
I Will tell you a little, Beloved, for the stirring of you up to prize a
Gospel Ministry, what use Christ is pleased to make of us, in order to this
Freedom (though we are but earthen Vessels, and poor Creatures like your
selves) As,

1. To be. Publishers of it among you. He commands us and sends us to blow this
Trumpet of the Gospel in your hearing, to proclaim this joyful sound to you,
that Christ came into the world to save sinners. We are bound, as we will
answer to Christ, to acquaint you with this good news, that God is in Christ
reconciling the world to him*self: that now is the time wherein prison-doors
may be opened, and the yoke of your spiritual Bondage may be broken all to
pieces: and oh, how should you welcome us in the Name of the Lord, for bringing
you such a Message as this is! Such an Entertainment does the Prophet foretell
the Preachers of the Gospel should receive; see Isa. 52. 7. How beautiful upon
the mountains are the feet of him that brings good tidings, that publishes
peace, etc. Beloved, I am sure that the news of this Deliverance, cannot but be
welcome to those that are sensible of their Bondage: See Exodus 3. 16, 17. q. d.
Moses, go and publish this among them, that I will deliver them out of this sad
slavery that they are in. Now compare chap. 4. 29, 30, 31. where the Message
was delivered to them: you see how they embraced it, they believed, bowed their
heads, and worshipped.

2. To be Pleaders with you about it. The Lord gives us leave to be exceeding
earnest with you about the matters of your souls, to stir you up by all the
Ways and by all the Arguments that possibly we can, to look after this
Freedom. He requires, that we should lay out the very strength of our spirits
in this Work; that we should deal with you as for our lives, and as for the
saving of our own souls. He would have us study what to say to you, and to pray
much to God, that he would fill our mouths with Arguments when we come to speak
to you; and that he would help us, that we may not be willing to let you alone
in your trifling careless delays; but to urge upon you the necessity of this
Freedom, and the danger of missing of it, and the benefit that you will reap by
it. Ministers should not only be Publishers, but they should be Pleaders, yea,
Beseechers of their hearers in this matter: We pray you in Christ's stead (says
the Apostle) be ye reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5. 20.

3. To be Instruments for the conveying of it to you. Through grace, Beloved,
we can help you to Christ, and help you to Freedom: Thus the man of Macedonia
that appeared to Paul in a Vision, prayed him, saying, Come over and help us,
Act. 16. 9. Poor sinners need help for their souls, and God has made his
Ministers helpers; they can help them to Knowledge, and Repentance, and Faith,
and out of their Sins, and help them to Heaven. He has given them Gifts and
graces for it, and a Scripture call to the Work; and he has put a willingness
in their hearts to do good to souls: and he has, and does give success and
blessing to the word of his grace by them, and by the foolishness of preaching
to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 21. So that Christ is here still by his
Ambassadors. But,

2. Which is more than this, He is here by his Spirit; and as long as that is
here, there is no fear but Freedom may be gotten. This is the great Successor
to Jesus Christ, in that work of doing good to souls, Joh. 16. 7, 8, 9, etc. I
beseech you consider, that the Spirit does attend the preaching of the Gospel,
and therefore it is called the Ministration of the Spirit; and what that can do
in our preaching, you may see, 2 Cor. 3. 6. -- the Spirit gives life. And were
it not for the presence of this Spirit of Christ in his Ordinances, both our
preaching and your hearing would be in vain. But now, because Christ has sent
his Ambassadors, and sends his Spirit also with them, I tell you, Beloved, you
are under a glorious Ministration, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9, etc. because whatever
veil is upon peoples hearts, and whatever bondage they are in, this Spirit can
take it away, and bring them into liberty, verse. 16, 17. But I must hasten.

The 3d Inquiry is, Upon what account Christ does offer this freedom, in
respect of himself? I will give you an answer to this in three things.

1. Upon the account of his Purchase: he has purchased Freedom, and therefore
he may offer it; it is his own to dispose of, as a thing that a man has bought
is his own: the Lord Jesus was willing to buy Freedom for you, that he might
give it to you. And here, it may be, you may desire to be resolved in two
Questions. Qu. 1. Of whom did Christ buy it? Qu. 2. And what did Christ pay for
it? Ans. to the 1. He bought this Freedom at the hand of his Fathers Justice:
for by sin we were all fallen into the hand of Justice, and out of that hand we
could not be taken, but by Christ's making full Satisfaction to it; therefore he
had to deal with a just and an angry God in this business. This is the meaning
of that, in Gal. 4. 4, 5. -- God sent forth his son made of a woman, made under
the law, To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the
adoption of sons. Mark here how 'twas with us, and how it must be with Christ,
that he might redeem us. We were under the Law, i. e. we lay liable to all that
the Law could threaten to us, or inflict upon us: And therefore, Christ he must
be, and he was made under the Law; i. e. in what he was to do for our
Deliverance, he must give the Law or the Justice of God its full demand: and he
must not expect to have any thing abated of it, by any such thing as mercy; for
he had not at all to deal with that in this work, he was not made under Mercy,
but under the Law. Now from hence we may quickly give an answer to the 2d
Question, What did Christ pay for this Freedom? Ans. Why to be sure some great
price, since he had to do with the offended and enraged Justice of God. For you
must know and believe, that for our sins, the wrath of God was dreadfully
kindled against us: and if Christ would put himself in our place, and be our
Redeemer, all this wrath must dreadfully burn against him; he must suffer so,
as that he must be made a curse for us; and he must be so bruised and broken,
and marred by the heavy weight of Punishment that lay upon him, that people
might even be astonished to see him, and so as to make him that he could not
even be known who he was, he looked so ghastly. See Isa. 52. 14. and therefore,
his precious Life and Blood must go for it; Body, Soul and all must be filled
with the tokens of God's displeasure. And therefore, you shall find the Lord,
as it were, stirring up of his Justice, as if that it self were too slow,
against him, when his sufferings are spoken of, Zech. 13. 7. Awake, O sword,
against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow. Oh Beloved, the
great worth that there is in one drop of Christ's Blood! but in this Work, he
must pour it out like water: See Psalm. 22. 14, 15. And therefore, I pray
observe this, that generally when you have this Redemption of Christ spoken of
his Blood is mentioned with it, to show what an inestimable price he paid for
it. See Zech. 9. 11. As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant, -- Ephesians. 1.
7. In whom we have redemption through his blood. Heb. 9. 11, 12. -- By his own
blood -- 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, -- but
with the precious blood of Christ --

2. Upon the account of his Pity. The Pity and tender Compassion that was in
the heart of Christ toward poor sinners, as he saw them lie in their lost
condition; he saw they needed Deliverance, and he could not pass him by, as
this and that man did the man that lay among thieves; but as the good
Samaritan; he would go to them to pour in Wine and Oil into their Wounds, and
bind them up. Do you think, Beloved, that ever Christ would have endured, that
such cruelty from his Enemies, and such severity from his Fathers Justice,
should have been exercised upon him, if he had not had his heart full of pity
toward poor sinners, as it could hold? Certainly, 'twas his mercy that made
him undergo all that misery. See Heb. 5. 1, 2. Tit. 3. 4. Beloved, Jesus Christ
saw that we were pitiful creatures by sin, and by reason of what was due to us
for sin, and he did pity us, Isa. 63. 9. -- In his pity he redeemed them: Yea,
and he does pity us still, and he has compassion for poor sinful creatures
still, Heb. 4. 15. We have not an high Priest that cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities. Therefore his pity to you makes him, that he cannot
but offer this Liberty to you.

3. Upon the account of his Power. He offers this Freedom to sinners, because
he can set them free; how fast soever they are bound, he can loose them. Hence
it is said, Psalm. 89. 19. I have laid help upon one that is mighty. As the Lord,
when he came to redeem Israel out of their Bondage in Egypt, he came with a
mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm: So does Christ, when he comes to
redeem a soul; let him meet with what as w^ll in his way, he carries all before
him; where he will deliver, he will deliver, (...) goes all that stands against
him. The sinner at first, and Satan with him, they do what they can to make
good their Fortifications against him, to keep out such a Word from entering,
and such a Conviction from fastening; and it sets up its own carnal plea's, and
excuses, and delays, and self-righteousness, etc. and all to keep out Christ
from setting up his Throne: but all before he has done, tumbles like a Babel,
and crumbles into dust before him. It Is true, there is a great deal of strength
put out against him; the sinner calls all his shifts together, and the devil
calls all his devices together, to resist, but Christ is resolved to have the
day. And therefore, mark how he is described as one that goes forth with
invincible Power in this Work, Psalm. 45. 3, 4, 5. So Rev. 6. 2. He went forth
conquering, and to conquer. Beloved, we must offer this Freedom to you, tho we
of our selves have no power to prevail with you; but he in whose Name we come,
he can break your gates of Brass, and cut in sunder your bars of Iron.

Use. And now, does* the Lord Jesus Christ offer this Lib^^^^ you? Oh then, I
beseech you, let (...) ^^cepted of you. Oh Beloved, it is off^^ (...) to this
end, that it should be accepted: (...) ^ot that it should be made light of, as
if t^^^e were no great matter in it, whether you had it, or had it not. I
therefore urge that Scripture upon you now, Heb. 12. 25. See that ye refuse not
him that speaks: For if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth,
much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from
heaven. What, shall Christ make such an offer to you, and will you not close
with it? Will you that are in Bondage perish in your Bondage, when you might be
set free? Is it such a good condition that you are in, that you should desire
to stay in it? The prison and bondage of the Body, tho it be nothing to this
that your souls are in, yet how glad are poor Creatures to hear, that there is
any hope or way for deliverance out of that. Oh, sirs, let not Christ lose his
love, let him not lose his labor, let him not lose his longing: fain he would
have you set at liberty: And therefore, don't hug your chains, as if you were
loath to part with them. Lay this to your heart, that Freedom is offered you;
how can you shift it, but you must close with it now? If it had not been
offered, there had been some excuse: but will you put it off, now it has been
offered; yea, when it has been offered particularly to every one of you, that
there is none of you have been excluded from this gracious Invitation: and when
it has been offered with a notwithstanding, notwithstanding all the great and
grievous sins which you have lived in, as it was said to Judah, Jer 3. 1, 2.
Thou have played with many lovers: yet return to me, says the Lord: And when
it has been offered frequently, not once or twice, but often; How often would
I have gathered you, says Christ to Jerusalem? God has seen you neglect this
Salvation, such a Sermon, and such a Sermon; and yet he has sent again, and
again, and again to you: And when it has been offered with so much importunity
and earnestness, that you have never been pleaded with about any thing in this
World, as you have about getting this Freedom: And when it has been offered to
you so freely, that you shall be redeemed at another cost, and not at your
own: you have sold your selves for naught, and ye shall be redeemed without
price: I say, when it has been offered, and thus offered, why what is your duty
from all this, but to close with it? 1. Close with it thankfully. What? Is
there yet Freedom for me, for such a one as I? Oh, blessed be God! admired be
his Mercy! adored be his Name! 2. Close with it thoroughly. Take heed of doing
it by halves: take heed of parting with your sins but as Pharaoh would part
with the children of Israel; he would yield to this and that upon force, but he
never came up to Gods terms. 3. Close with it quickly, before your day of Grace
be at an end, before it be too late to look out for it. Oh, sirs! stir, stir
for your souls, for the Lords sake, quickly, quickly; you may else be undone to
all eternity. Opportunities of grace are not long lived; and when they are
over, you will wish you had improved them, and then there will be no fetching
them back. I commend that awakening Scripture to you, Heb. 12. 15, 16, 17. Look
diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness
springing up, trouble you, and thereby many be defiled: Lest there be any
fornicator, or profane person, as Esau, who for one morsel of meat, fold his
birthright. For ye know, how that afterward, when he would have inherited the
blessing, he was rejected: for he found no place of repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears. That may be lost in a little time, that can
never be recovered.

But because this closing with Christ is a great Subject, and of so great
importance; and because I know there is a great deal of backwardness in the
heart of man to close with Christ; and for fear lest you should not have as
mueh said to you as can well be spoken by man, to persuade you to accept of
this soul-delivering Jesus whom I preach unto you this day: give me leave to
carry on the Use somewhat further, by way of motive. And tho many things might
be insisted on to stir you up, yet I will single out this one thing especially:
namely, to beseech you to consider how guilty you will be if you don't close
with Christ; and what grievous sinners you are, and will be found to be at the
great day of his appearing.

1. You are guilty of Ignorance. You Will show your ignorance of Christ, that his
worth and excellency was never seen by you, that you never took him to be a
Pearl of great Price; for if you had, to be sure the next thing would have been
to make him yours, Matthew. 13. 45, 46. Beloved, there is none that ever refused
Christ, that knew him; I don't mean, that knew him after the flesh, or that saw
him with the eye of the body; there were many that beheld him so, and had no
desire to him, Joh. 1. 10, 11. but none that ever knew him in a spiritual
manner, but fell in love with him: He draws all the hearts, and all the
affections of them to whom he has been revealed by the Holy Ghost. It is
therefore certain, that you dwell in darkness to this day, if you have no mind
to close with Christ; for if you were brought into the light, you would follow
him.

2. You are guily of unthankfulness. What! to make such a sad requital to
Christ for all his kindness toward you, as to prepare such good things for
you, and now to have none of them! Why, has he not deserved better at your
hands then this? Was there no love, nor no mercy to your souls in what Christ
has done for poor sinners? Nay, did you ever hear of the like love, or the
like mercy? Is it not beyond all comparison, and beyond all expression? Did you
ever hear of a Savior that delivered from so great danger? Did you ever hear
of a Surety that undertook to pay such great Debts? Did you ever hear of a
Physician that healed such great Diseases? What, and shall this be all the
thanks he shall have now, to be rejected? If God will take it ill at your
hands, to pass by those mercies that are but for the comfort of your bodies,
without thankfulness; how much more will he be displeased with you, for passing
by the offers of those mercies that are for the salvation of your Souls? Why,
Sirs, you that refuse Christ, where is your sense of God's goodness? where is
that acknowledgement that he should have from you? Has he done you no
courtesy in sending his Son? Is the very hopes and possibility of being
recovered out of your lost condition, a thing not to be at all affected with?
If a man does but offer you his help in your need, you will thank him, and you will
show that you are taken with his kindness, by accepting of it; and you will tell
him how much you are beholding to him, and that you shall own him for your
Friend as long as you live. Why, where is your thankfulness to Christ then? why
don't you own him for your Friend? Obj. Why, you will say perhaps, We are
thankful to Christ for his kindness to poor sinners? Ans. What, and not close
with him? how can that be? it is the closing with him that is the thankfulness
to him. If you do not this, you may say you are thankful, but who will believe
it? show it by your acceptance, Col. 1. 1, 2. Giving thanks unto the Father,
who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in
light. They give thanks; but see verse. 14. they had closed with it; We have
redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins.

3. You are guilty of Willfulness. It may be you will put it upon your weakness
that you don't close with Christ: and I grant indeed that you are without
strength, and that you must have a power beyond your own to enable you, Joh. 6.
44. No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him: and
if ever you come to him, it must be by grace from above. But yet, I pray
consider, that it is such a weakness, as is joined with wilfulness, Joh. 5. 40.
Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life. The great thing that hinders
your closing with Christ is, your will is against it. I am certain, that if you
were but willing, you would do it: only you must know what a willingness I
mean; Such a willingness as is spoken of in Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall be
willing in the day of thy power. Oh, if the power of Christ were but once come
upon your wills, to turn them, and bring them in, you would run to him with
strong and swift desires. If sinners were not willful in refusing of Christ, do
you think that God would ever charge them with willfulness? How often would I
have gathered you? etc. and ye would not, says our Savior of the Jews, Matthew.
23. 37. A wicked man carries it so to Christ, as that it is plain he is
unwilling to have him. He lays it upon his weakness, and he thinks thereby to
come off the better: I cannot repent, says he, and it is true, God says so
too: and I cannot please God, and God says so too, Romans 8. 8. and yet this
shall not excuse him; for there is a will not, with his cannot. If he were only
weak, and desirous to come, and did not oppose and resist the motions and
strivings of the Spirit, and the calls of Grace, 'twere something; if he were
faithful in the use of that natural Power that he has, though indeed he wants
a spiritual Power, 'twere something. But alas! he does not like Christ's terms,
and Christ's yoke; his will is against them.

4. You are guilty of the love of sin; not only of sinning, but of loving of
sin. By your not closing with Christ, you declare that you have some beloved
Lust or other which you cannot endure to part with; and that takes up those
affections and that delight which should be set upon Christ. Sirs, tho I cannot
see nor search your hearts, yet thus much I know of that which is within you,
that you who stand out against Christ, have something in the Throne that should
not be there. There is, as sure as can be, some darling-reigning sin; if there
were not, Christ and you would quickly make up a Match. Obj. But how can you
tell this, since you don't know our hearts? Answ. Why, we know it, because God
has told us so in his Word, that it is by reason of some unmortified sin that
people don't close with Christ; they have bosomed up some dear corruption or
other. I ground it upon that Scripture in Gal. 5. 24. They that are Christ's,
have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. Mark, if this be a
sign that persons are come to Christ, That the flesh with the affections and
lusts are crucified in them; then the reason why they don't come to Christ, is
because there are uncrucified affections and lusts in them; they have some Idol
in their hearts, to which they bow down and worship. And therefore, let me
allude to that Scripture, Act. 3. 14. where Peter is dealing with the Jews
about their standing out against Christ, But ye denied the holy One, and the
Just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you. Beloved, every unmortified
reigning lust is a murderer, a murderer of your souls; and now, what is the
reason that you don't own and close with this holy and just One, the Lord Jesus
Christ? Why, it is because you desire that this murderer should be granted unto
you: As the People there in Matthew. 8. 32. with 34. that they might keep their
Swine, they besought Christ that he would depart out of their coasts. So you
would keep your swinish Lusts.

5. You will be guilty of Pride. Oh, in what pride of heart do you walk, that
reject the Grace of GOD! You have high thoughts of your selves; certainly you
take your selves to be what you are not, as Christ says to them of Laodicea,
Rev. 3. 17. Thou say, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing: and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked. Pray give me leave to be free with you: Why, Sirs, you that
stand out against those Calls of Grace, why are you so proud? Soul, what art
thou, that thou look so coy upon Jesus Christ? I would fain have thee
understand thy self a little: Why, I pray thee consider, what Portion is Jesus
Christ like to have with thee, if he should have thee? What can bring to him?
Can thou bring any thing to him but a broken, ruined, undone condition? It Is
true, thou have a deal of thine own, but what is it? A deal of sin, a deal of
misery, a deal of deformity, a deal of poverty: If these things will make thee
rich, thou have enough of them; but as for any thing else, thou have it not,
nothing at all to render thee desirable or lovely in Christ's* eyes: and yet
does he offer love to thee, and woo thee as heartily, as if thou were some
great and excellent person, and had riches, and beauty, and worthiness, (tho,
alas! if ever he have thee, he must clothe thee from top to toe) And yet, will thou refuse him? why, I marvel at thy Pride! You know, it is counted an odious
thing by the common Proverb that goes among us, to be Poor and Proud: so
sinner, what, art so Proud, and yet art so Poor! The Lord in mercy show thee
what thou art.

6. You will be guilty of Cruelty to your selves. I might stand upon that of
Cruelty to us the Ministers of Christ, who take all this pains with you, as
though God did beseech you by us, to pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled
unto God. Beloved, if we should spend our strength and spirits (as we do) in
earnest entreaties of you to close with Christ, and you should not be
persuaded, would you not show in this, a great deal of hardness of heart
against Christ's Ambassadors, in suffering them to weary, and wear out
themselves in pleading with you to repent, and believe the Gospel, and all in
vain? I tell you, the account of this will lie heavy upon you another day; that
you should let our Strength, and Spirit, and Labors run to waste. You must
needs think, that the pains that the Ministers of Christ take with you in this
kind of work, are very spending to their outward man: their Strength is not the
strength of Stones, nor their Flesh of Brass; therefore, there should be some
pity toward them, and you should not, by your delays and backwardness to
embrace their Message, put a kind of necessity upon them, even to lay out
themselves beyond their strength.

But now, to come nearer to you; What Cruelty do you show to your selves, by
not closing with Christ? Says Wisdom (that is Christ himself), Prove. 8. 36. He
that sins against me, sins against his own soul. The great hurt of all,
is that which you do your selves: by refusing of Christ, you are with your own
hands making weapons of Death to destroy your selves. If you would study which
way in all the World to do your selves the greatest mischief, it is in this, to
neglect this great Salvation. I tell you, In this you take the shortest cut
that can be, to manifest that you have no greater enemy than your selves: And
this is the reason why the Lord will condemn at the last day, every
Christ-refusing sinner, for self destruction. Oh, Sirs, you are not in a right
sense self-lovers, till you are Christ-receivers. It Is true, you have a carnal
self love; but that is but a love to sin, it is not a love to the soul: and
therefore, it is not the right self-love, which teaches one to look after ones
own everlasting Salvation, next to the Glory of GOD.

7. You Will be guilty of undervaluing the highest mercies. Consider, you are
offered as precious things as God himself can give to his Creatures: what can
he give more than Himself, and his Son and Spirit, his everlasting Love, and
everlasting Life, his Pardon, his Promises? Why, you will be found despisers of
all these, if you don't come to Christ. And what, is it nothing in your account
to be a Child of God? to have all your sins blotted out? to be justified, and
sanctified, and saved? Is it nothing to be delivered from the curse of God, and
the wrath to come? Methinks you should be dealing with your own thoughts a
little thus: Why, what? shall I let these great things go? a great God, and a
great Savior, and a great Reward? Certainly, Friends, if you undervalue these
things, it is because you overvalue other things; you overvalue your sins, and
you overvalue the world, and you overvalue your own righteousness. If you could
but count these loss, you would count Christ to be gain, Phil. 3. 7.

8. You Will be guilty of Hypocrisy. What! do you come hither, and seem to be a
people that would close with Christ's offers of Grace; and yet, when all comes
to all, you will not do it? What Hypocrisy, what double dealing is this? You
put us in hope, by your attendance upon the Means, that you will give up your
selves to Christ; and upon this account, we are glad to see every one of you
here, hoping that you will be willing to list your selves into the number of
Christ's true Disciples: and now, what, will not you be sincere? Shall your faces
be toward him, and your hearts against him? Will you not be as you seem? Pray
be downright with us; give in your Souls to what you are about. This is no
place to dissemble with God, and with his Ordinances: and therefore, as in 1
Pet. 2. 1, 2. Laying aside all guile and hypocrisies, As new born babes, desire
the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby.

9. You Will be guilty of Unbelief. You that close not with Christ, you believe
him not. We tell you, he came into the world to save sinners; we tell you, that
there is mercy, and pardon, and life for you, if you come unto him; but you
believe not our report: if you close not with him, you believe not the
Scripture, you believe not the Gospel; See 1 John 5. 9. This is the witness of
God which he has testified of his Son. Shall God testify these things
concerning Christ which we preach to you, and shall he not be believed? Will
you make God a liar? verse. 10.

10. You Will be* guilty of Foolishness. What? not to accept of an offer that is
so much for your good? Is there any wisdom in this? Do you use to do thus about
the things of the World? Come eat of my bread, -- Forsake the foolish, -- Prove.
9. 5, 6. Observe here, we shall be among the fools, till we close with Christ.

11. You Will be guilty of Presumption. You talk of your hope to be saved, what?
and not close with Christ? Why, it is high presumption in you; a tempting, a
daring of God.

12. You Will be guilty of Vnprofitableness. Why, till you close with Christ,
what good do you do? This is that which must enter you into a holy, fruitful
life; without this, you have not laid the foundation of any spiritual walking.
Glorifying of God begins here; hence it is that People get no good under
Ordinances; do no good, upon a spiritual account, in their Places and
Generation; why they are out of Christ yet, from whom they should draw virtue
and strength to bring forth fruit unto God.

And so I have done with the second Branch of the Doctrine, That Christ offers
Freedom to poor sinners that are in the house of Bondage.

CHAP. III.
Wherein is handled the third Branch of the Doctrine, viz. That it is every
ones duty to look after a share in this Freedom.
THe third Branch of the Doctrine (which I now come to) is, That it is every
ones duty to look after a share in this Freedom, by getting a particular and
personal Interest in it; that so we may be of the Corporation or Society of
those whom the Son has made free. And before I go any further, I would show a
little, that this is our duty, though we be never so great sinners. The
greatness of your sins must not hinder or discourage any of you from looking
after it: you must not say, It is in vain for me to think or hope that ever I
shall have it, who am such a grievous sinner. The Lord humble thee that art
such a grievous sinner, and make thee as sensible of it as thou have need to
be. My work is not to go about to persuade thee to the contrary, but rather to
assure thee that it is so indeed. And if thou speak so from thy heart, and
from an inward sense and feeling of the burden of sin, it is well. There be many
grievous sinners, that are not grieved with their sins: great sinfulness and
great insensibleness, is the general condition of the World; but as great a
sinner as thou art, thou must look after this Freedom. The greater ones
Sickness is, the more need to send for the Physician. Do not thou conclude thou
shall never be free, because thou art so much in bondage; whatever comes of it,
look out for Deliverance. Pray mark; There be two things that we are greatly to
take heed of, about the grace of God by Christ.

1. That we don't despise it. Oh! how many be there, that make no more of
Christ and Salvation by him, than they do of a straw? It Is wonderful to see,
how the most do cast all the things of God behind their backs: and the reason
why they do so, is not because there is no worth in the things, but because
they do not see the worth of them. But I do but name this.

2. That we don't despair of it, whatever our sins have been. The truth is,
amongst those whom we preach to, there be nothing near so many of this latter
sort, ^^ there be of the first. Oh! there is a multitude of despisers and
slighters of Christ and his Freedom: these may go where they will, for any
thing that many care for them. But because sometimes we may meet with one here
and there, that will be ready to speak in a very discouraged way, as if it were
to no purpose at all for them to look out for this Freedom, by reason of the
greatness of their sins: therefore I would say a little, to take away this
hopelessness that some may have in them. As,

1. That this Freedom was intended for sinners, and grievous sinners, Romans 5.
6. In due time Christ died for the ungodly. Ver. 8. -- While we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us. 1 Timothy 1. 15. Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners. Luke 19. 10. The Son of man is come to seek and to save that
which was lost. You see 'twas intended for them that were ungodly, for sinners,
for them that were lost. God sent Christ to be Savior to such; and Christ
meant such in what he did in the work of Redemption. If we had been without
sin, we should not have needed that Christ should have died for us: why then
should our sins hinder us from looking out for this Freedom, since the aim, and
thoughts, and heart of Christ was toward us to do us good, upon this very
consideration, that we were those that lay in a sinful and lost estate; and
that there were diverse of us, to whom God did bear an everlasting love, and so
such of us were given by the Father to Christ, to be redeemed out of that
miserable condition. Obj. But you will say, Christ intended all this for
Believers; and they are none but Believers that shall have the good of what
Christ has done. Ans. That Is very sure, He that believes shall be saved, and
he that believes not shall be damned, in respect of what they were to be
afterward: So it is none but Believers that shall reap the saving benefit of
his Redemption; but at first, and in respect of Christ's dying for them, they
were Sinners before they were Believers; and so Christ dyed for them, not as
Believers, but as they were Sinners; tho it is true, 'twas as they were chosen
Sinners, and so to be made Believers. [I know, that what I am now hinting,
would give me a very fair opportunity to show you, that therefore Christ did
not intentionally die for all Sinners; and that the Doctrine of universal Grace
or Redemption is to be taken heed of. But if any desire it, I had rather give
them satisfaction in private, if they please to bring their Objections, than
needlessly to spend time about it now, since I do not know whether any of you
that hear me, are of that Persuasion.] That which I now drive at is, that your
sins must not discourage you from laboring after a share in this Freedom,
since Christ was intended for Sinners, tho not for all Sinners. Thou that art a
great Sinner, art in the very case for which Christ was sent to give Salvation
to; and thy Misery should not make thee despair of a Remedy, but stir thee up
to look out for it.

2. If thou art a great sinner already, then thou should not make thy self a
greater sinner, which hopelessness will do. It is the fruit of despair, that it
makes him that is very sinful, to be always growing worse: There is less and
less hope of one that casts away hope; and many would sooner be recovered, if
they did not conclude they should never be recovered. A despairing soul is
going on to further wickedness: I will give you two notable Scriptures for it,
Jer. 2. 25. Thou said there is no hope. No, for I have loved strangers, and
after them will I go. And chap. 18. 20. And they said there is no hope, but we
will walk after our own devices, and we will every one do the imagination of
his evil heart. What was their strong resolution to go on in their sins
grounded upon? What made them, that as bad as they were, they would still be
worse? Why, they said, there is no hope. Oh! however thou have sinned, don't
shut up the door of Mercy against thy self; for then thou openest the door wide
to more sin still. There Is nothing does more harden the heart, than despair
does; the more this is is increased, the more sin is strengthened. A despairing
sinner will grow a desperate sinner; he will not care how much he sins. They
that think they have sinned themselves past mercy, will fill up their sins
apace. It Is the hope of finding mercy, that must bring us back to the fear of
God; without that, a man will cast off all at once, and think that he cannot
sin too much. And no doubt, this is that which makes some in the world to be so
exceedingly profane as they are, and to be the wonders of the Age they live
in, for monstrous iniquity, that they carry themselves as if they were turned
into devils, and would even dare God to damn them. Why, it is like, if one could
see how it is within them, that they have, through God's just Judgment upon
them, a secret mis-giving of heart that they shall never be saved, they have
taken up that desperate Conclusion, and thereupon they harden themselves to
excessive ungodliness, and live as tho they had bid defiance to all sober
Conversation. That person blocks up his own way to repentance for sin, that
casts off the hope of being forgiven. See Psalm. 130. 4. There is forgiveness
with thee that thou may be feared. That which brings us to the fear of God,
is the hope of finding forgiveness with him. And therefore it is a very sad
thing, and much to be prayed against, to be delivered up to a hopeless heart;
and they that have provoked God by sinning much already, do provoke him more by
despairing of mercy.

3. It Is all one to Free Grace, whether thou art a great sinner or a little
one. God can pardon abundantly, tho thou have sined abundantly: do but forsake
thy sins, and then, need as much pardon as thou will, thou shall have it, Isa.
55. 7. The infinite mercy of God knows well enough what to do with a great
sinner: that is a notable place, Romans 5. 20. Where sin abounded, grace did much
more abound. Mark what words are here; he does not say barely, where there was
sin committed, but where sin abounded; nor only, there grace was manifested,
but there it abounded, yea, and abounded more than sin abounded, yea and much
more. It Is much that a sinner can sin, but it is more that God can pardon; Isa.
1. 18. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow: though
they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. He makes but a though of
scarlet and crimson sins: he brings it in twice with that word though, and
though; as if he should say, My mercy is not posed for all this. Whatever Mercy
will do, it does it without difficulty. You know, there be some things that you
can do with ease; small matters you make nothing of them: but then there be
some other things, that though you can do them, yet it is difficulty; you must
put out all that is in you, all your skill and all your strength: but so needs
not God to pardon the greatest sinner; that is, he can do it with ease. In some
sense, it is harder to God to punish, than it is to pardon. When he comes to
punish, he speaks as if 'twere hard to him, Hos. 11. 8. How shall I give thee
up, O Ephraim, etc. But when he comes to pardon, it is spoken of him as if that
were easy, Mic. 7. 18. who delights in mercy: and what we delight in, we do
with ease.

4. Tho thou art a great sinner, yet thou art not a sinner in hell; thou art a
sinner upon earth still. And there is this difference betwixt sinners upon
earth, and sinners in hell; that the first are yet under hope, while the others
are past it. It is thy great misery, that thou art yet among the unconverted;
but it is great mercy, that thou art not among the damned. The place in which
thou yet art, is the place of repentance, and not of punishment. We must look
upon no sinners as past hope, that are not past this life: Why, thou live
yet; Christ has not denounced the final sentence against thee; thou have not
yet stood before his Judgment Seat, and heard him say to thee, Depart thou
cursed into everlasting fire. What is the patience and long-suffering of God
toward thee for, but to show thee that thy condition is yet recoverable? 2
Pet. 3. 9. It is enough to answer thy despairing thoughts, to tell thee, that
yet the Lord waits to be gracious. Do thou not see how God does lengthen out
the thread of thy life day after day? He could snatch thee away in an instant,
but yet he continues thee where thou have Calls, and Means, and Opportunities
for the good of thy Soul. Why, it is not thus with those that are in Hell; they
are beyond all help, and beyond all hope; but thou art not, through the riches
of the goodness of God. The great thing that thou want, is but a heart to
know the things of thy Peace, in the day of thy Visitation.

5. The closing with this Freedom which Christ offers thee, may make thee as
great a Saint, as now thou art a great Sinner: As it did Paul; what a Sinner
was he before he closed with Christ; and what a Saint did he become afterward?
This Freedom will make a strange alteration in thee, if thou gettest but a
share in that. Such is the power and excellency of God's Grace, that where that
comes in truth, it turns things upside down; it makes an enemy to God, a friend
of God; a hater of Goodness, to be a lover of Goodness, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Art thou
a great Sinner now? ay, but don't be out of hope for all that; for if thou once
come in to Jesus Christ, thou will be a new man. If now thou have an hard
heart, this Freedom will break it; if now thou have a stubborn will against
God, this Freedom will make thee obedient; there is help in Christ against all
this. It is very observable, that many times those who have been the most
forward for sin, when the Lord has wrought savingly in them, they have proved
to be the most forward, and the most famous for Goodness: and God has had no
greater Instruments of his Glory in all the World, than some, who before they
were converted, brought him most Dishonor.

Well; all this now is spoken, to take away your hopelessness, that I may not
have this stumbling block in my way, while I would be calling upon you to look
out for a share in this Freedom, that any of you should be under despairing
thoughts about the getting of it, and so lie still, and let all be as it is. You
know, that man will hardly be brought to do much in a thing, concerning which,
he despairs that it will never come to pass. I would have you think, that the
business of your Salvation (as great Sinners as any of you are.) is a thing
that through Grace may be effected. Why, Sirs, why may you not be converted?
why may you not be pardoned? why may you not yet be washed, and justified, and
sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God? Why may
not as great Sinners be brought in yet, as have been brought in already?
Methinks that Scripture would come in very seasonably here, Ezr. 10. 2. We have
trespassed against our God, and have taken strange wives of the people of the
land: yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. 1. d. It Is very
true, our provocations against God have been very great, and particularly in
this, that we have taken strange wives of the people of the land, (which was
the sin that they were now mourning for) yet, let us not sit down hopeless now,
and do nothing, and give up all for lost: there is some hope left still; and
therefore (ver. 3) Let Us make a covenant -- to put away all the wives, etc. So
now in your case, that are yet under the guilt of so many and so great
iniquities, yet there is hope; and therefore, seek out for this Freedom by
Christ. See Zech. 9. 12. Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope. Tho
thou art a prisoner, yet thou art a prisoner of hope; and therefore, turn to
the strong hold, turn to Christ. So that you see, I have made way to go on upon
this now, to show you, that it is every ones duty to look out after a share in
this Freedom. And there are two things among others, that make this to be your
duty.

1. The Command of God. He has commanded you to look out after Christ and your
Souls: Friends, it is the will of him that made you, revealed in his blessed
Word, that you should come to Christ, and close with Christ, and not refuse the
great and good things which he offers to you, Matthew. 17. 5. -- Hear ye him.
Mark 1. 15. -- Repent and believe the Gospel. Act. 17. 30. God commands all
men every where to repent. Heb. 12. 25. See that ye refuse not him that
speaks, etc. And as all the other Commands of God are backed with Promises to
them that obey them, and with Threatenings to those that do them not: So it is to
be observed, in a special manner, concerning this Command of looking after
Christ, and believing in him, with what precious Promises it is accompanied to
those that close with Christ, and with what heavy Threatenings to those that
reject him. The Command it self, you may take one place more for, which
speaks the fullest of any yet; 1 John 3. 23. This is his commandment, that we
should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ. Now for the Promises, they
are so many that do belong to this, that I cannot name them all: See Act. 10.
43. and 13. 39, 40. for a taste: And for Threatenings, Act. 3. 22. Prove. 1. 24.
to the end: but only that the last verse is a Promise of everlasting safety to
them that receive him. We should therefore much awe our hearts with the strict
Commands that are about looking out for Christ, and harkening to his Calls, and
know, that the not accepting of Christ is the most damning sin, Joh. 3. 18, 19.
This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. The condemnation, as
if there were none but this: And this sin of not believing in Christ, is such a
great sin, that when the Holy Ghost comes to work upon the heart, he does, as
it were, single out this in a principal manner, to charge that upon the
Conscience, and to reprove and to convince for that to be sure, Joh. 16. 8, 9.
And this is a sin which we must, and shall be most humbled for, if ever God
intend mercy to us: and whatever other sins we are smitten for, till the heart
comes to be smitten for this, we fall short of those Convictions which the
Spirit uses to give in, in order to a true Conversion. Tho I don't say, that
this is always the first sin that the Spirit of God sets before the Soul, and
wounds it for (many times a man's inward trouble begins from some other sins);
yet sooner or later, the guilt of this Unbelief is discovered to such a soul,
and from the sight of that, it is brought to the deepest and the truest sorrow,
Zech. 12. 18.

2. The obligation that lies upon you, even by the very light of Nature, to
look after self-preservation. Indeed there is a self that we must not look
after the preservation of, but do all that we can to bring it to destruction;
our sinful-self, or our Sins and Lusts, which are as dear to us, by corrupt
nature, as our selves; this we must be sworn enemies to, Col. 3. 5. Mortify
your members which are upon the earth, etc. And the reason is, because this is
not the right self: our sins are the Devils Bratts, and therefore they must be
dashed against the walls; there must be no sparing of them, no pleading for
their life; for if you give sin its life, you will lose your own: as the Prophet
told Ahab from the Lord, concerning the King of Syria, that great enemy of the
children of Israel, when the Lord had delivered him into Ahab's hand, and he
out of favor to him had let him escape, when he should have destroyed him, 1
Kin. 20. 42. Because thou have let go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to
utter destruction; therefore thy life shall go for his life, etc. So thus it
will be to all you that spare your sins, and stroke them, instead of striking
them; and because they bring you a little pleasure to the flesh for the
present, therefore they must be let alone. God has put many opportunities into
your hand for the destroying of them; every time you come to hear, you have, as
it were, an advantage given you again: but it may be, that you so love this
painted strumpet, and are so overcome by the flatteries of it, that it is as
Death to you to part with it. Well Soul, if thou will not have sin to die, thou
must die; if thou will not be the death of that, that will be the death of
thee. But there is another self, the true self, or your selves as you are God's
creatures, that you are bound to look after the preservation of; that is, to
speak plainly, you must take care that you don't go the way to be eternally
lost, and to have Soul and Body cast into hell. And if you are so careful, as
you know you use to be, to preserve your selves from the evils of this World,
you do all that you can to keep your selves from Pains, and Prisons, and
Poverty; why, will it not follow, that you should be as careful, yea and much
more (because the Soul is more precious) to keep your selves from the
everlasting pains, and the everlasting prison, and the everlasting undoing?
Well then, you must look out for this Freedom by Christ, for otherwise these
things will certainly come upon you, Joh. 3. 36. He that believes not the Son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. And therefore, that
man or woman that refuses Christ, is not only no friend to Christ, but such are
no friends to themselves, they have not the ttue self-love in them, they don't
love their own Souls. It Is said of the Prodigal when he began to repent, he
came to himself, Luke 15. 17. He was gone from himself, the true self before:
but when he returned, then indeed he came to look out after self-preservation.

Well now, to proceed upon this Third Branch more thoroughly, That it is every
ones duty to look after a part in this Freedom: I will, 1. give you an
observable thing about it. 2. Show you the reasons and grounds why every one is
to do this. 3. Make application.

To the 1. There is one thing that is very observable about this in the
Scripture, which I would commend unto you; and that is, That Christ, in the
offers of his Grace, does not only speak in a general way to all in common, as
if he should say, Here it is amongst you: but in many places he comes to offer
it in a particular kind of Language, as if he had to deal with persons
severally and apart one from another, and were singling of them out one by one:
to teach us, that every particular person must own it as his great duty, to
look after Christ, and the Benefits that come by Christ for himself. See Joh.
4. 10. Mark how particularly Christ speaks here: Jesus answered and said unto
her, [i. e. the woman of Samaria] If thou knew the gift of God, and who it
is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked of him, and he
would have given thee living water. So Rev. 3. 18. I counsel thee to buy of me
gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich; and white raiment, that thou
may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear; and
anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou may see. So verse. 20. If any man
hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him,
and he with me. q. d. There must not be one of you, but must each for himself
be laboring for a share in these things.

Now for the reasons of this, I desire that you would seriously mind these four
following.

1. Every one should labor to have a share in the Freedom, because every one
has had share in the Bondage; as the Apostle says, in Romans 5. 12. Death
passed upon all men, in that all have sinned. There Is none of us can say
concerning this Freedom, as Paul did concerning his being a partaker of the
Roman Freedom, Act. 22. 28. But I, says he, was freeborn. They that have this
Freedom, are said in Scripture to be made free; they are not born free, but
made so, Romans 6. 18. So in the Text, If the Son shall make you free. Now
suppose, Beloved, that there were a company of People in the World, that had
been all of them in great distress, or that they had been all taken by the
Turks, and put to miserable slavery, that never any poor Creatures had a harder
condition than they; and suppose that it had been one of you that were of this
number, that had a fellowship with them in their bitter Bondage: And that some
merciful Prince, that knew of the lamentable case that these wretches were in,
should be willing, by the paying of a great Ransom, to redeem them; and he
lays down that which is demanded by him that held them in slavery, and so sets
this Company at liberty: at which, Oh, how their hearts rejoice! Only there is
one amongst them that will not accept of this favor, though his Captivity was as
great as others, and he was as fair for deliverance as the rest; he that set
the other free, would have done it for him too, if he would not have been
willful; but for his part, he would not have his liberty, he would lie and
perish in his thraldom. Why, what a fool and madman would he be counted, that
would have his part in all the affliction which that Company has endured, but
would have none of their Redeemers kindness? Now, Sirs, you may go travel over
all the World, and not find such an instance as this for the Bondage of the
Body: but we need not go far to find many such instances for this Bondage of
the Soul. Oh, how many be there that have been partakers of the Curse, that
don't look after the Blessing! that have been Satan's slaves, but will not be the
Lords freemen! that had rather be strangers and foreigners still, than to be
fellow-citizens with the Saints, and of the household of God?

Reas. 2. Because no man must rest in the general offers of Grace, without a
particular application of all to himself. The general offers of Grace are like
the hearing of some excellent Medicine, that is good for them that are under
some dangerous Disease: now, it is not the hearing of this that will cure; but
he that would have good by it, must get it for himself, and take it, and make
use of it. You know, tbo there be never so good a Plaster upon the Table for
the healing of a Wound, it may be the Salve of which it is made, is the best in
the World for such a purpose; yet that will not help at all, if it be not applied
and laid on. So now, if you do not look after a particular share in this
Freedom, to bring it home to your own Souls, you do but rest in the general
notions of Grace. This is but the Plaster upon the Table, as it were; it is too
far off to do you any good; thou have nothing for thy self all this while. You
know, there is a great deal of difference betwixt a man's saying, This is a brave
House, and, This House is mine. So there is a precious Christ, and precious
Freedom, and precious Promises; yea, but are they thine? Art thou one of them
that can say, they are given to us? 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby are given unto us
exceeding great and precious promises. Mark, he does not say barely, these
exceeding great and precious Promises are given, but given to us.

So that you don't come nigh enough to Christ, and the Benefits by Christ, if
you don't get them for your selves. It Is the great sin of Men and Women, that
they sit down in things at large about Christ: they know, and say, and read,
that Christ came into the World to save sinners, and to seek and to save that
which was lost. Ay, it is most true; yet what are you the better for all this,
unless this Salvation be yours? And how can it be yours, without your laboring
to make it yours?

Beloved, there be many that are, and will be undone for ever, because they
went no further than the hearing of a Christ at a distance. Now those that
shall be saved by him, he and their souls have been brought nigh together, and
they make such an application of him to themselves, that the relation they have
to him, is like that of the Members to the Head, or of the Wife to the Husband;
they are so joined to him by Faith, that they become one with him: now the
general offers of Grace never make us one with Christ; till he is my Christ, I
am never united to him. Now this is the great thing that you should look after,
to have Union with Christ, and it is application that makes the Union; and you
have nothing of him in a saving manner, till you are in him, and he in you,
Col. 1. 27. -- Christ in you the hope of glory Obj. It may be some will say,
that have but small cause for it, Oh, if it be Faith that makes Christ mine,
why then, I have a part in him; for I do believe (I thank God) in my Savior
Jesus Christ; I put my whole trust in him with all my heart. Ans. Those that
have the true Faith, have been made to see that there is a false Faith, a
counterfeit Faith; yea and to fear, and question, and examine whether their
Faith were not a counterfeit Faith. Beloved, there is a counterfeit of every
Grace; and certainly, there be many that think they believe, and don't. As I
would have no child of God to think he does not believe, when he does; so I
would have no Christless person to think he does believe, when he does not. The
way to find out the truth of our Faith, is to put our Faith to the proof: have
you not taken it for granted that you have Faith, without trying it? I Will give
you but two Notes of the true Faith, and I am sure they will be enough to prove
diverse to be Unbelievers, that think themselves to be Believers.

The true Faith is always accompanied with love to Christ, with a high prizing
love to him; they that believe with their hearts, they set their hearts upon
Christ; he has their dearest and choicest affections placed upon himself; they
have discerned such a Beauty in Christ, that they cannot but love him best, 1
Pet. 2. 7. Unto you that believe, he is precious. Now there be many of you that
think you have Faith, and yet let one listen never so much to you, one cannot
hear you talk of Christ, nor utter any longings or breathings of Soul after
him; and when the beauty, and sweetness, and fullness, and freeness of Grace
that is in Christ is spoken of, you have no delight to be upon such a
Discourse. And pray now, what do your thoughts and desires run out most upon?
Are not your minds and affections taken up with the present and perishing
things of this World, more than with Christ? Is there not something that sits
nearer to your hearts, than he does? Surely here is a discovery of a false
Faith, to say one believes in him, and yet not love him. Ask thy soul, Have not
gone many a day, many a week, many a year, nay all the days of thy life, and
had never one raised desire toward him? Thou do not know what it is to be
unsatisfied without his presence, and without communion with him: thou do not
know what it is to be sick of love for him: he may stay never so long from thy
Soul, and thou never grieve nor groan: thou can do well enough with the
Creature, though thou have not Christ. I tell thee, if it be so, thou have thy
Faith to seek: thou never made any particular application of him yet to thy
self; for if thou had, application of him would beget affection to him. A
true Believer is greatly in love with the Lord Jesus; he had rather be without
any thing than him, he accounts all loss in comparison of him, Phil. 3. 8.

2. The true Faith is always accompanied with likeness to Christ. A Believer in
him, is a Conformer to him, and a Follower of him; he bears about Christ's
Image in the World, he lives according to Christ's Life, and according to
Christ's Law, and according to Christ's Example; he partakes with him in his
crucified and in his quickened State: As Paul, in Gal. 2. 20. when he speaks
that the life of faith was in him; in the beginning of the verse, says he, I
am crucified with Christ; he died to sin, and walked in newness of life. But
now, how many be there of you, that think you have Faith, and yet are as much
for sin as ever you were, and as contrary to goodness as ever you were? you can
be as vain, and as vile, and as carnal, and as covetous, and as proud, and
passionate, and lukewarm, as ever you were. If it be thus with thee, I tell
thee, if there were no better Believers than thou art, there would not be one
true Believer in the World. A Faith that does not change thee into a new
Creature, is a false Faith; 2 Pet. 1. 1. -- To them that have obtained like
precious faith with us. How does he make out, that they had this precious
faith? why, verse. 4. they had escaped the corruption that is in the world
through lust. True Faith is of a sanctifying, purifying nature; It is at peace
with no sin, nor at war with any duty.

Reas. 3. We should every one look after this Freedom, because a diligent
looking out for it, is the way to obtain it. You know how much diligence has
done sometimes in other cases; how it has, by the blessing of God upon his
Labors, raised a man to great Riches, that before had nothing; yea, it may be,
was worse than nothing. So if you would be diligent, how can you tell but that
you may be rich, tho you are now so very poor? and that you may be made free,
tho for the present you are in Bondage? Why may not a man get a spiritual
Estate by taking pains, as well as many have gotten an earthly one?

Obj. Oh, but you will say, there are some discouraging places that I meet with
in the Scripture. Ans. Well, What are they? let us hear. And before thou go
any further, let me tell thee, it is a great mistake to think, that there is
any place of Scripture rightly understood, that does discourage any Soul from
taking pains to look after his own Salvation. Does not God every where almost,
call upon People to do it? Is not the Word full of Precepts to that purpose,
and full of Promises to that purpose? Take but one place among many, Matthew. 7.
7, 8. Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you. For every one that asks, receives; and he that
seeks, finds; and to him that knocks, it shall be opened. Well, I pray
thee, let us hear thy discouraging Scriptures. Obj. Why, there are especially
two places that seem to put me quite out of heart. What be they? Why, Romans 9.
16. So then it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God
that shows mercy. Ans. This is not to take a man off from Endeavors, or to
discourage him in them; but only to show, that a man must not put his Salvation
upon his Endeavors, as the chief Cause of it. What would all his Endeavors
be, if God had not Mercy on him? When we have done all, it is the Mercy and free
Grace of God that any of us are saved. Well, what is the other Scripture? Oh, a
sad one! Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I say
unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Why then, I were even
as good not seek it; Many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able. Ans. Why
sure, this is no discouragement against Endeavors now; but this is to show us,
how it will be hereafter, at the last day, with them that do not now endeavor,
and now strive: why, time will come, that they will seek to enter in, and then
they shall not be able. This is plain from the Context; see verse. 25. Well
therefore, here is no discouragement, but a call to diligence. Now this same
diligent looking out for this Freedom does consist, 1. In using the means: You
must be inquiring: Would I come to such or such an end, why, what is the way to
it? And then when you know what the Means are, you must use them. 2. In using
all the Means, you must try every way to be saved. 3. In doing all in obedience
to God: why this is my duty, here I am bid and bound to wait. 4. You must put
forth all your strength and care in the using of the Means: you must not do it
by halves, neither in regard of the means, nor in regard of the pains. 5. You
must do it with perseverance and continuance; give not over. 6. You must look
to God for a blessing upon the Means.

Reas. 4. We should every one look after a share in it, because, nothing will
stand in stead, but the having an interest in this Freedom: it is such a one
thing needful, that no man can have help or succor any other where. Now he may
think, that this and that will serve his turn, and that he shall not perish,
because he trusts in a company of lying vanities; but he will at last find all
his carnal refuges to fail him, and he will be left destitute of any thing to
fly to, that will be sufficient to save him from the wrath to come. Oh,
Beloved, there is a dreadful day of God's fiery indignation drawing near; in
which, all the wrath that ever was poured out upon the World, from the
beginning of it to this hour, is but a drop, in comparison to that Ocean of
vengeance that then shall swallow up the children of disobedience: and he that
would then have his house to stand, had need have it well built, and laid upon
a sure foundation, for 'twill be tried to the purpose, 1 Cor. 3. 13. Well now,
I would a little assure you beforehand (that you may be wise in time) that
nothing will stand you in stead but an interest in Christ and his Freedom.

1. Not all your worldly Enjoyments. If a man has been never so great, and
rich, and honorable in the World, if he has had his Table spread every day
with the finest Food, and his Body covered with the finest Cloth; if he has
laid up Treasures of Gold, and Silver, and Jewels; if he had as many Pearls of
his own as there be piles of grass upon the ground, this would be nothing: the
whole World, if you had it, cannot keep you from perishing, if you have not a
part in this Freedom, Prove. 10. 4.

2. Again; No pleas or excuses that Christless persons make. Now they have many
vain excuses, why they do not look after Christ and their Souls, Luke 14. 18,
19. One's excuse is, that he wants time, he is so full of business: another he
pleads, that he is not book-learn'd: another, why Lord help him, he is poor;
rich Folks, and those that need take no care for the things of this World, they
may mind good things: and another, that he has suffered so much in this World,
that he hopes he shall not suffer hereafter: and another, he hopes that he that
made him will save him, etc. and another, tho he swears an Oath now and then,
or tells a Lie, yet he is sorry for it, God forgive him. Oh, but these
fig leaves which thou have sewed together, will not cover thy nakedness when
the Lord appears, Isa. 28. 17.

3. Again; No Gifts which God has endowed you with. Tho you have the gift of
Knowledge, and the gift of Prayer, or a Minister the gift of Preaching, as Mat.
7. 22. God may make a great deal of use of you, while you are here; and yet, if
you have not an interest in Christ, he will damn you at last.

4. Again; No particular Opinion that you have taken up. It may be one may
think, that because he is for the Episcopal way, which he judges to be right,
therefore now he shall be saved: Another, because he is for the Presbyterians,
or Independents, or Anabaptists way, which he judges to be right, therefore he
shall be saved. No, be of what Opinion thou will, or of what Way thou will, if
thou have not an Interest in this Freedom by Christ, thou art a condemned man,
thy Opinion will not save thee. The Pharisees they thought that they could not but
be saved, because they were of that Sect: but when God came to work upon Paul,
he made him see, that 'twas not his being a Pharisee would do his business, tho
he was one of the strictest sort among them; but he must have the righteousness
of Christ, or he was undone.

5. Again; No near relation to those who have been, or are the people of God.
It may be, thou have been the Child, or the Brother, or Sister of them that
feared God, of the same Blood with them after the Flesh: but for all this, thou
must go to hell, if thou have not a part in this Freedom. Mary, that was the
Mother of Christ, you know, was very nearly related to him, he lay in her Womb;
but that would not have been enough that he was born of her Body, if he had not
been born in her heart. It would not serve the turn of the Jews that they were
Abraham's Seed, and the Children of his Flesh; but they must be partakers of
his Faith in Christ too, or else they could not be blessed. David did not count
it enough, that he could tell God that he was the Son of his Hand maid, unless
he could tell him that he was his Servant too: and he puts this first, to show,
that the other would have done him no good, unless he had been interested in
Christ himself, Psalm. 116. 16.

6. No religious or godly Education that you have had. It may be, you have been
brought up in the Families where there has been much of God and Goodness set
up; yea, perhaps you have spent all your days in the company and communion of
the Saints: and yet at last you must have your eternal abode and portion with
Sinners, if you have not a part in this Freedom. Ishmael was brought up in a
good Family, in the Family of Abraham, of whom God said, I know him, that he
will command his children and his household after him, Genesis 18. 19. And yet, for
want of this Freedom, he was rejected, and so was Esau.

7. No moral Virtues that you have lived in. It may be, thou have been a civil
Person, an honest Person, a chaste Person, a sober Person; perhaps never wronged
any Body by unjust Dealing, never told a Lie, never swore an Oath, never
disguisedst thy self by Drunkenness, never defiledst thy Body with Uncleanness:
it will not do thee a jot of good for the saving of thee from Hell, if thou have
no part in this Freedom, Matthew. 5. 20. Thou must have a righteousness that
exceeds this, even the righteousness of Christ by Faith, or else Heavens door
will be shut against thee.

8. No profession that you have made of the Gospel of Christ, tho to a very
high degree. Tho thou have outwardly seemed to be a very zealous and forward
Disciple of his, have worn his Livery, and have been baptized in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; tho thou have often in the
Sacrament, eaten of that Bread that signifies his Body, and drank of that Wine
that signifies his Blood* yet if thou have not this Freedom, it is nothing; 1 John 5. 12. He that has not the Son of God, has not life, let him profess
what he will of him.

9. No good thoughts that the People of God have had of you. It may be thou
have been taken for a true Child of God; no body suspects thee of Hypocrisy;
thou art current Gold by their Weights: yea, but if thou have not a part in
this Freedom, when thou come to be weighed in Gods Balance, thou will be
found wanting.

10. No sufferings that you have met with for Conscience Sake. Tho thou have
thus suffered, yet thou must suffer again, and that for ever, if thy Conscience
be not purged from dead works by the Blood of Christ; as Paul says, 1 Cor. 13.
1. that tho he gave his body to be burned, if he had not charity, it profited
him nothing. No more would it thee, if thou have not Christ.

11. Again; No bitter cries or earnest entreaties that you shall at last make
to God, for the escaping of his wrath. Oh! when Christ is just ready to
pronounce the Sentence against thee, what a lamentable ado will thou make that
it might not be past? but if thou have not a part in this Freedom, all thy
wringing of hands, and falling upon thy knees, will be in vain.

12. Once again; Not all the mercy that is in God. Tho God has an infinite
Ocean of mercy, yet it will not be for thee, if thou do not look after this
Freedom, Luke 19. 27. As there is no misery to the Saints, so there is no mercy
to the wicked beyond this life.

Use 1. This then sharply reproves the great slothfulness of the World, in the
matters of their Souls. It Is every ones duty to look after a share in this
Freedom, and yet almost every body is idle: the whole earth is quiet and at
rest; Oh, how little stirring is there for an Interest in Christ! What Pharaoh
said of the Israelites in their Bondage, I am sure may be said of Sinners in
this Bondage; Exodus 4. 17. Ye are idle, ye are idle. Oh! what cause is there
now that I should preach with tears, to bewail the lamentable carelessness of
people about their everlasting Concernments! The good Lord of his infinite
mercy be in the midst of us at this time, by the power of his Spirit, to
convince you that are out of Christ, of this great sin, and to humble you for
it. I offer my self now, in Gods Name, to plead with you about your woeful
negligence in not looking after this Freedom, which you have heard is every
ones duty to look after, and therefore it is yours. There is Freedom to be had
by Christ; but pray now, you that are in your sins, what have you done to get
it? Oh! what would many of you do to get the World? How would you ride and run,
and rise early, and go late to bed for a gainful Bargain, or great Estate? You
are so forward and eager, some of you, for the things of this World, that you
are like a high-metall'd Horse, you can hardly be held in; Christ is fain, as
it were, to call from Heaven to bid you stop, Isa. 55. 2. Wherefore do ye spend
your money for that which is not bread? and your labor for that which
satisfies not? You Will try all ways, and turn every stone to see what may be
done for a part in these uncertain Riches, though it may be you shall never get
them, when you have done your utmost; and if you do, you may leave them as soon
as you have them. Why, but Sirs, is there not another life? and are there not
better things? and have you not precious Souls to look after? and is it not
high time for some of you, by course of nature, to think of removing to
Eternity, and of being in a fitness for Death and Judgment? And yet, ah, Lord!
you live, as to spiritual things, as if you had nothing to do. Upon these
accounts, the Scripture sets you forth as persons that are standing still; Why
stand you here all the day idle? Matthew. 20. 6. and as persons that have their
hands in their bosoms, Prove. 19. 24. and as persons that are asleep upon their
beds, Prove. 6. 9. The children of God, if there be any of them that live about
you, or among you, they are, as 'twere, all of a trembling, for fear they
should fall short of Heaven, and fail of the Grace of GOD, tho they are not
like you, to let all run at random; Phil. 2. 12. But you, tho your Sins be
unpardoned, and your Souls unconverted, and nothing is set at rights between
God and you; yet you set neither your Hand nor your Heart to any good thing.
Why now, is this the way to do well? Dare you think that you are going to
happiness under all this remissness? Do you believe, that strait is the gate,
and narrow is the way that leads to life, and few there be that find it?
What, have you no talent to trade with for the glory of God, and the good of
your own Souls? If you have not five, nay if you have not two, have you not
one? Sure thou have one Talent at least: God gives every one something to be
doing withal; why, but what do thou with it? What do thou do with thy
Time, with thy Strength, with thy Understanding, Reason and Judgment? What do
thou do with thy Body? and what do thou do with thy Soul? What, have thou
received all these, to put them to no good use? Is there so great a work to do
as thou art told of in every Sermon thou hear, and thou fallest to nothing
of it? Well then, here is thy sin, but where is thy shame? Art not ashamed of
this slothfulness now? No wonder indeed that thou art yet in such a woeful
condition, and thou let all alone: Well may the fire burn the house to the
ground, when he that dwells in it does nothing to quench it. Oh, Sin and the
Devil will play Rex in thy Soul, that meet with no resistance. Three things I
would briefly leave with you, to go a little further upon this Use.

1. It Is true, you cannot do all that you should. You should be new Creatures;
and you should repent and believe: but this is God's Workmanship, and God's
Gift and Grace, Ephesians. 2. 7, 8, 9. No man goes thus far by any power of his own,
Joh. 6. 44. No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me draw
him. The truth is, you think you can do these things, but you are deceived: you
promise sometimes to do these things in your own strength; if you did not think
so, you would look to God in your promises, and go to God for power to perform
it; but you mind not that. And what makes you put off this work to hereafter?
you are not for repenting presently, nor for coming to Christ presently, but
you say, you will do it tho: Why, this shows, that thou think thou can do
it. When a man puts off a business, I Will do it at such a time, says he; he
thinks he can do it when he will, else he would not put it off, but go in hand
with it now. But you are deceived, you cannot do it of your selves; for the
work of Grace is above the power of Nature: it is too high for Nature to reach
it; nay, corrupt Nature is contrary to Grace: Yet,

2. You can do, what you do not: you can forbear many sins that you commit, as
to such a paricular Action and Time. I have known some that would swear hard
among their Companions, yet in the presence of one that they knew would reprove
them, they could bite in their Oaths; and you can outwardly perform many Duties
that you neglect: and therefore, you must look that God will judge you for
neglecting them. You can put your selves under the Means, and you can come to
hear the Word, and lend attention to it; and if you will, you can remember
something that is preached, and think and speak of it when you go home: You can
set up reading the Scripture, and praying morning and evening in your Families;
you can get acquainted with those that fear God, and need not be such strangers
to them, unless you would your selves. You can send for a good Minister, if you
will, to your House, and appoint him a convenient hour to come, wherein your
selves and family may be free to attend to those Instructions, which you, if
you will, can desire him to give you. You can reprove one another for swearing,
or lying, or taking the Name of God in vain. You can ask your selves some
serious questions in private, about your Souls condition; Do I hate sin? Do I
love God? Have I a part in Christ? Am I fitted for Death and Judgment? And you
can beg of God (in words) to make you better; and many more things you can do.
And therefore,

3. You should do what you can. There is a deal must go to your Salvation, that
no less than an Almighty Arm can bring to pass; and very like, if thou were
stirring, God would put forth his power, and come in with supernatural Grace
and Assistance: I would have you to hope he would. But why do not you do what
you can? Here Is your sin; and how can you expect that he should help you to do
what you cannot, if you do not what you can? You do in some measure put your
selves into the way of Gods enabling you, when you do set that natural power a
work which you have, as reasonable Creatures: as the man, that though he could
not put himself into the Waters, where there was Cure for those that were
diseased; yet he lay at the Pool. Yea, tho thou should not get Salvation at
last (which thou have no just ground to be hopeless of) yet, thou should do
what thou can, if it were but to lessen thy Condemnation, and that thou
might not sink so deep into the Torments of Hell, as otherwise thou will:
for he that has received a Talent, and wraps it up in a Napkin, and puts it to
no good use, will thereby greaten his everlasting misery; Matthew. 25. 30. Cast
ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth. Who is this unprofitable servant? Why, verse. 25. the wicked
and slothful one, that did not do what he could; he is cast into outer
darkness, the worst place of all.

Use 2. Then if every one should look after a share in this Freedom, to get it
for himself, this shows us, the fullness that is in Christ. If every one would
come to him, he has enough for them: he keeps such a good house, that he can
satisfy all that are hungry; in this house there is room enough to hold you,
though you come never so many, Luke 14. 22. and bread enough to feed you, tho
you come never so empty, Luke 15. 17. The reason why any Soul perishes, is not
because Christ is attended with any wants, but because they that were bidden
would not come. As for himself, he has enough to save as many Worlds, as are
Souls that shall be saved. And therefore, you that are come to Christ, make no
spare of him; feed upon him, and fear no lack; he has a Fountain that can
never be drawn dry, an Estate that can never be spent. All the fear is, whether
you will feed enough upon Christ; not whether Christ has enough to feed you. But
I shall not enlarge upon this. And so I have done with the third Branch of the
Doctrine.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein the Fourth Branch of the Doctrine is handled; namely, That this
Freedom comes by Christ.
THE Fourth Branch of the Doctrine is, That this Freedom comes by Christ; If
the Son shall make you free. Whoever is made free, is made free by Christ; it is
he does it, wherever it is done. In the carrying on of this, I shall do these
five things: 1. I shall show, when this Freedom that is in Christ did begin to
be of force. 2. What this intimates to us, that our Freedom comes by Christ. 3.
How it does appear that this Freedom comes by Christ. 4. After what manner this
Freedom is in Christ. 5. I shall make Application.

To the 1. When this Freedom that is in Christ did begin to be of force; I
answer, Immediately upon the fall of mankind. It is a great mistake to think,
that this Freedom did not begin to be of force till Christ came in the flesh.
If that were so, then all that died before that time, would have died in their
sins. It Is true, when Christ came, there were some things about this Freedom
that were not before: As,

1. It was more clearly manifested. They before us had it in shadows, and
types, and figures: the deliverance of the children of Israel out of the
bondage of Egypt, and then a long time after out of the bondage of Babylon, did
point at this; and all the ceremonial Worship and Sacrifices did look this way,
signifying, that there was one to come that should redeem them to God by his
Blood: and all the good and benefit of those things that were then observed in
those Ministrations, lay only in this, that they did lead them to Christ who
was held forth in them, tho in a more dark and obscure manner. Yea, but when
Christ came, this Freedom was brought unto light; for then he appeared, who was
the Substance of all; and then when the substance came, the shadows ceased.

2. It was more largely extended. Before, this Freedom was kept within the
bounds of the Jewish Nation, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. 'Twas a great privilege then,
to be one of that People, because salvation was of the Jews, and all the rest
of the World were Strangers and Foreigners: But when Christ came, then the
other Nations, poor Heathen and Gentiles, had this Salvation sent to them. The
Lord now makes his way to be known upon earth, and his saving health among all
nations. But for all this you must know, that this Freedom was in force ever
since the fall; for then God made the Promise of sending Jesus Christ, viz.
That the seed of the woman should bruise the serpents head, Genesis 3. 15. and all
that were saved, were saved in the way of looking to that promised Seed, though
he was not to come into the World till the fullness of time.

I must needs desire you to take notice of four things from hence, That this
Freedom has been of force since the Fall. As,

1. That persons, not living in the days wherein Christ was upon Earth, is no
hindrance at all to their eternal Salvation; for many are saved, both before
his coming in the Flesh, and since his ascending into Heaven, who never saw him
in his bodily presence. I confess it would have been a very desirable thing, to
have seen our dear and blessed Savior here in our Nature; and to have had the
privilege to have conversed with him about the things of the kingdom of God;
and to have heard him that spoke as never man spoke. But we are hindered neither
from Grace nor Glory for the want of this; we may be sanctified without it, and
we may be saved without it. As for sanctification, many that did so see him,
did remain unsanctified; and People were not converted by the Humane Nature of
Christ, but by the Divine Power and Spirit that dwelt in him, Joh. 6. 63. And
as to salvation, that is obtained, not by beholding Christ with an eye of Flesh,
but with an eye of Faith; and they who have that eye, here is their comfort,
Though they never saw Christ upon Earth, they shall see him in Heaven. If thou
had seen him upon Earth, thou would have seen him in the form of a servant,
in a poor and mean condition (for then he came to humble himself, and to be of
no reputation) but 'twill be another manner of sight to see him in Heaven, to
behold his glory there, Joh. 17. 24.

2. That there were Believers, and as great Believers, in the days of the Old
Testament, as there are in the New. Believing was the way to Salvation then, as
well as now. Because this Freedom by Christ did not then begin, when Christ
came in the Flesh; therefore you must think, that Faith in Christ did not then
begin neither. Believing was the old and the only way to Heaven, ever since the
Covenant of Works was broken all in pieces by Adam's Transgression. Indeed
there have been more Believers since the times of the New Testament, than
formerly; because the Gospel has been propagated further: but there were as
true and as great Believers before, as you may see, Heb. 11. where the Faith of
Abel, and Enoch, and Noah, and Abraham, and the rest, is recorded and
propounded as an Example to us. And if there were such eminent Believers then,
how shall we answer it if we be Unbelievers now, who have greater helps for our
Faith than they had? It should much stir us up to believe, to consider what
times we live in; how many things we have to help our Faith, of that they had:
they had the Promises of Christ made, but we have them fulfilled; they were
fain to spell out Christ in a heap of Ceremonies, but we may read him in his
own Story.

3. Take notice of the wonderful Virtue that is in Christ; such a Virtue as
reaches from the beginning of the World to the end of it. You see his Freedom
was of force in the first Generation, and so it shall be to the last. You know,
that Christ said, when the woman that had the bloody Issue touched him, I
perceive that virtue is gone out of me. But Oh, what a deal of virtue is there
gone out from Christ in this respect, that he has been the Redeemer of Souls
from the entrance of Time, and will be so till Time shall be no more. Things
may be very precious when they are made, and for a while after, as cordial
Waters, and curious Ointments, and costly Perfumes; but they will not always keep
their Virtue, and especially if they stand open, it will not be long before
they be corrupted: but Jesus Christ is such an excellent Cordial, and such an
excellent Ointment, that tho he has been so long standing open for the use of
every comer to him, yet he has not lost any thing of his Virtue or Savor; he
is as refreshing and as sweet still, as evet he was. You find in Solomon's
time, in the Old Testament, how he speaks in Cant. 1. 3. Because of the savor
of thy good ointments, thy name is as ointment poured forth; therefore do the
virgins love thee. What a savor Christ sent forth to the People of God then!
and in 1 Pet. 2. 7. in the times of the New Testament, still Christ held his
Virtue; he was precious to them that believed, and so he is still. A Believer
can be refreshed and comforted with Christ, (he is so full of Virtue still)
when he can be refreshed and comforted with nothing else: it is the present
experience of the Saints in this Age, as well as in the Ages that are past,
That Christ can revive a drooping Soul, and cheer up a fainting Spirit now, as
well as ever he could.

4. Take notice of the exceeding riches of the grace of God, that upon such a
thing as the Fall, he should bring in Freedom by Christ. Oh! what an
astonishing Consideration is this, that God should take occasion to manifest
his highest Mercy, where he might have taken occasion to have manifested his
hottest Justice! What could have been expected, in all likelihood, when our
first Parents, and we in them, had thus by sin spoiled all God's Workmanship,
and defaced his blessed Image to which we were conformed in our Creation, but
that he should have left us to all the misery that his broken Law could expose
us to? And lo! no sooner had man undone himself, but he brings in a promise of
Redemption by Christ. Who would ever have thought, that Mercy would have come
in at that door? Behold, Sirs, at what strange doors God can bring Mercy in:
when the Condition looks like a hopeless, lost, undone condition, God can let
in Mercy there. If it be great affliction, nay if it be great transgression,
God can let Mercy in for all that, Hos. 13. 9. O Israel, thou have destroyed
thy self, but in me is thine help. There Mercy comes in, but at what a strange
door it is! And therefore, whatever be thy case, or whatever be thy guilt, don't
say, Well, to be sure Mercy can never come in here. It Is true, we must look for
Mercies coming in the appointed ways of finding it, and we must not expect it
at any strange door. Don't tempt the Lord, and presume upon hopes of Grace in
ways of sin, Romans 6. 1. What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin that
grace may abound? I only note this from it, That when God will, it is wonderful
to see what strange occasions he takes to show himself gracious.

To the Second thing, what is intimated to us by this, That Freedom comes by
Christ.

1. It intimates the horrible nature of sin, in that no less than God's own Son
must be the Redeemer from it. You know sometimes the greatness of a Disease is
seen in the greatness of the Physician that comes to the Patient. If one ailes
but some small or ordinary matter, why, then one will hope to do well again,
either without any Physician at all, or else that an ordinary Physician will
serve the turn: But when there comes some famous eminent Doctor, one that all
the Country has been laid for, to inquire out a man that is so skilful and
able in his Profession, that there is not such another to be heard of; why,
then People will be ready to say, Certainly the person that this Physician goes
to, is taken with a very dangerous Disease, and his condition is no ordinary
Distemper, because there is such an extraordinary Physician sent for. So here,
that the Son of God must be sent into the World to recover it; that there must
be a Physician from Heaven to do this Work: Oh! it speaks what a grievous
condition sin brings us into. Sin is the worst of evils: one bad better be any
thing for Affliction, than be a Sinner; yea, the greatest suffering is not
comparable to the least sin. And therefore, you that will not believe that sin
has any such great harm in it, you must needs think you are deceived, if you
do but consider what a Physician this makes work for: See Psalm. 41. 4. If thou
had committed but one little sin in all thy life, yet it is of such dangerous
consequence, that thou will certainly die of it, if this Doctor Jesus do not
come to cure thee.

2. That spiritual Freedom is an unspeakable Mercy: you may see it is, in that
it comes by Christ, by so great a hand. Do you think, that the Son of God
should come down from Heaven to bestow it upon us, if it were not some
transcendent good thing? There are many excellent Mercies that are given to
men, and yet there is no coming from Heaven to give them; the Gifts come from
Heaven, but the Giver does not, Jam. 1. 15. but this is such a Gift, and such a
Mercy, that the Giver must come from Heaven to give it, Joh. 16. 28. Oh, Sirs!
what high thoughts should we have then of this Freedom? Surely there is
abundance of worth in it; (as I shall show upon the last Branch of the
Doctrine) in that it comes to us by such a Messenger as Christ himself. You
that have a part in this, you may say as Paul does, 2 Cor. 9. 15. Thanks be
unto God for his unspeakable gift.

3. That Christ has a ruining design upon the Kingdom of the Devil. If Freedom
comes by him, then that must not stand. This Freedom by Christ, is God's device
and contrivance, to batter down the Devil's walls, to turn his Subtilty into
Foolishness, and his Power into Weakness, and to bring away his Subjects from
him in spite of his heart, even as many as the Lord will have to be saved.
It Is true, the devil will keep multitudes of Souls in his slavery, but there is
not one of them that God has chosen, but shall be sure to be brought out from
his Iron Furnace. The Devil may keep those that are to be his own for ever, but
he shall not always keep any that belong to God; though he has some of them
yet in his Dominion, yet they shall be delivered: as Pharaoh had the Children
of Israel for a while in captivity, but at last he must part with them whether
he would or no, and there remained not one of them left behind. Though they
don't come all out in the self*same day, as they did out of Egypt, Exodus 12.
41. yet now one is converted, and then another is converted, till it shall come
to that at length, that the Devil has not one left that was a chosen Vessel to
God.

4. It intimates, that as Christ undertook the Work of our Redemption, so he
did not fail of accomplishing that which he went about. Freedom comes by him;
he did not only attempt or endeavor to bring it, but he effected it. Men many
times they set upon great things, but then when they have begun them, they
cannot carry them through; the burden, and charge, and care of it is beyond
their power: and it is one of the greatest follies of some, that they will be
meddling with those things that are too high for them. Now this was a very high
Undertaking that Christ went about, to procure Freedom for such a vast number
of Souls as were to be brought to Glory: for tho it is true, they that shall be
saved are but few, in comparison to those that shall perish; yet considered
apart and by themselves, they are a wonderful great Company, Rev. 7. 9. Well,
but now as high an Undertaking as this was, 'twas not too high for Christ; he
began it, and he finished it: See Joh. 17. 4. I have finished the work; he
means, this Work of our Redemption. And in Joh. 19. 30. you read, that these
words, It is finished, were the last words that Christ spoke before he died: as
if he should have said, Though I am a dying, yet the work of my Life is done. I
do not go off the World like a Bungler, that went about what he was not able to
effect. All that believe in me will find, that I have not been a half, but a
whole Savior to them: the business has not miscarried in my hands, that they
should wish I had never meddled with it. You know, the Apostle tells the
Colossians, chap. 2. 10. that they were complete in him: and in Heb. 9. 12.
it is said, that Christ has obtained eternal Redemption for us: he did not only
endeavor to obtain it, but he has obtained it. The Greek word is, he has
found it; he did not do as a man does sometimes when a thing is lost, he seeks
it, but then he comes back again and says, he cannot find it. Isa. 53. 10. The
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand: that is, he shall be sure to
carry it through. It Is true, he met with many difficulties in his way; as it
was the highest Work that ever was gone about, so 'twas the hardest Work: if it
had not been Christ that had been about it, it would never have been brought to
pass; but because 'twas he that had it in his hand, therefore he brought it to
a blessed period. And in this, Christ is an Example to us, not only to begin
good things, but to hold out to the finishing of them, whatever hardship we
must undergo. Beloved, difficulty does attend all Duty, and great difficulties
do attend some Duties; but for all that, we must see the end of them. God loves
such a frame of spirit, as to have Christians to be crowding and pressing to
Heaven, through many things that stand in their way. It Is no great matter, you
know, to get to a place when one has Elbow room enough; but when the way is
thronged up, and there is this to hinder him, and that to hinder him, and yet
the man will not give over till he comes where he should; it speaks that he was
resolved to get thither. And remember this Note, That the going on in our Duty,
notwithstanding difficulty, is an evident sign of our Sincerity. There was a
great deal of difficulty in Abraham's way, when he was to offer up his only Son
at the Command of God: but because he would not stick, at that, see what is
said to him, Genesis 22. 12. Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have
not withheld thy son, thine only son from me. As if he should have said, Now
thou have given a proof it to purpose.

You may judge of the Sincerity or Hypocrisy of your Hearts in this case. You
begin many things that are good, it may be; ay but do you carry them on to
perfection? Don't you fly back again, when you find it is hard? It may be thou
beginnest to deny thy self in this and that Sin or Lust; yea, but as thou art a
doing of it, thou find that Self-denial is a very hard thing, and so thou
returnest with the dog to his vomit, and with the sow that was washed, to her
wallowing in the mire. Oh! this is a bad sign that thy heart is not right in
the sight of God, One that is sincere will desire to stir himself up the more
now, because he finds it is hard; and he will be thinking, What, shall I be
worsted, and let alone, because my way is not smooth and easy for the Flesh to
walk in? And tho he finds it difficult, yet he does not think it impossible; he
believes, through Grace, such a strong Corruption may be subdued, and such a
Temptation may be overcome, and such a great Affliction may be born with a
patient spirit; and therefore, he will go to God for power, tho he has none of
his own; and go to God to make things easy, tho they are so hard to him, and
then he finds he can go on, Col. 4. 13.

To the Third, How does it appear that this Freedom comes by Christ? Ans. For
this I shall give you two sorts of Arguments; 1. Some that prove it more
directly. 2. Others that prove it more remotely; being drawn from such
considerations as are not immediately about Christ himself.

Those Arguments that prove it more directly, which do more nearly relate to
Christ himself, are these.

1. This Freedom was to come by one that was the only begotten Son of God, who
could call God Father, and whom God could call his Son, after such a manner as
none else could: they must have such a Relation one to another, as could not,
upon some accounts, be communicated to any other. For tho it is true, God does
in his rich mercy enter into the Relation of a Father with Believers, and gives
them power to become the Sons of God, Joh. 1. 12. Yet (as I have formerly
hinted) to them God is a Father by Grace, Covenant and Promise, and they are
children to him by Faith; see 2 Cor. 6. ult. Gal. 3. 26. But this was not
enough for him that was to bring in this Freedom; he must not be one that was
made the Son of God, so as to be none before; but he was to have this Relation
to him from all eternity. We cannot express the manner of it, it is such a
glorious Mystery. Well now, who can this be but Christ? The Saints, they do not
claim their Sonship this way, tho they are called Sons, and wonder at it that
they should, 1 John 3. 1. Yet they acknowledge, that they were not the Sons of
God by nature, no, but children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. They Will quickly tell you,
'twas not their natural due to be the Children of God, but to be firebrarnds in
Hell; for so this Scripture last quoted does intimate. And the glorious Angels
in Heaven, they don't claim their Sonship this way neither: they acknowledge
that they are Sons by Creation, and they all of them praise and bless the Lord
for this, and shout as it were for joy, in singing together to his Name, Job
38. 7. But Christ he has this Sonship by eternal Generation; this is the only
begotten of the Father, as he is often called, and therefore Freedom must come
by him. And in my Text you may observe, that when Christ speaks of this
Freedom, he puts in this Relation of his to God; he uses the word Son, If the
Son, etc. To teach them, that it must needs come by him, since he was the
eternal Son of God: for such a one he must be, who was to give this Freedom.

There is one Objection, before I can go on, that I would take notice of. Obj.
But it is said in Scripture, that this Freedom, and the Works about it, were to
be by a Servant of God; which is another Relation than that we are now speaking
of, yea and a far more inferior one than this of the Son of God. If a Servant
of God was to bring this Freedom, how can it be by the Son of God? You shall
find the places in Isa. 53. 11. Zech. 3. 8. and elsewhere. Ans. This is none
other than the Son of God who is here spoken of; only he is called by this
name, in reference to the great Work that he was to do, and in reference to the
mean and low condition in which he was to do it; he took upon himself the form
of a servant: and in respect to his faithfulness in all that he undertook, as
the Scripture says, he was faithful to him that appointed him.

2. This Freedom was to come by one that was to be God and Man together in one
person. He was to be such a wonderful One, that the like was not to be found
again, either in Heaven or Earth. In Heaven there was one that was God, yea but
he was not man; and upon Earth there were many that were men, yea but they were
not God. But here the two Natures, the Divine and the Humane, they must meet
together in him that was to be the Redeemer: and there was great reason for it;
the procuring of this Freedom did require both these to concur, and each of
them to lend their helping hand. Now thus it was with Christ; he was God, for
he says, I and my Father are one; and he was man too, for he says, The Father
is greater than I. And therefore, Christ was the wonderfullest Sight that ever
was beheld upon Earth: to see a person that was true God and true Man at once,
what a rare Sight was that? Oh! What an astonishing thing is the Incarnation of
Christ, that God should take upon him humane Flesh, and that humane Flesh
should be united to the Godhead! Yea, this will make a considerable part of the
Glory that shall be in Heaven, to behold the Son of God in our Nature. What an
everlasting joy will it be to the Saints, to see Christ in their Nature sitting
down at the right hand of God! Well, therefore, surely Freedom comes by Christ,
since it is he that is both God and man in one Person for ever.

3. This Freedom was to come by one, that was to be all his days upon Earth
without sin; he must lead as pure a spotless Life, as the perfect Law did call
for: he must not do as we do; the best of us perform Duties that have a great
many flaws, and fail in this and that, and then repent; no, he must fulfill all
righteousness to a tittle. Why, so did Christ, and therefore Freedom comes by
him, 1 Pet. 2. 22. Who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth. There
was not a Transgression in the whole Life of Christ; he was without blemish and
without spot; tho he spoke much, yet be never spoke amiss; tho he thought on
many things, yet he never thought amiss; tho he did many things, yet he never
did any thing amiss; he had not only sincerity, but he had perfection; not only
holiness, but all the degrees of it. The People of God, tho they have Grace,
yet they have need of grains of Allowance; they don't so their Duty, but that
they stand in need of mercy; tho God be glorified by that they do, yet they
don't look to be justified by what they do. But now, Christ he lived so, as
that he was justified by works; yea so, as to justify all that believe in him
by his works, Romans 5. 19. He lived so exactly, as that we need not fear to
follow his Example: we are commanded to follow the Example of the Saints; yea,
but we must take heed that we don't follow them in every thing, for fear we
should follow them in sin: tho the general course of a child of Gods walking is
holy and good, yet he has his particular miscarriages, and there we must leave
him: but Christ's walking 'twas all obedience, and all conformity to the Will
of God; therefore he is a fit and a full Pattern for us, in what is our Duty.

4. This Freedom was to come by one, who could make full satisfaction to the
Justice of God for sin: for so God was resolved, that he that would be the
Purchaser of it, should, without any abatement, bring in such a Ransom as was
able to recompense all the wrong that he had received. And therefore, he had
need to be some mighty Undertaker that should appear in this Work; since he was
to offer up a Sacrifice of such Value, as might make an All-sufficient
Expiation and Atonement to the highest Demands that could be propounded in a
way of Satisfaction. Now if all the Beasts of the Forest, and all the Cattle
upon a thousand Hills should have been gathered together, and given in
Sacrifice to God; yea, if all the lives of Men and Angels should have gone for
it: this would not have quieted the Justice of God. The guilt of sin is another
manner of thing, than that it can be bought off, or purged away by such means
as these: no, there must one be found, who could bring a more excellent
Sacrifice than all Creatures, or any mere Man could amount to. Now, this full
Satisfaction Jesus Christ did make, and therefore Freedom comes by him. And
that he did so, appears in three things, which you find in that Epistle to the
Hebrews: 1. In that after Christ had offered up himself, all other Sacrifices
ceased: it abolished all the ceremonial Worship of the Old Testament; then
there was no more blood of bulls and of goats required to be shed, nor the
ashes of an heifer to sprinkle the unclean: See Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Those
Ministrations and Services were pleasing to God before, as they did type out
his Son that was to come: but when he was come, and had offered up that great
Offering of Himself, then (mark the expression) God has no pleasure in them;
thou would not have them, says ver. 5. He had no pleasure in them, says
ver. 6. He takes them away, says ver. 9. q. d. Away with them, what should I
do with these now? He looks upon his Son in the flesh, the Body that he had
prepared, the second sacrifice, as it is here called; that is, of another kind
and nature than the first Sacrifices under the Law were; and that is it that he
is for, and that he will now establish. Now if Christ had not made full
Satisfaction, then these former Sacrifices should not have ceased; there must
have been the Old Testament Worship still: But there is no need of that now;
nay, it would be an abomination to God, now, to bring him such kind of things
as these; it would be, as you read in another case, Isa. 66. 3. He that kills
an ox, would be as if he slew a man: he that sacrifices a lamb, as if he cut
off a dogs neck: be that burns incense, as if he blessed an idol.

2. It appears that Christ has made full Satisfaction by this, that he does
not continue his own offering up of himself: he was to purchase this Freedom by
the offering up of himself. Now, if he had no laid down a full Price, why then,
he must have gone to his Sufferings again, he must have died often; as the
Sacrifices under the Law, because they were not full, and could not make the
comers to them perfect, therefore they must be renewed; but Christ offered up
himself but once, and there was enough: See Heb. 9. 25, 26. God never said to
Christ, Son, you must die again; this is such a great Debt, that you have not
paid enough.

3. It will be further manifest, that he cleared all the score, by this, That
when he had offered up himself, and rose again from the dead, he was received
up into glory. Now he could never have come thither himself, nor have brought
any else thither, if his Satisfaction had not been full; See Heb. 10. 12. But
this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sin for ever, sat down at the
right hand of God: that is, in token that he had made the comers to him
perfect; for so you have it in ver. 14. If he had not, it is certain that he
would have been in the Grave still.

5. This Freedom was to come by one that was to die, but not for himself: if he
had died for himself, he had not been fit to die for others. His Death must be
altogether for the excusing and delivering of those, who for their own
Transgressions had deserved that the wrath of God should have fallen upon
themselves. He must be a Surety for others, and one that could say, I am bound
for such and such persons Debts; and being so, I do acknowledge they are mine,
and I take them upon my self, and here I come to discharge them. Why, thus it
was with Christ, and therefore Freedom comes by him; he laid down his Life, but
he tells you, 'twas for his sheep, Joh. 10. 15. He was not indebted a farthing
token to God upon his own account: Law and Justice had nothing to say to him,
nor nothing to do with him, but only as he stood in our stead, 2 Cor. 8. 9. He
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor. Mark, for your sakes. What had he
done to offend God? or to suffer such a cruel, and painful, and cursed death as
he did? Let all his Life be scanned to the utmost, he would have been found
innocent, holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners. And had it not been
for others, in whose behalf he endured all that Agony and bloody Sweat which he
underwent, it had nor consisted with the Justice of God to lay such things upon
him. But since he would put himself in our place, out of his great love to poor
lost sinners, therefore 'twas fit that God should deal thus severely with him
as he did: and 'twas well for us that he laid on soundly upon Christ, and did
not spare him at all. See that Scripture, Isa. 53. 5. He was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him; and with his stripes we are healed. Mark here, how Justice
laid it on upon Christ. q. d. What? are you stepped in to bear these blows that
sinners have deserved should fall upon them? Well, I Will not spare you a jot the
more, because you are my Son: and then he falls to it in such a manner, as that
he wounded him, and bruised him; he crushed him as it were, between the
milstones of his wrath for our iniquities, that he made him the saddest
Spectacle to look upon that ever was. And I say, 'twas well for us that Justice
lashed Christ in this dreadful manner; for, with these stripes we are healed:
they were wounding stripes to Christ, but they are healing stripes to us: that
Blood that this sin-revenging Hand fetched from Christ, turns to be a precious
Salve for our grievous Sore. Hence it is clear, that Christ is the very
Redeemer, because 'twas not for himself that all this was done to him; See Dan.
9. 26. -- cut off, but not for himself.

6. This Freedom was to come by one who was witnessed to by all the Prophets
under the Old Testament, and to whom all things were to agree which they
foretold: Now thus it was with Christ, and therefore Freedom comes by him. See
Act. 10. 43. To him gave all the Prophets witness, etc. And therefore, you do
often meet with this in the Story of Christ's Life and Death recorded in the
Gospel; this and that was done, that the saying of such and such a Prophet
might be fulfilled, and that such a Scripture might be fulfilled; all was
fulfilled in Christ. The Prophecies of the Old Testament, they foretold out of
what Nation he that was to be the Redeemer should arise, viz. from among the
Jews: So did Christ, says the New Testament. The Prophecies of the Old
Testament foretold, that he must be of the house of David, and of the tribe of
Judah: So was Christ, says the New Testament. That he was to be born of a
Virgin; So was Christ, says the New Testament. That the place where he must be
born, must be Bethlehem; and there the New Testament tells us Christ was born.
I cannot stand to quote Places about these and many other things of this sort:
study the Word for this; compare Scriptures of the Old and New Testament
together, you will see how all does exactly agree to Christ. And therefore he is
the true Redeemer; and this Jesus whom I preach unto you, is Christ. But I
shall go no further in this.

There are other Arguments that do more remotely prove, that Freedom comes by
Christ. I will but hint at four.

1. If it does not, why then observe upon how many things this would cast a
lie. It would cast a lie upon all the Ministry that preach the Gospel: They
tell you that Freedom comes by Christ, and are, or should be earnest with you
to stir you up to come to him for Salvation. What? do you think they are all
Deceivers? Have they all conspired together throughout the World, to put a
cheat upon People? Why, how can this be? They never met all together, nor
possibly could, to plot such a business. It casts a lie upon all the Apostles,
upon all the Prophets. It would cast a lie upon all the Ordinances of Christ,
for they all lead to him. It would cast a lie upon the Scriptures, for they
speak of him. It would cast a lie upon the Angels in Heaven, for they sang at
his Birth, Glory to God in the highest, etc. It would cast a lie upon Christ,
for he told the World that he was the Redeemer: I am the light of the world;
and I am that bread of life; and I am the resurrection and the life; and I am
the way, and the truth, and the life. Yea, it would cast a lie upon God
himself; for he said, this was his beloved Son, and owned him by a Voice from
Heaven.

2. If Freedom does not come by Christ, then all the Saints hope is lost. They
have all placed their hope in him, 1 Timothy 1. 2. They hope that they shall have
eternal life by believing in him; they hope that it will not be long now, before
he will come again and receive them to himself, according to his Promise, that
where he is, there they may be also. They are described there in Tit. 2. 13. to
be a People looking for the blessed hope, and glorious appearance of the great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. And oh, how many breathings and longings of
Soul have they, and do they send forth to him! and, having the first fruits of
the Spirit, they groan within themselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the
redemption of the body, Romans 8. 23. And what? shall all this be lost.

3. If Freedom did not come by Christ, certainly the Devil would not keep such
a do to hinder Souls from coming to him. He makes this his great business, to
blind the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel
of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4. 4. But
they might come, and come to Christ, and he would put forth no power, nor use
no subtilty to hinder them at all, if there were no Freedom to be found in him.
The Devil knows it is otherwise; and therefore he sets all his devices a work to
block up that way.

4. If Freedom did not come by Christ, then no Soul that comes to him could
find rest in him: But every Soul that comes to him, finds rest in him, Heb. 4.
3. Yea, they find a glorious rest in him, as God promised they should, Isa. 11.
10. Obj. Why, but there are many that come to Christ, and yet are much
disturbed, and full of disquieting thoughts. Ans. Yea, that is true, and yet
notwithstanding they do find rest in Christ; for, ask such a person in the
midst of all his fears, It is thus and thus with you, ay, but would you change?
Would you place your hope in another? Oh! no: here he desires to pitch for
ever. Well then, he finds rest here, as to the Objection; and all his trouble
is not, that he fears whether there be rest in Christ, but whether he be truly
come to him.

To the Fourth, After what manner this Freedom is in Christ, I answer, 1. It Is
in Christ personally; i. e. Jesus Christ who is the Second Person in the
Godhead, is he who is our Deliverer and Redeemer. When a poor Creature is
delivered by some one out of his Slavery, certainly he must needs desire to
know who was the person that did it. Now the Lord Jesus Christ is the very
person that has done this great Work for us; as he said to the woman of
Samaria, Joh. 4. 26. when she spoke of the Messiah or Redeemer that was to
come, I that speak unto thee, am he. Now, the reason why I mention this, that
our Freedom is in the person of Christ, is in order to the answering of one
Question that may profitably be propounded here; which is this,

Quest. Whether our Redemption be so to be appropriated to Christ, the Second
Person in the Godhead, as that the other Persons, namely, the Father and the
Holy Ghost, had nothing, or have nothing to do in it?

Answ. 1. Our Freedom comes in some respects, from the Father and the Holy
Ghost, as well as from the Son, or from all the three Persons jointly. 2. In
other respects, it comes from Christ personally and peculiarly; so as that, in
some sense, he is and must be looked upon as more immediately our Redeemer. I
will open these two things a little.

1. Our Freedom comes from all the three Persons. That it comes from Christ,
you know that is the whole business of this 4th Branch of the Doctrine; and much
has been spoken to it already. But now for the Father and the Holy Ghost, they
are also concerned in this Freedom. For the Father, see that place, Col. 1. 12,
23. Giving thanks unto the Father, -- who has delivered us from the power of
darkness, etc. And for the Holy Ghost, you read, 2 Cor. 3. 17. that where he
comes into the heart, he brings Liberty with him: So that the giving of this
Freedom is, in some respects, the joint work of all the Persons. I shall show
you what you are to gather from this by and by, that they all have a hand in
it. But, first. I will show you what hand the Father and the Holy Ghost have in
conjunction with Jesus Christ about this Freedom; and then how Christ, as I
said, is more personally and peculiarly concerned in it.

For God the Father, I shall give you five things, for his having a hand in
this Work.

1. He did appoint, design and choose the Son to be our Redeemer: he did in his
infinite Wisdom and Goodness, contrive the way for the bringing of those that
should believe, out of the misery that they were fallen into by sin, Gal. 4. 4,
5. So that our Redemption was from the Father, as the Original and Fountain of
it. He broke, as it were, this Business to his Son, and by his own consent he
pitched upon him to be the Savior and Mediator. You may observe in many places
of the Old Testament, that the Father is brought in, speaking to Christ as one
that he had called and chosen to this Work, Isa. 42. 6, 7. and 49. 8, 9. and
55. 4, 5. and 61. 1. Zech. 9. 11. By these places you may see, that the Father
and the Son did, as it were, agree together from all Eternity about this thing;
and took, as I may say, a delight to confer together in Heaven about it. There
were many wonderful things done between them even there: there this admirable
Design was laid; and there Christ, as it were, engaged and entered into Covenant
with his Father, that he would undertake and faithfully perform this great
Work: and there the Father past his promise to the Son, that those whom he
should redeem should have eternal Life, Tit. 1. 2. And there the Father did, as
it were, give in to the Son, the Number, List or Roll of all the persons that
were to be redeemed, Joh. 17. 6. So that when Christ came into the World, he
knew for whom he was to die, and for whom he was to make intercession; that it
was not for all the World, but for them whom the Father had given him: and he
knew who they were, as he says, Joh. 10. when he speaks that he was to lay
down his Life for the Sheep, ver. 15. I know my sheep, ver. 14. he must needs
know them, for he stood charged with every one of them, Joh. 6. 39. So that
Christ was a long time separated to this Work before he went about it, even by
the everlasting Decree and Purpose of his Father, 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10. Oh! what
ancient Mercy this Mercy by Christ is! It has been laid up for the Saints of
old, before the World began. It Is from everlasting; and as it is from
everlasting, so it is to everlasting, Psalm. 103. 17.

2. The Father did fit his Son, and fit him with all that was needful to go
about such a Work. As God never sends or calls any to an Employment, but he
furnishes them with what is necessary for the discharging of it: So he did this
in a singular and eminent manner to Christ: the work that he had to do, would
require a deal to be laid out upon it; he had need bring enough with him, and
so he did: See Col. 1. 19. It pleased the Father, that in him should all
fullness dwell. And in Joh. 3. 34. you read, that the Father gave him the Spirit
without measure: he dealt otherwise with him, than he does with the rest of his
Children. It Is true, be bestows his Spirit, and the Gifts and Graces of it upon
them, but to them he measures it, Romans 12. 3. He does divide and distribute to
them, 1 Cor. 12. 11. and he gives it so to them, that they cannot say one to
another, I have no need of thee. But in his giving to Christ, he observed no
number, no weight, no measure; he gave him all, all Power, all Riches, all
Righteousness: he dealt with us by retail, as I may so say, but he dealt with
Christ by wholesale; he makes us to be as the Streams, or small Rivers; but he
made him the Sea; he hid all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge in him. See
that one place more how Christ was fitted, Is. 11. 2. The spirit of the Lord
shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of
counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. He
made him able to speak so as never man spoke; he made him able to comfort a
wounded Spirit, so as never man comforted, Isa. 50. 4. he made him able to
suffer so, as never man suffered; he made him able to live so, as never man
lived.

3. The Father did assist and stand by him, in the doing of all that he did in
the Work of our Redemption: he did not set him to work, and then forsake him;
but his Presence and Power went along with him. It Is true, he cried out upon
the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and at that time he had
an eclipse and withdrawment of the Presence of his Father: but this was not a
total and a final desertion; for even then, he could look upon God as his God,
and act his Faith in him; which shows, that even then, he was supported and
enabled to go through with his most bitter Sufferings. Now, for the Assistance
that he had from his Father, you have diverse places, as Is. 42. 1. Behold my
servant whom I uphold: that is, I will go along with him in his work, with my
upholding-power. God the Father looked after him, to carry him through what he
sent him about; and see what he undertakes for him, in ver. 4. He shall not
fail, etc. As if he had said, Tho it is a very hard Work that he has to do, yet
I Will keep him from fainting in it; and so he promises, in ver. 6. that he would
hold his hand for him, as it were, to keep it from being weak or shaking. And
in the confidence and full assurance of this, that he should have his Fathers
help, you shall see how resolvedly and courageously he goes to the Work, Isa.
58. 5, to 10.

4. The Father did accept this redeeming-work at the hands of his Son, as that
in which he was satisfied; as who should say, I have enough, I demand no more:
he took great content in what he had don, and so he does still. There be two
excellent places for this; one in Joh. 10. 17. Therefore does my Father love
me, because I lay down my life, etc. And another in Ephesians. 5. 2. Christ has
given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling
savor. Christ could not have pleased his Father better, than by performing
this Work. Oh, what a lovely delightful thing it is to his Soul, to see what his
Son has done for poor sinners!

5. He did reward him for his pains. You find Christ, when he had done his
Work, he calls for his Reward, Joh. 17. 4, 5. And if you look into Rev. 3. 21.
you shall see Christ says, he has it; As I also overcame, and am set down
with my Father on his throne. In this place, he tells John in his Revelation to
him from Heaven, and he bids John to tell it from him to the Church to whom he
was to write, That he was well paid for all the good and great Service that he
had performed in the work of our Redemption. God the Father had of old promised
to him, that he should have a large Recompense for it, as you may read, Isa.
53. 12. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great; he shall divide
the spoil with the strong, because he has poured out his soul unto death. And
if you bring this to the New Testament, you shall see what this Recompense was,
and how fully 'twas paid in to him, and how many ways God honored him; how he
raised him from the dead again, and took him into Heaven, and set him down at
his own right Hand on the Throne of the Majesty on high, and made him the Head
of his Body, the Church, and placed him far above all Principalities and
Powers, etc. Ephesians. 2. 20, 21, 22. and appointed him to be the Judge of all, and
he to whom all must bow: and all this was by way of Reward to him for what he
had done and suffered in the great Work of bringing this Freedom to us. See
Phil. 2. 7, 8. there you have an account of the great Service that he did about
it; and then he brings in ver. 9, 10, 11. with a wherefore, Wherefore God also
has highly exalted him, and given him a name that is above every name: i. e.
He considered how greatly his Son had been humbled for our sakes, and upon that
account he promoted him to this high degree of Exaltation. Thus you see the
Father had a hand also in this Freedom.

And then for the Holy Ghost, he does much about it too. For, it is the Spirit
that does awaken and convince the Soul that is to be saved, to see its lost and
undone condition by nature; and shows it, by its own illumination, Why, thou
art one that art in bondage. That proves this by undeniable Evidence: What!
live so as thou have and do, and not be in this spiritual Bondage! Oh! it
cannot be. Why, thou have the manifest signs and tokens of a person in slavery:
what is the meaning that thou art so in love with sin, and under the power and
dominion of these and these Lusts? that thou art so given to such and such
wicked Ways, and so contrary to all that is good? That thou have such an
unclean Heart, and such a disobedient Life, such a dark Mind, such vile
Affections, such a rebellious Will? Why, does not this speak that thou art an
Enemy to God, and a Child of Wrath? Would, or could any Man or Woman live such
a carnal, vain Conversation as thine is, if they were not in an unregenerate
condition? Therefore you read, Joh. 16. 9. that it is the Spirit that reproves
the world of sin.

Again; It is the Spirit that humbles the soul that is to be saved; that abases
and laves it low in the sight of its own sin and misery, that makes sin
grievous and odious to it, and that brings the Soul under a sense of that wrath
that belongs to the workers of iniquity: So that it shall cry out, Oh, what
have I done! Oh, what have I deserved! what a dangerous case am I in! Here Is
this and that sin forbidden by God, and yet committed by me, and thereupon the
Law threatens thus and thus. Oh, how shall I escape! Here Is this and that Duty
commanded by God, and yet neglected by me, and thereupon the Law threatens thus
and thus again. Oh, what shall become of me! Hence that sorrow and heaviness
that is in such a Soul now, is called the spirit of heaviness, Isa. 61. 3. to
note, that this heaviness comes from the Spirit: it is he that sets the Soul a
mourning thus.

Again; It is the Spirit that discovers to the Soul that is to be saved, where
its remedy is for all this; that acquaints it with the Gospel and Salvation by
Christ, and what things God has freely given to his People in and by his Son,
1 Cor. 2. 12. That shows it, Tho thou art such a great sinner, yet there is a
great Savior; one that is a Physician, appointed to cure such Diseases as
thine are; one that is a Surety, appointed to pay such Debts as thine are. It Is
said here, that the Spirit makes those who shall be saved, to know such things
as these are; what God has done for the raising and recovering of poor
sinners, in a way of free Grace; what a glorious Contrivance he has found out
by Jesus Christ, revealed in the Gospel, to show mercy to them: and indeed,
that is a knowing that is worth the having, to know these things so, as the
Spirit makes them known to the People of God. There be many that have a kind of
Knowledge of these things by bare reading of them, and hearing of them, and by
common Illumination of the Spirit; but this knowing here, is another manner of
thing.

Again; It is the Spirit that does help and enable the Soul to look out for
this Christ, to use all the means, and to go all the ways that may be, to come
to this Christ, and to get an interest in him; that works in it faith to lay
hold upon him, and that makes the Soul able to take him, Ephesians. 3. 16, 17. That
he would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened with
might by his spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by
faith. Mark, it is the Spirit that by his might does strengthen the inner man,
that Christ may dwell in the heart by faith. Take notice by the way, what a
deal of Power there must go out from this Spirit, to make a Soul believe with
the true saving Faith. They that have the false Faith, they can believe with
ease; there needs not an Almighty Arm to be stretched out to work their Faith,
they give it themselves, and have had it all their days; they find no
difficulty either in the getting of it, or in the keeping of it. But the true
Faith comes into the hearts of Saints by no less a strength than that which God
by his Spirit puts forth: See Ephesians. 1. 19, 20.

Again; It is the Spirit that seals and witnesses to the Soul, the Assurance
that this Freedom does belong to it, and that proves to the Soul that it is so,
by such Evidences as it gives out of the Word, Ephesians. 1. 13. This is he that
carries, as I may say, God's Privy Seal, and when, and to whom he pleases he
gives it; but he gives it to none but them that are sanctified: The secret of
the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his covenant. And
this is an unspeakable mercy, to have the Spirits Seal set to our Graces; to
have ones repentance sealed for a true Repentance, and ones faith sealed for a
true Faith, and ones comfort sealed for true Comfort, and ones interest in
Christ sealed up: We must make our state of Grace sure by Signs, but the Spirit
can make it sure by Seal.

Again; It is the Spirit that ingages and stirs up the Soul to such a walking
as is sit for one that is brought into a state of Freedom: therefore, 1 Pet. 1.
2. the People of God are said to have the sanctification of the Spirit unto
obedience. And Oh! how much are they beholding unto this Spirit, for many
heavenly Notions that he gives in to them; and for fresh quicknings, when they
find abundance of deadness, and formality in their Duties has seized upon
them. This Spirit is often calling upon the Saints to pray more fervently, to
hear more profitably, to walk more closely, to bring forth more fruit to God,
who has done so much for them. It often minds them of their Mercies, that they
may be more stirred up to Duties; and of the hope of their Calling, that so
they may walk more worthy of it.

Again; It is the Spirit that preserves and keeps them in the state of Freedom,
that they shall not lose it again; and that makes them to persevere to the end
in a holy life, that so they may come at last to the full enjoyment of all that
their dear Redeemer has purchased and prepared for them. This Spirit is that
Power of God, by which they are said through Faith to be kept unto Salvation;
See Ezekiel. 36. 27. Thus you see, that both the Father and the Holy Ghost have a
hand in this Freedom.

But yet (according to the second thing that was said, in answer to the
Question) our Freedom in other respects comes from Christ personally and
peculiarly; so as that in some sense, he is and must be looked upon as more
immediately our Redeemer; for he did that in his Person, which the other Persons
did not. They did not take our nature, and come in the likeness of sinful
flesh, but the Son did, Romans 8. 3. and therefore, 'twas not they, but he that
was made under the Law, and that yielded perfect obedience to it: neither did
they, but he died that accursed death upon the Cross for our sins; and 'twas
he, and not they, that rose again the third day, and that afterward ascended
into Heaven; and it is he, and not they, that is the Mediator betwixt God and
man, 1 Timothy 2. 5. and diverse such things must be appropriated to the Person of
Christ. 'Twas he that was put into the Offices of a Prophet, Priest and King;
and these things are everywhere in the Scripture kept so distinct from the
other Persons, as that Christ is the Doer and Executor of them. So that our
Freedom comes by him (as I have already showed upon this Fourth Branch of the
Doctrine) in a more eminent way, than by the Father or the Holy Ghost; tho they
have all of them, as I have said, in some respects, a very great hand in it.
And from that, I would now desire you to take three Considerations.

All the three Persons are concerned in the Freedom that comes by Christ: why,
then consider,

1. That there was not a word spoken in Heaven against the recovering of poor
Sinners out of their lost condition; not a word against showing Mercy to them.
You know; there be many great things upon Earth that come to a Proposition, but
then they meet with an Opposition, and such an Opposition, that the thing
propounded is dashed all to pieces. But it was not so in Heaven: there every
one was for it; the Father was for it, the Son was for it, and the Holy Ghost
was for it; and yet every one might have been against it. And Oh, how much
might have been said to have spoiled all; there was enough might have been
alleged, to have turned all their hearts against us: but every one was willing
that the business of our Redemption should go forward, all went on our side.
You may therefore be fully assured, that tho there was none but the second
Person that did visibly appear in the Work of our Redemption, yet that they are
all well-wishers to it. Here Is no place left for doubting, whether their hearts
be as inclinable toward your Salvation, as Christ did express, by word of
mouth, that his heart was in the days of his Flesh: for, they do all, by mutual
consent, unite together in this Design of doing your Souls good, and the voice
of one, is the voice of all. And when Christ did invite and call poor Sinners
to come unto him, and declared so much readiness to receive and embrace all
that were weary and heavy laden; you must know, that he did not only do this to
show his own kindness and good will to the Children of Men, but also to show
what kindness and good will the other Persons had in their hearts toward them
too. And if you look into 1 John 5. 7. you shall find them all joined together
in this matter of Salvation by Christ, compared with ver. 11. What an
engagement then is it to us to accept of this Salvation, when we have, as I may
say, three such great Suitors seeking to us; the Father sending his Son, and
the Son coming from the Father, and now Christ by his Spirit knocking at the
door of our Hearts for an entrance. Oh, that as they are all willing that we
should be saved, we were all willing to close with this Salvation!

2. Since they all have a hand in it, then in our laboring to get the benefit
of Christ's Redemption, we must look to all the three Persons: it is not only
Christ in particular that we must have an eye to, but also to the Father and to
the Holy Ghost. And we must look to them all two ways; 1. In the way of Prayer.
2. In the way of Thanksgiving.

As for Prayer; why, we must pray to the Father, that he would draw us to his
Son; as Christ says, Joh. 6. 44. No man can come to me, except the Father
which has sent me draw him. We must pray to the Son, that he would have mercy
upon us, and heal us, and that he would help our Unbelief; as you read they did
in the Gospel, when he was here in his bodily Presence. We must pray to the
Holy Ghost, to inlighten our Minds in the saving understanding of Christ and
the Gospel, to sanctify us and make us obedient to the word of Grace, and
effectually to apply to us the Redemption that comes by Christ, and all the
benefits of it. But here we must take heed, that when we do thus express our
selves (as sometimes we may) in such kind of Petitions as are directed more
particularly to one Person, we don't think that the other Persons are at that
time excluded.

And then we must look to all the three Persons, in a way of Thanksgiving: For
if every one has a hand in our Redemption, then we are beholding to every one
of them; and so we may not only make an Acknowledgment of it to the whole
Godhead jointly, but also to each of the Persons particularly; and so you shall
see, the People of God have sometimes done. As for Thanksgiving to the Father,
see Ephesians. 1. 3. and for Thanksgiving to the Son, Rev. 1. 5, 6. And tho we have
not, as I remember, any Scripture, in which the Holy Ghost is given thanks to
in this particular way of naming of him; yet, you must know, that in those
places in which Praise is rendered unto God, he is there to be understood. Well
then, as I said, we should be admiring and praising every one of them for this
Work, and saying, Oh, blessed be the Father, that sent his only begotten Son
out of his Bosom, to be a Savior to Mankind! And Oh, blessed be Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, who laid down his Life to be a Ransom for us! And Oh, blessed
be the Holy Ghost, which has given to any of our Souls the application,
comfort, and sealing up of this Redemption! Blessed be that one God in three
Persons for ever and ever. Amen.

3. If there be such a Three that join together to further the Saints
Salvation; then another Three that join together to hinder their Salvation,
shall not be able to do it. There is a Three that would fain keep every Child
of God out of Heaven; the World, the Flesh and the Devil: and it is true, they
are three great and mighty Enemies; howbeit, they attain not to the first
Three, 1 Chronicles. 11. 21. Oh! you that fear God, when you think what Three there
are against you, and thereupon are ready to be disheartened; why, think what
Three there are for you, and then be comforted. What are the Three below to the
Three above? The Saints do too little mind what great Friends and Helps are
engaged on their side. It daunted all the Children of Israel to see that great
Goliath coming against them, because they looked no higher than themselves: but
little David went forth with Courage and Resolution to meet him, because he
knew that he had God on his side, 1 Samuel 17. 45. Thou come to me with a
sword, and with a spear, and with a shield; but I come to thee in the name of
the Lord of hosts; and so he prevailed. This is the Cordial that true
Christians must take along with them, in their journey to Heaven, to keep them
from fainting, That Father, Son and Spirit are all engaged in the matters of
their Salvation. And it is certain, that they would not be so fearful and so
weak in their work as they are apt to be, if they did but know their strength.
And so this is the first thing that shows, After what manner this Freedom is in
Christ: It Is in him Personally.

2. This Freedom is in Christ abundantly: So Paul found it, when the Lord had
mercy on him, 1 Timothy 1. 14. You know, the manner of men is, when they give
others of their good things, to give but a little of them: it may be, rhey have
not such a store of their own, as to be able to part with much. But it is not so
with Christ; this Freedom is stored up in him, he has Treasures of it: it is
much that Christ can do for Souls; that place is very full for it, Heb. 7. 25.
He is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him. The
word in the Greek is, as if you should read it, He is able to save to the
finishing or perfecting of all, (...). Whatever is in Christ, it is in him
abundantly. Consider four things, and you will see it is thus with him in respect
of this Freedom: it is in him plentifully.

1. He can save more than ever shall be saved. The reason why such multitudes
do post and flock to Hell, is not because there was not enough in Christ to
keep them from it, but because they will not be ruled by him; they do not
follow this Physicians Prescriptions. Here upon Earth, though the Patient makes
the best use that can be of the Physician, and follows his Prescriptions and
Advice to a tittle, and does all things to the exactest obedience; yet many
times the Patient dies notwithstanding, or he is never the more delivered from
the pain and danger of his Disease; as it was with the Woman that had the
bloody Issue, Mark 5. 25, 26. And the Disease is so inveterate and malignant,
that all the skill of the Doctors is not able to cure them or preserve them.
But here, no Soul is lost for want of Skill or Power in the Physician; but it is
because they would not do as he would have them; they would not submit to his
Cure, nor accept of his Help: they should have found him a Healer, if he had
found them obedient, Psalm. 81. 11, 12.

Obj. But you may say, If Christ has such a Power, he could have made them
obedient if he pleased.

Ans. That Is true, he could have done so, and so he does to some; he does make
them obedient and willing, that he will not only give Advice, but they shall
take Advice, and give up themselves to be wholly at Christ's direction and
counsel; and wherever this is wrought in the Soul, it is the free Grace and
distinguishing Love of God. The overcoming of the Will to close with Christ, is
indeed the breaking forth of God's eternal Election, and he will do this in all
whom he has chosen: but when God sees, that tho men cannot of themselves
receive Christ, yet they do wickedly and wilfully resist the offers of his
Grace, and through the pride of their Hearts, will not cry to him to make them
willing, and to bring down the stubbornness and rebellion of their spirits; who
will dare to blame (...) if he leave them to themselves? (...) sure, as it is
unspeakable Mercy in God to draw some to willingness; So it is a very righteous
thing in him to leave others to their wilfulness. God is not bound to save any
man against his will; and whom he pleases he may make willing, and whom he
pleases he may let alone in their rebellion: and so they don't perish because
Christ could not save them, but because they would not be saved; and they
manifested that they would not, because they always resisted the Holy Ghost,
Acts 7. 51.

Obj. But how does this consist with that great willingness that is in Christ
to save Sinners (of which we are so often told) that so many Sinners should
perish, and yet Christ could save them?

Ans. 1. The willingness that is in Christ to save Sinners, must especially and
principally, as I conceive, be understood of those kind of Sinners, who seek to
him out of a sense of their need of his Salvation, and of their undone
condition without him; as appears from Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. As the Lord Jesus, in the
days of his Flesh, did upon all occasions of the coming of the diseased persons
to him, manifest his great readiness to cure them, and he turned away none that
offered themselves to him; by them he would be prevailed with, and by them he
would be touched; and as many as touched him, were made perfectly whole of
whatever Disease they had: So, whoever they be, whatever spiritual Plagues they
have, that do humbly and sensibly offer themselves to Christ as the Physician
of their Souls, and cry to him; Lord Jesus, be entreated to cure me of a blind
Mind, of a hard Heart, of the strong Possession that the Devil has taken hold
of me by such a sin, and such a sin; it is certain, that Jesus Christ does, as I
may say, stand prepared to help such a Soul, and to have mercy upon him, and
heal him. And therefore you must know, that Jesus Christ requires this at your
hands, that you who would have Mercy and Salvation from him, should repair to
him, and come and spread, as it were, your Wounds before him, and implore his
help. You must not stay away from Christ, and keep at a distance from him, but
go and tell him the misery that your Souls are in, and beseech him to show his
skill upon you; and this will be the way to get him to be moved with compassion
toward you: Then you will find, that he has a willingness in his heart to do
you good; and the more importunate you are with him, the more hopes you will
have to speed with him; yea, you need not doubt or fear, if you do sincerely
make out to him for his help, but you shall have it; you are to believe that
you shall: And if you do not thus look out for help in Christ, but neglect
coming to him that is appointed of God to save you; as you will certainly
perish, so, tho you shall, yet your destruction does not proceed from a want of
willingness in Christ to save you: tho I confess, this willingness that is in
Christ to save even them that shall never be saved, is not the same with that
which is in him to save those who are to be saved. You must take notice, that
this willingness of Christ to save sinners, may be considered two ways.

1. There is an absolute willingness in Christ to save some sinners, and these
sinners are those whom God has, from all eternity, chosen to life; and who
thereupon do come to Christ, that they might have life, being awakened and
stirred up thereunto by the inward and effectual working of Gods Spirit and
Grace upon their hearts. Now there is in Christ an absolute willingness to save
all such; he is fully resolved to be wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption to them, Joh. 6. 37.

2. There is a conditional willingness in Christ to save other sinners, yea all
sinners, yea even those that shall never be saved; by which Christ stands ready
to receive, and pardon, and embrace them, in case they come to him, and repent
and believe the Gospel: which they never doing, through the hardness and
impenitency of their hearts, to which they are justly left, they are eternally
lost, tho Christ could have saved them, and would have saved them, if the
Condition had been performed, Luke 13. 34.

Secondly, it will appear that this Freedom is in Christ abundantly, if we
consider how he and his Salvation are magnified and extolled in Scripture. You
shall find the Word of GOD speaking very honorably of both, as indeed he and
his Salvation deserve the highest Praise. When Christ himself, as a Redeemer,
is spoken of, see the great commendation that is given of him; I shall need to
lead you but to that one Epistle to the Hebrews for it; See chap. 4. 15. and
chap. 7. 26. and chap. 8. 1, 2, 6. and chap. 9. 14. And then, as he himself who
is the Savior, is thus set forth with such magnificent Expressions; So the
Salvation and Redemption that comes by him likewise, Heb. 2. 3. How shall we
escape, if we neglect so great salvation? He speaks of it, as that which cannot
be told what manner of thing it is, for the Worth and Value of it; he is so
taken up with the admiration of it, that he wants a fit comparison to set it
out by. So great salvation; as if he should have said, I cannot tell you how
great it is, it is so great. And in 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Ye were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, -- but with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot. He makes all the Silver
and Gold, and precious things of the World as nothing, to this Redemption which
the Blood of Christ has purchased for us.

Thirdly, there must needs be abundant Freedom in Christ, if we consider, that
this Redemption of his does more good to them that partake of it, than ever the
Fall of Adam did them hurt. It was indeed an unspeakable deal of misery that
was brought in by the Transgression of our first Parents; by it came Sin, by it
came Death and Condemnation. Beloved, there is no evil either of Sin or of
Punishment, either in this World or in that to come, but it is the woeful effect
and fruit of that Fall. Oh, that God would show us what a miserable condition
we are in by the Fall! Oh, how ignorant is the World of this! How unawakened
about it! Little do the most consider, where it is that Adam has left them;
what wretched, cursed Creatures they are upon that account; and Oh, how little
care do People generally take, or how little haste do they make to get out of
it! How secure do the most continue upon that sinking ground, as if there were
no danger toward them! Well, but now this Redemption by Christ has more good
in it, for them that are or shall be delivered by it, than that had hurt in it.
This second Adam sets them into a better condition, than ever they were before
they fell: He does not only make up their loss again, but with the greatest
advantage. Read that excellent place, Romans 5. 15. to the end.

Fourthly, It Is such abundant Redemthat is in Christ, that he can save those
that despair of ever being saved; not only can he save those who deserve to be
damned, but even such as despair of being saved. Oh, how many be there, that
have lain under most dreadful fears of everlasting condemnation! that when they
have been brought to see their sins, as it were, set in order before them, and
to see the wrath of God, as it were, flaming against them; they have concluded,
that they should as certainly go to Hell, as if they were there already: And,
Oh, the bitter cries that they have had upon this! Oh, the anguish and sorrow
that their Souls have been filled with, What shall become of me? etc. They have
roared by reason of the disquietness of their hearts; they could not tell how
to eat, or drink, or sleep, for the fearful looking-for of Judgment and of
Wrath that should devour them; and yet, after all this, have been saved: the
great Redeemer has given them rest from their fear, and from their sorrow, and
from the hard bondage wherein they were made to serve, Heb. 2. 15. And it may
be, here may be some or other amongst you that are full of trembling thoughts,
and very ready to speak about your Salvation, as if there were no hope. I know
that many poor Souls do go under this load; they cannot tell how to think that
they shall ever be saved. Oh, but consider, there is such abundance of Freedom
in Christ, that he can save those who despair of being saved: and therefore be
revived in thy hopes, thou poor disheartened Soul; and because of this, say as
Jonah did, chap. 2. 3, 4. For thou had cast me into the deep, in the midst of
the seas, and the floods compassed me about: all thy billows and thy waves
passed over me. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look again
toward thy holy temple.

3. This Freedom is in Christ freely; the very word does carry this along with
it. Christ does not release Souls, as men use to give Freedom to the Bodies of
them they have kept in prison; if they will have their Liberty, they must pay
their Fees. That which God speaks of Cyrus, in Isa. 45. 13. is eminently true
of Christ, He shall let go my captives, not for price or reward. Christ does
not ask Souls, What will you give me, if I will do this for you? But he is
willing to do it for nothing; he bids them come and buy, but it is without money
and without price; he is as glad to free poor sinners, as they are to be freed
by him. And there be three Reasons, why Christ does all freely in the Work of
Redemption: pray mark them.

1. Because he redeems them out of love; therefore he aims at no reward. What
is it that brings Christ to this Work? why it is Love, Isa. 63. 9. -- in his
love, and in his pity he redeemed them. Tit. 4. 5. Rev. 1. 5. Now, Love does
not work for wages. Beloved, you must know, that when the Lord Jesus was upon
this redeeming-Work, his heart was as full of love toward poor sinners, as it
could hold: you may say of Christ in this respect, as they said of him once
when he was weeping at Lazarus his Grave, Behold how he loved him, Joh. 11. 35,
36. So when he was in his bloody Agony and Sweat, and hung pierced upon the
Cross, and was suffering all that wrath from God and Men; this might have been
in the thoughts of them that beheld him, and no doubt was in the thoughts of
them that believed in him, Behold how he loves poor sinners. Now you know, when
a man comes to do any thing for you out of love, why if you ask him, What will
you have? Why, nothing, says he, because I love you. Set one about any thing
that you have to do, and if he does not love you, why he will be paid to the
full, and perhaps he will make unreasonable demands too: But Love will labor
for you for nothing; 'twill be glad of an opportunity to do you a kindness.
Thus 'twas with Christ; he went through hard things for you; you cannot think
what he suffered, that you might be saved: and yet, as Jacob's serving so many
years for Rachel seemed to him but few days, for the love he had to her; So,
tho Christ suffered many things for you that are his, yet to him they seem less
than they are, for the Love he has to you.

2. Because Christ knew that he wrought for the poor, Psalm. 72. 2, 4, 12, 13.
Now the poor, why they must be helped freely. Alas! we have nothing to give him
for his labor; and Christ knew this, and yet he did not do as many do; when
the poor have need of their help, they are ready to say, I Will not work for
them, they cannot pay me. Men love to work most for the Rich, where they shall
be sure of their Money: But the Lord Jesus, he does the poor man's work; and so,
tho they have a great deal of profit by it, yet he has none to himself.

3. Because the great design of this redeeming Work which is in the hands of
Christ, is the everlasting exalting of Free Grace, that Glory might be ascribed
unto God throughout all Ages, World without end: See Ephesians. 1. 6, 7. Therefore,
all must come freely, that Free Grace might be advanced, that every one that is
saved, might admire the riches of the Goodness and Love of GOD in Christ to
their Souls. Oh, what Praises has the Lord from his People, and will have to
all Eternity, for this Free Grace! Oh, admire it more, you that are under it!
It must be your work in Heaven, and we may be glad that it shall be our work in
Heaven, when we consider how short we come in the admiring of it here upon
Earth.

4. This Freedom is in Christ only. As to the Body, there may be many
Physicians for one Disease; but as to the Soul, there is but one Physician for
all Diseases, Isa. 45. latter part of ver. 21. and the 22. -- A Savior there
is none beside me. Look unto me and be ye saved, all ye ends of the earth: for
I am God, and there is none else. We have many spiritual Sicknesses, but it is
Christ alone that can heal us; whoever does not come (...) his hand, he dies
for it; and therefore, don't trust to Physicians of no value. Many are apt to
do for their Souls, as you read Ahaziah did, when he had gotten a very
dangerous Fall; he sent to the Idol gods, 2 Kings 1. 2. Go, and inquire of
Baalzebub the god of Ekron, whether I shall recover of this disease. And what
he got by this, you shall see, by what the Lord bids the Prophet go and tell
him, ver. 3, 4. Is it not because there is not a God in Israel, that ye go to
inquire of Baalzebub the god of Ekron? Now therefore, thus says the Lord, Thou
shall not come down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but shall surely
die. Let me allude a little to this Scripture. Sinner, thou art just in the
case of this man: thou have gotten a most dangerous Fall; thou art fallen from
the upper Chamber; when God created thee at first, by that Image of his in
which he made thee, he put thee into the upper Chamber. Oh, the high Preferment
that thou wast in, 'twas a heavenly condition that thou had, to be without
sin, and to be like to God: but thou art fallen from hence, and thy Fall has
done thee a world of hurt: now when thou beginnest to be sick of thy Fall, and
thereupon to think, that some course must be taken for the getting of a Cure;
Oh, take heed to whom thou go: for if thou go to any but the God in
Israel, I mean to Jesus Christ, who is the hope of Israel, and the Savior
thereof in the time of trouble, I tell thee from the Lord, thou shall surely
die. The great fear, when Souls begin to be awakened about their condition, is,
Whether they will go to Christ only; and if they join any thing with him to
trust to, and rest in, they spoil all; you must come up to that Scripture, or
you are undone, Phil. 3. 3. For we are the circumcision, which worship God in
the spirit; and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.
Remember what a warning Christ gave in another case, I may fitly allude to it,
Matthew. 24. 4, 5. Many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall
deceive many. This is ordinary amongst Professors to be thus deceived; there
comes this and that Profession, Duties, common Workings upon the Soul, and the
like, and these are apt to say, Why, I am Christ: Now, it is thus and thus with
thee; thou will do well: and many believe this, and are deceived. And
therefore, when you begin to look after a Christ, be sure to look after the
true One; for it is he, and none but he, that can do the Work: and don't think,
that because there be so many false christ's, therefore it is impossible to know
the true One; read for that, 1 John 5. 20.

Obj. But how shall I know, that it is the true Christ that I trust to? Ans.
I Will only say this to it; The true Christ makes a true Christian: they are not
only Christians to men, but Christians to God. Now thou art thus and thus to
men, but what art thou to God? Is thy heart savingly wrought upon? Have thou
the Life and Spirit of Jesus Christ within thee? It may be thou art, for thy
outward appearance, as the King's Daughter, thy clothing is of wrought gold;
but art thou all glorious within? Psalm. 45. 13.

5. This Freedom is in Christ continually. We may apply that place to him, even
for this, 2 Cor. 1. 10. He has delivered many already from so great a death as
the death of the Soul, and now also he is delivering more: he is upon this
Work, of giving Freedom to poor sinners, and we are confident that he will yet
deliver; Christ will not lose the power of doing Souls good; fear not, he will not be
put out of his Office. There be three things, through which men continue not in
their Office, but neither of them will happen to Christ; 1. Unfitness, that tho
they were put into it, yet they are found not to be fit for it; they have not
Abilities sufficient to manage such a Place. But Christ is such an able
Redeemer, that he will never be put out for unfitness; tho the business of
Souls be very weighty, yet he wants no Ability, All power is given him in
heaven and in earth, Matthew. 28. 18. 2. Unfaithfulness, that they are not true
to their Trust; but it is not so with Christ, Heb. 3. 2. He was faithful to him
that appointed him. So in chap. 2. 17. he is said to be a merciful and faithful
high Priest, etc. 3. Death: You know when a man in Office dies, then another
must take his place; but as for Christ, see Heb. 7. 23, 24, 25. He continues
ever, and he ever lives, etc. When God the Father put him into this Office, he
said to him, Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec.

Now, to end this Fourth Branch with a little Application.

Use 1. Does our Freedom come by Christ? Then this shows us what an undone
condition we are all in by nature: no man can deliver himself out of the misery
which he is in by sin; we cannot get out of that Prison in which we are bound;
we cannot knock off our own Chains; till Christ comes and sets us free, we
remain in our house of bondage; we are blind, and cannot see till he opens our
eyes; we are dead, and cannot live till he quicken us; we are lost, and cannot
be found till he comes to seek and to save that which was lost, I warn you from
hence to take heed of that Doctrine of Pride, that tells men in the state of
nature, that they may be saved if they will; that takes the Power out of this
Redeemers hands, and puts it into the hands of fallen sinful Creatures. If ever
God intends mercy to us, we shall know that our help is in him, and not in our
selves; and that we must be born again, not of our own will, but of the will of
God; and that we have no such will of our own, till he does make us willing,
Joh. 1. 13. Phil. 2. 13. The Devil is a great Enemy to the Free Grace of God;
and therefore he does what he can to exalt Free Will in man, as if he had that
within him that is sufficient to bring him to Heaven. Oh, Beloved! man has
that in his corrupt Nature, that is sufficient to bring him to Hell, but
nothing that is sufficient to bring him to Heaven. Why did not the man that was
wounded by the Thieves, and left half dead, bind up his own Wounds? Why was he
not his own Physician, if he could? What need the good Samaritan come and show
so much compassion to him, and take so much care of him, if he could have
helped himself? So certainly Christ did more than need was, if man of himself
has such a power to restore himself: If this be true, what great hurt had we
by the Fall, or what great good do we receive by Christ? When he came from the
Bosom of his Father to undertake the great Work of our Redemption, might he not
even have told the World, Why, I see you are not in such a bad condition, but
that you can help your selves; you can get out if you will: and so he might
have returned back to Heaven again, and have let all alone; and then, what
would have become of all the World?

Labor therefore to be sensible of your wretchedness and helplessness in your
selves, and do not think that you can do any thing without Christ, that is
truly spiritual. The way to be rich, is to see that you are poor; and the way
to be saved, is to see that you are lost. You know, that as long as one that is
diseased, thinks that he has something at home that will do him good, he will not
send for the Physician, but he will be tampering with his own Medicines. And
it is certainly a sign that a Soul is not awakned to purpose, nor wounded deep
enough with its own sinful condition, when it thinks it can heal it self. Oh!
if thou were but sick to the very heart, thou would see thou can not be
thine own Physician. A man's Destruction is of himself, but his Salvation is
not, Hos. 13. 9. Ephesians. 2. 8. For by grace are ye saved, through faith, and that
not of your selves: it is the gift of God.

Use 2. Does Freedom come by Christ? Then Oh, what a Friend is Christ to poor
sinners! A man, you know, is counted a Friend, according to the Kindness that
he shows us; and if he has showed us great kindness, then we count him a great
Friend. Now the Kindness of the Lord Jesus has been very great toward us, in
purchasing Freedom for us; and therefore, we must own him as our great Friend.
Christ once said to the Disciples, Ye are my Friends; but, Oh! what cause had
the Disciples to say to Christ, Thou art our Friend? Oh, Sirs, you that are
redeemed by Christ, mourn for this, that you can no more look upon Christ as
your Friend: how hard are some of you yet to be persuaded of this, tho he has
done such great things for you! How apt are you still, by Unbelief, to question
whether Christ be your Friend. You would wonder, if you should see a man that
was in great distress, owing a vast Debt, and looking every hour when the
Sergeant should come and arrest him, and hale him away to Prison; or kept as a
Slave by some merciless Enemy, and utterly unable to redeem himself; and some
tenderhearted rich Person comes and pays all this Debt for him, and without
any desert of his, gives in his Ransom, and so releases him out of Prison and
Captivity: Why now, to see this man, notwithstanding all this, to be still
fearing and questioning, whether he that did this for him be his Friend; surely
you would wonder at him, and be ready to say, You are the strangest man that
ever was! your Friend! why, do you make any doubt of that? has he not
sufficiently shown it? Wherein could he have manifested it more, than in what
he has done for you? Have not son cause to say, when you think of Christ's
redeeming you, as the Spouse says of him, when she was thinking of the
Excellencies that were in him, Cant. 5. ult. This is my Beloved, and this is my
Friend, O daughters of Jerusalem. Well now, if Christ be your Friend, be you
his Friends, Prove. 18. 24. He that has friends, must show himself friendly.

Quest. Oh! How shall I do that to Christ. Ans. I will but only name three
things, (...) you know pe^^on^ use to do toward their greatest and best
Friends: I would commend them to you, in reference to that great Friend of
yours, Jesus Christ. 1. Show your selves friendly to him thus, Commend him to
others. This is an ordinary thing amongst us, to speak of one that we are much
beholding to, by way of singular commendation, so as if we can, to bring every
one that we speak to, in love with him: So now, commend this Friend of yours
wherever you come. Tho Christ does not need your Commendation, yet you don't
know what a great deal of use he may make of it, for the bringing in of such as
are strangers to him. The Spouse is much at this work in the Book of Canticles.
2. If you have a special Friend, you will do all that you can to please him. I
dare not displease such a one, he is my great Friend, you will say: So carry your
selves pleasingly to Christ now; do what he would have you, and you will please
him. Let not Christ be for any thing, and you be against it; nor he be against
any thing, and you be for it. It would be a sad thing, if Christ should be
displeased by Enemies and Friends too: his Enemies they carry themselves
untowardly and crossly to him; but oh, don't you that are his Friends do so
too; this best Friend has deserved your best carriage toward him, Joh. 15.
13, 14. 3. If you have a great and special Friend, you will not leave him; you will
think you shall never have such another, as indeed true Friends are very
scarce. Thus let it be with you in respect of Christ: Oh, don't leave him; be
not like those Disciples who went back and walked no more with him, Joh. 6. 66.
I may apply that in Prove. 27. 10. Thy own friend, and thy fathers friend
forsake not. Why Christ is a Friend to thee, and he was a Friend to thy father;
forsake him not. If thou turnest a backslider from Christ, there will be two
great Evils in it among others; 1. To be sure thou will never meet with such a
Friend again. 2. Thou go the way to make this great Friend thy great Enemy.

Use 3. Does Freedom come by Christ? Then they, and they only who are in
Christ, are safe. It Is the having of this Freedom (and that is by being in him)
that puts Souls out of danger; and all that are without it, are in harms-way;
they stand where the Storm will fall. There is an excellent place to illustrate
this, Exodus 9. 18. Behold, to morrow about this time, I will cause it to rain a
very grievous hail, such as has not been in Egypt since the foundation thereof
even until now. You see what a Storm was a coming here: Well now, read verse
19. and that will tell you who would be saved from it, and who would be
destroyed by it: Send therefore now, and gather thy cattle, and all that thou
have in the field: for upon every man and beast which shall be found in the
field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon them, and
they shall die. And accordingly it came to pass, ver. 20, 21-23, 24, 25. That
which I allude to here is this, That whoever shall not be brought home, when
this grievous hail and thunder, and fire of Gods wrath comes, he dies for it.
And now, when is a Soul brought home? Why, when it is brought to Christ. Be
brought to what you will, you are not brought home, till you are in him: And if
you shall be found in him at the last day, this will be your Privilege, you
shall see others drowned, but you will be in the Ark. See it at large in Psalm.
91. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

CHAP. V.
Wherein the Fifth Branch of the Doctrine is handled; namely, That this Freedom
which Christ offers, is an excellent Freedom; and in particular, concerning its
excellent Names.
THe last (but not the least) Branch of the Point which I now come to, is, That
this Freedom which Christ offers to Sinners, and gives to Believers, is an
excellent Freedom; according to Christ's words here in the Text, If the Son
shall make you free, ye shall be free INDEED: As if he should have said, If I
make you free, it shall be a Freedom to purpose, a Freedom with a Witness; you
your selves, if you have it, shall say it is so, shall find it so. Beloved,
there is not a Soul made free by Christ, but is ready, as it were, to set its
Hand and Seal to this, That it is an excellent Freedom that the Lord Jesus
bestows upon such as believe in him; and to say to Christ upon this account, as
Laban did to Jacob in another case, I have found by experience that the Lord
has blessed me for thy sake, Genesis 30. 27. I will presently proceed to the
opening of the Excellency of it; only I would tell you two things, by way of
Preface to it.

1. There is more in this Freedom than I am able to make known to you. I shall
endeavor to do something toward it, and the Lord help me in it: but you must
not expect that I should set it forth as it is. I confess mine own inability to
handle this Subject as it deserves: If you had some others to speak to you
about it, they would lead you further into it than I can: but whoever should
speak to you about it, no Tongue of Man is able to unfold it in such a manner
as to say, Now I have told you all, and there is no more in this Freedom than
you have heard of it. Beloved, this Freedom by Christ is one of the deep things
of God; we cannot fathom it, it is so deep; we cannot reach it, it is so high; we
cannot measure it, it is so broad and so large. If we could but see it as it is,
it would be with us as it was with the Queen of Sheba, of whom you read, that
when she came and saw the Glory of Solomon, she was so ravished with it, that
there was no more spirit in her, 1 Kings 10. 4, 5. And tho she confessed, that
the report that she had heard of it before was true; yet she saw that in it
when she beheld it, that the half was not told her, ver. 6, 7. And therefore,
if it were no more but this that I should say about this Freedom by Christ,
That it is such a kind of thing, that all the Ministers of the Gospel in the
World are not sufficient to set it forth: Why, you might conclude even from
thence, Then certainly it is a very excellent Freedom. For, Oh, what abundance
does the Lord help his Ministers to declare about Christ and heavenly things!
And yet, that not one, not any, not all of them, with all their Gifts, with all
their Graces, with all their Study, with all their Prayers, are able to open
this Freedom as it is; Why truly then, you may even say with astonishment
concerning it, as they did when the Lord had so strangly turned the captivity
of Zion, Psalm. 126. 2. The Lord has done great things for his people; there is
some great, some excellent thing in it without doubt.

2. I would tell you this also before I go any further, That when we have done
what we can through Gods assistance, to set out the excellency of this Freedom;
and when you have heard, it may be, such things about it, as may even cause you
to say, Well, now we have had this Subject opened to us, we cannot but
acknowledge that this Freedom by Christ, has abundance of worth in it: oh, what
a precious thing it is! Yet still that which must make it excellent indeed in
the eye and esteem of your Souls, is your having an interest in it. Beloved, a
man may say of Christ, and of the things of Christ, they are precious, and yet
they may not be precious to him; no doubt but many a wicked man has said, that
Christ is precious, and yet he was not so to him, because he did not believe in
him, 1 Pet. 2. 7. Unto you therefore which believe, he is precious. Mark, he is
precious to you: this is the difference between an unbeliever and a believer,
the one says that Christ is precious, but the other prizes him. Nothing will
make this Freedom so precious to you, as your part in it. Our propriety in a
thing puts a kind of excellency upon it in our account, tho it be but mean in
it self; and the want of that, makes us have but low thoughts of a thing, tho
it be never so good; one may drop some words by way of commending a good thing;
but if it be not ones own, one has no prizing thoughts of it. You know if a
man has but an ordinary house of his own, tho he may say of one that is
another, and ten times better than his, such a one has a brave seat; yet his
prizing thoughts run most out to his own; he has an interest and propriety in
that, but he has not in the other. So you may in words commend this Freedom,
and say, what an excellent thing it is; but if it should be with you, as Peter
said to Simon, Acts 8. Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy
heart is not right in the sight of God, it will not be excellent to you. Tho
Christ cannot be more beautiful then he is, as to himself, yet propriety in him
will make him look, as to us, ten thousand times more lovely then otherwise,
Cant. 5. ult.

Well, now to proceed to the clearing up of this, that this is an excellent,
most excellent Freedom, I shall make it out by opening these Seven following
things.

1. The excellent Names by which it is called. 2. The excellent Person by whom
it was performed. 3. The excellent Price by which it was purchased. 4. The
excellent properties belonging to it. 5. The excellent Privileges which come
by it. 6: The excellent Uses that may be made of it. 7. The many Wonders that
may be observed in it.
And when I have gone through these things, I shall make Application of this
Branch of the Doctrine, and so finish my whole work upon this Text.

To the 1. This Freedom by Christ is an excellent Freedom, as we may gather
from the excellent Names which are given to it in the Scriptures. It was taken
for a great honor amongst the Romans, to have more Names than one; and when
they would reprove one that was of a low condition, that did take more upon
him, than became his place, they would tell him that he carried himself as if
he had three names; for that was a note of excellency among them, to have three
names. Now it is the excellency of this Freedom by Christ, that it has more
than three, it has many names, and every one of them will help you to see what
an excellent Freedom it is.

Sometimes it is called deliverance, see Joel 2. 32. In mount Zion and Jerusalem
shall be Deliverance. In this place, this Freedom by Christ is alluded to and
prophesied of; and hence Christ himself is called the Deliverer, Romans 11. 26.
Now what an excellent thing is deliverance counted among us. If any body be in
trouble, affliction, pain, or danger any way; oh, they would fain have
deliverance. If a woman be in travel; oh, how she groans for deliverance, Rev.
12. 2. and when she is delivered, oh, how glad she is of it, John 16. 21.
Deliverance is such a thing, if one be in distress, that they who want faith
will have it, if it be possible, tho they use unlawful means for it: Yea it is
such a thing that Gods own people many times cannot tell how to wait for it. We
are very apt to be impatient till deliverance comes. Every body concludes that
deliverance is an excellent thing. Well now this Freedom is deliverance; we
shall be all delivered, if we be made Free by Christ. I don't tell you from
what yet, I am not come to that; therefore I speak as yet in a general way.

Again, Another name by which this Freedom is called, is Redemption, Romans 3.
24. and those that are made Free by Christ, are very often in the Scripture
said to be redeemed. Now the word Redemption properly signifies the buying back
again of things or persons, that were alienated from the right owner, by being
gotten into Bondage. Hence it appears what an excellent thing this Freedom by
Christ is, in that it is set out by this word, it is a bringing of out of us
Captivity; a bringing of us back to God, who is our right owner; it is a
fetching of us out of the House of Bondage, an opening of the prison, as it is
called, Isa. 61. 11. this Freedom by Christ is a Jail-delivery: You may fitly
apply that Scripture to this in Psalm. 107. 10. to 17. when the poor wretch is
cast into some loathsome Prison, and there he sits in darkness, and it is such a
darkness as is the very shadow of Death, and he is not only thus, but he is
bound too, and that not with Cords, but with Iron; and there his very heart is
brought down, all his spirits, and courage, and strength, are gone out with the
misery he undergoes. I say, when it is thus with a poor wretch, oh, what a
precious thing would it be to him to have Redemption! how does his Soul long to
be out of that condition! Isa. 51. 14. The captive exile hasteneth that he may
be loosed, he is in heast, that is, it is in his desires, that he might be
redeemed. Why now this Freedom by Christ brings Redemption, it breaks the yoke
of our oppression; by this we come out of the Iron Furnace.

Again; Sometimes this Freedom is called Salvation, Tit. 2. 11. The Grace of
God that brings Salvation has appeared, etc. The Greek word signifies a
keeping safe: oh, what an excellent thing is that, to be kept safe, that come
what can or will come, never such dreadful storms, never such blackness, and
darkness, and tempest, yet to be safe. Safety is so highly accounted of, that
every body looks after it; for the outward man to be safe from poverty, and
safe from infection, and safe from falling, and safe from fire, and water, etc.
They take a World of care to be safe, if they are afraid of Thieves; oh, how
they will watch! and if they do but suspect that any danger is near them, how
circumspect they will be to prevent it, and all because they desire to be safe!
and if that people would but look about them thus, and be careful in the
matters of their Souls, oh how well would it be! but here generally people fear
no dangers, no, tho we cry Fire, Fire, to sinners, and tell them there is a
deep Pit of Damnation before them, and they will certainly fall into it, if they
don't take heed; yet here they are insensible; only here, where there is the
greatest danger, they fear the least; and tho they will thank any body from
their hearts, that will forewarn them of outward dangers, and count them their
great friends, and tell them, Well, if had not been for you, at such a time I
might have been drowned, or have broke my neck, and have been killed outright;
I might have been lost if I had had a hundred lives; yet they don't care to
hear of their inward and eternal dangers; and the more they are told of them,
the more some dislike those that warn them; the ready way to get some men's
hatred, is to show the greatest love to them; what greater love can there be
expressed to a sinner by any man, than to give him a friendly warning that he
do not lose his Soul by living in sin? and yet for this, some will become
enemies, Joh. 7. 7.

Again, Another excellent name by which this Freedom is called, is Rest, Mat.
11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give
you Rest, that is, I will set you Free. Now what a precious thing is Rest, this
is such a precious thing that Heaven it self is compared to it, Heb. 4. 9. To
have no Rest, you know what a sad condition this is, Rev. 14. 11. Oh, what
would a man give for Rest that cannot sleep, or that is quite tired; how
refreshing and comfortable is it, if he can get but a little of it! how
thankfully will some speak when they have been without it a great while! oh,
they will say, Blessed be God they have got some Rest, what a Mercy is this!
yea so it is indeed; you that can go to your Beds at Night, and find Rest there,
don't forget to be thankful when you awake, it is a great mercy: Yea, but then
what a great mercy is this Freedom by Christ? what an excellent thing is that
which is Rest indeed? Oh! take heed, don't forget this Resting place, Jer. 50.
6. I remember 'twas the Speech of Naomi to Ruth when she was propounding a good
match to her, Ruth 3. 1. My daughter should I not seek Rest for thee, that it
may be well with thee? And then she directs her how to order her matters, that
she might get Boaz her Kinsman to be her Husband, v. 2. She was a poor Woman,
and brought to great wants, and so was fain to go a gleaning, which was next to
going a beging; but her Mother in Law, made no doubt that if she could but get
such a rich and good Husband as Boaz was, that would be a condition of Rest for
her; and then she would do well: So that when she propounded such a one as Boaz
to Match with, there were many arguments included in it, to stir her up to look
out to get him. One was, that her was a good man; he would be a gracious
Husband for her: she would not cast her self away by being Married to him, but
she would be well bestowed. For this Boaz was a man that feared God; his whole
carriage in the business after wards declares it. Another Argument was this,
That he was rich too: for so he was; he had a great Estate, as you may see in
this story; he was so rich, that besides a great deal he had already, he was
able to purchase more, cap. 4. 9. so that if she had him, she would have a
purchasing Husband; he was so rich. And then a third Argument, that she uses
was this, That he was one that was near of kin to her; for in the case that
Ruth was now, in the next Kinsman had right to Marry her: And then add this to
all that she tells her, that she was now in a restless condition; 'twas so with
her, that she had great need of such an Husband as this was; and if she could
but get him, oh there would be Rest, then she would be well, she need take no
further care for her. I have briefly opened this story thus, because it is of
such excellent use to the thing which I have in hand. Oh poor sinners! I may
apply all this to you, concerning your matching with Christ. If you would have
a good Husband for your Souls, one that is holy and full of grace, why this is
he: If you would have one that has a great Estate, why this is he. If you
marry with Christ, you will have a purchasing Husband of him. Never was there such
a purchaser as this is; this is one that has purchased Heaven it self for
believers. And then he is your near Kinsman; he is become a kin to us, by
taking our nature unto him; he has a Body now in Heaven that is of kin to
mankind. And then for your parts, you are in a restless condition; so full of
Misery, so full of Poverty, so full of Iniquity, that there is no true Rest to
be gotten where you are; but if you do but match with this Husband Christ, you
will have Rest; it will be well with you; his Freedom is Rest, that same
excellent thing Rest: Yea, it is a glorious Rest, as it is called, Isa. 11. 10.
Oh! call upon your Souls now, and say, My Soul, should I not seek Rest for
thee, that it may be well with thee? Oh, that you could be restless till you
have got this Rest! you are so in the truth of your condition; but oh that you
could be so in your spirits, and in your desires, and in your endeavors, and
take encouragement to be so from what you find here recorded concerning Ruth.
You see when she set upon the work of getting this Boaz for her Husband, how
she prospered; she went and lay at his feet, verse. 7, 8. of cap. 3. and then
verse. 9. she prayed him to pread his Skirt over her, i. e. to become an Husband
to her; and see how this wrought, and how the heart of Boaz inclined to her;
first, he highly commends her for her pitching upon him, that she would be
satisfied with none but him, v. 10. and then he promises her, that he would
grant her all her request, v. 11. and then in the next, chap. he does solemnly
Marry her. So the Lord Jesus is inclinable and willing to Marry you. Go and try
if he be not. Lie you at his feet, beg earnestly that he would spread his Skirt
over you, see if he do not; can you think that he is not willing; when instead
of your coming to woo Christ (as Ruth here did Boaz), Christ comes to woo you?
he would fain be your Savior, be your Husband; he tells you so, and all, that
when you have him, you may have Rest, and that it may be well with you; which
it never will till you have him.

Again, Another Name by which this Freedom by Christ is set forth, to show the
excellency of it, is Health, or Healing, Isa. 53. 5. With his stripes we are
healed; we get Health by them, it is all one with this Freedom here: And Psalm.
67. 2. where this is prayed for, that it might be manifested to the World, and
that the knowledge of Salvation by Christ might be spread all over the Earth (as
it was to be in the days of the Gospel); it is called Saving Health: That thy
way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all nations. Now you all
know what an excellent thing Health is; some by the enjoying of it, and some by
the want of it; this is such a mercy that whatever one has besides, yet if
there be no Health with it, all is imbittered, it makes life it self burdensome,
and uncomfortable; and tho ones condition in the World be but poor in other
respects; yet sometimes you shall hear people say, but thanks be to God they
have their Health tho, and as long as they have that, they may make the better
shift. Health, beloved, is more then a single mercy, it is a double, treble, yea
a tenfold, yea a hundredfold mercy, because it helps us to take the comfort,
and taste the sweetness of all else; what is all the World to a man that is
very Sick, or near to Death? Health is such an excellent thing, that no body
can tell what to do without it. It Is an usual expression or cry with persons
that have it not, and are Sick, and are in pain; oh, what shall I do? and you
know how they will be enquiring of this Neighbor, and that, which comes to
visit them, whether they can tell what they should take; and they will send to the
Physician, and he must come and see them; and tho he prescribes sharp or
loathsome things, yet they will take them; they will Purge, they will Vomit, they will
Bleed, they will Sweat, and all to have their Health again. Well, now this is the
nature of this Freedom by Christ, it is Health; if a man be Sick at his very
heart, 'twill recover him; if he be never so like to dye, I mean by it, if he
be never so like to be damned, which is the Second and the worst Death: If he
never so much faint away in his Spirits, through the Anguish and Terror of a
wounded Conscience; yet this Freedom by Christ, if he believes in it, will
fetch him again; if he has never so many sores this will bind him up. There
are some very observable things about Christ's manner of healing, while he was
here upon Earth; I would desire you to take much notice of them, because the
thing that we are to gather from it, is what this same bealing Freedom by
Christ will do.

1. Observe, That Christ's manner of healing persons that were diseased, was by
touching; he touched them, and they touched him, See Matthew. 8. 3, 15. There
Christ touched them; and in Mark 6. 56. There you find that they touched
Christ: now there is much to be learnt by this. If you would have healing by
Christ, he must touch you by the finger of his Spirit, (for it is spiritual
healing that we are now speaking of; and therefore the touch must be spiritual
now, both in him and you), and you must touch him by the finger of Faith; for
you must have Faith to be healed. See what a Question Christ put to the Blind
men, Matthew. 9. verse. 27. Two blind men followed him, crying, and saying, Thou
Son of David, have mercy on us: then v. 28. you have his Question, Believe ye
that I am able to do this? And their Answer, They said unto him, Yea, Lord. And
what followed upon it, you read afterward, verse. 29, 30. Then touched he their
eyes, saying, According to your faith be it unto you: And their eyes were
opened. So you have such and such spiritual diseases; you have inward
blindness, and inward deafness, and inward hardness; but do you believe that
Christ can heal you? Does not unbelief keep off the cure in you? Do you touch
him by Faith? Christ and you, as I said but now, must touch one another, that
you may be healed: He by his Spirit, and you by your Faith. Beloved, this
finger of the Spirit is such a thing, that by it Christ can touch you, tho you
be upon Earth; and on the other side, this finger of Fath is such a thing, that
by it you can touch Christ, tho he be in Heaven. If Christ does but send his
Spirit to you, it will tell you where you are; it will find you out, and it
will give you such a touch as you will never forget; and when Christ has thus
touched you, he will help you to touch him, he will work Faith in you by his
Spirit. Oh! look after these touches, and don't think you are healed if Christ
has not touched you, and you have not touched him.

2. Observe, that as they must touch him that would be healed; so they were
healed if they did but touch him, Matthew. 9. 20, 21. Here is a great deal of
comfort for weak believers. Many a poor Soul is ready to think, that because
they have not Faith in that strength and growth, and full assurance that some
have, therefore, alas! they shall get nothing from Christ; do no good at all
with that poor, sorry, staggering Faith of theirs. Truly, poor Soul, I wish thy
Faith were stronger; but I tell thee, if thou have but a grain of true Faith,
tho it be never so weak, if it be but true, 'twill bring thee a cure; for
'twill touch Christ, if it be true, tho never so small.

3. Observe, that as many as touched him, were healed, Mark 6. last words of
the chapt. He did not turn away one that did it; he accepted of the weakest
Faith; there is not one that comes to Christ shall be refused.

4. Observe, that they who touched him, were not almost healed by him, but they
were healed perfectly, Matthew. 14. 36. You that are the people of God, you have
yet a great many weaknesses, and imperfections; you cannot say yet, I am well,
my heart is clean enough. No, I know it is your grief that you are no better:
Yea, but go on to touch Christ still, keep the finger of Faith upon him, and
you shall find by that time he has done, that you shall be made perfectly
whole; he has begun to cure you already, and he will finish what he has begun.

5. Observe, how quickly Christ healed them, Luke 13. 13. immediately, which
shows what a speedy Alteration the Lord Jesus can make in your condition. It Is,
it may be, very sad with thy Soul now; but how soon, if he please, can he bring
you to a better pass? If he speak but a word, 'twill be done; therefore wait
with patience for a recovery and a reviving in thy Soul; think of this, it may
be done immediately for ought I know: Why then should I be out of hope?

6. Observe again, That Christ healed them of whatsoever Diseases they had,
Matthew. 4. 23, 24. it is that which lies many times very heavy upon the Souls of
some: What such a sinner as I be received! I find mercy! one in my condition!
why my case is an extraordinary case for Sin and Guilt, and Misery. But mind
here, he healed all manner of Sicknesses; as if the Evangelist should have
said, he healed all manner of sinners that come to him, for that is the
spiritual meaning of it, see Matthew. 12: 31:

7. Observe, that he healed those who could not be healed of any other, Luke 8.
43. the poor Woman's case was desperate as to any other Physician, she could not
be healed. Very like the words may be delivered in the same language that her
Physicians had spoken to her; they might tell her when they had tried all
means, Now you cannot be healed, and yet Christ healed her. Beloved, a sinner
may be given up for Desperate; and a Soul may give up its case for Desperate,
and yet healing may come from Christ for all that. And therefore take heed both
to others, tho they be very wicked, and as to your selves too, tho your
condition be very sinful, and very sad, that you do not cast away all hope, tho
it looks never so much like a condition that cannot be healed; take heed, don't
undervalue Christ's skill: when thou say this sinner cannot be turned, this
condition cannot be got out of, thou forgettest how thou undervaluest Christ's
skill.

8. Observe again, You find that when Christ had healed them, they had an
inward perceiving of it, See Mark 5. 29, 33. she felt in her, she knew what was
done in her. Oh! how ignorant are many of this, who profess that they have come
to Christ, and have touched him, and some of them I believe have done so: Ah!
but how many be there, even of Gods own Children, that have not that feeling,
that knowledge of it, as to say, Sure enough I have been healed by Christ,
otherwise it could not be thus and thus with me, as it is, blessed be God; I
feel the healings of Christ within me. I know there is some feeling, some sense
of it in those who are healed; and therefore examine, you that think you are in
this healed condition; What do you feel? What Knowledge have you of any such
thing done in you? I observe in mine own experience, that when it comes to this
close question, If a Minister of Christ ask some, who are too ready to look
upon themselves as converted when they are not; Well, pray what have you
inwardly found or felt of such a change? They have nothing to say.

9. Again observe, what a running, and striving, and crowding there was by
them, to come to this healer, See Mark 3. 9, 10. and chap. 6. 54, 55, 56. Oh!
that we could see this forwardness and diligence in people, to get spiritual
healing from Christ! Oh Friends, did they do thus for their bodies, and will
you not do it for your Souls? Christ suffered it to be thus when he was upon
Earth, that they that came for healing, should throng in upon him, to teach us
how earnestly we should make out to him for our precious Souls.

10. One thing more observe, That Jesus Christ would certainly have us to look
after this healing by him in a special manner on the Lords days, and while we
are gathered in religious Assemblies; for you shall find how he went into their
Synagogues, and healed on the Sabbath Days, See Luke 13. 10, etc. Mark 1. 21,
etc. Beloved, I beseech you mind this well, for I bring it to you, that you may
be very careful to improve your Lords days opportunities of meeting together in
Gods Worship and Ordinances, that you may get healing from Christ on these
days. Beloved, these are such kind of days as you read of Luke 5. 17. Wherein
the power of the Lord is present to heal persons. Oh! that this day in this
Assembly you may have healing from Christ.

6. Another excellent name by which this Freedom is called, is Light, Isa. 9.
2. The people that walked in darkness, have seen a great Light: they that dwell
in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined. This
Scripture is a Prophecy, that Freedom by Christ should be made known unto us
blind and ignorant Gentiles; and the Apostle tells them there in 1 Pet. 2: 9.
who were now partakers of this Freedom, that God had called them out of
darkness into his mavelous Light. What a mavelous Light this is, we shall
speak some thing to it, when we come to show the many wonders that are to be
observed in this Freedom; but for the present let us consider a little the name
it self. Light, what an excellent thing is that! Eccl: 11. 7. Truly the Light
is sweet. The excellency of Light will appear by comparing it with it is
contrary, and by considering it in it self: what is the contrary to Light? Why
Darkness. Now you know that this is a thing in which there is neither Beauty,
nor Order, nor Safety, nor Comfort; 'twas one of Egypts Plagues, and the last
but one of all the Plagues they had; which shows what a dreadful thing it is;
the saddest Afflictions outward or inward are compared to Darkness: The Devil
is called the Prince of Darkness; Hell it self is called the place of Darkness.
And then if you consider Light as it is in it self, why it is one of the
desirablest things that is in the World. You have not a house but they will
have Windows in it to let in Light; this was the first thing which God made;
and as soon as he had made it, he commended it, Genesis 1. 3, 4. God saw the Light
that it was good. God himself is said to dwell in Light, 1 Timothy 6. 16. Heaven
it self is compared to Light, Col. 1. 12. it is called the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light. Now this Freedom by Christ is Light, and therefore sure it is
an excellent Freedom. To make out this, let us consider a little what Light
does, and you shall see that this Freedom by Christ does the same things in a
spiritual may.

1. Light is an awakening thing; you know tho persons be never so fast asleep
in the dark, yet when the Light breaks in, that awakens them, it makes them
think it is time to rise; they start out of their Beds when the Light compasses
them about, they will ask what a clock it is, and they are afraid they have lien a
bed to long. Beloved, spiritually thus it is with this Freedom by Christ, when
it gets into a Soul, it may be called Light: For oh! how it awakens the Soul!
it calls it up to work for Eternity, it makes the Soul ashamed to think how
long it has been a bed in carnal security; it is a rowzing thing when it takes
hold on the heart; it speaks to a man, according to that in Prove. 6. 9. How
long will thou sleep, O sluggard? when will thou arise out of thy sleep? Or
according to that which the Ship-master said to Jonah, when there was a mighty
Tempest in that Sea, and Jonah was gone down into the sides of the Ship, and he
lay and was fast asleep, Jon. 1. 6. What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call
upon thy God, etc. This Freedom by Christ shows them that have it, that they
must be no sleepers; mind two Scriptures, 1 These. 5. 5, 6, 7, 8. Ye are all
children of light, -- Therefore let us not sleep as do others, etc. And mark in
the 9th verse. what a Reason he gives for this, For God has not appointed us to
wrath: but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ. As if he should say,
why Freedom by Christ is come, therefore no sleeping for us now. See also Romans
13. 11, 12. And that knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of
sleep: for now is our salvation nearer then when we believed. The night is far
spent, the day is at hand: let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and
let us put on the armor of light. Mark how he brings it in knowing the time.
As if he should say, Do you know what a time this is? that it is a time of
Freedom by Christ, and therefore it is not only time, but high time to awake out
of sleep, etc. This is the Reason, why those that are in the darkness of an
unconverted condition, sleep as they do, because the Light of this Freedom has
not broken in upon them.

2. Light is a discovering thing, it brings things into view that were hid
before; you know when you are in a dark Room, it may be there be many things
there, yea perhaps things that are very precious, and that would wonderfully
affect one with the Beauty and Luster of them; but to one that is in the dark,
it is as if there were no such things; but when Light comes, that discovers
them. So when a Soul comes into this state of Freedom, then, and not till then,
the Beauty and Glory of heavenly things appears. You have an excellent place
for this, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. Ah Sirs! there is a Gospel among you, a glorious
Gospel, as it is called, 1 Timothy 1. 11. There Is a Christ preached to you, a
precious Christ; but as long as any of you are in the Bondage of Sin, you know
not what they mean; you never saw any thing in them, to raise your hearts
toward them, to bestow your best affections upon them; alas, can the Children
of Night and of Darkness see any Beauty in Christ, tho he be never so
beautiful; or any need of Christ tho he be never so needful? If I should reckon
up spiritual things one after another, I might show you how the Scripture
says, That they who are in this Bondage do not know so much as one of them;
why, the Scriptures, alas! they do not know them, Matthew. 22. 29. No, tho they
can read them, they don't know them; tho they can talk of them, they don't know
them. Again, the ways of God, alas, they don't know them neither, Heb. 3. 10.
Again, the Spirit that dwells in the Saints, they don't know him, Joh. 14. 17.
Again, God that made them, why they know him not, Joh. 17. 25. Again, the
Children of God, they don't know these neither, 1 John 3. 1. But there is not
one that is brought into this Freedom, but has some spiritual discerning of
heavenly things; Unto them it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
God.

3. Light is a preserving thing, it keeps a man from manifold dangers which
they who are in darkness are exposed to, Joh: 11. 9, 10. Darkness is full of
dangers; there be many Pits, and Snares, and Stumbling Blocks in the way, which
may be rusht upon before one is aware, from which the Light will secure one. So
this Freedom by Christ is a great defense against Soul-mischiefs; they that are
in this State are said to be preserved in Jesus Christ, Jude 1. and to have
escaped the corruption that is in the World through Lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4. They are
enabled to see through this Light; there is such a Sin and such a Sin that many
have been overthrown by, and therefore I will take heed of it; they do in some
measure see the Temptations and the Occasions to sin, that others do not take
notice of: Being entered into this Freedom, they are possessed with a holy fear
of offending God, and with a godly Jealously over their hearts and ways; and
tho it is true they have a fall now and then, yet it is not so dangerous; they
don't bruise and batter their Souls, and their Consciences as others do. Hence
you have those gracious Promises which are made to such as close with Christ,
of being kept from evil ways, See Prove. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and 3. 23. and 4.
12.

4. Light is an adorning thing, it casts a Beauty and Brightness upon things
when it shines upon them. So this Freedom by Christ: Oh, how it adorns them
that have it; it adorns them so, that it makes them all new Creatures, 2 Cor.
5. 17. There is a beauty in the eyes of men, and there is a beauty in the eyes
of God: Now there be many that are beautiful* in the eyes of men, and yet God
sees no beauty in them, for he is not taken with the outward appearance of
things, as we are; but now beloved, God himself sees a beauty in all those
persons that are made Free by Christ, this is a thing that does adorn us in his
eye: And therefore when Christ looks upon his redeemed Spouse, observe how he
speaks to her, Cant. 4. 7. Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee:
Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister, my Spouse, thou have ravished my heart
with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck. And chap. 6. 5. the former
words of it, and chap. 7. 6. It Is the Glory of this Freedom, that as it makes
Christ excellent to us, so it makes us excellent to Christ: we see a
preciousness in him above all others; and he sees a preciousness in us above
all others too; we cannot but love him, we are so taken with him; and he cannot
but love us, he is so taken with us.

5. Light is a rejoicing thing; as darkness breeds sadness, so Light begets
cheerfulness, Prove. 15. 30. it is a thing that raises up the spirits. So this
Freedom by Christ is Light upon that account; it brings joy to the heart where
it comes. No sooner was the Jailer entered into this, but it is said he rejoiced,
Acts 16. 34. it is such a condition that one would even wonder that any that are
in it should ever be sorry; and that any that are out of it should ever be
merry: And ordinarily there be but two Reasons why any that are in this
condition do not rejoice, pray mark them. Either,

1. Because, they fear they are not in this condition; for one may be in it,
and not know it with such assurance and certainty as to put him out of fear:
Now fear is a great hindrance to joy and comfort. You shall observe many times
that is the great thing that casts down many a poor Soul, whose condition we
look upon as very comfortable in it self: Oh! they cannot say but such and such
things have been done in them, that they speak some hope; but when they
consider what a rare work a right work is, and how deceitful the heart is, and
how far they may go, and yet be an hypocrite: Oh! then how they fear whither
yet a saving change has passed upon them; they would rejoice, yea, and sing
aloud, and shout for joy, if they did but know upon sure grounds that they
belonged to Christ; but alas there is their fear. They that are assured they are
in Christ, they rejoice, and well they may; but it cannot be expected that they
should do so that fear it. Fear has torment in it, and seeing it is such a
tormenting thing, tho a Soul should be in Christ, yet till it is in some good
measure satisfied about it, and persuaded that it is so, sorrow must needs be
the most prevailing thing there. And therefore if you would have the comfort of
this condition, you must not only be in it, but labor to see that you are in
it, and then you would find that this Freedom by Christ is a most rejoicing
thing to your Souls, it is your uncertainty that hinders your joy, See Romans 5.
1, 2. We have peace, etc. Mark that word we have it! and what then? why we
rejoice, etc.

2. Or, because they forget they are in this condition. I mean for the present
it is out of their minds. When the Saints are under sadness they are under a
forgetfulness; and 'twas their forgetting where they are, that was the great
cause that brought them to it. As now to make it out thus; It may be a Child of
God, and one that knows, for the main, he is a Child of God, and has such
grounds for his persuasion as will undeniably hold good by the word of God; and
therefore as to the main he knows that he has not built his House upon the
Sand, but upon the Rock. Yet I say, it may be this Child of God for all this,
has turned again to folly, and is guilty of such and such backslidings, and
he has not kept up his Communion with God by such a close walking as he ought;
and so now his comfort and his joy is gone, and he is now brought to such a
pass as David was in his Soul, there in Psalm. 51. by reason of the sins that he
had fallen into, and is fain to pray over his Petitions; because now it is his
own case, ver. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. and I pray what is it that has brought him to
this sadness? Why truly, because, by sinning thus he forgot where he was, he
did not mind, as he should have done; Why I am a Child of God, and in a state
of Grace; and therefore I must not return to these Sins, I must not yield to
these Temptations, I must not grieve the holy Spirit by unbecoming walking; but
alas he forgot this, and so ran himself first into sin, and then into sadness.

And then again, another Child of God it may be, and that has had good
Scripture-Evidences of his being so, tho he perhaps has not so gone away from
God by the forementioned backslidings; yet, (as it does indeed sometimes thus
fall out), he has his time of darkness too; and he is so sad, he cannot tell
what to do; why what is the great Reason now that his sadness is thus upon him?
The man, it may be, has been very careful to keep up his Communion with God,
and there is nothing in all the World that he has been as much afraid of, as of
displeasing his loving Father, and yet sometimes he cannot rejoice: Well, what
is the cause of his sadness? Why now he forgets where he is, and whose Child he
is, and what his Privileges are, and what Promises are made to such a one as
he is, and what a Covenant God has taken him into. If he could but remember
himself, and stir up himself to set Faith a work upon these things, and think,
Why is my Countenance sad, since I am the Son of a King? and why do I walk thus
dejectedly, since the Lord loves me, and has done such great things for me,
and will yet do greater? I say, if he could but well remember these things, and
improve the remembrance of them, would not he rejoice? Yes that he would to be
sure; but alas, he forgets for the present that he is in this comfortable
condition, and so has not the comfort of it; but when God helps him to
remember, then the man will rejoice again: See that remarkable place, Psalm. 63.
5, 6. David was now in a wilderness-condition, as the title shows, Well says
he here, but I shall rejoice and praise thee again, My mouth shall praise thee
with joyful lips; but which way must this joy come in: Oh! says he, when I
remember thee upon my bed, etc. As if he should havesaid, If I could but get
into this Remembrance, think upon what God is to me, and think upon what I am
to him; this would do it. So that this same Freedom by Christ it is Light, it is
a rejoicing thing in it self; only the Reason why many of Gods people dont't
rejoice in it, is either, because they fear they are not in this condition, or
they forget it.

7. Another name by which this Freedom is called, that sets out the excellency
of it, is Life. Now I need not much stand upon it, to show you that Life is an
excellent thing; what is the great care of people taken up about generally, but
how to provide for their Life: Why have they so many earnest thoughts, and why
do they put themselves upon such unwearied labors as they do, but to provide
for their Life? and when they are sick, and fallen into some dangerous disease,
what is the great, and the greatest fear that then most have? Oh, that their
Life will be gone; they prize Life; so that when we would set out the doing of
a thing with the greatest care, we use to express it thus, We did it as for our
Lives; and Life is such a precious thing, that tho one lives in a great deal of
pain and misery, yet one is very loath to leave it. And we show what an high
esteem we have of Life, by the rejoicing that we have in us, when any of our
dear Relations have been dangerously sick, and it has pleased God that they
have recovered again; oh, how glad are we that their Life is preserved, that
they shall continue longer with us; and then when any one of them are taken
away by Death, why the sorrow and grief that follows upon that, and the
mourning that we make for deceased Friends, confirms the truth of this, that
Life is an excellent thing. Well, now this Freedom by Christ is Life, Joh. 6.
33. -- He gives Life to the World: and chap: 5. 40. Ye will not come unto me
that ye might have Life; that is, that you might have Freedom by me. And here I
will speak a little about this suitableness of this Name, how suitable it is
that this Freedom by Christ should be called Life. You know Life puts a
quickening Principle into them that have it, so does this Freedom by Christ.
Take notice of four things here.

1. It puts Life into our Souls. Souls do not live spiritually, and unto God,
till they come into this Freedom, Ephesians. 2. 1. they are only such as are
interested in it, that are passed from Death to Life. Now to have a Soul that
is dead within one, is a dreadful thing, and dead in the worst sense of all
too; for the Soul to be dead, so as that it was never quickened. It Is true, Gods
Children complain many times how dead their hearts are, and what great need
they have of quickening; and oh, how much do they pray, that they might not be
so dead as they are, as you shall see David often does in Psalm. 119. 25, 37,
40, 88, 107, 149, 154, 146, 159. Yea, but here is something to be considered,
that tho they are dead now, it may be, yet, they have been quickened; it is not a
deadness that is from want of Life, but from want of liveliness; but the
deadness of those that are not made Free by Christ, is such that speaks they
were never quickened, and so their Souls are dead in the worst sense of all,
they have no spiritual Life in them.

2. This Fredom by Chrst, it puts Life into Ordinances. There be some that find
the Ordinances of Christ living things, as David says, Psalm. 119. 50. that he
had found the word to be a living word; But who are they that have this
Experience? Why they which are made Free by Christ. I tell you, opportunities
and means of Grace are other manner of things to them, than they are to others.
You that are yet in the Bondage of Sin, you can speak nothing that such an
Ordinance was blessed to you at such a time, and then another at another time;
you cannot say, Oh, the sweet Communion that I had with God upon such a
Sabbath, and at such a Sermon: You had such a meeting with Jesus Christ, and
there were such incomes from the Lord upon your Spirits, and such drawings out
of your hearts toward God, that you would not for the whole World but you had
been there; but they that are made Free, there be those amongst them that can
say so. I my self heard a good man say once, after Prayer had been made to God
by a Minister in the company of some Christians, who were together to that
purpose, that he would not for all the World, but he had been there that time.
And what do you think made David speak that in Psalm. 84. 10. A day in thy
courts is better than a thousand: but because he being one that belonged to
Christ, found Life in the Ordinances? Oh! this is that which makes Gods people
desire to come to Ordinances, and to bless God for them, because they do find
Life conveyed to their Souls by them; that is a notable place in 1 Cor. 1. 18.
That the preaching of the Gospel is the power of God; to whom? why, to us that
are saved, i. e. that are partakers of this Freedom by Christ, one of the names
of which, as you have heard, is Salvation.

3. This Freedom by Christ puts Life into our Communion; I mean that converse
which we have one with another, when we are in company together. Oh! if we are
but made Free by Christ, and then come into one another society, we are fitted
by it for a living Discourse together, for the having of some heart-warming
conference each with other. If there be two or three, or more of these persons
met together, it is to be hoped that they wont part one from another without
some spiritual good to one another Souls. Their being thus related one to
another in the Freedom that Christ gives to believers, will stir up their
hearts to heavenly Communication, to help one another forward in the ways of
God. They whose Privilege and State this is, they carry spiritual heat about
them, so that when they come into the company of others, they will glow; as Mary
and Elizabeth, when they come together, Luke 1. they did as it were sparkle in
their gracious Discourse one with another: When they that are in the Bondage of
sin, and strangers to Christ, meet together, many times there you shall have
the Language of Hell in their mouths, corrupt Communication, that discovers
what they are, for their Speech bewrays them; and others of them, tho they are
civilized, yet their talk 'twill be but earthly; oh, how their breath smells of
the earth! If one strive to get them into any discourse that is above the
things of this World, oh what dead companions they are! then you put them out
of their Element; and if you would not have them speak of things below, then
you stop their mouths, they must say nothing: for they savor not the things of
God. And tho it is true that Hypocrites may hold discourse about good things, if
they be persons that have parts and gifts, and brain knowledge; yet, oh, there is
no Life in that Communion; they are not in this state of Freedom by Christ that
should put Life into it, and make them speak of good things from a Principle
within; but now Christ's redeemed ones, they are living companions, and
Communion with them is sometimes as it were a corner of Heaven. If they can but
once get into gracious discourse together, as that is to often somewhat hard to
do, what for want of coming oftener together, and by reason of deadness and
backwardness to such a good work as edifying of one another in love when they
are together, and for want of making it, (as sometimes they should) the very
design and end of their coming together, to build up one another in their most
holy faith, etc. But I say, if they can but once get into it, and especially if
they be not only true Christians, but fervent: Oh, what comfortable, profitable
Communion will there be sometimes between them, that their very hearts will be
knit together by it, as it was between Jonathan and David, when they had had
Communion together, The soul of Jonathan, was knit to the soul of David, and
they loved one another as their own Souls. Now, the having of this living
Communion together, is a thing which the Lord sets a very high esteem upon. I
speak this to encourage Gods people to be more frequent and forward in it, then
many of us are, See Mal. 3. 16. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke often one
to another, and the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and a book of remembrance was
written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his
name. This is a Scripture that one would think should make you even long to be
more at this work; for mark what encouragement it carries in it. 1. The Lord:
hearkened, as it were by way of Attention; and 2. Heard it, as it were by way of
Acceptance: And then 3. This must not only be accepted, but it must be
written. 4. Not in some loose little Paper or Scroll, but in a Book. And 5.
This Book must be called a Book of Remembrance, Remembrance must be the very
name of it. And 6. That it might be remembered, it must not be laid away, but be
before him.

4. This Freedom by Christ (we being interested in it), puts Life into our
Hopes. If we have not this, all our Hopes of Mercy and Salvation are but dead
Hopes; and you will have no more benefit by them, then you will have of a man that
you had great hopes in that he would be a mighty Friend to you in your
distress, and you count upon it before your distress comes upon you, that
certainly you shall have such a Friend as passes of that man; and thus you go
on, and when your great distress comes upon you, then you begin to look out for
this Friend, that he may now do for you according to what he put you in hope he
would do; and when you have enquired after him, and now have such great need of
help, you find the man is dead. So if you are not partakers of this Freedom by
Christ, hope what you will, it will come to nothing; and therefore what the
Apostle tells the people of God they should not do, I tell you that are not the
people of God, that you should do it, Heb. 10. 35. He says they must by no
means cast away their confidence. But, oh Sirs, you that are out of Christ*
must by all means cast away yours, you must throw it out for a castaway, and
if you don't make that a castaway, that will help to cast away you. What a
slave to sin! and yet hope to enjoy the Privileges and Happiness of them that
are made Free by Christ! Away with it; In this Sense I pray with all my heart
that God Almighty would bring you to final desperation. What sinner* do thou
think to live by a dead Hope? Obj. But how do you prove that my Hope is a dead
Hope? Answ. I will tell thee but even in three words. 1. Because the Scripture
calls it no Hope, Ephesians. 2. 12. As a dead man is as good as no man, so a dead
Hope is no Hope. 2. Because it is not a Hope to which God has begotten thee,
thou have given thy self this Hope; but the living Hope is that which God has
given to his people by begetting of them to himself, by causing them to be born
again, 1 Pet. 1. 3. 3. Because it does not bring forth any purifying fruits;
thou keep thy Hope, and keep thy sins too; thy Hope and Holiness do not
go together; thou can allow thy self in ways of wickedness, and mindest not a
being like to God. Whereas it is otherwise with them that have the living Hope;
they purify themselves as he is pure, 1 John 3. 3.

8. One thing more briefly, about this Freedom by Christ, as to another name by
which it is called, serving to set out the excellency of it, and that is, it is
called the Blessing of God. Now that is a precious things indeed; What Is all
that we have, if we have not Gods Blessing with it? Why it is his Blessing that
keeps us from his curse; when God intended the greatest good to Abraham, he
summed it up in this, I will bless thee, Genesis 12. 2. And so when you wish the
greatest mercy to others, you pray that God would bless them; his blessing is
the comfort of every Calling, of every Relation, of every Condition. Why now
this Freedom by Christ is Gods blessing, See Acts 3. ult. Unto you first, God
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every
one of you from his iniquities. And therefore all that I shall say upon it, is
this, That if you have not this Freedom by Christ, you will never have Gods
blessing, and therefore you will have Gods curse, that will be your Portion. I
grant that in some sense you may be said to have his blessings, that is, you
may have outward mercies; in which respect God said he would bless Ishmael
himself, tho he were the Son of the Bondwoman, Genesis 17. 20. But he may bless
you thus, and yet you may be cursed for ever, and so you will be if Christ does
not make you Free: And oh Sirs, what a dreadful thing will it be to lie under
the curse of God to eternity! Do you think you are strong enough to bear such a
load as this is World without end? You may see some inkling of it now, what a
dreadful thing this curse is, if God does but let fall a drop of it, upon a
great Estate, how it moulders; or upon any person for his wickedness, what a
forlorn Creature he becomes, as Cain. Why this is a thing that will dry one up
to the roots, as the Fig Tree when Christ cursed it, immediately it whithered
away. But what then will it be in Hell where it shall be in its full force! But
as for them who are interested in this Freedom by Christ, I may say to them, as
in Psalm. 115. 15. You are blessed of the Lord which made heaven and earth.

CHAP. VI.
Concerning the Excellency of the person by whom this Freedom was performed.
TO the Second, The excellency of this Freedom will appear, if we consider the
excellent person by whom it was performed. You have already heard that this
Freedom comes by Christ, and Christ is an excellent person indeed, he is
excellent in his Names, and excellent in his Natures, and excellent in his
Offices; his Life, his Death, his Satisfaction, Righteousness, Intercession,
are excellent. Beauty, Grace, are in him to perfection; he is so excellent that
God and all Saints do set their best love upon him, that all the Riches, Hope
and Happiness of believers are laid up in him. So excellent, that he is the
chiefest among ten thousand, the Pearl of great price, in comparison of whom
all things are counted but loss and dung. But my purpose is not here to treat
of the excellency of Christ at large, (for that would fill up a Volume of it
self, there being no Subject of Divinity of a vaster extent than this is.) But
I shall confine my thoughts to the considering of the excellency of his person,
a little, as it relates to this Freedom, which we have in hand. He must needs
be an excellent person, in that he performed this Freedom according to these
twelve following things.

1. In that he did it with so much power* Psalm. 93. 1. The Lord is clothed
with strength, wherewith he has girded himself. The Lord Jesus Christ bewrayed
no weakness in his work from the beginning of it to the end. Our help was laid,
as God says in the Scripture, upon one that is mighty; he had such an heavy
burden upon him, as was enough to have broken the back of a thousand Worlds,
but he stood under it; he could, as it were, swim in the whole Sea of his
Fathers Wrath; one drop of which no mere man could bear without sinking. What
an excellent person must this needs be, that could grapple with the Divine
Indignation, with red hot Justice, with all the Curse of the Law, with the
Powers of darkness, and not be daunted! Never was there a work so full of
difficulty as this was; and yet Christ had enough to carry him through it; he
met with many Enemies, but he overcame every one of them: Oh the strength that
he put forth in the work of our redemption! all the Devils in Hell were
resolved and combined, if it had been possible, to have worsted him, and to
have spoiled the whole design of our Salvation, that it should never have come
to any thing; and there was not any thing wanting, that they could do to hinder
it; but this Lion of the Tribe of Judah was too strong for the roaring Lion,
and all his confederates; he wrought out our Freedom notwithstanding opposition
on all hands. And from this consideration let me mind you, That good things
must be set about and carried on with courage; for so you see Christ did what
he had to do; difficulty did not discourage him. And as this did speak the
excellency of Christ in his work, so it speaks the excellency of a Christian in
his work; that is a brave Christian that will not be discouraged, that whatever he
meets with in the way of Service aad Duty, his heart holds up still. You are
like to Christ, when it is thus with you: I know that you that are the people of
God meet with difficulties, you have this and that which is hard to go through;
but remember the Captain of your Salvation would not be daunted; take example
from him.

Obj. But thou will say, it may be, But I am not so strong as he was; he could
come with that Power to his work that I have not.

Answ. As thou have not Christ's strength, so neither have thou his work. It Is
true, thou have thy work too, but it is not such work as Christ in some
respects had to do; thou never were, nor ever shall be called to such great
things as he was; but then mark, that Power of Christ by which he did his work,
is also in him for the enabling of thee which believe to do thy work: So was
it promised to the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 9. And he said unto me, My grace is
sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness. And because
of this, you see Paul would be so far from being discouraged at difficulties,
that he would rather glory and take pleasure in them; Most gladly, therefore
will I rather glory in mine infirmities, that the Power of Christ may rest upon
me.

2. In that he did it with so much Faith. What an excellent person must this
needs be, that could go through such a work so believingly as Christ did, and
hold forth his Hope and Confidence in God his Father, notwithstanding all the
hard things he met with in procuring our Freedom? How apt are we, when we are
in distress and under desertion, (tho all our afflictions and sufferings are
but a Fleabiting in comparison of what he underwent), to let go our hold of the
Promises, as you may see it even in those who were very eminent for Grace, and
had had great experience of the former goodness of God to them, Psalm. 77. 7, 8,
9. 1 Samuel 27. 1. But now here is one that had such a Faith, that tho he were in
the Red Sea of his Fathers Wrath, and the deep Waters of his afflictions and
sufferings did not do to him, as the Red Sea, that the Children of Israel came
to, did to them; the waters of that were divided, and became a wall to them on
their right hand, and on their left, so that they were in the very midst of
them, as upon dry ground; but the waters of Christ's afflictions were
overflowing, overwhelming Waters, such as plunged and drencht him into the
deeps; his Soul was exceeding sorrowful even unto Death, his very sweat was
like blood; yet, even then he could believe that God was his Father, and that
he had an unspeakeble Love to him. And this Faith of his had no mixture of
unbelief, or of sinful doubting, as ours has; but 'twas a firm and full Faith,
whereby he resolved for ever to trust perfectly in God, let him do what he
would with him and to him. Take two Scriptures for this among others, Isa. 50.
7. The Lord will help me, therefore shall I not be confounded: therefore have I
set my face like a flint; and I know that I shall not be ashamed. Mark what
Faith he had; he does not say now he is looking upon his sufferings, (for so
you are to conceive of him in this place) Oh! what shall I do, I shall never go
through these Tribulations, I shall never be able to drink off this bitter Cup
that is prepared for me; but he believes he shall, and that his Father would
help him; he did not doubt of it: I know it, says he; and in the confidence of
this, he does as it were harden himself against all the sufferings of one kind
and another, that he was to be called to, which is the meaning of that
expression, I have set my face like a flint. Another Scripture for the acting
of his Faith, even in the sight, and under the Sense of the pains of Death, and
Hell Torments in his Soul, you have in Psalm. 16. 8, 9, 10, 11. I have set the
Lord always before me: because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.
Therefore my heart is glad, etc.

Herein Christ is an Example to us, above all the Examples of other believers.
No afflictions were like to Christ's afflictions, and yet no Faith like to his
Faith; the Trials of other believers were very great, some of them; as the
Trials of Abraham and David, and their Faith was of a more than ordinary
stature; but without disparagement be it spoken, even the Faith of Abraham
himself, was but a poor little weak Faith, in comparison of this Faith that
Christ had: All those Worthies which you read of there in Heb. 11. who through
Faith obtained a good report; they were Giants in respect of us, but they were
Babes in respect of Christ. Now I say what an unparalleled Example is Christ to
us then, of trusting in God in the worst condition! It may be you think, I hope
I should trust God, if it were not so exceeding sad with me as it is; alas! you
cannot think how sad it is with me, nor can I tell how to express my misery.
Well, I am sure it is not so sad with thee as 'twas with Christ; and yet he
trusted in God; the very enemies of Christ could take notice that he did, Psalm.
22. tho they wickedly reproached him for it. And in deed this is the only
sinking thing in affliction, let it be never so great, that we cannot trust
God; and to what end has God made the Promises, but that they should be
believed? Usually when you doubt of a Friends helping of you in your straits,
it is because you had not a Promise from him; it may be he put you in some hopes
that he would help you, but for all that you doubt whether he will or no; but
if you have a Promise from him, and he be a Friend indeed, and one that uses
to keep his word, then you conclude upon it, Now I am sure he will help me, he
has promised me faithfully to do it. Thus it is now with God, toward you that
are his Children; you have got a Promise from him, that he will help you in
your distresses; nay not only one, but many: Nay, you have got his Covenant,
and his Oath for it. Oh! rely upon him, then, however it is or shall be with you.

3. In that he did it with so much Wisdom, as one that fully knew and
understood what he went about in this great undertaking. You shall find in
Scripture, that his Wisdom is much taken notice of, in reference to the work of
our Redemption. He is called the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. and in Col. 2. 3.
In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Mark, not only
knowledge, but Wisdom and Knowledge; and that in such abundance, that he has a
treasure of them, yea Treasures, yea and all the Treasures of them. And you
shall see in the Old Testament, when it was prophesied of him that he should
come upon this work of giving Freedom and Salvation to us, how his discreet and
wise carrying on of all things about it, is foretold, see Isa. 11. 2, 3. chap.
52. 13. He dealt with such Wisdom, that he could tell how to deal with God for
men, and with men for God; and to discharge the three great Offices of a
Prophet, Priest, and King, with admirable understanding; and how to undermine
and infatuate all the Policies of the Devil and the World, and to render their
deepest designs against his Kingdom and Gospel void, and of none effect, see 1
Cor. 2. 19, 20. and how to carry himself so wisely, even amongst his worst
Enemies, that they could have no just occasion to speak evil of him, tho they
watched all that possibly could be to get advantages against him, both for his
Actions, and Speeches, and Doctrine; and therefore what an excellent person
must this needs be? And in this Wisdom Christ does all things still that are
yet to be done; he governs the World in Wisdom, and as the great and good
Shepherd, he feeds his Flock with Knowledge and Understanding; as a Pastor that
is after Gods own heart; and one great thing amongst the rest that he is made
of God to his people, is Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. 30. to instruct them, and teach them
by his Spirit how to behave themselves as the children of God, and to make them
to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, and to be to them a Counselor,
according to that name which is given him, Isa. 9. 6. And if his Disciples are
called at any time to bear a Testimony for him before the great ones of the
World, he has promised to give them a mouth, and wisdom, which all their
adversaries shall not be able to gainsay or resist, Luke 21. 15. And therefore
Gods people should learn to carry themselves wisely in all their ways and
walking, and take heed of doing things rashly and indiscreetly, as those that
have Wisdom for their pattern, see Ephesians. 5. 15, 17. See that ye walk
circumspectly, not as fools but as wise. Wherefore be ye not unwise, but
understanding what the will of the Lord is. And the Wisdom that you must do all
things with, is not a carnal, politic craftiness; but the Wisdom which is from
above; it must be the Scripture-wisdom and spiritual Understanding.

4. In that he did it with so much Love, Rev. 1. 5. He loved us, and washed us
from our sins in his own blood, Gal. 2. 20. He loved me, and gave himself for
me; and in Tit. 3. 4. when the Apostle would briefly sum up the whole work of
Christ in giving this Freedom to us, he expresses it in these words, The
kindness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared. While he suffered,
he was in love with those for whom he suffered; when he died, he was in love
with those for whom he died; he did not barely do the work it self, but he did
it with such affection to poor sinners, as who should say, he would have them
see and know that they could not have a greater Friend then he was; he bare
them upon his heart, while he bare their sins upon the Cross. If he had not
been an excellent person, the dreadful pains and sufferings that our iniquities
had put him to, would have made him for ever to loath us, and not to have
endured the sight of any man more; but his Love to us was neither removed nor
abated for any thing that he endured for our sakes; neither was his Love to his
Father in the least diminished by all the grief which he put him to, tho he
bruised him, and took, as the Scripture says, a kind of pleasure and delight
in the doing of it, Isa. 53. 10. Justice, as it were, requiring at this time
that he should afflict him willingly, which he does not use to do, to the
Children of Men; yet under all this, Christ kept up in perfect Love to God: And
this you may observe from his manner of speaking to God, when he was just
stepping into his great suffering, when his Soul was exceeding sorrowful, even
unto Death, Matthew. 26. 28. Yet mark v. 39. and 42. in what a loving way he
speaks to him, Father; and oh my Father, let this Cup pass away from me. And oh
what an Example is Christ in this to believers, to love the Lord and not to
question but that the Lord loves them, what ever he lays upon them! The Lord
sees a great proneness in us, to think it is not thus when his hand is heavy
upon us, in that he has left such kind of sayings as these upon record in
Scripture; As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, and whom the Lord loves,
he chasteneth; and scourges every son whom he receives. We are too ready to
measure Gods affection to us by prosperity and smiles, and when things go as we
would have them; but if we would be like to Christ, we must make account that
God can be our Father, tho he beats us, and hides his Face from us.

5. In that he did it with so much Patience. It Is not to be thought what Christ
suffered in obtaining this Freeeom for us, from God, from Men, from Devils by
their Temptations; yet under all, his Spirit was in a composed still frame; he
had not an hard thought of God for the low condition which he had cast him
into; he had not an unbecoming, repining, discontented word dropping from his
mouth, Isa. 53. 7. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not
his mouth: He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, as a sheep before her
shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth. God might do what he would to
him, and put as much Gall, and Wormwood, and Wrath into his Cup as he pleased,
and he would take it off: You may remember 'twas one of his patient Speeches,
The Cup which my Father gives me to drink, shall I not drink it? And men, they
might say and do what they would against him, they might mock and revile, and
scourge, and crucify him, and he could take all with an inward peaceableness;
he could meet that Traitor Judas when he was come to betray him, and even then
he could call him Friend, Matthew. 26. 50. Job, you know, is worthily counted an
excellent person for his Patience under Afflictions, and so he is pointed out
to us, in Jam. 5. Ye have heard of the Patience of Job, and yet in Christ there
are two things to be considered, which are far beyond what was in Job. 1.
Christ's Afflictions did out of measure exceed what Job was exercised with; take
all the Sufferings of the Saints in their Bodies and Souls too, and put them
into one Scale, and put the Sufferings of Christ into the other, these will
outweigh them as much as a Mountain will outweigh a Molehill; the greatest
Suffering-Saints in the Scriptures, such as David, etc. were but Types of
Christ in his Sufferings; and so they had but the shadow of sorrow in respect
of him, whose sorrows were so great, and of such a nature, that he is said to
be a man of sorrows, which is as much as to say, he was made up as it were of
nothing else. 2. Jobs great Patience was mixed with great Impatience; tho he
held out in his Trials to Admiration for a great while, yet afterward he had
his fits of distempered passion; and he that before had blessed God, tho he had
stripped him naked, at last opened his mouth and cursed his day. But Christ held
on in Patience, and held out in Patience; he did not at all stain or blemish
the state of his Humiliation with a spot of discontent in him; indeed that was
done which the Apostle James exhorts us to, Patience had its perfect work; when
his Sufferings were at the full, his Patience was at the full too; and
therefore what an excellent Person is Christ! and what an excellent Pattern for
us! In 1 Pet. 2. 21. the Apostle there tell us, that Christ suffered for us,
leaving us an example that we should follow his steps. Have we then afflictions
upon us in any kind? and does it seem good to the Lord to exercise us with
troubles without or within, or both? Oh, but let us pray that we may be
Patient; however, that we may not resist the Holy Will of God, by unwillingness
to suffer. And I pray consider this, That tho in some respects Christ had that
to quiet and compose his Spirits to Patience in his Sufferings, which we have
not; yet in other respects we have something to be thought upon for the
quieting of our Spirits in our Sufferings, which Christ had not. There are two
things which Christ had to quiet him that we have not; as,

1. That no suffering of any kind came upon him, but what he foresaw: this is a
great means to keep persons patient, to foresee such or such an Affliction; if
they be surprised with some great Calamity on a sudden, and had no inkling of
it before, but it breaks in upon them like the Sea, unexpectedly, then many
times there is much impatience mingled with that condition, tho it should not
be so; but now Jesus Christ knew of his troubles particularly before they came,
which we do not; we cannot tell what will befall us between this and Death;
what Affliction will meet us such a time, in such a place; as Paul, Acts 20.
22. Not knowing the things that shall befall me: he had a general notion about
it, as verse. 23. but particularly he knew not what would befall him; but it was
not so with Christ. See a place where he speaks of his going up to Jerusalem,
(as Paul does here) and you shall find that Christ knew what would befall him,
Matthew. 20. 17, 18, 19. Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall
be betrayed unto the chief priests, and unto the Scribes, and they shall
condemn him to death: And shall deliver him to the Gentiles, to mock, and to
scourge, and to crucify him: and the third day he shall rise again. Mark how
particularly Christ foresaw things; and no doubt but this was one help to
Christ's Patience, he knew it would be thus.

2. That he had not so much as a principle of Impatience within him; there was
no tendency in his spirit that way; for that is true in this case, which he said
of himself, Joh. 14. 30. The prince of this world comes, and has nothing in
me. But now, the Lord knows it is not so with us, we have corrupt natures that
are breeding of discontent, and impatience, and very apt upon all occasions to
be breaking out; and we have much to do, the best of us; nay, it is more than
the best of us can do without the Grace of God assisting us, to bear any
Affliction patiently, we have such seeds of sin within us.

But, as I said, in some respects we have that to think of, to quiet us in our
Sufferings which Christ had not; as,

1. That our Afflictions are but small; Christ could not say so of his, he
could not call them light Afflictions, as Paul does his, and such as befall the
people of God. No they were great, exceeding great, both for number and for
nature: and what shall not we be patient under small Afflictions?

2. That whatever we suffer, we have deserved it; this should quiet us. Do we
suffer? why, have we not sinned? Lam. 3. 39. Yea, but Christ suffered, and
others deserved it; he did not come to the Cross as the Thieves did that were
crucified with him: Mark what the good Thief says, Luke 23. 40, 41. -- We
receive the due reward of our deeds; but this man has done nothing amiss.

3. That whatever we suffer, if we be the people of God, we don't suffer with a
curse; we are afflicted, but we are not cursed; should not this quiet us? But
there was a curse upon Christ while he suffered; He was made a curse for us,
Gal. 3. 13.

6. The excellency of this person will further appear, if we consider with what
admirable Humility he did all in this work. Never was there one so high in some
respects, and yet so low in others. If he would have stood upon it, we must
needs confess that he had so much worth, and greatness, and goodness in him,
that the best upon Earth were not worthy to wait upon him, or to be in his
company. See what John the Baptist, and the good Centurion, speak in this
thing, -- Whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, says the first, Matthew. 3. 11. I
am not worthy that thou should come under my roof, says the other, chap. 8.
8. Nay, all the Angels of God are commanded to fall down before him, Heb. 1. 6.
And yet, oh! how did he abase himself, tho he were the Son of God, tho he was
the head of all principalities and power, tho he had in all things the
pre-eminence; he was too good in some sense to appear in such a sinful World as
this is; and if he should have appeared according to his excellency, his
Majesty would have been too bright for the eyes of man to behold him; but when
he came to be our Redeemer, he laid his Glory aside, or rather veiled it under
a mean and base outward appearance; and he was content for a while to be as it
were a Pearl of great price lying upon a Dunghill. I pray will you hearken a
little to a few things wherein his great Humility was manifested, while he
carried on this Freedom of ours; and afterward I will tell you what you are to
do with this famous Example of Christ's.

1. He humbled himself in becoming a Man; you will quickly see what great
humiliation here was, if you consider what he was before: why before he was
Man, he was God: (but take heed, do not think that he did cease to be God when
he became Man, but he took the humane Nature to the Divine, and so both
Natures, tho they were, and are, and shall be for ever distinguished, were
united together in one Person.) Hence it is said, that God was manifested in the
flesh; and the word was made flesh and dwelt among us. Now what an abasement
was here! Men and Angels may and will to all eternity admire it, that God
should come into the World in the likeness of sinful flesh! Beloved, if you
should see a King upon the Throne espouse a beggar, would you not say 'twere an
Act of great Humiliation in him? why thus the Lord Jesus humbled himself, and
much more, in becoming man; for he was the greatest King that ever was, and our
Nature was the veriest Beggar that ever was. If you would look upon it a little
under the consideration of a Woman, the better to conceive of things; what a
wife was here like to be for Christ? As pitiful a Creature as ever eye beheld,
Poor, Naked, Loathsome, Wicked, Cursed; 'twas a Nature that looked like the
Devil. I pray don't mistake again; Christ did not take the devilishness of our
nature; he kept Free from all the corruptions and pollutions of it; but he came
as near to it as possible could be without sin. I know not for my life how to
express it better to you than thus, I pray Mark it: He took the Humanity of our
nature, but not the Iniquity; the Iniquity of it was imputed to him, but it was
not united to him; it was laid upon him, but it was not in him; for he was
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, Heb. 7. 26. Now that the
Divine nature, and our poor beggarly, lost, undone nature should thus meet
together in the Person of Christ, that he should take this to himself for an
everlasting companion: Oh! beloved, 'twas an high Advancement for us, but 'twas
an unspeakable Abasement in Christ. If he should have took the nature of
Angels, it would have been a wonderful Humiliation in him; but that he should
take the nature of man, of sinful man; that he should come down from the Throne
of his Glory, and embrace, and espouse such a beggar as this was, what an
excellent person must Christ needs be for Humility? You shall find in Heb. 2.
That this is brought in as a great Evidence of his Humility, (of which he is
speaking before, that he should be one with us, and make us his brethren, and
not be ashamed to call us so, ver. 11.

2. In that he did not only humble himself so low as to become a Man, but that
he would be of the lowest rank of men in the World, Phil. 2. 7. He made himself
of no reputation, and took upon himself the form of a servant. As he went up
and down among men, they that knew not who he was, would have thought he had
been some poor Servant, he had such a base outward appearance; so that he took
away all occasion for any bodies asking such questions as these: When they
looked upon him, What gallant Gentleman is that, that goes there? What do you
think that brave Suit cost that he wears? No, I warrant you some asked
questions that were rather contrary to these, What poor sorry man that was?
etc. He was not only a Servant to God, for that is an honorable thing; but he
was a Servant to men, Luke 22. 27. I am among you as he that serves; he did
the greatest Service for men that ever was, he delivered them out of the
greatest danger, he served them so as to suffer for them; that is such a notable
piece of Service that no man is able to do one for another. If there could be
such a thing as that when any of you are to undergo great pains, another should
come and bear them for you; or when you are to dye, another should come and dye
for you, and so you should not dye at all; or if the Wrath of God were ready to
fall upon your Souls, another should come and let all fall upon himself; what
notable Service would this Person do you! Now such a Servant to men was Christ;
if they believe in him, he excuses them from their eternal pains, and eternal
Death, and from Gods eternal Wrath, by suffering it for them. And what a
Servant to men did he show himself in reference to their very Bodies, that he
labored like any Servant in doing good to them that way, in healing the Sick,
in opening the Eyes of the Blind, in casting out Devils! He went about every
where, doing good, and healing all manner of diseases among the people; yea, he
stooped to the meanest Offices, Joh. 13. 4, etc. he washed the Disciples feet,
which was such a humility in him, that Peter told him flat and plain, he should
never do it for him; and no doubt but he wondered that any of the other
Disciples would offer to let him do it to them. Christ was fain to bring him
off from his peremptoriness with a rowzing word, If I wash thee not, thou have
no part with me, verse. 8. (Tho Christ had a spiritual meaning in it): or else
he would never have yielded to it, he looked upon it as a thing so far below
Christ; but rather than have no part with him, at last he did not only suffer
it, but desire it.

3. He showed his humility in his submitting himself to the Ordinances. Christ
had no need of them, we must wait upon them, because we have such need of them,
as much need of them as our Bodies have of Physic when they are Sick, and of
Food when they are Hungry; but Christ he had no sin in him, nor no grace
imperfect, and yet he would come to the Ordinances; he was Circumcised at eight
days; and then when the New Testament Ordinance of Baptism was set on foot by
his forerunner John the Baptist, he came and would be Baptized himself, tho
John wondered at his humility in it. See Matthew. 3. 13, 14, 15. and so he went
into Synagognes, as his manner was on the Sabbath Day, Luke 4. 16.

4. In having no possessions in the World, I may say concerning Christ, in this
case, as it is said God dealt with Abraham about the Land of Canaan, Acts 7. 5.
God gave him no inheritance in it, no not so much as to set his foot on, yet he
promised that he would give it to him for a possession. So you shall see God
has promised to Christ, Psalm. 2. 8. that he should have all the World; and
yet, when he was in it, he had not so much of his own, as to set his foot on,
after the way of men's having possessions; he would not, to show his humility.
Hence you find him telling the Scribe that said, he would follow him whither
soever he went; that the Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air have nests;
but the Son of man has not where to lay his head, Matthew. 8. 20. The Lord Jesus
Christ did that which many are afraid of; they are afraid of becoming poor:
what! to have nothing, to be brought to nothing! but he became poor, 2 Cor. 8.
9.

5. In his associating himself with the meanest sort of persons. He did not
seek the acquaintance of the great ones of the World; one of his great
acquaintance was John the Baptist, a man whose Raiment was of Camels hair, and
a Leathern Girdle about his Loins; and others that he was most intimate with,
they were a company of Fishermen, and he would eat with Publicans and Sinners,
and be very familiar with the poor.

6. In his refusing the preferments of the World, when they were offered to
him. Sometimes he had a very fair occasion in his way to make himself great
upon Earth; but he would not close with it; he could as willingly lay a Crown
at his foot, as others could desire to have it upon their heads, Joh. 6. 15.
The truth is, he was made a greater King by his Father already, than any upon
Earth could make him; he had set him as King upon his holy hill of Zion, Psalm.
2. 6. he had made him King in his Church, and King of Saints; but this was an
Invisible and Spiritual Government; the most neither knew or believed that he
had a Kingdom which was not of this World.

7. In his Subjection to his Parents, of which you read Luke 2. 51. He behaved
himself in all dutifulness toward them, going and coming at their lawful
commands, with cheerfulness and obedience; he never gave them any just cause to
find fault with him for any unbecoming carriage toward them; he was a Child
that carried himself better toward his Parents, than his Parents did toward
him; they were sinful Parents, but he was an holy Child, filling up his
Relation to them in the fear of God. And therefore you young ones, that have
Parents, and carry your selves crosly, and stubbornly, and disobediently
toward them, tho God has commanded you to honor your Father and Mother:
Where did you learn to be so rebellious? are you too good to be ruled, and
ordered by your Parents, when Christ thought not himself too good to be subject
to his, and yet one of them was but his Father-in-Law, his supposed Father, as
the Scripture calls Joseph? Luke 3. 23. Now, you are ready to think here that
you may take more liberty. If it were your own natural Father or Mother, those
that you had been begotten and born of, then you will say perhaps you would not be
so stout; but Christ carried himself as dutiful to him that was but his
Father-in-Law, as he did to his own Mother that bare him in her Womb; such was
his Humility!

8. In his tender condescending to the weakest in Grace, Matthew. 12. 20. He had
a company of Disciples about him, that were but like little Children, in
respect of spiritual stature, and so he often calls them; and yet, oh, how
sweetly did he condescend to them, by instructing them in their ignorance, and
compassionating of them in their weakness, and bearing with them in their
Infirmities!

9. In his not seeking his own commendation for any of the great things which
he did or suffered, Joh. 5. 41. I receive not honor from men; he could speak
with the greatest Wisdom, and act with the greatest Power, and live with the
greatest Holiness, and suffer with the greatest Patience, and yet nothing
puffed him up. I cannot enlarge upon these things.

Now that which we are to do with this famous Example of Christ, is to learn
from it to be humble, Matthew. 11. 29. Whatever Mercies, whatever Gifts, whatever
Graces, the Lord bestows upon us, whatever use the Lord makes of us in one
kind, or other, still to lie low give all the Glory to God, and take none to
our selves. It is the great sin of many, that they cannot know a little more
than others know, or do a little more than others do, or have a little more
than others have, but presently they are proud of it; and if no body will
commend them, they will commend themselves. I beseech you watch much against this
sin; Jesus Christ has made it the great mark of an Hypocrite, Matthew. 6. 5. A
true Christian sees so many defects in his best works, that he desires rather
to be ashamed of them, than to glory in them.

7. We may consider the Excellency of his Person, (in Relation to this
Freedom), in his doing of what he did in it, with so much desire. Beloved, this
work did not at all look desirably in it self; never was there such a black and
dreadful face upon any work that ever was undertaken; and yet upon some
accounts Christ desired it, and desired it so much, that I doubt not to say, he
did rejoice in his Spirit, to think that he was the Person that was to do it.
You know that when there is a motion made, for the carrying on of some great
design, that will be of public and unspeakable benefit, tho indeed it will
cost a deal to bring it to pass, and the Person that is engaged in it, whoever
he be, must be at a vast charge before he can finish it; why the very motioning
of such a thing raises our desire, and we are full of good wishes toward it,
and all people generally will long, Oh, that it might be carried on! and they will
say it is a World of pitties that such a noble design should not be put forward;
but suppose that the carrying on of it, should be cast by Authority upon any of
our particular persons; that the King should single out such a man, whom he
sees to be much taken with the motion, and should say, Well, I pitch upon you
to be engaged in this business; truly, then our desire toward the thing would
be much damped, if it be our selves that must do it; and now we it may be, can
rather desire that the business should be quite laid aside, than that it should
be carried on by us; that it is we that must bear the burden of it, and we that
must be at the charge; how chill and cold will our affections grow to a work
then, tho it be never so useful! but Jesus Christ desired that this great and
costly work of our Redemption should go on, tho the lot fell upon himself to do
it: You have diverse expressions in Scripture that signify thus much; I will
quote Four amongst many. One is in Isa. 53. 11. where what he did in this work,
is called the Travel of his Soul; which, as I think, I have formerly hinted, I
look upon as not only setting out the greatness of his Sufferings in it, but
also the great desire that he had to go through with it. A second is, Luke 12.
50. But I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be
accomplished! A third is, Joh. 18. 11. speaking of the bitter Cup of his
Sufferings, shall I not drink it? A fourth is, that in Heb. 10. 9. Lo, I come
to do thy will, O God: The very words sound, as if Christ's desire were upon the
work; and if you compare it with Psalm. 40. 7, 8. from whence this is quoted,
you shall see that there is no less a word put in there, than delight, which
must needs carry desire along with it; I delight to do thy will, O my God. Now,
what an excellent person must this needs be, that could come to such a hard,
painful, costly work, under the weight of which all the Angels in Heaven would
have sunk into nothing, with so much desire!

8. Which will yet further appear, if we consider, that he should do it with so
much exactness as he did; there are some things that when they are done, we use
to say, they are done after a fashion, meaning, that they are sorrily done; if
another had had it in hand, it would have been another kind of thing. But
beloved, this same Freedom of ours that Christ has been a performing; oh, it is
excellently done, most admirably done, it is the exactest, curiousest piece that
ever was wrought, it is done to the life; Christ has shown himself in it, a
workman that needs not to be ashamed. I remember it is said in Exodus 39. 43.
That when they into whose hearts God had put wisdom to devise curious works for
the Tabernacle, brought all to Moses when they had finished it, Moses looked
upon all their work, and beheld that they had done it as the Lord commanded;
Even so had they done it, i. e. with that exactness; and Moses blessed them: so
we have great cause to bless Christ, when we look upon this exact work of his,
and to say, he has done all things well, very well; there is not the least
thing missing in it; every way perfect, his work is like himself; Christ is a
nonesuch, and so is his work: View it from the beginning to the end, it is all
over complete; let the Saints look upon it, they will say, the like was never
seen; let Angels look upon it, and they will say so too; let God himself look upon
it, and he will say so too, and therefore his work is called the pleasure of
the Lord, Isa. 53. 10. i. e. it is so done, as that he is well pleased with it.
From hence we should learn of Christ to be no bunglers in our work. Two things
there be that Christians should much aim at: 1. To do what they should; that
God may not set us about such and such work, and we be doing that is contrary;
when God bids you serve him, take heed, don't go, and instead of that, sin
against him; don't be about the Devils work, when you should be about the
Lords; remember you owe him Service, but you owe the Devil none; it is a good
question to be often asking your selves, Whose work am I a doing? 2. To do it
as they should, here the Lord knows we come miserably short; sometimes we can
see, through grace, that what we are about is good for the matter; but oh, then
for the manner of doing it, how we fail in that! Sirs, where is your exactness
in duty? You pray, but where is your exactness in prayer? You sing, but where
is your exactness in singing? You hear, but where is your exactness in hearing?
How much better might every thing be done, than we do it? Ephesians. 5. 15. See then
that you walk circumspectly. It may be rendered thus out of the Greek: Look how
exactly you walk [(...)]; how you come up to the height and fullness of duty. A
man may be about that which he should, and yet may be doing of it by halves;
here may be a fault, and there may be a fault; tho you cannot work so fast as
you should, yet be careful to do what you do, well. If you cannot write a fast
hand, yet labor to write a fair hand.

9. Christ's excellency will appear further in this, That he did it for so many;
that he could lay down a Ransom that was sufficient to Free so many; why how
many, you will say? that place in Joh. 17. 2. will tell you, to as many as the
Father gave him; and they be not a few, considered by themselves, tho they are
but a small number compared with them that perish, Heb. 2. 10. Oh, beloved,
there be many that will be the better for Christ to all eternity. Oh, that we
may be some of them; that others may not be made rich by him, and we abide
poor; that others may not have Freedom by him, and we remain in Bondage. What a
worthy person must he needs be, that can help, and pardon, and sanctify, and
save more than you or any Arithmetician in the World is able to take the sum of
them! Rev. 7. You have Gods redeemed people spoken of, and mark, they are
looked upon under a twofold consideration. First, as among the Jews, the people
of God under the Old Testament, and there indeed you have their number brought
in v. 4. One hundred forty four Thousand, which you are not to take, as if it
were exactly no more; but it is to show, that in the days of the Old Testament
there were not, as indeed it could not be expected, so very many saved, because
the people of God were then confined to one Nation: But afterward in v. 9.
When the Gospel is supposed to spread among the Gentiles; then their number is
so great, that it cannot be taken by any man alive. And therefore you that fear
God, you shall not want good company in Heaven: upon Earth you may; because,
perhaps the Saints may now live at such a distance from you, that you can have
but little of their Society. But in Heaven you will be all together. It Is very
true; if there were none but God there, you would do well enough, he will be
all in all; and immediate communion with him, will make up a perfect
blessedness, tho you were there with him alone; but you shall have God and
Angels too, and God and all the Saints too, the whole Host of the redeemed Ones
by Christ, shall meet in one general Assembly, and there you shall see better
than now you do, what an excellent Person Christ is, even upon this Account,
that he has made so many holy, and so many happy, and that he has freed poor
sinners by thousands, and thousands of thousands.

10. See the excellency of his Person further, In that he did all alone; he
discharged this great work, and bare this heavy burden without the help or
hand of any Creature in Heaven or Earth, Isa. 63. 3. I have trodden the
wine press alone, and of the people there was none to help me, Heb. 1. 3. he
did all by himself; the truth is, there was no Creature above or below that
could strike one stroke in it; the work was of such a nature, that if the best
of them all had but meddled in it, they had spoiled it. Angels in Heaven have a
great deal of Skill, and Wisdom, and Power, one of those glorious Spirits can
do more then a whole World of men, but if they had all joined their skill, and
their Power together; their Wisdom would have proved but foolishness, and their
Power but weakness in this matter; 'twas a business too great for any but the
Son of God to be the Savior of one Soul; but when he comes to it, his own arm
brought Salvation. And as for any help from man; surely, if any body were like
to lend him any Assistance, it must have been some of the good people that
lived in that Generation, when he was in the days of his flesh; but you know
what the Scripture says expressly about that, that when he was in the very heat
and brunt of his work, then all his Disciples forsook him and fled, Matthew. 26.
56. That which I would commend to you from hence, is this, That you would let
Christ be all alone still, I mean in the point of your Justification, he was so
in the work of your Redemption. Now, as none was joined with him there, so join
nothing with him here: Sirs, whom do you look to for your Acceptance with God?
Why you will say to Christ, but is it Christ alone? Have you set him by himself in
this thing? Some there be that hope for mercy from God, but they do not look to
Christ at all; they have this and that of their own, which they hope will do;
such honest, and such blameless, and such righteous persons as they are, must
out of all question, be in a good condition: this will prove a Rock to split
you on one side, to dream of Salvation without Christ, Gal. 3. 10. Others there
be that look to Christ, but not to Christ alone. Some thing must be mingled
with him; they will do something, and Christ must make up the rest; this will
prove a Rock to split you on the other side. I tell you, your Faith will never
be counted for righteousness, if you make these wretched mixtures in the
business of your Justification: It Is to him that works not, but believes in
him that justifies the ungodly, that faith is counted for righteousness, Romans
4. 5.

11. Again, In that he did it at once, Heb. 10. 10. Once for all; when he went
about it, he did it, and there was an end of it; he did not come into the World
twice for it. He is counted a worthy person that can accomplish a business of
great concernment, tho he makes many a journey to the place where he is to do
it; but Christ made but one journey from Heaven to Earth, about this work, and
he finished it; and therefore he gave up the Ghost, with those words in his
mouth, It is finished: as if he should say, there is nothing left for another
time. Learn from hence what great things Christ can do in a little while, and
wait upon him in the Faith of it. One thing that does much help to cast us, and
keep us down in our Spirits when we have this and that trouble upon us, is our
forgetting how quickly Christ can speak to our condition; what a great work was
it, when there arose such a mighty Tempest in the Sea, and the Ship that the
Disciples were in, was covered with Waves, and they were all in danger to sink
presently, to bring down these high Winds, and to lay those hugh Waves! but
Christ did it in a trice, Matthew. 8. 24, 25, 26. Poor Christian! have thou a
great corruption to be subdued? have thou a strong temptation to be removed?
have thou a great strait to be delivered out of? Remember Christ can do it at
once; it may be thou have been hacking, and hewing at such a sin, or
temptation, a hundred, and a hundred times, and trying many means, and all wont
do: Why but at once Christ can do it; look to him better then thou do, if he
strike but one stroke at a lust, down 'twill come; but one stroke at a
temptation, it is gone.

12. Lastly, The excellency of his person appears in this, That he performed
this work of our Freedom, with so much overplus: According to that Scripture
which I have formerly quoted, Romans 5. 20. Where sin abounded, grace did much
more abound. If you should lay our Bondage in one Scale of the Balance, and
this Freedom by Christ in the other, this will weigh that down to the ground.
This Offering of Christ's for the Salvation of Sinners that believe in him, may
be alluded to, from that in Exodus 36. where you read that the Children of
Israel offered so much toward the Service of the Tabernacle, that there was
fain to be a Proclamation throughout the Camp, that there was brought in more
than enough, and they should now hold their hands, verse. 5, 6, 7. But beloved,
Christ has brought in such abundance for our Redemption, that if ever there
were need of a Proclamation to stop any from doing no more in a good work,
'twas in this case; it is true that our sins, and wants, and miseries, were very
great; but this remedy for them, is above them, beyond all expression. I had
almost said, if it be possible for a Soul to be oversaved, Christ has done it.
It must needs have been a great comfort to believers, when they had thought of
this Freedom by Christ, if they could but have said this of it, Well, blessed
be God, there is enough; tho there be nothing over, yet there is nothing
wanting; we have not a sin but he can pardon, we have not a want but he can
supply; he has as much as we can need. Oh! but there is much more comfort than
so, much more cause of rejoicing for them; for they may say, that it is not
possible for them to take in what he is able to give out. When the prodigal
thought of his Fathers house, says he, (Luke 15. 17.) There Is bread enough and
to spare: So when you think of Christ, you may say, There Is Freedom enough, and
to spare. And oh, that God would help you poor sinners, in the thinking of
this, to reflect upon your selves, as the Prodigal did upon himself, when he
spoke those words, that there was in his Fathers house bread enough, and to
spare; and I perish with hunger, says he; as if he should say, Why then, what
do I do here in my undone famished condition? Why don't I go thither? Wretch
that I am! is not that a better place for me, than this is? He had, through
mercy, such a sense of his present condition, that he could not endure to be in
it any longer. I will arise and go to my Father, etc. verse. 18. and when he
came to him, there he found enough, and to spare indeed; there was compassion
in the Fathers heart, and running toward him when he saw him, and falling upon
his neck and kissing of him; and calling for the best Robe, and for the Ring,
and the Shoes, and for the fatted Calf to be killed. So Sirs, if you would
come to Christ once, you would come to one that has enough, and to spare;
there wants but one thing, which indeed was that which brought the Prodigal
home, and the Lord work it in you: And that is, he was grown so hungry that he
thought verily he should have perished. Oh, that it were but come to this with
you, that are yet afar off, that you had such a kind of hunger after Christ;
and I would make no doubt but you also would quickly say, I will arise and go
to him.

CHAP. VII.
Concerning the excellent price with which this Freedom was purchased.
THE Third thing for the making out the excellency of this Freedom, is the
consideration of the excellent Price with which it was purchased. Now that
which I shall speak upon this, shall be to open two things.

1. That this Freedom was purchased: And, 2. That it was purchased with an
excellent price.
1. This Freedom is a purchased Freedom. Persons that are in Bondage, cannot
come to be Free, but it must be by one of these ways, Either their Freedom must
be given them, or it must be bought; and if it cannot be bought by thenselves,
then it must be by another for them. Now the truth is, we come to have our
Freedom by Christ, both these ways; By Gift in respect of us, but by Purchase
in respect of Christ: Or to express it a little otherwise; It is given to us
upon the account or consideration that it was purchased by Christ for us, and
so it must be purchased by Christ, that it might be given to us, See Romans 3.
24. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in
Jesus Christ. Mark, it comes to us freely and by grace, that is, as a mere
Gift, which we could neither buy nor deserve; but yet it is through the
Redemption that is in Christ, that is, he purchased it for us: and therefore
Ephesians. 1. 14. all the company that do truly belong to Christ, are called the
purchased Possession; for so the best Expositors do understand these words, as
nor meant of Heaven, or blessed Immortality, but of the Church of Christ; not
of the place of Glory, to which they shall come; but of the people that shall
come to the place; they are a purchased Possession; so particularly Calvin upon
the place. And so 1 Cor. 6. 20. when the Apostle is stirring of them up to
glorify God in their body, and in their spirit, he makes use of this Argument,
That they were bought with a Price; and this is the meaning of all those places
of Scripture, in which believers are called Servants of God, and Servants of
Christ; particularly, see that place Joh. 12. 26. When you meet with this word
(as you may often), you must understand of what kind of Servants this is meant;
and for this you must know, that there were (among other divisions that might
be made of them) two sorts of Servants: Either hired Servants, that agreed to
dwell with such a Master for such Wages, and for such a time, and then were
gone again, and and at their own dispose: Others there were, that were bought
Servants, bought with money, as Abraham had many of them in his house. Now
these kind of Servants were much more under the power, and at the pleasure of
their Masters, than those who were but hired; they might use a far greater
Sovereignty over them. Now I say, when you read that believers are called the
Servants of Christ, you must understand it in this latter Sense, that they are
his bought Servants (for Christ does not care for hirelings), and so he has a
full and absolute right to them, as a man has to any thing which he has
bought with his money. Now here I would a little Answer to three Questions,
about this purchased Freedom, which may profitably be raised.

Quest. 1. How can this Freedom be said to be purchased? For it may be many of
us cannot tell how to conceive that there should be such kind of things done
here, as use to be in the making of a purchase. The Answer may be twofold.

1. Beloved, whatever darkness there is in our understanding of things, yet to
be sure the language of the Scripture is very proper and suitable; and the
fault is not in the Scriptures expression, but in our conception, that is weak,
and short, and dull. Nicodemus could not conceive aright of what Christ said
about being born again; he was ready to think that Christ did speak nonsense,
how can these things be? says he; and yet Christ spoke most properly and
suitably; and 'twas Nicodemus was the fool in the things of God. So now this is
the Scripture Expression, that this Freedom is the purchase of Christ, whether
we can understand it or no. And how many other things does the Scripture speak
of, which it may be we can understand no more than we do this, and yet are very
clear in themselves, tho not to us? I Will only say this, The less we can
understand the things of God, the more cause we have to be humbled for our
Ignorance, and to cry to God, so to teach us, that we may be in the number of
those to whom it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God. But,

2. Yet why may we not very fitly, and somewhat more easily conceive of this
Freedom under the notion of a purchase; if we should but speak of it according
to the custom that is amongst men? How does it use to be amongst men in the
matter of purchase? consider that; and you shall find there was the like here,
tho in a more glorious manner. Now for this, I will turn you to one Scripture,
where you shall read there was a purchase made, and then see how things will
agree. The place is in Jer. 32. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. In this purchase there are
diverse things.

1. There was something to be purchased, i. e. the Field that was in Anothoth,
in the country of Benjamin. 2. The person selling it, and that was Hanameel,
Jeremiahs Uncles Son. 3. The person buying it, was Jeremiah: And I bought the
Field, etc. 4. Here was these two persons being together and treating about
this business, v. 8. Hanameel mine Uncles Son came to me, -- and said unto me,
buy my Field, etc. 5. Here Is a sufficient solid Reason, why Jeremiah should be
the man that should buy it; for the right of inheritance is thine, and the
redemption is thine, i. e. because he was the next Kinsman. 6. Here is the
Price at which it was to be sold, and that was seventeen shekels of silver, and
this was paid down, he weighed him the money, v. 9. 7. Here was the writing
drawn, or the Evidence, or Conveyance for this, and Jeremiah Subscribes and
Seals to it. And then 8. There were Witnesses to it, v. 10. and so he takes it
to himself and disposes of it as he pleases, it being now his own. Now if we
should go over these things again, and see how it was in the business we have
in hand, certainly we may well say, that this was a purchase; for here was
something also to be purchased, and that was Freedom for poor sinners that were
in Bondage; then here is the Person that was to sell this, and that is God the
Father; then here is the Person buying this Freedom, and that is Christ the Son:
then here is these two Persons being together and treating about this business;
so they did in Heaven: then the like Reason holds why Christ should be he that
should buy this Freedom for us, he was (to be) our near Kinsman, and so the
right of Inheritance would be his. And then for the Price at which it was to be
sold, which was paid down by Christ in full weight; we shall come to that in
its place. And then for the Conveyance or Evidence for this, one of which in
Jeremiah's case was sealed, and the other open (as the manner then was among
the Jews, to have two writings, one sealed up, that they kept to themselves;
and the other open, that any body might read it); why there was the Covenant
between God and Christ alone; that is the sealed Evidence; and then there was to
be the Book of the Scriptures, wherein this Covenant of Grace is unfolded; this
is the open Evidence that all may look into: And then Christ subscribed, as it
were, and sealed to this Covenant or Conveyance, by giving his full consent to
all that was in it, and binding himself by Promise to his Father, to perform
what he undertook in it. And then as for Witnesses, the truth is, there was no
creature by when this was done; for 'twas done before the World began: But,
beloved, they were Witnesses to one another; and as we use to say, God is more
than a Thousand Witnesses. And it is enough to tell you, that the faithfulness
of these persons is such, that their agreement together must needs stand; See
Tit. 1. 2. So I have done with that 1st Question.

Quest. 2. But why did it not please God, that this Freedom should he given to
us, and there an end? Why must it first he purchased by Christ? Why did God
carry it thus here by poor sinners in bondage, they shall be set free, if you
will pay the price?

Answ. Two things to this: 1. In those things which God does, it were a
sufficient Reason (if we knew none other) to say, that God would have it so. So
was his will and pleasure: And if no other Reason could be given, we were to
rest satisfied, and to be silenced with this, as the highest Reason of all.
This Reason you shall find is given for things that are above our reach; as
namely, why some should be elected, and others past by, Ephesians. 1. 5. and why the
great things of God and the Gospel should be revealed to poor simple creatures,
and hid ftom the wise and prudent, Matthew. 11. 25, 26. and why such and such
should be saved, and others left in their damnable condition, Romans 9. 18. Now
beloved, if we had nothing else to say, to be sure we may say this, It was the
will of God, that Christ should purchase this Freedom; that you have expressly
in Joh. 10. 17, 18. And therefore Christ knowing that it was the will of his
Father; to be sure, being such an obedient Son as he was, he would do it: He
would by no means have his will to lie cross to his Fathers will. But,

2. There is another great Reason for it; and we have more to say in this case
than so; and that is this, That God was so to carry on this business of our
Freedom, as not only to have respect to our Good, but also and chiefly to his
own Glory. While he was to see the one secured, he must see that the other did
not suffer. Now you must know, that God could not have all his Glory, but in
this way. There were Two great Attributes amongst all the rest, which God did
intend to glorify, and that is his Mercy and his Justice. His Mercy would have
been pleased well enough, if sinners had been set free without the purchasing
of their Freedom. But then his Justice would have been offended still: How
should that have been quieted and satisfied? Therefore this must be so done, as
that mercy and truth might meet together, and that righteousness and peace
might kiss one another. Justice would have made a loud cry, that Heaven would
have rung of it again, if all should have been swallowed up in mercy, and in
giving away all, without any consideration had to it. For Law and Justice could
say, We have a curse against these sinners; and they are as legally condemned,
as ever were any Traitors: And therefore pray let us be heard; for they shall
not, nor cannot go free, if the Debt be not paid. And therefore if they be not
able to redeem themselves, where is the Surety that must do it for them, that we
may come upon him for all? This now makes it necessary that Christ must
purchase this Freedom, Acts 17. 3. -- He must needs have suffered. Why needs?
Because here was Justice to be glorified as well as Mercy.

Quest. 3. But if we are thus purchased by Christ, may believers say, Then it
may seem that God the Father, has quitted his interest in us (for so it is in
the manner of purchasing amongst men; he that sells to the purchaser, quits all
his right and title to that which is bought), and we are very sorry for that:
we would be Christ's, but we would be the Fathers too?

Ans. And so you are for all this; See John 17. and compare ver. 6. and 10.
together. In ver. 6. says Christ, Thine they were, and thou gave them me:
This looks now, as if the Father had quitted all his interest in them. But it is
not so; for in ver. 10. and all mine are thine. Still they are thine, and thine
are mine too, says he: As if he should say, We have a mutual interest in them;
their being mine, does not hinder them from being thine, as well as their being
thine does not hinder them from being mine. God had an interest in you upon the
account of Creation, and that he keeps still; and which is more, upon the
account of Election, or of everlasting love to you, and that he keeps still:
and Christ he has a right to you upon the account of Redemption: And tho that
does enter you into a new relation to him, yet it does not break off your
former relation to God the Father. He loves you, and delights in you as much as
ever he did; and your happiness by Christ's buying of you, is no way diminished,
but increased. For both have an interest in you, and both love you, John 14. 21.

Now for the Second thing, That this Freedom was purchased with an excellent
price. Here I shall do Two things: 1. I shall labor to make the truth of this
appear to you, That 'twas an excellent, most excellent price that Christ paid
for it. 2. I shall draw some profitable Considerations from it.

First, For the truth of it: Beloved! Jesus Christ paidwell for this Freedom.
God did not deal with Christ in this case, as you read Ephron the Hittite would
have dealt with Abraham, if he would have let him, when he would purchase his
Field, and the Cave that was in it, for a Burying-place, Genesis 23. he would have
given it him, ver. 11. He tells him indeed the Land was so much worth, Four
hundred Shekels of Silver, if it should be sold to the full value of it; but,
says he, what is that botwixt me and thee? bury therefore thy dead, ver. 15.
And thus he would even have forced it upon him for nothing: But Abraham
notwithstanding he stood upon it, that if he had it, he would lay down as much
money as it was worth, ver. 9. and so he did in ver. 16. Nor did the Father say
to Christ, as Ornan the Jebusite did to David, when he would purchase the place
of his Threshing-floor, that he might there build an Altar to the Lord, that
the Plague might be stayed: Take it to thee, says he, I give thee all, 1 Chronicles.
21. 22, 23. tho David would not accept of it. So ver. 24. Nay, verily I will
buy it for the full price. So he did, ver. 25. But God stood upon his price,
his full price with Jesus Christ. He held him up, without any abatement of what
this Freedom was worth. He paid to the worth of it. It Is true, it is a worthy
precious Freedom; but yet I may safely say, Christ gave enough and enough for
it. Oh the price that he paid for it! He did not buy of his Father as we may
buy of him, without price, Isa. 55. 1. but he came, as I may say, to a dear
Market, when he came to make his purchase.

Quest. Well, then you will say, pray what was the Price which Christ paid for
this Freedom?

Ans. Here I shall speak that which may make you wonder, and that is this:
Truly beloved, he did not pay one farthing for it; there did not go a penny out
of his Purse. Now it may be that which will be next in you thoughts, will be
this; truly then 'twas even cheap enough of conscience; here is a Price indeed,
we expected that you would have named some vast sum of Silver and Gold, that
would have been so great as to have beggared any man in the World to give it.
No, I have not one such word to speak to you; but this I have to speak to you
about it, that Christ had been as good to have brought a company of
Pebblestones to his Father for this Freedom, as all the Gold and Silver in the
World, and one would have done as much as the other; but he and his Son must
drive another manner of trade than this, to make poor sinners Free; there must
be anotherghess Price; Why what was it? Oh that which was infinitely beyond all
the treasures of this World. If these would have served, Christ by his power
could have rained them down from Heaven for a thousand years together. But
beloved, there must be (as I may so express it) another rain; it must rain
Blood, and Blood from the side and heart of Jesus Christ, i. e. he must come
down from Heaven, and shed his Blood to make a Ransom for us, see Acts 20. 28.
Feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood; there is the
Price that he paid. Now mark a little, while I show you in a few things, that
this was a Price indeed, an excellent Price. The Blood of Christ to be sure is
precious, as you find it called in 1 Pet. 1. 19. For this weigh but these four
things well, and you will say it is precious Blood.

1. This Blood of Christ is the great Seal of the Covenant of Grace; it is
called the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. 20. Now in the Covenant
of Grace, God promised a World of mercies, yea, no less than an eternal World
of mercies to his people; and the sum of this Covenant is this, I will be their
God, and they shall be my people: But this he branches out into many exceeding
great and precious Promises, wherein he says he will do thus and thus, and all
that is needful for his people. Take all the Promises of the Gospel together,
and there you have the whole Covenant of Grace unfolded and explained; and oh,
what a glorious Covenant it is! how much does, even one of the Promises of this
Covenant carry in it! so that we may say, Blessed, and for ever blessed are all
they, who are partakers of them, that are the heirs of all those great things
that are contained in them; they have Portion enough that have part in the
Promises. But beloved, all this Covenant, and all the Promises of it, would be
as nothing, were it not for this Blood of Christ, by which God Seals all to
believers; it is true, indeed, that the Sacraments of the New Testament, are now
the Signs and Seals of this Covenant of Grace; but these are but Seals of a
second nature, outwardly and Visibly; but that which is represented, and
signified by the Water in Baptism, and by the Wine in the Lords Supper, is the
Blood of Christ; this is the first and great Seal. And therefore it is said, 2
Cor. 1. 20. that all the Promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen. You
know when there is a Covenant or Conveyance made, a man makes great account of
the Conveyance; but why? Because it has the Seal to it, for it is that which
makes it to be all of force; if the Seal were gone, what were all else worth?
Now when Jesus Christ came to redeem his people, he was fain, as I may so
express it, to pawn his great Seal for us; that which ratifies and confirms all
that ever God has said he will do for them that fear him.

2. You will see the excellency of this Blood of Christ in this too, That no
Service or Duty that ever was performed since the fall of man, or shall be to
the end of the World, ever was, or ever will be accepted at the hands of God,
but upon the account of this Blood. I say, since the fall, because before that,
God dealt with Adam upon another score; he was to be accepted in the way of
perfect obedience to the Law; but since that, if ever God did accept of one
Service, or one Sacrifice, or of one Duty, it was always, and altogether for
the sake of this Blood: What was the Blood of all the Beasts that were offered
in Sacrifice, tho in never so great abundance? as you read there, in 1 Kings 8.
63. There were two and twenty thousand Oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand
Sheep, offered at one time; yet I say, what was all this to God, had it not
been for this Blood of Christ? And so what is all that we do, or can do in any
Service, if we don't look to this Blood in the Performance of it? and if God
does not look upon us, and our best works in this blood, it is but Abomination
to him. That Is a notable place in Heb. 10. 19, 20, 21, 22. Having therefore,
brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, etc. Ver.
22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, i. e. let
us come and present our Persons, and our Services before the Lord, and that
with boldness, noting that there is acceptance for us: But how? by the Blood of
Jesus; without that all would be nothing. Now what a precious thing must this
Blood of Christ be, that puts value to all the Services of the Saints
throughout the World? And therefore take heed how you go to any Duty, without
looking at it; and pray that God would not look upon any Duty of yours, without
sprinkling this Blood upon it. And by the way, what a case are you in, that
rest in your Duties, and don't look to Christ in them, but think it is well
enough if you do but take a Bible and read, or down upon your knees and pray,
and a hundred such things* but you have no Faith in the Blood of Christ in what
you do; you may think you have done some great matter now: and oh, this must
needs* be accepted; whereas God never did, nor ever will accept of any man's
person or work, but upon the account of this Blood. I pray mind that Scripture
well, there is much in it to this purpose, Rev. 8. 3, 4. And another Angel came
and stood at the Altar, having a golden Censer, and there was given unto him
much Incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon the
golden Altar, which was before the throne. And the smoke of the Incense which
came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God out of the Angels
hand. Mark some things. 1. This Angel is Christ. 2. His standing at the Altar,
is his being, as it were, ready for us, whenever we go to Duty; for on the
Altar, under the Law, were the Sacrifices offered. 3. He has a golden Censer
in which there was much Incense, which is his own righteousness. 4. And with
this he offers their prayers; he perfumes their Duties with his own spiritual
Incense. 5. They are not the prayers barely of men, but of Saints: Gods own
Children, whose prayers are more pure and heavenly then others are* even their
Duties must have this perfume. 6. Nor of some Saints, but all. 7. And then that
which makes them ascend before God, that is, be accepted of him, is because the
smoke of this Incense went up with them: without that they would never be a
sweet savor unto God.

3. This Blood of Christ is such a precious thing, that it makes God amends for
sin. If we did but know what unspeakable wrong sin does to God, and what
unspeakable dishonor God has by it, we should even be ready to ask this
question, How is it ever possible to make his blessed Majesty the least shadow
of amends for it? Beloved, if you wrong or trepass your Neighbor, you can put
that to an Arbitration, and make him amends for it; but who is there of you,
that can make God a recompense for the sins which you have committed against
him; yea, for the least transgression? see Mic. 6. 6, 7. All your Tears and
Blood can never quench that fire of Gods Wrath which is kindled against it, 1 Samuel 2. 25. When you have spoken but one idle word, or thought but one vain
thought; if you have no more help to get off the Curse and Condemnation that is
due to it, than Men and Angels can afford you with all their utmost ability,
you are undone for ever; it makes such a breach between God and you, as the
whole Creation cannot make up: But now there is one thing, and but one, that
can make God amends, and full amends for sin, yea, for all manner of sins, and
for never so many, and never so great sins, and that is this Blood of Christ, 1 John 1. 7. and 2. 1, 2. Tho thou have been never so vile, and ungodly; yet if
thou can but get this Blood sprinkled upon thee, through Faith in it, it
will make God himself to say, deliver him, for I have found a Ransom; this will
make amends for thy Swearing, and for thy Drunkenness, and for thy Uncleanness,
and for all the wicked Abominations of thy heart and life: Oh what a precious
Blood is this then! And take but one thing more for it, which is,

4. The dreadful Vengeance which God does take upon men, wherever the Guilt of
this Blood of Christ lies. If he does but come once to avenge the blood of a
man, he does that severely; if any one has committed wilful murder upon his
Neighbor, God is resoved that that man shall be surely put to death for it,
Numb. 34. 31. but when he comes to take vengeance for the Blood of his Son,
here the Vengeance is dreadful beyond all others: You have diverse Instances
that I might give you of it in Scripture. How terribly did God deal with Judas
for the betraying of this innocent Blood? he filled him with that horror of
conscience, that he must be his own Executioner, Matthew. 27. 5. and in the
hanging of himself, he fell headlong, and burst asunder in the midst, and all
his bowels gushed out, Acts 1. 18. And after all this, he sent him to his own
place, and that was a sad one, verse. 25. So the people of the Jews that brought
upon themselves the Guilt of Christ's Blood, Matthew. 27. 25. they have been under
the Curse of God for this, these Sixteen hundred years. And such as are guilty
of the Body and Blood of the Lord, by eating and drinking unworthily in the
Sacrament; you see what Vengeance God says he will take of them, 1 Cor. 11.
27, 29. And if any Professor shall profane this Blood by sinning wilfully,
after he has received the knowledge of the truth; you may see what a dreadful
doom God denounces against him, in Heb. 10. v. 26. There remains no more
sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, etc. to the
end of v. 31. Well now, beloved, this blood which is the great seal of the
Covenant of Grace, and without which no service or duty ever was, or ever shall
be accepted from the hands of any man, and which is the blood of Atonement for
all manner of sins; and the guilt of which God will so dreadfully avenge
wherever it shall be found to lie; I say, this blood was the price wherewith
the Lord Jesus Christ purchased this Freedom: And therefore, your selves being
Judges, Was it not an excellent price; and hereupon, is not this Freedom an
excellent Freedom, since Christ may well say of it, as the chief Captain did to
Paul, Acts 22. 28. With a great sum attained I this freedom? Now I will end
this with but Two Considerations briefly.

1. Consider from hence this, for your instruction, you that are Believers: Be
often thinking, What shall I do for this Christ that has done so much for me?
Obj. But it may be you will say, What, does Jesus Christ look for a requital?
Alas! then we are undone on the other side. I answer, No: Whatever you do for
Christ, you must be sure you do nothing upon the account of requiting of him;
as who should say, you are greatly in his debt, and you will do what you can to
come out of it. It Is not a recompense that I call upon you for (you are never
able to do that); but the manifestation of your gratitude to him, by an
obediential fruitfulness. Do but live as those that are his, and that is all he
desires. Why now, shall he that has paid this great price for you, require any
duty at your hands, and will you not do it? or call you to any difficulty for
his sake, and will you stick at it? Remember Christ observes how you walk after
such great things as he has done for you, and don't give him cause to say to
you by your unfaithfulness to him, as Absalom said to Hushai concerning David,
Is this thy kindness to thy friend? Why wentest thou not with thy friend? 2 Samuel 16. 17. Oh! keep with your friend.

2. Consider this from hence, for your consolation: This Jesus Christ who has
bought you, will never sell you. You know men many times after they have bought
a Purchase, and made it their own, they sell it again. Something or other is in
it that they do not like, and so they will part with it. But I am sure, and be you
sure, that Christ will never deal thus with you. Obj. But you will say, We have
such great sins, that we fear he will. Ans. Yea, but you know, that after a Man
has married a Wife (unless she offend him so by Adultery, as utterly to break
the bond of Wedlock, which Christ will never suffer true Believers to do), tho
she has a great many faults, yet he resolves he will not put her away. The Law of
the Land will not let him; nor, which is more, the Law of his Love will not let him.
He thinks, when he looks upon her, with all her failings, Ay, but she is mine;
I have made her mine tho. So is it here. See 1 Samuel 12. 20, 22. And Samuel said
unto the people, Fear not: ye have done all all this wickedness, yet turn not
aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord with all your heart: For the
Lord will not forsake his people for his great name sake: because it has
pleased the Lord to make you his people.

CHAP. VIII.
Concerning the excellent properties belonging to this Freedom.
AND now in the Fourth place, I am to demonstrate, that this is an excellent
Freedom, by the excellent Properties belonging to it. That you may plainly
understand what I mean by these Properties, it is as much as this, That I am
now to speak that of this Freedom, which is peculiar or proper to it self, and
that cannot be said of any other Freedom. Tho you read of other Freedoms in the
Scripture (as that of the children of Israel out of Egypt, and afterward out
of Babylon), which indeed were very great and glorious deliverances, yet they
will not reach to this. Never was there the like to this. As the Book of
Canticles is called the Song of Songs, for the excellency of it; so I may call
this Fredom, the Freedom of Freedoms, because there is none to be compared with
it. And therefore this may be the 1st Property, That you may take of it: That
it is an incomparable Freedom: It has not any fellow, nor any match. That
which was done in this Freedom, ws never done in any before, nor never shall be
in any for the time to come. What is said there, in Joel 1. 2, 3. of a great
Judgment which the Lord threatens, I may say of this great Redemption; Hear
this, ye old men, -- Has this been in your days, or even in the days of your
fathers? etc. And what God speaks to the Children of Israel, about their
Freedom out of Egypt, I may well apply to this Freedom, Deuteronomy. 4. 32. For ask
now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since the day that God
created man upon earth; and ask from the one side of heaven unto the other,
whether there has been any such thing as this great thing is, or has been
heard like it? Consider Three things here, and you will see that this is an
incomparable Freedom.

1. The other greatest deliverances that you read of, which God gave to his
people, they were but the types and shadows, and forerunners of this Freedom.
Particularly, see it in that deliverance out of Egypt, you that are acquainted
with the story of it, know what a great deliverance that was. It Is seldom
spoken of in the Scripture, but there is a glance upon the greatness, and
famousness of it. 'Twas so great, that they were charged never to forget it,
Deuteronomy. 8. 14. And to that end the Lord appointed that they should begin their
reckoning of the Months of the Year, with that Month in which this deliverance
came, Exodus 12. 1, 2. And on the 4th day of that Month, in the Evening of it,
which was the very day on which the Lord brought them out of their Bondage,
they were to keep the Passover every year throughout their Generations, for a
Memorial of it, ver. 6. 14. compared. And it was such a great deliverance, that
Moses, and all the children of Israel, sung together unto the Lord, in solemn
praises and thanksgivings for it, admiring the riches of his mercy toward them
in it; as you may see in Exodus 15. 1, etc. And it was so great, that it put the
wicked Nations of the Earth into a trembling to hear of it, ver. 14, 15, 16.
And again, it was so great a deliverance, that the Lord made use of it, as the
great and strong tie to bind them to himself in the strictest obedience: And
therefore when he gave them the Ten Commandments, he set this engaging Preface
before them; I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage: And then he gives them the Moral Law; and
in them to us, by whom the aforesaid Preface is now to be understood
spiritually of his bringing us out of the spiritual Egypt, and the spiritual
Bondage: And therefore we are to be obedient unto him. But now beloved, tho
this deliverance was such a great and glorious work, as you must needs say it
was, to bring a matter of Six hundred thousand Men, besides Women and Children,
with all their Herds and Flocks, out of the Iron Furnace in Egypt, where they
had been strangers and slaves for Four hundred and Thirty years together, and
that with such a mighty hand, and stretched-out arm, as brought destruction to
their enemies, and redemption to his chosen people: yet, I say, this was but a
type of this Freedom by Christ: This, and all else that Moses did, as Gods
instrument among them, was but to hold forth better things that were afterward
to be done by Christ; See Heb. 3. 5. The like might be said of their
deliverance out of their Seventy years Captivity in Babylon; but I would only
instance further in one great Freedom that was among the Jews by the
appointment of God himself, and that was, That every 50th year, which was
called the year of Jubilee (of which you read Levit. 25.) there was to be a
general Release, and Liberty was to be proclaimed throughout all the Land: so
that they who had sold, or mortgaged their land or possessions, were then every
one to return to them again, and every Hebrew Servant was then to have his
Freedom. So that this year was a great and a famous year amongst them; and
'twas welcomed with a great deal of joy, insomuch that it was called by them,
the Acceptable year; Why this also was to point out this Freedom by Christ; you
shall find it alluded to in Isa. 61. 1, 2. where the same expressions are used
by Christ in his setting forth his Redemption, as were spoken of that year of
Jubilee. He says, he was sent to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and to
proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord. So that other Deliverances, and other
Freedoms, were but to usher in this: They were but the Harbingers of this great
salvation: and in the reading of them, you must have your thoughts upon this,
not only to read them as stories, that did but concern that people; but as
shadowing out the great Gospel-redemption.

2. Again, it is an incomparable Freedom, thus, In that no misery, is like that
misery which this Freedom brings us from. If ever there were a Wretch, indeed
he is one that lies in that condition, out of which Christ was sent to deliver
us; it is such a condition, that if one were truly sensible of it, he would not
be in it one day for the whole World, I mean our natural condition, which is
such a miserable state, that if God bears everlasting love to any person, to be
sure he brings him out of it; and if he intends everlasting wrath to any, then
he leaves them in it.

3. Again, In that no mercy is like to that mercy which this Freedom brings us
to: as they shall have misery enough and enough, that continue in the Bondage;
so they shall have mercy enough and enough, that partake of this Freedom; they
shall have mercy in abundance, they shall be monuments of mercy for ever; and
therefore God gives them this Freedom by his Son, that he may convey to them
such riches of Grace and Mercy, as that all the common goodness which is
bestowed upon the whole World in general, is as nothing in respect of that
mercy which one single redeemed person has, and shall have bestowed upon him:
But what this mercy is, we shall hear particularly when we come to speak of the
Privileges of this Freedom.

Property 2d. This Freedom is an unconceivable Freedom: that is, it is an
unknown thing. Here take notice, 1. What I do not mean by this. 2. What I do
mean by it. I do not mean by this, as if the Saints knew nothing of it. Oh! yes
blessed be God they do, see 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were
not redeemed with corruptible things, etc. but with the precious blood of
Christ. -- So Colos. 1. 26, 27. -- The mystery which has been hid from ages,
and from generations, but now is made manifest unto his Saints. Mark those
words, it is now made manifest to his Saints, and God would make it known to
them; he was resolved that his people in the days of the New Testament, should
in a special manner have it revealed to them; see also Ephesians. 2. 6, 7. and cap.
3. 8, 9, 10, 11. Yea beloved, it is so made known now, as that there is not one
Child of God upon Earth, but has the knowledge of it, and none are altogether
ignorant of it, but such as are in their lost condition, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4, 6. But
if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. In whom the God of this
World has blinded the minds of them which believed not, lest the light of the
glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine upon them: For
God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our heart,
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ: And therefore look you to it, you that live in darkness, and have none
of this saving-light shining into your hearts, that cannot tell what to make of
Christ and the Gospel; you may see from this Scripture, what a case you are in,
and to what company you belong for the present. God is teaching his people in
these mysteries. It is written that they shall be all taught of God, and so
they are, tho not to alike degree.

That which I do mean, when I say that this is an unknown Freedom, is in these
three things.

1. That Gods people themselves don't know it in that full manner and measure,
as it is to be known. Surely there is more in it than they do understand, even
they who see and know most of it. Nay,

2. That which any of the people of God upon Earth do know of it, as yet is but
little in comparison of what is in this Freedom; and therefore they are said to
know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. Now you know, that but a part of a thing is very
short of the whole: They that have attained to the highest degree of spiritual
understanding, had need pray that they might be carried further and further
still, as Paul does for the Ephesians, cap. 1. 17, 18. and 3. 18, 19. Nay,

3. The Saints in Heaven it self, will never be able to take in all that
concerns the glory of this Freedom; tho they shall know it there clearly, yet
they cannot know it fully; it is that which is too great for any but God to
comprehend just as it is. He only knows his own Love, and his own Mercy to the
utmost; yet this shall be no diminution of the Saints happiness, that they
cannot, even there, fully reach the knowledge of it; for they shall know as much
of it as it is possible for a Greature to know; they shall be like Bottles cast
into the Sea, that tho they cannot take in the Sea, yet they shall take in so
much as shall make them so full that they cannot hold a drop more; but if they
could take in more, there is more still to be taken in. So that indeed this is
an unconceivable Fredoom; the Saints do admire it, and they will admire it for
ever: Now our admiring of things, does not only proceed from our being affected
with them, but also from hence, that there is more in them than we can well
dive into; so we cannot go to the bottom of this Freedom, nor ever shall, for
it has no bottom: So that the truth is, here we are all posed; Saints, and
Angels are posed to conceive what this Freedom comes to. You may go to some in
the World, that can scarch out deep Mysteries, that can expound Riddles; but
this is such a Mystery, and such a Riddle as no Creature in Heaven or Earth is
able exactly to unfold. I may say of it, as it is in Romans 11. 33. O the depth,
etc. Other Freedoms you can fathom, but this you cannot.

3d Property, It is the most honorable Freedom; you know when God redeemed the
Children of Israel out of Egypt; he did it in an honorable way; take it in
these three things.

1. He gat honor to himself, Exodus 14. 17, 18. by this he declared himself to
be above all gods, and above all great Ones of the Earth: God should never have
done this work if the Egyptians, and all their Idols could have hindered it: You
know what a fierce onset they made upon Israel at the Red Sea to bring them
back again; but instead of that, they never went back again themselves; the
waters covered their Enemies, there was not one of them left; what a name did
the Lord make himself at that time!

2. He honored his Promises; the Children of Israel had had many Promises of
Deliverance, which by reason of the anguish of their spirits in their Bondage,
they could not tell how to believe; they called the Faithfulness and Truth of
God into question, (as we are too ready to do, when we are in great straits;)
instead of trusting in God firmly, as they should have done, when once they had
a word from God, what depth of distress soever they were in; they did not rely
up-God's Promise, Exodus 6. 6, 7, 8, 9. But when God delivered them, he honored
his Promise for all that, he showed that he did remember it by the performing
of it, Exodus 12. 41. And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and
thirty years, even the self-same day it came to pass, that all the hosts of the
Lord went out of the land of Egypt. You must know, that this place looks back
chiefly to the promise that God made to Abraham, that tho his seed should be
afflicted in Egypt, yet he would bring them out after such a time, Genesis 15. 13,
14. Now here in this 12th of Exodus you see how God honored his promise, he
kept his word to the very day.

Obj. But how did God honor his promise? and how were they delivered the
selfsame day, when as in that place of Genesis, there is just Four hundred
years spoken of, that they should be in Egypt; and in the other of Exodus, it is
Four hundred and Thirty years? It seems therefore, that God failed of his
promise Thirty years?

Ans. No: God forbid that we should think so: Heaven and earth shall pass away,
but one tittle of his word shall not perish. But you must know, that there may
be Two Reasons why the Thirty years are not mentioned in the promise to Abraham.

(1.) Because it is not an unusual thing amongst us, to swallow up a lesser
number in a greater: As if a man ask you, how old you are, you say, so many
years; and tho there be some odd weeks, or months, you omit them, putting the
greatest number for all. So the Thirty years are to be understood in the Four
hundred, as the Text in Exodus, with which the other is to be compared, does
show.

(2.) I suppose the Lord might of purpose conceal these Thirty years (tho he
did as much intend them as the other), that his people might not precisely know
the very time when their deliverance should be, that it should be this year, or
this day, to teach them still to depend upon him for deliverance, even when
they might think that their deliverance was nearest. We must trust God for
deliverance: but the very time when it shall be, we must leave that to him. He
uses to reserve that in his own breast. But to go on.

3. In that deliverance God honored his people, Deuteronomy. 4. 34. Isa. 43. 3, 4. He
gat them a Name, and made them high above all Nations. They were a People that
all the World did talk of, that heard what God had done for them; how he had
redeemed them, and how he had chosen them, and how he went before them.

Well now, beloved, you see this was an honorable deliverance that God gave to
them; but this Freedom by Christ is the most honorable Freedom of all. God
never so honored himself by any deliverance as by this: nor did he ever so
honor his promises; nor did he ever so honor his people. For the first, see
John 12. 28. for the second, Luke 1. 68. to 74. for the third, Luke 2. 32. They
are so honored by this, that they that partake of this Freedom, are said to be
made Kings to God.

Property 4. This Freedom is a Heavenly Freedom. They who are interested in it,
are said to be partakers of the heavenly calling, Heb. 3. 1. And they are
called the heavenly Jerusalem, cap. 12. 22. and Jerusalem which is above, Gal.
4. 26. It Is such an Heavenly Freedom, that the very Angels desire to look into
this salvation which it brings, 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. Other Deliverances were
earthly; or at most, the best and greatest of them, as I said, were but types
and shadows of better things: but this Freedom is all made up of Heavenliness.
I shall make out this by Four things a little:

1. It is the Sons Freedom. 2. The Souls Freedom. 3. The Saints Freedom. 4. The
Scripture-Freedom.

1. I say it is the Sons Freedom; that which the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of
God has procured. It Is the Son that makes free. You have had this largely
opened to you. Now what an heavenly Freedom must this be, that God employed his
own Son in, and sent him from Heaven on purpose about it? When the Lord would
redeem his people out of Egypt, he sent Moses and Aaron for that work; and they
were but Men; but when he would give this Freedom, he sent one that was more
than a Man. It Is true, he raised up Christ from amongst the Jews, according to
the flesh; and the humane Nature did not come immediately from God, but 'twas
made of the Seed of David. Yea, but God was manifested in this flesh: and upon
this account he is said to come down from Heaven, John 3. 13. and to come out
from God, and to come forth from the Father, cap. 16. 27, 28. So that in this
Freedom, beloved, there came one from the Throne of God; yea, one that was God,
to give it to us.

2. It Is the Souls Freedom; the Freedom of the Soul. Now you know they must be
all heavenly things that can reach that, to do it any good. In other
Deliverances they were the Bodies of men that were set free; but in this Christ
brings Souls out of Prison and Bondage. And indeed, herein lies the very main
of all the excellency of this Freedom, that it is a Freedom for Souls. If I
should have said nothing else about it, but only this, That the precious Souls
of Men and Women are redeemed by it, you must needs have said it is an excellent
Freedom. Yea, beloved, all that I have said, or have yet to say, or can say,
runs into this. Oh blessed, joyful, heavenly Freedom by Christ! What a thing is
this! What, to bring salvation to Souls! to set the Heart, Mind, Will,
Understanding, Affections, Conscience at liberty; that when all was bound
within with spiritual Chains and Fetters, that were Ten thousand times stronger
than those that are made of Brass and Iron: that when the Soul sat in darkness,
and in the shadow of death, there should be redemption for that! that Christ
should pity lost and undone souls! Oh heavenly, heavenly, heavenly Freedom!
Well may I use those words to you here, which the Angel used to the Shepherds,
Luke 2. 10, 11. Behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to
all people: for unto you is born this day in the city of David, a Savioue,
which is Christ the Lord. Here Is a Savior for your Souls! Where are your
Souls, Sirs, by Nature? What a condition are they in? Oh! they are kept the
closest Prisoners that ever were, in the deepest darkest Dungeon that ever was:
and this Prison they are cast into for Debt, for Theft, for Murder, for
Treason; and no Debt like this Debt: for it is the Debt of Sins and Iniquities;
and no Theft like this Theft; for it is for robbing God of his Glory; and no
Murder like this Mruder; for it is for destroying your own Souls; and no Treason
like this Treason; for it is against the Crown of Heaven. And yet if you will
repent, and believe the Gospel, here is a Freedom for your Souls out of all
this. Methinks it should be even with us in the hearing of this, as it is said
in Luke 19. 37, 38. that we should rejoice, and praise God with a loud voice.
And if we should not be affected with this Freedom, one might think, as ver.
40. that if we should hold our peace, the stones would immediately cry out.

3. It is the Saints Freedom. Indeed it is to make sinners free; but it is not
the Freedom of sinners: That is, as long as persons are out of Christ, they
cannot truly call it theirs. It Is the portion and privilege of the children of
God. A wicked man may have it, but a true Believer has it. The one is under a
possibility of it, but the other is in possession of it, Romans 5. 2. They have
their standing in this Grace. They stand upon Gospel-ground. Now what a
Heavenly Freedom is this, that none but Saints enjoy! The men of the World may
enjoy other Freedoms, but one must be in Christ to enjoy this. It belongs to
the holy Company, Ephesians. 2. 19. Ye are Fellow-Citizens with the Saints. Indeed
this Freedom does not find us Saints, but it makes us so. And therefore hereby
you may know whether you have any thing of it. Do you think that you are made
free by Christ, and abide ungodly? To be sure you deceive your selves. The Lord
Christ never redeemed any Soul, to leave it where he found it; he puts it into
a contrary state to that which it had before; he found it in darkness, but he
puts it into Light; he found it in Death, but he puts it into Life; he found it
in Wickedness, but he puts it into Righteousness; he changes the person whom he
frees, 2 Cor. 5. 17. and continuance in sin is a certain sign that this
Redeemer has not yet been there.

4. It is the Scripture-Freedom: Beloved, tho you read, as I said, of other
Freedoms in the Scripture, yet this is the Scripture Freedom Joh. 5. 39. Search
the Scriptures, -- and they are they which testify of me. You know what
heavenly things are contained in the Scriptures: Why now, beloved, this Freedom
by Christ is the great thing that the Scripture treat of; all other things that
are there spoken of, are but in order to this; all its Precepts, all its
Promises, all its Threatenings look this way. It is, as I may call it, the
substance of the Scripture; that would not speak of sin so as is does, if it
were not for this Freedom; it would not speak of Christ so as it does, if it
were not for this Freedom; it would not speak of Death and Judgment, and Heaven
and Hell, so as it does, if it were not for this Freedom. Yea beloved, it is a
question whether we should have had any written word at all, if it had not been
for this Freedom; this is the great thing that the Scripture commands, and the
great thing that the Scripture commends; it blesses all them that have it, and
it curses all them that have it not. And, which is an unspeakable comfort to
think of, when a poor Soul has this Freedom by Christ, it is then Freed by
Scripture; it is in a good condition by Scripture; there be many that think
themselves in a good condition, but they have no Scripture-grounds for it; ask
them how they prove their hopes; they have not one word to show for it in the
whole Book of God; but now the Scripture will come and join with one that is
freed by Christ; it will help him to read his Freedom there; and he is one,
that however he may be fearing and questioning his condition for a time, yet at
last he will come to this, to be able to say, why Lord I am freed by thine own
word; certainly this is a heavenly Freedom then, which the Holy Scriptures are
so much taken up with. You see now by all that has said upon this fourth
Property, What great Reason there is for that Text of Scripture, Ephesians. 2. 6. And
has raised us up together, and made us sit togegether in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus. This is done by this heavenly Freedom.

5th Property, This Freedom is a perfect Freedom; it is so already in Christ;
and by that time he has done what he intends to do in and for his people, it
shall be so to them. You know the Apostle tells the Colossians, cap. 2. 11.
that they were complete in him. It has not only the perfection of parts, as a
Child has, that has all the members, tho they be not grown; but it has the
perfection of degrees, as a man has that is at his full stature. Christ's
Freedom as it is in himself, is full grown; and therefore it is able to do great
things for us, as you know; if you speak to a Child to help you, he can do but
little; but speak to a man that is grown, and in his strength, he can
powerfully assist you. And oh! what a vast difference there is between the
Freedom that man can give, and the Freedom that Christ can give! men may be
instrumental to deliver us one way, but then they cannot another way; the
Creatures arm is too short to reach us, and his hand too weak to help us in
every strait: But this Freedom by Christ is such a perfect thing, that in
whatsoever we have need of it, it is as able to help us in one as in the other.
Beloved, there was never such a Savior as Christ is, of all the Saviors that
ever God raised up to do his people good; he is able to save to the uttermost.
When God made use of them to be Saviors and Deliverers to his Church, yet
still his Church needed another Savior, and they did not save them from their
greatest dangers; but now in Jesus Christ the Church has got such a Savior,
that they need none other, I mean as to spiritual Deliverance.

6th Property, And so I shall end this fourth thing. This Freedom is an eternal
Freedom. Amongst men, tho persons may be set free at one time, yet they may
come into Bondage at another time; a man may be twice a Slave, and twice a
Prisoner, yea many times; but it is not so here. Where Christ gives this
Freedom, he settles it for ever, Heb. 9. 12. Having obtained eternal Redemption
for us. It is very true, there will be great and strong endeavors put forth by
the Enemies of those whom he has redeemed, to recoverthem again, as it was in
Israel's case; but they will be overthrown in their undertaking, as Pharaoh and
his Host was. Satan's furious attempts to keep those Souls still in Bondage,
whom Christ will have to be delivered, and to brings back those Souls into
Bondage whom Christ has made free, will cost him the fall of his Kingdom; and
it will be such a fall, as he and all the forces of Hell that he can raise,
will never be able to get it up again.

Well now, beloved, having heard the Properties of this Freedom, give me leave
to ask you, How do you like it? as when a man brings a thing to you, and bids
you make trial of it, and see the Conditions and properties of it; when he
comes to you again, he will say, Well, how do you like it? So, pray now, how do
you like this Freedom? What, are you pleased or displeased with it? Will you
have it, or will you not? what fault can you find in it? Why surely Sirs, it is
not to be misliked; is not an incomparable, unconceivable, most honorable,
heavenly Freedom to be liked? What, is there any of you here so disdainful as
wont like the Freedom of the Son? the Freedom of the Soul? the Freedom of the
Saints? the Freedom of the Scripture? Cannot you find in your hearts to like
Christ's perfect, eternal Freedom? Why then what can you like? Truly, I may
even say of such as cannot like this, as Job does, cap. 33. of very diseased
persons, whose soul abhors dainty meat (in verse. 20.) Your Soul (without
infinite mercy) draws nigh to the grave, and your life to the destroyers,
verse. 22.

CHAP. IX.
Concerning the excellent Privileges which this Freedom brings with it.
FIfthly, This is an excellent Freedom in respect of the excellent Privileges
which it brings with it. I have formerly told you, that this is a purchased
Freedom; and now I am to tell you that it is a privileged Freedom, it is full
of good things. They who are redeemed by Christ, are an heavenly Corporation,
the City of the living God. Now Corporations and Cities have their Privileges,
and some have greater than others; but none so great as these; that Scripture
may well come in here, Psalm. 87. 3. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou
City of God. Beloved, I would fain engage your most serious attention to what
shall be delivered upon this Subject; and to prepare you for it, I beseech you
to know, that I hope you shall hear some glorious things spoken to you of this
City of God, in the opening of the excellent Privileges which this Freedom by
Christ brings with it; which when you have heard, I am sure you will have cause
to say of these redeemed ones, as Moses once did of the Children of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 33. 29. Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people, saved
by the Lord. I shall not spend time in things that are but of a general
consideration; otherwise I might show you, that there must needs be very
precious Privileges attending this Freedom. 1. From the great difficulty that
there is to get into this Freedom. As you know those places and conditions,
that have great Privileges, what a hard thing it is to get into them; there
must be a great deal of seeking, and waiting, and much cost and pains laid out,
and such and such a great person must be made ones friend; so it is no easy
matter to get into this Freedom, to be made one of the Company. If ever you be
admitted into it, you must strive to enter: you must think no pains or labor,
too much; and you must patiently wait upon the Lord, till he have mercy on you:
and you must be sure to get God and Christ to be your friends; for they have
the power, and the disposing of this Freedom; they give it to whom they will.
Now what is the Reason that there is so much ado amongst men, to procure such a
Place, and to be one of such a Society, as many times there is? Why, it is
because, if they were once admitted into it, there be such Privileges to be
enjoyed, and such profits to be received, as will abundantly recompense all
their pains. So here, the difficulty of becoming one of these that are made
free by Christ, speaks that this Freedom is full of excellent Privileges, 2.
From the high esteem that they have of this Freedom, who are admitted into it
through Grace. Say what you will to them, you can never bring them out of love
with it again; they will like their Christ, and like their Condition, tho all the
world should set themselves to turn away their hearts from it. They Will part with
if for no good. They like it so well, that they set an higher value upon the
worst of Christ, than they do upon the best of the World, as Moses did, Heb.
11. 25, 26. Now certainly this is because their condition is full of
Privileges. They know they are better here than they can be any where else in
the World. 3. From the consideration of the Saints being so often called upon
in Scripture to praise the Lord. They who observe, may frequently find how much
they are stirred up to this duty. How many Psalms does David begin and end with
this, Praise ye the Lord? And he says, that the People of God should be a
singing to him, blessing of him, rejoicing, and giving thanks, extolling of the
Name of God, declaring his wonderful Works toward them. Now you shall see,
that one main thing that he drove at, why they should do this, was upon the
account of the Freedom which God had brought them into, Psalm. 107. 1, 2. and
136. 1, 2, 3. compared with ver. 10, 11, 12, 23, 24. And in Rev. 5. you read,
that the Saints were at this work of more than ordinary thanksgivings to God:
They sung a Song: What is it for? Oh! for the Freedom they had received.
Certainly then, if God has such great praises for it, there are great
Privileges in it. But I shall not go on thus; but will bring in a List of the
Privileges (so far as I can) in particular. And here, as the Prophet said,
Isa. 63. 7. I will mention the loving kindness of the Lord, etc. They are a
privileged people. For,

Privilege 1. Being made free by Christ, they are translated out of the Kingdom
of the Devil. His Prison-doors are now opened, that were shut so fast upon
them, as that none could open them, but he that has the key of David. Now
their bondage under that great Tyrant over Souls, is at an end. He shall no
more have them captive at his will: The yoke of their oppression is broken; See
Col. 1. 13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and has
translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son. They are redeemed from the hand
of the terrible. Satan has been forced to yield them up; and now he can lay no
more claim to them. This Privilege you read of further in Heb. 2. 14, 15. That
through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the
Devil; and deliver them who all their lifetime were subject to bondage. Mark,
he has delivered them from the Devil, by destroying of him; not as to his
Being; for the Devil is not dead: it is not the Nature of a Spirit to die; but
as to his power over them. So he is destroyed; he is quite routed, as to any
slavery that he now keeps them in. He may Lord it over his Vassals, whose God
he is; but with these he has nothing to do, but in a way of molestation: so
indeed he will vex them all that he can: and he will not be wanting to follow them
with his Temptations, and his siery Darts. In this kind these redeemed ones
must expect a War with him, Ephesians. 6. 11, 12, 13, etc. Christ will have them
fight, tho he has made them free; and tho the Devil does cease to be their
Owner, yet he does not cease to be their Enemy: and he designs all the hurt and
mischief to them that possibly he can; for they went out of his Kingdom against
his will and consent. If he could have staid them, they should never have gone.
And therefore his wrath is the more kindled against them, and that to such a
degree, that he is not only compared to an Adversary, but to a Lion: and this
Lion is in the siercest posture of all: he is a roaring Lion. But
notwithstanding all his rage, his Dominion is gone. Now beloved, this is an
excellent Privilege: Oh, to be loosed from the Chains of Darkness! to be turned
from the power of Satan to God! In this sense, they that are made free by
Christ, are past the Devil's Quarters. And therefore tho they should diligently
watch against him, yet they should not be slavishly afraid of him. Do but keep
Gods way, and what hurt can he do you? See John 5. 18. It Is a very unbecoming
thing, for a child of God to be afraid of the Devil. What have all the Devils
in Hell to do with you, for whom Christ shed his precious Blood? He himself
knows that you are none of his; and therefore sanctify the Lord God in your
hearts, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. It Is meet that you
should stand in awe of him with a holy filial fear: But as for the Devil, you
are no longer his.

Privilege 2. This Freedom brings the pardon of sin, which is such a Privilege,
that David could not tell how to think of it, or mention it, without wondering
at the blessedness of the man that has it, Psalm. 32. 12. Blessed is he whose
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Blessed is the man unto whom
the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile: or, as
it is in the Hebrew, Oh the blessedness of the man, etc. You would count it a
great Privilege, to have a man to forgive you a great debt, when you can say, I
owed such a person such a great sum of money; 'twas as due a debt, as ever any
was in the World: and tho I was not able to pay him, yet he might have had the
Law against me; he might have cast me into Prison, and there have kept me all
the days of my life: but out of his mere goodness he forgave me all: and he
has not only told me, that he will never trouble me for it, but has given me
in the Bond too. Why then, what a great Privilege must it be, to have God to
forgive us the great debt of our sins! for him to say, Well, I know, and you
know too, in some measure, what a grievous man or woman you have been; what
abundance of dishonor and provocation I have had with you. Oh the wicked
Nature that you have! Oh the wicked Life that you have led! Oh the wicked
thoughts that you have thought! etc. Now how might I make the fire of mine
indignation burn against you? What a wretch would you be, if I should deal with
you according to your deserts! But here I do in my infinite mercy, pass all by:
Instead of giving you punishment, I give you a pardon. Why, this is the
Privilege of this Freedom by Christ, Ephesians. 1. 7. In whom we have redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his
grace. And from hence it follows, that now being pardoned, God does not upbraid
his people with their sins, buthe forgets them in that sense, tho he cannot but
remember them by way of knowledge, so as to understand that they have been
committed; yet he forgets them, as to laying them to their charge. In that
respect he will hear nothing against them, not what the Devil says by his
Accusations; not what the Law says in regard of its Threatenings and
Condemnation. The whole course of the Laws proceeding this way, is utterly and
eternally stopped, Romans 8. 1. Gal. 3. 13. And being pardoned, they are justiffed
in the sight of God, Romans 3. 24. tho they will, it may be, condemn themselves
an hundred, and a thousand times after this, and confess, and bewail their
sins, and loathe themselves in their own eyes, and acknowledge that the Lord
might justly cast them into the deepest torments (as it is fit they should); yet
in and through Christ, God does not look upon them so as they look upon
themselves. And again, being pardoned, God is reconciled to them: his heart is
toward them. But yet there must be something more still, than the pardon of
sin, to make a child of God count himself a happy man. Yea, you will say, that is
strange* I should think my self happy enough, if my sins were but forgiven me.
I, no question of it: But tho a child of God count this an unspeakable mercy,
Psalm. 51. 1. yet if there were not something else joined with it, a great part
of his happiness would be wanting; and that is the subduing of sin. Which
therefore is the next.

Privilege 3. This Freedom brings down the Dominion of sin, Romans 6. 14. Sin
shall not have dominion over you. You that are in your sins, I know, unless God
come and work upon you, you would look upon it as no Privilege at all to have
your Lusts curbed. No, you would look upon your selves as undone, if you should
not have your swinge in them, they are so dear to you. This is a sign the
Redeemer has not been with you: But it is otherwise in those that are Christ's:
As he has broken the Yoke of their Souls, so he makes a Yoke for their
Corruption, Matthew. 11. 29. Sin must reign no more. Before, Pride reigned, and
Passion reigned, or Uncleanness, or Worldliness, and such like. Now the Crown
must be taken off from them; they must sit no longer upon the Throne of the
Heart, giving out their Commands, and the poor creature fulfilling of them, tho
it be to his own destruction. But every Lust must be mortified, and every vile
Affection discountenanced, and nothing pleaded for, or yielded to, that
proceeds from the Law of Sin, and of Death. And this now the people of God
count a Privilege indeed; Oh! that they are brought into a state wherein their
sins shall not, nor can have their head! Oh, how they bless God for this
Freedom upon this account, that it is an inlet to mortification! for so you
read it is, in Tit. 2. 11, 12. So that no child of God is under the Dominion of
any sin, Gal. 5. 24. He that is so, is in Bondage still, Romans 6. 16. 2 Pet. 2.
19.

And yet still there is something more about sin, than all this, to make him
look upon his Privileges (so far as they do concern that) to be complete; he
cannot count himself a happy man indeed, neither with the pardon of his sins,
or that sin does not reign in him, tho he is glad of this at his very heart;
but this same loathsome thing sin is in him still, what shall he do for that?
Romans 7. 24. Therefore this is another Privilege that this Freedom will produce.

Privilege 4. The very being of sin in them shall ere long be done quite away,
Col. 1. 22. Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. It Is not thus yet; tho the Saints have put on the
new man, yet they have not perfectly put off the old; there are excellent
things in them, but it is with a blemish, they have something to blemish them,
as well as something to beautify them. As you know it is with a Traveller, as
long as he is in his journey, especially, if he be to go against wind and
weather, he is apt to dash his Clothes; if he were but at home, there he would
beneat and clean, and you should not see one spot upon him from head to foot;
but while he is a traveling, he gets these spots, and he cannot tell how to
help it. So here, tho while the people of God are in their passage, it is not
all so well in them, and with them, as God would have it; nor as themselves
would have it; but shortly when they come home, their spots will be all out.
Thou Child of God shall have no more of this deadness, no more of this hardness
and unbelief of heart; here thou can not pray one quarter of an hour without
vain thoughts; there thou shall praise and glorify him to all eternity without
the least distraction. Oh! what a Privilege will this be, when sin and you
shall be quite parted! Now you hear of it in every duty; but there you may be
good as long and as much as you will, and no evil to hinder you; Paul's
complaint is now at an end as to himself, because he is at home, Romans 7. 21.

Privilege 5. They who are made free by Christ, are made nigh to God, Ephesians. 2.
13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by
the Blood of Christ. As the people of Israel, whom he redeemed out of Egypt,
are called a people near to God, Psalm. 147. 14. You know it is counted a
Privilege to stand near to an earthly King in some cases. The Queen of Sheba
pronounced the Servants of Solomon happy upon this account, 1 Kings 10. 8. But
as Christ said once of himself, a greater than Solomon is here; here is the King
of Heaven and Earth, that is the most high God, and these are near to him;
whatsoever is dear to us, is near to us. Now the Saints are very dear to God:
How dear is a Friend to you? And how dear are your Children to you? And how
dear is the Apple of your eye to you? Why by these names, the Lord calls his
people in the Scripture. Yea beloved, the Lord is very near to them, when they
think he is far off from them, Psalm. 73. 23. don't make account that God is at
such a distance from you, you that belong to him, as many times you do; you
think he is gone away, so that he will never return, and all that while he is
hard by you, if you could but see him; remember what he says in Isa. 41. 10.
Fear thou not, for I am with thee, etc.

Privilege 6. This Freedom brings Union with Christ, Ephesians. 5. 30. it joins those
to him, who are redeemed by an inseparable bond; Christ is in them, and they
are in him: therefore Paul says Gal. 2. 20. that Christ lives in him; and
it is said of the Saints, that Christ dwells in their hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3.
17. and Christ and they are not to be considered as two, but as one; he owns
them as his Members, and you know they are one with the head; as his Wife, and
she is one with the Husband. Now what an unspeakable Privilege is it to be
united to Jesus Christ, and what greater honor can a Soul desire, or enjoy,
than this is? If you have such a deal of comfort from those earthly Relations
in which you stand one to another, as some of you have; tho this is a Union of
a low degree in comparison of this; yet you find there is much sweetness in
being joined to a loving Wife, or a loving Husband: Oh, what is it to be joined
to the Lord Jesus Christ!

Obj. But you will say, What Is a bare Union, if there be no Communications from
him? if Christ does not give out that which he is, and that which he has to
us? there is many a one that is joined to another in an uniting Relation, that
is little the better for it.

Ans. Yea, but to be sure, they who are one with Christ shall be the better for
it; for in the next place,

Privilege 7. From this Union flows Communion with Christ, and a communication
from Christ of abundance of good things to them. I will instance in some, 1.
They partake of his likeness and image; to this you read, that they were of old
predestined, Romans 8. 29. Hence they are said to have put on Christ: as soon
as ever he brought them into this Freedom, he began presently, as I may say, to
draw his Picture upon them, and they grow more and more like him, every day, by
resembling of him in his Graces and walking: The Saints desire to live no other
life, but that which is suitable to the life that Christ led; and they would
fain imitate and follow him in his holy conversation; they (...) mightily taken
with it; all their trouble is that they can reach it no more. 2. They partake
of his fullness, Joh. 1. 16. It Is their Privilege, being made free by him, to be
fetching from him what they need; for tho he has it in himself* yet he does
not keep it to himself; no, he means to be liberal of what he has to all his
Members. He is not like the Rich covetous men of the World, that tho they have
abundance, yet they hoard it up; they have no readiness in them to distribute;
but Christ is all for distributing; and that which his redeemed ones have had,
and shall have from him, is an unknown deal. 3. They partake of his Death and
Resurrection, Romans 6. 5. They dye to sin by the virtue of Christ's Death, and
they live to God by the virtue of Christ's rising again: For beloved, Christ did
not do those things barely, that they should end in himself, that none should
have a fellowship with him in them. But his design was, that his Death should
bring forth another Death, and his Resurrection another Resurrection in the
Souls of his people; that they should feel in themselves, that he died by their
being crucified to sin, and crucified to the World, and that they should feel
in themselves, that he rose by their newness of life, and by their setting
their affections upon things above. Now this is a great Privilege, to have the
experience of these things within us; people talk how Christ died and rose
again; but where is our conformity to this? Oh! how little does the power and
the virtue of this come to us? 4. They partake of his Righteousness; I mean,
it is imputed to them as their own, that perfect unspotted obedience of his,
it is to cover all the unrighteousness that is in them, 2 Cor. 5 ult. Oh,
beloved, what a thing is this that a righteousness that is just as the
Scripture would have it, without the least defect, wherein all the holy rules
and commands of the word are fulfilled to a tittle, that this should be made
over to one, with as great and sure an interest in it, as if one had done all
this in ones person! why thus it is with those whom Christ has made free. 5.
They partake of his Intercession; the Lord Jesus is at the right hand of the
Father on their behalf, Heb. 9. 24. he is speaking good words to God for them
continually; and his intercession is powerful. Oh, with what great Arguments
can Christ back all the requests that he makes to his Father for them, even
from what himself has done, and suffered, and satisfied? 6. They shall partake
with Christ in his Glory; many of them are come to it already; and to make it
sure, that not one of his redeemed ones shall miss of it, he intends to come
himself and bring them all thither, Joh. 14. 3. So that not only Christ has a
Crown; but they shall have one too; a Crown of life, a Crown of Righteousness;
because I live, says he, ye shall live also; and he does not count himself
fully glorified, till he has got every particular Saint into Heaven. And not
only have the people of God upon Earth great longings after Christ; oh, that we
might be with him! but surely Christ has greater longings after them: oh, that
they might be with me!

Privilege 8. The indwelling of the Spirit is another Privilege, bought by this
Freedom; Christ having freed them, the Holy Ghost takes possession of them; now
their Bodies must be his Temples, and their Hearts his Throne, Romans 8. 11. and
oh, the great things that his Spirit does in them and for them! which I might
set down as distinct Privileges. But I must hasten. By this they are
enlightened; by this they are sanctified; by this they are quickened,
strengthened, comforted, guided; the Spirit that dwelt in them before, led them
into dark and dangerous paths, gave them evil counsel; was always a provoking
of them to be worse and worse; but here is one that will be checking and
reproving of them, when they walk disorderly, and that will be grieved at their
sins, and that will countenance and encourage them in way of duty, which is a
great benefit.

Privilege 9. This Freedom brings a right to all the Promises, Gal. 3. ult. And
there is more riches in one Promise, than in a thousand Worlds. I know not what
portion some of you may desire, or where you would have your lot to fall; if
you could have your wish, very like you would desire some huge things in this
World, that you might have so great an estate as such a man has, etc. and then
perhaps you would think, if it were but so, you had wished your selves into a
very good condition. But oh, beloved, the Promises, the Promises, they are the
Privileges indeed; when you have them, you have God in Covenant with you: If
you consider who it is that promises, and what it is that is promised, and the
certainty that there cannot but be of the faithful and full performance of
them, you must needs say, it is an high Privilege to be interested in them.

Privilege 10. It brings Peace of conscience, Rom 5. 1. Heb. 9. 14. This is
such a thing, that the having of it, is a kind of Heaven upon Earth, and the
want of it is a kind of Hell upon Earth. If a man's conscience fly in his Face,
and the Sense of Guilt, and the Horror of spirit, seizes on him, let him enjoy
the World if he can; 'twill bring down the stoutest heart that is, to have but
one sound gripe of it; but these redeemed ones are in the way of Peace; Christ
is to them the Prince of Peace, God is to them the God of Peace, the Word is to
them the Word of Peace. When we come amongst you in our preaching, and denounce
the Wrath and Judgments of God; they are not these persons that we mean, we
have another message for them; and we must in effect say to them in our
Sermons, as Paul does to them in the beginning of his Epistles, Grace be to
you, and Peace, etc. As amongst the Children of Israel, there were two
Mountains, Gerizim and Eball, one to pronouce the blessings upon, and the other
for the curses; So beloved, tho when we would give you that are out of Christ,
your portion, we must do that, as it were from the Mount of curses; yet when we
speak to these, we must get up on the Mount of blessings.

Privilege 11. Is Preservance in holiness. Hypocrites may fall away, because
they were never well on, Joh. 15. 7. there may come something or other that
will dash their profession to pieces; but these are well rooted, and nothing
will be able to pluck them up; you shall not see them turn Saints in the
beginning, and turn Devils in the end, as Judas did. 1 Pet. 1. 6, you read that
they had manifold temptations; there were diverse ways of suffering invented for
them, to beat them off from Christ; and ver. 7. their faith was tried with
fire; and yet it would be found unto praise, at the appearing of Jesus Christ;
and verse. 9. for all that they went through, and should receive the end of
their faith, the salvation of their souls; they should persevere still.

Privilege 12. Is Access to the Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. ult. Oh! what a
Privilege would it be counted upon Earth, that when the King is set down upon
his Throne, tho he be in the posture of Majesty, to have free admission to him
about a business of great concernment! You know how Esther the Queen was afraid
to come into the Kings presence, and what a favor 'twas to her, when the King
was upon his Throne, that he would reach out his golden Scepter to her, that
she might speak freely, and ask what she would, and it should be given to her.
But beloved, here is the Throne of the gracious God may be come to, in and
through Christ, by these redeemed ones. They may pour out their very hearts
before him; and while they are a praying, he will be hearing: he will bow down
his ear, and attend to the voice of their cry. He will not bid them go out of
his presence; but they shall have audience in Heaven. And if the Lord sees them
afraid, or unable to utter their desires to him, his Spirit shall encourage
them, and help their Infirmities.

Privilege 13. Hence follows another Privilege, That they shall have supply to
all their wants. If God withhold any thing from them, to be sure, tho it be
good for others, yet it is not good for them in particular, or not good for them
at that time when they would have it: and so they have good reason, either to
wait for it till it comes, or to be contented without it, if it should not come
at all. Now that this is their Privilege, see Phil. 4. 19. But my God shall
supply all your need, according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus. And
God's children should live as those that believe this: And they should be
careful for nothing; and take no thought for their life, nor for their meat,
nor their drink, nor their clothing. I don't say, you must not use means for
these things. God does not now provide for us, as he did for the children of
Israel in the Wilderness, by raining down bread from Heaven. No: if you will
eat, you must work: but you must work without perplexity; the Cares of the
Wotld must not fret your hearts: If they do, either you do not belong to God,
or you forget your Privilege; which indeed is a very great one, That having
given you his Son, he will with him also, freely give you all things, Romans 8.
32.

Privilege 14. They that are made free by Christ, are under special protection;
as you know the children of Kings, and great Persons, they must have some
always with them, to see that they get no harm. So beloved, these persons, they
are well guarded: the Lord himself watches over them. It Is true, he does employ
Angels for their safety; and you will say, that is a great matter, that Angels must
wait on them, and be doing them all the good they can, Psalm. 91. 11. Heb. 1.
ult. But God is so tender over them, that he will not trust Angels alone with
them, but he has also committed them, the care of them, particularly to his
Son. Whereupon Christ says, Joh. 17. Those whom theu have given me, I have
kept: and yet he will look after them himself too: He is with them, Isa. 41.
10. or he goes before them, and then he is behind them too, Isa. 52. 12. and
then on every side of them, Psalm. 125. 2. If this be not enough for their
protection, then he will lead them, Isa. 49. 10. if that be not enough, then he
will cover them, Psalm. 91. 4. if that be not enough, then he will carry them,
Isa. 46. 4.

Privilege 15. They are interested in the prayers of all the Saints in the
World. It may be they are prayed for, some where or other, all the day long;
yea, all the week; yea, all the year; yea, all their life: For it is like that
there is a continual stock of Prayers a going, by some or other of them, night
and day: And they don't use to pray for themselves alone, but for others, and
for their Fellow Members most of all, as Paul did for the Churches of Christ.

Privilege 16. Their Privileges about their Afflictious are very great; as
that they shall be, 1. moderated. God will not lift his Arm too high when he
strikes, nor make his Rod too big when he whips them, 1 Cor. 10. 13. 2.
Sweetened, Heb. 12. 6. For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges
every son whom he receives. Loves -- and Son, these be words to sweeten his
Corrections. 3. They shall be sanctified; they shall be for our profit, ver.
10. There is either some Sin to purge out, or some Grace to be brightned, or
increased, or some choice Experience to be learned. 4. At last removed. God
will be sure to hold his hand when it is enough, and to comfort them when they
have mourned enough, and to take them out of the fire when they have been tried
enough. He that has redeemed Israel it self, shall also redeem Israel out of
all his troubles.

Privilege 17. They have acceptance of their poor sincere duties. Alas! what is
it that they do, or can do for the great God to take any notice of it? and yet
God is well pleased with them, Heb. 13. 16. But to do good, and to communicate,
forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. 1 Pet. 2. 5. Ye also,
as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer
up spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

Privilege 18. They shall be blessed in and after death: in their death, for
they shall die in the Lord: and after death, for they shall be for ever with
the Lord. As here they are brought into a Kingdom of Grace, so there they shall
be brought into a Kingdom of Glory. Then comes the rest, the inheritance, the
pleasures for evermore, the building of God, the house not made with hands,
eternal in the heavens; the blessed hope, the everlasting life. Much time might
be spent about these Privileges, and many others that might have been
mentioned: But I shall stay no longer upon them. Now beloved, Is not this
Freedom by Christ, an excellent thing upon this account too, namely, the
excellent Privileges which come by it? And truly now you have heard them,
methinks you should not be able to forbear going to God when you come home,
pouring out your most earnest cries to him in these words (with which I will
close up this 5th Head), Psalm. 106. 4, 5. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor
that thou bear unto thy people: O visit me with thy salvation: That I may
see the good of thy chosen: that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation:
that I may glory with thine inheritance.

CHAP. X.
Concerning the excellent Uses that may be made of this Freedom.
THE Sixth way of making out the excellency of this Freedom by Christ, is to
acquaint you with the excellent Uses that may be made of it. The worth and
value of any thing is seen in the Uses to which it may be put. That which is of
no use, is naught: that which is of some use, is good: that which is of great
use, is very good: but that which is of the greatest use, is best of all. Now
beloved, to give this Freedom its due place, I must put it amongst those things
which are of the highest use. and in doing so, I shall not set it one jot above
what it deserves: for the highest place does of right belong to it. Now in
speaking upon this, I might show,

1. The excellent Uses which Christ makes of this Freedom. 2. The excellent
Uses which Christians may make of it.
I shall be brief upon the first, because I do chiefly intend the latter.

To the 1st I will hint but Four excellent Uses which Christ makes of it.

1. By this Freedom, he brings home all the elect of God: He fetches them one
after another into the Kingdom of Grace and Glory. It was the will of God
concerning those whom he has chosen in the eternal purpose of his love, that
they should be made holy in this World, and happy in the World to come. Now by
this Freedom Christ does accomplish that will of his Father: he brings them
unto holiness by it, Tit. 2. 14. and he brings them to happiness by it, 2 Timothy
1. 10. So that this Freedom will discover who they are that are elected, and
who are not: For they that are elected, will be sanctified and glorified; and
they that are not, will remain in their sins, and be damned. It will separate
between the precious and the vile, between the Tares and the Wheat, between the
Sheep and the Goats. By that time the work of this Freedom is finished, it will
set the children of God by themselves, and the children of the Devil by
themselves, that they shall never come near one another more, Matthew. 25. 31,
32, 46.

2. By this Freedom Christ repairs the great breach by the Fall of mankind. He
heals that deadly wound, and makes up that unspeakable loss for as many as
believe on his Name. In that Apostasy from God, the Devil did a World of
mischief to the Sons of Men: but by this Freedom Christ undermines him, and
out-plots him; and he brings his whole design against the Elect of God to
nothing: and thereof you read, 1 John 3, 8. that Christ was manifested for this
purpose, that he might destroy his works. The Devil was hard at work when he
brought in the Fall, and all the sin and misery that followed upon it. He never
wrought harder in his life, than he did at this time, and at one more, and that
was when Jesus Christ was in the World, and now come in person to restore
liberty by the Gospel; Then he wrought so hard to withstand the salvation of
sinners by Christ, that I may say, after our manner of expressing things, he
sweat till he dropped again: He was, as it were, all of a foam with rage: And he
showed it sufficiently from the very Birth, to the very Death of Christ. And
it is observable for this, what Christ says in Luke 22. 53. when Judas and his
company were come to take him, that that time was the power of Darkness; i. e:
Satan was then at work with all his might. But to look back again to the Fall,
Oh, how he was at work there! And when he had prevailed with our first Parents
in the Temptation, no doubt but he thought that he had made strong and sure
work of it; that all was now his own for ever: for he knew that man could never
recover himself: and he knew that all the Angels in Heaven were not able to do
it: and he knew, that tho God in mercy could have pardoned them, yet that must
not be neither, without satisfaction to his Justice: and he little thought of
any such way to be taken, as for God to send his only begotten Son into the
World, that the World through him might be saved, tho it was not long after,
but he had an incling of it, Genesis 3. 15. Now Christ by this Freedom, crushes
and breaks the Devil's head; i. e. spoils all the Master-peice of his malice
and subtilty; restores that Image of God of which he had robbed us; brings in a
Covenant of Grace for a Covenant of Works broken; and begins the World anew,
as it were.

3. By this Freedom, Christ executes the three great Offices of a Prophet,
Priest, and King. God the Father appointed and anointed him to all these
Offices, and by this redeeming-work he does discharge them. His Office of a
Prophet, is to teach his Church the things that are needful to their Salvation;
by this Freedom he discharges that; therefore Joh. 15. 13. with verse. 15. when
he tells them that he had showed his great love to them in laying down his life
for them, that is, to make them free; he adds this, that he had made known all
things to them, which he had heard of his Father, that is, which his Father had
sent him to teach them in, for their spiritual and eternal good. His Office of
a Priest, was to suffer and satisfy for them upon Earth, and to intercede for
them in Heaven, and by this Freedom he discharges that, Heb. 2. 17. His Office
of a King, is to rule in his Church by way of increasing, preserving,
defending, and ordering of it, and by this Freedom he discharges that; as in
Isa. 9. 6, 7. you may see. So that all that Christ does, it relates to this
Freedom; either it is in order to the giving of it, or else it is the fruit and
effect of his having given it; we cannot name any thing that ever he did, or
yet does, or shall do as Mediator, but it some way or other runs into this.

4. By this Freedom Christ leaves matter of the highest Condemnation upon the
refusers of the Gospel. Sirs, I beseech you consider this, The Lord Jesus is
resolved to make use of this Freedom one way or other, with all of you, either
to save or damn you: Where he cannot make the one use, that is to save sinners,
he will make the other use of it, that is to sink sinners. Where it does not
serve as an Engine to raise them, 'twill serve as an Engine to ruin them. Doubt
not of it, Christ will have enough to say from this salvation of his, when he
has offered it, and you have despised it, to leave you without excuse. 'Twill
furnish him abundantly with Arguments to plead against you, that will stop all
your mouths at the last day; when he shall tell you, how he had prepared a
Remedy that would have delivered you from all your misery, and how he did most
willingly shed that precious blood of his, which would have washed away all
your sins: and if you had but come to him, you might have been as safe, and as
blessed as others that believed in him: but nothing would prevail with you to
bring you in: You either did not look after him at all, or if you did, it was
not to purpose: You could not find in your hearts to turn every sin out of
doors: there must be something of your Lusts that must be spared, and something
of his Terms that must be abated: You were afraid of buying Christ too dear.
Well now, what shall Christ do, but make use of this Freedom and Gospel for a
Witness against you? and be sure of it, he is resolved to do it. That place
does intimate so much to you beforehand, in John 3. 18, 19. But I shall say no
more of the Uses which Christ makes of this Freedom; but shall come to show the
excellent Uses that Christians may make of it.

And in reference to them, I shall lay down in Twelve things, what this Freedom
is good for.

1. To make them from their hearts to pity Christless persons: To do that in
some measure which you read of Christ, concerning Jerusalem, which did not know
the things of their peace in the day of their visitation; when he came near the
City, he beheld it, and wept over it. So, beloved, this Freedom is good to make
them that have it, to weep over them that have it not; and to say, Ah poor
sinners! ah precious souls! where are you? what will become of you? It will
present unconverted men and women, to the mind and thoughts of a Believer in
Christ, as the saddest spectacles that ever their eyes beheld. Their Freedom
now, makes them sensible what it is to be a sinner. While they were in the
Bondage themselves, they saw not the danger that was in that condition; but now
they do: and so they are prepared to pity every one that is left behind. Indeed
they see (and it is commonly to be seen) that these Christless persons are
secure and merry, as if all were as well as could be. But all this makes those
that have this Freedom, to pity them the more. It would be some comfort to
them, to see them struck down with Convictions, that things are not well within
them; and to hear them cry out as the Jailer did to Paul and Silas, Sirs, what
must I do to be saved? etc. But to see them in their sins, and yet to be
secure; to see them under the Curse, and yet to be merry, Oh! this sets their
hearts a bleeding. Now take some Scriptures where you shall see that this
Freedom is good for this excellent use and purpose; see Psalm. 119. 158. also
ver. 136. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes; because they keep not thy law.
Obj. But you will say, this is the Old Testament. Ans. What tho it be? the Freedom
was in force then, and David was a partaker of it. But would you have something
out of the New Testament for it? see then Phil. 3. 18. Romans 9. 1, 2, etc. where
you find, that Paul, who was in this Freedom, had tears in his eyes, and
heartbreaking grief within him, for those that went Christless. And beloved,
this Freedom will teach Ministers that have it, to pity their Christless
Hearers; and Parents that have it, to pity their Christless Children; and
Masters that have it, to pity their Christless Servants, etc. And is not this
an excellent use now? I dare say, you cannot be in this Freedom, any of you, but
your bowels and compassion will work in some measure, insad be moaning the
wretched condition of persons in a state of Nature.

2. It is good to make us understand the Gospel. This Freedom sets up a light
to show us what that is. Friends, this word Gospel, is a Mysterious word, and
carries such things in at, as no natural man can receive or percieve, 1 Cor. 2.
14. Now, oh, what an excellent thing would it be to understand those things
which all the wisdom of the men of this World, (who understand abundance upon
other accounts) is not able to tell what to make of! Why, now come into this
Freedom, and the mind and the Mysteries of God will be unfolded to you; you
will be brought out of darkness into the mavelous light; Christ and the
Covenant of Grace will be revealed to you; you shall know the truth, and the
truth shall make you free, verse. 32. of this 8th of John. As Luther said when
he was brought to the knowledge of Christ, and of justification by faith, that
the whole Scripture seemed to be a new thing to him; he saw that in it which he
never saw before: so 'twill be with you. What Is the reason that persons are so
ignorant of heavenly things, as they are, of the new Birth, of the Life of
Faith, of Communion with Christ, but because they are not brought into this
Freedom? Certainly this would make the Bible another manner of thing to many of
you, than ever 'twas yet. Oh, the insight that those get into the Wisdom and
Grace of God, who are brought into this liberty, of that they had before! Now
they can speak of Salvation by the Son of God, and the things which belong to
it, like knowing men; this Freedom has opened the eyes of their understanding.
Beloved, what Sampson said to the Philistines, when he had propounded a riddle
to them, the meaning of which they were not able to pick out, but by the help
of his Wife; Judge. 14. 18. If, says he, ye had not plowed with my heifer, ye
had not found out my riddle; the same I may say, of the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of God; you will never discern them, if you don't make use of Christ's
Freedom; for they are like the Book, Rev. 5. which was sealed with seven seals,
and none was able to open it, or to look thereon with any understanding, till
Christ had opened the Seals thereof. In Ephesians. 1. 7. the Apostle-speaks, that
they had gotten this Freedom by Christ; and then in verse. 9. he brings in this,
Having made known to us, the Mystery of his will; then they came to know it.

3. Another excellent use of this Freedom is this: It is good to endear Christ
to the Soul: Alas, what is Christ to those, who remain in the Bondage of sin?
What beauty do they see in him? What breathings have they after him? You were
even as good tell them of a chip, as tell them of Christ, for any regard they
have to him; there is nothing that is of less account or esteem with them, than
he is. He is called there, in Isa. 49. 7. one whom man despises, and whom the
nation, (i. e. of the Jews) did abhor. What two greater words for undervaluing
of Christ, can you meet with, than to despise him, and abhor him? But now the
having of this Freedom, oh, 'twill make Christ a precious Christ to the Soul, 1
Pet. 2. 7. they cannot but prize him, who have been redeemed by him, when they
consider what he has done for them; that he came down from Heaven for them,
and became poor for their sakes, and that he was mocked and scourged, and spit
upon for them, and upon the Cross for them, and bear the Wrath and Curse of God
for them: Oh how does this make them to be highly in love with him! and to wish
that they had a thousand times more love for him, then they have. And
certainly, you that believe in Christ, this is one great means to raise up your
love to him; when you do find or fear that your Affection to him begins to be
chilled, to set your selves to meditate upon the Freedom that he has given
you, and how abundantly he has showed his dear Love to you, in dying for you,
and in washing of you in his own Blood; ply your hearts a while, as hard as you
can, with deep and serious thought about this; I am persuaded 'twill prove a
love-kindling, and a love inflaming consideration to you; you will find that
you have affections, and dear affections, for Christ again.

4. It is good to make all ones life comfortable. As the being without this
Freedom, is the way to make all ones life miserable; so the having of it, and
the knowing that one has it, lays in matter of daily consolation. Let
whatever will befall a man, this will be always at hand to cheer him; there is
no cordial to the heart like it, when a man can look upon his troubles, and
say, Notwithstanding it is thus and thus with me, yet, blessed be God, he has
had mercy on me. I belong to Christ, and what can hurt me? You would not much
fear living comfortably, if you had but two things in your comfort. 1. That it
were so strong, that nothing could overcome it. And 2. That it should be so
lasting, that it would never have an end. Why now, such comfort this Freedom
brings, Heb. 6. 18. and 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. in the one place it is called strong
Consolation; and in the other everlasting Consolation. And therefore away with
that vile reproach, which some are apt to cast upon the condition of Gods
people, that it is a melancholy life; as if persons must never look to be merry
more in this World, after they are once turned Godly; the Devil has always
something or other to blind and befool sinners, and to make them think that
their condition is the merry condition, and the Saints condition the mopish
condition; but if ever he were a liar, he is a liar in this; and God will judge
him and his instruments for bringing up this evil report upon the good Land
which he has given his people. Beloved, be not discouraged by this slander,
from looking after this heavenly Canaan, as the Children of Israel were from
entering into the earthly Canaan, when the Spies that went to search the land
had spoken evil of it to them; for as Caleb said to them, the same I say to
you, The Land is an exceeding good Land; I mean now, the state into which
Christ has brought believers, is even in this World a joyful state. You shall
see how it was prophesied of, in the Old Testament, that it should be so, Psalm.
67. read verse. 1, 2. where he speaks of the coming of this Freedom. God be
merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause his face to shine upon us. Selah.
That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all nations; and
what follows, why verse. 3, 4, 5. Let the people praise thee, O God: let all the
people praise thee: O let the nations be glad and sing for joy; there is the joy
that it brings with it. So Isa. 35. 10. this chapter is to he understood of
Gospel Freedom and Salvation; and mark what Joy here is now. The ransomed of
the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon
their heads: they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall
flee away. Obj. But where can you show us the people in the New Testament, that
live so comfortably and joyfully by this Freedom, and that in this World? Why,
turn to Romans 5. 2. By whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein
we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God; and verse. 10, 11. For if
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son: much
more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life. And not only so, but we
also joy in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the
attenement. Obj. But it may be they were a people that met with no great
afflictions; if they had, it would have spoiled their joy, tho they were in
this Freedom. Well, for that I Will give you a full Scripture, see 1 Pet. 1.
These were scattered abroad by persecution, verse. 1. They had manifold
temptations, verse. 6. And in v. 7. the Apostle speaks of the trial of their
Faith by fire: Yet in verse. 8. how comfortable they were for all this, In whom
tho now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full
of glory. Sirs, you that are out of this Freedom; are hindered by it from
abundance of joy; you don't know what true joy and true comfort is, without it.

5. It is good to make us taste the sweetness that is in the ways of God; 'twas
the Spouse of Christ, the redeemed company, that uttered that in Cant. 2. 3. I
sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my
taste: Duties, Ordinances are sapless things without this, but they are
refreshing, yea, ravishing things with it. What made David say, that a day in
Gods Courts, was better than a thousand otherwhere? 'twas because he was in
this Freedom. Why did the Lord call his Ordinances that should be under the
Gospel, A feast of fat things, a feast of wine on the lees, of fat things full
of marrow, of wine on the lees well fined, Isa. 25. 6. But, because he knew
they would be so to Souls that should be brought into this Freedom. Oh, this is
that which will make a Prayer sweet, and a good Sermon sweet, and a Sacrament
sweet, and Grace and the Exercise of it sweet. You that are in the Bondage of
sins, may come and hear precious truths, but you cannot tell what is in them,
for savor and relish; that Bondage has put your mouths quite out of taste, as
I may say to you; there is nothing so sweet, as that which is most bitter, and
that is sin; if your palate were not vitiated by this Bondage, you would call
it, as the Scripture calls it, viz. The gall of bitterness, and the bond of
iniquity, Acts 8. 23.

6. This Freedom is good to make us spiritually useful. Indeed one that has it
not, may be useful, and very useful for earthly respects; and if he should be
taken away by death, there might be a great miss of him; the family might want
him, or the Parish may want him: But spiritually useful such a one is not, nor
can be, any otherwise then as a wooden leg can be useful to the body, which tho
it helps it a little, yet it is but outwardly, it has none of that life or
motion that the true members have. But now, they whom Christ has made free,
oh, what a deal they are good for, upon a spiritual account; they are useful
persons to bring up a Family for God, they are good for the Souls of their
Relations. You that are out of Christ, you may be good for the bodies of your
Children; you may be good to provide them Meat, and Drink, and Clothes, and to
take care of them, when any of them fall sink, that they may not want
attendance, or the like; or you may be good to train them up in a civil way,
and to lay up for them, what you can, for a Portion in this World, or to put
them to a good Trade, or help them to as rich a match as you can, and in these
kind of things your usefulness to them, is at its journeys end. As for the poor
Souls of your Children; you forget them, because you never rememberd your own;
it may be you will say to your Children sometimes, you must be a good boy, or a
good girl, and there is all the good counsel that they shall have of you; but
alas, you take no care to tell them which way they must be good indeed; and
truly, if God should take you away from them, and leave them Fatherless and
Motherless, their outward man would miss you sadly, it may be; but their Souls
would not; you were never good for them; but they who are in this Freedom are
good for the Souls of their Family. And beloved, they are very useful persons
to promote a good work, when they see it would tend much to the Glory of God,
to have it carried on, and to take occasions and opportunities of speaking to
others about everlasting concernments; and to mourn for the sins of the times
and places in which they live, and to stand in the gap when the Wrath of God is
breaking in upon a Nation; and when God takes away one of these, oh, what a
miss there is of them, and what a loss it is upon the best account! If God had
pleased, a hundred wicked men might have been better spared than one of these.
The least of these is so useful, that the greatest in Grace cannot say, they
have no need of him, 1 Cor. 12. 21. and mark what it is said of Onesinus, Phil.
verse. 10. Whom I have begotten in my bonds; that is, Christ has now given him
his Freedom, by using me as an instrument for his conversion. Well, what then?
Why verse. 11. Which in time past was to thee unprofitable: but now profitable
to thee and to me. Now he becomes a profitable man.

7. It is good, again, to knit our hearts in love to all the people of God. Oh!
how dear will the Saints be to us, when we see that we are delivered from the
power of darkness, and that God has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear
Son! When we can say to them, Now blessed be the Lord, I am one of you, I am a
partaker of your Grace, and have obtained like precious Faith with you; that
Blood which has washed you, has washed me; that righteousness of Christ which
covers your unrighteousness, covers mine also: For if one finds it so, one may
to the Glory of God tell them so, as Paul did to the Galatians chap. 2. 20.
That Christ had loved him, and given himself for him. This now will so join our
affections to the Saints (at least it will be the way to it), that our Souls
will as it were cleave to their Souls; 'twill not only join hand to hand, but
Soul to Soul. That Is a notable place, Acts 4. 32. And the multitude of them
that believed, were of one heart, and of one soul, etc. When once they were got
into this Freedom together, (which is included in the word believed.) Oh what a
love here was to one another! This is an uniting Freedom, not only to Christ,
as you have heard, but to all his members.

8. It good is to strengthen our Faith in the greatest straits. For by this
Freedom a Child of God may reason thus; Why, he that brought me out of that
dreadful misery of my sinful condition, that did so great a work as that, and
gave me so great a deliverance as that, can bring me out of this. I cannot come
into such a woeful condition again, as that was, let befall me what will for
affliction or trouble; it is not like my spiritual Bondage that I was in, while
out of Christ; and yet, through infinite mercy I am freed from it; and did God
remember me there, and shall he not remember me here? David, when he prays for
deliverance out of his present distresses, thinks of this, that God has
redeemed him; so you may fetch a mighty support from your redemption by Christ,
for your weak Faith, when great Trials are upon you; what, do you think that
God will let you perish in them, and he has redeemed you? why, which is more,
to deliver thee out of the hand of the Devil, and out of the hand of Gods
Justice, and from the Wrath to come; or to deliver thee out of some light
Afflictions in this World?

9. It is good to make you rich. Oh! how do many desire to be rich? Now this is
the way to make you,

(1.) Really rich; not to seem to be rich, and yet be poor, as some do; but
rich indeed: So rich that you shall have treasures, In the house of the
rightousness, is much treasure; it is because he has this Freedom; indeed this
Freedom is his treasure, as it is said, Prove. 13. 8. The ransom of a man's life
are his riches; it is true here.

(2.) Inwarldly rich; rich toward God in Grace, and things of a spiritual
nature. Obj. But I would fain have something, if please God, of this World too.
Ans. Why this Freedom is the way to that too, Godliness has the promise of the
life that now is, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Obj. But they who have this Freedoms, are
generally the poorer sort, 1 Cor. 1. 27. Not many mighty, not many noble, are
called. Ans. 1. They are not all so then, as you see there. 2. God does that
for them, tho they be poor, which is equivalent to great riches, even in this
World. For 1. He supplies them many times by special Providence: God stirs up
the hearts of others to do them good. There were poor Saints at Jerusalem, that
had not of their own; but the Lord provided for them, by putting it into the
hearts of others, that were able, to make a Collection for them, Romans 15. 26.
So Paul, tho he had not of his own, yet the Philippians sent once and again to
his necessity, cap. 4. 16. and that supplied him so in his present wants, that
he looked upon himself as a rich man, verse. 18. 2. What is wanting in
abundance, God makes up in contentment, verse. 11, 12. of that chap. and this is
equivalent to a great Estate; nay, there be many that have great Estates, and
yet are not contented. Now, pray who is the rich man, he that has but a
little, and yet is contented, or he that has a great deal, and yet is
discontented? 3. God gives his blessing with that little they have, and the
blessing of the Lord makes rich, Prove. 10. 22. it is not so much what a man
has, as what God blesses to him. A great Estate without that, will prove
cankered and wormeaten; and with that, less by far will do the business.

(3.) This Freedom is good to make you eternally rich; there be many that are
very rich in this World, and yet will be miserably poor in the World to come,
because they never had this Freedom by Christ. Indeed, people use to say, when
a man has a great Estate, that he is made; yea, but for how long? it is but, at
most, for this life. If he be not in Christ, there is that a coming, that will
unmake him again; but he that is so, is made for ever, Prove. 8. 21. That I may
cause those that love me, to inherit substance; and I will fill their
treasures. Substance and Treasures, there is their riches; yea, but then says
he, I Will cause them to inherit it too, i. e. I will make them for ever.

10. This Freedom is of excellent use to keep Christians humble; it greatly
becomes the people of God, to have low thoughts of themselves; of all
Christians, the humble Christian is the most lovely Christian. If I see a man,
tho I hope, and believe he has grace; yet if he be not humble, methinks he is
not half so beautiful in his walking. Whatever good thing one has in him
besides, yet to have the heart to be lifted up, it is even like the dropping of
a great blot of Ink upon fair writing: How fair would the story of good
Hezekiahs Life and Reign have been, of whom you read so many excellent things,
all along the 2 Chronicles. cap. 29. and 30. and 31. and 32. had it not been for
that one great blot, which you meet with in verse. 25. of chap. 32. Beloved, the
Grace of Humility is the Glory of ones Graces. Well, but then, what is good to
make us, and keep us humble? Oh, nothing like this Freedom by Christ. If we do
but make use of it, as we might, it would lay us as low as the ground, yea, as
low as Hell in our own thoughts; for thus a Child of God may reason with
himself: By this Freedom I have great Privileges; and I may say of Gods
kindness to my Soul in his Son, as David did concerning Gods making a Covenant
with him, 1 Cor. 17. 17. Thou have regarded me according to the estate of a man
of high degree, O Lord God. And now in comparison of these heavenly riches and
hopes, which I have bestowed upon me, I contemn all the World, and count all
things, as Paul said, but loss and dung. I, but it is all by Grace, not for any
desert of mine; was I worthy that God should do this for me? Is not this the
richest alms that ever was, to the poorest beggar that ever was? I am arrayed
in a costy Robe, (for the righteousness of Christ is so); but where had I this
good clothing? I am freed from Condemnation, but who discharged me? I see, but
who opened mine eyes? I am a King to God, but who gave me my spiritual Crown?
Is it not of free Grace? And if God should take away his free Grace, what
should I have left? Well therefore, how humble must I be, as well as how
thankful? And if I may say, as David did in the words before mentioned, in
verse. 17. Have I not cause also to say as David did by way of self-abasement,
verse. 6. Who am I, O Lord God, and what is mine house, that thou have brought
me hitherto? Oh, this Freedom by Christ is a good weapon to run into the very
heart of spiritual Pride; to shut it out of doors. In Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. where
the Apostle is speaking of it, that it comes freely, and brings with it
remission of sins, and justication through faith in the righteousness of
Christ; you shall see he adds this in verse. 27. Where is boasting then? it is
excluded. By what law? of works? Nay: but by the law of faith. As if he should
say, Oh, what Doctrine is this Doctrine, of redemption by Christ, to lay us all
low!

11. This Freedom is of excellent use, to engage us to Christ in the strictest
obedience. As it was the cord of Love, to draw us to him at first: So it is the
Bond of Love, to keep us with him. And this is the great design of Paul
throughout his Epistles to the Churches, to show how the Grace of the Gospel,
does oblige them to a holy Conversation in all things, and to bring forth fruit
unto God. One would think, beloved, that the consideration of this Freedom, if
we have a part in it, should keep us from eversitting loose from Christ more;
but that we have such naughty hearts, that almost nothing is strong enough to
hold us in. Surely, there is much in it, to stir up a Christian to all that is
good. Oh! if one did but feel the Power of this Freedom upon ones heart, what a
life should one lead! What a frame should one be in? How would it water our
Grace, and cause our sins to wither? See for this that Scripture, 2 Cor. 5. 14,
15. For the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one
died for all, then were all dead: And that he died for all, that they which
live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for
them, and rose again. Mark that word constrains. As if he should say, we must
needs be holy when we think of this Freedom; it so shuts up in the narrow way
which leads to Life, that we cannot get out. Tho our carnal part would fain
have its liberty; yet this liberty by Christ will not permit it. Indeed,
holiness and close walking with God, is the great Lesson which this Freedom
teaches, 2 Timothy 11, 12. and without this, we don't use, but abuse our Freedom.
And therefore, what the Apostle said to them, in Gal. 5. 13. is very fit to be
minded here: For brethren, ye have been called unto liberty; only use not your
liberty for an occasion to the flesh. Beloved, if ye be not very watchful, the
flesh will take an occasion from the good condition which Christ has brought
you into; to insinuate it self, and draw you into remisness in good things: As
if since there is such abundance of grace revealed, there need not be
altogether such circumspection in every thing you do; but what he says there
to them, in verse. 8. I say to you, This persuasion comes not of him that
calls you. This Freedom will not allow you any sin, for Christ gave himself
for you, that he might redeem you from all iniquity; and it is the Law of your
Freedom, That you must live to him that freed you, 1 Cor. 6. 20. and if you be
freed by him, so you will, Romans 6. 18. Being then made free from sin, ye became
the servants righteousness. Verse. 22. But now being made free from sin, and
become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life. And remember this, that if a person can hear never so much,
or think never so much, or professes never so much, or know never so much of
this Redemption by Christ, and it be not a purifying thing to him, he is not a
partaker of it.

12. Lastly, This Freedom is of excellent use to fit us for Death. Beloved, we
must all dye, and therefore we should all labor to be fit to dye: It Is a
blessed thing to be fit for death; for if we be fit to dye, we are fit to live;
nay, if we be fit for Death, we are fit for Judgment, and fit for Heaven. Now
the question is, How one should be fit to dye? Why certainly, you can take no
way to be fit for it, but by getting into this Freedom by Christ. I confess a
man is not presently fit for death, by the having of it; therefore there is
ordinarily something that must be between Conversion and Salvation; therefore
there must be a growing up, and a ripening by further degrees of
Sanctification; but yet upon the very entrance into this Freedom there is the
foundation of a fitness for death laid; and if such a person should dye
presently, he would be happy for ever. But you that are out of Christ, you are
not in the least forwardness for death; there is nothing at all done toward it;
and therefore, if God should but stop your breath (as you don't know how soon
he may), you will be found altogether unprepared, and everlasting misery will be
your portion. But now the people of God, tho they have not all as yet that is
requisite to make them fully ready to be gone out of the World: Yet by their
very being in the state of this Freedom, they are so fit for Death, as that
their Death shall be in mercy to them, let it come never so soon; and they are
so fit for Heaven, as that to be sure they shall not miss of it, Col 1. 12, 13,
14.

And so, now you see what excellent Uses may be made of this Freedom, and
thereupon what an excellent Freedom this must needs be. Now you that are in it,
I beseech you, put your Freedom to these good Uses which I have set before you;
let it teach you to pity poor sinners to get more understanding in the Gospel;
let it endear Christ to you, let it comfort your hearts, let it make the ways
of God sweet to you, and you useful. Prize the Saints, let it strengthen your
faith; be enriched by it in all goodness; let it make you very humble, and
engage you to Christ in the strictest obedience, and to be ready against your
Lord shall come.

CHAP. XI.
Concerning the many wonders that may be observed in this Freedom.
THE Seventh and Last thing, to set out the excellency of this Freedom, is to
speak something of the many Wonders that may be observed in it. Beloved, if
ever there were any thing to be wondered at, since the beginning of the World,
this Freedom is to be wondered at; there is enough in it to amaze and astonish
every beholder: You know people are mightily taken with seeing of rare sights,
and the hearing of strange news; but never did any thing present you with such
rare sights, nor bring such strange news to your ears, as this Freedom does.
The whole story of it is wonderful from first to last; it begins in Wonders,
and goes on in Wonders, and is finished in Wonders. The Freedom that God gave
his people from other Bondages, for their worldly condition, were attended and
accompanied with great Wonders; so 'twas when he brought them out of Egypt, God
was a Wonder-working God at that time; I will smite Egypt, says he, with all
my wonders. When he came to deliver Israel, every one of the ten Plagues were
Wonders, the drying up of the Red Sea, the causing of his people to pass
through the midst of it, the drowning of all their Enemies by the returning of
the Waters upon them; they were great and mavelous works; and so 'twas when
he brought them out of the captivity in Babylon: he did such strange and great
things then, that his people were like to them that dreamed, Psalm. 126. 1. they
were great things in the eyes of their very Enemies, as well as in their own
eyes, verse. 2, 3. But now this same spiritual Freedom, is the Wonder of
Wonders. I might observe to you, how that in many places of the Scripture,
where this Freedom is spoken of, it is brought in with this word behold, that is
put before it, as who should say, do you mind what a Wonder here is? Can you
pass it by without admiration? see it in Isa. 7. 14. chap. 28. 16. chap. 42. 1.
Jer. 23. 5, 6. Zech. 9. 9. Luke 2. 10. Joh. 1. 29. 1 John 3. 1. and in Isa. 9.
6. When Christ is prophesied of that he should come into the World for the
giving of this Freedom, amongst all his other names, this is one, and the first
that is mentioned, that he should be wonderful. But now, to come to
Particulars, If I should insist upon all the Wonders belonging to this Freedom,
I should be too large; and indeed the Subject that I am upon, does not require
any more, than that I should speak so far of the Wonders in it, as may serve to
set out the excellency of this Freedom. And therefore, I do willingly omit the
Wonders that may be observed in the Incarnation, Conception, Birth, Life,
Death, Resurection, and Assention of Christ; and shall only lay before you such
Wonders, as by which you may see, as I said, that this is an excellent Freedom.
I will mention ten of them.

1. What a Wonder is this, That the greatest loss should be turned into the
greatest gain! it is so by this Freedom, it brings Saints the best estate that
ever they were in, out of the worst estate that ever they were in. 'Twas never
so low with them, as it 'twas by the Fall of man; 'twas never so high with
them, as it is by this Freedom by Christ, by which they are recovered from
that. Paul says Phil. 3. 7. That the things that were gain to him, became loss
for Christ; and they who are the Children of God may also say, that the things
that were loss to them, are become gain by Christ. Oh how have they gained by
the fall! And yet, beloved, we must not rejoice in the fall, while we look
barely upon that. No: it is matter of heartbreaking sorrow, to think that ever
Adam, and the World in him, sinned away their innocence, as they did; and
'twill be matter of everlasting mourning to many millions in Hell, that Adam
did not abide in that honor which God gave him at the first; but we may, and
we must rejoice in Christ, who turns even this great evil to the great good of
all that believe in him; to them it is according to Sampsons riddle, Out of the
eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness. If ever
there were a blessed loss, this was it, considering how God took occasion from
it to magnify the riches of his Grace in his Son. This Wonder you have set
forth in Romans 5. 17, 18, 19. where he speaks how we were ruined in the first
Adam, and raised in the second.

2. That every sin that a man has committed, should be damnable, and yet that
all the sins that he has committed, shall not damn him. Certainly, there must
be some wonderful way found out to bring this to pass; why, now this Freedom by
Christ does it. It Is the nature of every sin, to deserve Hell, not only the
evils and miseries of this present life, but also everlasting wrath in the
World to come; and who ever is not made free by Christ, shall find that every
sin is a deadly sin, and that it is not a Purgatory shall serve their turn, to
cleanse them from the least transgression. Oh, what a cursed practice is this
of the Papists, to harden sinners hearts thus, as if some sins were of such a
small guilt, and of such a venial nature, as if Hell were a place of too great
torment for them; but we say as Paul in another case, Nay, O man, who art thou
that reply against God? Does not this word say, that death is the wages of
sin, Romans 6. ult. of sin, as it is sin, and by death there is meant, that which
is in opposition to eternal life. But now, this Freedom makes innumerable
damnable sins not to damn; would you not count it a wonderful thing, if there
should be such a thing as were able to quench unquenchable fire? Why this
Freedom does it, for those that have it; it puts cut the Fire of Hell to them.
Beloved, if you would imagine that one that has this Freedom were to walk in
the flames of Hell, they would not hurt him, they would all part, and give way,
as who should say, this is one that we must not fasten upon; as the Children of
Israel past through the Red Sea, that dreadful gulf; and all the waters fell
back as if they were frighted at them; why, they were the people, who were
under Gods redeeming love, therefore they were not drowned, no, not so much as
wetted. So if those who have obtained, through faith, a part in this Freedom,
were to pass to Heaven through Hell, it would be with them, as it were with the
three Children, when they were cast into the burning fiery furnance, Dan. 3.
28, 29.

3. That the highest mercy should be reconciled to the strictest justice. It
would have posed any but a God to tell what to say to this, which way to show
the greatest severity against sin, and yet to show the greatest mercy to the
sinner; but by this Freedom this is done. Mercy does not fall out with Justice
for being so terrible; and Justice does not fall out with Mercy for being so
favorable; but both are well pleased in what is done, and so well pleased with
one another, that as David's expression is, they can kiss each other, as most
intimate loving Friends. Gods Attributes, as I may speak with reverence, did
never seem to be so near a falling out, as when the Covenant of Works was
broken by our first Parents. Mercy looked as if it would fain have pitied us;
but Justice looked as if it would by no means let it; these two, they were
(only by way of allusion to it) like the Twins in Rebekahs Womb, that strugled
together, Genesis 25. 22. And one did not prevail over the other, like two Armies
when they fight, and one puts the other to the worst, and so gets the Victory;
but a sweet peace and harmony was kept between them, by the intended Freedom
that should be by Christ. Take notice by the way, what a dreadful breach sin
made in our first Apostasy, in that it did not only make us to fall out with
God, but also as much as lay in us, to give an occasion (if it had been
possible) for God to fall out with himself, to set Attribute against Attribute,
Mercy against Justice, and Justice against Mercy; but now by this Freedom all
is quiet and well enough on both sides, as the Apostle says, when he is
speaking of it, in Gal. 3. 21. Is the law then against the promise? God forbid.

4. That one that has but a little grace, should be looked upon as one that
has no sin. What a Wonder is this! you have not one Child of God, but is very
ready to confess that he has but a little grace; yea, you will say that is their
holy modesty and humilty; it may be it is not so indeed. I grant it is so in
some, that they have much more of God and Christ in them, then they desire to
speak of; and the more grace any one has, the more apt, I think, they are to
bewail their own vileness; and in this case we must not take every Child of God
just at their word; but we may tell some of them, Come, blessed be God, you are
better than you will acknowledge. But really beloved, there be some in Christ
that have but a very little Grace; some I know they have, and they must have.
It is inconsistent with being truly in Christ, to have no grace at all; but
there are some of them that are but newborn Babes; their Grace is but like the
bruised reed, and the smoking flax; they be for their Souls as Zacheus was for
his Body, of whom it is said, that he was little of stature, Luke 19. 3. Now you
may think, that certainly they who have so little Grace, must needs be counted
by God to be persons that have a great deal of sin; but in respect of their
justification by Christ, who has made them free, it is not so. Observe 2 Cor.
7. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of God. As if he should say, Oh, Friends, you
have a deal of filthiness yet to be got out of you, both as to your outward
conversation, and as to your inward frame; and you are very imperfect and short
in point of holiness and grace; and yet he had told them before, cap. 5. 21.
that being in Christ, they were made, or reckoned and counted such as had no
less a righteousness than the righteousness of God.

5. That the eyes of one should be opened, that was born blind: this is such a
Wonder that you read in Joh. 9. 32. that since the World began, 'twas not heard
that ever any man did it; but this is done in this Freedom; they who have it,
were born blind, as blind as Moles, and so continued in respect of spiritual
sight, till Christ had made them free; and then, as it is said of Saul,
immediately there fell from their eyes, as it had been scales, and they
received sight forthwith. This same Freedom by Christ, is that eye salve, which
you read of Rev. 3. 18. If any has but the eyes of his understanding anointed
with it, it will make him see that he never saw, 'twill make him behold
wondrous things out of Gods law; things that he past by, and took no more
notice of, than a blind man does of the beautifullest sight that ever was seen.

6. That a man that is possessed by the Devil, should have the Devil cast out
of him. Would you not count it a wonderful thing to see a man that had been
possessed with the Devil, and he his now cast out? If any should tell you, when
you are in the streets, There goes a man that a little while ago the Devil
spoke in him, and dwelt in him as a man does in his own house, where he counts
himself at home; how would you look upon, and marvel to see such a man! Well,
this Freedom is such a thing that it casts out Devils: Mary Magdalen that was
brought into it, had seven Devils cast out of her: what is the heart of men by
nature, but an habition of Devils? it is not an expression that at all deserves
to be thought much on, to say, concerning wicked men, That the Devil is in
them, the Scripture it self says so, Ephesians. 2. 2. and the Devil was in Judas,
Satan entered into him; and where the Devil is, there he will be, he will keep
his hold till this Freedom comes, and then let him look to himself; he shall be
cast out, tho he has legions with him. It Is observable there in Luke 10. how
the seventy Disciples whom Christ had sent out to Preach this Freedom, returned
with joy to see what work the Gospel made with the powers of darkness; Lord,
say they, even the Devils are subject to us through thy name, verse. 17. And
mark what Christ says again, verse. 18. I beheld Satan as lightning fall from
Heaven. As if he should say, I foresaw this, when I sent you out, that it would
be so; I knew that he would come down as swift as the lightning* Beloved, this
Freedom makes sinners vomit up Devils where it comes; what a wonderful thing is
this!

7. That the dead should be raised; would you not Wonder to see a man raised
from the dead? If so be that any of you should stand in a Churchyard, and
while you are looking upon a grave, and think of the person that lies dead and
buried there, and how many years ago it is since he died, and that now he were
rotten and consumed; to see him come forth, and stand up, and live? Why now,
such a mavelous work is done by this Freedom, it has spiritually opened the
graves of many thousand Souls, and blessed be God we are not without some such
that live and walk amongst us at this day, and that are with us in this
Congregation. Beloved, do but turn your eyes now, and look upon such a man, and
such a woman that fears God, and you have this wonderful sight before you;
concerning whom it may be said, as in Ephesians. 2. 1. And you has he quickened, who
were dead in trespasses and sins. By this Freedom God shows Wonders to the
dead, the dead arise and praise him. Psalm. 88. 10, 11, 12. Will thou show
wonders to the dead? shall the dead arise and praise thee? Selah. Shall thy
loving kindness be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness in destruction?
Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land of
forgetfulness? Why yes; God does so in this case that I am upon. And therefore,
if you that have any Relations, any Children, any Friends, that are for the
condition of their Souls, stark dead, you cannot perceive the least motion or
breathing in them toward God, or any thing that is good: Why it is true,
indeed, if you be spiritually alive your selves, you cannot but do that which
persons use to do for their Friends that are dead; you cannot but mourn for
them, and in this sense you may, and you must do that which would be a great
sin in another sense, you may pray for the dead, and you may be stirred up to
it, by the consideration of the wonderful nature of this Freedom, that it is a
thing that will put life into the dead. You may look upon a wicked Child or
Relation, it may be so far gone in sin, that they are even past hope, as we use
to do upon people when they are dead; oh, as long as they were alive, tho very
sick, yet while there is life there is hope, as we use to say; but when we see
they are dead, then hope is gone. Yea, but as to this I am speaking of, how
know you but Christ may come to the grave of that dead Soul, and raise it, as
he did to Lazarus? So beloved, we that are Ministers of Christ, we preach of
this Freedom to you, and as to diverse of you we are afraid we preach to the
dead: and one would think, Why then, what hope is there? were it not as good to
give over? Oh no! Preach we must, for all this, in hope that you may live; we
are sure that if God please to give you this Freedom, tho you have it not yet,
when it comes, it shall do Wonders in you, 'twill fetch you out of your graves.
Our Preaching to sinners, it is like Ezekiels prophesying to the dry bones, cap.
37. God brought him and set him down in the midst of a Valley full of them,
verse. 1, 2. and when he had been viewing them well, and seen what a sad
Spectacle there was; now, Son of man, can these bones live, says he? do
think it is possible that ever they should live? And he answered, O Lord God
thou know. As if he should say, O Lord, that is with thee; who can resolve
that, but thy self? verse. 3. Well, in verse. 4. Come, do thou prophecy upon
them, says God, and keep on prophesying, and see what I will do by it. Now,
verse. 7. the Prophet prophesied as he was commanded. As if he should say, That
I did, and that was all that I could do; but mark what wonderful success here
was, see verse. 7, 8, 9, 10. and you read in verse. 10. that they lived, etc. The
Lord bless our preaching, as he blessed Ezekiels prophesying here.

8. That Death it self should be killed. Is not this a strange thing? You know
what a killing thing Death is; you have heard of many, and seen many that have
been slain by it, it is a killing all over the World: Whether you consider
Death naturally or spiritually, what a great destroyer it is! But now, that
there should be something that should cause Death it self to dye; would not
this be a wonder? why this Freedom does it, it kills the bodily death by the
Resurrection of the body; it kills the spiritual Death, by their being risen
with Christ; it kills the eternal Death, by giving them eternal Life. You have
two Verses in Joh. 11. 25, 26. that speak to this, says our Savior there, I am
the resurrection and the life: he that believes in me, tho he were dead, yet
shall he live; And whosoever lives, and believes in me, shall never dye. See
also 1 Cor. 15. 54, 55, 56, 57. So when this corruptible shall have put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be
brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O
death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is
sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which gives us
the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

9. That a man should be made able to do all things. Would you not Wonder to
see a man that is so able? It may be you will not believe that there is any
such man in the World: Nay, that if he could do all things, he would not be a
man; and it is true, if you take [all things] in the largest sense; he cannot do
all things that God can do; but he can do all things through God, that he has
to do, Phil. 4. 11. A true Christian is in some sense weak, and yet strong, as
Paul says, When I am weak, then am I strong, 2 Cor. 12. 10. And says our
Savior to the man that brought to him his Son possessed with a Devil,
beseeching him to help him, Mark 9. 23 If thou can believe, all things are
possible to him that believes. As if he should say, Art thou got into Freedom?
if so, there is nothing that thou have to do, but thou may go through with it
by faith in me. A man that has this Freedom, and improves it as he should do,
he can be poor, he can be rich, he can do, and he can suffer, he can live, and
he can dye, he can love his Enemies, he can gain by losses, he can prevail with
God, etc.

10. That a poor creature should come to know what thoughts God had of him
before the World began, and what he intends to do with him to all eternity. Why
many will be ready to say, how is it ever possible that such a thing should be?
Why, now it is one of the Wonders of this Freedom, that by the having of it a
man may come to know this; if you look backward from all eternity, he may be
sure that God has chosen him; if you look forward to all eternity, he may be
sure that God will receive him into Glory. See how Paul speaks about this, 1
These. 5. 9. For God has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by
our Lord Jesus Christ. Many there be, who are in this Freedom, that are assured
of this, and such as are in it, tho they be not sure as yet of it, yet they are
in the way to it.

You see something of the Wonders of this Freedom; and now is it not an
excellent Freedom also upon this account? I will only add this, That the
Scripture holds forth to us, that Gods wonderful works must have five Duties
performed about them, and so must this wonderful Freedom. (1.) They must be
talked of, Psalm. 105. 2. So now, oh speak of this wonderful Freedom one to
another, as you sit in the house, and as you walk by the way; declare what God
has done for his people by Jesus Christ. (2.) They must be considered,
pondered upon, Joh. 37. 13. So this wonderful Freedom you must observe the
Wonders in it, have deep and serious thoughts of it: Search into it by
Meditation; Mysteries cannot be understood by a superficial looking upon them,
but* they must be dived into. (3.) They must be remembered, Psalm. 105. 4, 6. So
take heed of forgetting this wonderful Freedom; it is a mercy never to be
forgotten. (4.) God must be praised for them; yea, praised and praised again,
Psalm. 136. 1, 2, 3, 4. So highly bless God for this wonderful Freedom; see in
two Psalms which are made about it, Psalm. 72. and he closes up all with this;
verse. 18. 19. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does
wondrous things. And blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let the whole
earth be filled with his glory. Amen and amen. And Psalm. 98. read the whole
Psalm. (5.) They must be believed, Psalm. 78. 32. So you must believe this
report about this wonderful Freedom; you must close with it by faith, you must
not continue in your sins, as if all this were a lie that we tell about
Salvation by Christ. I will end this Seventh thing of the Wonders of this
Freedom, with that Scripture, Acts 13. 38, to 42. Be it known unto you
therefore, men and brethren, that through this man is preached unto you the
forgiveness of sins. And by him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses. Beware therefore,
lest that come upon you which is spoken of in the prophets; Behold, ye
despisers, and wonder, and perish: for I work a work in your days, a work which
you shall in no wise believe, tho a man declare it unto you. Do you Wonder at
the things you have heard? Oh! take heed that you don't Wonder and perish for
want of believing of them.

CHAP. XII.
The Application of this fifth Branch of the Doctrine.
AND now, is this Freedom of Christ such an excellent Freedom, as you have
heard it is? Then I shall finish this fifth Branch, and so this whole Text with
seven Uses.

1. Of Information. 2. of Admiration. 3. of Lamentation. 4. of Examination. 5.
of Expostulation. 6. of Exhortation. 7. of Consolation.

Use I. Of Information. It informs of four things.

1. That the remedy that is prepared for sinners misery, is beyond all
exception; their misery is their Bondage by sin, their remedy is Freedom by
Christ, and it is beyond all exception, for it is excellent Freedom. The Lord
Jesus cares not who looks upon his redeeming-work, it is done so well, it wants
nothing to make it sufficient and all-sufficient for the ends and purposes to
which it was intended: we are sure therefore, that if we can but use this
sovereign Plaster as we ought, it will without question heal our wound. There
is that in Christ, that will do our work; do but make trial, and you will find
it is true; for in this case trial is all in all. Christ desires to be put to
the proof, whether he cannot do all things for a poor Soul that it has need
should be done for it. If you will but venture your Souls, he will venture his
Salvation; what would you desire more to manifest that a receipt for a disease
is the best that can be got, than that every one that has made use of it,
should give their approving-testimony, that they have been cured by it: Now
this is the witness, that all believers will give of Christ. If you should go
up and down for their hands, they will be all ready to sign and seal to the
great cures that they have by him, Isa. 53. 5. it is as it were the general
voice of all that have made use of Christ; We are healed. Again, it informs us,

2. That there is something that is much better than that which the men of the
World do spend their time and thoughts about. The truth is, they follow this
World, as if it were the best thing that ever was, or ever shall be. But, ah
Sirs, you (whose life and labor is thus laid out) are mistaken. There is an
excellent Freedom by Christ, that is better than all that you cark and care,
and rap and rend for. Would I could but tell what to say to you, to bring you
out of love with this World: you that are so much in love with it, What do you
see or find in it, that you should set your hearts upon it? you run after that,
and that runs from you, and that so fast, that some of you cannot overtake it
for your lives. I may say, that the World looks upon some persons, as if it
were afraid to come near them; they would fain lay hands upon it, and God wont
let them; he bids the things of this World run away from them, and this surely
is in much mercy to some, for God sees that if they should gain the World, they
would lose their Souls; and if he bears a love to them, he had rather they
should miss of Earth than Heaven. Well, but it may be God suffers some of you
to overtake this World, you make such haste after it, and when you have got it,
what have you got? I don't speak to lessen thankfulness for any of these
outward mercies; but my drift is to set the World in its place, and this
Freedom in its place; but what have you gotten? Why, I will cast it up for you,
and the whole sum amounts to this, You have got that, that you must lose, all
this getting it is in order to losing; you have it, but you cannot hold it; when
you have got the World, you have got Vanity, you have got vexation of spirit,
Eccl. 1. 2. and will you spend your whole time and thoughts for this? I will
throw some Scripture-Water upon the Fire of this Love to the World, to see if
it will put it out. Consider seriously these three Text, 1 John 2. 15. Jam. 4.
4. Luke 12. 20, 21. Again, this imforms us,

3. That this Freedom by Christ is highly worth the pains that any Soul which
has it, has taken to obtain it, or that any Soul is now taking to get it; oh,
it will quit the cost, and bear the charges, for it is excellent Freedom. It is
a great encouragement to a man to lay out his labor upon a thing, when he is
sure he shall not lose his labor; convince him that he shall be a gainer, and
a great gainer, and you have done enough to set him a work. If you had but told
him of a probability, and a hope of advantage, you should have seen him stir;
but if he can be sure that it will be a profitable business, he thinks long ere
he is at it. Now I assure you, from the sure word of God, That take what pains
you will to get this Freedom, it shall be like that seed, that was sown in the
ground, it will be increased thirty, sixty, yea an hundredfold; you will find it
the best employment that ever you were about; there never was any Child of God
that wished, Would I had not meddled with this Freedom by Christ, nor ever will;
Christ scorns that any that trade with him, should be losers. As they shall not
want for work, so they shall not want for wages. It Is true, he does expect that
they who will have his Freedom, should take great pains for it, but he will
graciously reward their great pains with great gains. If they will fell all
that they have, to get the Pearl, they shall find that the Pearl, when they
have it, is a Pearl of great price. I would put you in mind here of some Verses
in the 2. and 3. chapters of Rev. which I would allude to; read cap. 2. 7. To
him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the
midst of the paradise of God. Verse. 11. He that overcomes, shall not be hurt
of the second death. Verse. 17. To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of
the hiden manna, and will give him a white-stone, and in the stone a new name
written, which no man knows saving be that receives it. And chap. 3. v. 5.
He that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white raiment, and I will not
blot out his name out of the book of life, but I will confess his name before
my Father, and before his angels. Verse. 12. Him that overcomes, will I make a
pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I will write
upon him the name of God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new
Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God: and I will write upon
him my new name. Verse. 21. To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me
in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his
throne. That which I say to you from hence, is this: There are difficulties,
and great difficulties, in the way of obtaining this Freedom, but will you not
be daunted at them? but labor so as to overcome? will you resolve through the
help of God, let there be what pain there will, I Will overcome them? Why then,
you see how every verse that I have read to you, carries its gains with it.
Again, this informs us,

4. That the people of God are an excellent people; they must needs be so, for
they are gotten into this excellent Freedom. This is the company, that no
company in the World can compare with. I know that the people of God don't
desire to commend or speak honorably of themselves. But beloved, I have here a
very fair occasion to commend them to you; very like some of you, may have low
and mean thoughts of them, and the rather, because you see them so contemptible
in their outward appearance; it may be some of your clothes are better than
theirs, and some of your estates are greater than theirs, and some of your food
is finer than theirs, and some of your kindred may be richer than theirs: Well,
I grant this may be true one way; but I am sure if you be out of Christ, it is
false another way. Be you what you will in wordly respects, upon the account of
the condition that this excellent Freedom has brought them into, you that are
out of Christ, never wore such clothes as they do, for they have put on the
new man, the Lord Jesus Christ, and they go every day of the week in robes, see
Rev. 7. 9, 13, 14, 15. And for Estate, that which you have in the World, is
nothing to what they have in Christ, for they are heirs of God, and joint heirs
with Christ, Romans 8. 17. and the Promises are theirs, and the Kingdom of Heaven
is theirs, and all things are theirs; and for food, you never in all your lives
tasted any thing so sweet, as that which they feed upon; they eat of the bread
which came down from God, they eat the flesh, and drink the blood of the Son of
man; whose flesh is meat indeed, and whose blood is drink indeed: and for
hindered, why all your carnal Relations are no better than beggars in comparison
of them, that they are a kin to; Christ is not ashamed to call them brethren,
Heb. 2. 11. And God is not ashamed to be called their God, cap. 11. 16. Obj.
Why, then sure if they have all this excellency by their Freedom, their Freedom
will make them proud. Ans. No beloved, for all this, they were never so humble,
and never had such mean thoughts of themselves, as since they got into this
Freedom; they never loathed themselves till now; they were more lifted up in
their misery, than now they are in their excellency. Now they desire to give
God all the Glory, and to take nothing to themselves but shame; tho God has
made them great, yet they do not count themselves good, Romans 7. 18.

Use 2. Of Admiration. That ever such an excellent Freedom should be bestowed
upon the Sons of men. There are two things in this that may raise our
Admiration.

1. That ever it should be given to men; that the Lord should pass by Angels
with a purpose never to recover them when they were fallen, and that we should
be those to whom he would send redemption. He might have let us all alone:
Angels to perish, and mankind to perish; and if he would have saved any, he
might have bid his Son go take the nature of Angels, and redeem the Devils,
(but that it would not consist with his everlasting purpose) and have left Adam
and all his posterity under the curse; but that he should pitch upon us, to be
the subjects that should be capable of this Freedom, how is free Grace to be
admired! that God should overlook those that stood nearer to him by their
creation, then we did, to look upon us! The spirits of darkness are left in
despair, while we are under hope; they and we were all miserable creatures by
the fall, first of one, and then of the other; but their misery was
irrecoverable, ours is a recoverable misery, 2 Timothy 2. 26. God has an Election
amongst us, but he has none among the Devils; and therefore, the door of mercy
is shut against them, never to be opened, 2 Pet. 2. 4. Jude verse. 6. Oh, how
are we beholding to God, that he would reserve Mercy for us, when he reserves
Wrath for the fallen Angels! there he made quick work; they fell into
Condemnation, and God sealed up their Condemnation; there is not so much as a
possibility that God will ever be reconciled to them; but with us he was
willing to renew a better Covenant than that was which we brake; there is pity,
and pardon, and peace for us in Christ. Now have not we cause to admire this,
and to say, as Heb. 2. 6. What is man, that thou art mindful of him, and the
son of man that thou visitest him?

2. That not only men, but some of the worst of men, should have the benefit of
this Freedom. I mean, not only a temporal benefit, for so all have; but the
saving everlasting benefit of it. You read in the Scripture, of some of the
very worst of men, that have been made free by Christ. When this Freedom came
to them at first, it found some of them amongst the Thieves, and others amongst
the Drunkards, and others amongst the Whoremongers, and others amongst the
Idolaters, as it did the Corinthians; and others amongst the Persecutors, and
the Blasphemers, as it did Paul; and others amongst the Crucifiers of Christ,
as it did the Jews; and have you not heard sometimes of some notorious sinner
or other that became a new man, and through grace was afterward as much for
God, as before he was the for Devil? that to ones thinking was come even to the
height of wickedness, and yet brought home? Beloved, God will have this Freedom
by Christ, and the exceeding riches of it, glorified even in this World; and
therefore he gives it sometimes to the very dregs of sinners. And who indeed is
there of those, that have obtained a fellowship in this great Salvation, but
has cause to admire that ever it should be given to him? And to say, Oh! God
had mercy upon a grievous sinner, when he had mercy upon me. It is certain that
the loving kindness of God in Jesus Christ, will be admired by every Soul, upon
whom it lights; and such a one is ready to think, That never was there any
sinner that did more need mercy, or less deserve it: and the Reason of this is,
because where this Freedom comes, it works such a sense of ones vileness upon
the heart, that tho indeed there may in some respects be greater sinners than
ones self; yet one cannot but look upon ones self as one of the greatest
Wonders of Mercy that ever was, as Paul did, 1 Timothy 1. 15, 16. And when God
shall have gathered all his Children to glory: Oh beloved, what a wonderful
company there will be; I don't mean so much for multitude, tho that will be
innumerable, as to think what sinners these were, and especially, some of them.
Oh! the stories that might be told of them in Heaven, to raise matter of
everlasting Admiration, that one who had been formerly such a grievous sinner
on Earth, should prove notwithstanding a glorious Saint in Heaven. Oh wonderful!

Use 3. Is this Freedom by Christ such an excellent Freedom? then here is
something for. Lamentation and Mourning: Beloved, we have often through Gods
Mercy met together: Oh! that we could now mourn together. And you that cannot
weep with your eyes, oh, that you would mourn in your hearts. Why, but you may
say, What is there here to mouth for? This excellent Freedom is cause of
rejoicing? Yea indeed, so it is, ^is glad tidings of great joy, if all things
about it were well with us; but alas, the Lord knows they are not. I pray
therefore, consider four things, for the piercing of your hearts in this Use of
Lamentation.

1. That ever we should be the cause of putting* the Lord Jesus Christ, who
purchased this Freedom for us, to so much pain and grief, as he underwent in
the doing of it. Oh! what bitter mourning should we make for our sins, that
laid such a load upon Christ; that we could never have had this excellent
Freedom, if he had not suffered beyond expression. We may say, those of us that
are made free by Christ, he has put us into a good condition; but oh, into
what a bad condition did our sins put him! he has brought us joy, but we
brought him sorrow; he has brought us rest, but we brought him travel of Soul;
he has brought us life, but we brought him death; he has brought us blessing,
but we brought him a curse; he helped us to a great deal of Mercy, but we
helped him to a great deal of misery: in respect of his sufferings he was the
miserablest man that ever lived. Now friends, this was your sins, and my sins,
that brought him to this, that made Jesus Christ to have a very Hell upon
Earth; and shall we not mourn for this? Oh! that the Lord would perform that
promise to us this day, Zech. 12. 10. And I will pour upon the house of David,
and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, a spirit of grace and of supplications,
and they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for
him, as one mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him as
one that is in bitterness for his first born.

2. That God has no more Glory from us, for all this grace that he has
bestowed upon us. This Freedom is actually given to some of us; and those
Scriptures through the tender Mercy of God may be applied, I doubt not, to some
of you, Col. 1. 21. Gal. 4. 13. Ephesians. 2. 13, 19. But will you not say your
selves, (I know you will) that you do fall exceeding short of such a walking,
as this excellent Freedom engages you to? Beloved, I am glad to see any of you
that are in Christ, so good; but truly, the best of us have cause to mourn that
we are no better. Oh, what a people should we be, for whom the Lord Jesus
Christ laid down his precious Life, and shed his precious Blood! You do God
some Service, blessed be his Name; but should you not do him more? You bring
forth some fruit, but should you not bring forth more? It Is not enough for you
to be gracious, but you should be zealous. Christ, as I may so speak, hoped you
would, when he gave you this Freedom, see Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works.

3. That so many are gone to Hell for refusing this excellent Freedom. Oh, what
a sad thing it is to think how many Souls have perished for want of closing with
Christ! It Is true, they had other sins, but whatever other sins they had, they
would have been forgiven, if they had not neglected this great Salvation; that
made them that they could not escape. As the receiving of this Freedom by
Faith, has been the Salvation of many; so the refusing of it by unbelief, has
been the Damnation of more; tho poor wretches, they are not here to be told of
it, because they are now gone to their own place. Oh! the price that they had
once in their hands, but now they have lost it for ever, and it may be some of
these might be your Friends and Relations, the Wives of your own bosoms, and
the Children of your own bodies. Well, if they were, they are perished without
hope, there is no fetching them back again: you may perhaps mourn to think what
is become of them, but now they are past recovery; your prayers can do them no
good, and your tears can do them no good, and now you must labor to rest
satisfied with this, that the Will of the Lord is done, and that he is
glorified, tho it be in their eternal destruction.

4. That so many sinners, tho they are yet on Earth, will shortly be in Hell
too, for the same sin: For alas! how many be there of those who are yet alive,
that are making light of Christ, and of this excellent Freedom, and many of
them will go on to do so, to their dying day, and so come to the same pass to
which the unrepenting sinners before them have brought themselves. The
generations of Christ refusers is not all gone; they that were in the ages that
are past, are swept and snatch away; but there are others that stand up in
their room; there is a succession of these ungodly hard-hearted sinners, that
tho we offer Christ and Salvation to them, and beseech them as for our lives to
be reconciled to God, yet they go on, and it is to be feared will go on in the
broad way that leads to Destruction. 'Twas a sad word that Christ spoke to
them, in Joh. 5. 40. Ye will not come to me that ye might have life. Mark, he
does not say, you do not come; but he delivers it in a kind of hopeless
expression, you will not come. As if he should say, I see some of you are of
that temper, that as you are, you will be; you are in your sins, and you will
be in your sins: let them that hear me, mark it concerning you, if you do not
dye out of me. I pray God it be not so with some of you that are here. Really
Sirs, it is matter of mourning to see how some of you trifle in the things of
your Souls; would it not grieve ones heart to think that some of you that have
attended upon all this that has been preached upon this Text, should yet look
after a Christ no more than you do? I am this day to finish this work, and I am
afraid of diverse of you, that this Text will leave you as dead as it found you.
Well, the Lord be witness between you and me, whether I have not set Life and
Death before you, and whether if you perish, it be for want of being
sufficiently told of the misery of your Bondage of sin, or of the excellency of
the Freedom by Christ. Beloved, 'twill be a sad thing, when such a Text as this
is done, to leave any of you undone.

Use 4. Of Examination. You have heard much of this excellent Freedom: put this
question home to your selves, every one of you, Am I got out of prison yet? How
shall I know that, you will say? Ans. Take it in three things.

1. If a man be got out of Prison, he has made his peace with those that cast
him in; suppose it be for debt that one has been laid up, and you see him
afterward out of prison, and you ask him, why, you were a prisoner, how got
you out? Why, says he, I have compounded with my Creditors, I have made my
peace, or I have got an able surety to be bound for me. So Sirs, have you made
your peace with God, for your great debt of sin? Have you got Jesus Christ to
stand bound for you? Why then, you are no longer Prisoners; but if you have not
peace with God through Christ, you are in Prison still, for the condition of
your Souls, see Zech. 9. 11. As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant, I
have set forth thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water. God sends
forth none out of Prison, but by the Blood of that Conant which Christ has
made with God, on the behalf of the Prisoner that he will pay the debt for him.

2. Another sign that a man is got out of Prison, is, That he bears a great
love to him that freed him: If one comes and sees him lie there in a sad
condition, and has compassion upon him; Well, says he, I Will procure your
Freedom for you; I Will undertake it; he will have a great respect for that
person, to be sure, when he has done it. Oh! says he, if it had not been for
this Friend, I had perished; I have reason to make much of him. Sirs, if you
don't prize Christ, you are in Prison still; you have not his Freedom, if he
has not your best Love, Col. 1. 13. Who has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and has translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son. Mark how
those words, his dear Son, are brought in with the mention of this Freedom; and
I look upon them as to be understood, not only in reference to his Father, but
also those who are freed by him; As if he should say, Dear to his Father, and
dear to us too.

3. If a man be got out of Prison or Bondage, he is afraid* to go thither
again; he thinks what a sad condition he had when he was there, and he desires
he may not come there again: so do you fear and watch, lest any sin bring you
into Bondage again. Is there no lust, that you would be any longer a servant
to? Do you dread the thoughts of holding secret correspodence with any false
way? Why then you are made free. You may say, as it is in Psalm. 124. 7. Our soul
is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler; the snare is broken, and
we are escaped. If you be not made free by Christ, you will have a darling sin.

Use 5. Of Expostulation. And that with such as are not made free by Christ:
And here, tho I shall speak but few words, yet I wish they may be piercing.
What mean you, that you don't accept of Christ's excellent Freedom? It Is to be
had, and you want it, and you will be eternally lost without it, and yet you abide
in your Bondage; the sins you had, you have still; the sloth that was in you,
is in you still. I don't perceive some of you stir a jot toward the New Birth:
I have been endeavoring upon this Text, to hale you to Christ, and yet you
hang back. Why Sirs, for the Lords sake, what do you mean? I thought that if
any Scripture in the Bible would have won you, this and that which has been
said upon it, would have done it. And now after I have delivered all this
message from God to you; will you not here? I must needs here put you in mind
of the Prophets words to David; what he said to him, when he had delivered Gods
message to him, that I say to you, 2 Samuel 24. 13. Now advise, and see what an
answer I shall return to him that sent me. You have heard what I have said from
Christ to you; now let me hear what I shall say from you to Christ; I must go
back to him for a new message (now I have done with this subject); But what,
Sirs, shall I answer him, when he asks me what is become of the old; You
preached a great while about Freedom that I had to give sinners, how did it
speed with your hearers? I should be glad with all my heart, that I might be
able to say to Christ of this Text, as they did of the Talents, see Luke 19.
15, 16, 18. Lord, thy pound has gained ten pounds, says one, five pounds,
says another. So that my Text that I have been a trading with for God amongst
you, had gained ten Souls, or five Souls, or one Soul, rather then nothing.
Well, but what shall I say to him that sent me? I must go to reckon with him
for this Text, and as near as I can, I must give him a faithful account, and
that is, that I don't hear of one that is converted by all these Sermons; not a
Man or Woman of you that were out of Christ when I began them, have been with
me, to bring me this joyful news, that this Text has been the word of Life and
Power to you. If any such mercy has been showed to you, it is between God and
your selves: but if it be so indeed, methinks you should easily conclude,
Certainly, Gods beginning to work upon me, under such a man's Ministry, must
needs be welcome news to him: and therefore, I Will go to him, and tell him what
God has done for my Soul: And Friends, I long to see some of you to come to my
house upon such an errand. I know my labor has not been in vain, (in speaking
of this Freedom) to them here, who are in Christ Jesus; but God has given them
many a sweet refreshment in the hearing of it; and if there should be none that
are brought in, yet, blessed be God, that there are some that are built up. But
oh Sirs, what will become of you, that have neither gotten, nor are getting
this Freedom? Why don't you consider before it be too late, under what Offers
of Grace you live; what heart-rending thoughts do you think you shall have a
little while hence, when you shall look back upon the opportunities you have
lost, without hope of having any more? Will it not be an heavy charge against
you, that you have despised a precious Christ, and lost a precious Soul? If you
believe that you are sinners, what is the reason that you don't regard a
Savior? Is Christ beholding to you, to accept of his Salvation? or are you
beholding to him, that he is so willing you should have it? If you could be
contented to live in your sins all your days, can you be contented to suffer
for them to all eternity? I tell you, Hell is ready for you, if you will not
repent and believe the Gospel; and the more calls you have now, the more
Torments you will have there? Is it fit that such sinful Worms as you are, should
take upon you to tell Christ that you wont have him? And do you think that he
does not observe your unkindness, and frowardness to him, tho for the present
he lets you alone? If you have no love for Christ, have you none for your
selves? Will this World last always, that you provide no better for another? Do
you think that Christ cannot tell what to do with his mercy, because he offers
it to you? And now I have blown the Trumpet, and given you warning, because I
see the Sword is a coming, now read Ezekiel. 33. the nine first Verses.

Use. 6. Of Exhortation. Take it amongst you in three things, briefly.

1. Bless the Lord, that you live under the Ministration of such an excellent
Freedom. Oh Sirs, think what a mercy you have, and be thankful. How many be
there that want what you enjoy! God has made the way to Heaven plain before
you: You may see by the light that shines amongst you, how fain, he would have
you saved. You may read those words as your own Princiledge, Luke 1. 78, 79.
Through the tender mercy of God, the dayspring from on high has visited us;
To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death; to
guide our feet into the way of peace. God might have left you, as he has many,
without the means of Grace; your feet might have stumbled upon the dark
Mountains; you might have gone all your lives, and not have heard so much of
Christ, as you have heard from this one Text. Oh! that now you could be
praising God for his goodness to your Souls. I say no more to you but this,
Unthankfulness for the Gospel, endangers the Gospel; they who don't look upon
it, as a great mercy, are not like to have such a mercy long.

2. If any of you be looking after Freedom for your Souls; or when ever it
shall please God, that any of you shall, (which the Lord grant, may be quickly;
for in this case delays are dangerous); be sure you look after Freedom indeed:
take heed that you be not deceived with a Counterfeit, with the show and shadow
of this Freedom, but that it be that very Freedom which Christ gives to
believers. An hypocrite he thinks he has this Freedom, but he is in Bondage
still; you never have this true Freedom, till your hearts be right in the sight
of God; Acts 8. compare verse. 21, 23. together. There be two great fears
concerning persons that are out of Christ; the first, whether ever they will
look after him at all, and then, if they do; whether it will be in Truth.

3. Don't abuse this excellent Freedom, you that have it. You use to say, it is
pity that good things should be abused. Now this Freedom by Christ, is not only
a good thing, but an excellent thing; oh, don't abuse it then, and if you would
not do so, ever remember that Exhortation which Paul gave the Thessalonians,
which I also give to you, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 12. That ye would walk worthily of God,
who has called you unto his kingdom and glory. I beseech you, don't deal
unworthily with your Freedom, don't walk unbecomingly in it; adorn the Gospel
now, with a Conversation in Christ; it is not for you to sin as others do; you
must be holy; it is not for you to sleep as others do, you must watch and be
sober; it is not for you to mind earthly things, and the foolish fashions of
this Generation; For Christ gave himself for you, that he might deliver you
from this present evil World; it is not for you to be carried away with errors
in your Judgment, for the truth has made you free; it is not for you to enslave
your consciences to the wills of men, it is against your Freedom, 1 Cor. 7. 23.
Thus in all things, it is your great duty to stand-fast in the liberty,
wherewith Christ has made you free, and not to be entangled again with the
yoke of bondage.

Use 7. Of Consolation, to you, who are made free by Christ. I have but two
things to say to you by way of comfort.

1. It is better with you now, than it is with any in the World besides your
selves. Is not that a comfort to you? I may say of you, in respect of others,
as Solomon does of the virtuous Woman, Thou excellest them all. I remember what
Balaam said, when he looked upon the Children of Israel, whom God had redeemed,
Numb. 23. 9, Lo, the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among
the nations, And then chap. 24. 5. How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy
tabernacles. O Israel! As if he should say, Oh! what a company here is, in
comparison of the rest of the World! Beloved, by this excellent Freedom, Christ
has made you high above all the glory of the World. Whereas before you were
but as common stones: by this Freedom he has turned you into Jewels, into a
peculiar treasure to God. How can you read that Scripture without rejoicing, 1
Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar people. Envy not the men of the World for their poor enjoyments; you
are in a better condition then they are. God has done more for the least of
you, than he has done for the greatest of them.

2. As it is better with you now than it is with any in the World besides your
selve^: so it shall be better with you shortly, than it is with any of your
selves. Now you are got beyond what others are; but a little while hence you will
be got beyond what your selves are; and is not this matter of great comfort?
you know what Paul says, Phil. 1. 23. I desire to depart, and to be with
Christ, which is far better. As if he should say, If I come but there once, I
shall be gone a great way, beyond what I am now; and with this these redeemed
ones have comforted themselves in the world, 1 John 3. 2. and so do you. Your
Freedom will ere long bring you to another place; it will hand you into Heaven:
you are not brought out of Egypt, to die in the Wilderness (as those did, who
believed not); but to enter into the rest that remains for the people of God;
and whatever is here wanting to make you fully happy, shall there be received
and enjoyed for ever; and therefore in the faith of this go on to wait (yet a
little longer) for the Son of God from Heaven, whom he raised from the dead,
even Jesus which delivered us from the Wrath to come. And so I have finished
this famous Text, through the help which I have received from God, to whom
through Christ, be given all the Glory. Amen.

FINIS.

