ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE REFLECTIONS UPON Dr. B's TRAVELS.

Printed in the Year 1688.

ANIMADVERSIONS ON THE REFLECTIONS UPON Dr. B's TRAVELS.
WHEN we were made believe that Reflections upon Dr. B's Travels would quickly
appear, somewhat that was considerable was both promised and expected, and even
Dr. B's friends apprehended that in such a number of particulars, with which he
had filled his Letters, some few might have been found that had been ill
warranted: For no body could have imagined, that a Book which had been so much
read, and so well received, should have been reflected on with so much malice,
and with so little judgment, that after a Preface full of dull spite, there
should not have been one single Article among Fourscore and Two that are picked
out, that should in the least shake the Credit, in which the Book and its
Author are held.

Some have fancied that either Dr. B. or the Printers of his Book, have hired
the Reflecter to this perfotmance, for raising the credit of those Letters of
Travels, and for giving them the advantage of selling another Edition of them:
Sure such Reflections cannot possibly have any other effect. If we had a party
of men of our side, that had learned to put in practice the Modesty and other
Morals of the Jesuits, one should have imagined that this Book might have been
such an Imposture as was discovered about thirty years ago, among the Jesuits
at Paris, who hearing of a severe book that was coming out against them from
the Cabal of the Iansenists, employed one of their own Fathers to write a book,
which as it had the same Title, so seemed to pursue the same design; but was
writ in so poor and contemptible a manner, that it could have no effect, but to
render the party from which it was believed to come, ridiculous: and the Press
wrought so hard, that this mock-book prevented the true one; so that upon its
appearance, and its passing for that which was expected, the party was much
deceived, till a little time laid open the Imposture; which had covered the
Society with a just confusion, if their being accustomed to such practices had
not rendered them insensible of the shame that the discovery brought upon them.
So upon this occasion I staid a while to see if there might not be some foul
play here, though our side has no reason to be so much as suspected of such
Legerdemain. I confess I do not know what judgment to make of the Author, or
his Translator: for as report, and the Title Page, call him a Foreigner; so the
gross errors, and the coarseness of the Style are capable of no excuse but that
of a Translator's being tied to his Author, though a liberty of changing such
Phrases as, that his breath should fail, and the most polite Nation of the
English, is practiced by all that have a right notion of giving a true
Translation. I do not know which is the most polite Nation of the English: I
hope he does not mean the Irish; and I am sure whatever that Nation is, he is
not of it: His Helvetia, Sorbierius, and Amelottius Houssarus, show that the
Translator knows not how these Names ought to be writ in English. There are
some very few touches that look like Wit, and that by consequence are so little
of a thread with the whole, that I am apt to believe these have been dropped in
by a once famous Poet, who, as is said, reviewed it: and perhaps he had some
Remnants in his Common-place*book of Wit, that were not yet employed by him; so
as he found that this book wanted garnishing extremely, he was so bountiful as
to afford some; but that was done so sparingly, as not to exhaust his own
stock, which is now low. Our Reflecter shows his good taste of Wit, by giving us
that gross Clinch of Asinitas set against Patavinitas as due to Asinius Pollio,
for reproaching Livy with the other: and this he seems to think a flower. His
accusing of Plutarch of dullness, and want of Spirit, shows, that his taste is
as correct concerning the Authors whom he despises, as concerning those whom he
esteems: and Dr. B. has no reason to be troubled to see himself attack't by a
man that had the confidence to disparage the greatest of all the Ancient
Authors, in whose simplicity and seeming carelessness, there is a beauty that
far exceeds all the painting of a labored Style. The other parts of the
Preface show how little he either understands books or men: But as he seems not
capable of correction, so he is too Inconsiderable to need that a Warning
should be given to the World for preventing the mischief that his Pen may do
it. This Essay is warning enough.

He warns us of his Choler against Dr. B. and thinks that he has used him
severely, which injury, he says, ought to be redressed: But, I dare say, he
cannot raise any choler in the Doctor, or make him complain, either of the
injuries he does him, or of his severe usage of him: Such a Writer as he is,
can do injuries to none but himself. He makes a fair parallel between Learning
and Virtue; and to show us how well he knows the History of the last Age, he
gives us the Constable Momorancy for a pattern of great Virtue. In conclusion,
he fancies Dr. B. is little concerned in the esteem that the World may have of
his Virtue, so long as he maintains the Character of a Learned* Man; but I do
not know in which of the Doctor's Actions or Writings he has discovered this:
to be sure our Reflecter has found nothing like it in these Letters of his
Travels: for though he pretends to say somewhat on those points which relate to
Learning, yet he has not mentioned any one thing that can in any manner lessen
the opinion that any may have of the Doctor's Virtue: So that all this
discourse is, besides the malice of it, absolutely impertinent.

He reckons up some who have writ of the Commonwealth of Venice, among whom he
names Amelotius Houssarus, as the last, which shows how little he knows the
Books writ concerning that State, since Mr. St. Didier, a man of another sort
of force, as well as of greater probity, who was Secretary to the Count of
Avaux while he was Ambassador at Venice, has given an account of that
Commonwealth, that is both more faithful and more exact than the other. I do
not love to tell personal things that may be to a third man's prejudice; but
since the Reflecter opposes his Houssarus to Dr. B. I must tell him, that de la
Houssarie is too well known in France to build much on his Credit: the
accidents of his Life have been too public, and his Attempt on the Memory of
Mr. Ablancourt, has been turned upon him in so vigorous and so severe a manner,
that few things will pass upon his Authority. The Reflecter's calling an
Extract drawn from a Record, the Fable of the Monks of Bern, is a beauty of
Style peculiar to him: If he had proved, that Dr. B. had falsified the Record,
he might justly have called it a Fable, and have also bestowed on the Doctor
all the good words that he could invent. His Raillery concerning the Women is
too coarse to deserve an answer. He censures the Dr. for setting Francis the
1st before Charles the 5th: This he thought so remarkable an Error, that not
contented with the Reflection that he bestows on it, he sets it in the Preface,
as one of his most Conspicuous Faults; though if such an Error had been
committed in a Letter, which does not require an exactness of Style, it had
been no great matter: But Dr. B. was speaking of the Wars of Millan; so to
observe the Order of the History, he ought to have mentioned Francis the 1st in
the first place, because he had conquered Millan, and was in possession of it
for some years before either Charles the 5th was chosen Emperor, or before he
began to meddle in the matters of that Duchy: So all his discourse of the
Precedence due to the Emperor, is mere fooling here, where the Order of Time
was only considered, without any regard to the Dignity of the Persons: And the
Order in which the Doctor put the Three Religions that had their Exercises in
the Church of the Concord at Manheim, had no relation to their Dignity or
Precedence, but merely to the Order of Time, the Calvinists having their
Exercise first, the Lutherans next, and the Papists last.

The Reflecter studies to infer from Dr. B's Promise, to write an account of
those things that he saw, which pleased him most: That therefore the Misery
which he observed in France, and with which he begins his Letters, was a thing
that pleased him mightily. But the Dr. might be pleased with the Observation
that he made, without delighting in the Misery which he saw: For to a man that
loves a Legal Government, and a Religion free of Superstition, it is no small
pleasure to be confirmed in that, by the Observation of the Effects that these
things have upon Civil Society; which are never so sensibly felt, as when one
sees the Effects that flow from a contrary Constitution of Government and
Religion: so the Doctor might have had all the tenderness with which such
objects ought to have moved him, and yet be pleased to think of the happiness
of other Nations and Churches. I dare say the Doctor is very well pleased to
find such a book writ against him, without being pleased with the Impertinences
that are in it; so he might find a real pleasure in observing the difference
between England and France, and yet have all the Compassions that became him
for the Oppressions under which the French groan.

He finds matter of Censure in the Doctor's making a difference between the
Public Justice of Geneva, and the Private; for that which he says relating to
their Arsenal, is too much honored by being mentioned, it being so excessively
impertinent. The Public Justice is fully explained by the Doctor, by which he
means the Justice of the Government, and the Court of Judicature, which may be
highly commendable in a State, in which there may be too great a mixture of
double dealing in private Transactions; and an Author that fancies there is a
Contradiction in saying, that the Switzers are heavy witted, and yet conduct
their matters with much dexterity and address, has, it seems, studied Logic to
good purpose, Wit flowing from a lively imagination, and Dexterity from a
solidity of judgment: Those that have a small share of the one, may be that
very defect be so much the more eminent in the other. And it seems the
Reflecter's knowledge of Manuscripts, is of a piece with his other Qualities,
since he quarrels with Dr. B. for saying, that the Manuscripts in St. Mark's
Library are Modern, and not above Five Hundred Years old. Those Manuscripts are
the Works of the Old Greek Philosophers, and the Fathers; and nothing but an
Ignorance equal to his, could except to the calling the Manuscripts of those
Writers Modern, since they are not above Five Hundred Years old. But it seems
he is so ignorant as to think they lived but Five Hundred Years ago; and upon
that supposition the Manuscripts cannot be Modern, if they are as Ancient as
the Authors themselves are.

There is but one part of this Preface in which I am of the Reflecter's mind,
which is, that he confesses he expects no praise from the Work: and in that I
dare answer for it, his hopes will not fail him. He adds, that there is no need
of Ingenuity in it; and indeed he has writ like one that thought the smallest
measure of it would have quite spoiled his performance: Therefore he has put in
none of that mixture which would have been very foreign to his design. But if
what he adds is true, that a man of a mean capacity was proper for it, then
his, which is of the lowest Form, will scarce be allowed to rise up to the size
of a mean capacity. He avoids the saying any thing of Switzerland, though if he
had found matter for Reflections, he who to the reproach of his Country, is
said to be a Switzer born, should have insisted most upon matters that he may
be supposed to know. But to supply that defect, he pretends that he is informed
by a friend, that a Learned man of Zurich is about a Work to expose the Insipid
Errors of the Doctor. This would make one think that he is a Protestant, though
his Reflections show the contrary. If he has had any correspondence at Zurich
hitherto, he must expect that will soon fail him, that Canton being too severe
to the Principles of their Religion, to endure such a rotten member long; and
from what Canton soever the Doctor may apprehend some severity, certainly it
cannot be from Zurich, of whom he has given so just and so high a Character,
that he can look for no sharpness from any of that Body.

So far I have gone over our Reflecter's Preface, and have found faults enough
in my way, for so short a discourse: But I go next to the Book it self. I am
indeed ashamed to write against such an Author; and if it were not that I
intended to discover by a fresh Instance, the Spirit of Impudence and Imposture
that appears even in the most Inconsiderable things that pass through the hands
of a certain sort of men, I would not have put Pen to Paper. For as I do not
find that Dr. B's Reputation is concerned in any thing that is contained in
these Reflections; so if it were, these Gentlemen know sufficiently well, that
he is of Age, and can answer for himself.

I cannot easily imagine why the Reflecter has set down the Abstract, which the
Learned men of Leipsic gave of the Doctor's Travels, unless it was to let the
World see how many matters were treated of in his Letters, to which the
Reflecter has not a word to say: for he touches on a very small number of those
which are mentioned in those Contents which he produces. The only reason I can
imagine, is, because it is an easier thing for the Reflecter to Copy than to
Compose: so he found a shift to swell his Book Nine and Twenty Pages more by
that means, which in a Book of One Hundred and Sixty Four Pages was no small
Article. It was fit to make a show with a Book of some bigness, since bulk
makes an impression on some people: yet these Gentlemen might have known by
this time, that how Implicit soever the multitude may be on their side, yet on
our side the World is not so tame, but that people will both read and consider,
before they can be brought to believe, especially a set of men who have
entertained them with Imposture upon Imposture for some Years past. I confess,
I believe few will be carried so far on this occasion, as to read and consider
these Reflections, since the things appear so trivial at first view: and with
relation to the Doctor's Travels, it is of no small credit to them, that he
having adventured to publish so particular an account of many things so soon
after he had seen them, there has not been the least attempt made to discover
the falsehood of any one thing in that Book. It was too much read in England,
for them to pretend that they despised it: For though our Reflecter says, that
presently upon its appearing in England, it was suppressed, we all know the
contrary; and that no Book of that Nature has had in our time so great and so
quick a Sale as it had. The chief matters in it were of that Nature, that if
the Doctor had abused the World, it had been easy to have discovered it in an
authentical manner. It is known, that his Book has been seen in the chief
Cities of Italy now above a Twelvemonth; and the Persons concerned, have had it
in their power to undeceive the World. It is also no Secret, that any discovery
that had been much to the Doctor's prejudice, would have been made a matter of
no small merit; and the things that he has told us of those parts, were too
sensible, and have made too great an impression on the Nation, to have been let
alone so long, if the clear Evidence of Truth had not maintained the Book
hitherto. But one would be tempted to think, that the Reflecter thought it was
necessary to give it a new luster, by making so feeble and so unsuccessful an
attempt upon it. It has gained Credit enough already, and wanted not this
addition; but some men seem to lie under a Curse, and in every thing that they
undertake to work counter to the true Interest of their Cause; which if it is
bad of it self, it is certainly in as bad hands; and is managed as if its
Enemies gave secret directions for every step that is made in it.

Dr. B. had given an account of that 1. Art.
famous Silver Shield at Lions, of Two and Twenty Pounds weight, that seemed to
represent that famous Action of Scipio, in restoring a fair Captive to a
Celtiberian Prince. Upon this our Author bestows. Three Reflections: First, He
says, Mr. Spon, who has writ a Discourse concerning that piece of Plate, calls
it but One and Twenty Pounds. Secondly, The Doctor ought to have called it not
simply a Shield, but a Votive Shield, since otherwise a Reader has great reason
to doubt of it: for no man can use a Shield of that weight for the defense of
his Body. And to beautify this Reflection, he cites some Authorities of the
Ancients, to prove that they had such Votive Shields; and because a Print makes
a deep Impression on weak People, he gives us one. Now, the Reader must know
that he cites not these from his own reading, but though in other places he
dares not tell us out of what Modern Author he drew his Quotations, yet here he
is so honest as to tell us, that he gives his Authorities from Mr. Spon and Mr.
Saumaise. Thirdly, He excepts to Dr. B's saying, that the bas reliefs of this
Shield, seemed to represent Scipio's generous Action, as if in this the Doctor
claimed the Honor of this Conjecture; and because the word seems was doubting,
our Author gives us one Citation out of Livy, three Pages long, containing an
Account of Scipio's Action, and another of Mr. Spon's, and to all he gives us a
Print of the Shield, and so here ends his first Reflection.

But if the Doctor writ down in his Table Book Two and Twenty for One and
Twenty, here is no designed Error at least; and I have been told by those who
have seen the great Print of that Shield, made by Mr. Mey, its owner, that it
calls it at the bottom Two and Twenty Pounds weight. 2. The Doctor choosing to
write True English, he could not call it a Votive Shield, because Votive is not
English. All Readers, except such as our Reflecter, must know, that it was a
Shield intended for a Memorial in some Temple, and could not be intended for
Defense. And it is plain that Dr. B. knew that Mr. Spon had writ so learnedly
of it, that he thought fit only to name it, and so he did not stay to explain
it; for he does not seem to be so much in love with Copying as the Reflecter
is. 3. The Account that the Doctor gives of that which is represented in it,
plainly shows, that he rather goes in to the Opinion of others, than that he
pretends to give one of his own: And if our Reflecter is angry at the Doctor's
reservedness, in not being positive, but saying only, it seems; he ought to
know, that though such men as he is, are apt to determine very readily, yet men
of more Learning and Judgment bring themselves to an habit of speaking of most
matters with a due reserve in their Expressions. I acknowledge that Conjecture
which Mr. Spon gives, seems so well grounded, that few things of that Nature
are better. But since History is so defective, who knows but some other Roman
General might in imitation of Scipio, have done somewhat like that in Gaul,
the Memory of which is preserved in this Shield; and this might have fallen out
in Provence, and so the Shield might have been found at Avignon? I do not say
that this is true, but to be sure it is possible: and therefore since there is
no Inscription to be seen on the Plate, it cannot be denied but that the Dr.
writ with due caution, when he said, that it seemed to represent that Action.
So if our Author is not more successful in his following Reflections than in
this First, on which he bestows Ten Pages, I do not see that the Reputation of
the Doctor's Learning or Virtue is like to suffer much by the attempt he has
made upon it.

He reflects on the Doctor for saying, 2. Art.
that this Shield is Invaluable; and yet for adding, that if there were an
Inscription upon it, to put us beyond doubt, or conjecture, it were yet more
Inestimable, as if here were an accumulation of Infinites, Invaluable, and yet
more Inestimable.

But the most that this can amount to, is a carelessness of Style, which in an
Epistolar work is thought to have a peculiar Grace; and if the Reflecter
understood the prices at which things of that nature go, he would know that the
general Phrase concerning them, is, that they are Invaluable; For they having
little of Intrinsic value, the price is set on them rather according to the
Wealth and the Curiosity of the buyer, than by any certain Standard; so though
the Value of this piece of Plate is such, that one does not know to what price
it ought to be raised, yet after all, an Inscription would still carry this
indeterminate Notion of its vast value much higher.

The Doctor gives us a Conjecture 3. Art.
upon an odd Expression in an Inscription at Lions, with the modesty that
became him in so doubtful a thing; and in this the Reflecter may differ from
him as much as he thinks fit; but to be sure his Exposition is the most
ridiculous thing that is possible: Quae cum Nimia, pia fuit: facta est Impia;
who while she was great (not to dispute with him about Nimia) was pious, she
became Impious. There is nothing here to knit the one to the other, or to
imply, in opposition to (Nimia) her Riches, that made her Pious, what it was
that made Impious. But here our Author produces many Capitals, and some
Inscriptions: This he thought was great, and might look like a man of Learning
to those who do not know how easily these things are picked up from second
hand. Yet our Reflecter is willing to make a Christian of the man, founded upon
this Reason, because the Inscription ends and sibi vivo ponendum curavit. This,
according to what is common in many Inscriptions, is to be translated thus, and
he ordered this (Tombstone) to be placed for himself during his Lifetime. But
our Author puts a weighty Scruple here: He cannot think that he was to have
gone in alive to the Tomb; and that it was some Vault, to which he intended to
retire as to a Catacomb. I do not envy our Author the Glory of this Learned
Conjecture: But he forgets that this was dedicated, D. M. that is, Diis
Manibus. Now, though perhaps a sort of Christians of later date, would make no
scruple to use Dedications of this Nature, yet that did not agree with the
strictness of the Primitive Christians. As for his denying that the Inscription
is vivo, and pretends, from Gruter, to say it is vivus, and from his own happy
Invention, that it must be vivas; in this case I take leave to believe the
Doctor, who saw it, and says, he copied it, better than Gruter, who saw it not,
but had it sent him from another; or our Author, whose fruitful Imagination is
not yet of Credit enough with me to balance an Eyewitness.

The Doctor gave us a correction of 4. Art.
a Passage in Vegelius, which does not please our Reflecter, who assures us,
that the Reading that the Doctor explodes, instead of being common, was only in
that Edition of Paris, when a certain Author writ, that was made in the year
1511. at which time I believe there were very few different Editions of that
Author; but, though I do not love to reckon up Editions, yet all the Modern
ones that I have seen, are according to that which is censured by the Doctor;
so it seems the Paris Edition, though it was at first singular, yet has carried
it since in all the succeeding Editions. But the Reflecter seems to have some
advantage, since the common Cubits, according to Vitruvius's measure, are only
a Foot and an half, and therefore the reading of Three Cubits must be false,
since the next Line says, that the Soldiers height was to be of Six Foot, or
very near it, and by consequence, they could not be of Three Cubits height,
which is but Four Foot and an half. I perceive our Author has, at least, read
Dictionaries, if he has not read good Authors; and, in particular, that most
Learned and Ingenious Discourse of Dr. Cumberland's, concerning the Ancient
measures. Now if he had examined the different sorts of Cubits, either in that
Noble Essay, or in other good Authors; or if he had sought for it in Greek or
Latin Dictionaries, he would have found, that as the common Cubit was indeed
only a Foot and an half, so there was another Cubit that was Two Foot: and thus
this Reflection sinks to the Ground, and here the Reflecter's Learning ends;
For though a variety of Books could furnish him a few Quotations, yet where a
little Judgment was to come in, and furnish him with matter, he runs so low,
that my Corrections hereafter will be much shorter.

The Doctor had said, that the Bailiages 5. Art. p. 35.
of Bern were courted, perhaps, with as much Intrigue as was ever used among
the Romans in the distribution of their Provinces; upon which the Reflection
made, is, that the Romans spared no wicked Plots, and other Practices, for
obtaining their Provinces; therefore he thinks it is extreme ridiculous to
compare the Practices in Bern to these. But if the Doctor had said, That the
Citizens of Bern had used as much Intrigue and Violence as the Romans did, the
Reflection had been just: yet there is no room for it, since the Doctor speaks
only of Intrigue, which signifies only refined practices, and the arts of
management, which may appear as remarkable in small as in great matters.

Dr. B. had said, That some new Fishes 6. Art. p. 37,
appearing of late in the Lake of Geneva, was imputed to diverse Reasons, which
he names: But the Reflecter tells us, That the Rusticks, which dwell near the
Lake, are at a certain time of the year obliged to fling in certain Vessels
full of sundry sorts of Fishes. Here indeed the Doctor appears extremely to
blame that he did not keep more Company with the Boors; and one would judge by
our Author's breeding, and way of writing, that he had spent much of his time
among them. But after all, unless these Boors are obliged to go to the
neighboring Lakes, and to bring Fish from them, it does not appear how the
Fish of Lakes, at a considerable distance, should be brought into the Lake of
Geneva.

Dr. B. had corrected a Vulgar Mistake, 7. Art. p. 38.
that represents the Rhasne, as running through the Lake unmixt, at which the
Reflecter is very angry; and to confute the Doctor, he cites a long passage out
of Mr. Spon, which says indeed, That at the entry of the Rhasne into the Lake,
and at its issue out of it, the course of the Rhasne appears clearly; yet he
plainly confirms what the Doctor said, which is, that through almost the whole
length of the Lake one cannot distinguish the Rhasne from the Lake, neither by
its Motion nor its Color, which is the very thing that the Doctor said, That
it did not run through it unmixed, as some Travelers had fondly imagined; For
through it imports from the one end of it to the other.

The Doctor had commended the real 8 Art. ^ 4^.
Charity of those in Zurich, who took care of their Poor, without building
Magnificent Palaces for them, which he represents as a Vanity that is too
generally affected elsewhere. And here the Reflecter flies out into great
anger, and thinks that no good man can pardon such Malignity. Here is a common
place on which he thought to show his force; and I dare say the poor man has
done his best; and so I leave him. But as I had enough to do to read what he
writ on this Head, so I can assure him I will not venture on answering such
stuff.

Dr. B gave us an account of some 9. Art. p. 43.
Lettters he saw at Zurich, from England, concerning the Disputes in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, relating to the Habits of the Clergy, in
which it is said, by some of the Bishops, that Cranmer and Ridley intended to
procure an Act for abolishing the Habits; on which our Author bestows this
Judicious Reflection, That Cranmer died before Queen Elizabeth came to the
Crown; as if those Letters that were writ Ten years after his death, might not
have mentioned an Intention which he had, though he died before he could
execute it.

Our Author finds fault with the Doctor's saying, That the Observation which he
made on the various readings of that Verse in St. John's Epistle, may may seem
too Learned, as if this were his setting an high value on his own Learning. Yet
since Books of Travels are writ for all sorts of Readers, it seemed necessary
to make some excuse for setting down some Observations that belonged more
properly to a Treatise of Divinity. But the malice of our Reflecter is too
heavy, and his Raillery is too dull to stand on either of them.

Our Author has a long Discourse concerning 12. Art. p. 45.
that Passage, the meaning of which I do not understand. It is certain from St.
Ierome's Preface, that he restored it, having found it struck out in the Copies
that the Arrians had vitiated; and therefore those Bibles which have his
Prefaces, but have not that passage, must owe that defect only to the
negligence of the Copiers, since, if they copied his Bible truly, they must
have copied that passage, which, according to that Preface was certainly in it.
All our Author's Reflection seems to amount to this, That St. Jerome was exact,
that so he might discover the Cheat of the Arrians, but not that he had
actually done it: and so he seems to conclude that the passage was not in his
Bible. This is stuff worthy of our Author, and I leave him the honor of it.

The Doctor had said, Thus will I finish 12. Art. p. 49.
my Account of Zurich; and three or four lines after that, he ends his Letter
in these words, And so* I will break off. Here comes an heavy Reflection on the
Doctor's pride and haughtiness, and his maintaining of falsities; and that he
neither believes nor desires that any other should credit what he says, unless
he twice repeat it. But if one asks, why so much wrath? It amounts all to this,
that the Doctor first says, he will finish his Account of Zurich, and then,
that he will put an end to his Letter. And this to him seemed so nauseous a
Repetition, that it stirred up all this Choler in him. Certainly he is the
tenderest stomached person that ever was. But I leave him to the Physicians;
for such stuff as this shows how much he needs their help.

The Doctor dated his Letter from Zurich, 13 Art. p. 50.
as he did the others from Millan, Florence, Rome and Nimegu^n, at which our
Author is extreme uneasy: For if you but tread hard near a sick man, you
discompose him quite. He finds some passages in some of the Letters, that show,
that the Doctor had seen the places which are mentioned in his following
Letters, when he wrote the former. And indeed if the Doctor had cast his
Observations into so many Letters, and had made the Dates only at pleasure, I
do not see any great mischief in it. He might also have writ the Letters in
those places from which he dates them, and yet have added passages that
belonged to the things which occurred to him, in other places, and I see no
great hurt in all this.

The Doctor had mentioned the Switzers 14. Art. p. 52*
throwing off the Austrian and German Yoke; upon which our Reflecter triumphs,
as if the Doctor had represented the Switzers as oppressed at the same time by
Two Nations. But though the Archdukes of Austria were their Immediate Lords,
yet they were likewise Members of the German Empire; and the Switzers having
not only shaken off the Tyranny of the Austrians, but having likewise separated
themselves from the German Empire, and formed themselves into a Free and
Independent Commonwealth, the Doctor had not fully expressed that matter, if he
had not made mention of the German Yoke, as well as of the Austrian.

And thus I have examined all that is Reflected on in the Doctor's first
Letter, and have found, that as every one of the Particulars is ill-grounded,
so if every one of them were acknowledged to be well grounded, there is not one
of them all that leaves the least Reflection on the Doctor's Virtue and
Sincerity; the uttermost to which they can amount being to discover some
neglect in the Doctor's way of expressing himself. But even in that I have made
it clear, that the Doctor writ with more exactness than at first view, perhaps,
every Reader might imagine.

Dr. B. had said, that the Remnants of 15. Art. p. 57.
St. Emerita's Veil, which were showed him at Coire, that are pretended to have
been saved out of the Fire, looked as if the burning had not been a Month old;
at which the Reflecter laughs, as very ridiculous, since by this the Doctor
seems to judge of Ashes, how long ago they were burnt: but the Doctor only
speaks of the pieces of Linen: And certainly it is no hard thing, by looking
on a piece of Linen Cloth, that is burnt all about the edges, to judge whether
it seems fresh and lately burnt, or not. He concludes this Article, after some
coarse Raillery, that he fears that it will be said, both of him and the
Doctor, That too much Learning had made them both mad. I dare say every body
will be of opinion, that he is not far from being mad. But unless he gives
other Proofs than appear in this Book, I am very confident no body will ascribe
the cause of it to too much Learning.

The Doctor had mentioned the Archdukes 16. Art. p. 59.
of Inchspruck, upon which the Reflecter runs division, according to his Talent
of Raillery, as if there were no such Archduke. One should have expected, that
if the Reflecter knew any thing, it should have appeared in matters that relate
to Germany, where the Branches of the Great Families, though their Dignity is
really no other than that of the Great Family from which they are derived, yet
they carry their Title in common compellation from the Principality which falls
to their share: So all the Branches of the Family Palatine, are known by the
Titles of Zweyburg, Simmeren, Vilden, etc. So the Dukes of Lunenburg are
distinguished by the Titles of Cell and Hanover: So the present regnant Family
of Austria was distinguished Sixty years ago by that of the Archduke of Grats
and Leopold: This Emperor's Uncle was known by the distinction of the Archduke
of Inchpruck, though the dignity in it self was that of Austria, with the
distinction of Inchpruck.

The Seventeenth, Eighteenth, and Nineteenth Articles, are such strains that I
will not meddle with them. He who thinks it worth his while, to see to what a
degree the stupidity of the Author can carry him, may consult the Reflections
themselves, and he will soon see, that what reason soever there may be to
conclude the Reflecter mad, there is no reason to think that it flows from too
much Learning.

Our Author cannot comprehend why 20. Art. p. 62.
the French concerned themselves with the passes of the Alps; and he thinks,
that though the Venetians were concerned in it, yet the French had nothing to
do with it. But if he does not know, that the French did interpose in that
matter, he is as Ignorant of the History of this Age, as he is of all other
things: and if he does not apprehend how they were concerned in that matter, it
is not to be wondered at, if a man of his size of Capacity should not
understand how the Maxims of holding the balance, of weakening an Enemy, and
of a Superior Power's being always ready to run to the aid of an Inferior,
should have governed the Councils of France. Certainly a man that cannot
comprehend this, should meddle with somewhat else than Politics.

The rest of the Reflections, on to the Thirtieth, which comprehend all the
Doctor's Second Letter, are strains so worthy of their Author, that it were too
great an abuse of the Reader's patience to examine them.

The Doctor tells us, that the Venetians ^1. Art. 80.
are willing to keep up the quarrels among the Nobility of the Conquered
Cities; and in opposition to this our Author very judiciously cites la
Houssarie, to prove that the Venetians study to keep down all Factions among
their own Nobility; as if the Nobles of Venice, and the Nobles of the Conquered
Cities, were the same.

The Two and Thirtieth and Three and Thirtieth Articles are left to the Reader.

The Doctor had said, That the Arsenal ^. Art. 84.
of Venice, was the only one that they had: whereas the Reflecter says, they
have Two others in the City it self; but he is only at the pains to name that
of St. Mark's Palace, which is indeed called the Little Arsenal, and is only a
Repository of some few Arms, that is of no considerable moment; but since the
Reflecter named Two in Venice, besides the great one, he should have told us
where the other was.

The Five and Thirtieth and Six and Thirtieth Articles, are Remarks of so great
Solidity, that I leave them to the Reader, who will see how weightily he
contradicts the Doctor, particularly in the Six and Thirtieth.

The Doctor had told us, that an Eminent 37. Art. p. 86.
man at Venice said to him, That he did not think the Greeks believed
Transubstantiation: but in opposition to this, the Reflecter tells us, that he
saw a Letter of Olearius's, which asserts, that they do believe it. But what is
this to the Doctor? What he says may be very true, though Olearius was of
another mind: Nor is Olearius of such Authority in matters of this nature, that
his Opinion must determine the Point: but the Reason is considerable that the
Doctor's Author gave him, which was the want of Respect in the Greeks to the
Sacrament, since their not adoring it seemed a great Evidence that they could
not believe Transubstantiation. This Reason seems much more convincing than
Olearius's authority.

The Eight and Thirtieth Article is left entire to the Reader, to judge of the
Reflecter's strength from it.

The Doctor, after he had mentioned ^9. Art. ^. 89.
that unequal match of one of the Cornara's, goes on to speak of the greatness
and pride of that Family in general. But the Reflecter, to give us a taste of
his Sincerity, knits these Two together, as if the Pride of the Cornara's was
by reason of the mothers birth, which plainly belongs to another matter.
Besides that, the Doctor tells us, that Cornara Piscopia was none of the great
Families of that Name.

The Doctor had showed the Inconveniences ^0. Art. ^. 90.
of the Honor of the Doge of Venice, which were such, that some of the
greatest Families declined it; and yet the Grandeur of it was such, that the
greatest part of the best Families courted it extremely: Upon which the
Reflecter accuses him, as having contradicted himself: but it must be a degree
of dullness or malice peculiar to him, that made him find a Contradiction
between these Two Assertions, That the greatest part courted it, though some
declined it.

The Doctor had said, That when a 41. Art. p. 91.
Duke is chosen, all his Family must retire out of the Senate: But the
Reflecter lays a judicious Note on this, and says, This is only true, with
relation to the Brothers and Children. So if the Doctor meant the word Family,
in that which is its natural sense, then here is no difference at all: but if
Family is to be taken in the larger sense, for the whole Tribe, even thus
supposing that Amelol is to be believed against the Doctor, amounts to no more,
but that the Doctor did not distinguish the sense of the word Family Critically.

The Reflecter, without citing his Author 42. Art. p 93.
for it, pretends, that no Dogess can be Crowned, and that the Inquisitors made
a Decree against it. But when this is acknowledged to be true, it does not
contradict that which the Doctor had said, and only proves, that he did not
know all the Constitutions of that Republic.

The Three and Fortieth Article is left to the contempt of the Reader; and in
the Four and Fortieth the Reflecter runs out into a commendation of the German
Nation, in which I know no man that will contradict him. I am sure Dr. B. says
nothing to the contrary, though all the World knows, that the general Character
of the German Women, is, that they are good house wives, and that they do not
amuse themselves with a general Conversation, as the French and English Women
do; for which the Doctor is so far from censuring them, that he commends them
for it.

The Doctor had showed upon what ^5. Art. ^. 97.
Reasons he judged that the Secular Inquisitors of Venice, was a great
advantage to that Body, against which the Reflecter argues. But as the Doctor
gave his opinion, so it is free for the Reflecter to give his; and it is also
free for the Reader to pass a judgment on both. The Reflecter is resolved to
let the world see in so short an Essay, that he is equally unhappy in all the
Subjects which he undertakes.

Any Reader, unless he is as dull as 46. Art. p. 103.
our Reflecter, will clearly perceive the difference that the Doctor puts
between the Court of Inquisition, and the Secular Inquisitors of Venice, but
nothing is clear to one whose Talent is a composition made of dullness and
malice.

The Seven and Fortieth, Eight and Fortieth, and Nine and Fortieth Articles,
are left to the Readers judgment.

The Doctor had said, speaking of 50. Art. p. 108.
Ferrara, that one might conclude it was extreme poor, by the meaness of its
Churches, and their want of Ornaments; and that one might take the measure of
the Wealth of any place in Italy from the Churches. Upon this the Reflecter
finds a Contradiction between this and the Remark that the Doctor made on the
poverty of Millan, notwithstanding of the vast Riches that appear in the
Churches: But on the one hand, according to the Doctor's Observations, one may
conclude where he sees poor Churches, that the Town is poor; yet it does not
follow, that where the Churches are rich, the Town must be rich: On the
contrary, it must be poor, in proportion to the excessive Wealth that is found
in the Churches.

The Doctor had taken notice of the 51. Art. p. 110.
meanness of the Libraries of Italy, and yet the Reflecter finds that he
mentions Four good ones; and this he thinks a Contradiction; but it is plain,
the Doctor is speaking of the Libraries in the Monasteries, and Three or Four
is so small an Exception, that in such a number they deserved not to be named:
And though the Doctor mentions several Italians with much respect, as men of
Learning, yet that does not contradict what he says in general of the decay of
Learning among them, though there are some Exceptions to be made, and even
these owe the Reputation in which they are, perhaps to the Ignorance of those
about them, at least in a great measure.

The Doctor mentions the Reflection 52. Art. p. 113.
that Magliabecchi made on the Library Keeper of St. Laurence's at Florence,
which puts the Reflecter all in fire against the Doctor, as base, disingenuous,
and ungrateful; whereas the Doctor says nothing of himself, but only repeats
what another had told him.

The Three and Fiftieth Article is not meddled with, as a great many others are
passed over, for a Reason that is not too much to the advantage of the
Reflecter, among whom the Four and Fiftieth Article is also to be reckoned.

If any has a mind to see how well 55. Art. p. 121.
the Reflecter understands Politics; he may be at the pains to read this
Article; for I dare say no body will be at the pains to prove against him, that
an Elective Prince ought not to be Absolute. And for his Learned performance,
in proving, that the Popedom ought not to be Hereditary, I dare say, that he is
the first man who ever thought that it was a point that needed so much proof;
for his Invention is so copious here, that he bestows six or seven Arguments
making out that wise Aphorism of his.

He quarrels with the Doctor for saying, 56. Art. p. 125.
That the Pope has an Insatiable Desire of heaping up Wealth; and thinks that
the Doctor contradicts himself, since he owns, that he has not enriched his
Family, and that he has sent great Sums to support the War against the Turk.
But Sixtus the Fifth laid up a vast Treasure, though he gave none of it to his
Family; and why may not the present Pope be of the same Temper? and his laying
out money may well consist with his laying up of Wealth besides.

Upon the Doctor's naming the vacant 57. Art. p. 127.
Caps, the Reflecter tells us what all the Gazetts told us long ago, how these
are now disposed of: And after such a Confutation, who can suppose that the
Doctor can ever show his face any more?

The Doctor told us of a Pasquin 58. Art. p. 128.
that appeared upon Molinos's business, upon which the Reflecter passes this
Censure, That he has found the same Pasquin in a Book Printed One Hundred and
Forty Years ago. But does that show, that it is impossible that the same
Pasquin might have appeared again upon a New Occasion?

The Doctor had, from the freshness 59. Art. p. 129.
of the Painting that is in the Catacombs of Naples, concluded, that the Paint
could not have been done while the place was employed for burying. But the
Reflecter cannot comprehend, why the Painting, which the Doctor believes may be
Six Hundred Years Old, may not be much Ancienter. Yet if he knew any thing of
the Remains of Antiquity, he would know, that though there are many Pieces of
Painting of Six Hundred Years Old, there are none of the time of the Ancient
Romans. But the chief Reason that the Doctor gives, that the Painting could not
have been done while Bodies were buried there, is, That the Steams, occasioned
by the Corruption of so many Bodies, must have dissolved both Plaster and
Colors: This seems convincing; but our Reflecter thought not fit to take
notice of it. His Conjecture concerning the Letters which the Doctor saw on
those Walls, shows how happy a Critic he is, and what great Discoveries may be
expected from him, if he would be at the pains to write upon Old Inscriptions;
For a man that will make a Sentence that plainly ends in Greek, begin in Latin,
is like to afford us many new Readings.

The Sixtieth and Sixty First Articles, are left to the Reader's Censure.

The Doctor's Inference from Pope 62. Art. p. 134.
Martin's Confirming the Council of Constance, seems well grounded; For if he
was not Infallible, his Successors, to this day, are not; and if he was, then
from that Infallibility we must conclude, That the Confirmation which condemns
the Infallibility, is likewise an Infallible Decision: But our Reflecter, after
a little heavy Raillery, in which he is always unhappy, thinks to turn the
matter thus, Either Pope Martin was Fallible or Infallible; if Fallible, then
the Decision is of no force; if Infallible, then so were all his Predecessors.
But though the Pope was Fallible, the Decision is strong against that See, and
against his Successors, though it does not make the Decision Infallible, by
Virtue of any Authority that he could give it. So that this makes clearly
against the Pretensions of that See.

The Sixty Third Article is very material. The Reflecter tells us, that the
person whom the Doctor calls the Pope's Steward, was his Major Domo. Now when
he gives us a more proper English word for Major Domo than Steward, he may
censure the Doctor as defective in our Tongue.

The Sixty Fourth Article pretends P. 136.
to find a Contradiction between the Doctor's calling the Pope's Government
severe, and his commending the Regularity that is now at Rome, as if Vice could
not be punished, and the Subjects be oppressed at the same time.

The Sixty Fifth Article is left to the Reader, so is the Sixty Sixth; for they
are Strains so well becoming our Reflecter, that I confess I can say nothing to
them.

The Sixty Seventh is pretended to P. 139.
be a Contradiction to what the Doctor had said of the Queen of Sweden, as
having the best Court of Strangers in Rome; and yet he says of the Duchess of
Bracciano, that the best Assembly of Strangers that is to be found in any of
the Palaces of the Italians, is in her Court. Now except the Reflecter can
prove, that the Queen of Sweden is an Italian, here is no Contradiction; for it
is plain, that the Doctor means, that the Queen of Sweden's Court is the best
Assembly of Strangers that is in Rome; and that the Duchess of Bracciano's is
the best of all the Assemblies that is to be found in any of the Palaces of the
Italians in Rome.

The Sixty Eighth, Sixty Ninth, and Seventieth Articles, are again left to the
Reader's Censure; only in the Seventieth Article an Error of the Press, Places
being by all appearance, instead of Palaces, seemed to give him some small
Color for fixing a little Censure, though even without that Correction, the
sense will appear clear enough.

Our Reflecter doubts if Cannon was 71. Art. p. 147.
brought before Morat; by which he shows how well he knows the History of
Gunpowder and Cannon, since he does not think they were found out in the end of
the Fifteenth Century.

The Seventy Second Article is a worthy one, I mean, worthy of the Reflecter.

The Reflecter laughs at the Doctor 73. Art. p. 149.
for telling the World, That the Lutherans pay no sort of Religious Respect to
the Images that they have in their Churches, as if this was so well known, that
it was needless to tell it. But though the Doctrine of the Lutherans, in that
point, is well known, yet it was not impertinent to inform the World, that the
people followed that point of their Doctrine, since we know, that in the Fifth
Century, the Worship of Images was as much disowned as it can be by the
Lutherans; and yet we see, that in Gregory the Great's time, the People in many
places began to worship them.

The Doctor describing Spire, tells 74. Art. p. 149.
us, That one of the Prebendaries was, according to the German Custom, a man of
greater Quality than Learning; Upon which the Reflecter falls on him in great
wrath, as if he had reproached the German Nation for want of Learning; and with
an equal measure of Ignorance and Impudence, he spends several Pages in
refuting this Calumny. But the Doctor left no Reproach on that Great Nation; he
reflects only on the Constitution of their Chapters in all the great Sees of
Germany, in which, Birth is the most necessary and indispensable of all other
Qualifications.

The Doctor is most solidly confuted in the Seventy Fifth* Article.

The Doctor had said, That the 76. Art. p. 155*
Elector Palatine was as Absolute as any Prince of the Empire; Upon which the
Reflecter labors to prove, that other Princes are as Absolute as he is; but
this does not contradict the Doctor, unless he proves, that some other Princes
are mo^e Absolute; for that is all that the Doctor* denies. Besides, many
Princes of the Empire are bound to govern their Countries by the Assembly of
the States, to which the Elector Palatine is not subject.

The Reflecter does not believe 77. Art. p. 157.
that the Elector Palatine is designed in the Public Prayers their Sovereign;
since, besides other sad stuff, he says, there is no word in the German
Language that imports that. But the French have a Church in Heidelberg, where
the Doctor might well have heard the Elector prayed for, and named Their
Sovereign, which, as I am told, is the common form there.

For the Seventy Eighth and Seventy Ninth Article, that relate to the Golden
Bull, they are the only Errors that I know in all the Doctor's Letters; for it
is certain, that the Original of the Golden Bull in Latin, is in Francfurt.
There is also a Great Parchment that contains a Translation of it into Dutch;
and that is commonly showed to the German Travelers. But men who are more
curious, may also see the Original. So it seems the Doctor's Guide in
Francfurt, knew not of any other Copy but that Great Parchment, which is in
High Dutch: So that in this point the Dr. was not at pains enough to be rightly
informed.

The Eightieth Article runs on the same mistake that appeared in the Seventy
Sixth, where the Dr. had not said, that the Elector Palatine was more Absolute,
but only as Absolute as any Prince in Germany: And so this is not contradicted
by his saying, that the Elector of Mentz is an Absolute Prince.

The Eighty First Article is another strain of the Reflecter's Malice. The Dr.
found, having been in the Palaces of Four of the Electors, that there was much
form, and a great deal of a-do to come within their Courts. But in
contradiction to this, the Reflecter tells us of the Magnificence, and easy
access that one finds in the Courts of Brandenburg and Lunenburg: yet the Dr.
notwithstanding this, might have made his Remark, though perhaps he had done
better to have restricted it to these Courts which he saw.

And now we are come to the last, 82. Art. p. 163.
which is no small comfort, when one is engaged to deal with so much weakness
and folly. The Reflecter quarrels with the Dr. for telling us, that the Medals
found at Bon, were believed to be made about four or five hundred years ago;
and he cannot fancy how that could be known. But in this the Dr. affirms
nothing himself; he only tells us what he had from others; and I do not see why
this should offend the Reflecter, unless he was beforehand resolved to take
every thing amiss that should come from the Dr.

The Conclusion has nothing in it that is good, but that it is short. The
Reflecter makes an excuse for the flatness of his book, which was no less than
was needful, if he could have found a good one; but he comforts himself with
this, That he had rather that Wit should be wanting to Truth, than Truth to
Wit; but I can assure him, both are equally wanting here. And if he yields that
there was Wit in the Doctor's book, I am sure he has not brought any one
Article against him, in which he has so much as pretended to show any want of
Truth. So that it must be confessed, that since he yields the Doctor Wit, Truth
belongs also to him in as eminent a degree as it is wanting to the Reflecter.

FINIS.

