LICENSD,

November. 29. 1689.
AN EXHORTATION TO Peace and Union, IN A SERMON PREACHED At St. LAWRENCE-JURY,
ON Tuesday the 26th of November. 1689.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARUM.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXIX.

THE BISHOP of SALISBURY's SERMON of PEACE and UNION.

AN EXHORTATION TO Peace and Union: IN A SERMON PREACHED At St. LAWRENCE-JURY,
On Tuesday the 26th of November. 1689.
ACTS VII. VER. 26. Sirs, ye are Brethren, Why do you wrong one to another?


THE open Assaults and the secret Practices of our Enemies are things that we
are prepared for, we look for them, and guard against them; so that we are not
surprised with them, nor unprovided when they appear. But the mutual
Animosities of those who are all united in the same Common Interests, and that
ought to be animated with the same Spirit, have somewhat in them that is more
terrible, that carries the Characters of a Nation not capable of a Deliverance,
but fitted for destruction. This is at all times deplorable, but sometimes it
is so dismal, that it is not easy to see a People in such a State, when their
Dangers are extreme; without concluding that so fatal a madness must be the
Mark as well as the effect of some Stroke from Heaven.

Who could have seen Jerusalem in the State in which Josephus describes it,
without concluding them Cursed of God? Besieged by the greatest Power that was
then in the World, and languishing in Famine; yet in the Intervals of the
Attacks of their Enemies, giving one another no rest, but divided into three
great Parties, who were Butchering one another, as often as their Enemies gave
them leisure for it.

Somewhat not unlike this, though in a lower form, is set forth in the words of
my Text: The Posterity of Jacob had endured a terrible Bondage in Egypt, and it
was no wonder if while they groaned under such an oppression, an Israelite and
an Egyptian were engaged in a Quarrel, in which Moses it seems took it for
granted, that the Egyptian was in the Wrong, and so he killed him in the
assistance of an injured Israelite. But it was an astonishing thing to him to
see two Israelites fighting; therefore he who was the meekest Man in the Earth,
studied to soften both their minds, with a reproof that in very gentle words,
set forth the madness of their quarrel with great Authority.

They were Brethren either as they were one people engaged all in the same
Interests, groaning under the same miseries, and wishing for the same common
Deliverance; or as they were all initiated into the same Covenant with God, as
being the Seed of Abraham according to the promise made to him. But besides
this general consideration of their being Brethren, there were two special ones
that enforced it in their present Circumstances.

They were in Bondage to a strong, an ungrateful, a perfidious, and a cruel
Enemy; that forgetful of all the Services Joseph had rendered the Crown, was not
satisfied with condemning them to an ignominious Slavery: but carried this to
so Brutal a degree of Cruelty, as to design the Murder of all their Male Issue,
and even to oblige Parents to destroy the fruit of their own Body. Now while
they were under so terrible a Bondage, it seemed a very unnatural piece of
madness for them to have any Quarrels among themselves. But besides this they
had reason to believe that a deliverance was approaching: the time that was
marked by Prophecy, for the continuance of their Captivity was now Genesis 15. 13.
almost expired; so they had reason to believe that God was to appear very
speedily, and to set them at liberty: and therefore nothing was more contrary
to that prospect, than for them in such a state of things to engage into
Quarrels and Animosities, which might naturally have produced such
Consequences, that they must have been very much disabled from being the
Instruments of Heaven in such a glorious Work, as that which they had reason to
conclude was now near at hand, since the Period of 430 Years was now expiring.

From the Consideration of the mutual tie of their being Brethren, it was
reasonable to expostulate, as Moses did, Why do you wrong one to another?
Insinuating that in such quarrellings the wrong lay not only on the one side,
but was mutual. Both were to blame, they wronged one another, and wronged the
Public besides. But though both were in the wrong, we see who was most so,
even he that would not hear of a reconciliation, or of the putting a stop to
the Quarrel; he reproached Moses with the assistance that he had given the day
before to an Israelite against an Egyptian: so enraged he was at the friendly
interposition of Moses in the matter, that he seems concerned for the Egyptian
that was killed; a Public Enemy being less hated than a Brother, when those
Domestic Feuds are once raised to any height; even a Reconciler becomes then
more odious than an Alien.

This is the account of the occasion on which these words were spoken, and of
the words themselves, and of the effect they had. In the next place, let us
consider how far we may be concerned in them.

We have been engaged in a great and hard struggle with open Enemies as cruel
and as treacherous as Pharaoh or the Egyptians ever were: We have overcome
them, but now we are falling into mutual quarrellings; some are whetting on
their spirits to Revenge, by the remembrance of past Errors, with relation to
Civil Matters: others are raising up those Disputes which have been already
once and again so fatal to us, that they have given us often cause to wish that
they had never been once named amongst us; and after all these unhappy
Consequences that such things have hitherto had, we are now again trying our
Strength, mustring our Forces, and raising within our own Minds, and in the
Minds of all, over whom we have any Influence, all the sowrness and peevishness
that is possible, which at any other time were an inexcusable piece of Folly;
but now it is a Madness that wants a Name. Let us then so far at least take
breath in our Quarrel as to hearken to these words, and to examine what is
imported by them. Ye are Brethren.

This belongs to us, first, as we are Englishmen, all of the same Nation under
the same Laws, and the same Protection, shut up indeed in an Island, which as
it separates us from all the World, so it secures us against all the World. We
were anciently a broken People divided into many Kingdoms, and though most of
these were swallowed up many Ages ago, yet we were never brought all under one
Head before the beginning of this Century: Our Climate, it is true, is none of
the best; we have but a faint Sun, and the Product of our Soil cannot be
compared with that of more Southern Regions; but our Ports and Rivers give us
such Advantages, that we send out both Colonies and Manufactures all the World
over, and fetch home rich Returns; so that we have both Security and Wealth
beyond any of our Neighbors.

It is a melancholy thing to live upon a Continent, and to be subject to the
Chances of War, and to all the Depredations, and Miseries which follow all
Wars; but it is yet much more unhappy to be in the Neighborhood of that cruel
and barbarous Enemy of Mankind, who having laid off all the tenderness of
humane Nature, and the regards that have been by a common consent held sacred
in the most destructive Wars, executes whole Countries all at once: who after
all the Wealth that can possibly be squeezed out of them, is drawn from them to
the last Farthing for purchasing a Security for their Houses, Persons, and
Cattle: Who I say, after these Securities are so dearly paid for, sends the
final Order of destroying all, and burning, and wasting every thing without
exception. I speak not this to aggravate matters with words of Pomp; I say
nothing but what they do daily practice, and of which I have seen many fatal
Proofs in the Ruins of many great Towns, and large Countries, where the Words
of Joel were literally accomplished by that devouring Army; the Country before
them being like the Garden of Eden, but behind them like a desolate Wilderness.
Joel 2. 3.


But our Security from Enemies without us, is but half our Happiness: We are
safe at home likewise, having the blessing of a Government so tempered, that as
we are not exposed to the Fury of a levelling Multitude, nor the Confusions of
an Equality among Men, but have a Government that is strong and firm enough to
keep us in Order and Obedience; so we have the greatest Blessing that can be
found in Government in as high a degrees as wise men can desire. Oh! the
difference between us and some happier Climates, where men's Estates and
Liberties, and often their Lives are at the mercy of mere Humor and Passion:
where the Frowns of a Court can throw a man in a moment from the most plentiful
to the most miserable Condition imaginable: where one rash word is thought
Crime enough for a perpetual Imprisonment joined with all the Circumstances of
Rigor that can render it much more terrible than Death it self; so that if
such Tyrants do not make many public Examples of their Severity, their design
in so doing seems only to be to lengthen out the Miseries of such as suffer at
their hands, that so they may glut themselves with a more lasting Revenge. I
say, nothing of those terrible Impositions by which they eat out the Fortunes,
and the very Strength of their Subjects, all men's Estates by a quick
Circulation, are melted into the support of their Unjust Wars, or Extravagant
Expenses; and the poorer sort must give at least the half of their time to
work, in order to the paying those cruel Taxes, by which they grind their
People. Their ruined Houses, their ragged Clothes, their hungry Looks, and
their half-naked Children, give evident Proofs of the Tyranny of those
Governments that can render their People extremely miserable, in spite of all
that abundance which Nature has set before them, while Millions of People are
pining away in Want and Beggary, that so a few may surfeit themselves with all
the Excesses of Fullness and Vice. This is a short hint of that which every one
that has traveled abroad has seen in the richest Countries beyond Sea, God
grant we may never see it nearer. But we know it has been the Language of all
the Flatterers of lawless Power, that nothing can tame People, and make them
quiet and obedient but Poverty; whereas Plenty makes them haughty and mutinous,
as if Pharaoh's Maxims had been to be derived to all his Successors in Tyranny:
Ye are idle, ye are idle, therefore ye say, let me go. Exodus 5. 17.


We are all then Brethren, as we are Englishmen and Freemen, born under a
Government that gives us all possible Securities for both Liberty and Property,
the two chief earthly Blessings of humane Nature, whose Persons can neither be
restrained, nor punished beyond the bounds of Law; who can be charged with no
Taxes but by their own Consent; and who can be subject to no Laws but what were
prayed by themselves.

Happy Liberty! and happy Subjects! if they but knew their own Happiness; but
as good Men love Liberty, so it is only wise Men that can value it and secure
it; Fools part with it easily, and if they pay but a little for the Purchase of
it, are apt to think it is dear bought. The Israelites in their March when they
saw not the abundance to which they had been accustomed in Egypt, wished
themselves there again; so a voluptuous Nation that was Exodus 16. 3.
over-set with abundance, and corrupted with Luxury, may think it was better
with them when they were languishing away under that false appearance of
Plenty, into a certain Ruin; then now, if their Prospect of Liberty is like
for a year or two to force them to be a little more frugal and sober, less
vain, and less prodigal: such a lessening of Expense to secure Liberty, will
appear intolerable to those that have not sense enough to value it, nor Virtue
enough to starve their Vices; that they may settle it upon themselves and their
Posterities.

Our Neighbors in the Low Countries after they had felt the smart of Tyranny,
resolved either to recover their Liberty, or to perish in the Attempt, and by a
War of Forty Years continuance a small Corner of the World maintained it self
against the greatest Power then in Europe, and was reduced to a Misery and
Poverty; that nothing but an obstinate Resolution of being Freemen, or of
perishing, could have supported. In Conclusion, their Noble Designs were
blessed with Success, they became the Wonder, and the Envy of the World, the
Arbiters of Europe, and the Supports of that very Power which then studied to
crush them, and to crown their Glory, the Instruments of giving us Liberty, as
well as of securing their own. And yet after all this, though the Name of their
Government has a greater sound toward Liberty than our own, we are really the
much freer People of the two, where every man has a more open access to a
proportioned share in the Government, than among them.

That small Expense which we may borrow from our Pleasures to secure our
Liberty will be soon repaied to us in that firm and settled Happiness which is
in our view. We run indeed the hazard of losing it, and we deserve that it
should be so, if we either throw it up, as not worth the holding, or let it be
snatched from us by the great Ravisher of Liberty, and common Enemy to Mankind:
the truth is that Corruption of our Morals which is spread so universally over
the Nation, gives us just Cause of apprehending that we have not Virtue enough
left to maintain Liberty. But that as the voluptuous and degenerated Romans,
after they had shaken off Cesar's Tyranny, were too much vitiated to return to
their Ancient Government, and so they quickly fell under a new, a worse, and
more lasting Tyranny. Thus we who have fallen so far from the Virtues of our
Ancestors, can never be able to maintain those Rights which they derived to us,
if we do not resolve to return to their Virtues, and to cleanse our selves of
those Vices which do deprave us. If we will unite in maintaining this common
Cause, and concur with every man who on this occasion is willing to show
himself an Englishman, if we will forget all our little Interests to mind this
great One, and sacrifice small matters for the saving our All, then we will
show that we are Brethren, all born of one common Mother, and all equally
concerned in her Preservation.

But in this ye are Brethren, there is a closer relation implied; That as the
Jews were all Brethren with regard to that Covenant to which they had a Right,
as they were Abraham's Seed; so we Christians are Brethren, as we profess the
same common Christianity, and look for the same common Salvation. As we are
Christians, or as we are Protestants we are Brethren, believing the same
Gospel, owning the same God, and the same Savior, animated by the same Spirit,
and hoping to live together in the same state of Happiness for ever. In all
these respects we are Brethren; for that we are Protestants, imports no more
but that we are Christians who believe that holy Religion in the same Purity
and Simplicity in which it was at first delivered to the World. If there happen
to be any Diversities among us about some lesser things, we ought first to
compare the Importance of that in which we agree, with that in which we differ;
and if we find the one is vastly great, and the other is nothing in comparison
to it, then it is plain, that small Differences must give place to the greater
Points, in which we are at one; for all that act otherwise, show clearly, that
though they do not think it decent to speak out what they think, yet in their
Hearts they undervalue the common Interest of the Protestant Religion in which
we agree, but set a real Value upon indifferent matters, and are acted by the
Heats and Animosities of a Party, to which all other things give place. It was
not only a certain sign of Ruin to the Jews, but an infallible Cause of it,
that while they were besieged by the Romans, instead of consulting together the
Methods of their common Defense, they were broke into such irreconciliable
Feuds, that they no sooner had a time of breathing given them by their
Besiegers, than they fell upon one another, so that they became their own most
implacable Enemies. When the Saracens were too hard for the whole State of
Christendom, the Eastern and Western Churches fell out about so trifling a
matter, as whether the Bread in the Sacrament ought to be leavened, or not:
This first broke them, then some other matters not much more important, were
found out to widen the breach, which had such Effects, that the Western Nations
that ought to have supported the Greek Church and Empire, if not out of Charity
to them, yet out of a due care of themselves, that they might be covered by
such a Barrier from the Turkish Empire, looked on, and saw them destroyed, and
found themselves by that means exposed to a Power that has been so often
formidable to Europe. Shall not the Madness and Miseries of others make us so
wise as to fortify our selves all we can, and to forget, if we cannot quite
remove the Occasions of our Differences: Shall an evil Spirit still prevail
among us to the defeating all the Designs of Providence, and the crossing of
all Attempts for Peace and Union? so that neither the Errors that all men
seemed lately to confess, nor the Promises which were then generally made,
neither our late Distress, (...) our present Dangers, can bring us to a sound
Mind, or to a calm Temper, that in this our day we may know the things that
belong to our Peace. It is indeed strange that we should not know them, when
all the World besides us knows them. But as there is nothing that can tend ^o
the strengthening of all Bodies so much, as their being ^ted among themselves;
so there is somewhat ^o peculiar to the Genius of the Christian Religion, that
both obliges us to Peace and Love, and also disposes us to it, that we cannot
give a more eminent proof of our ignorance of the main Design of our Great
Master, and of his Blessed Doctrine, than to delight in everlasting
Quarrelling, and to hate, and study to destroy those for whom Christ died. Nor
does any thing defeat the design, nor stop the progress of Religion, so much as
the Divisions of those who profess it; for these do divert all men from bette^
things, as much as they scandalize the World against those who promote them
with so much zeal.

When the Reformation appeared first in the World, it made a mighty progress;
whole States and Kingdoms embraced it so fast, that the Advances it made in the
hands of a few Instruments, seemed to supply the want of Miracles, and looked
like a great one it self: but all on a sudden it came to a full stop, and now
for above an hundred years it has gained little ground, but lost much. The
chief reason that can be assigned for this, is, That those who embraced it,
instead of carrying on their common Cause with an united Strength, have fallen
a quarrelling among themselves about some Uncertain and Inconsiderable things.
Those in Germany being broken about the manner of the Presence in the
Sacrament; though all agree, that neither the one, nor the other Opinion has
any relation, either to the Worship of God, or to any Practical Duty: Those in
Holland have quarreled about the Decrees and Councils of God, though both
sides acknowledge that it is a Mystery past finding out: And we here in England
have had a long^ and fierce Contest about things, which we all confess are
indifferent in their own nature.

This Animosity works still so high among us, that many take fire upon the
smallest steps that can be made toward the healing so great a Breach; and fill
all places with Tragical Outcries, as if the Church of England were to be
pulled down: while the chief Promoters of these Reports know well how false
they are; and that instead of offering at any thing that can in any sort weaken
our Church, every thing which has been endeavored, must prove its Strength, as
well as its Glory; if we are so happy as to weigh all in even Balances. The
things that are proposed are of themselves desirable, though there should not
be one Dissenter gained by them; and are such as will tend to the making all
the parts of our Offices both more Unexceptionable, and more Edifying. But
Distempers are far gone, when the Patient rages at the first mention of a
Medicine. We have lost many happy Opportunities since the first beginnings of
the Reformation among us, for the healing our Breaches: One is sorry to
remember them, and wishes that such fatal Errors could be covered from the
knowledge of all succeeding Ages for the sake of the Church, and of those who
have governed it. But if we do again repeat former Errors, and let the present
Advantages that we have now in our hands slip from us, what is to be said upon
it, but that this is of the Lord, who by it is punishing us for our other sins,
for our Remissness in our Duties; for our neglect of the Pastoral Care; for our
slackning that strictness of Life which becomes our Profession; for our
Indulging our selves too much in Sensuality and Laziness; and for all those
other sins, by which we have departed from his Law, and have corrupted Mal. 2.
8, 9.
the Covenant of Levi, and made many to stumble at the Law; and that therefore
God will make us become Jer. 10. 21.
base and contemptible before the People; and that all our Flocks shall be
scattered. But we might hope for better things, if every one would put away all
Prejudices, all Wrath, Anger, and Revenge; and would put on Bowels of Mercies
and Kindness, remembering that we are Brethren. So that having purified our
selves from Humor, Passion, Interest, and every thing else that may corrupt
our minds, unto the 1 Pet. 1. 22.
unseigned love of the brethren, we would resolve to love one another with a
pure heart fervently: And if instead of the Pride of not yielding to one
another in any thing, we should rather engage into a holy Emulation of trying
who could yield most for the healing of those wounds that have been so often
opened, and that begin now again to bleed afresh.

It is not the Differences themselves that keep us asunder, they are too
Inconsiderable for that. It is a secret dislike that we bear to one another:
For as the Greeks and Latins could never have fallen out about so
inconsiderable a matter as the Leavening the Bread in the Sacrament, if the
Dispute about the Authority of the Bishops of Rome and Constantinople had not
embittered their minds: So our Subjects of Dispute are only the Occasions by
which our Uncharitableness works; and if by bringing our selves to a more
Christian Temper, that hidden Disease were once cured, all the Symptoms of it
would fall off of themselves, and men would grow ashamed that they had ever
spent so much Time and so much Zeal about things which deserve them so little.
The Apostles who were full of this Divine Temper, after they themselves had
judged in a Dispute of much more Consequence than any is among us, yet were not
only willing to let the Jews continue to do as they had wont to do, but even to
the Jews they became Jews, that so they might 1 Cor. 9. 20.
gain them, not by a Spirit of servile Compliance, but by the enlarged Spirit
of true Charity, which is of too great a compass, to be limited within any
narrow sub-division. By this Spirit it was, that while St. Paul was a Prisoner
for the Gospel, some thinking to add affliction to his bonds, preached Christ
not sincerely, but out of malice and envy; Phil. 1. 15, 18.
yet so Triumphant was the Spirit of Universal Love, and of Zeal for the Honor
of his Blessed Master, in him, that he rejoiced in this, That Christ was
Preached: And then do we become his Followers, when by a degree of the same
Spirit, we can so far raise our minds above all the narrownesses of a Party,
that tho we were assured that those men who differ from us, were in the wrong,
and had ill designs against us, yet w^ would conquer them in the Spirit of the
Gospel, and so overcome their evil with our good.

Upon all such occasions we ought not so much to consider what we owe to these
with whom we have to do, as what we owe to our selves, to the Church, and to
the succeeding Generation: So that if we can see how we may do that which may
produce good effects at any distance of time from us, we ought to do it; though
it should not, like a Charm, have a present sensible operation; nor ought
things that are offered at for Peace, be rejected, if they are in themselves
reasonable, because we cannot be assured before hand, that those in whose
favor they are proposed, will be gained by them. The Church will always gain
both with God and Man, by offering at Peace as much as is possible, and as much
as in her lies; nor are we to stop in a good thing, because the effect is not
certain; in such cases we may well trust the Providence of God; and things that
will be their own Apology, are never the worse, if they are defeated by the
sowrness of unreasonable men; on the contrary, as the one side will have the
more Glory, so the other will be the more inexcusable, when great Concessions
are frankly made, but unhandsomely rejected.

To crown all; We have still one reason to persuade us to reflect a little more
frequently on our being Brethren, since we know our Enemies do it to purpose;
their Bottom is on Absolute Authority and Infallibility, that are maintained by
Implicit Faith, and (...) which gives them indeed (...) ou^ Principles do not
allow us; yet it (...) ^ccountable piece of the pervers^ness of human nature,
that false Persuasions should have so great an Influence, when certain Truths
are so feeble; and when all the weight that our Savior has laid on mutual Love
and Charity, shall have so little force, while some False Notions work more
certainly. Our Adversaries have indeed among them, many differences, both in
Doctrine and Practice, not to mention a vast variety in their Rituals, that are
much more important than any of those are, about which we are divided; and yet
as soon as they see the common Cause concerned, they can lay all these to
sleep, in order to their running down their Common Enemies; but we by a fatal
obstinacy continue our Disputes, and heighten our Animosities, when our Enemies
are in our Bowels, ready not only to take advantage of our Passions, but to
devour us; while we, instead of securing our selves from them, seem only to be
set on devouring one another. This is from God, and gives us a melancholy
Prospect of it self; but a much more melancholy one, when we have reason to
look upon it as a Judgment of God on us for our sins, and as a forerunner of
our destruction. We seem now to be in the like State with that in which
Jerusalem was, when our Savior said of her, How often would I have gathered
thee under my wings, as a hen gathers her brood, Luke 13. 34.
but thou would not!

This leads me to consider the first Circumstance in which the Israelites were,
that made it more necessary for them to remember that they were Brethren, since
they were then in Egypt, in bondage to a Cruel, Treacherous, and Ungrateful
Tyrant, who had both Strength enough to master them, and Rage enough to destroy
them. It is true, such has the goodness of God been to us, that we are not now
in Egypt; but we were lately very near the being brought under that Yoke: and
if we do not manage the happy Opportunity that is now in our hands, we have
reason to apprehend that we shall quickly fall again under it. The Scene that
has been lately acted in France, and Savoy, has given us sufficient warning of
what we ought to expect when we fall under such Pharaohs, who will neither
remember Joseph, nor the most signal Services that can be done them, nor have
any of the tendernesses of Humanity, not to say of the Compassions of
Christianity, but who will by a slow oppression eat out the Estates, and spoil
the Houses of those they call Heretics, and give them all the vexatious
disquiet that they can contrive; and then, when all is consumed, will separate
the nearest Relations, and throw them into terrible and noisome Prisons,
without any regard to Age or Sex, to Sickness or Infirmity: And the very
attempt of flying away from so dreadful a Misery, will be made a Crime to be
punished by the greatest severity to which men can be adjudged; to be chained
to a Bank, and to tug at an Oar, in the most uncomfortable state of life that
is imaginable. This is what many thousands in France have suffered, and still
do suffer; and has driven vast multitudes out of their Country from their
Dwellings and Families, naked almost, and destitute of all things: you have
seen so many crying Instances of this Cruelty, that it is not necessary to
enlarge further upon it: and you have received, and relieved them with such a
bountiful hand, and so tender a Charity, that you have reason to hope that
there is a Blessing reserved for you, proportioned to the labor of Love you
have showed, who have ministered to so many of our persecuted Brethren, and
still do minister.

We here, had formerly reason to have looked for no better usage; we know their
Church is Uniform in her Proceedings against Heretics; the Spirit and
Principles are the same everywhere; so we had no reason to have expected to be
exempted from the fate of others, if we had been delivered over to them whose
tender mercies are cruel. We saw that they remembered not Joseph, not only in
the Age after he was dead, but that immediately after the greatest Service that
could be done, and the most solemn Promises that could be made, all was
forgotten: and if there appeared at any time any relenting, it was like that in
Egypt; for when Pharaoh felt the weight of the Divine Displeasure, he was so
far wrought on, that he was willing to let the People go; but that Terror was
no sooner over, than his heart was hardened; so that his good Temper went off,
and all his Promises were forgotten. Some, perhaps are so foolish as to
imagine, that present Misfortunes may have wrought a Change somewhere, and that
they now see past Errors, so that they would not venture to fall again into the
same Follies, that have proved so fatal to them. But yet such Persons ought to
consider that Pharaoh was Pharaoh still, and would be so still, after all the
Changes of Fortune through which he could pass; Obligations and Engagements
will be but feeble things. And we must expect to be the most miserable Nation
under the Sun, if after the Escape that we have made, we should again fall back
into the same Hands; not only the old Crime of Heresy must be brought against
us, but our Presumption in daring to set our selves free, and to accept of the
Deliverance, which God has so wonderfully wrought for us, would be thought the
greatest of Crimes, and be aggravated by all that could be invented to make it
look odious. We have in such a Case the most deplorable State of Misery
imaginable to look for, all the Hardships of Prisons, all the Cruelty of rough
Treatment, and after the lengthned Misery of ill Usage, such a terrible Death,
as they may think, will give us the most exquisite Misery; so that all the Ease
and Pleasure we might hope for, should be to be speedily delivered by a quick
Execution out of their Hands; their Temper and Principles are of themselves
cruel enough, but when these are sharpened by Resentment and Revenge, then new
Contrivances of Cruelty are to be expected.

This is that Egypt out of which we are delivered, I wish I could say
delivered. Alas, Ireland is not! but is still in Bondage with her Children, and
like to be a long Scene of Blood and Misery, nor can our Deliverance be
complete till that is perfected; and tho we here are not at present in their
Power, yet it is but too evident that many wish we were. If these were the
avowed Members of that Body, it ought not to surprise us, but that many who
seem zealous against it, should yet by their whole Conduct be carrying us back
thither, is more amazing. Can any Man be so void of Understanding, as to forget
so soon what was so lately done? or imagine that any Change in the Affairs of
our Enemies, can have changed either their Principles or their Hearts, unless
it be to the worse? And yet after all this there are not a few, that say
plainly, Would to God we were in Egypt again, for it was then better with us
than it is now. Others are not so sincere as to speak out, but their Actings
speak for them. Some are uneasy, because they can no more persecute their
Brethren. Others, because they can no more insult over their Neighbors. Some
are afraid of suffering a little of the great deal they deserve: While, on the
other hand, others are acted with another Extreme of Fury, and under the
pretense of punishing past Errors, seek only to gratify their own Revenges, and
so drive others to the common Folly of all that are in any present Danger, to
wish for any thing that may deliver them from that, how fatal soever it may
prove afterward.

These unruly Agitations of Men's Minds on both hands, are the very Plague that
our Enemies ought to wish to us, that while Pharaoh pursues, we may stand still
quarrelling with one another till he can overtake and destroy us; and thus,
instead of securing our selves against the Common Enemy, we create many new
Ones among our selves, and expose the Whole to the Rages of those who can have
no Mercy.

The Second Circumstance of the Affairs of the Israelites was, That they were
upon the Point of being redeemed out of their Bondage, and being made one of
the most Glorious Nations that ever was: The Prophecy relating to it was near
the assigned Period; and it seems it had begun already to be understood, that
Moses was to be the Person to be employed in it, for we find here that he
imagined they had known it, which shows that it was got even then into many
Hands. And now if we turn this toward our Selves, here is a Dawning to a
Happiness, and a Deliverance begun, that carries with it all that is desirable
to us. Whether this is a beginning of that great Restitution of all Things,
which is supposed to be held forth in Prophecy, and to be near its
accomplishment, is that which I will not undertake to affirm; but this is
certain, that since the first beginnings of the Reformation, the Face of the
Times never looked so bright toward that blessed Work as it does at present.
There was never such a happy conjunction of Interests among those who professed
it, as there is at present; nor were ever these Kingdoms, and the United
Provinces, in such a close conjunction as they are at this Day. And on the
other Hand, the great Persecutor of Protestants has, by his Violence and
Injustice, raised against himself so strong an Alliance of Princes of the same
Religion, that it is visible the Signs of the Times give us all the grounds of
hope that we can propose to our selves; nor can any thing disappoint all this,
but first our Sins that may provoke God to appear against us, and then our
mutual Animosities and Quarrellings that may distract us at Home. If Men will
forget their present Danger, and only think of former Provocations, if both
Sides are studying to aggravate Matters one against another, and seeking and
improving all the Advantages they can find; if the repeated Interpositions of
Him, to whom, under God, we owe our present Quiet, and our late Deliverance,
cannot inspire us with softer Thoughts: If, I say, we continue firm to these
ill-temper'd Resolutions, What must the conclusion of all this be, but the Ruin
of Religion, and the loss of Liberty? We will appear to all the World, as well
as to all succeeding Ages, the most unthinking, and the most blinded Nation
under Heaven, the least sensible of Religion, and the least capable of Liberty;
that have not the regard due to the One, nor the sense and the virtue necessary
for the Other; and that after all the noise we have made about Religion, that
we have none at all; and that after all the Concern we have showed for Liberty,
we neither deserve it, nor can maintain it. Upon our Behavior at present
depends all the Prospect that, humanely speaking, we can possibly have of our
Religion's not being wholly extirpated, at least in all these Parts of the
World. If in this Fermentation and Crisis the Design miscarries, there is
nothing so black and dismal, as that which we ought to look for. We will be
despised by all our Enemies, as much as we are now hated by them; we will fall
unregarded and unpitied; and if such a Misery is reserved for us, we shall have
one aggravation of it, that as the damned in Hell are supposed to curse and
reproach one another, so if we fall again into a state of Persecution, both
Sides will be reproaching, and next to cursing one another for it. Weaker Minds
will be struck with this, that the miscarriage of so great a Design, that was
carried on so far with such unlook'd-for Successes, looks as if God had only
let Things go so far of our Side, that all the World might see in our
mismanagement of them, that we are under a Curse which no Successes could
remove, and under a Madness that was passed all Cure. What prospect can we
have, or whither can we so much as think of flying, if our present Settlement
should be overturned? The view is so terrible, that if that should happen, the
Thing which next to it a good Man would chiefly fear, must be his own outliving
it, and not perishing in it; since after such a Miscarriage, nothing beside
Miracle could retreive that, without which Life would be a perpetual Burden to
a wise or a good Man. These are not Words of Pomp, nor the undue Aggravations
of a Misery, which can never be fully expressed in words, and which I pray God
may never be felt in deed by us.

At such a Time as this, is it fit for us to raise up into our Thoughts the
unreasonable remembrance of all the Errors and Follies into which the Weakness
and Credulity of some may have led them, who yet as soon as they saw how they
had been deceived, seemed sensible of former Faults, and stood firm afterward?
If, I say, all these Things are to be canvassed with rigor, how can it be
hoped that Men's Minds should ever be settled or freed from those Apprehensions
that may tempt them to think of securing themselves at any rate? And on the
other hand, Men whose Passions have once so fatally misled them, as not only to
be concerned in the shedding of Innocent Blood, but in the exposing the whole
Nation to be destroyed, ought not to suffer the like Passions to return afresh
upon them, to the keeping up and heightning our Differences, and to the
reviving our Animosities, by a pretended Zeal for the Church, which they have
once already endangered to the highest degree; it were more modest and becoming
in them to be silent and retired, than to study still to trouble our Waters,
and to sow the Seeds of new Dissentions among us, and so commit new Faults
instead of repenting of old Ones: all these indecent Errors of all sides
concur, to let us see how far we are yet out of the way, and give us reason to
conclude, that our Deliverance was too quickly wrought for us; that we were not
long enough in distress, and that we are not yet wholly purged from our Dross,
but that we must go through a fiery Trial, which will either purge us more
entirely, or consume us quite.

But if after all that Heat which we are raising in our selves, or in others,
we would grow so calm and so wise, as to remember that we are Brethren, this
would quickly give us another view of Things, and make us see our Madness while
we are so much worse than the two Israelites in my Text, who did wrong one to
another, for we wrong our selves and our common Concerns in the Wrongs that we
do to one another. Are not the hard Speeches we throw out, and the severe Words
that we fasten on one another, Injuries of a very high Nature? We first hate
one another, and then study to render one another as odious, both to our Selves
and to all the World, as possibly we can: We are possessed with a Spirit of
Jealousy and Distrust, which makes us easily believe all the Ill that we can
hear of those that differ from us, and to create to our selves groundless
Apprehensions and Fears; and when such an ill Temper has once corrupted us, we
are easily led to all the Injustices that do follow Parties and Divisions on
the account of Religion.

God be thanked for it, that there is an end put to all Persecution in Matters
of Conscience; and that the first and chief Right of Humane Nature, of
following the Dictates of Conscience in the Service of God is secured to all
Men amongst us; and that we are freed, I hope, for ever, of all the Remnants of
the worst part of Popery that we had too long retained, I mean, the Spirit of
Persecution. If this gives uneasiness to any, it shows that their Eye is evil,
because the Eye of our Legislators has been good toward those, who tho they
may be mistaken in their Notions, yet have still the Rights of Men and of
Christians. But after all this it is to be remembered, that Men may be still
Persecutors, though they are not able to persecute any longer, according to our
Savior's charging the Guilt of intended Sins on those who never acted them:
for as long as we entertain Hatred and Malice in our Hearts, and wish that it
were in our Power to do hurt to others, so long we become guilty before God,
and so do wrong to our selves, though we are not in condition to do them any;
but if we do them all the wrong we can, we show what our Tempers are, and that
we would do more if it were in our Power. If we love to keep up old
Differences, or to create new Ones, if we will continue to make the Terms of
Communion with us as strait as possibly we can, and shut out all Persons, as
much as in us lies, from joining Labors with us, because they do not in all
Things think as we do: If we will by turns employ all the Interest we have in
any Turn of Government that is kind to us, to do wrong to others, either by
loading them with false Accusations, by aggravating some lesser Matters, or by
an undue prosecution of real, but repented of Faults; All these are the several
Instances, in which an injurious Temper shows it self; and while such things
are among us, we are under the Guilt that is charged on these Israelites in my
Text, who though they were Brethren, yet did Wrong one to another.

While we are so liberal in throwing out of Lies and Slanders, or at least,
while we do so easily believe them, and so willingly report them, we show that
whatsoever our want of Power to do Mischief may be, yet that our Inclinations
are still full of Malice and Wickedness. And while we are under the power of
such ill Tempers, we are far enough from the Blessedness of Brethren that dwell
together in Unity: Indeed this Disease is gone too far to admit of any other
Cure, but what must come down from Above from the God of Love, through the
effusion of the Spirit of Love and Peace.

The Corruption that is rooted in our Natures, is too deeply fixed there to be
cured any way, but by an Interposition of a Divine Power. We see that neither
the consideration of Reason nor of Interest; neither the sense of Honor, nor
the apprehension of Danger, are strong enough to prevail over the Prejudices of
our Education, or those angry Impressions which we have so long Cherished in
our selves and in others, that perhaps we are now scarce Masters of them, and
therefore since the Disease has gone so deep, we must look up to him who alone
can Cure it; We must all consider, that such an Evil Spirit prevailing among us
at such a time, is a plain Indication of Gods Anger that is kindled against us.
Therefore before this proves our Ruin, let us all turn to God with our whole
Hearts, and Repent us of the Evil of our ways, and Cry mightily to him, That so
he may Arise, and Save, and Deliver us, who by our Sins and our Divisions are
brought so very Low, and who must yet fall into the most abject and miserable
State possible, if God do not bless us with a healing Temper, and with healing
Counsels, That so we may go on to Perfection, and Complete those Great Things
which God has begun to work for us, and in which we our selves have fatally
stopped the Course of his Mercy to us, and that we may both Live as Christians,
and Love as Brethren; That the God of Love and Peace may delight to dwell among
us, and Bless us, That this Church may become more and more, that which she
truly is, The Praise of all the Churches, and the Joy of the whole Earth, and
that every one of us in our own particular may, at last come to dwell in those
Regions above, where all are made perfect in Love; which may the God of Love
grant us, for the sake of him that Loved us, and that gave himself for us; to
whom be Glory and Dominion for ever.

Amen,
FINIS.
Books Lately Printed for Richard Chiswel.
The Case of Allegi^nce in our present circumstances considered, in a Letter
from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country.

A Breviate of the State of Scotland in its Government, Supreme Courts,
Officers of State, Inferior Officers, Offices and Inferior Courts, Districts,
Jurisdictions, Buroughs Royal, and Free Corporations. Fol

Some Considerations touching Succession and Allegiance. 4to

Reflections upon the late Great Revolution: Written by a Lay-Hand in the
Country, for the satisfaction of some Neighbors.

The History of the Dissertion; or an Account of all the public Affairs in
England, from the beginning of September 1683. to the Twelfth of February
following. With an Answer to a Piece called The Dissertion discussed, in a
Letter to a Country Gentleman. By a Person of Quality.

K. William and K. Lewis* wherein is set forth the inevitable necessity these
Nations lie under of submitting wholly to one or other of these Kings; And that
the matter in Controversy is not now between K. William and K. James, but
between K. William and K. Lewis of France for the Government of these Nations.

A Sermon preached at Fulham, in the Chapel of the Palace upon Easter day
1689. at the Consecration of the Right Reverend Father in God Gilbert Lord
Bishop of Sarum: By Anthony Horneck, D. D.

The Judgments of God upon the Roman Catholic Church, from its first Rigid
Laws for Universal Conformity to it, unto its last End. With a prospect of
these near approaching Revolutions, Viz. The Revival of the Protestant
profession in an Eminent Kingdom, where it was totally suppressed. The last End
of all Turkish Hostilities. The general Mortification of the power of the Roman
Church in all parts of its Dominions. By D^ue Cressener, D. D.

A Discourse concerning the Worship of Images; preached before the University
of Oxford: By G. Tully Sub-Dean of York, for which he was Suspended.

Two Sermons, one against Murmuring, the other against Censuring: By Simon
Patrick. D. D. Now Lord Bishop of ^hichester.

An Account of the Reasens which induced Charles the Second, King of England,
to declare War against the States General of the United Provinces in 1672. And
of the Private League which he entered into at the same Time with the French
King to carry it on, and to establish Pope^y in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
as they are set down in the History of the Dutch War, printed in French at
Paris, with the privilege of the French King, 1682. Which Book he caused to be
immediately suppressed at the Instance of the English Ambassador. Fol.

An Account of the Private League betwixt the late King James the Second, and
the French King. Fol.

Dr. VVake's Sermon before the King and Queen at Hampton Court.

Dr. Tenison's Sermon, before the House of Commons, Jane 8. 1689.

Mr. Tully's Sermon of Moderation, before the Lord Mayor, May 12. 1689.

An Examination of the Scruples of those who refuse to take the Oath of
Allegiance. By a Divine of the Church of England.

A Dialogue betwixt two Friends, a Iacobite and a VVilliamite; occasioned by
the late Revolution of Affairs, and the Oath of Allegiance.

The Case of Oaths Stated: 4to.

A Letter from a Fr^h Lawye^ to a^ English Gentleman* upon the Pr^ Revolu^ 4to.

The Advantages of the Present Settlement and great (...) of a (...).

The Interest of England in the preservation of Ireland*

The Answer of a Protestant Gentleman in Ireland to a late Po^ish Letter of N.
N. upon a Discourse between them, concerning the present posture of that
Country, and the part fit for those concerned there to act in it. 4to.

An Apology for the Protestants of Ireland, in a b^ef Narrative of the late
Revolutions in that kingdom* and (...) Account of the present St^te thereof: By
a Gentleman of Q^ty* 4^.

A true Representation to the King and people of England (...) Matte^ were
carried on all al^ in Ireland by the late King James, in favor of the I^ish
Papi^ there, from his Accession to the Crown to the 10th of April 1689.

The Mantle thrown off: or the Irish man dissected. 4to.

Reflections upon the Opinions of some Modern Divines, concerning the Nature of
Government in general, and that of England in particular. With an Appendix
(...) ^o this Matter containing* 1. The Seventy fifth Cano^ of the Council of
(...) 2. The Original Articles in Latin, out of which the Magna Charta of King
John was ^amed* 3. The true Magna Charta of King John in French: By which the
Ma^na Charta in Ma^h. Paris is cleared and Justified* and the Alterations in
the Common Magna Charta discovered. (Of which see a more particular Account in
the Advertisement before the Appendix.) All three Englished.

The (...) of Non-Resistance or Pa^ve O^edience no way concerned in the (...)
depending between the William ac^ the I^es.

(...) (...) Historia (...) inter Orthodoxos and ^ ^ac (...) Descri^it, dige^t
^ H^cus Wha^ton, A. M. (...) Archie^ (...) a Sacris Domesticis.

A Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a New Separation on Account of
the Oath^ With an Answer to the History of P^ssive Obedience.

A Discourse concerning the (...) C^mission opened in the Jerusalem* Chamber*
(...) 10. 1689.

Taxes no Charges: In a Letter from a Gentleman to a Person of Quality: Showing
the Nature* (...) and ^enefit of (...) in this Kingdom* and compared with the
Impositio^ of ^oreign States. Together with the Improvement of Trade in time of
War.

A Discourse of the necessity of encouraging (...) Industry: Wherein is plain^
proved* that Luxury and the want of (...) Labor, became the ^in of the four
Grand (...) of the World in the former Age, a^ of Spain and other (...) in
this; and the promot^g of m^al Tra^* the rise of Dutch, German^, etc.
Paralleled and (...) and (...) to be practi^ under the present (...) of (...)

A Se^mon Preached at the A^zes at (...) July 8. 1689. By John (...) M. A.
Vicar of Low-Leyton in Essex.

The Bishop of Salisbury's Sermon before the House of Peers. Nov. 5. 1689.


