THE Spiritual Anatomy OF MAN.

In which is Considered,

I. The Happy State of Man's Integrity in his first Creation.

II. The woeful Apostasy of Man from God, by his Original Sin, and how his
Posterity is guilty of the same, and affected with the consequences thereof.

III. Man's Restoration by the Second Adam, the Mediator Jesus Christ, and the
great excellency of the Covenant of Grace.

IV. The whole series of Christian Duties: With Promises of assistance relating
to the respective cases.

V. The particular cases of Affliction, especially Spiritual (...) Sickness,
Poverty, Imprisonment, Reproach, Desertion of (...) and Relations; and the
Promises in the several cases.

VI. The great encouragement to Believers, for Patience and Perseverance, from
the great reward of Eternal Happiness, and Promises of assistance.

To which is added an Index of the whole Contents.

When the Morning Stars Sang together, and all the Sons of God shouted for Joy,
Job 38.7. The first Man is of the Earth, Earthly; the second Man is the Lord
from Heaven. Published by Andrew Burnet: M. A.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. and are to be sold by John Lawrence at the Sign of
the Angel in the Poultry, 16^^

THE Epistle Dedicatory. To the Right Honorable, Learned and Religious, Sir
Thomas Burnet of Leis, Knight and Baronett, and one of their Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council; for the Kingdom of Scotland; Grace, Peace, and all
Happiness, both Temporal and Eternal.
Right Honorable,
IT is the Promise of the All-Glorious God, to Honor those that Honor him;
there be four special ways, whereby God Honors Men.

First, When he raises them out of nothing, worse than nothing, yea, from the
very depth of Hell, to a height of Heavenly Honor, Happiness and Holiness in
Christ Jesus, whereby he makes them more Excellent than their Neighbors, Prove.
12.26. more Excellent, not in degrees only, but in kind; more Excellent in
their Birth, for they are Born again of the Word, and of the Spirit; more
Excellent in their Thoughts, more Excellent in their Affections, more Excellent
in their Practices, more Excellent in their Lives, in Regard of Gods Favor
toward them; and more Excellent in their Death, their Death is sweet to them:
All True Christians are truly Right Honorable, and Truly Royal: They are Loyal
Subjects, and a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. They are really the lowest, yet
the highest People, Exodus 19.6. Lowest in their own Sense, highest in Gods
sight, Rev. 1.6. and 5.10.

Secondly, God Honors Men, when he gives them Hearts to serve him, in a
Faithful and Fruitful Subjection to his Will. The Service of God, is not only
Duty, but also our Privilege and Preferment. Hence Theodosius Gloryed more in
that he was a Servant of Christ, than being Emperor of the East.

Thirdly, God Honors Men, when he rases Men to places of Eminency above
others: And makes them Faithful, in employing their power for God, and Piously
prudent in their public Deportment.

Fourthly, But the highest Honor shall be hereafter in Heaven, when the Saints
shall be filled brim full, with Grace and Glory. We cannot Honor God, until he
has Honored us: We cannot give glory to God, until we have received glory
from him; because he first Honors us; Grace is Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18.

Sir, God has Honored your Family, with the Truest Honor in Christ, Romans
8.30. Your Ancestors have been Right Honorable, for Piety, Virtue, Religion
and Zeal to Gods Glory; and God has made you a Honorable Branch, of that
Honorable Family, and has given you a Heart to Honor him again. Some
Families are valued from Antiquity, who can pretend Title to Religion or Virtue
in themselves or Ancestors; but your Honor is truly valuable on both accounts,
and indeed from Religion, and Exemplary practice of Godliness, the Blessing on
Families and Persons, is to be expected. Wickedness and Debauchery, has lain
so long on some Families, as a Moth, until they are altogether gangrened; and
as the Degeneracy of some Families in Religion and Morals, is too, too
palpable, it is to be likewise feared, their Extirpation may be as Conspicuous,
and it ought to be Matter of Humiliation, that Impiety has been so
Predominant, without Parallel, in the late Reigns; From the inexcusable
Encouragement at the Helm; that the most Considerable Families in these
Nations, have been Sullyed with the blackest Stains of Vice, so that Morality
has been accounted pedantry, and Religion Bafouned and Ridiculed. And it must
be allowed the Glory, as well as the Mercy of some, who have not been carried
away in such a Deluge. And your Honor by the special Conduct of Providence,
has been preserved in your integrity, as an Exemplary Stock to graft upon, for
the future Propagation of Religion.

These following Sheets, being a Collection of the private Meditations of a
Gentleman, Born and Educated in the Kingdom of Scotland, near to your Honors
Ancient Manor of Crathis; In his Solitude, when by Providence, he was
restrained from the Exercise of his Talent, in the way of his Profession and
Education; and only intended for the use of himself, and Family. But whilst in
his Confinement, he was visited by some Christian Friends, as well of Sacred,
as Civil Profession, and these Sheets coming occasionally to be by them viewed
and approved of; The Author was Importuned to Print the same, as containing
many particulars, which might tend to the Advancement of Religion. But for
several Reasons, he was Averse; as First, his then Circumstances could not bear
the Charge of the Press; Secondly, He has truly observed, that the sincere
Affections to Religion in Life and Practice, is so decayed, that whatever is
wrote on that Subject, unless varnished under the Name of some Author Eminently
in Vogue, the same is implicitly vilified; and he intending not to be known,
and considering, if known, his Name might not be Authentic, to give Reputation
to the Truth of the Writing, however valuable in it self. Thirdly, That as
Books are valued not so much for the matter they contain, as the Fame of the
Author, or Patrociny of some Eminent Person, he found himself at a loss, to
whom to Dedicate, fearing in this Degeneracy of zeal for God, his Dedication
might be construed avarice, rather than desire of a Patron.

These Sheets lying thus in their Swadling-Cloaths, and like to perish in
Darkness, and I being Familiarly acquainted with the Author, and finding that
in them the most Nervous parts of Practical Relegion, were Judiciously Treated
and Methodized, I was induced from Zeal, in Advancing Religion, to Solicit the
Authors Permission to Publish these Sheets; and the rather, for what was his
Discouragement, in want of Patron, was my Encouragement, that I might Presume
upon your Honors Favor on this behalf.

The Author having appositely Entitled this Treatise (The Anatomy of Man) as
being a Series of the whole State of Man, from his Creation, to his Eternal
Rest in Glory, and I having the Happiness to be so well acquainted with your
Honors zeal, for the Kingdom of Christ, and of your Knowledge in all the
Mystical and Practical parts of Religion, your Serene Judgment to distinguish,
and your Charity to Encourage good Intentions, and Indulge Escapes, I could no
where find a safer Sanctuary for (the Anatomy of Man) than in your Honors
Protection. Neither could I, without the Violation of greatest obligations,
omit this Oblation to your Honor; and if I may be justified from the false
Imputation of flattery, I can boldly aver, your Honor is duly Entitled to
such Patrociny, not only from the long Series of your Judicious, Just, and
Honorable Ancestors; but also from your own Exemplary Espousing, Protecting
and Encouraging of Religion; and Constant, Holy, Affection to the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.

Therefore Right Honorable, through your gentle Hands, I commend this Treatise
to the World. It is not necessary that I should give it an account, why I seek
so far from home! God has wrought my Heart, to Love those that Love him, and
Honor those that Honor him: And distance of Place, cannot Abridge my Duty.
With all this, I would the World should know, I am one, amongst those many, who
truly Honor you for your Virtues. In Testimony whereof, I make this Dedication
to your Worthy Name, and Honorable Person, which I beseech you to accept of,
as an Acknowledgment of that Debt I owe, and the unfeigned desire I have of
your Souls Welfare.

Let these Sheets as hopeful Twins, find shelter under your Wings, and
Protection under your Roof. If your Honor approve of them, and find in them
the Anatome of the Title, and that they may be of use to the present, and after
Generations, your Countenance is implored thereunto as a Luster, which in some
measure, may supply Omissions or Defects of the Author. And as he is sond of
your Patrociny, and will gratefully acknowledge the Honor of it, I must needs
own my Renewed Obligations, in the Acceptance of this my Address; and shall by
Divine Assistance, never be wanting, to Wish and Pray for the Increase and
Continuance of Grace, Honor, and Prosperity to your self, your Pious,
Honorable Worthy, and Zealously Religious Lady, and Hopeful Succession, as the
indispensable Duty of,

Your Honor's most Faithful and Humble Servant, ANDREW BURNETT.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader.
IF we consider Man in his first Creation, as Created in the Likeness, and
after the Image of God, Genesis 1.27. in Righteousness, True Holiness, and
Knowledge, Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 1.10. whereby he was sufficiently enabled to
understand all things, necessary for his own Happiness, his Obedience to God,
and Government of the Creatures; and that to him, were given all the Creatures
for Use, with Dominion over them, and that then all the Works of God were very
good, Genesis 1.28, 31. when all the Creatures were in Amity amongst themselves,
and in Subjection to Man; when God delighted in Man, and was pleased with all
the Works of his own Hands; when the Creation admired the Majesty of God, and
paid Obedience to Man; when all the Creation rejoiced together, and had
Complacency in one another; when the Sovereign Ruled with Love, and Subjects
obeyed with Fear; when greatness was without Envy, and Subjection without
Contempt; when Beauty was without Pride, and Wealth without Covetousness; when
pleasure was without Lust, and Profit and Plenty, without Trouble or Sorrow;
when each complied with others, and there was no Repining; when all had enough,
and none was under Reproach; when all were in Amity, and took pleasure in one
another; when all enjoyed Content, and none exceeded his bounds; when all
things were pleasant, and nothing contemptible; when all things were useful,
and nothing pernicious; When the Morning Stars Sung together, and all the Sons
of God shouted for Joy, Job 38.7. When the Speech and Language of all the
Creation, to the ends of the Earth, was to sound out, and declare the glory of
the most High. Ps. 19.1, 2, 3.

When the unity of the Sons of God by Creation, was Like the Precious Ointment
on the Beard, running down the Skirts of the Garments, fragrant and refreshful,
and as the Dew on the Mountains, bringing Nourishment to the Plants, Ps. 133.
who could withold from crying out, O Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all
the Earth, thou art glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, doing Wonders,
Ps. 8.1, 2, 3. a Fountain of Gardens, a well of living Waters, and Streams of
all fullness? Cant. 4.15. and with David, admire the free and Sovereign goodness
of God, What is Man, that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of Man that thou
visitest him? For thou have made him a little lower than the Angels, and have
Crowned him with Glory and Honor, thou have given him to have Dominion over
the works of thy Hands, thou have put all things under his Feet, Ps. 8.4, to
end.

Who could avoid to sit down under this shadow with great delight, and find the
Fruit pleasant to their Taste, and be sick of Love? Cant. 2.2, 3, 5.

If on the other hand, we consider that pale and dismal Countenance of all
things, under that woeful Apostasy, and Spirit of Rebellion, against God in this
our Day, That every Imagination of the Thoughts of Man's Heart, is only Evil
continually, Genesis 6.5. That Man denies God, has gone astray from him, is
become filthy, that there is none that does good, no not one, nor any that
calls on God, Ps. 14. to 5. That Man has lifted up his Heels, and Revolted
from his Maker. This is not found out by secret search, but discovered in all
his steps, since that Apostasy, Man was Holiness to the Lord, at his Creation
in Gods Image, Jer. 2.3. but now is a Loathsome Batch of all filthiness, From
the Sole of the Foot, even unto the Head, there is no soundness in it, we are
fall as an unclean thing, and all our Righteousness are as filthy Rags, and we
do all fade away as a Leaf, and our Iniquities like the Wind have taken us
away, Is. 1.6. chapter 64.6, 7.

As Man has Revolted in Disobedience from God, so we find a Revolt, Confusion,
and Apostasy amongst the Creatures, the Spirit of Disobedience is so broke out
amongst Men, that through the Pride and Voluptuous Appetite of Men's Hearts, the
World is almost Degenerated into an assumed Annarchy, of self-interest, and
preferrence, so that due Subjection is declined, unless constrained by force;
and that amongst Men, first, in D^mestick, secondly in a public Capacity,
which is clearly proved by Scripture and Experience, First by Scripture, The
Son Dishonors the Father, the Daughter rises up against the Mother, the
Daughter in Law against the Mother in Law, a Man's Enemies are the Men of his
own House, etc. Mic. 7.6, 7.

David was Persecuted, and hunted like a Partridge by Saul his Father in Law,
and had his Crown usurped from him by his own Son Absalom, 2 Samuel 15. and
Zenacherib King of Assyria, was murdered by his own Sons, Is. 37.38.

Does not Ambition for Dominion, Covetousness for gain, divide Relations? what
Relation or Affinity, oblige Men beyond their pretended Interest? what
Allyances or Treaties, tie Princes from Usurpation or Encroachments? may it not
be too much charged on most of the greatest form on Earth, which was said of
Philip of Macedon, amicitias utilitate non fide colebat, his Interest, not his
Promise obliged him.

Secondly, If we look on the World in respect of the Politic Constitution,
what Nation, Country, or People shall we find quiet from Commotions,
Disturbances, Rebellions, or Mutinies, either from the Oppression, Tyranny, or
Usurpation of the Sovereign, or the Murmurings, Jealousies, and Mutinous,
Uneasy, and Discontented Humors of the Subject? Does not Judah vex Ephraim,
and Ephraim envy Judah, Is. 11.13. does not the Church Complain, Servants have
ruled over us, and none delivered out of their Hands, Kings are hanged up by
their Hand, the faces of Elders were not Honored? Lam. 5.8, 12.

Is not the whole World at Enmity, Nation against Nation, and Nations divided
by intestine Wars, and Contentions? This Enmity is not only between Man and
Man, but has also infected the Beasts of the Field, Fish of the Sea, and fouls
of the Air; whereas in Man's first State, he had all of them given him for use,
with Dominion over them; they are turned wild, run into Rebellion, and not to
be subdued or made useful, but by force, and many are not only useless, but
destructive, and they also are at War amongst themselves, destroying one
another; so that in place of all the Sons of God, shouting together for Joy, as
in the first State, we now hear the noise of Wars, Malice, Envy and
Destruction; and whereas at first, God looked on all that he had made, and it
was very good, Genesis 1.31. afterward for the Degeneracy thereof, It repented
God, that he had made Man on the Earth, and it grieved him at his Heart, Genesis
6.6. and whereas all things were good when first Created, and given to Man for
use; the Scripture tells us, That the Friendship of the World is Enmity with
God, and whosoever will be a Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God. If any
Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him, Ja. 4.4. 1 Jo. 2.15.

If then the Heavenly Harmony, Union, and joyful Shoutings of the Sons of God,
was Ravishing and Refreshful, even to sitting down under that shadow with great
delight, and being sick of Love, when Man and the Creation was in its first
Integrity, when we look on the black and defaced Countenance of Man and
Creatures, defiled with all manner of Sin and Pollution, and the World with all
Deformity of Wickednesses and Contention, and being Branded with Gods
displeasure.

How great reason have we with the Church to cry out, How is the Gold become
Dim; How is the most fine Gold changed? and with David to say, Woe is me, that I
Sojourn in Mesech, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar? Ps. 120.5.

If the Soul of Righteous Lot, was grieved at the Iniquity of Sodom, how much
more Reason have Men now adays, to grieve for that universal Deluge of
Abominations, which overflow the whole, while earth in serious Reflection of
Man in his Integrity, and the Beauty of the Creation, and the present
Degeneracy under Sin and Misery, and being Anxious to understand that Mystery,
why the World once approved of God to be good, and given to Man, should
afterward be stamped with Gods Curse and Displeasure, as in the foregoing
Scripture, I was entertained with that of Eliphas the Temanite, Shall Mortal
Man be more just than God, shall a Man be more pure than his Maker, Job. 4.17.
which lead me to enquire into the particular causes of this great Catastrophe,
and to understand the meaning, together with the Justice of God, and the
Mystery of his Love to believers, in Christ Jesus.

In this enquiry, I was led up to the Fountain of Gods bounty to Man, by which
he was made in the likeness of God in Righteousness, true Holiness, and
Knowledge, according to the Image of him that Created him, and had the other
Creatures given to him for use, with Dominion over them, under the Tenure of
his Obedience, and under the Commination and Assurance of Death on his
Transgression.

I had no sooner viewed the Happiness of his first Estate, when I was led to
the Record of his Transgression, by putting forth his Heart to Rebellion, and
his Hands to the Trespass, and then found the Judgment entered against him, by
which he was degraded of his Sovereignty, and Enmity was sown between him and
the Creatures, and the Earth accursed for his sake, Genesis 3.14. to 20.

And here with the Prophet, we may put the question, is Man the Darling of the
Creation, made lately in Gods own Image, and Lord of all the Creation? is he
now a Servant, a Home-born Slave? why is he spoiled? The Answer is in the Text,
have thou not procured this to thy self, In that thou have forsaken the Lord
thy God? for my People have committed two Evils, they have forsaken me, the
Fountain of Living Waters, and hewed themselves Cisterns, broken Cisterns, that
can hold no Water, Jer. 2.11, 13, 14, 17.

And with the same Prophet we may cry out with Astonishment, Be Astonished O
Heavens, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord, Jer. 2.11.

And here is this Riddle resolved, shall Mortal Man be more Just than God?
Shall Man be more pure than his Maker, Man has forsaken God, and followed his
own Inventions, therefore God must be just, to bring upon him the Judgment
threatened, viz. the forfeiture of all his Privileges, and make him smart under
the folly of his own Devices. They hatch Cockatrice Eggs, and weave the Spiders
Webb, he that eats of their Eggs dies, and that which is crushed breaks
into a Viper, their Webb shall not become Garments, neither shall they cover
themselves with their Works, their Works are Works of Iniquity, Is. 59.5, 6, 7.

Hence we find God is Just, in punishing Man for his Transgression, and Man by
his Folly has brought himself and Posterity to ruin, who through the Pride of
his Concupiscence, abode not in his Integrity, but in repining against God,
has brought himself and Posterity, under Servitude to Sin, Misery, and Death.

Thus while with Rachel weeping for her Children, and refusing to be Comforted,
because they were not, Jer. 31.15. I was plunged in oppression of Thoughts, and
heavily Lamenting, that so glorious a Fabric of Gods Handiwork, as in the
first Creation, in Holiness and Integrity should be polluted by Sin, and
defaced from the primitive Beauty, and as Moses pleading with God from the
Arguments of his own Glory and Power, in behalf of his People of Israel, Number.
14.11. to 17. heartily wishing, that glorious and first Image might again be
restored in Man, after the Image of him that Created it, I was led to that
Scripture, My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways,
says the Lord, for as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my ways
higher than your ways, and my thoughts higher than your thoughts, Is. 55.8, 9.

And while musing what the Spirit meant in these Expressions, I was carried
back, to review the fatal Record of man's Condemnatory Sentence for his
Rebellion, in which I found written, And I will put Enmity between thee and the
Woman, and between thy Seed, and her Seed, it shall bruise thy Head, and thou
shall bruise his Heel, Genesis 3.15.

And being yet more in the dark, as to the meaning of that Scripture, I was led
to that of Gods Covenant with Abraham, and I will Establish my Covenant between
thee and me, and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations for an everlasting
Covenant, Genesis 17.7, 8. and to that other Word of God to Moses, I will raise
them up a Prophet amongst their Brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words
into his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all the words which I have
commanded him, Deuteronomy. 18.18. And being led a little further, to understand the
meaning of this, I met with that Word of the Lord to David, by the Prophet
Samuel, And thine House, and thy Kingdom shall be Established for ever before
thee, and thy Throne shall be Established for ever, 2 Samuel 7.11, to 17.

And that of David himself, The Lord has Sworn in Truth unto David, he will
not turn from it, of the Fruit of thy Body will I set upon thy Throne, Ps.
132.11. And the Lord has said to my Lord, sit thou at my Right Hand, until I
make thine Enemies thy Footstool, Ps. 110.1. and that other place of the same
Prophet David, And thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, neither suffer thy Holy
one to see Corruption, Ps. 16.10.

And thus being led to the view of these Scriptures, and being yet more Anxious
to understand their meaning, I was at last, by the Blessing of God, led to that
of the second of the Acts, verse 22, to 37. And that of the 7th. of the Acts,
And to these words, Of this man's Seed, has God according to his promise,
raised unto Israel a Savior, Acts 13.15, to 42.

By all which I found plainly laid open, that before the Foundations of the
Earth were laid, 2 Timothy 1.9. God according to his own purpose, had provided the
means of man's Redemption, and that all the foregoing Scriptures under the Old
Testament, were Prophetical of his Eternal purpose, and good Will, and that in
the fullness of time, he should send one, even Jesus Christ, to take upon him
the Nature of man, with whom God entered into an everlasting Covenant, and that
for Sin, Sin should be Condemned in the flesh, and that Everlasting Covenant
with Abraham, and the Prophets spoken of by Moses, and Establishing of David's
Throne for ever, are all meant of that Everlasting Covenant between God and
Jesus Christ, the Second Adam, by which Covenant, Christ was to come in the
flesh, and suffer death as he did, and that he should obtain Eternal Life, for
all such as should believe in him, Jo. 3.16.

And thus being instructed, that the manifold promises and privileges spoken
of in the Old and New Testament, do belong to Believers, and that as well
Salvation, as Faith, to lay hold on Jesus Christ, are freely of God as a gift,
Jam. 1.17. Hence I found the Truth of that of Gods Word, My thoughts are not
your thoughts; our thoughts are narrow, and run only after the lesser things,
and would de satisfied with the Restoration of man, to his first Estate in the
first Adam, and considering this new and Second Covenant, in the Second Adam,
not only of things Temporal, but also of things Eternal, and that this Second
Covenant is Everlasting, sure, and not subject to the fatal Apostasy, as was
that in the first Adam.

And as in Contemplation of the Happy State of man, in his First Creation, the
Heart was raised to rejoice in God, and magnify his goodness, and could not
but take pleasure in so choice a Speculation, and as on reflection upon the
dismal and decayed condition of man, upon his degeneracy, the Soul must needs
be dejected with melancholy and grievous thoughts, how highly may the Soul be
Elevated with Admiration, of that infinite love of God to mankind, in Christ
Jesus, who has in him, chosen of the Seed of Abraham, before the Foundation of
the World? Ephesians. 1.4, 5. having predestined them unto the Adoption of Children
to himself, and properly apply that of the Holy Prophet, Eye has not seen, nor
Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man (besides thee O Lord)
what good things he has laid up for them, who wait on him, Is. 64.4.

Thus, Christian Reader, being led unto the meditation of these three material
Concerns of man's everlasting condition, I have Collected these ensuing Sheets,
in which I have first considered man's condition in the First Creation, and
Secondly under his Apostasy, wherein I have examined, that original Sin in
Adam, in the several Ingredients thereof, and how far the Posterity are guilty,
and affected with the Evil Consequences of the same; upon which are made some
practical Inferences. Thirdly, I have considered the Covenant of grace in the
Second Adam, wherein I have touched on all the Duties incumbent on Believers
under that Covenant, and have met with all the emergent Cases of Affliction,
incident to Believers, in the militant State, such as spiritual desertion,
Afflictions by Sickness, Imprisonment, Poverty, Reproach, loss of, and being
forsaken by Friends and Relations, and have collected and applied the several
promises to the respective cases, and in the close, have examined the Duty of
Christian Patience, and Perseverance, with the promises suitable thereunto; and
lastly, have drawn a large Series of Christian Duties, and Truths, in short
Heads, with the Scriptural Proofs thereof; so as in two or three Pages, the
marrow of the whole is comprehended; and as I dare averr in all Christian
Sincerity, these Sheets were only Collected for Private and Domestic use,
without any intention of sending them to public view, by which means they are
in a more naked and rude dress, without the Curiosity of Eloquence or
Artificial patching; and as by the importunity of some Friends, I was induced
to send them abroad, I shall only desire thus much in Christian Charity, that
thou may believe that these are the effects of serious enquiry into the Holy
Scriptures, with Meditation and Prayer, and narrowly searching into Truth, with
what strength I could obtain by grace; and that neither in Ostentation, or for
secular ends they are sent abroad, but in all Humility, if it may be, that
others may find therein, that Light and Establishment in the way of God, which
I hope I have, and shall find, and conceiving this to be a Duty, according to
that of the Holy Apostle, Look not every Man on his own things, but every Man
also on the things of another, Phil. 2.4. and that thou may have the Truths
of grace Sealed on thy Soul, and that Christ may dwell in thy Heart by Faith,
and that being Rooted and Grounded in love, thou can be able to comprehend
with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to
know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. and that
thou may be filled with all the fullness of God; In all sincerity is the
earnest Prayer of, thine in Christ Jesus our Lord.

FINIS.
THE Anatomy of Man.
SInce Man's Woeful Apostasy from God, Sin is become so habitual, that the
Custom has taken away the Conscience of it, and Corruption is so condensed in
men's hearts, without the due sense thereof, that unless upon gross
out-breakings, little remorse is expressed for Sin, and Guilt for most part is
only owned from actual Transgressions, and men do not charge themselves with
the guilt of Original Sin, as supposing that foreign to them, as coming from
Adam's particular Act and Transgression, and take themselves not to be
accountable therefore, as being the single Act of another; and if any thing of
that guilt be owned, it is only by roate, and as coming from education, or the
customary profession of Religion, without the due sense or conscience of the
guilt; and in regard that Original sin, has more in it than one single act,
(though that one act of disobedience was cause enough of all the misery that
followed) and that the consequence of that disobedience, has fallen upon, and
concerns all the Posterity of Adam, we shall therefore consider,

First, What Original Sin was in Adam.

Secondly, How far the Posterity of Adam are therein concerned, or chargeable
and affected with it.

Thirdly, We shall make some practical Inferences and Uses from thence.

First, If we consider Adam, the first and root of all Mankind, that he was of
God created after the Likeness of God, in his Image, Genesis 1.26, 27, 28. and at
his first Creation had power and command given him to increase and multiply,
and subdue and have dominion, over the Fish of the Sea, the Fowls of the Air,
and every thing that moves on the Earth, (under restriction from eating of the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil) with a penalty upon eating thereof, that he
should surely dye. Genesis 2.15, 16, 17. Thus Man made after the Likeness of God,
and in the Image of God, let us examine what this Likeness and Image was; The
Holy Apostle Paul tells us, that it was Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians.
4.24.

The same Apostle elsewhere informs us, that it was in Knowledge, after the
Image of him that Created him, Col. 3.10.

By these words of Righteousness, true Holiness, and Knowledge, we may
understand, that Adam in his first Creation, was endowed with all suitable
faculties of the Mind, to understand the Nature of all Beasts, Fowls, Fishes,
creeping Things, and Vegetatives, how to use and apply them to his own use, and
govern them in order to their subjection to himself, and congruity among
themselves; as we find by Gods bringing the Creatures to Adam, to vest him with
Sovereignty over them, and that he might express his faculty of understanding,
by giving to them names, Genesis 2.19, 20. and as some naturalists observe, he
gave to them names significant or expressive of their nature, which implied his
Knowledge of their several Natures, from that primitive Knowledge given to him
in his first Creation.

By Righteousness rendered in the Latin Justice, as it is the Likeness, and
Image of God, we must understand all integrity of Mind, leading to what is
right, and forbearing what is wrong.

By true Holiness, we must understand, all purity of Mind, Will and Affections
in Sincerity and Truth, to affect only and desire what is just, pure, holy, and
good, and to shun all Thoughts, Affections, Actions, or Purposes to the
contrary, as God is of purer Eyes than can behold Iniquity.

And by that Knowledge of God, according to the Image of him that created him,
we must understand effectual and sufficient knowledge, not only of things
natural, but also of Spiritual Truths, by which man was made effectually
capable to understand, and to do good, to abstain from, and resist evil.

Thus Man being composed, in such excellent frame, capable to understand all
things, as well of God himself, as of the Creatures, and that he had his Being
of God, and sufficiently understood the Terms under which he was confined to
his Allegiance and Obedience to God, and the consequence of his Disobedience,
and there being given to him entire Integrity, not tainted by any pollution, or
disabled by infirmities, in full possession of all secular enjoyments, with the
knowledge of the glorious sovereignty of God, and Majesty in the Creation,
sufficient to delight himself in God, and glorify his Maker in the Station he
had placed him. If David after the Apostasy, when for Sin the World was
degenerated, and brought under the Curse and Bondage, did then admire Man's
Excellency, Power, and Glory, how much more when in Man's Integrity, unity of
the Creation, without Enmity, Jarring, or Discord, Emulation or Contention? the
Morning Stars sang together, Job 38.7. and all the Sons of God shouted for Joy.
How had the first Man reason to cry out; How excellent art thou Lord in all the
Earth? And what is Man; that thou remembrest him, or the Son of Man, that thou
art mindful of him? And what reason had he? And how much had it been his and
the happiness of all Posterities, to have sat down contentedly, in admiration
and obedience of God, and in quiet possession of all created enjoyments, and
subjection of the Creatures to him?

Thus Man Created in Righteousness, true Holiness, and Knowledge, after the
Image of God, made Lord of all the Creatures, and in possession thereof, having
sufficient knowledge to understand his Duty and Interest, and to know the
advantage of Obedience, and consequence of breach of Duty, breaks the Chain of
his Obedience; and eats the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3.6.

Whereupon God in his Justice, according to his Promise, and Terms of Man's
first Creation, deprives Man of his Sovereignty over the Creatures, puts Enmity
between Man and the Creatures, and accurseth Man, and the Earth for his sake,
Genesis 3.14. to the end.

This being the Matter of fact in Man's Creation, under the Penal Law, and his
Breach, and Rebellion against God, and the punishment of his disobedience, we
come next to examine the nature of this first and original sin, and consider
whether it consisted only in this single Act, of eating of the Tree of
Knowledge; or what other sins were, or are complicated in it.

If we consider Man as truly endowed by God, with Knowledge, Righteousness, and
true Holiness, and under the Prohibition of a Penal Law, we shall find all the
sins committed and discovered in after Ages, under the growth of Corruption, to
have been in that transgression.

First, That wilful breach of Gods Law and Sin, cannot be palliate, under the
excuse of the sin of Ignorance, for that man's knowledge was strong and
sufficiently clear, to understand good and evil, and in respect there was a
positive prohibition against such offense, it must imply knowledge, and
therefore makes it a wilful breach and offense against a known Law.

Secondly, It cannot be called the Sin of Infirmity or surprise, as Adam would
have excused himself, by the Woman's giving of the fruit to him, and the Woman's
Apology of the Serpents beguiling her; for that they were foretold, that they
should not Eat of that Fruit, and forbid the eating thereof, under the Penalty
of Death, Genesis 3.12, 13. and that the knowledge they had of good and evil, and
that to break the Commandment of God was evil it self, although it had not been
under the Penalty expressed, and therefore having in themselves sufficient
knowledge to understand, and strength to defeat and resist the force and
arguments of Satan's Insinuations, this Sin was a vehement and bold presumption
against the Justice and Authority of God.

Thirdly, This Sin was of the greatest Pride and Ambition imaginable, for that
God had endowed Man with knowledge sufficient in every respect, to make him
happy, in understanding all things to complete his satisfaction and delight in
God, and the Creatures; nevertheless upon Satan's Insinuation, that, by eating
of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, they should become more knowing and
be like Gods, knowing Good and Evil, they wilfully in the Pride and Ambition of
their Hearts, lusted after knowledge to be equal with God, and by disobedience
broke Gods Law.

Fourthly, This Sin was of greatest unbelief and impeachment of Gods Truth and
Justice, in believing Satan's Lie, (you shall not surely die,) Genesis 3.4. and not
believing Gods word, thou shall surely die. Whereby to their own ruin, and ruin
of their, Posterity they yielded to a deceitfully, and did not obey the Truth
and righteousness, Genesis 2.17.

Fifthly, This eating of the Tree of Knowledge, employed the greatest Murmuring,
Repining, and Ingratitude, for that God had given to Man, the Use of and
Dominion over all the Creatures and had only reserved one single Tree, with a
Prohibition from meddling with it; nevertheless man is not Content, but must
have all, not remembering, or wilfully forgetting, that he had his beginning
and being of God, and what he had, was of and from him, and that he had what
was sufficient to make him happy; yet was his Covetousness without bounds.

Sixthly, This Sin was of the greatest Sloth, imprudence, and inadvertence, in
that while God had endowed Man with Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness,
when Satan did accost him, with a Ly, to break the Command, he should have
reflected on the Righteousness and Hoilness of God, that it was impossible for
God to Lie, and thereby should have resisted Satan's Suggestions, founded on a
Ly from the Holiness and Goodness of God in giving man all things; he should
have reasoned that it was not just in him to murmur at his pleasure in man's
being restrained from some thing, and upon Satan's first Suggestion of a Ly
against God, he should not have listened further to him* but rested in the
Credit of Gods truth and continued in his Obedience.

Seventhly, From the Method of Committing this Sin, all manner of Sin seems to
be employed in it the Text says, And when the Woman saw that the Tree was good
for Food, and that it was pleasant to the Eyes, and a Tree to be desired to
make one wise: She took of the Fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also to her
Husband with her, and he did eat, Genesis 3.6.

From hence we see when Satan by a lying Suggestion had tampered with the
Woman, ay and got her to listen to his temptation, from her ambition of (being
as Gods) she lets her thoughts out to a further survey of the apparent
excellencies and advantages to be had in the eating of that fruit, and thus
ambition kindles lust, and one lust begets another, so the heart swelling
with ambition of further Knowledge, and that ambition runs to the Eyes, and
from the Eyes to the Sensual Appetite, and thus the whole Mass is tainted and
defiled, and let out to the gluttinous poisoning of the Soul to the Rebellion
of Disobedience.

This seems to be that same thing which the Apostle calls the Lust of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life. Which is an entire Mass of
all pollution, so that it was not only the eating of that fruit which was the
Sin only, but the Infection that was got into the Heart and Affections, whereby
the goodly frame of Righteousness, Holiness, and true Knowledge became all
tainted and infected with the deceitful Appetites and Lusts of the Flesh, 1 John 2.15, 16.

First, By distrusting of God, and then by a Covetous lusting after what was
set apart from them by Gods prohibition, and so breaking the limits of
Obedience, lets the Lust swing after a carnal propension or forwardness to
satiate their desires, and thus disorders the righteous frame of Justice,
Holiness and Knowledge, lately erected by God in them, so that this Sin was not
only that actual and only act of eating the fruit, but the Corruption of the
whole faculties run into disorder from God, expressed by that rebellious act of
eating the forbidden Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge.

This also seems to be proved and explained in many places of Scripture,
especially those of the Apostle Paul, I had not known Sin, but by the Law: I
had not known lust, except the Law had said thou shall not Covet; Romans 7.7.
Where by the word Lust rendered most properly in the Original (Concupiscence)
and the word Covet there, Exodus 20.17. is properly meant a desire of what is
more than our own, and allowable in Justice, and in that place, For the
Iniquity of his Covetousness, Isa. 57.17. Where by Covetousness is meant the
lustful Inclinations, and by the Apostle in that place, Romans 7.7. By lusts he
means not so much the polluted actions of the Flesh as the polluted fountain of
them, Non pravas Cupiditates sed illarum fontem; and the Soul is well called
Seeds Nativae illius labis, the seat of that Natural Corruption, and this seems
likewise to be confirmed by that Scripture and God saw that the wickedness of
man was greater in the Earth, and that every Imagination of the thoughts of his
heart was evil and only evil continually, Gen 6.5. Where God charge man's
heart with this Sin as being the Fountain of the Corruption.

That of the Psalmist, The Fool has said in his heart there is no God, Psalm.
14.1. Seems to be to the same purpose, for none were openly such professed
Atheists as to deny the being of God, but the Prophanity of their Conversation
leads the Psalmist to charge them with denying of God, whereby he charge the
heart with the pollution and brings the act of Sin as Instance and proof of it.

Christ himself also in that Scripture But those things which come out of the
mouth, come from the heart, and they do defile a man, Math. 15.18, 19, 20.
Seems to confirm this Doctrine that Sin principally consists not in the
outward acts, but in the inward Corruption and Disorder of the affections and
mind, for here in this Scripture he brings the words and actions of a man to
charge the guilt upon the heart.

This is explained also by the Custom and Laws of Countries against Treason,
where Imagining and Conspiring to kill the King is made Treason and any act
which discovers or proves that Intention is made Treason, but the main guilt
lies in the malice and rebellious Inclinations of the heart in Conspiring the
Kings, Death, and the act is but a proof of it; so upon the whole matter we
find this great transgression of Original Sin was the adulterate and disorderly
frame of the Spirit of man, let out in disobedience against God, and having
once listened to temptation, the whole faculties were defiled and did not stop
until man run into actual rebellion against God; So that we must look on Man's
corrupt Nature as having in it the Complication of all Lusts and Sins, as the
Principal cause of Gods Wrath and Curse, and that the act of Disobedience
served for Gods Evidence to prove the guilt of the heart, and this Corrupt
Fountain of Nature with the Curse for Rebellion have our first Parents sent
down to all Posterity.

And thus we see man lately Righteous, Holy, Pure, and Undefiled, full of
Knowledge, Power, Sovereignty over the Creatures, giving Law to them, and
receiving Obedience from them; living in Honor, Glory, Pomp, Plenty, and at
Pleasure, having all the Creatures in Subjection to him, and none in
Competition with him, a Friend of, and at Peace with God; the Darling of the
Creation; having Glory without Envy, Plenty without Toil, Pleasure without
Trouble; Strength without Infirmities, or Pain; Degraded from Sovereignty,
Clouded with Darkness, Pestred with Contention, Oppressed with Toil, Pinched
with Difficulties, Obnoxious to Destruction from such who lately were under
Subjection to him, an Outlaw to God and Banished from his Presence, his Body a
Mass of Infirmities, and Soul a Cage of unclean Lusts, The whole Head is Sick,
the whole Heart faint, from the Sole of the Foot even unto the Head, there is
no soundness in it, but Wounds and Bruises and putrefying Sores, Isa. 1.5. We
are all as an unclean thing, and all our Righteousness are as filthy Rags, and
we do all fade as a Leaf, and our Iniquities like the wind have taken us away,
etc. Isa. 64.5.

And there is none that calls upon thy name that stirs up himself to take
hold of thee, for thou have hid thy self from us, and have consumed us because
of our Iniquities, Isa 64.7.

Thus having viewed man's estate in his Creation and Integrity, and considered
his fall and steps thereof, we come next to examine how far his Posterity is
concerned in his guilt, and punishment thereof.

Adam being freely Created of God, and by him endowed with excellent Knowledge,
Righteousness, and Holiness, and made Lord over the Creation, under the
Covenant of Obedience, and Penalty of Disobedience, we must look on him in the
Purpose of God, as representing all mankind; so as on his performance with God,
he should continue and hold all the Privileges he was dignified with, and send
them down to his Posterity; and if he should fail, in the Conditions assigned
to him, he was to forfeit all these Privileges as well for himself as
Posterity: this is but what was just with God, who freely made Man what he was,
and might duly claim the disposal of his own gift upon his own terms; this was
only advantageous enough to Man having so fair a bargain gratis without price
or any purchase, except that of due Obedience, which he was capable to perform,
had he not wilfully corrupted himself.

This is illustrated by the customary practice amongst Men, for when any man
lets Land to Lease for term of years, reserving a Rent payable at a certain
time: if the Rent be not paid at the term assigned, the property reverts and
vests in the Leasser, and the Tennant is divested of his term, and of all
benefit thereby; but if the Leassee performs, he holds for himself and assigns:
This also is clear in that case, when a King or Overlord makes a Grant for
Service to a Man, and his Heirs, if the Grantee performs, he holds for himself,
and sends the right and benefit of the Grant to his Heirs; but if he fail the
Grant is Extinct by his Nonperformance; and the Heirs take nothing by
succession to him, for that his right in his own time was voided, so could not
he send it down to his Heirs,

In the Case of Treason, the Ancestors blood is corrupted and he so dead in
Law, that the claim of Succession is cut off, so as the Issue of his Body can
make no claim through him; and not only so, but the Ancestors blood is so
attainted by Act in Law, that the Posterity is not only barred from succession
to what the Ancestor held, but the Crime of Rebellion or Treason is imputed to
the Successors or Posterity, that in all time coming, their Succession is cut
off, unless by Act in Law, the blood be restored; although the Posterity should
not be guilty of the Act of Rebellion, or Treason, on which the forefeit was
declared or accrewed: In this case two fatal Consequences have happened to the
Posterity of Adam.

First, By his Act of Disobedience he has so far corrupted Nature, so as
thereby the Nature of all Men by Natural Generation is Corrupted.

Secondly, by breaking of the Command, he in his own life time was
dispossessed, of the Rich Privileges vested in him, and thereby his Posterity
were cut off from the claim of right thereunto,

First, Adam by his transgression has corrupted his Nature, and thereby all
men by Natural Generation are corrupted, and as partakers of that degenerated
Nature, they are guilty of and chargeable with Adams transgression and have
lodged in them inherent Corruption.

That Adam by the many enormous steps of his Disobedience above mentioned, has
not only incurred the Wrath of God, but also Corrupted his Nature; does thereby
appear, by what has been already said, in the Concomitants or special steps of
that Disobedience; for it was simply impossible, that so many irregularities
could have concurred in any one Act, as have appeared in this; if the whole
Nature had not been polluted, the very Act in the Circumstances of it clearly
prove it, for that so many different Concomitants would have jarred and marred
that Act, if the chief propension of the Affections and Natural Dispositions
had not joined, whereby we must agree, that the whole Mass was Corrupted and in
Conspiracy to rebellion against God.

If Adam by his Apostasy from God did defile his Nature from the first purity,
and that all men since are the seed of Adam, we must infer that all men by
Natural Generation are of a Corrupted race and naturally defiled, and
consequently original guilt imputable to them, in so much as they are part of
that Mass which was corrupted: common experience in all Ages tell us, that
unhappy constitutions of Parents, either natural, or accidental, render
Posterity exceeding corrupt as well in Intellectuals as in bodily habits, and
what reason can be given, why men beget men, and not beasts, and beasts beget
beasts, and not men, but because of the Affinity of Nature, between the Sire
and what is begotten? the same Parity of reason will infer, that from corrupt
Men, corrupt Issue must be produced, and how can it be otherwise supposed? for
what is begotten of man, can give no quality to it self, and therefore must
participate of the nature, and ascribe its quality to that by which it is
begotten.

This also is clear from Scripture, who can bring a clean thing from an
unclean? not one, Job 14.4.

If a man be sinful, polluted and unclean, as Adam was after his fall, how
could his Posterity be clean, they have it not of themselves, and could not
claim or derive it from him.

David gives us for this a clear Scripture proof, in his own acknowledgment of
Original guilt behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother
conceive me. Psalm. 51.5.

From whence comes this pollution of David, the Embrio took it not from its
lodging in the Womb, there being nothing there to defile it, therefore it must
needs have it from its polluted Parents.

Do not daily and woeful experience instruct us, that the first Acts of Children
is wickedness, and if not restrained, and instructed, they will perish in Sin
and Atheism? whence comes this? Man was created Righteous and Holy, until he
wilfully defiled himself, does not then this wickedness arise from that first
pollution of Nature in Adam, and so descended and fell on all Posterity, and
continues successively until Nature be polished by Grace, and man be renewed in
Christ Jesus, and made conformable to the Image of him that Created him, in
Righteousness, and true holiness? wherefore we must conclude all men under Sin
by natural Generation, and for this the Scripture is most clear, for we have
before proved both Jews and Gentiles, that they are all under Sin, and in that
other place of the same Apostle, Wherefore as by one Man, sin entered into the
World, and Death by Sin, so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have
sinned, Romans 3.9. Again, therefore as by the offense of one, Judgment came upon
all Men to condemnation. For as by one Man's Disobedience, many were made
Sinners, so by the Obedience of one shall many be made Righteous. Romans 5.12,
18, 19.

Having discovered from Scripture, and by other arguments, that by Adams
Transgression, his Nature was corrupted, and that thereby his Posterity,
partaking of his corrupted complexion and nature, are also tainted with his
corruption, and are thereby guilty of his original Transgression, we come next
to consider the consequences thereof upon his Posterity, and these are twofold.

First, The Posterity of Adam, are made subject to Death, and disabled from
succeeding him in the many privileges he enjoyed in his Integrity.

Secondly, They are disabled in natural enjoyment and spiritual performances.

For the first, as we have already cleared, upon Adams transgression an act of
attender passed against him, and he was deprived of his Sovereignty over the
Creatures, enmity was sowed between him and them, and the Earth was accursed
for his sake, and he himself exposed to toil, misery, and sorrow, so that all
these evil effects have fallen on his Posterity, and they also made subject to
Death. This is already cleared from their participation of the corrupt nature,
and consequently, the Judgments which have followed must also affect them, and
they are thereby brought under the Judgment of Death, as by that Scripture
already cited, as by one man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, so
Death passed upon all men, for that all men have sinned, Romans 5.12. So as Adam
had not seen Death if he had not sinned; and sinning was brought under the
Judgment of Death, all his Posterity likewise sinning in him, are liable to the
Judgment of Death, For the Wages of sin is Death, Romans 6.23.

Secondly, The Posterity of Adam are not only disabled, from succeeding him in
that glorious state of his Integrity, but are disabled in the use of natural
enjoyment, and spiritual performances.

First, In natural and temporary enjoyments, for though the World be respited
from utter ruin, and God continues Man on Earth with a Course of Day and
Night, and the usual seasons, nevertheless since the Curse on the Creatures for
Man's Sin, the enjoyment of Creature delights is attended with such uneasiness,
that Man's Life is a continual dying, and a Life of Sorrow, Man that is born of
a Woman, is of few days, and full of trouble, he comes forth like a flower,
and is cut down, he flies also as a shadow, and continues not. Job 14.1, 2.

See David's testimony of the greatest of Men, surely, Men of low degree are
vanity, and Men of high degree a lie, to be laid in the hallance, they are
altogether lighter than vanity, Psalm. 62.9. If we take Solomon's opinion of the
whole World, he plainly tells us, all is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, Eccles.
2. all. The holy Apostle gives us an Inventory of the World, In the World is
only the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life; and
these things are not of God and perish in the using. 1 John 2.15, 16. The holy
Apostle Paul informs us, that the whole Creation is brought under subjection,
and groans under bondage for Sin. Romans 8.20, 21. So that since the Curse for
Sin, the World is but a Stage of Sin, Sorrow, and Misery.

This also is proved from daily experience, what Age, Nation, City, or Family
is exempted from the lash of mortality, misery or changes? is not the greatest
Earthly glory, honor, wealth and strength, clouded in a moment and brought to
nothing? and this is the just effect of man's Sin and Rebellion, and will be the
continuing Lot of the Seed of Adam, until the Restoration of Man in Christ
Jesus, according to the Image of him that created him, and that the bondage of
the Creation be restored by the coming of the second Adam, and restitution of
all things by him, Romans 8.21, 22.

The second thing wherein Man is disabled by Adam's Sin, and inherent
Corruption from the first pollution, is not only natural feebleness and
weakness, all the vital and corporal faculties being disabled, from that
original, wholesome, and vigorous Constitution of the first Adam, whereby the
actions are either corrupt or faint, in comparison with what they were before
the Fall; but also in Religious performances and duties, so as all these
actions, and performances, are either wholly corrupt and sinful, or so weak,
and scanty, that they are rather a Skeleton or Picture, than real Duties.

This is illustrated from these three Instances.

First, From the corruption of the Fountain.

Secondly, From Scripture.

Thirdly, From daily experience.

First, From the corruption of the Fountain of our actions, or performance of
Duties; It being already proved, that Man, having wilfully polluted and
disordered the frame of Holiness, Integrity, and Knowledge, in which he was
created, and poisoned the Heart and Affections, from whence actions and
performances do flow, how can pure and full performances or duties be expected
from thence? Man being in his Heart and Thoughts polluted, his Actions must be
suitable; to the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled is
nothing pure, but even their Mind and Conscience is defiled. Tit. 1.15. This is
of necessary consequence, who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not
one, Job 14.4.

Wherefore we must conclude, that so long as the Fountain of the Heart is
defiled, so must the actions and performances coming from thence be impure and
weak, and until Man be renewed in the Spirit of his Mind, by regeneration in
Jesus Christ, he still remains corrupt and polluted until he be again revested
with that holy Spirit and that a new heart be given to him, by which again he
may be enabled to walk in the Statutes of God to do them, by virtue of that
promise, I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes,
and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27.

Secondly, Scripture is most clear, that all the Actions of a Carnal Man (such
as are all the Issue of Adam until restored by Regeneration) are sinful, and
unacceptable with God.

First, His Thoughts are polluted and defiled, and God saw that the wickedness
of Man was great in the Earth, and that every Imagination of the Thoughts of
his Heart, was only evil continually, Genesis 6.5.

Secondly, His words are defiled and sinful, but unto the wicked God says,
what have thou to do to declare my Statutes, and take my Covenant in thy Mouth,
seeing thou hate Instruction, and casts my Words behind thee? Psalm. 50.16,
17.

Thirdly, His Actions are all evil, the Ploughing of the Wicked is sin, Prove.
21.4.

Fourthly, The very Religious Actions or Performances of Duties of the Wicked
are sinful. The Sacrifice of the Wicked is an abomination to the Lord, Prove.
15.8. He that turns away his Ear from hearing the Law, even his Prayer shall
be an abomination, Prove. 28.9. When ye spread forth your hands, I will hide
mine Eyes from you, yea when ye make many Prayers, I will not hear, your hands
are full of blood, Isa. 1.11 to 16.

This point we may thus conclude, that whatever flows from a Carnal Man, whose
Mind and Heart is defiled, must be impure and unacceptable to God, for that the
Carnal Mind is enmity against God, and is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be, Romans 8.7. Wherefore until the Fountain be purified, and
the imbred prejudice of the Heart be taken away, and man be reconciled to God
in Christ Jesus, nothing coming from him can be acceptable with God.

Thirdly, Experience clearly proves, such disability in every performance,
Religion for most part is wrapped up, in a bare exercise of outward actions of
Devotion; Formality, Ceremony, and customary performances, are come in such
repute that men easily deceive themselves and sit down at ease in these
performances, without searching into the frame of the Spirit toward God, or
examining the spring and motive of these Duties, or scope and end of their
Devotion, not regarding whether these duties be undertaken and performed, in
obedience of the Command, in Faith, in Sense of Sin, in Eye to the Glory of
God, or remorse for Sin, in sense of self pollution, and in a desire of
renovation and assistance to perform, and in every thing to deny our selves,
and depend on God by Faith; but lull their Consciences for most part secure, by
having done what was customarily reputed religious performances.

Let a Man pretending to religion more than ordinary, examine himself
impartially, he shall find such disorder of Thoughts in religious duties, such
narrow and scanty apprehensions of God, such invasion of his Thoughts and
Affections, diverting him from the right, and leading him to improper objects,
unruly interruptions, such scanty performances, and such uneasiness under these
duties, that Custom rather than Conscience (and Conscience for Self) if not
carnal Interest at best, than for Gods Glory and Salvation, is the chief
Impulse or Spring of such actions. But as to the arraigning of the Affection
before God, whether placed on God, or Lusts; Faith on Christ for Justification,
and Salvation, the work of Mortification, unfeigned Repentance, Christian
Patience, Charity, Brotherly Love, and new Obedience, are Riddles, not only hid
from Carnal apprehensions, and made men's duties, but rather thought nusancies,
scare crows, and enmity to the World and the flesh; so that we must conclude,
that in nature we are without streng^h, for any Righteous performances, and
that until the Law of the Members be brought under the Law of the Spirit, we
can do no good thing, Romans 8.6. For I know that in me, that is in my Flesh,
dwells no good thing, for to will is present with me, but how to perform that
which is good, I find not. Romans 7.18. For I see a Law in my Members, warring
against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into Captivity to the Law of sin,
which is in my Members. Chap. 7.23. Here we have a clear description and proof
of man's natural Incapacity for doing any good, and this Incapacity we must
ascribe to the corruption of the Heart and Affections, which had its rise from
sin in Adam.

Having cleared what Original Sin in Adam was, and how his Posterity was
tainted therewith, and made liable to the fatal Consequences thereof, we come
in the third place to make some practical Inferences from thence.

First, If from the premises it be an unquestionable truth, that Adam was
created in Perfection, and Integrity, and that he fell under the most
detestable Apostasy, and that in his Transgression were complicated all manner
of Sins, that Nature was polluted in him, that all after Posterity are tainted
with his guilt, and made liable to the consequences of his Sin. How little
reason have the greatest and richest Men of the World, to boast, and how great
reason have they to humble themselves, upon reflection of their Pedigree?

For that their descent was from him, who once was the most glorious, absolute,
richest, and only Sovereign on Earth, who for his Pride, Covetousness,
Ingratitude, and Murmuring, was forfeit, degraded, made miserable, and debased,
That they are at best, of corrupted, adulterate and degenerate blood, and
extraction, Scripture does clearly explain this, Cause Jerusalem to know her
abominations, thy Birth and thy Nativity is of the Land of Canaan, thy Father
was an Amorite, thy Mother a Hittite, Ezekiel. 16, 23.

This People was lineally of Abraham, but had followed the Idolatry, and
wickedness of the Amorites and Hittites, therefore are they said to be of that
Pedigree; we see Christ would not suffer the Scribes and Pharisees amongst the
Jews, to claim to Abraham, because they did not his works, we see the Prophet
Isaiah charge the Jews to be an adulterous race, and that they were of a
Mother divorced from her Husband, where is the Bill of your Mothers
Divorcement, whom I have put away? behold for your Iniquities, have you sold
your selves, and for your transgressions is your Mother put away, Isa. 51.1.

What glory is it to be of noble blood, which for the worst of Crimes was
attainted, and to be of Illustrious birth, when the Issue is Adulterous and
Spurious? this is the Fountain and Spring of the Blood and Pedigree of all
Mankind, of higher or lower degree on Earth, and this cross bar is inherent in
the Scutcheon of all Mortals, this is that Mean Tekel, Dan. 5.25. the Motto of
all the natural Issue of Adam, and this stain is not to be blotted out, but by
the Blood of that Escape Goat, the Lamb, Jesus Christ, who must blot out the
Handwriting of Ordinances, that was against us, contrary to us, and took it
out of the way, nailing it to his Cross, Col. 2.14.

Secondly, This Sin having such Complication of all manner of sin in it, and
being the Fountain from whence came all manner of Corruption, look not on it as
one single act, to be extenuate with that excuse of eating only a little of
forbidden Fruit, but look on it, as a poisoned Fountain, in which were lodged
all enchantments to sin, and that deliberate contraction of enmity against God,
an evil Heart of unbelief, stuffed with malice, glutted with covetousness,
swellen with pride, cankred with envy, fretted with discontent, and boundless
in desire.

Thirdly, When by Providence Affliction or Chastisement for sin comes,
consider, that before Sin came, there was no sorrow, that Justice and Judgment
must attend Iniquity, and as Sin was first punished by a deluge of misery on
Mankind, so the Continuance must not escape the like fate; and look on all acts
as coming from that Fountain of Corruption, and make not the single act of any
one transgression, the sole cause of mourning, repentance, and reformation, but
run the act to the spring of the Heart, and fix on the Soul that vehement
desire, fear, zeal, indignation and revenge in the act, and corruption in the
fountain, what Indignation, yea what fear, what vehement desire, yea what zeal,
yea what revenge! and never meet with any sin or temptation to it, but with an
Eye of Jealousy as over a Pit of Destruction.

Fourthly, When Providence deprives thee of any Earthly enjoyment, for the
reasons in Divine Wisdom, murmur not to be denied some of thy desires, but
remember thou wast guilty in Adam, of grudging God the reserving of the Tree of
Knowledge, and by thy impatient bearing of losses thou make the old sore of
Adams transgression bleed afresh in discontent, but rather let the memory of
Original Sin, oblige thee, to submission, contentment, sorrow and repentance.

Fifthly, Are all men guilty of Adams transgression, and are of the same
corrupted and degenerate blood, and some by course of Providence raised to
Wealth and Honor above others, what reason then has the exalted, or brother
of high degree, to despise him on whom the deceitful Riches of this World, have
not smiled? this Man who dispiseth his Brother, is forgetful of himself, as if
not of the same blood with the other, he is like a man beholding his natural
Face in a glass, he beholds himself, and goes away, and forgets what
manner of Man he was, Jam. 1.23, 24.

The Riches, and Honor of this Life, should not raise a Man in esteem of
himself above his brother, for what he has is given to him of God, who can as
equally level him with his Brother, and thereby make him remember his own
Pride, and that the other is of the same Blood with him. See the Instance of
this in Nebuchadnezzar and many others. I Nebuchadnezzar, praise and extol, and
honor the King of Heaven, all whose Works are Truth, and his ways Judgments,
and those that walk in Pride he is able to abase. Dan. 4.29. to the end.

Consider what the Apostle James says of Carnal partiality, of preferring the
Rich in Gay Clothing, with a goodly Gold Ring, and despising the poor Brother,
and what arguments he uses to the contrary. Are ye not then partial in your
selves, and are become Judges of evil thoughts? has not God chosen the Poor of
this World, Rich in Faith, Heirs of the Kingdom, which he has promised to
those that love him, and ye have despised the Poor? do not Rich Men oppress
you, and draw you before the Judgment Seats, do not they blaspheme that worthy
name by which ye are called? if ye fulfill that royal Law, according to the
Scripture, (thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self) ye do well, but if you
have respect to persons ye sin, Jam. 2. to 10.

Here by strong arguments he proves the partial preferring the Rich before the
poor to be sinful.

First, For that the Godly though poor in this World, is the worthier person in
Gods esteem, in that he is chosen of God, an heir of the Kingdom of Glory.

Secondly, That Great and Rich Men, are Enemies to the Godly, they bring them
before Judgment Seats, and oppress them.

Thirdly, Rich Men are not Enemies only to Godly Men, but to God, and Blaspheme
his Holy Name.

Fourthly, That the royal Law of God commands the Duty of equal love, love thy
Neighbor as thy self.

Wherefore, since Pride, and Ambition, was a chief ingredient of that first
Fountain of sin, let none through Pride, despise him who was of the same blood
with himself, though not in that equal Worldly Splendour or Glory, but consider,
as Pride did ruin Adam, and abased all his Posterity, so Justice will take the
like vengeance upon all the Race of Adam guilty of the same Crime. Whosoever
dispiseth the poor reproacheth his Maker, Prove. 17.15. God is Maker of poor and
rich, Prove. 22.2.

Sixthly, Are all men of one Blood and Family, and so Brethren and Members one
of another? Ephesians. 4.24. This calls all men to mutual Sympathy, mutual Assistance
and supply of one another, this is that express Command of Christ, that ye love
one another as I have loved you, John 13.34. And the Apostle presses this most
vehemently; Whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that
loves not his Brother, 1 John 3.10. We have passed from Death to Life if we
love the Brethren, and he that loves not his Brother, abides in Death; he
that hates his Brother is a murderer and has not Eternal Life: We ought to
Lay down our Life for the Brethren, 1 John 3.14, 15, 16.

This Love consists not only in the Airy Compliment of professed and pretended
Friendship, but

First, In a general Sympathy, Fellow-feeling, and Compassion, in all
Conditions, and Circumstances Spiritual and Temporal, like Christ's Love to his
Church: In all their Afflictions he was Afflicted, and the Angel of his
presence saved them; in his Love, and in his Pity, he redeemed them, and
carried them all the days of old, Isa. 63.9.

Secondly, This Love is extensive to all wants and necessities or else it is
empty and profits not: Whosoever has this Worlds good, and sees his Brother
have need, and shuts up his bowels of Compassion, how does the Love of God
dwell in him? 1 John 3.17. And the Apostle James is to the like purpose, If a
Brother or a Sister be naked, and destitute of Daily food; and one of you say
to them, depart in peace, he ye warmed and filled, notwithstanding ye give them
not these things which are needful to the Body, what does it profit? Jam. 15.16.

Seventhly, Is it so then of a lamentable truth, that all men are concluded in
Adams Apostasy, and that there is a woeful Degeneracy in the Soul of Man, from
that primitive Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness, and that all men in
Nature are dead in Sin, and have their Conversation with the Lusts of the
Flesh, fulfilling the desires thereof, and of the mind, according to the Course
of this World, according to the Prince of the Power of the Air; the Spirit that
now works in the Children of Disobedience, and are by Nature the Children of
Wrath. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. And that there is even amongst the renewed a Law in the
Members warring against the Law in the Mind, Romans 7.23. Chapter 8.1. And that by
reason of Sin, the Creature is Subject to Vanity, and the whole Creation
groaneth and travelleth in pain for the Adoption and Redemption. Romans 8.20, 22,
23.

And that in this degeneracy, a man's life is his burden, and there is no true
pleasure under the Sun, confirmed in Solomon's experience, Therefore I hated
life, because the work that is wrought under the Sun is grievous unto me; for
all is vanity, and vexation of Spirit, Eccles. 2.17. all.

Seeing then this Earth is but a sojourning, and no abiding place, and that
here is neither Pleasure, Rest, nor Happiness; how much is it mortal man's
concern, anxiously, restlesly, and with a believing Impatience to pursue close
after these two things?

First, That as by one man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, so
Death passed upon all men, for that all men have sinned, Romans 5.12.

And that as by the offense of one man, Judgment came upon all men to
Condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men to Justification of life. Romans 5.18.

That man would seriously apply himself to the Throne of Grace that he may be
found in the Faith, that he may be entitled into Eternal Life in Jesus Christ,
that only mediator; and for that the first Image of God in man was wilfully
abolished, or defaced by man, that by the bounty of Free Grace he may be
begotten again by the regeneration of the Spirit, unto a lively Faith; and that
he may put on the new man of Righteousness and True Holiness, Ephesians. 4.^^. And
may be renewed in Knowledge after the Image of him that Created it, Col. 3.10.
And may be set free from the Law of Sin and Death, by the Law of the Spirit of
Life,

And that he may be spiritually enlightened, not by the Spirit of the World, but
by the Spirit which is of God, and that he may know the things freely given of
God, 1 Cor. 2.12.

And that he may be spiritually minded, that enmity of the Carnal mind may be
removed so as he may no more mind the things of the Flesh, but the things of
the Spirit, Rom 8.5, 6, 7. That being raised from the Death of Sin by the
Spirit of Christ, he may seek these things that are above where Christ is, Col.
3.1. And may be accounted to be called a Child of God, an heir and Joint heir
with Jesus Christ, and may also be glorified with him, Romans 8, 17.

That he may be dead and crucified in Christ to Sin and may also live with him
in Glory, Romans 6.8.

Secondly, Seeing the Earth was accursed for man's sake, Genesis 3.17, 18, 19. And
that the Creature was made Subject to Vanity, not willingly, but by reason of
him, who Subjected the same in hope, Romans 8.20. And that the whole Creation
groaneth and travelleth in pain together, for redemption from the bondage of
Corruption, unto the glorious liberty of the Children of God, Romans 8.21, 22,
23. That he may watch, and be always ready with Oil in his Lamp, for the coming
of the Bridegroom, who comes as a Thief in the night, Rev. 16.15. And may
earnestly pray that the Bridegroom would hasten the coming of his Kingdom, and
the new Heavens and the new Earth, and set the Sons of God at liberty from the
Liberty of Sin and Corruption; and that the glad Tidings of that Heavenly
Proclamation may be heard: Behold the Tabernacle of God is with Men, and God
shall dwell with them, and they shall be his People, and God himself shall be
with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from their Eyes:
and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying, neither shall
there be any more Pain: For the former things are passed away, Rev. 21. to 6.

Having thus viewed Adam in his Primitive Integrity, in Glory, Honor,
Righteousness, true Holiness, and perfect Knowledge, with absolute Sovereignty
over the Creatures, the Darling and Friend of God, and all the Creation at
Unity and Peace with him and in Subjection to him, and in Amity amongst
themselves: And afterward by Man's falling from God, Man the declared Enemy of
God, and by a guard of Angels barred out of Paradise, deprived of his
Sovereignty, and Enmity sowed between the Creatures, and the Earth accursed,
and the Creation brought under Bondage, and the Posterity of Adam (once the
apparent Heir of all Righteousness, true Holiness, Knowledge, Honor, Glory,
and Sovereignty over the Creatures) disabled and cut off from that glorious
succession, and exposed unto all misery and under the servitude of Sin and
Wrath, Romans 3.23. Ephesians. 2.3. And in place of that Unity of the Sons of God, and
shouting together for joy; nothing to be seen or heard, but Subjects rebelling
against their Sovereign, and the whole Creation Split in Enmity, and Envy,
Malice, Oppression, and Unrighteousness, to have filled the whole Earth; where
is that corner of the World, where ambition for Dominion, Covetousness for
Wealth, private or public animosities, have not drowned the sense of all
comfortable enjoyments? Man raging against the Creatures, and they against him,
and each in contention, devouring one another, and nothing to be seen, but a
woeful Convulsion, and dismal complexion, and the degenerate frame of that first
and beautiful Fabric of the Creation, from its so late purity and glory.

This then being the Tragical Condition of all Mortals Subject to Sin and
Misery, as entailed on them from the Inherent Corruption of Nature, Job 5.6.
Who can withold the Churches lamentation, How has the Lord covered the
Daughter of Sion, with a Cloud in his anger, and cast down from Heaven to
Earth, the beauty of Israel, and remembered not his footstool, in the day of
his anger, what thing shall I take witness for thee, what shall I liken unto
thee O Daughter of Jerusalem, what shall I equal unto thee, that I may comfort
thee, O Virgin Daughter of Zion, for thy breach is great like the Sea, who can
heal it? Lam. 2.1, to the end. How is the Gold become dim, how is the most fine
Gold changed? the Stones of the Sanctuary are poured out in every Street, the
precious Sons of Zion comparable to fine Gold, how are they esteemed as
Earthern Pitchers, the work of the hands of the Potter? Lam. 4.1, 2, all. And
with the Holy King and Psalmist heavily lament, woe is me that I sojourn in
Mese^^, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar, Psalm 120.5.

This being the universal state of Misery to all Mankind as in the place before
cited, Man is born unto troubles as the sparks fly upward. It being no more
natural, to the Sparks to come out of fire and fly up, then to man born in Sin,
to meet with sorrow and misery, and therefore all Men should Copy out the
Prophets methods and wish, Oh that my head were Waters, and mine Eyes a
Fountain of Tears, that I might weep, day and night, for the slain of my
People, Oh that I had in the Wilderness a lodging place, of way faring Men,
that I might leave my People and go from them, for they be all Adulterers, an
assembly of treacherous Men, and they bend their Tongues like their bows for
lies, but they are not valiant for the Truth upon Earth; for they proceed from
Evil to Evil, and know not me, says the Lord, take ye heed every one to his
Neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother, for every Brother will utterly
supplant, and every Neighbor will walk with Slanders, they weary themselves to
commit Iniquity, thine habitation is in the midst of deceit, through deceit
they refuse to know me says the Lord, Jer. 9.1, to 7. And should also with the
Church, arise, cry out in the night, in the beginning of the Watches, pour out
thy Heart like Water before the Face of the Lord, lift up thy Hands toward
him, for the Life of thy young Children, that faint for hunger in the top of
every Street, Lam. 2.19. And with the same Prophet Jeremiah, Rachel weeping for
her Children, and refused to be comforted because they were not, Jer. 31.25.

Now if the holy Prophet was thus in an Agony of grief, for the Sin and Misery
of one Nation, and People, and the Church for her private state, and the holy
King for his uneasiness under such Companions; how much more reason has every
Son of Adam, not, only to mourn for, and bewail his private guilt, and misery,
but also to lie low in self abasement, humiliation, repentance, and bitter
Complaints of the universal misery of all mankind as Sons of Wrath by Nature
because of Sin?

This being the dismal Estate and Condition of Man by Nature, in which is too
great matter of mourning, and lamentation, methinks I hear the loud sounding of
bitter groaning, under the subjection and bondage of the Creation, Romans 8.22.
And a voice grievously putting the question, Is the plant of renown of Gods
Creation utterly cut off? Has the Lord forgot to be gracious, will he be
favorable no more, are his tender Mercies clean gone for ever? Psalm. 77.7, 8,
9. Psalm. 85.5. Psalm. 89.46. In answer to which I was led to that place, Thus
says the Lord, refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine Eyes from tears, for
thy works shall be rewarded, and they shall come again from the Land of the
Enemy, and there is hope in thine end, and thy Children shall come again to
their own Land, Jer. 31.16, 17. And while in deep contemplation of this
consolatory voice, and plunged with reflections on Man's Incapacity, to
reconcile himself to God; and of the apparent impossibility, I was led to that
of the Prerogative of God, With Man this is impossible, but with God all things
are possible, Mat. 19.26.

And to that precious Truth, My Thoughts are not your Thoughts, nor my Ways
your Ways, says the Lord, for as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are
my Thoughts higher than your Thoughts, and my Ways than your Ways, Isa. 55.8, 9.

And being further plunged in the deep contemplation of Man's Rebellion, and of
the Justice of God, which requires Atonement for Sin, and finding Man had
nothing wherewith to come before the Lord, to appease the wrath of an
Omnipotent, Holy and Dishonored Majesty, I was lost between the belief of his
Faithfulness who had promised, and the apparent impossibility; I was carried to
that Scripture, Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose, and Grace, which was
given us in Christ Jesus, before the World began, 2 Timothy 1.9. And to that other
Scripture, According as he has chosen us in him, before the Foundations of the
World, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love, Ephesians. 1.4.
In hope of Eternal Life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the World
began, Tit. 1.2. And to that other clear truth, for as much as ye know, that ye
are not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, but with the
precious blood of Christ, as a Lamb without blemish, and without spot; who
verily was foreordained before the Foundations of the World, but was manifest
in these last times in you, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20.

And being also carried to view that Scripture, And I will put enmity between
thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed, and her Seed; It shall bruise thy
Head and thou shall bruise his Heel, Genesis 3.15. by all which, I was brought to
understand that the same Eternal Wisdom and Council of God, whereby at first
Man was created in the Image of God, Genesis 1.26, 27. by which the Fall of Man
was foreseen, the Restoration of Man to the same Image of God was also decreed,
from all Eternity by Gods Eternal goodness and free bounty, and by means above
the reach of Man to contrive, or his power to accomplish, viz. by Jesus Christ's
taking upon him the Humane Nature, and shedding his blood to death, to expiate
the guilt of Man's Sin, as in that of the forecited testimony of the Apostle
Peter.

This then being the unfolding of that great mystery of Man's Redemption, and
Eternal Salvation by Jesus Christ, as by Gods Grace shall be more fully
explained in the ensuing Discourse; If the reflection upon the miserable Estate
of Man in the foregoing Description, justly occasioned and called for, from all
men, deep humiliation; sorrow and repentance, how great Reason have all Men,
with all adoration, humility, and thankfulness, to cry out with the Holy
Apostle, Oh the depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God!
how unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out, for who has
known the Mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? Romans 11.33, 34.
And with the same Apostle, That ye being rooted and grounded in love, may be
able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height, and to know the love of Christ which passes Knowledge, that ye
may be filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. And to admire
Infinite Goodness with the Holy Prophet, For since the beginning of the World,
Man has not heard, nor perceived by the Ear, neither has the Eye seen, O God
besides thee, what he has prepared for him, Isa. 64.4. And further of the
mystery of this love, read 1 Timothy 3.16. Psalm 139.17, 18.

Having thus viewed the first estate of Man in his Innocence, and his estate of
Apostasy from God, and being informed of the mystery of Gods Love, and eternal
good Will to Man, in Christ Jesus, we come next to consider, how in infinite
Wisdom the Redemption of Man is contrived.

We have already discovered how God of his bounty, made man in a happy and
glorious estate after his own Image, and upon the Condition and Covenant of
obedience, he was made Lord of all the sublunary Creatures, and that God
putting Man's Stock in his own hand, and though he was sufficiently enabled to
perform Obedience, nevertheless through the Concupisence of his Heart he broke
his Allegiance to God, and incurred to himself and posterity the forfeiture of
all the glorious Dignities and Privileges given to him, and he and his
Posterity were concluded under Misery and Wrath, because of Sin, so that having
no capacity in himself to be reconciled to God, and retrieve his loss, the
Infinite Wisdom and Bounty of God from all Eternity, as above is discovered,
did determine man's Restoration to a better and surer Estate and Condition, than
what he was in at his first Creation, and that same Infinite Wisdom foreseeing
that Man having corrupted his Way and Heart, the Fountain of Actions, And that
the Thoughts and Imaginations of his Heart were evil and only evil continually,
Gen 6.5. And that his Heart was deceitful and desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9.
And though he intended Man's Restoration and Eternal Happiness, yet because of
the pravity of Man's Heart, he was neither to be treated with upon his own
Integrity, nor fit to be trusted with a new Stock in his own strength, and
therefore Heavenly Wisdom, appoints the only begotten Son of God, and Second
Person of the Holy Trinity to be a Mediator for Man, and by him enters into an
everlasting Covenant with Man, which shall be demonstrated in the ensuing
Discourse, and that as well to satisfy Divine Justice for Man's Transgression,
as to secure to Man the future Stock of Gods bounty, granted unto him by virtue
of this New and Second Covenant, and what this Covenant is and the terms of it
shall be the next Subject of Discourse.

This Covenant commonly called the Covenant of Grace: is mutual between God and
Man through the Mediator Jesus Christ, who in Scripture is called the Mediator
of the New Covenant: considering this Covenant, we shall

First, Take notice of the freedom thereof.

Secondly, Of the terms of it.

First, As to the freedom, It being apparent that God of his Free Will and
Goodness, without any tie, necessity, or obligation upon him, for his own
Glory, Created the World and Man, in that glorious and stately Condition as we
have heard, and that Man by his Rebellion departing from God, had incurred the
execution of Justice upon himself, and all after Posterity, and that the
Pravity of Man's Nature was such, that it grieved and repented God that he had
made Man, Genesis 6.6. There lay no obligation upon God to restore lost Man, but
that God intending to make Bounty and Mercy, as it were, to triumph over
Justice, and magnify his Infinite goodness; by the Council of Heaven, this
mystery of Christ's love is contrived, by which Justice is satisfied, and Man is
not only relieved from the servitude of Sin, and delivered from wrath to come,
and insured in a better estate than what he was in at first, but also is made
Heir to all the most excellent privileges contained in this new Covenant,
which shall be branched forch in the ensuing Discourse.

The frequent testimonies of the Spirit in the New Testament, witness the
freedom of this Covenant. Having Predestined us to the Adoption of Children
by Jesus Christ to himself according to the good pleasure of his Will, Ephesians.
1.5. But God who is rich in Mercy, for his great love wherewith he has loved
us, even when we were dead in sins, has he quickened us together in Christ; by
Grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 11. And not by Works of Righteousness which we
have done, but according to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us, abundantly,
through Jesus Christ our Savior, that being Justified by his Grace, we should
be made Heirs according to the hope of Eternal Life, Titus 3.5, 6, 7.

For all have sinned and come short of the Glory of God, being justified freely
by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set
forth, to be a propitiation through Faith in his blood, to declare his
Righteousness for the remission of sins, that are past, through the forbearance
of God, to declare his righteousness that he may be just, and the justifier of
him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3.21, to the end. When we were yet without
strength in due time Christ died for the ungodly, God commends his love
toward us, in that, while we were yet Sinners, Christ died for us, for if when
we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more
being reconciled we shall be saved by his Life, Rom 5.6, to 11. Who was
delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our Justification, Romans
4.25. and other innumerable places of Scripture, as Romans 9.11, 15, 16. Ezekiel.
16. to 15, and Ezekiel. 36.17, to 33. James 1.17.

By all which we see the blessing of this Covenant coming freely of Grace, by
the Council of Heaven, Christ undertaking for impotent, helpless sinners, and
enemies, and this undertaking approved and accepted of, by the forbearance of
God and the suffering of Christ, coming as a propitiation and satisfaction to
Justice for Man's offenses, who was in no capacity to help himself, the freedom
and excellency of this love of Christ in this new Covenant appears, yet more
particularly in these respects.

First, As man was of himself incapable to make satisfaction to Justice, and
reconcile himself to God, so he was not fit to be treated with by God in his
own person, because he had altogether defiled himself, and was of no Integrity,
therefore Jesus Christ becomes Man's Surety to God, to perform for him the
Conditions on Man's part, which he does by offering himself up to Justice for
Sin, Romans 4.25. And by his Spirit of Grace enabling Man to do spiritual homage
and obedience to God, and by so much was Jesus made the Surety of a better
Testament, Heb. 2.22.

Secondly, Christ does not only become Man's Surety, but actually clears and
discharges them from the debt of Sin to Justice, and frees Sinners from the
penalty of eternal wrath for Sin, for he has made him to be sin for us, who
knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.

Herein does the Suretyship of Christ for Man differ from the suretyship
amongst Men, for that amongst Men, when one becomes Surety for another, he
contracts for relief from him whose security he is, and only lends his Credit
for a time, but will not pay the debt for him, if he can by Law avoid it, and
if he be constrained to pay it, he will force relief from the other if he be
able, and if not able, will treat him with all severity for his own relief; but
Christ Jesus neither expects or desires any satisfaction or relief, but freely
of his own good Will pays the Debt and expects no return but the humble and
thankful acknowledgment and improvement of the mercy of forgiveness and
privileges obtained by him to the debtor.

Thirdly, He becomes a Curse for sinners, and frees them from the Curse due for
their sins, Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law being made a
Curse for us, Gal. 3.13. For it is Written, Cursed is every one that hangs on
a Tree, Deuteronomy. 21.23.

Fourthly, He does not only free us from the Curse for Sin, and Punishment of
Justice, but also frees them from all Imputation of guilt for Sin, and obtains
the condemnatory Sentence of Justice, against them, to be cancelled and nailed
to his Cross of Satisfaction to Justice, that the same shall never retort upon
them to their prejudice, And you being dead in your Sins, and the
Uncircumcision of the Flesh, has he quickened together with him, having
forgiven you all Trespasses, blotting out the Handwriting of Ordinances, that
was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way nailing it
to his Cross, Colossians 2.13, 14.

Herein also is a second difference between Christ's love to me, above that
amongst men, for when a surety is obliged to pay the Debt of another, he takes
Assigments to the Creditors Debt, and keeps it on foot against his Friend,
either to force satisfaction from him, or to keep him in constant trouble,
fear, danger, and disquiet of mind, but Christ does not only, early,
cheerfully, and willingly pay the debt, but also cancels all the instruments of
payment, and puts the debt in utter oblivion. And remembers their sins no more,
Isa. 43.25. and quiets their Thoughts from the fear of their danger, or after
trouble for their Debts.

Fifthly, He does not only satisfy Justice, take off the Curse, and procure
them Indemnity, but also procures the Imputation of Righteousness to them, as
he was made sin for sinner, though he knew no sin, so he makes them righteous
through him, though they were altogether unrighteous in themselves. And he
received the Sign of Circumcision, a sign of the Righteousness of Faith, which
he had yet being uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all them that
believe, though they be not circumcised, that the righteousness might be
imputed to them also; now it was not written for his sake alone, that it was
imputed to him, but for us also to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe in
him who raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered for our
offenses, and was raised again for our Justification, Romans 4.11, 24, 25.

Herein is manifest the excellency of Christ's love to sinners above any thing
amongst men, for men commonly upbraid others with their good offices done, and
if one man suffer the least injury from another, especially in paying a debt
for him, the same is not only a continual reproach, but prejudice so far
prevails, that they never afterward assist them in any good office, but rather
defame and lessen their reputation, than advance them to any good, though it
may be in their power; but Christ glories in the good Office done, and is so
far from upbraiding his poor friends, Jam. 1.5. That he will not only have all
names of reproach (from their former transgressions) taken off, Isa. 54.4. but
he will have them farther advanced, and though they were in themselves
unrighteous, he will have his own righteousness imputed to them, as in the
foregoing Scripture, 2 Cor. 5.21. and is so tender of their reputation, that he
will have all their deformities covered and washed away in his own blood, Rev.
7.14. Who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2.23, 24. Who
gave himself for us, that he might deliver us from this present evil World,
according to the Will of God and our Father, Gal. 1.4.

We do not read in Scripture that Christ upbraids any Repenting Sinner with
their Sins committed before their Conversion, Mary Magdalen after her
Conversion was not reproached with uncleanness, Peter with denial of Christ,
nor Paul for his vehement persecuting of him. This of upbraiding or reproaching
the Penitent with their former transgressions is clear contrary to the Method
God takes with his People, for in that famous Scripture, Eze. 33, The Spirit of
God tells us the Righteousness of the Sinner shall not justify him without
Repentance and new Obedience, When I shall say to the Righteous he shall surely
live, if he trust to his own Righteousness and commit Iniquity, all his
Righteousness shall not be remembered, but for his Iniquity that he has
committed he shall dye for it, verse 13. And on the other hand the Sins of the
Penitent shall not be remembered against them. If the wicked restore the pledge,
give again that which he has robbed, and walk in the Statutes of Life, without
committing Iniquity, he shall surely live, he shall not dye, none of his Sins
that he has committed shall be mentioned unto him, he has done that which is
lawful and right, he shall surely live, ver. 15, 16.

The Lord is a Spirit of meekness, tender hearted and compassionate, and he
knows that the regenerate are a people afflicted and broken in Heart for
their Sins, and under a continual sense of being under a body of death, and
that they often want the Oil of Joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for
the spirit of heaviness, Isa. 61.3. To support them under their fainting fits,
a wounded Spirit who can bear? therefore in his gracious condescension he
ministers consolation to his People. Thus says the high and lofty one, that
inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is holy, I dwell in the high and holy place,
with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of
the humble, and to revive the Heart of the contrite ones, for I will not
contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth for the Spirit should fail
before me, and the Souls which I have made, Isa. 57.15, 16.

From whence we may have these two Lessons.

First, A Lesson of Caution, Humiliation, and Watchfulness to the Godly and
Penitent.

Secondly, An advice against censoriousness and rash judging of others.

First, As to Godly and Penitent, have thou upon serious enquiry into thine own
Heart, Affections, and Conversation, found that Godly sorrow and repentance for
sin spoken of, 2 Cor. 7.9, 10, 11. And explained in this ensuing Discourse,
Page.

And have found Faith warranting thee to believe that Christ Jesus who knew no
sin, is made sin for thee, 2 Cor. 5.21. And thou made the Righteousness of God
in him, and that the Handwriting of Ordinances of Gods Justice as to thee, is
by him blotted out, Col. 2.13, 14. Then consider,

First, What thou art called unto, That as ye have learned Christ Jesus, so
walk ye in him. Has he made thee Righteousness who was dead in trespasses and
sins, not by thine own work of Righteousness, but of his Grace, and by his
Power of Regeneration, art thou justified) not by the Law of thy Works, but by
Grace and Faith in Jesus Christ, Romans 3.27, 28.

T,hy works are only Obedience, Faith and Holiness which are given to thee by
him, and though they neither have justified nor can justify thee, they are thy
duties, and what thou can do is but duty, and thou should account thy self
an unprofitable Servant as to God, Luke 17.10. And though in the acceptance of
God through Jesus Christ, thou art accounted Righteous, thou must continue in
holy duties, in all manner of conversation, and must not continue in Sin, that
Grace may abound, but as being dead to sin and crucified in Christ, thou
should walk in newness of life to the destruction of the body of Death, that
we may live with Christ, Let not therefore Sin reign in your Mortal bodies,
that you should obey it in the lusts thereof, neither yield ye your Members as
Instruments of unrighteousness to Sin, but yield unto God as those that are
alive from the dead, and your Members as Instruments of Righteousness unto God;
and sin not, because thou art not under the Law but under Grace, Romans 6. to 16.

Secondly, Art thou in thy apprehensions renewed to God, and have a loathing
sense of Corruptions, is the Bondwoman of Sin and Satan, cast out by the power
of Regeneration and Grace, leave not thy house empty, but get it freshly stockt
with increase of Grace, consider what Christ says of the Man out of which the
Devil was cast out, that if he find the House empty, he will return with seven
Devils worse than himself, and the last state of that man will be worse than
the first, Luke 11.24, 25, 26.

Be instant therefore in Prayer to God for increase of Grace, and Guard against
old favorite Lusts and Corruptions, that they return not again to entangle
thee to Folly, take the Apostles advice, be sober, be vigilant, because your
Adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may
devour, whom resist steadfast in the Faith, 1 Pet. 8.9.

Thirdly, Art thou Righteous to God by Christ Jesus, not by thine own works and
power, be humble in the sense of thy own incapacity and insufficiency for any
good in thy self, and say with that holy Apostle. For I know that in me, that
is in my Flesh there dwells no good thing, for to will is present with me,
but how to perform that which is good that I know not, for the good that I
would I do not, but the evil which I would not that I do: for I find a Law,
that when I would do good, evil is present with me. O wretched man that I am!
Who shall deliver me from the Body of this death? Romans 7.18, to 25. And be
deeply sensible of the weakness and imperfection of all thy Graces and
Seize, as rotten Garments and menstruous Clouts, as in and from thee, and
that in thy self there is no soundness, but uncleanness from the sole of the
Foot to the top of the head, Isa. 1.6. Chapter 64.6.

Secondly, As to censoriousness and rash judging the Scripture tells us, that
offenses must come, but woe to them by whom they come, Luke 17.1. And as none
are more obnoxious to be slandered, reviled and evil reported of, and be
treated censoriously, and uncharitably than the Godly, this they may remember
for their Comfort and Patience, that the Disciple must not expect better
entertainment than his Master, nor the Servant than his Lord, and as Christ was
reviled with being a friend to Publicans and Sinners, a Wine-bibber and a
Drunkard, and that he did cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils.
Luke 7.32, 33, 34. So may the Children of God contentedly sit down under the
uncharitable constructions of the Enemies of Truth, after the example of
Christ, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered he
threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet.
2.21, 22, 23.

As the Children of God when they do well and suffer for it, are called to
suffer patiently as following Christ's example in the foregoing Scripture, so
the uncharitable and censorious Rabsecahs whose business is to ridicule the
Truth of God, disparage Religion, and load the zealous for God, with reproach
and infamy, Isa. 36. Chap. 37.8, to 14. should do well to remember that
uncharitable censoriousness is a great sin against God, and to take on them to
charge the Professors of Religion with Hypocrisy, is assuming to themselves the
Prerogative of God, of knowing men's Hearts, which alone is the peculiar power
of God, Jer. 11.20. chapter 17.9, 10. Psalm. 7.9. 1 Samuel 16.7. Man looks on the
outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the Heart.

No Man can charge another with any Sin, but if he search into his own Heart
and Ways, he may find himself guilty of that same or worse Sins wherewith he
charge his Brother, wherefore he should take Christ's directions, first To
take the beam out of his own Eye, before he challenge the Mote in his Brothers
Eye, and not to Judge least he be Judged, Mat. 7. to 6.

Let such consider how much a narrow uncharitable and censorious Spirit, is
contrary to that love, tenderness and charity, which is commanded and
recommended in Scripture, Romans 2. all, and that if any brother or professor of
truth be fallen under any sin that he be reclaimed in the Spirit of meekness,
and not treated with bitter invectives and reproaches, 2 Cor. 2.7. and that
self-humiliation is the best means of another conviction, and the true
Christian duty, For whosoever exalts himself shall be abased, and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted, Luke 14.11.

Let such consider how injurious slander and reproach is to the reputation of a
Christian, and how ill it is resented by the Spirit of God in Scripture, for
the Lord accounts his People so nearly related to himself, that he will not
have them injured, so that he accounts the Injury done to them to be done to
himself. He that touches you, touches the Apple of mi^e Eye, Zach. 2. and 8.
There is that speaks like the piercing of a Sword, but the Tongues of the
Wise is Health; Prove. 12.18. And though Malice and Prejudice may raise a
slanderous report, nevertheless, neither in man's esteem at long run, nor in
Gods account shall it have any weight, but shall be wiped off in course of
time, although the Innocent and Godly may suffer for a time, Lips of Truth
shall be established for ever, but a Lying Tongue is but for a moment, Prove
12.18, 19.

Let such farther consider how detestable lying, slandering and reproaching is
to God. Lying Lips are an abomination to the Lord, but they that deal truly
are his delight, Prove. 12.22. We see that the railing Blasphemous Reproaches of
Rabsecah, and the great King of Assyria against the People of God, is accounted
by God against himself. Whom have thou reproached and blasphemed, and against
whom have thou exalted thy voice, and lift thine Eyes on high? even against the
Holy One of Israel. By thy Messengers thou have reproached the Lord, and have
said, etc. 2 Kin. 19.22, 23. read all, and read, chap 18.

Let such further Consider What badge, and brand of folly is put upon Peevish,
Uncharitable, Narrow and Censorious Persons, who either raise slanders or by
reporting foment them, He that hides hatred with lying Lips and he that
utters slander is a Fool; in the multitude of words there wants not sin,
but he that refraineth his Lips is wise: The Lips of the righteous feed many,
but Fools die for want of Wisdom. It is a sport to a Fool to do mischief, but a
man of understanding has Wisdom, Prove. 10.18. to 24. Prove. 26.21.22. See the
words.

By the blessing of the upright the City is exalted, but it is overthrown by
the Mouth of the wicked: He that is void of Wisdom despises his Neighbor, but
a Man of understanding holds his peace, a Tail-bearer reveals Secrets, but
he that is of a faithful Spirit concealeth a Matter Prove. 11.11, 12, 13.

Let all such remember that such reproaching slandering and defaming do more
mischief to themselves at the long-run than to the Godly, for that the Godly
shall be justified by their Integrity both before God and Man, and the malice
of the wicked shall be retorted upon themselves The Righteousness of the
upright shall direct this way, but the wicked shall fall by his own wickedness;
an Hypocrite with his mouth destroys his Neighbor, but through knowledge
shall the just be delivered; the righteous is delivered out of trouble and the
wicked comes in his stead, Prove. 11.5. to 10. His own Iniquities shall take
the wicked himself and he shall be holden with the Cords of his sin, Prove.
5.22, 23.

Let such persons also consider the Character given in Scripture to the
Malicious and Slanderers. His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and fraud,
under his tongue is mischief and vanity; he sits in the lurking places of
the Village, and in the secret places does he murder the Innocent; his eyes are
privily set against the poor, he lies in wait secretly as a Lion, Psalm. 10 7.
to 11.

By which may be gathered that such are accounted treacherous and murderers in
Scripture language.

But let us on the other hand observe and consider the event of all the
prepensite malice of the wicked against the godly, and we shall find it stored
up to their own ruin, He has prepared against him Instruments of Death, he
Ordains his Arrows against the Persecutors. Behold, he travelleth with
Iniquity, and has conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood. He made a
Pit and Dug it, and is fallen into the Ditch which he made. His mischief
shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing upon his own pate,
Psalm. 7.13, 14, 15, 16. The Lord shall cut off all Lying Lips, and the Tongue
that speaks proud things, Psalm. 12.3.

Let us observe what the Psalmist foretells shall be the end of slanderers and
slandering Tongues, Thy Tongue devises mischief: Like a sharp Rasor, working
deceitfully. Thou love evil more than good: And lying rather than to speak
righteousness. Thou love all devouring words, O thou deceitful Tongue. God
shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, and pluck thee
out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the living. Psalm.
52.2. to 6. Let us view the revilings and reproaches of God-almighty and his
People by the King of Assyria and his Messengers in that 2 Kings 18. And the
Judgments of God both on Messengers and their Master in that 2 Kings Chap. 19,

The Spirit of God is so compassionate even to the offenders amongst his
People, that though he will not have sin and offencies amongst them go without
chastizement, yet will he have Mercy and and Charity to be so mixed with
Justice that his People may not be reduced to despair in reference to Gods
purpose toward them, as in that famous place of his own Justice and Clemency;
For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth: Lest the
Spirit should fail before me, and the Soul which I have made. For the
Iniquities of his Covetousness was I wroth. I have seen his ways and will heal
him: I will lead him also, and restore comfort unto him and to his mourners,
Isa. 57.15. to 19.

In which we see Mercy so mixed with Justice, Clemency, and Bounty, that
Correction and Chastizement is only intended of God for the good and reclaiming
of his People, and not for their destruction. We find also by Gods direction in
the punishment of offenses by Judges amongst the People of Israel, the very
number of stripes to be inflicted were appointed, and not to be exceeded, Forty
stripes he may give him, and not exceed, least if he should exceed and beat him
above these, with many stripes, then thy Brother should seem vile unto thee,
Deuteronomy. 25.3. Whereby it is clear that the Lord will not have the very Sinners
amongst his People to be made contemptible by the inflicting of Justice upon
them, but will have the Rod only used to reclaim the stubborn; and their name
and reputation, nevertheless, to be kept up; so as they neither despair in
themselves, or should be reproached by others if they could be reclaimed,
Prejudice and Passion will expose to contempt, which is expressly cautioned
against, and implied in these words, then thy Brother should seem vile unto
thee.

This calls on all professing Religion for the Spirit of meekness, compassion,
charity, and tender heartedness, even to such as are either under the Rod of
affliction, or taken under any infirmity to sin, especially on their
Repentance, and to check that heat of uncharitable judging, or reviling which
is freequently pressed in Scripture especially by the Holy Apostle, Ephesians. 4.
Throughout the whole chapter, where he exhorts to unity, peace, and love, in
particular instances, and expresses the same by many arguments. First, They
are all of one body, and one spirit one hope of our Faith, verse 4. Secondly,
One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, ver. 5. Thirdly, One God and Father of all by
which they are Brethren, ver. 6. Fourthly, They have all several gifts, and all
useful, and therefore none either to be despised or envied, all being given for
edifying of the body, ver. 7, to 16. Fifthly, They are all joined and compact
together, in the unity of the Spirit, as the Joints and Sinews unite the Body,
they are Members all of the same body, ver. 16. Sixthly, They are all Members
one of another, ver. 25. And therefore concludes with the Command of these
Heavenly Duties be ye angry and sin not, let not the Sun go down on your wrath,
neither give place to the Devil. Let all bitterness, and anger, and clamor,
and evil speaking be put from you, with all malice, and be ye kind one to
another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven you, ver. 26, to end. And the same Apostle elsewhere, let us not
Judge one another any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling
block before his Brother, Romans 14.23. Put on therefore as the Elect of God,
holy and beloved bowels of Mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long suffering, forbearing one another, forgiving one another, and above all
these things, put on Charity, which is the bond of perfectness, Col. 3.12, 13,
14. See how zealous this holy Apostle is to unite the People of God in Love,
throughout his whole writings. Let nothing be done through strife or vain
glory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem others better than themselves,
look not every man on his own things but every man on the things of others,
Phil. 2. to 9.

The whole Scriptures run in this strain, above all things have fervent Charity
amongst your selves, for Charity shall cover the multitude of sins, 1 Pet. 4.8.
and add to Godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness, Charity, 2
Pet. 1.7. And above all this we have the express command of our great Lord and
Lawgiver Jesus Christ, be ye therefore merciful as your heavenly Father is
merciful, Luke 6.36. a new commandment I give you, that you love one another,
as I have loved you, that ye also love one another, John 13.34.

To conclude this discourse, it were desirable, that all of the Profession of
Christianity, though of different methods and worship, would seriously consider
how much it is the incumbent duty of all Christians, to study the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace, how agreeable it is to the Command of Jesus
Christ, from his own Mouth, as also by his Messengers as well in the old
Testament as under the new. Have we not all one Father, has not one God
created us, why do we deal treacherously every Man against his Brother, Mal.
2.10. How much it would remove the stumbling of Heathens, Idolaters, Atheists,
and the Profane, who are much scandalized by the Divisions of Christians, and
more especially of the reformed Churches, how much it would strengthen their
hands against the Enemies of Truth, and what great inducement it might be, to
invite the dissolute, and profane, to join in a body or Church incorporated by
love, and serving of God with one consent, what ease, satisfaction, comfort,
and delight, it would create to each other, when differences, janglings, and
contention about lesser things, were removed, and the substantial part of
Religion, to wit holiness toward God, Charity and Brotherly kindness with one
another, were more sincerely pursued? How much it would adorn the precious
Gospel of Jesus Christ, such unity would be like that precious Ointment on the
Head, which run down to the Skirts of the Garment, Psalm 133. and would give a
most pleasant savor to all the beholders, and to Christians themselves, like
the Churches Spikenard, Myrrh and Camphire, Cant. 1.12, 13, 14. and being once
experimentally found, will constrain them to sit down under the shadow of God,
who is Love, 1 John 3.16. and Wisdom, Pro. 8.1. with great delight, and would
undoubtedly find his fruit pleasant to their taste, Cant. 2.13. This also would
be a special mean to entangle others into the Net of the Gospel.

From all which we plainly see the unexpressible freedom of this Grace, and
love of the second Covenant, which as first founded in Free Grace, is also
accomplished unto us by the mystery of his love, and to enquire into the Tenure
and Condition of this Covenant comes next in course.

This Covenant of Grace, Mercy, and Salvation, is between God and Man, by the
Mediator Jesus Christ; and the Conditions thereof are mutual on Gods part, and
Man's part.

The Justice of God being offended by Man's falling in disobedience, and the
Counsel of Heaven designing Man's Restoration, by means above man's apprehension
and capacity, the bounty of Heaven makes a Proclamation ^f indemnity and free
pardon; and God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have eternal life, Joh. 3.16.

This is the great Magna Charta of Man's Restoration and Eternal Happiness, and
as it come of the good Will of God, is free; nevertheless, for the honor of
Justice, and for the further security of Man's future happiness, this Covenant
is circumscribed with conditions.

First, On Gods part a free Pardon, and reward of Eternal life.

Secondly, On Man's part believe.

But as we have already showed that Man rendering himself incapable of doing
any good, much less to satisfy Divine Justice, or in his own strength to manage
a new stock of mercy, the Wisdom and Infinite Goodness of God, in the Counsel
of Heaven, before the World began, has settled this contrivance, that Jesus
Christ the only begotten Son of God, and Second Person of the Holy Trinity,
should become surety to Justice, and undertake for poor lost Man, and as Christ
is responsable to Justice for Man, so Man is tied up also in the New Covenant
to terms, so that the Covenant stands also on Conditions between Christ and
Man, Christ performing to God for Man, and procuring to Man the benefits of
that new Covenant, viz. absolution from Sin, and Eternal Life (Man performing
new obedience to God) The terms then of this Covenant on Christ's part, are,
that he becomes between God and Man, a Prophet, a Priest, and a King.

First, A Prophet, the office of a Prophet is to teach, instruct, declare, and
reveal the mind of God to his People.

And that Christ is that only true Prophet, the whole Scriptures concur in
Testimony, he is that Prophet foretold, by whom that Everlasting Covenant was
made with Abraham, Genesis 17.7. And that Prophet promised to Moses, and I will
raise them up a Prophet amongst their Brethren, like unto thee, and I will put
my words into his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command
him, Deuteronomy. 18.18. And he is that Prophet of whom the Apostle speaks: Of this
Man's Seed has God according to his promise raised unto Israel a Savior Jesus,
Act. 13.22. And this is that rod out of the Stem of Jesse, on whom the Spirit
of the Lord does rest, The Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of
Counsel and Might, the Spirit of Knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord, he
shall not judge after the sight of his Eyes, nor reprove after the hearing of
his Ears; but with Righteousness shall he judge the Poor, and Reprove with
Equity, for the meek of the Earth, and shall smite the Earth with the Rod of
his Mouth, and with the breath of his Lips shall he slay the Wicked, and
righteousness shall be the Girdle of his Loins, and Faithfulness the Girdle of
his Reins, Isa. 11. to 11. And this is that Prophet who has received the
Spirit in full, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because the Lord has
appointed me to Preach good tidings to the meek, he has sent me to bind up the
broken hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captive, and the opening of the
Prison to them that are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and
the day of vengeance of our God, and to comfort all that mourn, to appoint unto
them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for
Mourning, the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness, Isa. 61. to 4. He
is the only true Shepherd of the Sheep, and enters in at the Door, to whom
it is opened, and the Sheep hear his voice and follow him, he knows his
Sheep, calls them by their Names, and leads them into the true and good
Pastures, John 10. to 6. He is the infallible guide and teacher, He is the Way,
the Truth, the Light and Life, and no Man comes unto the Father but by him,
Joh. 14.6. He is the only true light, that lightneth every Man that comes into
the World, John 1.6.

This then being the first step of Christ's Mediation between God and Man, to be
their Teacher, to instruct them their duty toward God by his infallible
Spirit, this should lead us again with the Apostle to cry out, O the depth, and
infinite dimensions of the Love and Wisdom of God to sinners. If we consider
Man's Fall from his credulity, in believing the lying suggestions of a fallen
Angel in the Mouth of a Serpent, and not believing of God and that to avoid
man's splitting on this Rock, God sends his infallible Spirit of Truth, to guide
them in all Truth, and bring them under the Law of the Spirit, by Regeneration,
and a new Life in Christ Jesus, by putting his Spirit in them, to make them
walk in the Spirit, and no more in the unprofitable course of this World, in
the Flesh and Lusts thereof, and endoweth them with the Wisdom and Graces of
his Spirit, to perform to God new obedience, as shall be shown in examining of
the Christian Duties, as the conditions of this Covenant on Man's part, how much
should the consideration of this mystery of Love and Wisdom, lead our anxious
desires after attaining unto a large stock of this enriching and confirming
Grace, and to be endowed with the knowledge of the love of God in Christ Jesus!
by which poor Believers are not only retrieved from Sin and Wrath, but are kept
sure in Christ's Hand from falling away from God, as under the first Covenant,
John 17.6, to 13.

The second branch of Christ's Mediatory Office, is to be a Priest, and the
Office of a Priest being to offer up Sacrifice for Sinners, we shall consider
how this agrees to Christ, and is performed by him, the holy Apostle tells us,
That he that desires the Office of a Bishop or Teacher, desires a good work,
1 Timothy 3.1. And he also tells us that it is so honorable and sacred, that no
man takes it to himself, but he that is called thereunto as was Aaron, Heb.
5.4.

And therefore God in displeasure with Uzziah the great King of Israel, for
intruding into the Priests Office struck him with Leprosy to his death, 2 Chronicles. 26.18. to end. But none can claim better or so good a Title to the
Priesthood, as our great high Priest Jesus Christ, who took not that honor to
himself, but it was given to him of his Father, who said to him, this day have
I begotten thee, and thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisedeck, Heb. 5.5. Psalm 110.4. Isa. 7.13, 14, 15, 16.

And although he was Heir of all things, and by whom the World was made, and
being the brightness of the Fathers glory, and express Image of his person, he
was anointed with the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows, Heb. 1.2, 3, 9. And
made the High Priest, by the Council of Heaven, for Man's Eternal Salvation, and
as he had this his call, immediately from Heaven, so he has it, with more
transcendent eminency than other Priests, in many considerations.

First, The holy Apostle Paul tells us, that all Priests taken from amongst
Men, are compassed about with Infirmities and Sins, and as in compassion to
others, so also for their own as well as for the sins of others, they are to
offer up Sacrifices, Heb. 5.1, 2, 3. chapter 7.23, 28. chap. 9.7. but this our
great High Priest though in Compassion to us, he took our nature upon him, and
was subject to natural Infirmities, and in the Flesh was tempted with like
Infirmities, to succor such as were tempted, yet without sin, Heb. 2.16, 17,
18. chap. 4.15. However he is essentially holy, for such an High Priest became
us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners, and made higher
than the Heavens, who needs not daily, as these High Priests, to offer up
Sacrifice, first for his own Sins, and then for the People, for this he did,
once when he offered up himself, Heb. 7.26, 27.

Secondly, All other Priests are made without an Oath, but he with an Oath, for
those Priests were made without an Oath, but this with an Oath, by him that
said to him, the Lord Swore and will not Repent, thou art a Priest for ever,
after the order of Melchisedeck, and has an unchangeable Priesthood, Hebrews
7.21, 24.

Thirdly, Other Priests are for a time, his Priesthood is for ever, and
unchangeable, as in the foregoing Scripture, They were many Priests, and not
suffered to continue, because of death, but this man, because he continues
ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood, wherefore he is able also to save them
to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
Intercession for them, for the Law makes High Priests which have Infirmities,
but the word of the Oath which was since the Law, makes his Son, who is
consecrated for evermore; for Christ is not entered into the Holy Places made
with Hands, which are the figures of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to
appear in the Presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. Heb. 7.23, 24, 25, 28. And by
the Holy Apostle John, If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the Righteous, 1 John 2.1.

From these Scriptures we have a clear proof of this consolatory Doctrine, that
Christ's Priesthood continues when men's cease, for his is Eternal, theirs are
but while they are on Earth; but on the other Hand, Christ has entered into
the Heavens to make Intercession for us, and although he has once for all,
fulfilled the Sacrifice to Justice for Sinners, nevertheless he is still at a
post of Intercession in Heaven, with the Father, to make our requests known,
and to procure the answer to our Petitions; and as at his leaving of the World,
he told his Disciples he was going to the Father, and told them Whatsoever ye
ask in my name, that I will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son,
and if ye ask anything in my name I will do it, Joh. 14.13, 14.

It clearly appears his Mediatory Office is not determined, but continues, and
will continue until the restitution of all things, and he give up the Kingdom
to his Father.

As this Doctrine affords great consolation to all Believers, that in all their
wants Spiritual and Temporal, while in their Pilgrim state, they are assured of
an Advocate to make Intercession for them, so we have a clear confutation of
that error of the Church of Rome, who set up the Doctrine of Invocation, and
Intercession of Saints, which exceedingly derogates from the Prerogative of
Jesus Christ, who is that great High Priest and only Mediator for Sinners; for
the Apostle is most positively clear, that Priests amongst men are not suffered
to continue because of Death, but this man continues for ever, so as nothing
can be clearer than that their Office determines with their Lives, and his
continues in Heaven, making Intercession for Sinners.

What can be a greater contradiction of Scripture, and more derogatory to the
sole Prerogative of Jesus Christ's Mediation, than to allow the power of
Intercession to any Saint or Angel, whose Office is extinguished when they
yield up the Ghost.

Fourthly, Priests amongst Men, offer Sacrifices of corruptible things at the
charge of others, but this great High Priest has made a Sacrifice of his own
blood for the sins of others. But Christ being come an High Priest of good
things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands,
that is to say, neither by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own
blood, he entered in once into the Holy Place, having obtained eternal
Redemption for us, for if the blood of Bulls, and Goats, and of the Ashes of
an Heifer, sprinkling the Unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the Flesh,
how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit,
offered himself, without spot to God, purge your Consciences to serve the
living God? Heb. 9.11, 12, 13, 14. and elsewhere, Looking for the blessed hope,
and the glorious appearing of the Great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2.13, 14. Who gave
himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil World,
according to the Will of God and our Father, Gal. 1.4. being justified freely
by his Grace, by the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set
forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his
righteousness, for the Remission of Sins that are past, through the forbearance
of God; to declare at this time his Righteousness that he might be just, and
the justifier of him which believes in Jesus, where is boasting then? it is
excluded, by what Law? of Works? nay, but by the Law of Faith, therefore we
conclude, that a Man is justified by Faith, without thee deeds of the Law, Romans
3.24, to 29.

Hence then have we this great Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction for Believers,
plainly discovered and proved unto us, in which we see the contrivance of
Heaven for Man's Eternal Redemption; (freely justified) that is without merit or
reward on our part, but of Bounty and Grace, (whom God has set forth) by the
joint Council of the Godhead (through Christ Jesus;) here the Sole Mediatory
office lodged in him (through Faith in his blood;) this is the duty and
condition on Believers part (for remission of Sins that are past;) this is the
full satisfaction to Justice, (through the forbearance of God) the consent of
Heaven and Indemnity for Sinners (that he might be just) that Justice might be
satisfied and sin expiated by the Blood of Jesus (and the Justifier of him that
believes in Jesus) that Christ's Blood be imputed as satisfaction for Sin,
without farther satisfaction from Believers, or other Mediators.

From all which, and almost in express words, we have the confutation of that
impious Doctrine of Rome, viz. of Merit, Mediation of Saints, Purgatory after
Death, all sins being done away by the Blood of Jesus, God being the justifier
of him that believes in Jesus, what room then is there for Purgatory?

Another difference between our great High Priest and Priests on Earth is that
they offered often, but he offered up himself once for all, a Propitiation for
Sin, and thereby at once satisfied Justice as in the foregoing and other
Scriptures, By the which Will we are sanctified through the offering of the
Body of Jesus once for all, and every Priest stands daily ministering, and
oftentimes offering the same sacrifices, which can never take away Sin, but
this Man after he had offered one Sacrifice for sin, for ever sat down on the
Right Hand of God, for by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified, Heb. 9.11, 12. He entered in once into the holy Place, having
obtained Eternal Redemption for us, Heb. 10.11, 12, 14.

From this plain Doctrine of Christ's once offering himself a Sacrifice for
Sinners, believers may comfort themselves in assurance of Salvation from that
Sacrifice of his Blood, and may come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may
obtain Mercy and find Grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16. And may have a
strong consolation who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us, which hope we have, as an Anchor of the Soul, both sure and
steadfast, and which enters into that within the Vail, whether the forerunner
is for us entered, even Jesus made an High Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedeck, Heb. 6.18, 19, 20.

This Doctrine also plainly reproves that Judaick Idolatrous and vain opinion
of the Popish Mass, in crucifying a fresh the Lord of Glory, and so often as
their superstitious fopperies lead them to it, not remembering, or wilfully not
believing, that Christ entered once for all within the Vail, and that their
superstitious worship, is the old yoke which neither the Jews nor their ^athers
could bear, and was a Figure for the time then present, and could not make him
that did the Sacrifice perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, and only
i^posed until the time of Reformation; but Christ coming an High Priest of good
things to come, and by his own blood entered once into the holy place, and
obtained eternal redemption for us, and thereby abolished the shadow of
Sacrifices, Heb. 9.9, 10, 11, 12. By his own final Sacrifice, so as the Body
being come, we should stay no more on the shadow.

The third branch of Christ's Mediatory Office for Believers is to be their King.

The honor, wealth, and safety of a Nation and People, do commonly depend on
the good or bad qualification of their Kings, Rulers, and Governors, and we
see in all Histories that the Prosperity and happiness of a people has been
according to the Virtue, or Genious of their Princes, Rulers, and Governors,
and we find in Scripture it is a Curse to a Nation, when Children are set over
them, Eccles. 10.16. and the Church complains as her greatest afflictions,
Servants have ruled over us, and Princes are hanged up by the hands, the faces
of Elders were not honored, Lam. 5.8, 12. And that this of having Childish
Governors, not endowed with suitable faculties of governing, is a great
Judgment on a Nation, experience tells us, for that thereby all the Fountains
of Justice are corrupted, and men either do that which is right in their own
Eyes, as when there was no King in Israel, or a King not capable or
sufficiently qualified for Government, or the Judges and Inferior Governors
are culled out of Favorites, or men of disposition with the unqualified
Governor, and thus as a Judgment for the sins of King and People, Justice
which is the only preservative of the Body Politic is corrupted, The wicked
walk on every side when the vilest Men are exalted, Psalm. 12.6. and according
to that Scripture, Judgment is turned away backward, and Justice stands afar
off, for Truth is fallen in the Street, and Equity cannot enter, yea Truth
fails, and he that departs from Evil makes himself a Prey, Isa. 59.9, to
16.

And as the folly of Princes, corruption of Judges, Interruption, Decay, or
wresting of Justice, is one of the greatest Judgments on a People or Nation, so
on the other hand, It is one of the greatest Blessings that can attend a People
or Nation, when their King, Governors, or Rulers, are of the Wise, Just, and
Prudent; Blessed art thou O, Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles, and thy
Princes Eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness, Eccles.
10.17. And therefore the Lord promises to his People as a special token of his
love, and Kings shall be your Nursing Fathers, and their Queens your Nursing
Mothers, Isa. 49.23. I will restore your Rulers as at the first, and Judges as
at the beginning, Isa. 1.26. I will make your Rulers Righteousness, and your
Exactors Peace.

If then the glory and safety of a People, be in the right frame and
Constitution of Government, and due qualification of their Governors, how
great reason then have they to rejoice, who have Christ for their King and
Governor; As was said of the People of Israel, what Nation or People are like
unto thee, whose God is the Lord, for in him dwells all fullness of
perfection. He is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 17.14. In him dwells
all the fullness of the Godhead, he is the only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15. In whom
is lodged all the treasures of Wisdom, Knowledge, Holiness, and all Excellency,
Isa. 11. to 6. He is that wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, of the increase of his Government
there shall be no end, Isa. 9.6. In fine in him are treasured up all the
excellencies, necessary to com^leat a King and Governor, as shall be more
particularly branched forth, in discoursing of the particular terms of the new
Covenant which he performs to his People, and for them.

The Office of a King chiefly consists in these three.

First, To Rule his People by his Laws.

Secondly, To Protect them by his Power.

Thirdly, To Reward them by his Bounty.

The Laws of Kings and Nations especially amongst the more civilized and
Christian, are commonly such, whereby the Prerogative of the King, and the
Rights of the People, are reciprocally preserved and provided for, and under
the dominion of Jesus Christ we are not to question, but that all his Laws,
which are framed by the Council of Heaven, are all holy, and just, and full of
safe preservatives, of the spotless Righteousness of Heavenly Majesty, and
proper boundaries of Christians duties, as in Psalm 19.7, to 12. and are the
Laws of the Spirit, and not of the Flesh, Romans 7.12, 14. chap. 8.1, 2. holy
just, and agreeable to every exigent of a Christians case and condition, and
are in themselves so choice and delightful, that the renewed of God delight
therein, as shall be cleared at length in the ensuing discourse, and this is
the consolation of Believers, that Christ as he is the Son, so is he the word
of God, and in him all the Promises of God, are yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20.

The second branch of Kingly Power, is, To Protect his People, which Christ
does, more eminently in many respects than any other King.

First, By defending and preserving them from falling into evils or dangers. He
shall give his Angels charge over thee to uphold thee in all thy ways, least
thou dash thy foot against a Stone, Psalm 91.11. Fear thou not, for thou shall
not be ashamed, neither be thou confounded, for thou shall not be put to shame,
for thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, the Holy One of
Israel, the God of the whole Earth shall he be called, Isa. 54.4, 5.

Secondly, When they are in trouble he upholds them and keeps them from
perishing under their Burdens. Can a Woman forget her sucking Child? etc.
Behold I have graven thee on the Palms of my hands, thy Walls are continually
before me, Isa. 49.15. When thou passest through the Waters, I will be with
thee, and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee, when thou walk
through the Fire, thou shall not be burned, neither shall the Flame kindle upon
thee, Isa. 43.2.

Thirdly, When they are in troubles, he strengthens them by his Grace, and
assists them with Patience, until he give them an outgate, thy Children shall
make haste, thy destroyers and they that made thee waste, shall go forth of
thee, lift up thine Eyes round about and behold, these gather themselves round
about and come to thee, as I live says the Lord, thou shall surely cloth thee
with them all, as with an Ornament, and bind them on thee, as a Bride does, I
will contend with them that contend with thee, and I will save thy Children, I
will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh, and they shall be drunk
with their own blood, as with sweet Wine, Isa. 49.17, 18, 25, 26. And in that
famous place of the Holy Apostle, There has no temptation taken you, but what
is common to men, but God who is faithful, will not suffer you to be tempted
above what ye are able, but will with the temptation also make a way to escape,
that you may be able to bear it. 1 Cor. 10.13. And in that other famous place,
Thus says the Lord, refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears,
for thy works shall be rewarded, and they shall come again from the Land of the
Enemy, and there is hope in thine end, that thy Children shall come again to
their own border, Jer. 31.16, 17. And as he is King so is he that merciful High
Priest, subject to the like infirmities of his Brethren, and Sympathiseth with
them, and succors them under their temptations, Heb. 2.17, 18. chap. 4.15.
chap. 5.2. And is able to save them to the uttermost, Chap. 7.24, 25, 26. and
in fine is universally concerned in all their troubles and difficulties, in all
their afflictions, he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them,
in his love, and in his pity, he redeemed them, and bare them all the days of
old, Isa. 63.9. And this his power and protection, is not only in general, but
in all particular Cases of Afflictions and Troubles, as shall be more
particularly expressed in handling of the Privileges of the New Covenant.

The third Branch of Princely power over Subjects, is expressed in the exercise
or extent of his bounty toward them, and no King or Prince ever exercised such
bounty or goodness toward his Subjects, as Christ has done, and still does to
all such as believe in him, and that in two respects.

First, By showing his free pardon of all their transgressions and sins, by a
full and general act of oblivion, entered into the Records of Heaven, by the
Blood of Jesus. I even I am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine
own sake and will not remember thy sins, Isa. 43.25. I have blotted out as a
thick Cloud thy transgressions, and as a Cloud thy sins, return unto me for I
have redeemed thee, Isa. 44.22. And that famous record of free love, bounty,
and absolution from sin: And you being dead in your sins, and the
uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened together with him, having
forgiven all trespasses, blotting out the hand writing of Ordinances, that was
against us and contrary to us, and took it away nailing it to his Cross, Col.
2.13, 14. And not only by the pardon of Sin, and thereby delivering from wrath
to come, and eternal misery: But,

Secondly, By raising lost man from the miserable state by Nature and Sin, Ez.
16. To the highest pitch of honor, glory, and eternal happiness, in making
them Heirs of eternal Life, and joint heirs with Christ in Glory, as many as
received him, he gave power to become the Sons of God, even to them that
believe in his Name, Joh. 1.12, 13. and if Children, then Heirs and Joint Heirs
with Christ, Romans 8.17. And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them,
that they may be one, even as we are one, Joh. 17.22.

What greater bounty can there be, and what higher love can be expressed, or
can be equalled to that of Christ to Believers. Greater love has no man than
this, that a Man lay down his life for his friend, but God commends his love
to us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Romans 5.6. to 11.
All which is more particularly insisted on in the Doctrine of the New Covenant.

Thus when we see what a happy state is that of a Christian, who can find
themselves within that everlasting and sure Covenant of Peace, and Eternal
Happiness with Christ, who is that infallible Prophet to teach his People, and
lead them in the way wherein they cannot err, Isa. 35.8. and that merciful High
Priest, who has offered himself once for all a Sacrifice for Believers, and is
able to save to the uttermost, and is that only Potentate and bountiful Prince,
rewards the Faith and Obedience of his People with Eternal glory, from whence
may be these clear uses, and inferences of consolation to all such as believe
in Jesus.

First, Is Jesus Christ that infallible Prophet, the Way, the Truth, and the
Life, John. 14.6. to lead and instruct his people.

Is he wisdom himself, Prove. 8.1. and all things are revealed unto him of the
Father? Is the Spirit given to him to bring glad tidings to his People, even to
the Prisoners of Hope? Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. does he instruct and give Wisdom, and
Knowledge to all that asks? Jam. 1.5. Then what person can be so ignorant in
any of the matters of God, or between God and their own Souls, but here they
may have a promise of supply, he who to Believers is all and in all, is to them
in the darkest circumstances their God, and they are commanded to trust to him,
who is among you that fears the Lord, and obeys the voice of his Servant,
and walks in darkness and has no light, let him trust in the name of the
Lord, and stay upon his God, Isa. 50.10. And he is to them Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.

Secondly, Is Christ that glorious High Priest, who once for all, by his own
blood has entered into the holy place, and obtained eternal Redemption for
sinners, Heb. 9.11, 12. what reason is there for disquietude or doubting,
seeing he has sacrificed himself for Believers, even though the black Cloud of
their Iniquities be as crimson and scarlet, Isa. 1.18. and though they may
under temptation with Jacob and Israel say, their way is hid from God, and my
Judgment is passed over from my God, Isa. 40.26, 27, 28. to end, yet in him
they ought to comfort themselves in this, that the everlasting God, the Creator
of the ends of the Earth, faints not, neither is weary, there is no searching
of his understanding, he gives power to the faint, and to them that have no
might he increases strength, Isa. 40.28, 29, 30, 31. And should under the
Apostles consideration, That we have not an High Priest, that cannot be touched
with the feeling of our Infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we
are, without sin, comply with his exhortation, let us therefore come boldly
unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy and find Grace to help in
time of need, Heb. 4.15, 16.

And with the same Apostle, triumph in a holy rejoicing, There is therefore now
no condemnation, to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
flesh but after the Spirit, who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? It is God that justifies, who is he that shall condemn? It is Christ
that died yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the Right Hand of God,
making intercession for us. Romans 8.1, 33, 34.

Thirdly, Is Christ Jesus that triumphant, and glorious Champion, With dyed
Garments from Bozrah, having trod the Wine Press of his Fathers wrath alone,
for sinners, Isa. 63.1, 2, 3. Who has conquered over Hell and Death for
sinners, 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56, 57. Why should a Believer be afraid and doubtful
of his Eternal Salvation in Jesus Christ, considering he has his Promise for
it who cannot lie. I even I am he, that comfort thee, who art thou, that
thou should be afraid of a Man that shall die, and of the Son of Man, that
shall be made as Grass? and forgets the Lord thy Maker, that has stretched
forth the Heavens, and have feared continually every day, because of the fury
of the Oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy, and where is the fury of the
Oppressor, Isa. 51.12, 13. This one Consideration and Faith in exercise, is
sufficient to stay the Soul against all discouragements and doubtings.

Fourthly, Is Christ that brightness of the Fathers Glory, and express Image of
his Person whose Throne is for ever, Heb. 1.3, 8. Has he dignified man, and
abased himself, in taking Man's Nature upon him, and not the Nature of Angels,
Heb. 2.16. Art thou amongst men, O Christian contemptible, as a Worm, and no
Man: looked upon as the abject and of scouring of the Earth as was Christ?
Psalm 22. Why art thou cast down and disquieted, is not Christ thy Eldest
Brother, has he taken thy Nature on him for any other end than for thy
comfort? For that he himself has suffered, being tempted he is able to succor
those that are tempted. Heb. 2.18. Let therefore thy Condition in the World be
never so despicable, lay thou hold on Christ as thy Sacrifice, be comforted in
this, Though thou have lien amongst the Pots, yet shall thou be like a Dove,
whose Wings are covered with Silver, and her Feathers with yellow Gold, Psalm.
68.13.

Fifthly, Is Christ thy King, who has the Keys of Hell and Death, who can bind
and no man loose, and loose and no man bind, Rev. 1.18. What Prison,
Confinement, Restraint, or Power can keep thee out of his Hands, when his
appointed time comes, That he will send his word and heal and loose thee?
Psalm 107.16, 20. Romans 8.35, 38, 39.

Sixthly, Is Christ that bountiful Prince, who gives gifts to Men, has he
abased himself to Death to make thee a King, John 1.12. art thou in Poverty
with Lazarus, and in thy own sense, and humane appearance thy way is hid from
God as in the foregoing place, nevertheless, remember his power and bounty, He
sets the poor on high, and makes them families like a Flock, the righteous
shall see it and rejoice, Psalm 1^7.41, 42. Yea remember his Promise, believe
and be comforted in it, I will give thee the treasures of darkness and hidden
riches of secret places, Isa: 45.3. Prove me now says the Lord, if I will not
open thee the Windows of Heaven, and pour you out a blessing that there shall
not be room enough to receive it, Mal. 3.10. But above all whereas the Wicked
and Rich of this World, receive their Consolation in this Life, Woe to you that
are Rich for you have received your Consolation, Luke 6.24. Believers shall be
Eternally happy, And they shall be mine in that day, when I make up my Jewels,
and I will spare him as a man spares his own Son that serves him, then shall
ye return and discern between the Righteous and the Wicked, between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not, Mal. 3.17, 18.

We have seen in the foregoing discourse, the happy condition of man in his
first Creation, and thereafter his unhappy and miserable estate by reason of
sin, and also, and immediately preceding this discourse, the Lords great
clemency and free bounty to Man, by the Counsel of Heaven from all Eternity, in
redeeming Man by a Covenant of free Love in Jesus Christ according to that
Scripture, O Israel thou have destroyed thy self but in me is thy help, Hosea
13. and 9. And as this great Salvation is by a Covenant with Jesus Christ,
wherein he both undertakes for Man, and procures Mercies to Man, so there are
duties incumbent to man on his part of the Covenant.

Although Man by his first and original sin, as has been already shown, has
disabled himself, that he is capable of no performance in himself, nevertheless
Jesus Christ his surety undertakes for him, and he works and accomplisheth all
these works in him.

These Conditions on Man's part are variously expressed in Scripture, Moses
under the Law, tells the People of Israel their duty toward God. And now O
Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee? but to fear the Lord thy
God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God,
with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, to keep the Commandments of the
Lord, and his Statutes, which I command thee for thy good, Deuteronomy. 10.22, 23. The
holy Prophet Micah, much to the same purpose, he has showed thee, O Man what
is good, and what does the Lord require of thee but to do justly, love mercy,
and walk humbly with thy God. Mic. 6.8.

The duty of Christians under the Gospel, and Believers under the Law are
morally the same, the holy Apostle gives us in diverse places the account of our
duties under the Gospel. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
Flesh, and of the Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord, 2 Cor.
7.1. And the same Apostle elsewhere, For the Grace of God that brings
Salvation, has appeared to all Men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
World, Titus 2.11, 12.

These foregoing and other Scriptures, as well in the old, as new Testament,
hold out to us, the material and substantial part of our duties, or conditions
of the new Covenant on man's part; although grace and salvation, comes freely
unto us, by the forbearance of God, and free love of Jesus Christ as is already
shown, nevertheless, it is but reasonable and just, that such precious mercies
should be answered, with conditions on Man's part, and the rather, for that: Man
has neither strength, power, nor capacity in himself to perform. But that as
the Covenant is free, so grace to perform is freely given and obtained by Jesus
Christ, James 1.17. and all the performances of Christians, though never so
exact, are but the returning to God what we received from him and though we may
better our selves by these performances, and thereby render our selves more
acceptable to God, nevertheless we do not at all profit God thereby, for what
we can do to God in our Service and Worship is but our Duty, and brings him no
advantage, according to Christ's own Doctrine. When ye shall have done all these
things which are commanded you, say, we are uprofitable Servants, we have done
that which was our duty to do, Luke 17.10.

As the holy Scriptures of the old and new testament, hold out to us the whole
complex of Christian duties, which being so various, and collected from so many
several Scriptures, and for the better attaining to the knowledge thereof, are
to be reduced in order, under the several heads of the duties of the first and
second Table, shall by the blessing of God be the subject of the ensuing
Discourse. Before we proceed to examine the particular duties of Christians
under this new Covenant, we shall by the way consider the great difference
between the bounty and goodness of God to Repenting Sinners, and the bounty and
goodness of man to one another, in which we shall find made good that
Scripture. As the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my thoughts higher
than your thoughts, and my ways higher than your ways, Isa. 55.9.

We have discovered that the Lord Jesus Christ his bounty is such, that man by
sin against God, having forfeited his first and happy estate in Paradise, and
being therefore accursed and concluded under wrath, is freely restored by the
Sacrifice of Christ's Blood, and that all required of him in return of such
mercies; is the due observance of Gods Commands in new obedience; and that
toward man's performance, God in Christ Jesus, makes with him an everlasting
Covenant, that he is their God and they his People, That he will give them one
Heart, and one Way, that they may fear him for ever for the good of them and
their Children after them, Jer. 32.38, 39, 40. and give them a new Spirit,
Ezekiel. 11.19 and I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
Statutes and ye shall keep my Commandments and do them, Jer. 36.27. By which we
perceive that as the Lord requires duties on man's part, he affords to his
people Strength and Grace to perform the duties Commanded, which other
Benefactors, neither do, nor can do.

Secondly, The Lord gives power and authority to his people to call on him for
a supply of such of his Graces, as are necessary for them to enable them to
walk with him, Ezekiel. 36.37. I will yet for this be inquired of the House of
Israel to do it for them, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened,
etc. Mat. 7.7, 8. and in that famous place, Ask me of things to come concerning
my Sons, and my Daughters, and the works of my hands command ye me, Isa. 45.11.

Thirdly, The Lord does not only afford stock of Grace by his Spirit, and gives
a command to call for more supply, but he also rewards the right improvement of
Grace with fresh Grace, he will give Grace for Grace, and no good thing will he
withold from those that fear him. Then shall we know if we follow on to know
the Lord, Hos. 6.3. and this is clear by the parable of the Talents, to such as
improved, more was given, and Eternal Life as a reward of their well-doing: but
he that did not improve, what he had was taken from him, and he himself was
thrust into utter darkness, Mat. 25.

Fourthly, The Lord delights in mercy and not in the severity of his Justice,
and rather desires sinners should repent and live, than perish under his Wrath
and Justice. Cast away all your transgressions, whereby you have transgressed,
and make you a new Heart, and a new Spirit, for why will you dye O House of
Israel, for I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies, wherefore turn
your selves and live, Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. As I live says the Lord, I have no
pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and
live, turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye dye O House of Israel? Ezekiel. 33.11.

We see in all these foregoing steps, the great desire and zeal the Lord Jesus
Christ has, for the good and conversion of sinners, and aversation to their
destruction; but on the other hand, we shall find the great prejudice,
oppression, and cruelty of men, against one another.

For first consider any man as a benefactor to another, either in that case,
where any man has raised some to some degree of preferment or profit, either
of mere good will or favor, and on taking a liking to him as his favorite, or
for some good office done to him by another, makes him some grant to himself
and his heirs, how frequently does it happen that either the donor loses his
fancy or forgets the good office to the donec in his own time? or like Pharaoh
to the Posterity of Joseph, and thereby rests not till by some means or other,
he brings his favorite into disgrace, and worms from him the grant with
Ignominy, and leaves him in worse condition than he found him, or makes him the
continual Butt of his displeasure, and exposes him to the contempt of others,
or if any condition be performable on the grant, makes the Grantee uneasy, and
never at quiet until the grant be voided.

Secondly, If on the account of Charity or common course of dealing, one
Neighbor or Friend happen on some pinching exigent, to supply the want of
another, how frequently does Pride upbraid the necessitous, and covetousness
take these advantages, that what was lent is called and forced back, so
unseasonably and in such rigid and hard terms, that the calling the thing back
after such manner, is a greater prejudice, than the supply could be a service,
and many are ruined on pretense of friendship in lending, when the event is
pernicious, and the design appears to have been nothing but covetousness; let
such persons consider the common duty of Charity, of lending without
expectation of a return, according to Christ's Doctrine, Love ye your Enemies,
and do good for evil, and lend hoping for nothing again, and your reward shall
be great, and ye shall be the Children of the highest, for he is kind to the
unthankful, and to the evil, be ye therefore merciful, as your heavenly Father
is merciful, Luke 6.34, 35, 36. It were advisable such persons would consider,
it is only Gods bounty, which makes one man in a worldly state to differ from
another, What have thou O man, that thou have not received? Every Good and
every Perfect Gift comes from the Father of Light, Jam. 1.17. The Race is not
to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong, but God raises up one and casts
down another. Let man in prosperity consider, it is only by the favor of God
he stands, and he that thinks he stands let him take heed least he fall.
And remember what the Psalmist says, When thou Lord rebukest man for Iniquity,
how do thou make his beauty to consume like a Mothe? Let him consider the
Parable of Dives and Lazarus, Luke 16.19. to the end, and the rich Husbandman
in the Gospel, Luke 12.16, to 22. Let him consider Nebuchadnezzar's Fall from
the height of Glory, to a Brutal State, Dan. 4.

Let such men remember they are of the same Family and extraction with the
poorest, that they owe their Life, Being, and what they have to God, and are
eternally lost, unless reconciled to God in Jesus Christ, and that all men by
Nature are under Wrath, and Debtors to Gods Justice, and if he should prove a
rigorous exactor who could stand before him? therefore they ought equally to
have compassion on their Brethren. Remember them that are in Bonds, as bound
with them, and them which suffer adversity, as being your selves in the Body,
Hebrews 13.3.

Let such remember the Parable of that cruel servant, whose Lord forgave to him
his debt, but he dealing cruelly with his fellow Servant, his Lord fell on him,
and made him irrecoverably miserable, Mat. 18.23. to end; and these are Christ's
own words, so likewise shall my Heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from
your Hearts forgive not every one his Brother their Trespasses, Mat. 18.35.

It being so known a Truth, and fatal to Mankind, that all Men in Adam were
concluded under Sin and Wrath, and that woeful experience as well as Scripture
teach us. That all men (except Christ) are frequently defiled with actual
Transgressions; And that no man acquainted with himself can be ignorant of this
truth, Psalm. 51.5. Ephesians. 2.3. Eecles. 7.20,

And that as all men in Adam are under the condemnation of Wrath and Justice,
so the only way of Salvation is by Faith in Jesus Christ, Romans. 5.18, 19.

Now that all naturally are under the state of Sin, let us consider the duties
incumbent for our recovery out of this condition, and these are chiefly five.
First, Trace Man what he is in his Estate of Nature. Secondly, Let us set
Original Sin before us as a Beacon. Thirdly, Study Mortification. Fourthly,
Study Repentance. Fifthly, Search into the promises of God and believe them.

The first Duty is to trace Man from his beginning, of whom if we take a view,
we will find him soon after his Creation to fall from his Original
Righteousness, by breaking the command and eating the forbidden fruit, And the
Lord saw that the wickedness of Man was great in the Earth, and that every
Imagination of his Heart was evil and only evil continually, Genesis 6.5, 7. And
see how he is described by the Prophet. The Heart of Man is deceitful and
desperately wicked above all things, who can know it, Jeremiah 17.9.

See how Man is painted out in his natural defilement, Thy Father was an
Amorite, and thy Mother a Hittite as for thy Nativity, in the day that thou
wast born, thy Navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in Water to supple
thee, thou wast not washed at all, nor salted at all, no Eye pitied thee, to
do any of these things to thee, to have compassion on thee, but thou wast cast
out on the open fields to the loathing of thy person, in the day thou wast
born, Ezekiel. 16.3, 4, 5, etc. See more of this under the head of original sin.

We are all as an unclean thing, all our unrighteousnesses are as filthy-Rags,
we do all fade away as a Leaf, and our Iniquities like a Wind have taken us
away, Isa. 64.6.

Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother conceive me, Psalm.
51.5.

He is accursed of God, for as many as are under the Law are under the Curse,
For it is written, cursed is every Man which continues not in every thing
which is written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 27.26.

Secondly, Set Original Sin as a Beacon before us, The use of a Beacon is to
take directions how to steer a right Course, to avoid splitting on a Rock or
danger, or upon Invasion to avoid surprizal by Enemies, how great reason has
Man in remembering his lost happiness by sin, to avoid splitting on that Rock
again? Remember Lots Wife struck up into a Pillar of Salt, for looking back to
sinful Sodom, Genesis 19.26. The Passover was appointed to remember the
Israelites, that the Lord by his Power had rescued them from their Bondage in
Egypt, Exodus 13.3. The Prophet Hosea in 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13. chapters
of his Prophecies holds forth to us the natural and rebellious frame of Man's
Spirit, which we should always have under our Eyes.

The third Duty incumbent is Mortification of all sins and corruptions, actual
and habitual, of whatever quality or degree. And that

First, by applying our selves to Christ by Prayer, Wash me and I shall be
clean, purge me and I shall be whiter than Snow; create in me a clean Heart,
and renew a right Spirit within me, Isa. 51.7, 10. We being naturally defiled
must be cleansed by him, For he is made to us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. of this more at large hereafter.

Secondly, Get a self loathing for sin, we are all as an unclean thing, from
the sole of the foot to the top of the head, and with holy Job abhor thy self
and repent in Dust and Ashes, Isa. 1.6. chapter 64.6. Job 42.6.

Thirdly, Get deep apprehensions of the Infinite and free love of God in
Christ. And that first in his early Mercy of Man's Redemption, and Promise after
Man's Fall, it shall bruise thy head and thou shall bruise his heel, Genesis 3.15.
And admire his infinite goodness of free Mercy When we were without strength,
Christ in due time died for the ungodly. God so loved the World, that while we
were yet Sinners and Enemies, Christ died for us, Romans 8.5, 6, 9. This is that
Emmanuel which was promised for Redemption of Sinners, Isa. 7.14. chapter 11.1. chapter
53. all.

The fourth Duty is Repentance, which is a Godly sorrow for sin not to be
repented of, which according to the Apostles description has these seven
qualifications in it. 2 Cor. 7.11.

First, Carefulness, which is an Impartial discovery, and searching into all
the Thoughts and Actions, concealing none, nor conniving at any thing of Sin,
though as dear as right Eye, or right Hand, If thy right Hand offend cut it
off, if the right Eye offend pull it out, it is profitable that one member
perish rather than the whole Body. He that loves Father, Brother, or Child,
better than me, is not worthy of me, he that loses his Life shall find it,
and, he that saves his Life shall loose it, and he that takes not up his
Cross, and follows not me, is not worthy of me, Mat. 5.29, 30. Mark 9.44.

Secondly, Clearing your selves. That is, not only to part with what Lusts we
please, and confessing what sins we are indifferent to part with, but searching
and condemning our selves according to the balance of the Sanctuary, To the
Law and to the Testimony, not by the level of affection and interest, Isa. 8.20.

A Third is Indignation, To hate every sin with an implacable prejudice, even
to hearing, seeing, touching, handling, or any sort of communication or delight
in sin, with an abhorence as infectious; can any touch Pitch and not be
defiled? with aversion as an infectious Plague, jealous as of the Wiles of the
Devil, as Intanglements and Fetters.

Fourthly, Zeal; With great anxiety, after a thorough discovery of every sin in
its blackest dress, in its Nature, Root, Branches and Tendencies, zeal for full
purging, and washing, not leaving Root or Branch of any Sin unmortified or
subdued; without any tampering or listening to new affinities, or terms of
recon^iliation, or inticements, hotly and warmly pursuing every Sin, to utter
death and destruction.

Fifthly, Vehement desire, Like one curious to paint to the Life. the Nature,
Monstrous shape, and mischievous quality of every sin, as well in its
offensiveness to, and detestableness with God, (who is of purer Eyes than to
behold Iniquity) as in its perniciou^ness to Man, exposing him to the wrath of
God, and barring him from entering into the Heavenly Jerusalem, where ^o unclean
thing can enter in, Rev. 21.27. And as the only Enemy of Man's Eternal
Happiness, and blasting with a Curse all his temporal enjoyments, and the
disturber of the Peace of Man's Conscience, in a Communion with God, and diverts
him from enjoying of God, in place of Lust and Sin.

The Sixth qualification, is Fear, Watching and Praying lest we enter into
temptation, being always mindful that the subtle Enemy of our Salvation, the
Devil goes about night and day, like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour, And therefore in watching put on the whole Armor of God, Ephesians. 6.14,
15, 16. and watch over our Thoughts, Words, and Actions, having a continual Eye
on the Enemy without, as a Sentry standing in view of the Enemies Camp day and
night, observing the voice of all Gods Providence and Dispensations, not
putting the evil day far from us, but being on our watch with oil in our Lamps,
and our Lamps burning, knowing that the Bridegroom comes as a Thief in the
night, not knowing what hour he will come, and therefore to be always ready
lest when he comes we sleep, and that the door of Mercy may not be shut on us
for ever, Mat 24.14.

The Seventh qualification of true Repentance, is Revenge, Holy revenge
consists ^t a restless discovering of sin, and not only giving up all society
with it, and entertainment of it, and contradicting or implacable prejudice and
hatred to it, but also knowing that corruption and sin is such an infect, and
that of venomous Nature, that every piece and crum will excite to a new
Rebellion against God. And therefore by a holy re^enge to give up every Sin and
Lust, though never so dear, entirely to Divine Justice, as well to appeal the
Wrath of God, and avoid his Dishonor, as to secure our selves, from falling
into disobedience and new rebellion, by tampering with the seditious deceit of
Sin and Lust; Cast out the Bondwoman and her Son, Genesis 23.10. Be not again
entangled with the Y^^k of Bondage, walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not
^u^fi^l the Lusts of the Flesh, for the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and
the Spirit against the Flesh, and they are contrary one to the other, Romans 5.1,
16, 17, 24.

The next Duty incumbent to Man, in order to Eternal Life, is to search the
Prom^^es in Christ Jesus and believe them, all men are anxious to have good
Titles to their Estates, and to know them; how much more ought Christians, to
be solicitous for the knowledge of sacred Records, to insure their Interest of
something with Christ. Christ's Promises to his People, are either for things
Spiritual or Temporal, first of things Spiritual, which may be considered under
these three,

First, The free love of God, in sending Christ a Ransom for Sin.

Secondly, All suitable graces and spiritual blessings, given by God to the
called according to his promise, Romans 8.28.

Thirdly, Eternal Life and Salvation given to all who believe in Jesus Christ.

As to the first, Scriptures are full of the Records, of Gods free love in
redeeming Man by Jesus Christ, when Man was in no condition to make terms for
himself, and that early instance of Gods compassion on Man when he had so soon
fallen from his Integrity. I will put enmity between thy Seed and her Seed, It
shall bruise thy head and thou shall bruise his heel, Genesis 3.15. Here is a
clear promise of the Messiah, of victory over Sin and Satan. And when we were
without strength, in due time Christ died for us, and when we were yet sinners.
And that compassion of God, when Man was contemptible, and without help, and no
Eye pitied thee, to do these things to thee, and when I passed by, thy time was
the time of Love, and I said to thee live, yea I said to thee live, And that
Evangelical Invitation, Ho, every one that thirsts, come to me, drink of the
Waters of Life, buy wine, and milk, without money, and without price, come to
me, and I will make your Souls live, and make an everlasting Covenant with you.
Let the wicked forsake his wickedness, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,
and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our
God, and he will abundantly pardon him, Isa. 55. to 8.

This strain, constant current, and Ocean of free Love, flows upon free terms,
upon the most miserable, and without any terms, or expectation of any return
from Man, but freely without recompense. I am found of them that sought me not,
I am sought of them that asked not for me, Isa. 65.1, 2. From all which may be
seen that great mystery of the Love of God to Sinners, which passes
understanding.

The second thing in spiritual blessings, is Gods furnishing Believers with all
suitable Graces, blessings, and Indowments, And we know, that all things work
together for good, to them that love God, who are called according to his
purpose; for whom he did foreknow, them he also did Predestinate, to be
conformed to the Image of his Son, He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not also with him freely give us all
things? Romans 8.28, 29, 32. Eye has not seen, neither has Ear heard, nor has
it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive, (besides thee O Lord) what great
things he has laid up for those, who wait on him, Isa. 64.4. Ask and it shall
be given, seek and ye shall find, whatsoever ye ask the Father in my name,
believe ye have them, and they shall be given you, Mat. 7.7.

The last instance of divine bounty, is Eternal Life. To them who by patient
continuance and well doing seeks for glory, and honor, eternal Life, Romans
2.9. When Christ who is our Life shall appear, then shall we also appear with
him in glory, Col. 3.4. God so loved the World, that he sent his only Son, that
whosoever should believe in him, should not perish, but have eternal Life, Joh.
3.16. And the glory that thou gave me I have given them, that they may be one
as we are one, I in them, and thou in me, that the World may know, that thou
have sent me, and loved them, as thou have loved me, Joh. 17.22, 23. Be thou
faithful unto the end, and I will give thee the Crown of Life, To him that
overcomes, I will give to sit down in my Kingdom, even as I have overcome, and
am sat down with my Father in his Kingdom, Revel. 3.21.

The second branch of Gods Promises, are of temporal Mercies, or of Temporal
and Spiritual mixed together, and these in Scripture are extended to all the
exigencies of a Christians state or condition. As First in general afflictions,
In all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved
them, in his Mercy and in his pity he redeemed them, and bore them all the days
of old, Isa. 63.9. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in
all thy ways, they shall bear thee up in their hands, left thou dash thy foot
against a stone, Psalm 91.11, 12.

Secondly, In all particular trials and afflictions, When thou passest thorough
the Waters I will be with thee, and thorough the Rivers they shall not overflow
thee, when thou walk thorough the Fire thou shall not be burned, neither
shall the flame come upon thee, Isa. 43.2. And he shall call upon me, and I
will answer him, I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and honor
him, with long life will I satisfy him, and show him my Salvation, Psalm. 91.15,
16.

Thirdly, His Promises in greatest extremity when left and forsaken of all
Friends and Relations, When my Father and my Mother forsake me, then the Lord
will take me up. Psalm. 27.10. Can a Woman forsake her sucking Child, and not
have Compassion on the fruit of her Womb, yea they may forget, yet will I not
forget thee, behold I have graven thee upon the Palms of my hands, thy Walls
are continually before me, Isa. 49.16, 17.

And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no Intercessor,
therefore his own Arm brought Salvation to him, and his fury upheld him, Isa.
63 5. All thy lovers have forgotten thee, they seek thee not, for I have
wounded thee with the wound of an Enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one,
for the multitude of thine Iniquities, because thy sins were increased, why
cryest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow is incurable, for the multitude of
thine Iniquities, because thy sins were increased, therefore all they that
devour thee, shall be devoured, and all thy Adversaries every one of them shall
go into Captivity, and they that spoil thee, shall be a spoil, and all that
prey upon thee, shall be a prey, for I will restore health unto thee, and heal
thee of thy wounds says the Lord, because they have called thee an outcast,
saying, this is Zion whom no Man looks after, Jer. 30.14, 15, 16, 17.

Having thus viewed the manifold Promises of God to his People. Let us now
consider the methods to be taken by repenting sinners under their afflictions
which may be in this threefold Consideration.

First, Consider Sin as the cause of all Evil and of Afflictions.

Secondly, That all Afflictions are from God.

Thirdly, Consider Gods Intention and Purpose toward his People, by afflicting
of them.

The first Consideration, is that sin, as it is the cause of all evil, is also
the cause of affliction, no man is so insensible, but he finds the burden of
affliction, or should be so irrational as not to enquire into the causes
thereof, so that if we do inquire into the first Chastisement which happened to
Man, to wit, his being shut out from Paradise, we will find the cause thereof
to be his Rebellion, and Disobedience to God, in eating of the forbidden Fruit,
and as we must acknowledge the Justice on Gods part, so all the Scriptures all
along show Sin to be the cause of Affliction, Hear O Heavens, and hearken O
Earth, for the Lord has spoken, I have nourished and brought forth Children,
and they have rebelled against me, the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his
Masters Crib, but Israel does not know, my people do nor consider, O sinful
Nation, a People laden with Iniquity, a seed of evil doers, Children that are
corrupters, they have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy One of
Israel to anger, they are gone away backward, why should ye be stricken any
more? ye will revolt more and more, the whole head is sick, the whole Heart is
faint, from the sole of the foot to the top of the Head there is no soundness
in it; but wounds and bruises and putrefying sores, they have not been closed,
nor mollified with ointment; your Country is desolate, your Cities are burned
with Fire, your Land Strangers devour in your presence, and it is desolate as
overthrown by strangers, Isa. 1.2, to 8. O Lord the hope of Israel; all that
forsake thee shall be ashamed, and they that depart from thee shall be written
in the dust, because they have forsaken thee the fountain of living Waters,
Jer. 17.13. Where is the Bill of your Mothers Divorce, whom I have put away?
behold for your Iniquities have you sold your selves; and for your
transgressions is your Mother put away, Isa. 50.1.

In the second place, We ought to consider that Affliction arises not out of
the Dust, but directly or indirectly they are from God, is there any evil in
the City that the Lord has not done? Job. 5.6. You only have I known of all
the Families of the Earth, therefore will I punish you, for all your
Iniquities, Amos 3.2, 3, to 7. Who gave Jacob to the spoil, or Israel to the
Robbers, did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned? for they would not
walk in his ways, neither were they obedient to his Laws, Isa. 24.24. I form
Light and create Darkness. I make Peace and create War, I the Lord do all these
things, Isa. 45.7. All thy lovers have forsaken thee, they seek thee not, for I
have wounded thee with the wound of an Enemy, with the Chastisement of a cruel
one, for the multitude of thy Iniquities, because thy sins were increased, I
have done these things unto thee, Jer. 30.14.

The third consideration, is what may be Gods purpose or intention in
chastising his own People, which may be resolved and comprehended in these five.

First, To purge away their sins.

Secondly, To invite his People to Repentance, by withholding his Face by
afflictions.

Thirdly, To distinguish between his Children and Bastards.

Fourthly, To fix on their Hearts, the sense of the emptiness of humane
enjoyments.

Fifthly, To possess them of the true opinion of Christ's excellency above all
things else.

First, It is to purify his People from sin, wash you, make you clean, cease to
do evil, learn to do well, if ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good
of the Land, but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured by Fire, thy
Silver is become dross, thy Wine mixed with Water, ah I will ease me of my
Adversaries, and avenge me of my Enemies, I will turn my Hand upon thee and
purely purge away thy dross, and take away thy Tin, Isa. 1. to 26. By this
therefore shall the Iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to
take away his Sin, when he takes away all the Stones as Chalkstones, etc. Isa.
27.9. I have refined thee, but not with Silver, I have chosen thee in the
furnace of affliction, Isa. 48.10.

The second Branch of Gods purpose in afflicting his People, is, to call his
People to him by his withdrawing his countenance from them by afflictions,
either on their Persons or Substance. I will go and return to my place until
they repent and seek my Face, in their afflictions they will seek me early,
Hos. 5.15. Therefore behold I will hedge up thy way with Thorns, and make a
Wall that she shall not find her Path, and she shall follow after her Lovers
and not overtake them, she shall seek them, and not find them, then shall she
say I will return to my first Husband, for then was it better with me than now,
Hos. 2.6, to 10. Standing Waters stink, and Metal not used or scoured
corrupts, and as the Goldsmith by rubbing, filing, or fire, purifieth and
c^eanseth his chiefest Metal, so the Lord by chastisements, exercises his
People, and reclaims them from going astray from him, to carnal vanities. Hos.
11 8, 9, 10.

The third Branch of Gods purpose of Afflictions upon his People, is to
distinguish between his own peculiar People, and the Wicked, which are called
Bastards. And that by a fatherly restraining their extravagancies by moderate
correction. Though I make a full end of all Nations whether I have scattered
thee, yet I will not make a full end of thee, but I will correct thee in
measure and not leave thee altogether unpunished, Jer. 30.11. Whom the Lord
loves he Chasti eth, and scourges every Son whom he receives, for if ye
endure chastisement, God deals with you, as with Sons, for what son is he,
whom the Father Chastises not? but if ye be without chastisement, whereof all
are partakers, then are ye Bastards and no Children, Heb. 12.6, 7, 8. Behold
happy is the Man whom God corrects, Job 5 17.

The Prodigal had never returned but for his Penury and Want, this is Gods
chief means to reclaim his People, to hedge up their way with Thorns, I will
melt them and try them, etc. Hos. 2.6, 7, 14. Jer. 9.7.

The fourth reason of Gods purpose in chastising his people is to fix on their
Hearts, the true belief of emptiness of humane enjoyments.

The Lord having a purpose to unite his People to himself, and finding their
inclinations running after creature enjoyments, as cogenious with their natural
Appetites, he draws them thence, not by necessity, or constraint, but in
choice, by his chastisements to fix on their senses and experience the
emptiness of all humane enjoyments. And that by these two reasons.

First, They are not our own, but given or lent to us.

Secondly, They are certain troubles, and uncertain Comforts.

First, That Worldly and Earthly enjoyments, as well as Spiritual Mercies, are
not ours, but all given to us, that all the enjoyments of this Life are but
precarious from God, at his pleasure, to give and continue them with us, or us
with them, is a truth, in experience without contradiction, and needs no proof,
though there are Scripture proofs sufficient. Naked came I into the World and
naked shall I return, the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be
the name of the Lord, Job 1.21. We brought nothing into the World with us, and
it is certain we shall carry nothing away with us, 1 Timothy 6.7. And Christ
saying to the Rich Man in the Gospel, thou fool this night thy Soul shall be
required of thee, then whose shall all these things be that thou have? Luke
12.19, 20.

Nay more, Man in his natural and intrinsic capacity, is of all Creatures the
most weak impotent, helpless and miserable of himself, the Beasts of the Field
can crawl, seek their food, supply themselves, but Man is so feeble, that
unless help be administered to him at his Birth, and a long while after he must
perish.

And this clearly appears from Scripture. In the day thou wast born, thou wast
not washed at all, nor swadled at all, thy navel was not cut, thou wast in thy
blood cast out into the open Field, to the loathing of thy person, no Eye
pitied thee, to do any of these things unto thee, and when I passed by, it was
the time of love, and I said to thee live, when thou wast in thy blood, Ezekiel.
16.1, to 7. This is the true and lively description of Man in his natural state
and condition, whereby every Man has cause of lowliness of mind, and no man
has cause to boast, glory, or claim any thing of his own, but to acknowledge,
that all things even in temporals, are given to him of God.

The second thing whereby the Father of Life, and God of all Wisdom, teaches
his people to the low esteem and contempt of the World by their afflictions, is
to instruct them that the things of this Life are uncertain comforts, and
certain troubles, and this is manifest in all humane experience, in all ages,
and all the train of enjoyments clearly demonstrate this.

If we take a view of all Worlds goods, and its excellency, as they are
computed by the Apostle, The Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the
Pride of Life, 1 John 2.15, 16, 17. If we will branch them forth in the several
particulars of honor, riches, health, friends, relations, and all the other
pretended excellencies of humane Life or Enjoyments, and examine all the
pretenders to these enjoyments since the World began, we shall find none who
have not experienced the uncertainty of these enjoyments, and the anxiety and
trouble attending the having of them; of all the Men on Earth, none could lay a
greater claim to enjoyments of all kinds, than could Solomon, let us see then,
what account he gives thereof. I was great and increased more than all that
went before me, and whatsoever my Eyes desired I kept not from them, I
withheld not my heart from any Joy, for my Heart rejoiced on all my labor,
then I looked on all the works my hands had wrought, and behold all was vanity,
and vexation of Spirit, and there was no profit under the Sun, Eccles. 1.2.
chap. 2. all.

Let us see the experience of David, a Man in great honor, and in favor with
God, Thou have made my days as an hands breadth, and mine age as nothing,
before thee, every Man at his best estate is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5, 6.
Surely every Man walks in a vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain, he
heapeth up riches, and knows not who shall gather them. Psalm. 62.9. Surely
Men of high degree are vanity, and men of low degree are a Lie, to be laid in
the Balance they are all together lighter than vanity? Psalm. 144.4.

But this will be more palpable if we dissect the World or its enjoyments in
its particulars.

First, Honor, secondly Wealth, thirdly Friends or Relations, fourthly Health
or Strength, and we shall find uncertainty of enjoyment, anxiety, and trouble
attending all and every of them.

First, Honor, As it is only the airy applause of Men, and depends on humane
and vulgar esteem, how does daily experience prove the instability thereof, all
Ages see a Man in honor this day, and in disgrace the next, what uneasiness
are men under, to support and continue the Idol of vain glory? Do Men stick at
any acts of injustice, cruelty, tyranny, or oppression, to support their Dagon
of Pride or vain glory? yea do not these Idolaters of vain glory, rather than
outlive the slippery splendor of this World, with Achitophel, often become
their own Murderers, at once ignominiously extinguish their life and honor?
the too many instances of this kind, and the immediate foregoing Scriptures
tell us, that of all things worldly honor and glory, is the most shadowy and
fantastical folly of humane Life. Man is like to vanity, his days are like a
shadow that perishes away. Man that is in honor is like the beast that
perishes, Psalm 144.4. Psalm 49.12, 17.

Secondly, Riches are the second branch of humane enjoyments, and how uncertain
they are, and what anxiety they bring upon a Man to acquire and keep them, none
can pretend ignorance, who are indifferently conversant in the World.

See the account Christ gives thereof, That it is easier for a Camel to go
thorough the Eye of a Needle, than for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, see for this the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, and the Fool in the
Gospel, Mat. 19.23. Luke 12, 19, 20. See the Apostle Paul's account of Riches:
we brought nothing into this World with us, and we shall carry nothing out of
it, but they that will be rich, fall into many temptations, and a snare, and
many foolish and hurtful lusts, which draw Men into destruction and perdition,
for the love of Money is the root of all evil, which while some coveted after,
they have erred from the Faith, and pierced themselves thorough with many
sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.7, 8, 9.

The third branch of humane enjoyments is Friends or Relations, and although
desirable Friends and Relations, be one of the greatest comforts of humane
Life, yet how uncertain and decietful this also proves, and often the greatest
affliction, is evident; yea an injury from a stranger is comportable, when
unkindness, or any ill office from a Relation, is a heart breaking affliction.
For it was not an Enemy that reproached me, then I could have born it, neither
was it he that hated me, that did magnify himself against me, then I could have
hid my self from him, but it was thou a man, mine equal, my guide and my
acquaintance, we took sweet Counsel together, and walked unto the House of God
in Company. Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14. It was not only Shimei but Absalom who were
unfaithful to David, and proved his greatest affliction, 2 Samuel 16.5, to 13.

Job found greater trouble from his three friends Impeachments of hypocrisy,
and from his Wives tempting of him to curse God and dye, than from all his
other trials, but this is the frequent case of Christ and his Saints, Christ
was betrayed by one of his own Disciples, and Paul accused by false Brethren,
and the Prophet Micah gives sufficient Caveat against relying on Friends or
Relations. Trust not in a Friend, put no confidence in a guide, keep the Door
of thy Lips, from the Wife that lies in thy Bosom, for the Son dishonors
the Father, and the Daughter rises up against the Mother, and the Daughter in
Law against the Mother in Law, and a Man's Enemies are those of his own House,
Mic. 7.5.

Hence we see, how the surest pretensions of humane enjoyments, are, and prove
often as the rotten Reeds of Egypt, and not only fail such as lean to them, but
most frequently splinter and gaul rather than comfort.

The fourth thing of humane enjoyments, is Man's Life, Health, and Strength, and
how brittle this is all men can testify. When thou rebukest Man for his
Iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume like a Moth. It is appointed for
all Men once to dye, and what a Load is Man to himself? obnoxious to so many
vicissitudes, composed of such different parts, and elements, that no man can
keep a calm within himself, or can resist the assaults of God, and the exigence
of his Lot, how many loathsome distempers is man exposed unto, by the natural
Imbecility of his Constitution?

And how irresistible are the Armies which invade him, in his Mind and Body,
and how frail is Man if once God frown upon him, and what defense can he make,
if the Armies of the Almighty assault him? what Man is he then, who can boast
of any thing of his own, except Sin, Corruption, and Infirmities. Therefore let
not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man in his strength, nor
the rich man in his wealth, but he that glories, let him glory in this, That
he knows me who exercises Righteousness, Justice, and Loving Kindness in the
Earth, for in these things I do delight says the Lord, Jer. 9.23, 24.

The fifth thing designed by Christ in afflicting his People, is to make them
sensible of his own dignity and excellency, above all created enjoyments, and
that in these six respects.

First, He is of himself, and all things else from him.

Secondly, He is infinite in Power.

Thirdly, Infinite in Wisdom.

Fourthly, Matchless in Beauty.

Fifthly, Of everlasting Continuance.

Sixthly, Conqueror over all Enemies.

First, If we do duly consider the value of objects, Reason and Interest will
enduce the choice of the worthiest; and what can bar, but we must approve of
Christ as the only choice, especially if we consider him, in all and every of
these his incomparable excellencies, and as to the first Creator of all things,
no Creature can hold proportion with the Creator, we must in our choice give
the pre-eminence to Christ, he is Alpha and Omega, by him and for him were all
things created, and by him all things subsist, he is of himself and all things
else from him, Rev. 4.11. Col. 1.15, 16, 17.

Secondly, He is Infinite in Being, Eternal, and Infinite in Power, Who has
measured the Waters in the hollow of his hand, and metted out the Heavens with
his Span, and comprehended the Dust of the Earth in a Measure, and weighed the
Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance, all the Nations of the Earth
are as a drop of a Bucket, and are counted as the small Dust of the Balance,
behold he takes up the Hills as a very little thing, all Nations before him
are as nothing, and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity. He
is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings. And his dominion is without end or
limitation of time, he is glorious in holiness, fearful in praises doing
wonders, Isa. 40.12, to 18. Psalm 68.17. Revelation 17.14. Exodus 15.11.

Thirdly, He is infinite in Wisdom, who has directed the Spirit of the Lord or
being his Cousellour taught him? with whom took he Counsel, and who instructed
him, and taught him the Path of Judgments and Knowledge, and showed him the way
of understanding? he is Prince of Peace, wonderful Counselor the everlasting
Father, Isa. 40.13, 14. Isa. 9.6, 7. chap. 11. to 11.

Fourthly, He is matchless in Beauty, He is the Rose of Sharon, White and
Ruddy, the choicest of ten thousands, His Head as the most fine Gold, his Locks
are bushy and black as a Raven, his Mouth is sweet, yea he is altogether
lovely, Cant. 2.1. Cant. 5.10, to 17.

Fifthly, He is of everlasting continuance, all created Beings are either
tainted with inherent, and natural defects, or imperfections: Riches canker and
consume, beauty fails with the complexion, friends, power, and humane glory,
are Solomon's vanities, and perish in the using, or are cut off with time, but
he made all things, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end, he is Alpha and
Omega, Rev. 1.8.

Sixthly, He is absolute Sovereign and Conqueror of all Enemies, even of Death
and the World, be of good-Comfort, I have overcome the World, the Issues of
Death belong to him, he has the Keys of the House of David, he can shut and no
man open, he can open and no man shut, I am he that lives and was dead, and
behold I live for evermore and have the Keys of Hell and Death, Rev. 1.8. chap.
5.9.

The seventh reason why the Lord Jesus Christ, does afflict and chastise his
People, is to exercise their Faith and Patience, upon his Promises to them in
their afflictions. It being the Lords way with his People, to afflict them to
trials and confirmation, not to their destruction or overthrow, to chastise
them in Measure, and not to leave them altogether unpunished, for I am with
thee says thee Lord to save thee, Jer. 30.11.

Though I make a full end of all Nations, whether I have scattered thee, yet
will I not make a full end of thee, but will correct thee in measure, and not
leave thee altogether unpunished. The Lord knows the complexion of his
People, and therefore deals warily and gently with them, by his afflicting hand
he intends not their destruction, but to frame them for Vessels of Love and
Mercy, he intending they shall be the Temples of the Holy Ghost, he refines
them and chooses them in the Furnace of Affl^ction, to scour off the natural
and sinful uncleanness; And thus he deals in a tenderly and fatherly way. Jer.
48.10. chap. 9.7. In measure when it shuts forth, I will debate with it, he
stays the rough wind in the day of his Eastwind, and all his Billows do not
blow at once, Jer. 27.7, 8, 9. He will not overcharge them, but proportions the
Physic of Affliction to the strength he will give them. No temptation has
befallen you but what is common to Men, the Lord is faithful who will not
suffer you to be tempted above measure, but with every temptation will give an
outgate, that ye may be able to bear it. 1 Cor. 10 30. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. And
therefore the Wise Physician of Souls, who will not break a bruised Reed, nor
quench a smoking Flax. Isa. 42.3. To prevent the discouragement of the
Christian Patient in their afflictions, affords them the Cordials of his
Infallible Promises, to stay, support, and uphold them, against the sourest
gripings of Temptations and Trials, which is his Fatherly Potion, that he
measures to them in this Life. And these Promises are suited to all the
Christians Lot on this side of time, as well to their Spiritual State, Trials
and Difficulties, as to that of the Temporary Troubles and Afflictions, Isa.
11. all, Isa. 61.1, 2, 3.

And First for their Spiritual state in these three particulars.

First, In Spiritual darkness and desertion of Gods presence, for their
Cloudiness in the sense of Gods favor.

Secondly, Under the sense or apprehensions of greatest Sins. And

Thirdly, Under repeated Sins or Relapses.

First, In Darkness and Soul Desertion, as every throw or gripe to the
diseased, do discompose and aggravate, so much more, when afflictions, the
Arrows of the Almighty are upon any, and that their Spiritual state is clouded,
and they have not the comfortable presence of God, so as they are under fears,
and darkness, that the Lord is not their Salvation, or cannot be satisfied that
these Chastisements are in Mercy, and not in Wrath, from the Hand of a Father,
how is the Soul hurried, and curdled like a Cheese, and roars with David as
distracted with terrors, a wounded Spirit who can bear? this of all conditions
is the most anxious and comfortless, as on the other hand when the Countenance
of a reconciled God in Christ Jesus, looks thorough the deepest Cloud of
Afflictions* the Soul rejoices in Tribulation. Some will say who will show us
any good? but Lord lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance, which will make
our Soul more joyful and more glad, than when their Corn and Wine increase in
great abundance. Psalm. 4.6, 7, 8. And in this doleful state, the Lords Promises
are rich and manifold. Who is among you that fears the Lord, and obeys the
voice of his Servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light; let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God, Isa. 50.10. Unto the
Righteous there arises light in darkness, Psalm. 112.4. Light is sowed to the
Righteous, and Joy to the Upright in Heart, Psalm. 97.11. I am sought of them
that asked not for me, I am found of them that sought me not, I said behold me,
behold me, unto a Nation that was not called by my name, before they call I
will answer, and while they are yet speaking I will hear says the Lord, Isa.
65.1, 24. Before she traveled she brought forth, before her pain came she was
delivered of a Man Child, and as soon as Zion Traveled she brought forth her
Children, shall I bring to the Birth, and not cause to bring forth, shall I
cause to bring forth, and shut the Womb says the Lord? Isa. 66.7, 8, 9.

The great Physician of Souls, like a just and wise Physician, uses ordinary
means in common Distempers, but in extremities and dangerous Distempers,
Cordials, and Rich and Choicest Medicines are not with held, when all ordinary
helps fail, his special Love and Power manifests it self, when we were
helpless, yea Enemies, he brings succor, comfort and relief, and makes with us
an everlasting Covenant, Ezekiel. 16. to 8. Romans 5.6, 7, 8.

Thus he shows his Prerogative of curing, as well as his Love, when no other
help appears, when my Father and my Mother forsake me, then the Lord shall take
me up, Psalm. 27.10. Isa. 49.15. chap. 63.5.

The Shepherd of Israel, is that tender hearted Physician, who sympathiseth
with his People, In all their Afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of
his Presence said them. In his Love and his Pity he Redeemed them, and bore
them all the days of old, Isa. 63.9. His compassion is great, his Bowels yearn,
and are turned for them, how shall I give thee up Ephraim, how shall I deliver
thee Israel, how shall I make thee as Adma, how shall I set thee as Zeboim, my
heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled? Hos. 9.8. Is Ephraim my
dear Son, is he a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly
remember him still, therefore my Bowels are troubled for him, I will surely
have mercy upon him, says the Lord, Jer. 31.20. Am I a God at hand and not a
God afar off? Jer. 22.23. The Lord cannot forget his People, though the Cloud
of darkest afflictions, may hinder their apprehensions of his love, and care of
them, I have even called thee by thy name, though thou have not known me, I am
the Lord and there is none else besides me, I guarded thee, though thou have
not known me, I Form the Light and Create Darkness, I make peace and create
evil, I the Lord do all these things, Isa. 45.4, 5, 7. He heals the broken in
heart and binds up their wounds, wherefore although the pale and dark side of
the Cross, should look grim upon the Christian, he is by Faith and Patience to
look thorough the Cloud, to the Conquerours, and lay hold of him in his
Promises; though the Vision tarry, wait for it, it will speak at last, and he
that will come, shall come and will not tarry, Hab. 2.3.

No Man did look thorough a paler Cloud than this Prophet, Although the
Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vine, though the
labor of the Olive, and the Fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut
off from the fold, and there shall be no Heard in the Stall, yet will I rejoice
in the Lord, and joy in the God of my Salvation, the Lord is my strength, and
he will make my Feet like Hinds Feet, and he will make me to walk upon my High
Places, Hab. 3.17, 18, 19. The holy Prophet Micah, after he had viewed the
folly of all humane expectations, weakness, and deceitfulness of friends,
relations; and all other Men, puts his confidence alone in God, and thereby
takes great courage and resolution, and seems to make Inference of Faith, upon
the view of humane vanities. Therefore I will look unto the Lord, I will wait
for the God of my Salvation, my God will hear me, rejoice not against me O mine
Enemy, when I fall I shall arise, when I sit in darkness the Lord shall be a
light unto me, He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his
Righteousness, Mic. 7.1, to 11.

The second branch of Gods Promises to his People, is of his great Mercy, Love,
and Reconciliation under the greatest Sins, the Lord does not measure his
dispensations as Men do their benevolences, by scanty measures, and do pardon
lesser and not greater offenses, for that Sins of the deepest dye are no bar to
his Mercy, He came not to call the Righteous but Sinners to Repentance. In the
Language of his Mercy the whole need no Physician, but the Sick, Luke 5.31, 32.
His Invitation is look unto me and be you saved all the Ends of the Earth, Isa.
45.22. And come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest, Mat. 11.28.

My Thoughts are not as your Thoughts, neither your Ways my Way says the Lord,
for as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my Thoughts higher than
your Thoughts, etc. Isa. 55.8, 9.

Come now let us reason together says the Lord, though your sins be as
Scarlet, they shall be made white as Snow* though they be red like Crimson,
they shall be as Wool. If you be willing and obedient ye shall eat the good of
the Land, but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with fire, Isa.
1.18, 19 20.

Christ makes a free Market of Mercy, and puts no limitation to his bounty, but
offers freely upon the Sinners acceptance by Faith and Repentance; Ho, every
one that thirsts come to the Waters, buy Milk, and Honey without price, etc.
Isa. 55.1, 2. his satisfaction is for all, and for all manner of Sins, upon
Faith and Repentance. God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever should believe in him, should not die, but have eternal
Life, John 3.16, 17. Christ's love is free, and respects not the greatness of
Sin, but the sincerity of Faith and Repentance, yea, When we were Enemies and
without strength Christ died for us, Romans 5, 6, 7, 8.

David's uncleanness and Murder of Uriah was no bar to Divine Mercy, 1 King.
21.29. Nebuchadnezzar on Repentance found Mercy, Dan. 4. Manasses Idolatry,
Witchcraft, and other great Abominations received Mercy on Repentance, and When
He was in great affliction, he sought the Lord, and humbled himself greatly
before the God of his Fathers, and Prayed unto him, and he was entreated of
him, and heard his supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem, and into
his Kingdom, Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God, 2 Chronicles. 32.12, 13.

Thirdly, His Promises upon Relapses, although it is ill complexion to sin
after receipt of Mercies, as with the Dog to the Vomit, and the Sow to the
Mire, yet Repentance in its due qualifications gives a rise to Mercy. The Lord
had to do with the most stubborn People on the whole Earth, who revolted from
God in most heinous manner. And yet how often did he renew his Mercies to them?
the whole tract of the Israelites Life was Rebellion and Revolts, nevertheless
he regarded their afflictions, when he heard their cry, see their backslidings
and the Lords wonderfully renewed Mercies toward them, Psalm. 106. Psalm. 107.
all.

The Lords wonderful free and early Mercies were eminently manifested to
Israel, nevertheless, see their stupid revolt, and ingratitude, but they
rebelled against him and converted all his kindness and mercies to the feeding
of their lusts and abominations of Idolatry, Ezekiel. 16. from 15, to 37.
Wherefore the Lord in his Justice sends them under severe punishments, to verse
60. and then the Lords anger is pacified toward them, and he remembers his
Covenant with them, when they are ashamed of their sins and abominations, and
return to the Lord by Repentance, to the end of the chapter. That thou may
remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy
shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou have done, says the
Lord.

The Lords Ear is always open to the cry of a Penitent sinner, The Lord is nigh
to all that call upon him in Truth, Psalm. 145.18. Repent and turn your selves
from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin, why will you
dye O House of Israel, for I have no pleasure in the Death of him that dies
says the Lord, wherefore turn your selves and live, Ezekiel. 18.25, to 33. chap.
26.

As the Lord does exercise the Patience of his People, in Spiritual Promises
for Spiritual things, so also to trust his Promises in reference to temporals,
and these may be branched out in these two.

First, His Promises to the People of God in general, without reference to
particular cases of suffering, and these comprehend God's complex or full
purpose to his People.

Secondly, These Promises may relate to the several cases or exigence of Gods
People.

First, For Gods Promises in general not relating to particular cases, the
Scriptures are so full, that it is impossible to collect them, however we shall
touch some of the most obvious, In all their afflictions he was afflicted and
the Angel of his Presence saved them in his Love and in his Pity he remembered
them, and carried them all the days of old, Isa. 63.9.

His Anger endures but for a moment, sorrow may be at Evening, but Joy comes
in the morning, Psalm. 30.5. For thou Lord wilt bless the Righteous, with favor
will thou compass him as with a Shield, Psalm. 5.12. The Lord will be a refuge
for the oppressed, a refuge in time of trouble, for they that know thy name
will put their trust in thee, for thou have not forsaken them that seek thee.
Psalm. 9.9, 10. Though you have lain among the Pots, yet shall ye be live a
Dove, whose Wings are covered with Silver, and their Feathers with yellow Gold,
Psalm 68.13. For thou Lord wilt save the afflicted People, but wilt bring down
high looks, he is a buckler to all those that trust in him, Psalm. 18.22, 30.
unto the upright there arises light in darkness, surely he shall not be moved
for ever, the righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance, he shall not be
afraid of evil tidings, his Heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 112.4,
6, 7. Alas for that day is great, there is none like it, it is the day of
Jacobs troubles, but they shall be delivered out of them all, Jer. 30.7. The
Prophet Isaiah sets down in many places Gods universal care over his People. O
Israel fear not for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name, thou
art mine, when thou passest through the Waters I will be with thee, and through
the Rivers they shall not overflow thee, when thou walk thorough the Fire;
thou shall not be burned, neither shall the flames kindle upon thee, Isa. 43.
all. The Lord will be a Sun and a Shield, he will give Grace and Glory, and no
good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84.11. Psalm.
86.5, 13, 15. The holy Psalmist is full of Prophetical Promises of Gods
universal good to his People, he that dwells in the secret of the Most High,
shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty, I will say of the Lord, he is my
Refuge and my Fortress, my God in him will I trust, surely he shall deliver
thee from the snare of the Fowler, and from the noisome Pestilence, he shall
cover thee with his Feathers, and under his Wings shall thou trust, his truth
shall be thy shield and buckler, Psalm. 91. all.

And of the numerous and large Promises of God to his People, and of the
Halcyon days of Zion, all the Prophets abound, for the Law shall go forth of
Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, he shall judge many people, and
the Nations afar off, and they shall beat their Swords into Ploughshears, and
their Spears into pruning hooks, Nation shall not lift up a Sword against
Nation, neither shall they learn War any more, but they shall set down every
man under his own Vine, and under his own Fig tree, and none shall make them
afraid, for the Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it, I will assemble her
that halteth, and her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted, and I
will make her that halted a Remnant, and her that was cast far off, a strong
Nation. And the Lord shall reign over them in Zion, from henceforth and for
ever, thou shall go even to Babylon, and there thou shall be delivered, there
the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine Enemies. Arise and thresh O
Daughter of Zion, for I will make thy Horn Iron, and thy Hoofs Brass, and thou
shall beat in pieces many People, and I will consecrate their gain and their
substance to the God of the whole Earth, Mic. 4. all. Awake, awake, stand up O
Jerusalem, which have drunk at the hand of the Lord, the Cup of his fury, thou
have drunk the dregs of the Cup of trembling and thou have wrung them out,
there is none to guide her amongst all the Sons whom she has brought forth,
neither is there any that takes her by the hand of all the Sons whom she has
brought up, these two things are come unto thee, who shall be sorry for thee?
desolation, and destruction, the Famine and the Sword by whom shall I comfort
thee? thy Sons have fainted, they lie at the head of all the Streets, they are
full of the fury of the Lord thy God, therefore now hear this thou afflicted
and drunken, but not with Wine. Thus says the Lord the God, and thy God, that
pleads the cause of his People, behold I have taken out of thy hand the cup
of trembling, even the dregs of the Cup of my fury, thou shall no more drink it
again, but I will put it into the hands of them that afflicted thee, who have
said to thy Soul, bow down that we may go over, and thou have laid thy body as
the ground, and as the street to them that went over, Isa. 51.17, to end.

Is Ephraim my dear Son, is he a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him,
I do earnestly remember him still, my bowels are troubled for him, Jer. 31.20.
Thus says the Lord, because the Enemy has said against you, a hah! made you
desolate, and swallowed you up for a possession, to the Heathen, and ye are
taken up in the lips of talkers, and are in Infamy to the People, and are a
prey and derision. I have spoken in my Jealousy, and my fury, because ye have
born the reproach of the Heathen, ye shall shall shoot forth your branches, and
yield your fruit, for behold I am for you, and ye shall be tilled and sown, I
will multiply you, and settle you after your old Estates, and I will do better
to you than at your beginning, and ye shall know that I am the Lord, I will
take you from among the Heathen whether I have driven you, and I will bring you
into your own Land, then will I sprinkle you with clean Water, and you shall be
clean from all your filthiness, and from all your Idols, a new Heart also will
I give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and I will take away the
Stony Heart out of your Flesh, and I will give you a Heart of Flesh, and I will
put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall
keep my Judgments and do them, Ezekiel. 36. all.

He that spared not his own Son, but freely gave him up to death for us all,
how shall he not also with him freely give us all things? Romans 8 31. to the
end. I am persuaded that neither Death nor Life, things present nor things to
come, nor Principalities nor Powers, nor Height nor Depth, nor any other
Creature, shall be able to separate us from the Love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.31, to the end. Ask and it shall be given you, seek and
ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened, for every one that asks
receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be
opened, Mat. 7.9. Thou calledst in trouble and I delivered thee, I answered
thee in the secret place of Thunder, I proved thee at the Waters of Meribah,
Exodus 17.6. The People of God are his Temple and he dwells amongst them,
therefore he assists, comforts and protects them, For ye are the Temple of the
living God, 2 Cor. 6.16.

Know ye not your own selves, how that Christ is in you except you be
reprobates, 2 Cor. 13.5.

And are built upon the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief Corner Stone, in whom all the building, fitly framed together, grows
unto a Holy Temple in the Lord, in whom ye also are builded together for an
habitation of God thorough the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. Christ is as a Sun
over his House, whose House we are, if we hold fast the confidence, and
rejoicing in the hope unto the end, Heb. 3.6. Eye has not seen, Ear has not
heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive, (besides thee
O Lord) what good he has prepared, for those that wait on him, 1 Cor. 2.9.

The great Physician of Souls has not only offered his temporal Mercies in
general afflictions, but also has proportionate his Promises to the particular
Cases and Conditions of his People in their afflictions, which may be chiefly
in these.

First, Under Sickness, Weakness, or Infirmities of Old Age.

Secondly, In Poverty, Want or Oppression.

Thirdly, Under Captivity, Restraint or Imprisonment.

Fourthly, Under Revilings, Reproaches or Slanders.

Fifthly, Under unkindness, or forsaking from Friends or Relations.

First, In Sickness or Weakness, As it is Christ's own saying in another sense,
what has a Man profited if he gain the whole World and loose his own Soul? So
it may be said, what comfort can a Man have of Honor, Friends, Riches, and all
other enjoyments of the World, when by Sickness, Infirmity, or natural Decay
and Weakness, he is not able to find a relish of these Enjoyments, his Palate
is so out of order, that all are insipid and tastless to him; And as its said
by Christ, What shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul; what will not the
greatest Misers the Lovers of Honor, or Wealth, give to ease the gnawing pains
of a lingering and loathsome Disease, when by sickness or pain all the Channels
of Comfort are stopped, and a Man can have no breathing, but is tortured and
racked by fainting fits; or tearing pains, how cheap would he sell all his
pretensions to breath freely, and he eased of his Pains and Sickness, which
drain all the Faculties from the Sensor Use of any other enjoyments. And how
miserable is the richest, wisest, most honorable, and best related, when the
Heart is stunned with faintings, and the body with torturing pains,
nevertheless, this is the Christians comfort, that there is Balm in Gilead, and
a Physician in Israel, and one who not for filthy lucre, but one who of free
love, has not only promised to cure them, but also never to leave, nor forsake
them; Heb. 13.5. Am I a God at hand and not afar off, he is present when
trouble is near, Jer. 23.23. Behold I will bring it health and cure, I will
cure them and will reveal unto them the abundance of Peace and Truth, I will
restore health unto thee, I will heal thee of thy wounds, because they call
thee an outcast, saying this is Zion, whom no Man seeks after, Jer. 30.17.
Which are born by me from the Belly, which are carried from the Womb, even to
your old Age, I am he, even to your hoar hairs will I carry them, I have made
and I will bear, even I will carry and I will deliver you, Isa. 46.3.

He alone has that universal Medicine, who has ^hte Keys of Hell and Death,
and none can rescue out of his Hands, of this David in his Affliction and Decay
of Strength, being sensible applies himself to the proper Physician. I am a
Wonder unto many, but thou art my strong refuge cast me not off in time of Old
Age, forsake me not when Strength fails, now when I am Old and Gray headed
forsake me not, Psalm. 71.7, 18. I have seen his Ways I will heal him, I will
restore Comforters unto his Mourners, I create the fruit of the Lips Peace,
Peace to him, that is afar off, and to him that is near, says the Lord, and I
will heal him, Isa. 57.18, 19. He makes sore, and binds up, he wounds and
his Hands make whole, Job 5.18. Come and let us return unto the Lord, he has
torn, and he will heal, he has smitten, and he will bind us up, after two days
he will revive us, in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in
his sight, Hos. 6.1, 2. Behold the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him,
and hope in his Mercy, to deliver the Soul from Death, and keep them alive from
famine, Psalm. 33.^8, 19. The Lord will strengthen him upon the Bed of
languishing, thou will make all his Bed in Sickness, Psalm. 41.3. They cry unto
the Lord in their trouble, he saved them out of their distresses, he sent his
Word and healed them, and delivered them from their destructions, Psalm. 107.19,
20.

Secondly, In Imprisonment, As all Afflictions for the time, are grievous and
not joyous, Restraint or Imprisonment wants not its aggravations, for that it
restrains a Man from that freedom of Nature in converse, which is most
desirable by Man, as the Philosopher defines him to be a sociable Creature, It
restrains him from the Comfort of such in whom he delights, Relations, Friends,
and Acquaintance, It deprives him of the Improvement of his Talent, for
Religion, or Virtue, for God, his own Family and Commonwealth. It abridgeth
his Comfort in other Enjoyments, It lessens health, creates sickness, and
oppresses the vitals, often to fatal effects, and here in this House of
Darkness, the Lord appears to support his People by manifold Promises, either
of deliverance, or his strength and presence, to comfort and uphold them, and
often to both, He is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and all power is given to
him, in Heaven and in Earth, he has the Keys of Hell and Death, he opens and
no man shuts, and he shuts and no man opens, Rev. 1.18.

He executes Judgment for the oppressed, who gives food to the hungry, the
Lord loses the Prisoner, Psalm. 146.7. The Lord upholdeth all that fall and
raises up all that be bowed down, Psalm. 145.14. He made them to be pitied of
those that carried them away Captives, Psalm. 107.10 Then they cried unto the
Lord, and he delivered them out of their distresses, such as sit in darkness,
and in the shadow of Death, being bound in Afflictions and Irons, he brought
them out of Darkness and the Shadow of Death, and broke their Bonds asunder, he
sent his Word and healed them, and delivered them from their destructions,
Psalm. 107.6, 10, 14, 20. The Lord hears the Poor and despises not the
Prisoners, Psalm. 69.33. Thus says the Lord, I will bring again the Captivity
of Jacobs Tents, and have mercy on his dwelling place, and the City shall be
built upon her own heap, and the Palace shall remain after the manner thereof,
Behold I will bring them from the North Country, and they shall come, with
weeping and with supplication will I lead them, I will cause them to walk by
the Rivers of Waters, by a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble, for I
am a Father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first born, he that scattered Israel,
will gather him as a Shepherd does his Flock, for the Lord has redeemed
Israel, and ransomed him from him that was stronger than he, Jer. 30.18. A
Voice was heard in Rama, Lamentation and bitter weeping, Rachel weeping for her
Children, refusing to be comforted, because they were not, thus says the Lord
refrain thy Voice from Weeping, and thine Eyes from Tears, for thy Work shall
be rewarded and they shall come again from the Land of the Enemy, there is hope
in thine end, that they shall come again to their own Borders, Jer 31* 8, to
23. And the Heathen shall know that the House of Israel went into Captivity,
because they trespassed against me, therefore hid I my Face from them,
therefore thus says the Lord, now will I bring again the Captivity of Jacob;
and have mercy upon the whole House of Israel, I will be jealous for my Holy
Name, after that they have born their shame, and all their trespasses, that
they have trespassed against me, when they dwelt safely in their own Land, and
none made them afraid. And I am Sanctified of them, in the sight of many
Nations. Then shall they know, that I am the Lord their God, which caused them
to be led into Captivity, among the Heathen, but I have gathered them into
their own Land; and have left none of them any more there, neither will I hide
my Face any more from them, for I have poured out my Spirit upon the House of
Israel, Ezekiel 29.23, etc.

Behold I will gather them out of all Nations, and all Countries whether I have
driven them, in mine anger and in my fury, and in great wrath, and will bring
them again to this place, and will cause them to dwell safely, and they shall
be my People, and I will be their God; and I will give them one Heart and one
Way, that they may fear me, for the good of them and their Children after them:
Yea I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will most assuredly plant
them in this Land, with my whole Heart, and with my whole Soul, for as I have
brought all this great evil upon this People, so will I bring upon them all the
good that I have promised them, Jer. 32.37, to end.

Turn ye to the strong hold, ye Prisoners of hope, even to day, do I declare
unto you, that I will render double unto you, they shall be as the Stones of a
Crown lifted up, as an Ensign upon his Land, for how great is his goodness, how
great is his beauty, Corn shall make the Young Men cheerful and the new Wine
Maids, Zach. 9.12, to the end.

Thus says the Lord after seventy years be accomplished at Babylon. I will
visit you, and perform my good words toward you, and cause you to return to
this place, for I know the Thoughts that I think toward you, Thoughts of Peace
and not of Evil, to give you an expected end: you shall call on me, go and
pray, and I will hearken unto you, ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye seek
me with all your Heart, I will be found of you, and turn away your Captivity,
and gather you from all the Nations, and all places whither I have driven you,
and bring you again to the place, whence I caused you to be driven away
Captive, Jer. 29.10, to 15.

And the ransomed of the Lord shall return to Zion, with everlasting Songs and
Joy upon their Heads, they shall obtain Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow and
Sighing shall fly away, Isa. 39.10. That thou may say to the Prisoners go
forth, to them that are in darkness show your selves, the Captives of the
mighty shall be taken away, and the Prey of the terrible shall be taken away
Isa. 49.5, 25, 26. read Isaiah 52. to 7. and Psalm. 102.19, and Isa. 20. God
sets the solitary in Families, and brings out those that are bound with
Chains, but rebellious are in a dry Land. As we see from the foregoing
Scriptures the manifold Promises of God for the delivery of his Prisoners of
hope, the same instruct us also of the Lords great Power and goodness in his
delivering of his People in these respects.

First, By giving to them a more lively appearance, and discovery of himself,
under their confinement, than formerly, and affords them more patience and
courage to bear their Afflictions and Confinements, Prisons or places of
Retirement, and as at all times, we should examine our case, as to peace with
God, and seeing all afflictions are from God and Confinements especially, for
the good of such as wait on him, we ought in Prison Houses to search our
Hearts, and try our Ways, and seek out the Causes of Gods so dealing with us,
and by this means, he makes the darkest Prisons the happiest Lodgings, by the
effects it works on such as therein walk with God and seek reconciliation with
him in Jesus Christ, we see what clear revelations Jeremiah had, when shut up
in closest Prisons and Dungeons, and with what undaunted Zeal and Courage for
God he delivers the Message of God, when he was most severely dealt with, being
supported by God against all discouragements, see Jeremiah 32.2. and 3. chap.
33. and 1. chapter 37.16. chapter 38.4.5, and 6. chap. 39.16, 17, 18. chapter 42.10.

See the constancy of Zeal and Courage of the three Children, when they knew
the Law against them was irrepealable, Be it known to the oh King, we will not
obey thee, nor worship the Image which thou have set up, Dan. 3.16, 17, 18.

How did Peter filled with the Holy Ghost, being in Prison, maintain the Cause
of Christ, when being forbid to Preach any more in the Name of Christ, thus
reasoned, Whether it be better to obey God or Man, judge ye, for we cannot but
speak the things that we have seen and heard, Acts 4.3, 9. How joyful and
cheerful were Paul and Sylas in Prison, after they had been soundly whipped, for
Preaching in the Name of Jesus, by Praying and Singing of Psalms in the hearing
of other Prisoners, how are all the Books of the Histories of the Christians
Persecutions, as well under Heathenish as Roman Tyranny, full of the
cheerfulness of Christians in their Imprisonment for Truth, so as many have
been offered their Lives, who rather did choose to suffer Death, than to live
and be under greater Temptation.

Secondly, By making Enemies Mediators for his People, and Instruments of their
Deliverance, the Lord put it in the Heart of Cyrus King of Babylon, whose
Ancestors had kept the Israelites Captive seventy years, to send them back to
Jerusalem, with Instructions to rebuild the Temple at his Charge, and restored
to them the Vessels took out of the Temple. Jeremiah was enlarged and delivered
by the King of Babylon, when he was imprisoned by his own Native Prince, Jer.
39.11, 12, 15. Paul and Sylas were brought out of Prison by the same persons by
whom they were shut up, and the Jailor washed their wounds and entertained them
in Prison, Act. 16.26.

Thirdly, By delivering of his People by his own immediate Hand, And the Angel
of the Lord opened the Prison Doors, and brought them forth, and said to them
go forth, and preach to all People the words of this Life, Act. 12.13. The same
Apostle also delivered by an Angel, the Doors and Iron Gates opening of
themselves, and his Chains falling off, and he and Sylas delivered by an
Earthquake, all which show the Lords special care over his Prisoners of Hope,
which invites all such to a patient waiting on God, Believing the Vision is for
an appointed time, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. He
made them to be pitied of those that carried them captive, Ps. 106.46.

The third case wherein Gods Promises do support his People is Poverty, or
which the Scriptures abound, the Holy Jesus who is truth it self tells us, That
Man lives not by Bread alone, but by every Word that proceeds out of the
Mouth of God, Mat. 4.4. And that his special Providence and care is the only
supply of his People, as he c^reth for the Lillies provides for the Ravens and
Sparrows, so takes he care of his People; however the Lords Promises to his
People in Poverty are large. When the Poor and needy seeks Water, and there
is none, and their Tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, the
God of Israel will not forsake them, I will open Rivers in high places, and
fountains in the midst of the valleys, I will make the Wilderness a Pool of
Water, and the dry Land springs of Water, Isa. 41.17, 18.

I will give thee the Treasures of Darkness, and hidden Riches of Secret
Places, that thou may know, that I the Lord, which call thee by thy name am
the God of Israel, Isa. 45.3. Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the
Waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy and eat, without money, and
without price, Isa. 55.1, 2. The Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy
thy Soul in drouth, and make Fat thy Bones, and thou shall be like a Watered
Garden, and like a Spring of Water, whose Waters fail not, Isa. 58.11.

Though Poverty pincheth, and Straights are sore Trials, yet consider and
believe Gods Providence and Care of his People at all times, either in
supplying their wants in his own time and way, or blessing what they have, and
increasing a little to a great deal.

First, In supplying their wants, see the Lords supply of Ishmael, when his
Mother laid him out of her sight, not willing to see him dye for want of Drink.
Genesis 21.16, to 21.

The Lords feeding his People with Manna for Bread, and Quales for Flesh from
Heaven, Exodus 16. The Lords making Water to arise out of the Jawbone of an Ass,
to preserve Sampson's Life, Jud. 15.9. The Lords feeding of Elisha by sending
of food to him by a Raven, 1 Kin. 17. The Lords wonderful relieving the City of
Samaria, strongly besieged and oppressed with Famine, when Women did eat their
own Children, and in one Night brought it great plenty by his wonderful
Providence, 2 Kin. 7. all.

Secondly, By blessing and increasing a little to a great deal, The little that
a Righteous Man has, is better than the Riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37.16.
The wonderful increasing of the Widow of Sarepta's Oil, and Barrel of Meal* to
the feeding her self; her Son, and the Prophet Elisha many days, when she
thought to have starved for want, 1 Kin. 19. The Lords preserving Elisha, forty
days and forty nights, by two single Meals, 1 Kin. 19. The Lords making a small
quantity of Oil to increase to many Barrels, and thereby relieved the Widows
two Sons, who were to have been so^d for the payment of their Fathers debt, 2
Kin. 4 all. The Lord Jesus Christ his feeding of five thousand Men, besides
Women and Children, with five Loaves and two small Fishes, and after all were
satisfied twelve Baskets full of Fragments were taken up, Mark 6.42, 43, 44.

And to conclude this point, see what Omnipotency says, Prove me now says the
Lord, if I will not open the Windows of Heaven, and pour out a Blessing, that
you shall not have room to receive it, Malachy 3.10.

Fourthly, The fourth Affliction or Trial of Christians, in which God assisteth
his People by his Promises is the unkindness, unnaturality or changeableness of
friends, as this is a great trial, yet it is the frequent Lot of Christians,
Christ the Lord of Glory was not only forsaken of his Friends, but also
betrayed by one of his own Disciples, Job was charged with Hypocrisy by his
three Friends, and tempted by his Wife to Curse God.

David had his Throne Usurped by his own Son, and his Wives defiled by him in
the sight of the Sun, Moses was accused of usurpation by his Brother Aaron, and
Sister Miriam, Numb. 11.4. and daily experience proves, that a Man's Enemies
are those of his own House, however the Lords Promises for Comfort and Support
of his People under this Trial, are many and almost numberless.

See that early Mercy of God to the Church as representing the state of all men
by Nature, in that often repeated place, No Eye pitied thee, to do any ^f
these things to thee, nevertheless, he proves that kind Samaritan who takes
pity and care, when the Priest and Levite, whose profession was to show
Charity, passed by without Pity or Care, and sufficiently provides for the
poor wounded Man. Luke 10.30, to 39.

See the Psalmists Case, Thou have put away my acquaintance far from me, thou
have made me an abomination to them. I am shut up, I cannot come forth, I am
afflicted from my Youth, and ready to dye, while I suffer thy Terrors I am
distracted, Psalm. 88.8, 15, 18. We are become a reproach to our Neighbors, a
scorn and a derision to them that are about us, I am become a stranger to my
Brethren, an alien to my Mothers Children, Psalm. 69.8.

See the Apostles Case, At my first answer, no man stood by me, but all Men
forsook me, nevertheless the Lord stood with me and strengthened me, 2 Timothy
4.16, 17.

Consider the Churches state, there is none to plead thy cause, all thy lovers
have forgotten thee, they seek thee not, in which we see the height of
unkindness, of unnaturality of Relations, but consider in that same and often
repeated place, The Lords wonderful kindness, therefore all they that devour
thee shall be devoured and all thy Adversaries every one of them shall go into
Captivity, for I will restore health unto thee and heal thee of thy wounds,
Jer. 30.11, to 18. One shall say unto him, what are these wounds in thy hands?
and he shall answer, those which I have received in the house of my Friend,
Zech. 13.6.

See the Churches state, and what advice the Prophet gives unto her, upon the
consideration of the unfaithfulness of Friends: Trust not in a Friend, put no
confidence in a Guide, keep the Doors of thy Mouth, from the Wife that lies in
thy Bosom, for the Son dishonors the Father, and the Daughter rises up
against the Mother, and the Daughter in Law against the Mother in Law, and a
Man's Enemies are those of his own House, Mic. 7.5, 6, 7. The Church in the
Prophet Isaiah's time was under contempt, reproach, and forsaken of friends,
but yet, he comforts her with great assurances of Gods everlasting favor, fear
not for thou shall not be ashamed, thou shall forget the shame of thy Youth,
and not remember the reproach of thy Widow-hood any more, for thy Maker is thy
Husband, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, and thy Redeemer, the holy one of
Israel, for the Lord has called thee as a Woman forsaken and grieved in Spirit
a Wife of Youth, when thou wast refused, for a little moment have I forsaken
thee, but with great Mercy will I gather thee, in a little wrath I hid my Face
from thee, for a moment, but with everlasting kindness, will I have mercy upon
thee, says the Lord, Isa. 54.5, 6, 7, 8, And farther when all help fails and
no appearance of any hope, then the Lord Interposeth. I looked and there was
none to help, I wondered that there was none to uphold, therefore mine own arm
brought Salvation and my Fury it upheld me, Isa. 63.5. This also was David's
case, I looked on my Right Hand, and beheld, but there was no man would know
me, refuge failed me, no man cares for my Soul, Psalm. 142.4.

This also was the great case of the Church, wherein the Lord interposeth with
his great deliverance, but Sion said, the Lord has forsaken me, my God has
forgotten me, but behold the Lords Fatherly answer, exceeding all the
compassion of Women, Can a Woman forsake her suckling Child, that she should
not have compassion on the Son of her Womb? she may forget, but I cannot forget
thee, says the Lord, I have graven thee upon the Palms of my hands, thy Walls
are continually before me, thy Children shall make haste, thy destroyers and
they that made thee waste shall go forth of thee, Isa. 49.14, to 18. Behold the
lamentable state of the Church, wherein she complains all her friends have
dealt treacherously with her, and not only forsaken her, but become her
Enemies, Lam. 1. all.

The fifth instance of Gods kindness to his People, is when under great
reproaches, as a good name is better than Gold and Precious ointment,
nevertheless the holiest and most innocent of Gods People, have been exposed
unto, and are obnoxious to slanders, revilings, and reproaches from the worst
of Men.

Christ the Lord of Glory, was called a Wine-bibber, a Drunkard, a Friend to
Publicanes and Sinners, and charged with having a Devil, and being a Charmer by
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, and at his Death, was reviled as a deceiver,
and they that passed by railed on him, thou that savest others come down from
the Cross and save thy self, he that saved others, himself he cannot save. Mat.
15.29, 30, 31. Luke. 7.33, 34. chapter 11.15.

The Apostles were called rebellious turners of the World upside down, stirrers
up of the People and Inventers of new doctrine. How was David reviled and
reproached by Shimei? Come out thou bloody Man, the Lord has returned on thee
all the blood of the House of Saul, and thou art taken in thy mischief, because
thou art a bloody Man, 2 Samuel 16.6, 7, 8.

I was a reproach amongst all mine Enemies, especially to my Neighbors, and a
fear to mine acquantance, they that did see me fled from me, I am forgotten as
a dead man out of mind, I am like a broken Vessel, I have heard the slanders of
many, fear was on every side, while they took Council together against me, they
devised to take away my Life, but I trusted to thee O Lord, and said thou art
my God, Psalm. 31.11, 12, 13, 14, 20. False Witnesses rose up against me, they
laid to my charge things I knew not, they rewarded me evil for my good to the
spoiling of my Soul, in my adversity, they rejoiced and gathered themselves
together, yea the Abjects gathered themselves together against me, and I knew
it not, they did tear me and ceased not, with Hypocritical mockers at Feasts,
they gnashed upon me with their Teeth, yea they opened their mouth wide against
me, and said, a ha! a ha! our eyes have seen it, Psalm. 35.11, to 22. My lovers
and my friends stood aloof from my sore, my kinsmen stood afar off, they also
that seek after my Soul, lay Snares for me, and they that seek my hurt speak
mischievous things against me, and imagine deceit all the day long, but my
Enemies are lively and they are strong, and they that hate me wrongfully are
multiplied, they also that render evil for good are mine Adversaries, Psalm.
38.11, to 21.

Mine Enemies speak evil of me, when shall he die, if he come to see me, he
speaks vanity, he gathers iniquity to it self, and when he goes away he
tells it, all that hate me whisper together against me, they did devise my
hurt, now that he lies down he shall rise no more, yea mine own familiar
friend in whom I trusted, who did eat of my bread, did lift up his heel against
me, Psalm. 41.5, to 9.

Moses the humble and meekest of Men, was charged with ambition and assuming of
Arbitrary Power, even by his Brother Aaron and Sister Miriam, Thou take too
much upon thee, has the Lord spoken by Moses only, has he not spoken by us
also? Numb. 12.1.2.

This also was Christ's Lot, My Brethren have dealt deceitfully with me as a
Brook, John 13.18* This also was the sad Condition of the Church, Thou have
heard their reproach O Lord; their Imaginations against me, the Lips of those
that rise up against me, their devices against me all the day long, behold
their sitting down and their rising up, I am their Music, Lam. 3.6, 62, 63.
David was as among Lions, their Teeth were as Spears against him; and their
Tongues as sharp Swords, they wrested his words, Psalm. 57.4. Psalm. 56.2, 5, 6.
He was the Song of the Drunkards, Reproach has broken my Heart, I am full of
heaviness, I looked for some to take pity, but there was none, and for
comforters, but I found none, Psalm. 69. all. Our Soul is exceedingly filled
with the scorn of those that dwell at ease, and with the contempt of the Proud,
Psalm. 123.4.

The sixth reason, why God thus chastises his People, is to make them sensible
of the different measures, by which he deals with his People in their
Afflictions, and with the wicked by his Judgment upon them, and that consists
in these six respects.

First, He chastises his People in love and for their good, but his Judgments
on the Wicked, are to their Everlasting Loss and Condemnation.

Secondly, He unwillingly and with reluctance corrects his People, but takes
pleasure in his Justice upon the Wicked.

Thirdly, He corrects his People in measure and moderation, but Rains down the
Vials of his displeasure upon his Enemies.

Fourthly, The Chastisements of his People are but for a moment, and not to
make an end of them, but the Wicked are totally cut off, without expectation or
hope of recovery.

Fifthly, The Godly though afflicted are comforted, by Gods presence, they have
communion and fellowship with the Father and holy Trinity, but the Wicked have
no hope in their end or punishments.

Sixthly, The Godly by their afflictions are taught to know the difference
between Spiritual and Carnal enjoyments, Temporal and Eternal Mercies.

First, The Godly's Chastisements are for their good, although all Trials,
Afflictions and Temptations, are a dark Cloud. and carry a pale Face, yet when
the Godly do search out the purpose of God in this, and are desirous to know
his Intentions therein, they will see this to be in love, when the Godly enjoy
all sensual pleasures without any intermission, they are apt to surfeit upon
Mercies, and turn lazy and forget God, as the slothful Man by luxuriant
feeding, ease, and gluttony contracts a Lethargy, so are the best of men, apt
to forget the Fountain of Mercies, and wax wanton against God, as the People of
Israel in their quiet and plenteous enjoyments, Exodus 15 chapter 17. Number. 11. chapter
16. Deuteronomy. 11. Therefore the Lord visits his People with Rods, to rouse them out
of their laziness to make them turn to their rock for their good and safety,
Psalm. 106. Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I learned to keep
thy Word, blessed is the Man whom thou chastises and teaches out of thy Law,
Psalm. 119.67, 71.

This is the end to the Godly to take away his sin, Isa. 27.9. Whom the Lord
loves he chastneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives, If ye endure
chastning, God deals with you as with Sons, for what Son is he whom the
Father chastneth not? but if ye be without Chastisement whereof all are
partakers, then are ye Bastards and no Children, we had Fathers of the Flesh
who chastised us after their own pleasure and we gave them reverence, shall we
not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits, and life? for they*
for a while corrected us according to their own pleasure, but he for our
profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness: now no chastning for the
present seems joyous but grievous, but afterward it brings forth the
perfect fruit of Righteousness, to them that are exercised thereby, Heb. 12.5,
to 12. But see the Issue of the wicked and ungodly, they shall be like the
chaff which the Wind drives away, Ps. 1.4, 5, 6.

Secondly, The Lord does not afflict his People willingly, but with great
reluctance, How shall I give thee up Ephraim, how shall I deliver thee Israel,
how shall I make thee as Adma, how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my Heart is
turned within me, my repenting is turned together, Hos. 11.8.

Is Ephraim my dear Son, is he a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him,
I remember him still earnestly, my Bowels are troubled for him, I will surely
have mercy upon him, says the Lord, Jer. 31.20. Repent and turn your selves
from your transgressions, so Iniquity shall not be your ruin, cast away all
your transgressions, and make you a new Heart and a new Spirit, for why will
you dye O house of Israel, for I have no pleasure in the death of a sinner,
therefore turn your selves and live. See Ezekiel. 33.11. Luke 13.34, 35. Ezekiel.
18.30, 31, 32.

Thirdly, The Lord corrects his People in measure and not in extremity as he
does the wicked, has he smitten him as he smote those that smote him, or is he
slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him, in measure when
it shoots forth thou will debate with it, he stays his rough Wind in the
day of his East Wind, Isaiah 27.7, 8.

Fourthly, The Afflictions of the Godly, are but for a short time, for a small
moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercy will I gather thee, in a
little wrath I hid my self from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy upon thee, Isa. 5, 4.7, 8. They shall go into
Babylon until I deliver them, I will visit them there and restore them to this
place, Jer. 27.22. Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears,
for thy work shall be rewarded, and they shall come again from the Land of the
Enemy, and there is hope in thine end, and thy Children shall come again in
their own border, Jer. 31.15, 16, 17.

Thus though the Lord deals severely with his People, nevertheless it is but
for a time; and in moderation, and gives them a happy delivery, and eternal
rest with himself in the end, but he deals otherways with his Enemies, never
withdrawing his Judgments from them, until he has accomplished their
destruction, and avenged their malice against his People, Wherefore it shall
come to pass when the Lord has performed this whole work upon mount Sion, I
will punish the stout-heart of the King of Assyria and the glory of his high
looks, Isa. 41.15, 16.

I was wroth with my People, I have polluted mine Inheritance, and given them
into thy hands, thou did show them no mercy, upon the ancient have thou very
heavily laid thy yoke, thou said, I will be a Lady for ever, for that thou
did not lay these things to thy Heart, neither did remember the latter end
of them, therefore hear thou this, thou that art given to pleasure, that
dwell carelessly, that say in thy Heart, I am and none else besides me, I
shall not sit as a Widow, neither shall I know the loss of Children, but these
two things shall come to thee in a moment, in one day, the loss of Children and
Widow-hood, they shall come upon thee in their perfection, for the multitude of
thy Sorceries and great abundance of thy Enchantments. Therefore all that
devour thee, shall be devoured, and all that prey upon thee, wi l I give for a
prey, for I will restore health unto thee, and heal thee of thy Wounds, though
I make an end of all Nations, whether I have scattered thee, yet will I not
make a full end of thee, but will correct thee in measure, and not leave thee
altogether unpunished. Jer. 30.7, 11, to 18. And they shall dwell safely
therein and build houses and plant vineyards yea they shall dwell with
confidence, when I shall have executed Judgment on all them that despise them
round about, and they shall know that I am their God, Jer. 50.29. Ezekiel. 25.26.
Thou shall seek them, but not find them, that contended with thee, they that
War against thee, shall be as nothing, and as a thing of naught, Isa. 41.12.
The Sons of them who afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee, and they
that despised thee, shall bow themselves and the soles of thy Feet, Isa 64.12,
14, 15* Behold I have taken out of thy hand the Cup of trembling, even the
dregs of the Cup of my fury, thou shall no more drink it again, but I will put
it into the hands of those that afflicted thee, which said to thy Soul bow
down, that we may go over, and thou have laid thy Body as the ground, and as
the street to them that went over, Isa. 51.21, 22, 23. They shall rob them that
robbed them, and spoil those that spoiled them, read Ezekiel 20. all. chapter
36. all. chapter 39. all.

Fifthly, The People of God in their afflictions have the comfortable presence
of God with them, but the wicked are wrackt and torn with anxiety, and
displeasure under Gods Judgmencs, In all their afflictions he was afflicted,
and the Angel of his Presence saved them, in his love and in his pity he
redeemed them, and bore them all the days of old, Isa. 63.9.

He that dwells in the secrets of the Most High, shall abide under the shadow
of the Almighty, Psalm. 91. all. When thou passest thorough the Waters I will be
with thee, and through the Rivers they shall not overflow thee, when thou
walk thorough the Fire thou shall not be burned, neither shall the Flames
come upon thee, for I am the Lord thy God. Fear not for I am with thee, be not
afraid for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea, I will uphold thee, with
my right hand of my righteousness, for I the Lord will uphold thy right hand,
saying fear not I will help thee, says thy Redeemer the holy one of Israel,
Isal 43.2, 3. chap, 44.10, 13, 14.

The sixth thing God intends in chastising of his People, is to teach them to
distinguish between Spiritual and Temporal, Eternal and Temporary Mercies, this
being one of the chiefest considerations, and proper for Man's direction in his
choice of things, and useful for Man in his Conversation, how to choose things
most desirable, we shall consider things Temporal, and things Spiritual and
Eternal under their several qualities, as they are contained in holy
Scriptures, the holy Evangelist St. John sums up all the things of the World in
these three heads, The Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and Pride of
Life. It being usual and natural to all men to seek and affect the enjoyment of
what seems best to them* wherefore the great point of discretion, is to inform
our Judgments what things are best, which will appear by comparing of things
Temporal with those that are Eternal.

The several qualities of Temporal things, may be briefly taken up from the
foregoing Scripture in these heads.

First, All things Temporal or of this Life, are subject to changes and have no
certainty or stability in them, but things Spiritual or Eternal are parmanent.

Secondly, All enjoyments of this Life are unperfect, and cannot make any man
happy while he h^th them, but Spiritual* and things Eternal, are perfect and
make the Possessors happy in t^em.

Thirdly, All the excellencies of Creature enjoyments, are short of the Eternal
Inheritance of the Saints, which is Christ and Eternal Life.

Fourthly, All secular or temporary enjoyments, leave a Man at his Grave, but
when this Life is ended then comes the Saints Eternal rest, and continues to
all Eternity.

First, Things of this Life are uncertain and changeable, the great Savior of
the World, Love, and Wisdom it self, being willing to inform the World and draw
them off the uncertainties of perishing things, in his great Sermon on the
Mount advises to Seek Treasure in Heaven, where the Moth consumes not, nor
the Thief does purloyn, Mat. 6.19, to 34. See what account Solomon the
greatest, richest, and most honorable of all Men, gives of all humane things
All his days are sorrow, his travel grief, his Heart takes no rest in the
Night, this also is vanity, and vexation of Spirit continually, see Eccles. 1.2.

See the uncertainty of humane things in Nebuchadnezzar, Adonibezech,
Ahithophel, Haman, Herod and many others, see Dan. 4.30, to end, 2 Samuel 17. to
24. Esther 7. Act. 12.20, to 24*

We find in daily experience, a Man to day in Court like a green Bay Tree, and
next in Disgrace, Prison, or Misery. The Wicked shall perish and the Enemies of
the Lord shall be as the fat of Lambs, they shall consume, into Smoke shall
they consume away, I have seen the wicked in great power and spreading himself
like a green Bay Tree yet he passed away, and Lo he was not, I sought him, but
he could not be found, but the Lord knows the days of the Righteous, and his
Inheritance shall be for ever, Psalm. 37.

Secondly, the enjoyments of this Life are all imperfect, and cannot make
happy. The foregoing truth of uncertainty, Demonstrate this truth of
imperfection, and daily experience confirm it, the gathering and preserving of
Riches, acquiring, and restlessness in upholding of Honor, care to preserve
and recover Health, do so Cruciate and Oppress Men with such Anxiety, that all
their Labor and Travel, is Sorrow and Trouble, Psalm. 90.9, 10.

And they have no Pleasure, much less Happiness in any Enjoyment, the Rich Man
in the Gospel, went from Christ sorrowful, for that he could not hold his
Riches and have Life eternal, the Scripture tells us, we brought nothing into
this World with us, and it is certain we shall carry nothing out with us, and
having Food and Raiment, let us be therewith content but they that will be
Rich, fall into Temptation and a Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful
Lusts, which drowned Men in Destruction and Perdition, for the love of Money,
is the Root of all Evil, which while some covered after, they have erred from
the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many Sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.7, 8, 9
10.

Thirdly, all Humane Enjoyments are short of Christ the Inheritance of the
Saints, let us narrowly survey with all the Advantageous Aggravations of Humane
Excellency, all that can be pretended choice, good, or desirable in the
Creature and we shall find them, all short to, and far exceeded by the inherent
excellencies in Christ, the Lord of Glory, in these particulars.

First, for that all Created Beings have their rise and being from him, and he
alone is of himself, he is the first and the last, all things were made by him,
and without him was nothing made, which was made, by him were all things
Created that are in Heaven, and which are in Earth, visible or invisible;
whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things
were Created by him and for him, Col. 1.16.

Secondly, he is, was, and alone subsists of himself, and all other things were
made by him, so by him do they subsist, in him we live, move, and have our
being, Rev. 1.18.

Thirdly, he is perfect himself, all things were made for him, and he not for
them, all things were Created by him and for him, Col. 1.16.

Fourthly, he excels all things in Antiquity, he is the Ancient of Days the
Firstborn of every Creature, and Firstborn from the Dead, tbat in all things
he might have the Pre-eminence, Col. 1.19.

Fifthly, in Wisdom, he is Wisdom it self, and the Fountain of Wisdom, in whom
are hid all the Treasures of Knowledee and Wisdom: If any Man lack Wisdom, let
him ask it of God, who gives to all Men liberally and upbraideth not, read
Isaiah 2.6. Col. 2, 3. Isa. 1.5.

Sixthly, in Beauty, he is the Morning Star, the Rose of Sharon, the Image of
the invisible God, who is the brightness of bis Glory, and the express Image of
his Person, Heb. 1.3.

Seventhly, In power, he is Omnipotent, and all things else but of limited
Power, he is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9, 15.

Who has measured the Waters in the hollow of his Hand, and metted out Heaven
with a Span, and comprehended the dust of the Earth in a measure, who has
weighed the Earth in Scales, and the Hills in a bal^^nce, the Nations are as a
drop of a Bucket, and are counted as the small dust of a Balance, he takes up
the Isles as a very little thing all Nations before him are as nothing, they
are accounted to him less than nothing and vanity, Psalm. 90.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Is.
40.12, 15, 17.

Fourthly, the fourth difference between things Temporal and Eternal is that
Temporal things leave a Man at his Grave, and in this Life; but Spiritual and
Eternal continue with the Saints to all Eternity, So as when this miserable
Life is ended, the Saints are happy in their Death, and their Spiritual Life of
blessed enjoyments then begins, Blessed are the Dead which dye in the Lord,
they cease from their Labor, and their works follow them* Rev. 14.13.

These Spiritual enjoyments are not seen or apprehended by Carnal sense, but
are spiritually discerned, and are eternal. While we look not after things that
are seen, but after things which are not seen; for things which are seen, are
Temporal, but things that are not seen, are eternal. 2 Cor. 4.18. The Kingdom
of Heaven consists not in Eating and Drinking, chambering and wantonness,
Ryotting and Drunkenness, but in Peace and Joy of the Holy Ghost. This State of
Possession of Spiritual things, is briefly comprehended under these Heads.

First, it Commenceth when all Humane Enjoyments fail and continues to all
Eternity.

Secondly, it is incorruptible, and not subject to changes.

Thirdly, It is a complete fullness of all Happiness.

First, when Enjoyments of this Mortal Life leaves a Man at his Grave, after he
has experienced the uncertainty, vanity, and vexation of Spirit, touching
Humane Enjoyments, then he enters upon the quiet possession of Eternal
Happiness, as in the foregoing Scripture, all the People of God are Sealed,
Marked and Secured from after danger, and made firm Pillars in the House of God
eternally in the Heavens: hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea, until we have
sealed the Servants of the Lord in their Foreheads, Rev. 3.12. which mark is a
white Stone and in it a new Name, the Name of Christ and the City of God, which
is their being renewed by the Spirit of Regeneration, Rev. 7.3. Chap. 2.17.
They are under an everlasting Covenant with God, I will make a Covenant of
Peace with them, and it shall be an everlasting Covenant, and I will place my
Sanctuary amongst them, for evermore, Ez. 37.26. There is therefore now no
Condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit, who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It
is God that justifies, who shall condemn? it is Christ that dies, yea, rather
that is risen again, and makes intercession for us, Rom, 8.1, 31, 34.

But on the other hand, the Lot of the Wicked, after they have enjoyed their
good things in this Life, like the rich glutton, they are confined to
everlasting wrath and misery, Remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy
good things, and Lazarus his evil things, therefore thou art now Tormented, and
he Comforted, Luke 16.20. to end.

The Righteous are brought out of great Tribulation, and have their Robes
washed in the Blood of the Lamb, and are Clothed with the Righteousness and
Glory.

These are they which came out of great Tribulation, and have washed their
Robes, and made themselves white in the Blood of the Lamb, therefore they are
before the Throne of God, Day and Night to serve him in his Temple, and he that
sits on the Throne, shall dwell amongst them, Rev. 7.14. to 18.

And on the other hand, the wicked are Chained in everlasting Darkness, and
tormented with inexpressible Torments, so that they desire Death, rather than
Life, if any Man Worship the Beast and his Image, or receives his Mark in his
Forehead or in his Hand, the same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God
which is poured out without mixture, into the Cup of his Indignation, and shall
be Tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the presence of the Holy Angels, and in
the presence of the Lamb, and the smoke of their Torments ascends up for ever
and ever, and they have no Rest Day nor Night, Rev. 14.9. Chap. 6.12. to end.
Chap. 9.4. to end. Chap. 21.8, 27.

Secondly, this State and Inheritance of the Godly is incorruptible, and
therefore not Subject to changes or Alterations, Blessed be the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his abundant Mercy* has begotten us
again into a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead,
unto an Inheritance Incorruptible and Undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in the Heavens for us, 1 Pet* 1.3, 4. This is that Treasure laid up,
where Moth consumes not, nor Thieves can purloyn, this is a State where no
change, case, or Circumstance of time, or things can alter, for I am persuaded
that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities nor Powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
Creature shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus, our Lord, Romans 8.38, 39.

Thirdly, this State is a State of Complete Happiness, we have formerly seen
the emptiness of all Human and Temporary Enjoyments, That therein Happiness
cannot be expected, from the uncertainty, and vexatiousness even under the
Enjoyments thereof; but here in this State is fullness of Joy and ^^easures for
evermore, he that spared not his own Son, but freely gave him up for us all,
how shall he not also with him freely give us all things? Romans 8 32. Violence
shall no more be heard in thy Land, wasting nor destruction within thy Borders,
but thou shall call thy Walls Salvation, and thy Gates Praise, the Sun shall no
more be thy Light by Day, neither for Darkness shall the Moon give the light;
but the Lord shall be to thee an Everlasting Light, and thy God thy Glory, thy
Sun shall no more go down, nor thy Moon withdraw it self, for the Lord shall be
thy Everlasting Light, and thy God thy Glory, Is. 60.19, 20. they shall Hunger
no more, neither Thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them or any
heat, and the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and
lead them to living Fountains of Waters, and God shall wipe away all Tears from
their Eyes, Rev. 7.14, 15, 16, 17. Chap. 2, 3, 4.

We are come unto Mount-Sion, the City of the living God the Heavenly
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of Angels, and to the general Assembly
of the Firstborn, which are written in the Heaven, and to God the Judge of
all, and to the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of
the New Covenant, and to the Blood of sprinkling, which speaks better things
than the Blood of Abel, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. Cbap. 3.

The Seventh and great end Christ has in Chastising his People, is, that which
is the great end of the Gospel, which is to raise Men's Hearts up to, and fix
their desires, on that great prize of Salvation and Eternal Life, as all
Actions of Men have their Scope at which they chiefly Level, this is the chief
thing, and ought principally to be driven at, for these Reasons.

First, this Great Salvation is for Gods Glory.

Secondly, It is of all things most Profitable, therefore most desirable.

Thirdly, It has the greatest Encouragements attending it.

Fourthly, The Prize contended for is unvaluable.

First, by Man's Salvation arises to God great Glory, for as Christ is the
Alpha and Omega, and Firstborn of his Brethren, and though Originally perfect
in himself, and Glorious without Addition from Creatures, being the express
Image of his Person, in whom the Godhead dwells bodily, by whom all things
were made, and for him, and to his own Glory, and all things upheld by him; his
great goodness is such, that he promotes Man's Happiness, and sets it before him
as his own Glory, gave himself to Death for Man, and made himself the Captain
of that great Salvation, by enduring all the Indignities of Human Contempt, and
his Fathers Wrath, by personating Man, and taking the Chastisements of his Sins
upon him, and this he proposes as his Glory, looking unto Jesus, the Author
and Finisher of our Faith, who for the Glory that was set before him, endured
the Cross, dispising the shame, and is set down at the Right Hand of God, Heb.
12.2. As I live says the Lord, I desire not the Death of a Sinner, but rather
that he should Repent and live, this being not only our Interest, but Christ's
Glory, how much, and chiefly should we be concerned to promote it.

Secondly, this is Man's most profitable concern, all Men Level their Designs
and Actions, to the most Advantageous Interest, and this of Eternal Life,
according to Christ's Advice is most profitable, What has a Man profited, if he
gain the whole World? thou Fool, this Night thy Soul shall be taken from thee,
then whose shall these things be that thou have? wherefore do ye spend Money
for that which is not Bread and Labor, for that which satisfies not? Hearken
diligently unto me, and eat that which is good, and let your Soul delight in
Fatness, Luke 12, 16. to 21. Is. 55.2.

Thirdly, As this is most Advantageous, so it is that in which most
encouragement of help and assistance is offered and promised.

The whole Book of the Holy Writ is full of the great promises, of
Encouragement and Assistance to the People of God, in their pursuit of this
great Salvation, yea, it is Christ's great desire, that all Men should be saved,
How often would I have gathered thee, as a Hen gathers her Brood under her
Wings? Luke 13.34. Is it not, and has it not been, the Cours^ and Care of
Christ, all the Prophets and Apostles, to gather and bring Men to the Kingdom
of God? Christ made a purchase of Sinners, but on his own Expenses, he is that
kind Samaritan who Helps, Cures, Supplies, and Recovers, when other helps fail,
when Priests, Levites, and others pass by, without Compassion or Relief, he it
is who of his own good will brings Deliverance, as we see in the often repeated
Scriptures, Luke 10.10 to 37. Eze. 16. to 9. When we were without strength,
yea, Enemies and Sinners, Christ dyed for us, so great is Christ's Love to
Sinners, that nothing can stop the Current of his Mercy from them, Romans 5. to
11.

First the Multitude of Sins do it not, I have blotted out as a Cloud thy
Transgressions, and as a thick Cloud thy Sins; return unto me, for I have
Redeemed thee, Isa. 44.22.

Secondly, the greatness of Sins cannot hinder his Love, though your Sins be as
Scarlet, I will make them white as Snow, though they be red like Crimson, I
will make them as Wool, Is. 1.18. Let the Wicked forsake his way, and the
Unrighteous Man his Thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have Mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly Pardon, for as the
Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are my Thoughts higher than your
Thoughts. Is. 55.7, 8, 9.

Thirdly, Cloudiness and Darkness of Condition cannot do it, who is amongst you
that fears the Lord, and obeys the Voice of his Servant, that walks in
Darkness, and has no Light, let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God, Is. 50, 10. Come my People, enter into your Chambers, shut the
Doors about thee, hide thy self for a Moment, until the Indignation be
over-past, Isa. 26.20. I will go and return to my place, until they
acknowledge their offenses, and seek my Face, in their Afflictions they will
seek me early, Hosea 5.15. by all which we see the Lord in Mercy, often clouds
his Face from his People not in Anger, but to rouse them up to enquire into the
cause of his withdrawing, and by Afflictions to set them more eagerly on
returning to him by Repentance, that he may return to them with a healing in
his Wings.

Fourthly, No Extremity of Condition can hinder the Love of God to his People,
he brings back the Captive, he raises the Dead Bones, and causes them to take
flesh and live, he unites divided Brethren, who are at Enmity, and Cements them
in Love* for all which see, Eze. 37. Isa. 43.2, 25. Ps. 91. all.

Neither Death nor Life, Height nor Depth, things present, nor things to come,
Principalities nor Powers, Angels nor Men, nor any other Creature can separate
us from the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.35, to 39.

Fourthly, The greatness of the Prize to be contended for, should raise our
great pursuit of that Salvation to our Souls, the Holy Scriptures are full in
the Enumeration of the many excellencies that attend that great Interest, that
they are almost infinite, and it may be well applied to that which the Holy
Prophet says, That Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, neither has it
entered into the Heart of Man to conceive (besides thee O Lord) what good
things, The Lord has laid up for them that fear him, Is. 64.4. However the
great Salvation of Man, may be in some measure considered under these Heads.

First, It Is the restoring of lost Man from the deepest State of Misery,
without power in himself, to a State of Happiness in Christ Jesus, in the Day
thou wast born, thy Navel was not cut, thou wast in thy Blood, no Eye pittyed
thee, thou wast cast out to the loathing of thy Person, but when I passed by,
it was the time of Love, I said to thee ^ive, in that often repeated place,
Eze. 16. to 15. and Romans 5. to 10. wherein we have the perfect emblem of Man's
Misery in Nature, and by Sin, and the lively Description of the love of God to
lost Man.

Secondly, All in this State are entitled to, and are made Heirs of all
things, and called to an Inheritance Incorruptible, as in these foregoing
Scriptures, Romans 8.32. and 1 Peter 1.3 and 4.

Thirdly, They are exempted from all manner of Evil, are happy in their Death,
and God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, and there shall be no more
Death, Sorrow, nor Crying, neither shall there be any more pain, for the former
things are passed away, Rev. 7.14. to 18. chapter 21, 4.

Fourthly, they have all Complete Happiness and Fullness of Glory, are united to
God in Christ Jesus, and Crowned with his Crown of Glory, and admitted into the
Inseparable Fellowship of Christ, Saints and Angels, according to that great
Scripture, that they all may be one, as thou O Father art in me, and I in thee,
that they also may be one in us, the glory which thou gave me, I have given
them, that they may be one, even as we are one, I in them, and thou in me, that
they may be made perfect in one, I will that they may be with me where I am, to
behold my glory, John 17.21. to 25. And for the Fellowship of the Saints with
God, Christ Jesus, Angels and just Men made perfect in the New Jerusalem, see
that often repeated place, Hebrews 12.22, 23, 24. Thus, this great Prize should
in the Apostles Exhortation, raise our Encouragement, to hasten our motion to
the New Jerusalem* where for being compassed about with so great a Cloud of
Witnesses, let us lay aside every weight which hang down, and the Sin that does
so easily beset us, and with patience run the Race, that is set before us,
looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the glory was
set before him, endured the Cross, dispising the shame, and is set down at the
Right Hand of the Throne of God, Consider him which endured such contradiction
of Sinners, least ye be wearyed and faint in your Minds, Heb. 12.1.

Thus as Salvation, Eternal Happiness, the Incorruptible and Undefiled
Inheritance of all things, the inseparable fellowship of the Holy Trinity,
Angels, and Saints, is the undeniable Prize at the end of our Race, the
Interest and valuableness thereof ought to raise our constant, zealous, and
patient pursuit thereof, for which, besides what has already been said, we
have these manifold and superexcellent Encouragements.

First, our Salvation is freely of Gods pure Love in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, Christ made and redeemed the World, without Man's help.

Thirdly, We have the examples and instances of Christ's great humiliation and
sufferings on Earth.

Forthly, The different and sure estate of the Redeemed far more excellent and
sure than Man's Estate in his first Creation.

Fifthly, The great Privileges and Excellencies of the Saints in Heaven.

First, God being infinite in Power, Wisdom, and Holiness, absolute and perfect
in himself, without the help or necessity of any humane Being, being to
accomplish his Sovereignty of himself, of his own free Will and for his Glory
he made the World, and upholds it, Who is the Image of the Invisible God, the
first born of every Creature, by him were all things created that are in
Heaven, and that are in the Earth, Visible and Invisible, whether they be
Thrones or Dominions, Principalities or Powers, all things were created by him
and for him, and by him all things consist. And to us there is but one God the
Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 8.6.

Secondly, As Man, The World, and all things were freely made by Ood, so Man
and the World are freely Redeemed by Jesus Christ. This of the Redemption of
Man by Jesus Christ, being one of the most incomprehensible mysteries of free
love; It may be branched out thus.

First, That it is free, without paction or condition of any retribution or
satisfaction, but merely by love and good will.

Secondly, That this Salvation is to such who are utterly incapable of helping
themselves, and in such circumstances as they are in most incapacities and
disadvantages.

Thirdly, That it brings with it all means of comfort and suitable supplies.

Fouthly, That it is complete and full, and nothing can lessen the enjoyment,
or bar the sense of it, except obstinate wilfulness, and a refusing of the
offer.

Fifthly, The Method and Way by which this great Salvation is accomplished, to
wit, by Christ's taking on him the humane Nature, and in the flesh suffered for
Man's Transgressions, do much heigthen the mystery of Redemption.

Sixthly, That the Mediator when he has completed that great work, makes the
Redeemed sharers of his own and Fathers glory.

First, That this Salvation is freely of love and good will, without paction of
any recompense from such as expect and receive the benefit of it, appears from
these Scriptures for all have sinned and come short of the glory of God, Romans
3.23, 24, 25. Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that
is in Jesus Christ, Romans 8.29.30. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy,
and compassion on whom I will have compassion, Romans 9.15, 16. So that it is not
of him that wil^eth nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy,
Ephesians. 5.8. In hope of eternal Life, which God that cannot Lie has promised
before the World began, not by works of Righteousness, which we have done, but
according to his Mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and
renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus
Christ our Savior, Tit. 3.5, 6.

Secondly, This Salvation is to such as are incapable of helping themselves and
under most miserable circumstances, Christ is that charitable and kind
Samaritan to the wounded man by the Thieves, who brings help when the Levite
and Priest (whose Office preach charity) passed by without giving any ^elief.
See that ^^mous and often repeated place, ^n instance of mercy and relief, when
Man was exposed to all imaginable misery, in most contemptible and helpless
condition, where the bowels of mercy are liberally extended, and relief is
brought from mere love and pity, Ezekiel. 16. to 9. And that other famous
Scripture demonstrate the freedom and fullness of love, when Man was in the
worst of circumstances, when we were without strength, Christ died for the
ungodly, God commends his love to us, in that while we were yet sinners
Christ died for us, for if when we were Enemies we were reconciled to God
through the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved
throug his Life, Romans 5. to 12.

Nothing can be a greater instance of love, pity, and compassion, than the
relieving of one in a helpless state, so that Christ's redeeming of Souls is
unparallelled, who relieved Enemies, without their own help, or capacity to
relieve themselves, and that famous Scripture, of causing the Dead Bones to
take flesh, sinews and life, and become a numerous host, is a clear emblem of
the Infinite and Free love of God and man's incapacity to relieve himself, Ezekiel.
37. And in that famous place of Gods interposing for his People, when all
friends and relations, are treacherous and helpless, Micah 7.4, 5, 6. From all
which we may see, the eminent instances, of Man's self incapacity and
miserableness, and of the fullness and freedom of Gods Love, and early mercies
for him.

Thirdly, The third excellency and encouragement in this great Salvation, is,
that it brings with it all suitable helps and supplies to assist us, to promote
that great Salvation, we find the Apostle discovering to us Gods eternal
purpose of Man's Redemption, he resolved to bring Man to a conformity with his
own Will and Image, For whom he did foreknow he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might be the first born among many
Brethren, Romans 8.29. Whereby we find God purposed to have the ransomed, and
such as shall be saved by Christ's Blood, to be completely supplied with all
things necessary to adorn and complete that great Salvation, and this is most
manifest in the Scripture, He that spared not his own Son, but gave him up for
us all, how shall he not also with him freely give us all things, Romans 8.32. He
will give Grace and Glory, and no good thing will he withold from such as
fear him: seek first the Kingdom of God and the Righteousness thereof, then all
things else shall be added thereunto, Mat. 6.33. Ho every one that thirsts*
come ye to the Waters, and he that has no money come, come ye, buy and eat
without money and without price and let your Soul delight it self in fatness,
Isa. 55.1, 2. Here we find, a full, free, and cheap Market of all supplies,
from whence may clearly be employed, Gods purpose to have his people whom he
adopteth heirs of his Kingdom to be completely furnished with all things
necessary thereunto.

Fourthly, The fourth and sixth may be comprehended in one, that this great
salvation, is complete and full, in that it has the enjoyment of God, in union
of the Father by the Son, in the Spirit, and the Heirs of that Inheritance are
made sharers of all Heavenly excellencies, In thy presence is fullness of Joy,
and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore, this is more particularly
expressed by the manifold privileges of the glorified Saints, and their
blessed Inheritance.

First, As it is the restoring of Man from the deepest state of misery, and
exalting him to the highest pitch of happiness, as has been already showed.

Secondly, These of that estate are entitled to all things as has been
alreardy showed.

Thirdly, They shall be exempted from all manner of misery, sorrow and grief,
They have complete happiness, and enjoyment of all things as being eternally
united to God by Jesus Christ,

The fifth and last mystical excellency of this great Salvation, is, in the
method taken by Heavenly Wisdom in the accomplishing of it, to wit, by Christ
the Mediators taking upon him the humane nature* and therein making an
atonement for Sin in the Flesh.

This is so great a mystery that it merits all admiration, that Jesus Christ,
though he was from the beginning and from all eternity, clothed with all
Majesty and Glory, and the first born of all the Creation, the Heir of all
things, by whom the World was made, and by whom it subsists, who being the
brightness of the Fathers glory and express Image of his Person, and by himself
upholding all things, the only begotten Son of God, whose Throne is in glory
for ever more, who laid the Foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the
Workmanship of his Hands, nevertheless, according to the Counsel of his own
Will, he abased himself, to enter into a Virgins Womb, and came into the World,
and under the infirmities of humane Nature, suffered the highes^ indignities,
that the vilest wretches could have been exposed unto.

And at last though he knew no sin, he gave himself unto Death, to make
satisfaction for our sins, this is that mystery which was hid from the
beginning of the World, Ephesians. 3.9. This is the riches of the glorious mystery
of love to the Gentiles, Col. 1.25, 26. Christ the hope of glory. And
oppositely, it is said by the holy Prophet and Apostle Paul, Eye has not seen,
nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive
(besides thee O Lord) what great things he has treasured up for them that love
him, 1 Cor. 2.3. And though the Tongues of Angels and Men, are not able
sufficiently to express and unfold this great mystery, nevertheless we may
sincerely view it, in these four heads.

First, The unsearchable dimensions of the love of God to Sinners, in his
eternal purpose of redeeming the World by Jesus Christ, before the World began,
To make all men see, what is the fellowship of the mystery which from the
beginning of the World has been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 3.9. Romans 8.28, 29, 30.

Secondly, By his greatest and almost incredible humiliation, in abasing
himself, to descend from the highest pitch of glory, to the lowest step of
humane miseries, temptations, ignominies and sufferings, that humane nature
could be exposed unto, and to make himself a Servant, in his sojourning in the
World to teach the Gospel, and the mystery of this great Salvation.

Thirdly, His further condescension of abasement to the Wrath of God, and
suffer death for Man's Sin, though he knew no sin, that by his Suffering, Death
and Resurrection, he might not only by satisfaction of Justice for Man, redeem
him from wrath to come, and procure him eternal happiness; but also to be a
pattern of patience and obedience to all for whom he suffered, and both these
last heads are contained or expressed in that of Isaiah, he shall grow up
before him as a^ tender plant, and as a Root out of dry ground, he has no form
nor comeliness, and when we shall see him there is no beauty that we shall
desire him, he is despised and rejected of Men, a man of sorrows and acquainted
with grief, and we hid as it were our faces from him, and we esteem him not,
surely he has born our grief, and yet we esteemed him, stricken, smitten of
God, and afflicted, he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for
our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and the Lord has
laid upon him the iniquity of us all, he was oppressed and afflicted, yet he
opened not his mouth, he was brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep
before the Shearers is dumb, he opened not his Mouth, he was taken from Prison,
and from Judgment, he made his Grave with the Wicked, and with the Rich in his
Death, because he had done no violence, neither was deceit found in his Mouth,
he poured out his Soul unto death, and was numbered with the Transgressors, Isa.
53. to 11. This further instance of Christ's Humiliation and Abasement for Man's
Salvation, is further expressed by the Psalmist, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me, why art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my
roaring? I am a worm and no man, a reproach of men, and despised of the People,
all men that see me laugh me to scorn, they shoot out the Lip, and shake the
Head, Ps. 22. to 18. This shows in a Type, what indignity, reproach and
misery, the Savior of the World should be exposed unto, in the accomplishing
of Man's Salvation, and this was actually performed, and brought about at
Christ's Suffering, he was mocked reviled and flouted at, when apprehended and
brought to the Cross, He trusted in the Lord, let him deliver him, seeing he
delighted in him, Mar. 15.27, 28. Mat. 27.35, 43. Because Christ suffered
leaving us an example that we should follow his steps, who did not sin, neither
was guile found in his Mouth, who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when
he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22, 23.

Fourthly, This mystery of love and redemption of Man, is magnified by Christ's
unparallelled indulgence and goodness, that he did not only abase himself unto
the greatest indignities in the flesh, but he does good for evil, he does not
only make an Atonement by his death for the sins of Enemies, but he also
exalts them from the greatest depth of misery, to the highest form of glory,
an union with himself, Father, Angels, and Saints, as it is more fully
expressed elsewhere.

This Doctrine and Truth of Man's Eternal Salvation, so accomplished by Jesus
Christ, is not only given to us, for our everlasting consolation, but also for
our instruction and direction, in Faith* Patience, and new obedience, in our
sojourning state, for although eternal Life, our Redemption, and Salvation is
freely given and procured by his alone merit, nevertheless he makes every man
by a blessing on his Graces, given to him, instrumental of his own Salvation,
we are commanded To work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, and as the
Lord waits to be gracious so he commands and expects to be called upon for all
his Mercies which he intends to bestow upon his People, in that famous
Scripture where he makes a new Covenant, and Promises new and clean heart, and
to pour out his Spirit, though he does it freely, and for his own name and
glory, yet he does not intend his People should be bare Spectators, and only
passive in the receipt of mercies, but that they should be active and
solicitous in the duties of Faith, Patience, New Obedience and Prayer, I will
yet for this says tbe Lord, be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for
them, and seeing all the days of our sojourning here, we must wait until our
change come, and that as our duties are still incumbent upon us, so we are
obnoxious unto temptations and difficulties, and for our help and directions,
steddily to steer our course, we cannot have a more proper mean than to set
Christ before us as a Pattern, who is the Captain and Author of our Salvation,
and that in his Doctrine and Practice.

First, in his Doctrine, his Doctrine is Preaching up Holiness, Patience in
Sufferings, Mutual forbearance, Peaceableness in Losses, Contempt of the World,
Zeal for the Kingdom of God, and Faith in the Providence of God, and under all
Despensations, Mutual Love and Charity and Relief to the Distressed as a Duty
even to Enemies.

His Doctrine is all for Holiness, be ye Holy, as your Heavenly Father is Holy,
Math. 5.48.

Patience in sufferings, Blessed are ye, when Men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and say all manner of Evil against you, for my sake, rejoice and
be exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven, for so Persecuted they
the Prophets which were before you, Math. 5.11, 12. If ye be Reproached for the
Name of Christ, Happy are ye, for the Spirit of Glory and of God, are on you;
on their part he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified, 1 Pet,
4.14. to end.

He teaches mutual forbearance, and not to return evil, but to do good for
evil, ye have heard it said, an Eye for an Eye, etc. but I say unto you, that
you resist not evil with evil* but whosoever shall smite thee on thy Right
Cheek, turn to him the other also, if any Man sue thee at Law, to take away thy
Coat, let him have thy Cloak also, if a Man will compel thee to go with him a
Mile, go with him two, hence we are taught the great Spirit of Meekness,
whereof Christ was the Pattern, and are commanded to bridle our Passionate
Resentments of Injuries done us, Math. 5.38, 39. He Preaches up the Duty of
Charity, and Charitable supplying of the Indigent, give to him that asks
thee, and from him that would borrow of the turn thou not away, Math. 5.43.
Remember them that are in Bonds, as being bound with them, and them which
suffer Adversity, as being your selves also in the Body, Heb. 13.3. What does
it profit if a Man say, he has Faith, and has not Works? can Faith save him?
if a Brother or Sister be Naked and Destitute of daily Food, and one of you say
unto him, depart in peace, be you Clothed, and be you Filled, notwithstanding
you give him nothing James 2.14, 15, 16. of these things which are needful to
the Body, what does it profit? 1 John 3.17. Mortification* if thy Right Eye or
Right Hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee, it is better one of
thy Members perish, than thy whole Body should be cast into Hell, Math. 5.29,
30. Hence we are taught the Subduing and Mortifying of all Lusts of whatsoever
esteem they may be, and as dear to us, as any of our Members, we are to admit
no enjoyment of them, in Competition with true Holiness, and new Obedience. He
Preaches up the Doctrine of Love and Charity to all Men, even to Enemies, you
have heard, that it has been said, love thy Neighbor, and hate thy Enemy; but
I say to you, Love your Enemies, Bless him that Curse you; do good to them that
hate you, pray for them that dispightfully use you, and persecute you, that ye
may be the Children of your Father, which is in Heaven, for he makes his Sun
to rise on the Evil, and on the Good, and the Rain to come down on the Just and
the Unjust, for if you love them that love you, what reward have you? do not
even the Publicans do the same? and if you Salute only your Brethren, what more
do ye than others? but be ye perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect, Math.
5.43. to end.

See that great Doctrine of Mutual Love and Charity, he that says he is in the
Light, and hates his Brother, is in Darkness even until now, he that loves
his Brother, abides in the Light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in
him, but he that Hates his Brother, is in Darkness, and knows not whither he
goes, because the Darkness has blinded his Eyes, 1 John 2. to 18.

We know that we have passed from Death to Life, because we love the Brethren,
he that loves not his Brother, abides in Death, whosoever hates his Brother,
is a Murderer, and ye know, that no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him,
hereby perceive we the Love of God; because he has laid down his Life for us,
and we ought to lay down our Life for the Brethren, but whosoever has this
Worlds good, and shuts up his Bowels from the Brother, how dwells the Love
of God in him? 1 John 3.14, 15, 16, 17. Let us Love one another, for Love is of
God, and every one that Loves, is born of God, and knows God, he that Loves
not, knows not God, for God is Love, in this was manifested the Love of God
toward us, because God sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we
might live through him, herein is the Love of God Manifested, not that we loved
him, but that he Loved us, and sent his Son to be a propitiation for our Sins,
if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another, if we love one another,
God dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us, and we have known and
believed the love that God has to us, God is love, and he that dwells in
love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 Jo, 4.7, to end.

A New Commandment I give unto you, that you love one another, as I have loved
you, that you love one another, Jo. 13.34. from all which we are instructed of
the Nature and Extent of Charity, that it does not consist, only in naked and
bare profession of Friendship, good wishes, and pretended Respects, but in the
Bowels of Tenderness, Compassion, Simpathy, and suitable Supplies, to the
necessities of others, that Charity is not to be straightened and confined to
Relations, Friends, Benefactors, and these in Amity, and persuasion with us,
but is to be extended to Enemies, as well as Friends, and to all whose
Necessities call for our help and assistance in any respect, toward their
Relief.

He Preaches up the Contempt, and Denyedness to the World, lay not up Treasure
on Earth, where the Moth Cankereth, and Thieves break thorough and steal, but
seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, then all these things
shall be added thereunto, and lay up store for your selves in Heaven, Math.
6.19, 20, 32, 33. See Christ's own Discourse of the Rich Man in the Gospel, that
it is easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle than for a Rich Man
to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Math. 19.23, 24. See the Parable of Dives,
who received his good things in this Life, and is eternally Tormented, and
Lazarus who was pinched with Want, Hunger, Cold, and Diseases on Earth, was
received into everlasting Happiness, Luke 16, 19. to end.

See the Parable of the Rich Husbandman, who took anxious care for his Earthly
Store, but made no Provision for Eternal Life, but God said to him, thou Fool,
this Night will I require thy Soul at thy Hands, then whose shall all these
things be, which thou have provided? so is he who lays up store for himself,
and is not Rich toward God, Luke 12, 16. to 22.

See the woe the Lord of Life pronounces against the Rich, Woe to you that are
Rich, for ye have received your Consolation, Luke 6, 24.

And to forward our Mortification to the World, let us consider the Advice
given by the Holy Apostle, Love not the World, nor the things of the World, for
if any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him, for all that
is in the World, the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of
Life is not of the Father, but of the World, 1 Jo. 2.15, 16, 17.

And the World passes away and the Lusts thereof, but he that does the Will of
God, abides for ever. 1 Jo. 2.15, 16, 17. The Holy Apostle James, does
eminently discover the danger of loving the World, know ye not that the
Friendship of the World is enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a
Friend of the World is the Enemy of God, James 4.4.

Let us further consider the Apostle Paul's Character of the World, we brought
nothing into the World with us, and it is certain we shall carry nothing out,
and having Food and Raiment, let us be therewith content, but they that will be
Rich, fall into many Temptations, and a Snare and many foolish and hurtful
Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and Perdition, for the Love of Money is
the Root of all Evil, which while some have coveted after, they have erred from
the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many Sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.7, 8, 9,
10.

This Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, who is the only Wisdom, Light, and truth it
self, teaches his People to a dependence on himself, by Faith and Submission
in all Providence, and as in the foregoing Scriptures, we are taught the
emptiness of all other supports besides himself, and the emptiness of all other
Enjoyments, his purpose therein, is to wean our Hearts from thence, and fix
them on himself, by Faith and Submission in all Providence: he tells us, that
a Man's Life consists not in the abundance of what a Man has, in the
foregoing Instance of the Rich Husbandman, and that Man lives not by Bread
alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God, this was the
Doctrine of Moses to the People of Israel, when in the Wilderness they murmured
for want of Bread, and when they were shut up from expectation of help, and all
probabilities of supply, were hid from their Eyes, he minds them of the great
wonders God had wrought for them, in their Deliverance from Pharaohs Servitude
and designing to wind up their thoughts to God by Faith, that he would as well
relieve them in that straight, as well as he had done from under former
difficulties, and therefore tell them, Man lives not by Bread alone, but by
every Word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God, Deu. 8.3. Implying that the
sole pleasure of God, influences all the Creatures, and that God in his
Omnipotence and Wisdom, is not confined to the Methods and Appearances of Men,
but can in his own way, accomplish his purpose at his own pleasure, his
Blessing on the Creature can Augment them, to such a Pitch as he designs, he
can make a little Pot of Oil, swell to many Barrels, when he designs to
manifest his Power, and good Will to Man, 2 Kings 4. to 8. he can make one or
two single Meals, feed and refresh for forty Days and forty Nights, he can make
five Loaves and two small Fishes, feed five thousand Men, and cause the
Fragments left, to exceed the first bulk, Luke 9.12. to 18. he can open the
Windows of Heaven, and give a Blessing, so as no room is for it to be stowed,
Mal. 3.10. he Clothes the Lillies, and feeds the Ravens, without their Care or
Industry, so that Faith and Submission to his Blessed Will and Care will answer
all things. He it is that Commands, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall
be opened, whatsoever ye ask the Father in my Name, believe ye have it, and ye
shall receive it, Math. 7.7. to 13.

Now as Christ's Doctrine is full and without Parallel, so his Sufferings are
without example, as being without Sin, not only against God, but upright also
and perfect, so as he could not offend against Man's Law, and that all his
sufferings were voluntary, of pure love, not for Friends, but for Sinners, and
Enemies, wherefore such as believe in him, and have the Hope of eternal Life,
ought cheerfully and patiently to endure Temptations, and bear their
Afflictions in the Flesh, and willingly take up and bear the Cross, and more
paraicularly for these Reasons.

First, To bear the Cross, is Christ's Command.

Secondly, For this we have the Example of Christ his Prophets, Saints and
Martyrs.

Thirdly, We have his Manifold promises of Assistance.

Fourthly, The Cross is the inevitable Path and Way, by which he leads his
People to the Kingdom of Heaven.

Fifthly, It is the means by which he fits his People by Holiness, for that
eternal Union and Communion with himself.

Sixthly, The Reward of Eternal Life at the end of the Race, is exceeding great.

First, Patient suffering and bearing the Cross is Christ's Command: Christ
Jesus, the Word of God, by whom is forgiveness of Sins, and Redemption through
his Blood, who made our Peace through the Blood of his Cross, Preaches this
Doctrine, come unto me all ye that Labor* and are Heavy Laden, and I will give
you rest, take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am Meek and Lowly in
Mind, my Yoke is easy and my Burden is Light, Math. 11.28, 29, 30.

When he sends out his Disciples to Instruct and Convert the World, he tells
them, he sends them as Sheep in the midst of Woolves, he Commands them to be
wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves, and that they shall be brought before
Kings and Governors, and hated of all Men for his sake, and that they could not
expect better Entertainment than he their Master, that they must deny Father
and Mother, and all other Relations and things dear to them for his sake, and
if they loved their Lives, or any thing else better than him, they should loose
them, and he that takes not up his Cross, and follows not him, was not
worthy of him, Math. 10.10. to end.

This also has been the strain of all the Prophets and Apostles, to Preach up
Patient bearing of the Cross, to you it is given, says the Apostle, not only
to believe but also to suffer Phi. 1.27. to 31. let us go forth therefore,
says the same Apostle unto him bearing his Reproach. Heb. 13.12. to 16. Count
it all Joy says the Apostle James, when you fall into diverse Temptations,
knowing that the Trial of your Faith works Patience, but let Patience have
her perfect works, that ye may be entire wanting nothing, James 1. to 6. take
the Prophets, says the same Apostle, for an example of suffering, affliction,
and Patience, ye have heard of the Patience of Job, and have seen the end of
the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender Mercy, Jam. 5.7. to 12.
For even hereunto are we called, says the Apostle Peter; because Christ also
suffered for us, leaving us an Example* that ye should follow his Steps, who
did not Sin, neither was guile found in his Mouth, who when he was reviled,
reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to
him that Judges Righteously, 1 Pet. 2. to end. chapter 3, 14, 25.

Whose own self bore our sins in his own Body on the Tre^, that we being Dead
to sin, should cleave unto Righteousness, by whose Stripes we are healed: see
further of this, 1 Pet. 4.12. to end.

Secondly, We have the Sufferings of Christ, and his Prophets, Apostles, Saints
and Martyrs for our Examples, the Holy Scriptures give an account of the
Opprobious usage of Christ, his patient Sufferings, his Ignominious death, who
willingly gave up his Life for Enemies, see this more particularly under four
heads, elsewhere. These Holy Scriptures, Isa. 51.6. chap. 53. all. Psalm 22.
all. John 14.31. Mat. 27. all. give the fuller history of the Particulars. The
whole book of Holy writ, offers to our view, a large Catalogue of the
sufferings of Prophets, Saints, and Martyrs, with their patient deportment
therein, how patiently did Moses the mildest of Men bear the revilings of Aaron
and Miriam, and prayed for Miriam, Numb. 12. so the Lord healed her? How humble
was David under his Son Absolom's Usurpation of his Crown, and defiling his
Wives in the sight of the Sun, when he and all the People went out of the City
barefoot, weeping, and ashes on their heads, when they fled from Absalom? If I
shall find favor in his sight, says he, he will bring me again, and show me
both it (meaning the Ark of God in which he much delighted) and his Habitation,
but if he say I have no delight in thee, lo here am I, let him do with me what
seems good in his sight, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. With the like humility and
patience, he bore the cursings and revilings of Shimei, and David said, let him
curse, because the Lord has said, Curse David, who then shall say why have
thou done it? it may be the Lord will look upon mine affliction, and that the
Lord will require me good for his cursing this day, 2 Samuel 16.7, to 13.

How humbly did Hezekiah lay himself, and Rabsecahs Railing and Blaspheming
Letter before the Lord, at the Siege of Samaria? and see the event thereof by
Gods wonderful delivering of the City by his own immediate hand, 2 Kin. 19. How
did Holy Job the mirror of Patience and Innocence, in his great affliction
abase himself before the Lord, when his Eyes were opened, when he could justify
himself to Man but not before God, I have heard of thee by the hearing of the
Ear, but now mine Eyes see thee, wherefore I abhor my self in Dust and Ashes,
Job 42. to 7.

How resolutely did the three Children with Faith and Patience, submit to the
fiery Furnace for the honor of God, and his Truth? Our God is able to deliver
us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand, but
if not, be is known unto th^e O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor
worship the Image that thou have set up, Dan. 3.16, 17, 18. how courageously
did Daniel worship the Living God, when forbid upon pain of being cast into the
Lions Den? and we see what glorious deliverance he had, Dan. 6. Holy Stephen
courageously and patiently endured Martyrdom, and kneeling down prayed for his
Enemies, Father forgive them, they know not what they are doing, Act. 7.60.

The Holy Apostles were made spectacles of Men and Angels, God has set forth
us the Apostles last, as spectacles of Men and Angels, and to the World, 1 Cor.
4.9. The Cross of Christ was the glory of Paul, and should be of all Men, God
forbid that I should glory in any thing save in the Cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14.

See the instances of the Apostles sufferings, we are troubled on every side,
yet not distressed, we are perplexed, but not to despair, persecuted, but not
forsaken, cast down, but not destroyed, always bearing about in the body, the
dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus, might be made manifest in
our body, for we which live are always delivered to death for Jesus sake, that
the Life of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh. 2 Cor, 4.8, 9 10,
11.

See a farther instance of the Apostles suffering, but in all things approving
our selves as the Ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions,
necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in
labor, in watching, in fastings, in pureness of knowledge, by long sufferings,
by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by honor and dishonor, by
evil report and good report, as deceivers and yet true, as unknown yet well
known, as dying and yet behold we live, as chastned and yet not killed, as
sorrowful yet always rejoying, as poor yet making many rich, as having nothing
and yet possessing all things, 2 Corinthians 6.4, to 11.

Of the Jews, five times received I forty stripes, save one, thrice was I
beaten with Rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered Shipwreck, a Night and a
Day I have been in the Deep, in peril by Water, in perils by Robbers, in peril
by mine own Countrymen, in perils by the Heathen, in perils in the City, in
perils in the Country, in danger in the Sea, in perils by false Brethren, often
in weariness, painfulness and watching, often in hunger and thirst, often in
cold and nakedness, 2 Cor* 11.24. to 28.

See the Instances of the Churches sufferings and great afflictions, almost
incredible, and by Nature without Grace intolerable, her sore runs in the
night, her friends not only left her, but dealt treacherously with her, and
became her Enemies, the Enemy spread his hand on all her pleasant things, her
people have given their pleasant things for Bread, no sore like my sore,
desolate and faint, delivered into their hands from whom she was not able to
rise, she was trodden as in a Wine press, Priests and Elders gave up the Ghost
for Famine, Children and Sucklings swoun away in the Street, and Women eat
their Children of a Span long, Enemies hiss and wag their Head, and say we have
swallowed her up, this is the day we looked for, and yet in all this, she can
with patience and submission say, Why should the living Man complain, man
suffers for his Sin, all this is less than our iniquities do deserve, Lam. 1.
all, chap. 2. all. And thus justifies the Lord and applies to him by Prayer
and Confession of Sin for Mercy, the Holy Apostles also rejoice in their
afflictions, that they are counted worthy to suffer for the testimony of Jesus,
and say, in all this through Grace, We are more than Conquerours, and God
forbid that we should glory in any thing, save in the Cross of Christ.

Thirdly, Promises of assistance: as the greatest evils are alleviate, and
greatest extremities are lessened, by hope, and help of means and relief, and
as the most diseased persons, in the most chronical and malignant Distempers,
are eased, composed, and half cured, by the sight of a famous and approved
Physician, and by his assurance or opinion that the Distemper they labor under
is curable, or that the Distemper which he can easily cure, will not only work
it self out, but will also cure and cleanse the body, of more gross and
contagious humors, which are more dangerous and infectious of the blood, as
Agues often cure Hectique and malignant Fevers, which more invade and annoy
the brain and endanger the Life; so the blessed Lord Jesus Christ, being the
great Shepherd and Physician of Souls, in whom the Godhead dwells bodily, not
only knows as being omniscient, but also has all power both in Heaven and
Earth given to him: has not only the means in his own hand, but by his
Promises has engaged himself, by his faithfulness, that he will heal, help,
and deliver his People, therefore faith in the Promises of God, does and should
uphold his afflicted and discouraged People, and these Promises are sure,
numerous, and by Divine Wisdom and Love, suited and proportioned to the
exigence of his People in all cases, either in Spiritual or Temporal maladies;
and these Promises answer to the twofold estate or condition of Man, as he is
either under Spiritual or Temporal Diseases or Temptations.

And first a Spiritual, and as the Soul is more excellent than the Body, so the
diseases of the Soul are more dangerous, grievous and uneasy, The Spirit of a
Man can bear his Infirmities, but a wounded Spirit who can bear? as all the
motions of the body are disordered by the distemper of the Spirit, so greatest
care should be taken to cure and remove the disorders thereof, and this is the
great consolation of the diseased in Spirit, that their Physician has cures
paramount to the cures of all others, as being in himself omnipotent, to whom
alone is given the faculty of healing of Soul distempers.

The Spirit of the Lord is upon me* because the Lord has anointed me to preach
good tidings to the meek, he has sent me to bind up the broken hearted, and to
proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that
are bound, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of
vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn, to appoint unto them that
mourn in Zion, to give unto them Beauty for Ashes, the oil of Joy for Mourning,
the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness, that they might be called
Trees of Righteousness, the planting of the Lord, that he might be glorified,
Isa. 61.1, 2, 3.

And see hence what great encouragement the Saints have to wait on God, for the
accomplishments of his Promises, who is faithful and cannot fail; the Church
and People of God, say in the same Scripture, I will rejoice in the Lord, my
Soul shall be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the Garments of
Salvation, he has covered ^e with the Robe of Righteousness, as a Bridegroom
decketh himself with Ornaments, and as a Bride adorneth her self with her
Jewels, Isa. 61.10.

By which we see his Promises are not only large, but he makes them effectual
in the Christians Improvement thereof to their own comfort: these Promises may
be branched forth answerable to the several Spiritual Distempers in these three
Heads.

First, Under Spiritual darkness and desertion.

Secondly, Under anguish of Spirit for heinous Sins.

Thirdly, For the multitude of Sins or under Relapses.

And as to these three states or conditions of Spiritual Distempers, see the
manifold particular and apposite Promises of God under these Distempers.

The second Disease to which Gods Promises are annexed, is under Temporary
afflictions and trials, which though he could easy and instantly remove,
nevertheless as a wise and just Physician, judiciously consults the Patients
Distemper, and finds that one single Dose or Potion is not enough, but that a
course of Physic is absolutely necessary to cure the Distemper, and as he
studies neither to gratify the Patients present distempered Palate, nor his
uneasy humor, but minds the most suitable Medicines, proper method of Cure,
order of Diet and Exercise under the Cure, he confines him to retirement and
abstinence, as well from the luxuriant eating and drinking, and the too great
liberty of former converse, as the causes and rise of his distemper, so that
tender Physician of Souls the Lord Jesus Christ, takes the same method of
curing and relieving his afflicted under their distempers by afflictions, and
as he knows the humors, on which the Physic is to work, that it must have
liberty and time for operation, and that the Patient must needs be sick and
anxious for a Cordial; as when a Surgeon has bound up a wound and applied
suitable Plasters pinching and cauthorizing, which necessarily in order to
cure must annoy, and disquiet the patient, that he will importune the Doctor
for a Cordial, to abate his sickness, and the Surgeon to remove the
Plaster; nevertheless they wisely considering, that giving a Cordial, or
removing the Plasters before its time, hinders cure, increases more and
grosser humors, therefore gives no other compliance, but advice of Patience,
and assurance of cure, on the due operation of the means; so this great
Physician of Souls, though in all their afflictions he is afflicted, he will
take his own time and way for their relief, and affords no other Cordial for
the present, but that of his universal promises, which are extensive to all
circumstances of their several cases and conditions, which may be branched out
in these heads.

First, Sickness. Secondly, Imprisonments. Thirdly, Poverty. Fourthly,
Desertion, and forsaking of friends. Fifthly, Under Slanders and Reproaches, in
all which cases the Lords promises are not only full and numerous, but also
peculiarly apposite, and especially calculated by him to all and every of the
particular cases, which is more expressly set down before.

Fourthly, The fourth encouragement for the People of God to bear afflictions
patiently, is that the Cross of Christ is the Path way, that Christ has
appointed his People to walk to Heaven, for if you be without chastisement,
whereof all are partakers, then are you Bastards and no Sons, Heb. 12.5, to 12.
Woe is me for my hurt, my wound is grievous, but I said I must bear it, Jer.
10.19, 24. O Lord correct me not in thine anger but in judgment, least thou
bring me to nothing, I am with thee says the Lord to save thee, though I make
a full end of all Nations whether I have scattered thee, I will not make a full
end of thee, but correct thee in measure, and not leave thee altogether
unpunished, Jer. 30.11.

And this is Christ's Legacy to his followers, Brothers shall deliver up
Brothers to death, the Fathers shall rise against the Children, and Children
against their Parents, and cause them to be put to Death, and ye shall be hated
of all men for my sake, Mat. 10.6. to 40. and if any man will be my Disciple he
must deny himself, lay down his Life* take up his Cross daily, and follow me,
if any man suffer as a Christian let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify
God on this behalf, for the time is come, that Judgment must begin at the House
of God, and if it first begin at us what shall the end be of them that obey not
the Gospel of God? if the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly
appear? wherefore let them that suffer according to the Will of God, commit the
keeping of their Souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator, 1 Pet.
4.15, 16, 17, 18. For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he
also spair not thee: behold therefore the goodness and severity of God, to them
that fell severity, but toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his
goodness; otherwise thou shall be cut off, Romans 11.21, 22.

Is it not the foretold Lot of Gods People, that through tribulation and
persecution they must enter into the Kingdom of God? and the Disciple cannot
expect better entertainment than the master, if they have called the Master
Beelzebub, how much more they of his household? Mat. 10.24, 25.

Fifthly, The furnace of affliction is the means, by which the wise contriver
of our Salvation, fits his People for these eternal Mansions of Glory, for as
the Goldsmith does purify his metal by fire and furnace, to bring it to the
pure and true touch, and as the Joiner by Plain and Chissel fashioneth his
Wood, for his Mortice, even so the Lord who is of purer Eyes than can behold
Iniquity, by his Fatherly chastisements, of trials and afflictions, does polish
and fit his peoples Hearts and Affections, and by blasting the glory of humane
enjoyments, he raises their desires to the heavenly enjoyments, and fits and
fashions them with suitable qualifications of holiness, and having experienced
the vanity, emptiness, and uncertainty of all earthly enjoyments, their
affections are wholly raised unto, and set upon God alone. The Prodigal had
never thought of the plenty, wealth, or glory of his Fathers House, or of
returning thither, had it not been that he was pinched and under straits. The
Church had not thought of returning to her first love, had it not been, that
her Corn and Wine, and the delicacies by which she entertained her self with,
and lived voluptuously, were taken away, Hos. 2.

The sixth thing to encourage Believers patiently to bear the Cross, is the
great prize of Eternal Life already spoken of.

But here it may be objected, that the Doctrine of mortification, self-denial,
and contempt of the World, is a comfortless, and melancholy Doctrine, and
Heaven seems only to be obtained on hard and dear terms, and that the necessity
of loosing all for Heaven, will encourage the neglect of Heaven, and induce men
rather to take Solomon's advice, in taking pleasure and delight in the
Creatures, and therein to comfort themselves, and thereby they will be the less
anxious for Heaven, Ecclesiast. 11.9.

Secondly, This Doctrine seems contrary to the Scriptures, which promises
halcyon days to the Church, and great Honor, Wealth, and prosperity, and that
Kings shall be her nursing Fathers, and Queens her nursing Mothers, and that
the Saints shall Judge the Earth, how then can this consist with the contempt
of the World.

Thirdly, This Doctrine seems desparagable, and contrary to the Holy, Just, and
good Nature of God, to treat the best of his Friends and People with pinches,
Difficulties and Contempt, and to suffer the wicked to enjoy their full
delight, and amongst Men, it will be thought great ingratitude, to treat the
best of Friends, worse than the worst of Enemies.

As it is most certain from experience, and History from the beginning of the
World, and coming of Christ, the People of God have been under the worst of
Temporary Circumstances, so it is likewise proved in the foregoing Discourse,
that this is their appointed Lot, and this has also been the stumbling of the
Saints, and particularly to David, the wicked's constant oppulency, quiet, and
prosperity, made him much amazed, Psalms 10. Psalm. 17.9. to 15. Ps. 37. Ps.
73.3. to 17. Jer. 12.1.

See what Holy Job the Patient, and Wise, says on this Subject, The Wicked
become Old, they are mighty in Power, their Seed is Established in their Sight,
and Offspring in their Eyes, their Houses are safe from fear, the wrath of God
is not upon them, their Bull gendreth and fails not, their Cow Calveth, and
casts not her Calf, they send forth their little ones like a Flock, and their
Children dance, they take the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the
Organ, they spend their Days in Wealth, and in a Moment go down to their Grave,
wherefore they say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of
thy war, what is the Almighty, that we should serve him, and what profit have
we, if we Pray unto him? Job 21.7. to 16.

And the same Language was in use in the time of the Prophet Malachy. And ye
said it is in vain to serve God, and what profit have we, if we keep his
Commandments* and Ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the
Lord of Hosts? and now we call the proud Happy, and they that work wickedness,
are set up, yea, even they that tempt God, are delivered, Mal. 3.14.

For the full clearing and answering these Objections, let us consider the
things in Competition and Weigh them in the Balance of the Sanctuary, and
these are chiefly two.

First, The Enjoyments of this sensual Life and Being, which are Temporary.

Secondly, Things Spiritual, which are Eternal.

First, As God of his Heavenly Wisdom, made the World for his own glory, and by
himself upholds the same, and gives to whom he pleases, what portion thereof
he will, so it is at his pleasure to recall what he gives when he will, so
that Man is but a Sojourner in Earth, and Tenant at Will, for Life, and all
Human Enjoyments, and Man's claim thereunto is extinguishable at his pleasure.

Secondly, Let us consider the vast disproportion in value, between things
Temporal, and things Spirital: Solomon the Wisest, and of greatest experience
has given us this Testimony on Record, that all Human Enjoyments, are but
vanity and vexation of Spirit, Ecl. 2. all. The Apostle Paul in the foregoing
Scriptures, shows the emptiness and vanity of all, that may be challenged for
good or great in the World, that all perish in the using, 1 Timothy 6.7. to 17.

The Holy Evangelist John, gives us the like account, 1 John 2.15, 16, 17. so
that the whole that can be pretended to in this World, is some present
possession of Worlds vanities, attended with uneasiness, and discontent of
Mind, uncertainty in the Enjoyment, all being subject to change, at the pleasure
of God.

Thirdly, Let us consider the Nature, Value, and Continuance of things
Spiritual; things Spiritual literally understood, imply something above the
sensual Appetite and Perception, and only to be apprehended, and enjoyed by the
Spirit, Mind, or Soul of Man, the Nobler part, and that is Eternal and not
seen, as described by the Apostle, while we look not after things which are
seen, but after things which are not seen; for that which is seen is Temporal,
but that which is not seen, is Eternal, 2 Cor. 4.18.

In the next place we are to consider, what are these Spiritual things which
Transcend, and are above sensual Enjoyments, about which the Soul is only and
principally exercised, which may be briefly comprised in these four.

First, Jesus Christ the Son of God and Savior of the World.

Secondly, All Spiritual Endowments and Graces given to the Saints, and
procured to them by Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, The Sanctified Use of all Temporal and Spiritual Mercies bestowed on
the Saints, while in time.

Fourthly, Eternal Life obtained, and freely bestowed on the Saints by Jesus
Christ.

As to the first; God of his own free Will, having Created Man in Holiness and
Righteousness, according to his own Image, Genesis 3.6. Scripture and sad
experience inform us, that our first Parents, and we in them, have fallen from
the Original State of Innocence, in which they were Created, and thereby the
Venom of their sin. has infected and depraved Man's Nature at such a rate, that
there being a necessity for an Atonement, and satisfaction to Gods Justice for
Man's Sin; And of a Mediator between God and Man, to restore Man to the pure and
unspotted Image of God, and it being impossible for Men or Angels, to make such
Atonement, or to procure a Mediator; The free Love of God, raises one up even
Jesus Christ the Son of God, and express Image of his Father, to take upon him
the shape of a Servant; and though he knew no sin, to become sin for us; so
that by taking upon him our Nature, and in our shape and place submitting to
the Justice of God on the Cross, has paid the Ransom for us, and restored
fallen man to the Image of God, in Righteousness and True Holiness, 1 Cor.
15.21, 22, 47, 48.

The first Man is of the Earth, Earthy; the Second Man is the Lord from Heaven;
and as is the Earthy, so are they which are Earthy, and as is the Heavenly, so
are they which are Heavenly, and as we have born the Image of the Earthy, we
also shall bear the Image of the Heavenly; and thus Christ having paid the
Ransom for Sinners, he offers to all Men the free Market of Salvation, Pardon
and Eternal Life; for God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not Perish, but have Eternal Life,
John 3.15, 16, 17. For when we were without strength, Christ dyed for us; when
we were yet Sinners and Enemies, Romans 5.6, 7, 8.

But it may be Objected that Christ had a Body, and Man's Nature, and the
Resurrection from the Dead, seems things under the Comprehension of Sense and
Feeling.

Answer; Although Christ had, and took on him Man's Nature, nevertheless the
Mystery of his Incarnation, Resurrection, Ascension, Communication of Garces
and Eternal Life, procured by him, must be apprehended by Faith, and can never
be reached by Human Sense; the Natural Man knows not the things of God,
neither indeed can do, because they are spiritually Discerned.

The Second thing in the Treasury of Spiritual Mercies, are the various gifts
and graces spiritually bestowed by God, to believers in Jesus Christ, He that
spared not his own Son, but freely gave him up for us all, how shall he not
with him also, freely give us all things? To. 8.32. These choice and spiritual
Mercies may be classed up in these three.

First, Such as are absolutely necessary to Salvation, and the actual laying
hold on Jesus Christ, and applying him in his Merits, Sufferings, Resurrection
and Glorification, as the only Mediator between God and Man, such is Faith, for
without Faith, it is impossihle to please God, Heb. 11.6.

Faith is that Grace whereby Christ is owned, and upon which Salvation is
promised, in the foregoing Scripture, This is that grace that unites and
incorporates Sinners to God, for ye are all the Children of God by Faith in
Christ Jesus, this is that grace which gives Life, Sap, and being to
Christians, Now the Just shall live by Faith, but if any Man draw back, my Soul
has no Delight in him, Heb. 10.38. This is the only operative and effectual
grace, where is boasting then? ^t is excluded, by what Law? by Works? Nay, by
the Law of Faitb, therefore we conclude, that Man is justified by Faith,
without the Deeds of the Law, Romans 3.23.

Although this of Faith be the chief essential grace* on which the being of a
Christian depends, this flows from the spirit of God, from whom are all good
and perfect gifts, and by him are wrought in us, for by grace are ye saved,
through Faith, and not of your selves, it i^ the gift of God, Ephesians. 2 8.

The second grace is Holiness, without which also it is impossible to please
God, be ye Holy, as your Heavenly Father is Holy, who is of purer Eyes, than
can behold Iniquity, this grace qualifieth Sinners to resemble God in Purity,
Innocence, and Righteousness, Blessed are the pure in Spirit, for they shall
see God, Math^ 5.8. and thus it behooves Christians to be, for that Christ
having taken on him our Nature, to purify it from all the stains of sin, he
makes all his Children partakers of the Divine Nature and designing to assemble
them in the New Jerusalem. where no unclean thing can enter, they must all be
Holy, and Clothed with Righteousness.

This essential Duty is Recommended and Commanded to us in Scriptures, we are
all his Workmanship Created in Christ to good Works, which God has before
ordained, that we should walk in them, and are built upon the Foundation of the
Apostles, and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner Stone, in
whom all the Building fitly Framed together, grows unto an Holy Temple in the
Lord, Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 20, 21.

And that ye put off concerning the former Conversation, the Old Man which is
Corrupt, according to the Deceitful Lusts, and that you put on the new Man,
Created according to Holiness, Ephesians. 4.21. to end.

If ye be risen with Christ, seek these things which are above, where Christ
sits at the Right Hand of God, set your Affections on things above, not on
things on Earth, for ye are Dead, and your Life is hid with Christ in God, when
Christ who is your Life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in
glory. Mortify therefore your Members which are on Earth; and put on the New
Man, which is renewed in knowledge, aften the Image of him who Created it. Col.
3.1, 2, 3, 4.

They that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh, but they that
are after the Spirit, the things of the Spirit, to be Carnally minded is Death,
but to be Spiritually minded, is Life and Peace, because the Carnal Man is
emnity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can
be; so these that are in the flesh, cannot please God, and if Christ be in you,
the Body is Dead because of Sin, but the Spirit is Life, because of
Righteousness; for if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye, but if through the
Spirit, ye mortify the Deeds of the flesh, ye shall live; for as many as are
led by the Spirit, are the Sons of God, Romans 8.5, 7, 10, 13, 14. and every one
that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, as he is pure, 1 John 3.3.

The third Special grace, coming from this great Magazine of Heavenly Store, is
Mortification, although there is such affinity and connection amongst spiritual
graces, that they are not perfect nor complete, but when in one Chain, and
joined together, yet this grace has some thing peculiar in it, as being that
special piece of Accomplishment, which frames the Soul to an immediate closing
with Christ.

Mortification is either the curbing or subduing superfluous excrescences, or
growth of superfluous Humors in the Body, or like proud flesh about a wound
under Cure or the total destroying of that which has the Pre-eminence, and may
destroy a better Life, as the reigning prevalent Lusts of the flesh, to the
Destruction of the Soul; in both which Senses spiritual Mortification may be
taken; for as the Vine and other Fruit Trees, are oppressed by superfluous
Wood, so as the Sap is exhausted in feeding so many superfluous Bows, which may
bring forth Leaves, weak Blossoms, but little, or at best bad Fruit, because
not sufficiently Nourished with Moisture from the Root, but the Root being
Disburthened from these excrescences or superfluous Boughs, the Root is able to
communicate moisture to the remaining part, and the Tree produces more and
better Fruit; even so when the affections and delight of the Soul, are spent
upon the Lusts, and sensual Pleasures of the Flesh, the Soul and Spiritual
graces are starved; and whether for want of suitab e Encouragement, and
therefore the Great and Wise Husbandman, and Shepherd of the Soul, by his
Chastisements, lops of the superfluous delights, and Lusts of the Carnal Heart,
either by blasting the Objects of our Lusts and Carnal Delights, or assists his
People in this great Duty, to mortify and wean their Affections from these
Objects, and be more fruitful to Eternal Life, by fixing their Hearts on Christ
Jesus. Now as all Christians are Members of Christ, and must be ingrafted in
him, John 15.1. they must be suited for that Ingraftment; and as the Joyner
frames his wood, each piece to answer to another, and cuts it till it fit* and
as the skilful Chyrurgeon by his powder, or Incision cuts off the proud Flesh
about the wound, until it be clean; and as the Gardner frames the Scyon for the
stock, even so must the Soul be ordered, before it can be ingrafted into that
spiritual Root, Christ Jesus.

In this Spiritual Operation, these three things are considerable.

First, Wherein it consists.

Secondly, The necessity of the Cure.

Thirdly, The means whereby this Cure is wrought.

As it must be agreed unto, that all Christians must be renewed, Rooted and
built in Christ Jesus, being the chief corner Stone, If any Man be in Christ,
he is a New Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17.

In this is first the cutting off what is superfluous.

Secondly, The grafting the Soul into the New Root, Christ Jesus.

As to the first, it is the Custom of skilful Chyrurgeons, in cutting any Ulcer
or Ulcerated Member, to make a full enquiry into the habit, and disposition of
the Patients Body, and Symptoms of the Grievance, and some times in his
Operation purges, and at other times he Ministers Cordials, to prevent
faintings, and often times he renders the Patient insensible of the pain by
sleep, or otherwise; and before he begins his Cure, the better to be informed
where the Malady lies, if it be a Stone, he uses some Instrument to search
it; if a Wound he cleanses about the Wound, and when he has made these
Preparations, he makes Incision without regard of the Patients complaining of
pain, until he has finished his Work; so in this Work of Mortification, a
Christian must do these three things.

First, He must make a full and impartial Examination of himself.

Secondly, He must prepare the Soul for the Cure, he must proceed and go on
with the Work without partiality, or Indulgence to any sin.

First, Examination in which the Thoughts and the Objects thereof on which they
are most exercised, and wherein they most delight, are to be inquired into, for
as the thoughts and affections are so is the whole Man, therefore he must bring
them to the line, and to the plummet of Gods Law, to the Law, and to the
Testimony, if ye walk not according to this Rule, it is because there is no
light in you, Is. 8.20.

To be Carnally minded is Death, but to be Spiritually minded, is Life and
Peace, and they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh, but
they that are after the spirit, do mind the things of the spirit, for that the
flesh is Enmity against God, To. 8.5, 6.7, 8. So that here by the Word of God,
we are to examine and judge, and in the Work of Mortification to take special
care to get the thoughts, and affections, which are Carnal and Enmity against
God by Nature, to be weaned from the Carnal Objects, and placed on Christ, and
the felicities in him, for ye are dead, and your Life is hid with Christ in
God, provide your selves bags with wax not old, a Treasure in Heaven which
fails not for where your Treasures are, there will your Hearts be also, Luke
12.31, to 35. So the Christian being dead to this World, and his Life hid with
Christ in God, like the Apostle Paul, in whom I am Crucified to the World, and
the World to me, nevertheless, I live, but not I, but Christ that lives in me,
and the life that I live in the flesh, is by the Faith of the Son of God, who
loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20. his delight was in Heaven, and
not in the splendour or vanities of this Life; so that the chief part of
Mortification, is to wean the affections from Carnal things, and to raise,
elevate, and place them on things above, and as the thoughts and affections are
to be looked unto, even so are all the words and actions of a Man, and if for
every idle word and enormous action, we must answer, how much more are we
concerned to search into, and Mortify the Corrupt Fountains from whence flow
such Corrupt and sour Grapes?

This Examination must be very thorough, and impartial, into every word, and
every action, with all the lightning Circumstances and Aggravations thereof.

This Examination also must be attended with a Godly sorrow, and a hearty
Repentance, like that Repentance not to be repented of; for godly sorrow
works Repentance to Salvation, not to be repented of, but the sorrow of the
World works death, and our Repentance should be such as the Apostle
Describes, behold the self same thing that ye sorrow after a godly sort, what
carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your selves, yea, what
indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea,
what Revenge? and this is true Mortification, never to think of old Sins and
Corruptions, but with Indignation and Abhorrence, as is more fully explained
under the particular Head of Repentance.

Secondly, A second thing considerable in the work, is a due preparation; this
being no easy task, no less difficult, than the divorcing Old Friends, Lovers,
and Acquaintances, and the breaking of Old inured Friendship; therefore the
Soul must have this preparative; he must be under the Conviction of a
necessity, either of perishing eternally, or be separate from the Lusts of the
flesh. If any Man be in Christ, he is a new Creature, Old things are done away.
I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman; every Branch in me that
bears not Fruit, he takes away, John 15.1, 2. Now under this Conviction, of
the necessity of having Old Superfluous Lusts, and Carnal desires to be cut off
and purged away, or the Soul everlastingly to perish how should not the Soul be
wise, and condescend to the Divorce, and say, what have I any more to do with
Idols? does not the great Physician of Souls tell us, it is better that one
Member perish, though never so dear, or desirable to the flesh, than that the
whole Body and Soul should be cast into Hell, which will follow inevitably, if
not divorced from Lust, and be renewed in Christ? Mat. 5.20, 30.

A Second preparation is, to consider the great advantages will accrue by this
Divorce of Lusts; such who are thus Divorced, shall be made Sons and Heirs of
God with Christ, John 17.22, 23. and shall have all things Rev. 21.7. When lopt
off from the World, they shall be united unto God in Christ Jesus, their short
sufferings, and parting with the Lusts of the World, shall work for them an
exceeding and an eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18.

They shall have treasure in Heaven instead of, and in exchange of Earthly
Riches.

Their Life shall be saved in losing of it, and lost in saving of it, Luke 9
23, 24, 25. Who then would not part with uncertain Riches for Heavenly
Treasure, with a rotten Member for a sound Body, a paltry pleasure for Eternal
happiness?

Thus the Patient being prepared, of the necessity of an Incision to preserve
Life, and with Cordials of promises to prevent faintings, he must go on
courageously, to cut off all corrupt and festered members, of what quality or
whatsoever use; and for this we have Christ's express command, if thy right Eye
or thy right Hand offend thee cut it off, If Father, Mother, or any of the
dearest Relations come in competition, all must be forsaken for him, Luke 9.23,
24, 25, 26. Thy life must not be preferred to him, but a man must take up his
Cross and follow Christ; so that nothing however so choice or dear to us, must
stand in the way against, or in balance with Christ, but in all these things a
man must deny himself and lose all for Christ, Mat. 5.29, 30. If any man be in
Christ he is a new Creature, old things are done away and all things are made
new; mortify therefore your members which are on Earth, 2 Cor. 5.17.

The fourth Spiritual advantage from Heavenly bounty is Regeneration. It is not
enough to cut off old withered branches, or lop Trees; to make them fruitful,
and propagate new Trees, but plashing, ingrafting, or inoculation is necessary,
even so in the Christian Musbandry, though cutting off the old luxuriant
branches of Lust, be absolutely necessary by mortification, yet this is not
all, for the Christian must have a new life, for that by the impurity of Sin,
and Concupiscence of our Natures since the Fall, the whole Mass of Blood or
Nature is corrupted, And God saw that the wickedness of Man was great in the
Earth, and that every Imagination of the Thoughts of his Heart was evil
continually, Genesis 6.5. Therefore he must be ingrafted into Christ, the true and
living Vine, I am crucified to the World, and the World to me, nevertheless I
live, but not I but Christ that lives in me, and the Life that I live in the
Flesh, is by the Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for
me, Gal. 2.20. That ye put off concerning their former conversation, which is
corrupt according to the deceitful Lusts, and that ye be renewed in the Spirit
of your minds, and that ye put on the new man which after God is created in
true holiness and righteousness, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. And be not conformed to
this World, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds, that ye may
prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect Will of God, Romans 12.2. Know
ye not that Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates, now we are no more
strangers nor foreigners* but fellow Citizens with the Saints and with the
household of God* and are built upon the foundations of the Apostles and
Prophets, Christ Jesus being the chief Corner Stone, in whom all the building
fitly framed together grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord, in whom ye also
are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.19,
to end. All which Scriptures teach us, that the Christian is a new man, has a
new ^ife* and is built on Christ the foundation and nourisher of his Life, and
that Christ is the Vine wherein the barren Branches must be cut off, and the
fruitful nourished. This holy Lord Jesus Christ convinces the great lawyer
Nichodemus of the necessity of Regeneration, of being born again by the Spirit,
Unless a Man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God, John 3.3, 5. Now
in this great concern we are to consider two things.

First, To make a right discovery of the truth of this new Life by Regeneration.

Secondly, We are to consider seriously of the means how this Conquest and new
Life may be preserved.

First, As this is the greatest concern to man, to be well founded in his claim
to Heaven, so it is easy to the flesh to be deceived in this thing, for as it
often falls out among Women that they are deceived by false conceptions, and
travel long in expectation of the Birth, when both they themselves and others
are in hopes, yet it proves at last a deceit, oftentimes to the destruction of
the person, having nourished Diseases and Corruptions instead of a true Birth,
so no doubt many may seem to be under conception of this Heavenly Birth, have
some symptoms, and appear to labor under pain, to be delivered of the old
corruption, and bring forth the Spiritual Birth, and yet Christ is not formed
in them. As the desire of issue makes many Women use many uneasy and expensive
means, so many men for the lucre of Heaven strain far and yet come short,
because their Hearts are not straight with God, Simon Magus offered a large sum
for the Holy Ghost, the young rich Man in the Gospel kept all the Commandments,
Annanias and Saphira sold their possessions, and brought the Money to be
distributed amongst the Saints, and yet all fell short of this new Birth, and
so of the Kingdom of God: we are commanded to try the Spirits, for every Spirit
is not of God, wherefore, that we may find out the truth and reality of this
new birth; It is fit to reflect on the actions of the former Life, and examine
the new life in all its parts, and find out whether the suitable effects of the
change and new birth be produced, for according to the effects of life so must
we judge of the Life, whether it be renewed or not, for the Tree is known by
its fruits The effects of life are chiefly three.

First The Thoughts earliest in the conception of the rational creatures.

Secondly, The Affections.

Thirdly, The Actions.

These three generally make up the whole Man, and as we find these three
concurring in the first degeneracy, The Thoughts of man were evil and only evil
continually. So we find Thoughts, Affections, and Actions, concurring in that
first transgression, the rebellious Thoughts, mutining against the Command, the
lustful affections after the fruit that was good to eat, and pleasant to the
Eyes, and to be desired to make one wise, and the actions in eating thereof.
Now as by this degeneracy in our first Parents, the whole Nature of Man in
Adams Apostasy was corrupted, that thenceforth their thoughts were evil and
only evil continually.

So that whatsoever man's estate was at his Fall, he must now have a new life by
Jesus Christ, and as his Nature and whole Man was corrupted, so must he be
wholly framed a new, by being transformed into that holy frame, after the
Spirit and Image of him that created him, and that in all his thoughts,
affections and actions, and whether it be so or not, let every man search and
try himself, and

First, In his Thoughts, If any man be in Christ he is a new Creature in his
Thoughts, let the same mind be in you, which was in Christ Jesus, says the
Holy Apostle, and a right regulation of a man's thoughts consists.

First, In placing of them on proper objects.

Secondly, In the right Government of them directed to these objects.

Man in his degeneracy and state of Nature, is as in a Fever, the whole Mass
of Blood being so disordered and infected, that nothing is regular with him,
much less his Thoughts, for that he is of the Earth, Earthly, and in that
natural darkness, that he neither knows or can understand the things of God,
like the blind Mole, always working and walking about the Earth and Earthly
things, and in his ferment of affection to the Creatures, is hurried with
frantic raptures after them, and finding in them no satisfaction flys from one
vanity to another, like Noah's Dove can find no rest, and as Solomon says
finds all vanity and vexation of Spirit, so as he hated all his labor, the
Wicked Man is unstable in all his ways, but these renewed are made partakers of
the Divine Nature, and place their desires on Heavenly objects, have the same
mind in them that was in Christ Jesus, as Christ came into the World to do the
Will of his Father, in the Redemption of Man, and did behave himself as his
Kingdom not being of this World, even so Christians are in this World as
Sojourners, and must not look on the things of this Life, as the objects of
their delight or objects of their inheritance, and therefore must be
Spiritually minded, For to be carnally minded is Death, but to be spiritually
minded is Life and Peace, Romans 8.6. Now the objects of the Spiritual Man must
be Spiritual, and nothing can with satisfaction or delight, contemplate any
thing, but what it has a resemblance unto, or affinity with it, so that if the
Thoughts be Spiritual, they will be fixed on Heavenly and Spiritual objects,
which are only two.

First, One God in the Trinity.

Secondly, The benefits accrewing to man from thence.

First, On God as that only essential and omnipotent Being by whom the World
was made, and subsists in his Infinite Power, Isa. 9.6.

In his holiness, of purer Eyes than can behold Iniquity. In his Justice to
reward the upright and condemn the guilty.

In his Wisdom, As Wisdom it self, and who gives Wisdom to all Men, Prove. 8.1.
Jam. 1.5.

In his Love, He is love and dwells in love, God so loved the World that he
sent his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish
but have Eternal Life, John 3.15, 16, 17.

In his Mercy, Witness his long forbearance and forgiveness of Sins through
Christ Jesus, with the merciful thou will show thy self merciful, and with the
froward thou will show thy self froward, Ps. 18.25, 26. and so through all the
Attributes of God, where there is an Ocean of Delight to pitch upon, and
swallow up and drown all the most longing desires, and fill the greatest
appetite, on which are spent the eternal breathings and delight of the Angels
and Saints in Heaven. Therefore shall they be before the Throne of God, and
serve him day and night in his Temple, and he that sits on the Throne shall
dwell amongst them, Rev. ^.15.16, 17.

Secondly, On Christ that Ocean of Consolation to Believers, who shall have
from him fullness of Joy and Pleasures for evermore; who humbled himself to
death to see them on the Throne of Glory, who was made Sin though he knew no
Sin, that Sin might not be imputed to them, 1 Pet. 2.20, 21. Who brought them
from being slaves of Sin to the Inheritance of Sonship and Glory with himself
and made them heirs of all things, John 17.21, 22. who is made to Saints
Wisdom, Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption, and all and in all
to them, 1 Cor. 1.13.

3dly, On the Holy Ghost the Comforter, who shall dwell and abide with them for
ever and teach them all things, and who shall uphold them in all their ways to
guide them in all truth against all dangers and temptations, Psalm 91. all.
John 14.16, 17, 26.

Secondly, The second object on which the thoughts of the renewed Christians
are to be exercised, are the things of great advantage which flow to them from
the bounty of God in Christ Jesus, but especially that inexpressible dignity,
honor, and happiness of being made partakers of the Divine Nature, and being
made one, with the Father and the Son in mind, will, and glory, and to be where
God is for ever, in that often repeated place, John 17. They shall feed on the
Tree of Life, in the Paradise of God, Rev. 2.7.17. have the white Stone, and in
it a new name, and have power over the Nations, Rev. 3.12, 21. they shall sit.
On the Throne of Glory before God, and shall serve him day and night, shall
hunger no more, nor thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, or
any heat, and God shall lead them unto living fountains of Water, and wipe away
all Tears from their Eyes, and there shall be no more sorrow, Rev. 7.15, 16, 17.

The thoughts of Believers being thus directed to their proper objects, as they
are yet in the Valley of Tears, and obnoxious to the temptations of the Flesh,
and subject to so many incident distractions, their thoughts are frequently
diverted from their proper course; the means thereof to fix them right, when
any temptation occurs, whether from the Lust of the Eyes, Lusts of the Flesh,
or Pride of Life, is to compare the object offered, with that on which the
Thoughts should center, and bringing infinite beauty, glory, and power, that
which is infinitely full of all perfection, and above what eye can see, or ear
hear, or heart apprehend; how easily may this parrallel eclipse, dazzle, and
confound the insinuations of Fleshly Lusts, which perish in the using?

Secondly, The second part of the renewed man is his affections, which also
must be spiritualized and renewed; for if a man be in Christ, he has mortified
the Flesh and the Lusts thereof, and if the Thoughts be duly placed on God, and
the blessings flowing from him, it may be the more easy to regulate the
affections.

It is certain while we are in the Body, there is an unavoidable conversation
with the Creature upon us, and the degeneracy has so much prevailed, that even
in the renewed, there is a law of the Members against the Law of the Mind, and
therefore our Life is a constant Warfare, Romans 7.23. and for this reason great
care must be taken to govern the affections, and although it is impossible in
some respects, to keep the affections from carnal objects, however the renewed
man must mortify the Flesh and Affections thereof: and as helps thereunto we
must,

First, Distinguish between giving our Affections wholly to any Creature, as
resting on that as our chief good, and so delighting in it, and between letting
out our desires to any Creature, in subordination to the Creator, in some
lawful end, and in this consideration we are to love nothing intensively, with
our whole delight and satisfaction, except God, who alone is able to fill the
desires of our Heart, but we may in moderation use and take some complacency in
the Creature, as helps from God to assist us in our Pilgrim state, to advance
his Honor and discharge our Duty to him.

Secondly, We must consider that since the Apostasy in Adam, the Judgment of
the Curse is fallen on all Creatures, and the Creation is brought under the
Bondage of Corruption, and the Creatures are fallen under the King of this
World, as a forfeiture for Sin, and the Devil made Prince of the Power of the
Air, and this World put under his Dominion (though under restraint) from God,
and that the Natural Man, or Love of the World, is enmity to God. He that
loves the World, the love of God is not in him, John 1.2, 15. and by the
Apostle James, the friendship of the World is enmity with God; whosoever
therefore will be a Friend of the World is the Enemy of God, Jam. 4.4.

Thirdly, We must consider, that Christ's Errand to the World was to reconcile
God to Man, and therefore he humbled himself by taking upon him the Nature of
Man, and restored it from the vanity and impurity of Sin, to all such as shall
believe in him: for though the whole Creation was subjected to servitude for
Sin, nevertheless Christ by his coming and suffering, has paid the Ransom for
Believers, and for them removed the Curse from the Creatures; Because the
Creatures also shall be delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, into the
glorious Liberty of the Children of God, for we know that the whole Creation
groaneth, and travaileth in pain together until now, Romans 8.21, 22. Hence then
measures may be taken to regulate our Affections.

First, We ought to love God and set our affections on him, above all things,
and in loving of him we cannot go the due length, much less be in excess.

Secondly, We should love nothing beneath Christ, but in subordination to him,
and in reference to his glory, and that we may the better serve him.

Thirdly, In our use of the World, we must remember the Worlds degeneracy, and
as in that state it is accursed, and the love thereof is enmity to God, so that
if we be not our selves reconciled to God, all the Creatures are accursed to
us, and we usurpers of them, so that we must use them as purified to us from
the impurity of the Curse, by the Mediator, and all in a mortified manner,
according to the Will of God; Be not conformed to this World, but be ye
transformed by the renewing of your minds, that ye may prove what is the good,
perfect, and acceptable Will of God, Romans 12.2.

In the use of the Creatures, We must use them without sensual affectation, as
things that have a stamp of danger in them, with fear, lest we be again enticed
to sin against God, in our delight in any thing more, or so much as in God, and
that we be with the Apostle mortified to all things, I am crucified to the
World, and the World to me, in that often repeated place, Gal. 2.20 Thus then
must man's Affections be regulated as a new Man, and doing away the old Lusts of
the Flesh, and knowing nothing after the Flesh; the Children of God are all
incorporated into a new society in Christ Jesus, and must needs have their
Conversation different from the World: Ye are no more Strangers and
Foreigners, but Fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God,
Ephesians. 2.19. Therefore they must love and delight in Holy and Spiritual things.

They are no more under the Law of Sin to Death, but under the Law of the
Spirit unto Life, they are not to walk after the Flesh, but after the Spirit,
Romans 8.1, 2, 12, 13, 14. Christ himself knowing how man's Affections are apt to
incline to Earthly Vanities, and sink under the delight of the Creatures,
Commands to lay up Treasure in Heaven, Where your Treasures are, there your
Hearts will be also. Seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, let
us follow that choice directory for Holiness and Heavenly mindedness, Luke
12.31, to 35.

If ye be risen with Christ, seek these things which are above, where Christ
sits at the Right Hand of God, set your Affections on things in Heaven, and
not things on Earth, for ye are Dead, and your Life is hid with Christ in God,
Mortify therefore your Members which are on Earth. Fornication, Uncleanness,
Inordinate Affections, Evil Concupiscence and Covetousness, which is Idolatry,
seeing you have put off the Old Man with his Deeds, and have put on the New
Man, which is renewed in Knowledge, after the Image of him that Created him,
put on therefore as the Elect of God, Bowels of Mercy, Kindness, Humbleness of
Mind, long Suffering, forbearing one another, forgiving one another, put on
Charity, which is the bond of perfectness, Col. 3. all.

See the Instructions for our Holy and Heavenly Conversation, Ephe. 2. all,
Chap. 4.22. to end, Chap. 5. all, Romans 6. all they that are in Christ, have
Crucified the flesh, and the Lusts thereof, if we live in the spirit, let us
also walk in the spirit, Gal 5.24, and 25. Thus then we see how Christians are
to govern their affections, next we come to consider their Actions, As the
Christian is and must be a New Creature, and Holy in all manner of
Conversation, so must he be in his Actions, in two respects

First, They must be all Just and Holy in themselves.

Secondly, They must be directed to proper ends.

First, As a Man's Thoughts ought to be pure, and Affections clean, so must his
Actions; for one piece polluted, defiles the whole Lump, and a good Tree
produces good Fruit, and there can be no pretense of uprightness in any Man,
where the Actions or Conversation is Corrupt, so that all Actions of a Man must
be squared by the Word of God, and if disagreeable thereto, the Conclusion must
be, that the Fountain is corrupt, for as a bad Tree cannot bring forth good
Fruit, so a good Tree brings forth good Fruit, for the Tree is known by its
Fruits, and it is no Justification of an Action bad in it self, that it is
intended well, for we must not do evil, that good may come of it.

Secondly, As the Actions must be in themselves good, they must also be
directed to the right end, that is, to wit, the glory of God, for what is not
levelled so, are sinful before God; Col. 3.17. 1 Cor. 10.31.

From what has been said, may plainly appear, that though the Christian as a
New Man in Christ Jesus, is an excellent Creature, as made partaker of the
Divine Nature, Nevertheless he is, and must be entangled in a continual
Warfare, whilst in the Body, and therefore not to be idle or lazy, but to stand
always upon guard, against Enemies within himself and without.

Be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might, for we wrestle not
against Flesh and Blood, but against Principalities, and against Powers,
against the Rulers of Darkness in this World, against Spiritual Wickednesses in
high places, wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, your Loins girt
about with Truth, the Breast Plate of Righteousness, your Feet shod with the
Gospel of Peace, the shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, the Sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God, praying and watching, so that the Work of a
Christian is not over, even when he has attained newness of Life in Christ
Jesus, but of necessity must continue in a fighting State, while in a Body,
Ephesians. 6.10. to 19.

As you have received Christ Jesus, so walk you in him, Christians must fight
offensively, to subdue the continued growing of Lusts; Defensively, to
withstand continued Temptations, and persevere to the further Conquest of
Enemies within themselves, and without in the World, Watch and Pray, lest ye
enter into Temptation: in this case three things are to be considered.

First, Perseverance and continued Stedfastness is the Christians commanded
Duty.

Secondly, Gods Promises to his People, to uphold and strengthen them in their
Duties and Conflicts.

Thirdly, The experience of Christians, that they thrive and grow, when in
pursuit of, and continuance in their Duties.

As to the first it plainly appears, as the Christians Life is a continued
warfare, so must he not be lazy or draw back, but be still in Arms ready to
fight.

He that puts his Hand to the Plough, must not draw back, and if any Man
draw back, my Soul has no delight in him, Luke 9.62. Heb. 10.38. The whole
Book of Holy Writ, is full of this Command, we are not to stop or rest in our
Course, but cheerfully in imitation of Christ, to run the Race that is set
before us, without regard to the difficulties in our way, but with Courage to
continue our progress, till we come to the end of our Stage, even Eternity,
Heb. 12.1, 2, 3. This is Christ's express Command, we must take up our Cross,
and daily follow him, Mat. 10.16. to end. Nothing must stop our course, however
so dear to us, Honor, Wealth, Relations, nor Life it self, we must give up,
and Sacrifice all upon the Altar of Obedience, Mat. 16.24, 25, 26, 27. Chapter
24.42. to end, Mark 13.33. to end.

Let us fear, a promise being left us of entering into his Rest, lest any of you
should come short of it, let us labor therefore to enter into that rest, lest
any Man fall by unbelief; seeing then we have a great High Priest, that is
passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession,
Heb. 4.1, 11, 14. Be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the Work of
the Lord, knowing that your Work is not in vain, 1 Cor. 15.58. Let us not be
weary in well doing, for in season we shall reap, if we faint not, Gal. 6.9. As
ye have received Christ Jesus, so walk ye in him, rooted and built upon him,
and established in the Faith, abounding therein, with Thanks giving, Ephesians. 6.10.
to 19. Endure Hardness, as a good Soldier of Christ Jesus; no Man that Warreth,
entangleth himself wi^h the affairs of this Life, that he may please him, who
choose him to be a Soldier, if a Man strive for Mastery, yet is he not Crowned
except he strive lawfully, 2 Timothy 2, 1, 7. Be sober, be vigilant, because your
Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may
devour, whom resist steadfast in the Faith, knowing that the same Afflictions
are accomplished in your Brethren, 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. giving all diligence, add to
your Faith Virtue, and to your Virtue Knowledge, and to your Knowledge,
Tempeaance, and to Temperance, Patience, and to Patience. Godleness, and to
Godliness, Brotherly Kindness, and to Brotherly Kindness, Charity; for if these
things be in you, they shall make you, that you shall never be barren or
unfruitful, in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.
Hence we see how incumbent it is to Christians, to be upon their Duty of
Perseverance, and as the state of the Militant Church is Laborious and full of
Hazards, and exposed to Difficulties insuperable, as to Man, and the
Adversaries in themselves powerful, Nevertheless, as no Man goes to War at his
own Charge, but at the charge of him whose Soldier he is, neither has the King
of Kings, whose Soldiers Christians are, left his People, without assurances of
sure pay and constant supplies out of the Treasury of Omnipotency, whose word
we believe. I will open to you the Windows of Heaven, and give you a blessing,
that ye shall not have room to receive it, Mal. 3.10. The vision is for an
appointed time, if it tarry, wait for it, it will speak at last, and he that is
to come, shall come and will not tarry, Hab. 2.3.

And for the Encouragement of the Faith, and Patience of the People of God, the
Scriptures are full of fresh and sure clusters of consolatory promises, for
Comfort, Relief, Support, and Delivery, which is the second thing considerable.

The Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, has stored his Book with legions of
Consolations, fear not, I have redeemed thee, thou art mine. I will be with
thee in fire and in water, they shall have no power over thee, thou art
Honorable and Precious in my sight, I will restore thy Captives, I am thy
Redeemer, when thou have no help, I will be a Savior and Provisor, Is. 43. to
26. I will pour water on him that is a thirst, and floods on the dry ground. I
will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine Offspring, thou
shall not be forgotten of me, I have blotted out as a Cloud thy Transgressions,
and as a thick Cloud thy sins, return to me, for I have Redeemed thee, Is. 44
3, 21, 23. Hearken unto me ye House of Jacob, which are born by me from the
Womb, and even to your Old Age, I am he, and even to Hoar Hairs, I will carry
you, I have made, and will bear, I will carry, and will deliver you, Is. 46.3,
4.

I will defer mine anger, I have refined thee, but not with Silver, I have
chosen thee in the Furnace of Affliction, Is. 48.9, 10. A Woman may forget her
Sucking Child, and not have Compassion on the ^^uit of her Womb, but I cannot
forget thee, says the Lord, for I have graven thee upon the Palms of my
Hand's, thou art mine, thy Enemies shall go forth of thee, and they shall go
far away, the Children thou shall have after thou have lost the others shall
multiply, that thou shall be straightened for room for them, and thou shall say in
thy Heart, who has begotten me these, seeing the other were lost, seeing I am
Desolate, a Captive, and remove to and fro, who has brought me up these? where
have they been? thy Captive Children shall be brought back by the Enemies in
their Arms, and on their Shoulders, Kings shall be their Nursing Fathers, and
Queens their Nursing Mothers, they shall bow down to thee, and lick the dust
under thy Feet, for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me, I will feed
them that oppress thee with their own flesh, and make them drunk with their own
Blood, as with sweet Wine, and all flesh shall know, that I am the Lord thy
Savior, Is. 49. all.

Who is among you that fears the Lord, and obeys the Voice of his Servant,
that sits in darkness, and sees no light, let him trust in the Name of the
Lord, and stay upon his God. Is 50.10.

Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Salvation shall never fail, fear not
Reproaches and Reviling of Men, they shall consume as a Moth, and Worms shall
eat them up.

Awake, awake O Arm of the Lord, art not thou it that cut Rahab, that wounded
the Dragon, that Dried the Sea, and made it a way for thy Ransomed to pass
over, thy Redeemed shall return with Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow and Sighing
shall fly away. I am he that comfort thee, be not afraid of a Man, or the
Son of a Man, awake, stand up thou that have drunk and wrung out the Cup of
mine Anger, there is none to guide her, or take her by the Hand, of all the
Sons that she has brought for^^ Desolation and Destruction, Famine and the
Sword, are come upon thee. behold I have taken out of thy Hand, the Cup of
Trembling, and I will put it into the Hands of them that afflict thee, who have
said to thy Soul, bow down, that we may go over thee, and thou have laid thy
Body on the ground, and as the Street to them that went over, fear thou not,
for thou shall not be ashamed, thou shall forget the the shame of thy Youth,
and the Reproach of thy Widow-Hood, for thy Maker is thy Husband, and thy
Redeemer, the God of the whole Earth, Is. 51. all.

For a small Moment have I forsaken thee, but with great Mercy will I gather
thee, in a little wrath have I hid my self from thee for a Moment; but with
everlasting kindness, will I have Mercy upon thee, says the Lord, thy
Redeemer, no Weapon formed against thee, shall prosper, Is. 54.4. to 9.

The Lord is the avenger of his People, Vengeance is in my Heart, and the year
of my Redeemed is come, and is a Deliverer, when all other helps fail, I looked
and wondered that there was none to help, therefore mine own Arm brought
Salvation and my fury it upheld me; in all their Afflictions, he was Afflicted,
and the Angel of his presence saved them, in his love and in his pity he
Redeemed them, and saved them, all the days of Old, Is 63.3, 4, 5.

The Lord never puts his People to Work, but does furnish them with Assistance,
shall I bring to the Birth, and not cause to bring forth, shall I cause to
bring forth, and shut the Womb? Is. 66.9.

When Christ sends forth his Disciples to Convert the World, he forewarns them
of the Difficulties, and usage they should meet with, but assures them of his
present support, outgate and eternal life are their reward, Mat. 10.16. to end,
Chap. 16.24. to 28. Chap. 19.28, 29. the Holy Apostle gives Christian
Combatants great Encouragements for their full bearing the Cross, for as much
as Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also took part of the same,
that through Death, he might destroy him that had the power of Death, even the
Devil, and deliver them who all their Life's were subject to Bondage, Heb. 2.14,
15. We have an High Priest, which cannot be touched with the failing of our
Infirmities, but was in all things tempted as we are, yet without sin, let us
come therefore boldly to the Throne of grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.15, 16. No Temptation has befallen
to you, but what is common to Men, but the Lord is gracious, who with every
Temptation will give an outgate, that ye may be able to bear it. 1 Cor. 10.13.
These Crowning Mercies promised in the Revelations, are sufficient
encouragements to bear the Cross, and fight cheerfully under Christ's Banner: to
him that overcomes will I give to eat of the Tree of Life in the midst of the
Paradise of God, and to eat of the hidden Manna, and give him a white stone,
and in it a new Name, and he shall be Clothed with white Raiment, and I will
confess his Name before my Father and his Angels, and he shall sit on my
Throne, Rev. 2.7, 17. Chapter 3.5, 21. The Valiant and constant Soldiers of Christ
are Sealed in their Forehead, and are Clothed with White Robes with Palms in
their Hand, and these are they which come out of great Tribulation, and have
washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb, and are
before the Throne of God, Day and Night, and Jesus Christ dwells with them,
they shall Hunger no more, neither Thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light
on them, or any Heat, for the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne of God,
shall feed them, and lead them to living Fountains of Water, and God shall wipe
away all Tears from their Eyes, Rev. 7.29. to end.

They live in Holiness, and are Blessed in their Death, Blessed are they which
dye in they Lord, the cease from their Labor, and their Works follow them,
Rev. 14.4, 13

The third thing Remarkable in this Duty of Perseverance, is that Christians
thrive and grow, in the Continuance of their Duty of patient waiting on God, as
in all Trades, Vocations, Arts and Sciences, the frequent and constant practice
begets perfection, so we find in the History of the Church Militant in all
Ages, that the more Persecution the Church met with, she did grow in greater
Power, Zeal, and Purity, and the professors did more cheerfully outdare
Temptations, and Embraced the Truth, and this is held forth as a Duty with a
promise, then shall we know if we follow on to know the Lord, Hosea 6.3.

David was almost tired out, and his Patience worn, how long will thou forget
me, for ever, how long will thou hide thy Face from me, how long shall I take
Counsel in my Soul, having sorrow in my Heart, how long shall mine Enemies be
exalted over me? but whilst he is continuing in his Application to God is
strengthened and at last concludes, but I have trusted in thy Mercies, my Heart
will rejoice in thy Salvation, I will sing unto the Lord, because he has dealt
bountifully with me, Ps. 27.13, 14. all. This Holy Man continuing in Duty with
God, was supported by his Confidence in God. I had fainted in mine Affliction,
unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the
Living, wait on the Lord, and be of good Courage, and he will strengthen thy
Heart, wait, I say, on the Lord, Ps. 27.13, 14.

When he had Experienced great Afflictions in his Family, and a long
continuance of it, he could at last say, sing unto the Lord O ye Saints of his,
and give Thanks at the Remembrance of his Holiness, for his Anger endures but
for a Moment, in his Favor is Life, weeping may endure for a Night, but Joy
comes in the Morning, Ps. 30.4 5.

Though he was lashed with Shimei's Tongue, yet he could say, thou shall hide
him in the Secret of thy Presence, from the Pride of Man, thou shall keep them
secretly in thy Pavilion, from the strife of Tongues, Ps. 31.21. Though he was
forced to sculk and hide, and said, I shall one Day fall into the Hands of
Saul, then he could say, thou art my hiding place, thou shall compass me about
in trouble with Songs of Deliverance, Ps. 32.8.

When this Holy Man takes Breath from his complaining, and reflects on Gods
Dispensations to him, how sweetly does he set forth the many Advantages and
Privileges, of such as wait on God? his Eyes are upon them, and his Ears open
to their Cry, The Lord hears them, he delivers them from all their
Troubles, he is near to the broken in Heart, and loves the Contrite Spirit, he
delivers them out of all their Afflictions, not one of their Bones are
broken, those that hate the Righteous shall be Desolate, Ps. 34.15. to end.

The Holy Apostles were never more Thriving and Courageous, than under their
greatest Sufferings, we are troubled on every side, yet not distressed,
perplexed but not in despair, persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down, but not
destroyed, knowing that he which raised the Lord Jesus, shall also raise us,
and present us with you, for which cause we faint not, for though our outward
Man perish, yet our inward Man is renewed Day by Day, for our light Afflictions
which are but for a Moment, works for us a far more exceeding and an Eternal
Weight of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.8, to end, Chapter 15. to 11. And again that same
Apostle, testifies this truth, I would have you to understand, that the things
which have fallen out to me, are for the furtherance of the Gospel, many of the
Brethren in the Lord waxing confident in my Bonds, are much more bold to speak
the word without fear, Phi. 1.12. to 21. and elsewhere he says, for which
cause I also suffer these things, Nevertheless, I am not ashamed, for I know in
whom I have believed, and he is able to keep that which I have committed to him
against that Day, 2 Timothy 1.12. The whole Scriptures and other Histories, make
mention of the growth and cheerfulness of the Saints, now in Glory, who with
great Stability and Patience, have run their Course, and at the height of their
Tragical Sufferings, have showed more Courage and Resolution, than when they
began their Race.

Daniel and the three Children, Job, Jeremiah, and the Prophets grew stronger
and stronger, under their Duties of Continuing in well doing, and the Martyr
Stephen finished his Course with Joy, praising of God, and praying for his
Enemies, Acts 7.59, 60.

The third thing considerable in this Conflict of Regeneration, and Saints
Warfare, is the Comfort the Saints have in a Sanctified use of all
Dispensations and Enjoyments, of what they meet with in their Trials, to have
any thing, and not enjoy it, or to want the grace and liberty of right
improving of it, is a Curse, and not a Blessing.

Experience teaches, that many Worldly Cormorants, or Misers, have much of the
Worlds Wealth, Riches, and great possessions, and yet their Hearts and
Affections are so forfeited and glutted with the love and delight thereof, that
they are slaves to their fancy, and delight therein, so as they cannot allow to
themselves, the Comfortable use thereof, but either hoard them up (as the Idols
of their fancy) to such as come after them, or on the other Hand, glut and
satiate themselves therewith, and have not the Grace or Heart to Communicate
them in Charity, to the necessity of others, as the Rich Glutton in the Gospel,
who belike did gratify his Dogs, rather than Lazarus in his wants, Luke 16.19.
to end.

Although the wise disposer of all things, makes his Sun to shine on the Godly
and the Wicked, and most frequently gives more plentifully of the things of
this Life to the Wicked, than to the Godly, nevertheless his Dispensations
thereof is much different*

First, They are given to the Wicked as Snares, a Curse and their Portion, and
with them Eternal Wrath, for their mis-improvement.

Secondly, They are given to the Godly, only as a means of Subsistence in their
Journey Heavenward, with Contentment and the Sanctified use thereof, with a
promise of Eternal Life in Jesus Christ, as their Portion.

First, It is most certain, and Consequential in reason, that where the things
of this Life are given, and the Heart and Delight is fixed on them as their
full and sole Satisfaction, these things are Curses, Snares and Entangle the
Soul in Misery, and it is certain, that such as place not their Content,
Delight, Satisfaction and Happiness in Christ, are Wicked, and Eternally
Accursed, and therefore all their Enjoyments are Snares, and Curses, and they
are miserable in the Enjoyment thereof, and this is evidently proved,

First, For that as it has been already shown, that Man's Apostasy by sin has
brought that Curse on the Creature, so as the love of the World is Enmity
against God, and the lawful use of the Creature is only procured by Christ's
Mediation, to such as believe in him.

So that whatsoever love to the Creature, and Enjoyments thereof is not for
Christ, and founded on him, is a Curse, and not a Blessing: and this is further
illustrated from Reason, for that First, where Contentment cannot be found,
there is no Happiness.

Secondly, There is no satisfaction to be found in any thing, without Christ.

The first is clear in reason and common opinion, which place Happiness in
Satisfaction of the Affections and Desires, and whatsoever Enjoyment comes not
that length, is short of Happiness, and brings Anxiety and Discontent. And this
is clear from Common Experience; for let a Man have Wealth, if he have not
Health, Strength and Vigor, let him have Riches, and if he have not Honor, let
him have one hundred Enjoyments, if any one thing be wanting, which either some
other has, or he shall please his fancy upon, he is not content, so not Happy,
because his Affections or fancy are not pleased, and if we consult Solomon, the
greatest in Experience, we may conclude, that Happiness in Creature Enjoyments,
is not attainable.

The Second is also Demonstrate from Reason and Experience, it being most
consonant to Reason, that no contentment can be found, but in that which is
permanent and perfect, for that Man's Nature is for Novelties, and cannot rest
on any one thing, when something else occurs, which either excels the other,
or he does fancy it does and indeed it were beneath the Dignity of the Soul,
(which is of a Divine Extract) to bottom on any thing, which is not of greatest
value; besides the Soul being a Spirit; cannot place and confine its delight,
to what is only sensual, unless it could give satisfaction to the Soul, or
Fancy, and that no Satisfaction can be had in sensual Enjoyments, is apparent
from the Nature of all Created beings.

That Holy Apostle John, Exhorting against the Love of the World, says, Love
not the World, nor the things of the World, for in the World, there is the Lust
of the Eyes, the Lusts of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, and these things
perish in the using, but he that does the Will of God shall endure for ever;
Here the Apostle sets forth before us the Inventory or Scheme of the World in
these three; where by the Lusts he means the Objects, and the delights taken in
them.

That we may the better discover, That nothing in this World can give
satisfaction, or is perfect or permanent, we shall consider the World and all
things in it, in these three circumstances.

First, By the Lusts of the Flesh must be meant, all sensual Objects, and the
pleasure taken in them; and that there is neither permanency nor perfection, as
it is proved from the Text, so it is demonstrable, from all the instances of
sensual objects: are Riches the object? they take the Wings of the Wind and fly
away, a man may be found Rich to Day, and a Beggar next, as was said of Craesus
who was reputed the richest on Earth, Irus and est hodie, qui modo Craesus
eras, they either torment a man in getting, keeping, or increasing of them: the
Apostle tells us they leave a man in this Life or at his Death, and in the mean
time load a Man with inexpressible cares, snares, and troubles, so as their
uncertainty is clear, We brought nothing to this World with us, and it is
certain we shall carry nothing out of it, the love of Money is the Root of all
evil, and they that will be rich fall into many temptations, and snares, and
many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men into destruction, and
Perdition, etc. 1 Timothy 6. to 11.

See Christ's own Testimony of Riches, and what clog it is to a Man's Soul,
whilst looking after better things, It is as impossible for a Rich Man to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; as for a Camel to go through the Eye of a
Needle, Luke 19.20, to 25. chap. 6.24. See his woe unto thee Rich, for they have
received their Consolation, and how he advises to provide Bags that wax not
old, a Treasure in Heaven that fails not, where no Thief approaches, or Moth
corrupts, for where your treasure is, there will your Hearts be also, Luke
12.34.

Is thy Lust or desire placed in Friends or Relations? how deceitful they be,
Abel, Joseph and David, and almost all the train of Saints, and experience of
all ages can testify, trust not in a friend, put no confidence in a guide, keep
the Door of thy Lips from the Wife that lies thy Bosom, for the Son
dishonors the Father, and the Daughter rises up against the Mother, and the
Daughter in Law against the Mother in Law, and a Man's Enemies are the Men of
his own House, Mic. 7.5, 6. Jer. 9.4, 5. note.

See David's complaint of the treachery and unkindness of his Friends, Psalm.
88.8, 18. Psalm. 41.9.

See what complaint the Church makes of the treachery and deceitfulness of
friends and relations, Lam. 1.19. And see how the Prophets hold forth the
instability of humane friendship, Isa. 59.16. chap. 63.5. Jer. 30.13, 14.

The Lusts of the Eyes comprehend all that is taking or delightful to the
Sight, and what can that be, but what is either the contemplation of our own
beauty, or outward excellencies, or the glory of other Creatures? our own may
wither, and Age and Sickness, and other vicissitudes make it decay, our
Infirmities or thousands of accidents can soon make all without us tasteless
and insipid to us: besides as all Flesh is Grass, and wither as the Green
Herbs, so as there is no permanency in any thing to raise felicity from the
Eyes, it is not long before these Glass Windows shall be shut, the Silver
threads be cut, and the golden bowl be broken at the Well by Death, and thereby
the glory of the whole House be darkened, Eccles. 12. to 9.

(...) third thing which compleats this pitiful Inventory of the World, is the
Pride of Life, and what is that but a shadow to the Lust of Humane Glory, and
vain Titles of Honor or Preferment in this World? and how short this is of
permanency and happiness, experience tells us.

There is no stinting of Man's Ambition, the Spirit of Pride rests not in one
Title, but Envies, and Ambitions another, and at best all these are but
fanciful, and have no intrinsic worth in them, and are only valuable as Fancy
esteems them.

How soon is all humane Glory extinguished by the least cross Providence from
God?

How was the Glory and Pride of Nebuchadnezzar laid to the Ground, when he was
turned from under his glorious Canopy of State, and rich embroidery, and from
wearing a Crown of pure Gold, sent to feed and lodge amongst the Beasts until
his Hair became like Birds Feathers, and his Nails like Eagles Claws, and he
forced to acknowledge his own nothingness and Gods Sovereignty, All whose Works
are Truth, and his ways Judgment, and those who walk in Pride he is able to
abase? Dan. 4.30, to end.

How eminently was the Gluttony, Pride, and Tyranny of Adonibezeck chastised,
who had threescore and ten Kings, having their Thumbs and great Toes cut off,
gathered their meat under his Table, who was forced to acknowledge the
Sovereignty and Justice of God, as I have done so God has requited me? Judges
1.7.

How was the Blasphemous Pride and Ambition of Senacherib and Rabsecah against
God and his People, punished by Gods miraculous raising the Siege of Jerusalem,
by sending forth his Angel, and killing fourscore and ten thousand men in the
Camp of Assyria, and when Senacherib fled and at his Idolatrous Devotion, God
raised up his own Sons to Butcher him, 2 Chronicles. 32. to 24. How eminently was
the Pride of Herod, taking Glory to himself and not giving to God, severely
punished by his being suddenly struck to Death and consumed by Worms? Act,
12.20, to 24.

Where is now the glory and Honor of Caesar, Pompey and Alexander, and all the
ancient Heroes? can their History or ours witness any thing to make out
happiness, farther than that all perish in the using?

Object. It may be objected, if contentment be not to be found in the things of
this ^ife, how come the Apostle to say, havi^g Food and Raiment let us be
therewith content?

For answer we may take up the word content, to signify the placing our sole
and full satisfaction on some object, without desiring any farther; and in that
sense, it is unlawful to place our contentment in any Creature: or content may
signify, an acquiescence in the use of any Creature Enjoyment, in the measure,
time, and toward the end it is given us, as being contented with so much of
the Creature as God will give us for our use in this Life, without murmuring or
stinting of him to time or measure, and in this sense is the Apostle's meaning,
as he explains himself, I have learned how to want, and how to abound, and in
every condition therein to be content, Phil. 4.11, 12, And yet he longed for
Christ and Eternal Life, and gloried in nothing but in the Cross of Christ, by
whom the World was Crucified to him, and he to the World, Gal. 6.14. So that
though he used the World with contentment, that is, with acquiescence, it was
not his full satisfaction and rest, but Christ was his end he drove at, in that
use of the Creature.

Now as from what has been said, we see the things of this Life, though they
make no happiness, they are given both to the Godly and to the Wicked. but with
these differences.

First, The Godly have them as owning them from God, the Wicked ascribe them to
themselves, or their own industry, or suppose they have them by chance.

Secondly, They are given to the Godly, as Instruments in their Journey to
Heaven or Traveling expenses, but the Wicked have them as their Portion.

Thirdly, They are given to the Godly with submission to the Will of God, in
time, manner and quantity, but to the Wicked with murmuring, repining, and
covetousness after more.

Fourthly, They are given to the Godly to be improved for Gods Glory, but the
Wicked spend them on their Lusts.

First, The Godly have the Blessing of owning the dispensation of all things to
them as from God, that they are all made, created, and supported by him, and
that they do all flow from him of his free goodness and pleasure; For by him
were all things created and for him, and all things consist by him, and he is
before all things, Col. 1.16, 17. Every good and perfect gift is from above and
comes down from the Father of Light, with whom is no variableness or shadow of
turning, Jam. 1.17.

Holy David ascribes all his Power, Greatness and Grandeur to God; He sent
from above and took me from many Waters, he delivered me from my strong
Enemies, and from them which hated me, for they were too strong for me, Psalm.
18.16, 17, 18, 19, 31, to 41. Psalm. 27. to 4.

But on the other hand the Wicked boast of their own strength, glory, and
greatness, and ascribe all to themselves, as if they were the original of their
own glory and greatness. Is not this great Babylon, says Nebuchadnezzar, which
I have built for the honor of my Majesty and Glory of my Kingdom? Dan. 4.30.

It was Rabsecah's boasting, Where are the Gods of Havah, and the Gods of the
City of Sephervaim? Who are they of all the Gods of the Countries, that they
should deliver them out of my Hand? Thus the Wicked boast themselves, and give
not the glory to God, 2 Kin 19.35, 36, 37.

Secondly, The second difference is that the Godly have all allowances as
helps, and not as their Portions, but the Wicked have them as their all, and
their Portions; See what Christ says to the Rich Glutton, he had his Portion
in this Life, and is chained up in everlasting darkness and misery, but poor
Lazarus though he was glad of the Crumbs from under the Rich Man's Table, is
placed in everlasting Paradise of happiness. The Arms of the Wicked shall be
broken, but the Lord upholdeth the Righteous, and their Inheritance shall be
for ever, the Wicked shall perish, and be as the fat of Lambs, they shall
consume away, into smoke shall they consume, such as be blessed of him shall
inherit the Earth, and they that be cursed of him shall be cut off, Psalm.
18.16, to 29.

Christ himself advises his People not to be anxious or make provision for the
Flesh, for that he will take care of them, but against the Wicked whose care is
only for this World, he pronounces Curses, Woe to you that are Rich for ye have
received your consolation, woe to you that are full for ye shall hunger; woe to
you that laugh now for ye shall mourn and weep, Luke 6.20, to 26.

The third difference is, That the Godly receives these things with a humble
and thankful mind, with submission to the Will of God, in giving, taking away,
or continuing, but the wicked fret, repine and murmur at every eclipse or
change, whereby his Condition seems to be worsted, and covetously curses God
in his Heart, when he has not his full desire, I create the fruit of the Lips,
peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, says the Lord, but
there is no peace to the Wicked, says my God, the Wicked are like the raging
Sea, casting up dirt and mire, Isa. 57.19, 20, 21. Hence then see the different
complexion of the Godly and Wicked, the one patiently submitting, the other
constantly murmuring; how patiently did Job bear the loss of his Children and
vast Estate? The Lord has given and the Lord has taken, blessed be the name
of the Lord; in all this Job sinned not, neither charged God foolishly in his
Heart, Job 1.21, 22, 23.

But on the other hand, see the restless and implacable malice of Satan to
persecute, Job, Job 2. to 6.

How patiently did David submit himself, under the revilings, cursings, and
reproaches of Shimei, and the King said, let him curse, for the Lord has said
to him, curse David, who then shall say why have thou done it? my Son which
came out of my Bowels seeks my Life, how much more may this Benjamite do it?
2 Samuel 16.10, 11, 12.

See on the other hand the tragical turbulency, and murmuring temper of the
Wicked, in the instance of Achitophel, whose Counsel with David and Absalom
used to be as of an Angel of Light, because his Counsel was rejected, in the
Pride of his Heart he hanged himself, 2 Samuel 17.23.

The fourth difference of Gods dispensations to the Godly and Wicked is, That
the Godly are directed and assisted of God, to level all their actions, and
apply all that is dispensed to them, for the Glory and Honor of God; but the
Wicked apply all to the gratifying of their Lusts; the Godly believe, that all
things as well in prosperity as in adversity, work together for their good;
therefore they level all their purposes and actions at his glory, Romans 8.28.

Deborah though by God made eminently instrumental in that great victory over
Gods Enemies, takes not the glory thereof to her self, but ascribes it to God,
Judge. 5. all.

The great Steward of Heaven dispenses the blessings of this Life, as the Lord
in the Gospel gave forth his Talents to such as did profit by them, he trusted
them with more, and gave them Eternal Life, as the reward of their care for
their Masters Honor and Profit; but the slothful and unprofitable Servants are
cast into utter darkness, where they shall meet with nothing but weeping and
gnashing of Teeth, Mat. 25.14, to 31.

Having thus cursorily made enquiry into the emptiness of all humane
enjoyments, and discovered that no happiness can be found therein, we come next
to inquire into that complete felicity of Eternal Life, which is the fourth
thing treasured up in that bank of Mercy for Believers, and that under these
considerations.

First, The freedom of it.

Secondly, The fullness of it.

First, of the freedom, as all temporal Mercies are of God, as we have already
discovered, so also, all Spiritual allowances are of him, and from him, he is
the Father of Spirits, and of his free will he has begotten us by regeneration
in Christ Jesus, who has purchased us with the price of his Blood, God so
loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish but have Eternal Life, John 3.17. When we were without
strength Christ died for us. God commends his Love to us in that while we
were yet Sinners* Christ died for us, That as Sin reigned unto Death, even so
might Grace reign through righteousness unto Eternal Life through Christ, Romans
5.6. to end. It is not of him that wills nor of him that runs, but of God
that shows Mercy, Romans 9.16.

For by Grace ye are saved through Faith, not of your selves, it is the gift of
God, not of works, lest any Man should boast, Ephesians. 2.8, 9.

In hope of Eternal Life which God that cannot lie promised before the World
began, Tit. 1.2.

Having Predestined us unto the Adoption of Children, by Jesus Christ unto
himself, according to the good pleasure of his Will, in whom we have Redemption
through his Blood, the forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his
Grace, Ephesians. 1.5, 7.

Thus we plainly see the freedom of this gift of Eternal Life, though purchased
by the Death of Christ, yet freely given to us by him.

The second thing we are to consider of, is the fullness of this great gift, and
for the clearer discovery thereof, we shall compare the excellencies of it,
with the things of this Life, in all the advantageous circumstances of the
same, whereby we shall find the excellencies thereof, incomparably excel all
that can be pretended desirable in this Life, in all their superlative state
and condition.

The glory, fullness and excellency of this World, is laid down by the Apostle
in the foregoing Scripture, to consist in the Lust of the Flesh, the Lusts of
the Eye, and the Pride of Life, and these things perish in the using, but he
that does the Will of God abides for ever: these being put in the Balance
with eternal Life and its excellencies, we shall easily find there can be no
parrallel when we consider and believe the Testimony of that Evangelical
Prophet, Eye has not seen nor Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart
of Man to conceive, what great things he has laid up for such as wait on him,
Isa. 64.4.

Hence we may see an inestimable difference, seeing all the enjoyments of this
Life are only sensual and vanishing, and the others are all Spiritual and
Lasting to Eternity.

Secondly, If we consider the World as the Apostle describes it, and that The
Love of the World is not of the Father, and by the Apostle James, that it is
enmity against God, and that eternal life is the purchase of Christ's Blood, how
much will this sink the Parrallel? 1 John 2.15, 16. Jam. 4.4.

Thirdly, If we compare the Worlds Inventory, that in it is only the Lusts of
the Eyes, the Lusts of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, How soon is this cast
out of the Scales by the Apostle? The Kingdom of God consists not in eating and
drinking, chambering and wantonness, but in Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost.
When all that is said or can be said of the World is summed up,

First, In Eating and Drinking.

Secondly, In Apparel to cloth our nakedness.

Thirdly, In Friends or Relations. And

Fourthly, In Riches or Wealth: all which perish in the using as is often
demonstrated; what Parallel then can be imagined between these two? For our
better satisfaction, we shall examine all these severally by themselves and
those things which come in exchange of them.

First, Clothes of the best, Richest or Gordious sort which can be invented,
afford no cause of glory, pride, satisfaction, or content, for at best they are
but badges of our Sin and Misery, and causes of grief, mourning, humiliation,
and repentance, for that they were at first upon Adams Transgression invented
to cover our nakedness, discovered by sin, which first brought shame, and
therefore they are but the cover of our shame and nakedness, in which we should
neither delight not glory, but rather on sight thereof humble our selves in the
sense of our original guilt and lost estate in Adam, Genesis 3.7, to 12.

Secondly, The best of Garments have under them infirm Bodies, tainted with
natural weakness at best, and sometimes the Richest cover the frailest Carcass,
tainted with noisome Distempers, the sight of which may make the Garments and
what is under them loathsome and abhorrent; so that what we have for our
necessity, to cover our shame, and hide our loathsomness, should not be our
Pride, much less our Delight or Glory.

Thirdly, Clothes are often our Burden, when either by penury we cannot attain
to them, or the persons are so weak that they cannot bear them in Winter to
defend the cold, nor in Summer because of heat.

Fourthly, The fashion changes and frets the Indigent that they cannot have
them, and draws the richer to excess, emulation and prodigality in foppish and
unnecessary pomp in the change of fashions, to the exciting of Lust and
superflous wasting what better may be bestowed on the poor, whom God recommends
as objects of Charity.

This being the badge of our shame and sin, and the superfluity thereof so much
abounding now a days, it is worth consideration to reflect on the great
threatenings denounced against such vanity and superfluity by the Prophet
Isaiah, especially against the Pride of Women. The Lord shall smite them with a
scab, and discover their secret parts, and take away all their bravery, and
their round tires like the Moon, the changeable suits of Aparrel, the Mantles,
Wimples, and Crisping Pins, the Glasses, fine Linen, Hoods and Vails, instead
of a sweet smell, there shall be a stench, instead of a girdle a rent, instead
of well set Hair Baldness, instead of a Stomacher a Girdle of Sackcloath, and
burning instead of Beauty, Is. 3.16. to end.

This being one great Idol of the flesh and our shame, let us see how this Lust
of the flesh is compensed to the godly and glorified Believers.

First, for that all their Sins, and consequently their shame are taken away in
Christ Jesus, For as in Adam all died, even so are all made alive in Christ, 1
Cor. 15.22. God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have Eternal Life, Joh. 3.16.

Fear thou not, for thou shall not be ashamed, neither shall thou be
confounded, for thou shall not be put to shame, thou shall forget the shame o^
thy youth, and shall not remember the Reproach of thy Widow-hood any more, for
thy Maker is thy Husband, Isa. 54.4.

The Saints of God have the rotten Garments exchanged, with the Righteousness
of Jesus Christ, These are they which came out of great Tribulation, and have
washed their Robes, and have made themselves white in the Blood of the Lamb,
Rev. 7.14, Thus the Saints of God as Inhabitants of the New Jerusalem, being
Clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, are cleansed from all sin and shame,
and so have no necessity of Clothes to cover sin or shame.

Secondly, the Saints have no occasion for Clothes, to Comfort the weakness of
their Bodies, for that when raised from the Dead, they shall not have Corrupt
Bodies of Corruptible Elements, but shall be Clothed with Spiritual and
Incorruptible Bodies, not subject to change, nor tainted with infirmities of
Nature, Hunger, or Cold, Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God,
neither does Corruption inherit Incorruption; for this Corruptible must put on
Incorruption, and this Mortal must put on immortality, 1 Cor. 15.50, 52, 53. So
that they shall have no occasion of the Corruptible Rags of most Sumptuous
Apparel; how much then have the Saints translated into glory the Advantage over
such, whose Earthy and Crasy Corpse, must be Clothed with rotten Garments, to
cover their shame, sin and nakedness, and defend their infirm Bodies from
offense of Cold, and Heat, of which the Saints are not sensible?

Secondly, Eating and Drinking being the second Branch of the Lusts of the
Flesh, it is so gross a predominant and necessity of Nature and weak Mortality,
that it is not only the peculiar Resemblance of Bruits, beneath the Dignity of
Man's Soul, and as it is the necessity of Nature, so it is the great burden of
Nature, to be under that necessity, that some Sensualists, of whom the Apostle
says, whose God is their Belly, whose glory is their shame, who mind Earthly
things, and Human Experience tells us, how far this Tyranny upon Man so
prevails, that their luxuriant Appetite, never suffer them to be at ease, but
either after the quantity or variety of eating and drinking, they are hurryed
with further desire, and thereby often miserably loaded with hurtful diseases,
thus delicate Mortals are plunged in misery, by that they so much delight in,
this was the Case of the Rich Glutton in the Gospel, but on the other hand, the
Saints in Heaven are not Afflicted with troublesome Appetites, for they feed on
the Manna, in the midst of the Paradise of God, for they shall Hunger no more,
nor Thirst any more, for the Lamb shall feed them, and lead them to living
Fountains of Water, Rev. 21.4, 6. their feeding is their Eternal beholding God
and the Lamb, but the Wicked feeds on the Eternal Wrath of God, if any Man
Worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his mark on his Forehead, or in
his Hand, the same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured
out into the Cup of his Indignation, and he shall be Tormented with fire and
brimstone, in the presence of the Holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb,
Rev. 14.9, 10.

Thirdly, The third Branch of the Lusts of the Flesh, is that insatiable
Appetite, the World has after the Riches of this Life: what has already been
said of the uncertainty, emptiness and vanities of Human Riches, in the
foregoing case of the Rich Glutton, and the many Instances of that Nature, may
give the Complexion of that State: and what Christ says of the Rich Man, that
it is hard for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, and that the
Rich have received their Consolation and Portion in this Life, do all
sufficiently illustrate the Contemptibleness and Misery of that Life, if not
rich toward God; but on the other Hand, Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for
theirs is the Kingdom of God, Mat. 5.3. Christians though never so poor in this
World, have all things in Christ, They are Sons and Heirs of God, and joint
Heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17, 32. all which show how far the State of the
Godly, though Poor in this Life, exceed the Condition of the wicked, though
rich as Craesus, if not rich toward God.

Fourthly, the fourth Branch of the Lusts of the Flesh, is the pleasure Men in
this World take in Relations, Friends, and Companions: but what is said before
of this, what Christ says, who loves Father, Children, Relations, Life it
self, or any thing else better than him, is not worthy of him, and whosoever
loses any of these things for his sake, shall have double in Heaven, is
sufficient to give us a Parallel of the State of the Godly and the Wicked, who
Lust after the Flesh; but let us see what account the Apostle gives of a far
better exchange the Saints have made of the choicest of Companions, but we are
come into Mount Sion, the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, unto
an innumerable Company of Angels, into the general Assembly and Church of the
Firstborn, which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to
the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant, and to the Blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24.

David was weary of the Society of wicked Men, woe is me, that I dwell in
Mesheck, and Sojourn in the Tents of Cedar; so when the Saints are sure that he
that sits on the Throne shall dwell with them, they will freely part with
the Company of Sinful Mortals, Ps. 120.5.

The Lusts of the Eyes being the second part of the Worlds Inventory, we shall
examine it with the excellent discovery of the Saints Light, the Eye being the
more curious and choice Organ of Natural and Sensual Understanding and Delight,
the right Frame and Complexion thereof affords a Man the greatest Satisfaction
of all Sensual Faculties, and yet we see how frail and weak it is at best,
soonest and easiest wounded and diminished by Age or Accidents, and must needs
have supports by glasses in Old Age, or otherwise, and at last it wholly fails
at Death, whereby we find these two defects in it.

First, It is but weak.

Secondly, It altogether fails at Death. The Silver Threads are cut, and the
Golden Bowl broken at the Well, Ecl. 12. to 6. read all.

In these Considerations, the godly have much the Advantage, for when
enlightened they are made of a spiritual Frame strong and vigorous, as being
built on Christ the Rock of Ages by Faith, and when renewed in him, and
Translated into Glory, can admit of no defect, nor be subject to any Infirmity,
you has he quickened, who were once Dead in sin, he has quickened us together
in Christ, Ephesians. 2.1.

As Christ being once raised from the Dead, was reed of all further Natural
Infirmities, even so renewed Sinners even in this Life, have the Cataracts and
Scales of Natural Darkness taken off, as spiritually enlightened, and made
partakers of the Divine Nature, and are taught to see and understand the
Mysteries of God and Godliness, which the Natural Man knows not, nor can
understand; to be Carnally minded is Death, but to be Spiritually minded is
Life and Peace, because the Carnal Mind is Enmity against God, for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can he, the Carnal Man receives not
the things of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them,
because they are Spiritually discerned, but he that is Spiritual, judges all
things, Romans 8.6, 7. for who have known the mind of the Lord, that he may
instruct him? but we have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15, 16.

Thus Christians having the Eyes of their Understanding enlightened, they can
see and understand distinctly, for they walk and see by Faith, and not by
Sense, and being here as to the World Strangers, and not minding the World in a
Carnal Method, as Worldlings do, and as dis interessed, they do impartially
make the more certain observation and judgment of things of this Life,
therefore we are always confident, knowing that while in the Body, we are
absent from the Lord, for we walk by Faith, not by Sight, we are confident and
willing to be absent from the Body, and be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.9.
The Saints have yet a further excellency in their sight, for when they are
Spiritualized in this Life, and the natural ignorance taken off by their
ingraftment in Christ, when these Silver Threads are cut, they are enlightened
with the knowledge and sight which fails not, and united to Christ, that first
and Original Light, and their knowledge is eternal and unextinguishable, and
augmented to the seeing, not only in part as in this Life, but to know as they
are known, and to see as they seen eternally in the Heavens, that they all may
be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in
us, that they may be perfect in one. We know in part, and we Prophecy in part;
but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be
done away; when I was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I
thought as a Child, but when I became a Man, I put away Childish things, for
now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face, now I know in part,
but then shall I know, even as also I am known, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12.

In this side of time, our Eyes are blurred with Sorrow and Grief, and our
sight marred, but in the Translation, all Tears shall be wiped away from our
Eyes, there shall be no night there, they shall need no Candle, nor light of
Sun or Moon, for the Lord gives them Light. Hence plainly may appear, the
great difference between the Lusts of the Eyes, in a Carnal Man, and the
Transcendent excellencies of the sight of the Saints in glory, for that the
Carnal Eye of the Body can only reach sensual Objects, and that under great
Infirmities and Weakness, but the Spiritual Light reaches Heavenly Objects,
and that in full extent, and continues its strength to all Eternity.

The last thing which makes up the Worlds glory and excellency, is the Pride of
Life, by which may be understood all Worldly Honor, Credit, Titles, and
Preferments, which do chiefly consist, either in naked Titles of Honor, or
Titles with Preferment and Benefit attending them, in both which respects, we
shall find that of the glorified Saints, infinitely excel all that can be
pretended from the World.

Worldly Titles of Honor, of the Highest Elevation or Degree, as Dukes, Kings,
Emperors, and such like, are splendid in Carnal Fancy, but having no intrinsic
value, depending only upon the frothy Opinion of others, the professors thereof
may fall from them, into more Contempt than they were in esteem by reason of
their Titles, Power and Glory, as daily experience teaches, but the Saints are
Sons and Heirs of God, and joint Heirs with Jesus Christ, and their Names,
Titles and Dignities are entered in the Records of Heaven, and they are Sealed
with Truth that cannot lie, The grace and calling of God is without Repentance.

To him that overcomes, will I give a New Name, better than the Name of Sons
and Daughters, the Name of God, and the City of God which comes down from
Heaven, this is more Honorable, than that of the Order of St. George, or St.
Andrews, or any of the most splendid Dignities on Earth. Rev. 3.12.

These Titles are not only glorious, though not made up of the vain and
flattering notions of Carnal fancies, and outward gaity and show, but are also
accompanied with the richest Preferments, and greatest profit; such as are thus
dignified with the Name of God on them, are in the Presence Chamber
continually, before the Throne of God Day and Night, and he that sits on the
Throne, dwells amongst them, they shall Hunger no more, neither Thirst any
more, neither shall the Sun light on them, or any Heat, Rev. 7.15, 16* 17.

Though these be not eminent Titles, yet not all, and what the richest,
greatest, and most generous Princes on Earth cannot give, the Lord gives to the
Saints, he makes them Sons and Heirs of his Everlasting Glory, he that
overcomes, shall inherit all things, and he shall be my Son, and I will be his
God, Rev. 21.7. If ye be risen with Christ, then are ye Heirs according to his
promise, and joint Heirs with Christ, and because ye are Sons, God has sent
forth this Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, whereby ye cry Abba Father,
wherefore thou art no more a Servant, but a Son, and if a Son, then a Heir of
God through Christ, Romans 8.15, 17, 26. He makes his Saints Copartners of his
own glory with the Father, and places them to sit on the Throne with himself,
and The glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be one,
even as we are one, Jo. 17.22, 23, 24.

To him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me on my Throne,, even as I
overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne, Rev. 3.21.

Hence we see how far all the Glory, Grandeur and Enjoyments of this Life, come
short to that inheritance in Heaven, and expectation of Believers.

Having thus viewed the emptiness of all these Carnal and Earthly pretentions,
with the fullness of the Saints inheritance, we come now to the answer of these
three foregoing Objections.

Object. Frst, The Scope of the first being, that the Kingdom of Heaven is to
be purchased on hard Terms, by the loss of all the Comforts, and what is dear in
the World, and that such Doctrine is Discourageable, and inclines Men to to a
taking up with, and delighting in the pleasures of the Flesh, by Solomon's
advice, rather than in the loss thereof, anxiously to seek after so hard a
bargain, as the Kingdom of Heaven.

Answ. In answer to which, we must lead the Objector back to the Survey and
Consideration of the two things in Competition, viz. Worldly Enjoyments, and
things of eternal Life, and when the vanity, uncertainty, and emptiness of the
first is considered, and compared with the infinite excellencies, and fullness
in the last, and as Heaven is of more value than Earth, so these earthly things
must be of less esteem, than these Heavenly, and seeing in Merchandise, and
good Husbandry, the value of the thing in purchase is considerable, beyond the
price, or in balance with it, in prospect of the advantages that may accrue;
so that in reason, it cannot be pretended, that the getting of Heaven in all
the glorious excellencies thereof, can be a hard bargain, though the World
under its best pretentions, should be given in purchase, For what has a Man
profited, if he gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul, Mat. 16.26.

Secondly, Consider God is the Author of life, made Heaven and Earth, and
disposes of it at his pleasure, has he not then the Terms in his own hand?
must we cut and carve, and make bargains for our selves, and of our side only?
must we have Heaven and Eternal Life, on our Terms, or on Gods Terms? as he
have the World to us freely, he may make what Terms he pleases, and if we will
not close with God on his Terms, we may, and must go without the bargain.

And these are Christ's Terms, he that takes not up his Cross Daily, and
follows not me, is not worthy of me, Mat. 10.38.

Thirdly, This Doctrine of self-denial, Crucifying the Word, and Mortification
neither does, or should discourage from the purchase of Heaven, for that it
does not forbid the use, or comfort of the Creature, but commands that it be
used aright, according to the Will of God, Whatsoever is sold in the shambles,
that eat asking no question for Conscience sake, the Earth is the Lords, and
the fullness thereof, 1 Cor. 10.25, 26. We are not forbid the use, but the abuse
of the Creature, we are Commanded to Crucify the flesh, and the Lusts thereof;
but we are not commanded to destroy Nature, or Despise the Moderate use of the
Creatures, for our Moderate and Temperate Subsistence, but forbidden the
Ryoting of the Creatures on our Lusts; and though many of Gods People, do
voluntarily abstain from the abuse and superfluous use of the Creature, or that
by his Providence, the plenty thereof may some time be restrained from them,
even to streights, yet he supplieth that with the Blessing of a Contented
Submission, and teaches how to want, and how to abound, and in every Condition
therewith to be content, Phi 4.11, 12. and leads them to a dependence on
himself, that he will not suffer them to be Tempted above measure, but that
with every Temptation, he will give an outgate, that they may be able to bear
it, 1 Cor. 10.13. And make them wait on the appointed time for the vision, in
their greatest streights, Hab. 2, 3.

We are not forbid the moderate use of the World, for supply of our
Necessities, as Mortals, when used in the fear of God, and in Faith of Jesus
Christ, but we are forbidden placing our Affections on Earthly things, when
they come in Competition with Christ, his Honor, and Interest, and clog our
desires and duties toward God, so as not to set his glory before us, as the
main design in every thing.

Fourthly, Solomon's Advice is mistaken, as if he he should encourage Men to
satiate, and delight themselves, only in the Pleasures and Enjoyments of the
Creature, without Dependence on God, or to take that of the Creature for their
all, and not mind future Happiness; he only in experience of Humane vanities,
reproves Men's resting on the Creature, as making an Idol thereof, and advises
the moderate use of it, without anxiety, in reproof of the Worldlings, who in
the too excessive affection of the Creature, take not the free and thankful
enjoyment of it, but Covetously hoards it up, and makes a God of it, which he
accounts foolishness, and warmly reproves resting on Creature delights, Eccl.
11.8, 9.

Object. The second Objection is, that the Doctrine of Saints sufferings, seems
contrary to Scripture, which in many places promise peace, Tranquillity and
Protection, and plenty to the Church and People of God.

Answ. This is easily answered, for either these promises are to the Church and
People of the Jews, all which were conditional on their Obedience, and
performed to them, when in their Duty, and afterward upon their Repentance,
until their falling off in Crucifying the Lord of Glory; however, they are
still the People of Promise, and in his own time, he will bring them to his
Marvelous light, and show them his Salvation.

Secondly, In no place of Scripture, has the Lord promised a constant Tide of
Temporary Mercies, but upon their continuing in Duties, and he has reserved to
himself the giving and taking them away, at his Will and Pleasure, and for his
own ends in his Divine Wisdom, and no Man can pretend to that Innocence, but he
must with David, and the Church, confess, in Righteousness have thou Corrected
me, less than mine Iniquities do deserve, La. 1.18. Cha. 3.39. So we may
conclude our wants, Afflictions, and Chastisements are from the Hands of
Justice for Sin.

Thirdly, Although the Lord often brings his best People under sore
Afflictions, Troubles, and Wants, as experience of all Ages teach us, yet all
this is in love and mercy, and but for a short time, to convince them of, and
bring them from their sins, and to wean their Hearts from the World, and to
wind them up to himself by Repentance, and to draw their Hearts more eagerly
after him, the Kingdom of God and Righteousness; and as a tender hearted Father
leaves not the Child altogether unpunished, yet he corrects in measure, thus
the Lords exercising his Peoples Faith, Patience, and Obedience, can never be
said to be their Discouragement, or contrary to any of his gracious promises to
them in Scripture, but should rather be atributed to that gracious promise of
never leaving or forsaking of them, Jer. 30.11. chap. 31.18, 19, 20. Isa. 43.2.
And in his chastising of them, he distinguishes between them and Bastards,
Heb. 12.7, 8, 9.

But on the other hand, it is the unhappy Lot of the Wicked, to be let run on
in all manner of Riot without punishment, and their Eyes to stand out with
fatness, to be given over to their own Hearts Lusts, to their utter
destruction, and to be given over to a reprobate sense, and to take no pains
upon them, but gives them leave to swallow down the Consolation of their Lusts,
with the bitter Pill of Eternal woe. Woe to you that are rich, for you have
received your consolation, woe unto you that are full, for ye shall be hungry;
woe to you that laugh now, for ye shall weep; woe unto you when all men shall
speak well of you, for so did their Fathers to the false Prophets, Luke 6.24,
25, 26. Job 21.30.

Obj. The third Objection is, This Doctrine seems to be contrary to, and
disparageable of the Nature of God, who is holy, loving, just, and tender
hearted, to suffer his own Children, who love, and serve him best, to be
hampered with all the ill usage of Mortal Life, yea put to Death for his sake,
and amongst men it would be great ingratitude for a Man to suffer his Children
and best Friends to be thus used?

Answ. The Lords suffering his Children to lie for some time under the smart of
the Rod, can never be imputed to his want of tenderness for them; for as a
Father can hear the complaints of a Disobedient Child under correction, at the
same time his Bowels of Compassion turn after him, and yet he Corrects, the
Physician loves and takes care of the Patient, though he will give him no
Cordial until the Physic work, neither will the Surgeon take off the
Plasters though they smart, until the wound be clean and whole; so the Lord
suffers the Rod of Afflictions to work up the sinner to a Conviction, that
the Cordials of his Love when reconciled, may be more accepted of,
notwithstanding in the mean time his Compassion fails not; In all their
afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved them, in his
love and in his pity be redeemed them, and bore them all the Days of Old,
Isaiah 63.9.

How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee O Israel? how
shall I make thee as Zadma? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? my Heart is turned
within me, my repentings are kindled, Hos 11.8.

I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, thou have chastised me and I was
chastised, as a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke: is Ephraim my dear Son, is he
a pleasant Child? for since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him
still, therefore, my Bowels are troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon
him nevertheless, I will correct thee in measure and not leave thee altogether
unpunished, Jer. 30.11. chap. 31.18, 19, 20.

Secondly; The Lord cannot be counted unkind, much less ungrateful to his
Children, when for a moment he chastises them, and recompenseth with eternal
Salvation. I reckon that the sufferings of this present Life which are but for
a moment, are not worthy to be compared to the Glory that shall be revealed in
us, Romans 8.18.

For our light afflictions which are but for a moment, work for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, while we look not after these things
which are seen, but after these things which are not seen; things which are
seen are temporal, but things not seen Eternal, 2 Cor. 14.17, 18.

For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great Mercies will I gather
thee, in a little wrath I hid my self from thee for a moment, but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy upon thee, says the Lord, Isa. 54.7, 8.

For his anger endures but for a moment, in his favor is Life, weeping may
endure for a Night but Joy comes in the Morning, Psalm. 30.5.

Thus then the Lord by his temporary Chastisements cannot be said unkind or
ungrateful, to the best of Saints; when he exchangeth the momentany afflictions
with Oceans of his goodness; In thy presence is fullness of Joy, and at thy
right hand are pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.

Besides all this, Consider the Godly's stumbling at the Wickeds Prosperity; Ye
have said it is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept
his Ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts, and
now we call the Proud happy, and they that work Wickedness are set up, yea they
that tempt God are even delivered? Mal. 3.14, 15.

Job that Pattern of Wisdom, Patience, and Experience gives also an account of
the prosperous state of the Wicked, and their arrogance against God. And in the
second part he gives an account of their end; Job 21. to 16. thus, Their Candle
is put out, destruction comes on them, God distributeth on them sorrows in his
anger, they are like the Chaff before the Wind, his Iniquities are stored up
against his Children, his Eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drink of
the wrath of the Almighty, what pleasure shall he have in his house when his
Months are cut off in the midst of them? the wicked is reserved to the day of
Destruction, they shall be he brought forth to the day of wrath, Job 21.16, to
end.

See the Issue of the Rich Glutton clothed in Purple and fairing daintily, and
poor Lazarus begging the Crumbs at his gate, and the Dogs licking his Sores;
remember that thou in thy Life, receivedest thy good things and likewise
Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted and thou art tormented, Luke
16.19, to end.

Hence we may clearly see Gods bounty and gratitude to his People, and well may
they rely on his promises of rich rewards, for their Faith and Patient
sufferings for him. Verily I say unto you, that ye who have followed me in the
Regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit in the Throne of his glory, ye
shall also sit on Twelve Thrones, Judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel, and
every one that has forsaken Houses or Brethren, or Sisters, Father, Mother, or
Children, or Lands for my sake, shall receive one hundredfold, and shall
inherit everlasting Life, Mat. 19.28, 29.

The Godly may be persecuted and suffer Death, but shall be happy in their
Death; Blessed are they that dye in the Lord, they cease from their Labor and
their Works follow them. And this is their reward, these are they which come
out of great Tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and made them white in
the Blood of the Lamb, therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve
him day and night in his Temple, and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell
among them, they hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun
light on them, or any heat, for the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne
shall feed them, and lead them into living Fountains of Waters, and God shall
wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, Rev. 7.14, 15, 16.

Is not here a fair recompense for all possible tribulations, losses, crosses
and sufferings? And on the other hand see the end of all the voluptuous
pleasures and enjoyments of the Wicked. If any man worship the Beast and his
Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall
drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture,
into the Cup of his Indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and
brimstone in the presence of the Holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb,
and the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever, Rev. 14.9, 10,
11.

And they shall go forth and look on the Carcasses of men that have
transgressed against me, for their worm shall not dye and their Fire shall not
be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh, Isa. 66.2, 4.

But on the other hand we have the further comfort of the Godly; Hear ye the
Word of the Lord ye that tremble at his Word, your Brethren that hated you,
that cast you out for my names sake, said, let the Lord be glorified; but he
shall appear to your joy and they shall be ashamed, Isa. 66.5.

And then shall the Godly see the accomplishment of these evangelical
Prophecies. My Servants shall sing for joy of Heart, but ye shall cry for
sorrow of Heart, and howl for vexation of Spirit, and leave your name for a
Curse to my chosen, Isa. 59.18, to 22. chap. 65.14, 15. and have all the other
comfortable Promises and Prophecies made clear to them, Isa. 50. all. chap. 60.
chap. 61, chap. 62. chap. 63. chap. 65. chap. 66.

As we have viewed man's state from the beginning, and traced the steps of his
toilsom Pilgrimage, to his reconciliation to God by Jesus Christ, and placed
him in the state of Adoption by the Covenant of Peace, we come in the next
place to consider the difference of man's estate in the first Adam, and his sure
and happy condition in the second Adam Jesus Christ the Mediator.

Man in his first Creation while in obedience, was the Darling of God, Head and
Lord of all the Creatures on Earth, and had the privilege of self pleasing in
all the Creatures, (under restriction of the Command,) but lusting against the
command and exceeding his bounds, broke the Chain of obedience and fell under
the Curse: and thus soon after his being made Lord over the Creatures, his
concupiscence and ambition of enjoying more, and knowing more than what was
allowed to him, by the Justice of God for his presumption, he is deprived of
his sovereignty over the other Creatures; whereas before they were subject to
him, he and they also are subjected to the Curse of Enmity; I will put enmity
between thy Seed and her Seed, it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise
its Heel. Cursed be the Ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all
the days of thy life, Genesis 3.14, to 20.

Whereas upon the other hand, such who have obtained mercy to be within the new
Covenant of Peace through Jesus Christ, are founded upon surer terms of an
everlasting Covenant that cannot fail or be broken, and those within it cannot
miss of having the privileges and advantages thereof, and these principally
are four.

First, This Covenant is everlasting not subject to change or alteration.

Secondly, He is Faithful with whom it is made, and cannot fail in his
performances.

Thirdly, As God who Covenants with his People, is faithful, able, and willing
to perform on his part, so he fits his People to perform on their parts.

Fourthly, The great benefit and advantages annexed to this Covenant eternal
Life and all Happiness.

First, This Covenant is everlasting, how great a consolation must it be to
Believers, that they are not only reconciled to God, and the Curse for
Disobedience taken off by Jesus Christ in his blood, but also to be within an
everlasting Covenant with God, and have the Mediator Jesus Christ to make
continual Intercession for them, for when we were without strength Christ in
due time died for the ungodly, when we were yet Sinners Christ Died for us;
much more being now justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from wrath
through him; if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled by his Death, much
more being reconciled we shall be saved by his Life, Romans 5.6.7, 8, 9.

Wherein God willing more abundantly, to show to the Heirs of Promise, the
Immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath, by two Immutable things
in which it was impossible for God to lie, that we might have a strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us,
wh ch hope we have, as an Anchor of the Soul both sure and steadfast, and which
enters into that within the Vail, whether the forerunner is for us entered,
even Jesus made an High Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedeck, Heb.
6.17, 18, 19, 20.

For this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of his
Death, for Redemption of the Transgressions that were under the first
Testament, they which are called may receive the Promise of Eternal
Inheritance, for Christ is not entered into the Holy Places made with Hands,
which are the figures of the true, but into Heaven it self, now to appear in
the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.15, 25.

If any Man sin we have an Advocate with the Father even Jesus Christ the
Righteous, 1 John 2.1.

The whole Scriptures are a series of testimonies of this everlasting Covenant
with Believers. I will betroath thee unto me for ever in righteousness, in
judgment, in loving kindness and mercy: I even will betroath thee unto me in
faithfulness and thou shall know the Lord. Hos. 2.19, 20.

This shall be my Covenant, not after the manner of their Fathers, but a new
Covenant, and I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
Hearts and they shall be my People, and I will be their God, Jer. 30.31, to 38.

They shall be my People and I will be their God, and I will give them one
heart and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them and
their Children after them, Jer. 32.38, 39.

Secondly, God is faithful, therefore this Covenant founded upon his Promise
cannot sail, The gifts and calling of God are without Repentance, Romans 11.29.
If my Covenant be not with Day and Night, and if I have not appointed the
Ordinances of Heaven and Earth, then will I cast away the Seed of Jacob and
David my Servant, I will not take away any of his Seed to be Rulers over the
Seed of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, for I will cause their Captivity to return,
and have mercy on them, Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but one Jot of my
word shall not pass away, Jer. 33.25, 26.

Thirdly, The third and main point in this Covenant, are the qualifications
given by God to man to perform this Covenant, for He it is that works all our
works in us, in him we live move and have our Being, and without him we can do
nothing.

These qualifications are principally Faith and Holiness. Faith by the Apostle
is defined, The Evidence of things not seen, the Substance of things hoped for,
Heb. 11.1.

Faith by the same Apostle elsewhere is thus described: If thou will confess
with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus Christ, and believe with thy Heart, that God has
raised him up from the Dead, thou shall be saved, for with the Heart man
believes unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth. Man's confession is made unto
Salvation, Romans 10.9.

So that Faith is the giving credit to the Word of God in all his Judgments,
Threatenings, Promises, and disengaging our affections to sin and lusts of the
flesh, and turning to God with all our Souls, Hearts, and Minds, and resting
confidently and quietly on the Accomplishment of what is promised, patiently
waiting for the same, and this grace of Faith is accomplished, and wrought in
the Hearts of his People by the Spirit of God; by Grace you are saved, not of
Works, lest any should boast, but by Faith in Jesus Christ, not of your selves,
it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.7, 8, 9. and this Grace of Faith, has he
promised in his New Covenant; they shall be my People, and I will be their God,
and I will give them one Heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever,
for the good of them, and their Children after them, Jer. 32.38, 39. this
qualification also has he promised to give his People in that often mentioned
Scripture, of the New Covenant, A New Heart, a New Spirit will I give them, I
will take away the Stony Heart, and give you a Heart of Flesh, and put my
Spirit in you, and cause you to walk in my ways, and ye shall keep my
Judgments, and do them, Eze. 26.25, to 29. of this grace and qualification of
Faith, we have spoken el^ewhere.

The Second qualification to those in this Covenant is Holiness, for without
Holiness, it is impossible to please God: of this grace and qualification of
Godliness, we have spoken elsewhere.

The Fourth excellency of this Covenant, are the many Advantages attending it,
which may briefly be summed up in these four.

First, To these within this Covenant belong an universal Inheritance of all
things.

Secondly, The certainty of that Inheritance.

Thirdly, The excellencies of the Companions of that Covenant.

Fourthly, The many Privileges belonging to those within this Covenant.

Although the whole Scriptures are full of the great excellencies of the
Heavenly Inheritance, and that place herein is verified, Eye has not seen, nor
Ear heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of Man to conceive (besides
thee O Lord) what he has prepared, for those that wait on him, Is. 64.4. Ps.
31.19. however they may be thus hinted at.

The first is, it is an universal Inheritance, He that spared not his own Son,
but freely gave him up for us all, how shall he not also with him, freely give
us all things? To. 8.32.

All Monarchs, Princes and Propriators of the Earth, have certain Confinements,
and limits to their Territories; and some enjoy, what others cannot pretend
unto, either in respect of the extent of their Countries, or Qualities or Wealth
thereof; but none can pretend in the right of their Inheritance or Possessions,
to that unlimitted Interest of fullness of right, that the Partners of this
Covenant may; for in Christ Jesus, all things are theirs, and they are Heirs of
all things, and shall Inherit all things, Rev. 21.5, 6.

But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made to us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.

Let no Man glory in Man, all things are yours, whether Paul, Apollos, Cephas,
or the World, Life, or Death, or things present, or things to come, all are
yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.21. to 24.

Secondly, this Covenant is certain, all pretentions of right, or possession of
Earthly things, are uncertain and ambulatory, and in the experience of most,
admit of their Eclipse in this Life, witness David, Solomon, Haman, Mordecai,
Herod, and all the great Heroes of this Life, who had their ebbings and
flowings, and have not been exempted from the fate of changes, and with Solomon
have found all but vanity and vexation of Spirit, and that often repeated
place, the 1 John 2.15, 16, 17. describes the uncertainty, and perishing
condition of the things of this Life, and does ascertain the Interest, and
certain condition of the fellows of this New Covenant, as is more plainly
expressed elsewhere; and if they continue in this Life, they leave a Man at
best at his Grave, For we brought nothing into the World with us, and it is
certain we shall carry nothing out, 1 Timothy 6, 7, 17.

Thirdly, The third excellency of this New Covenant, is in the Company,
Fellowship, and Society, the fellows of this Covenant have by virtue thereof,
Men may have Honor, Wealth, and all other Human Delicacies, and all this may
be marred and imbittered to them, by the uneasiness, unsuitableness, and
disagreeableness of their Companions, or unavoidable Society; but the
Companions of this New Covenant are all desirable, grateful, acceptable, and
advantageous; the Soul of Lot was vexed by the wickedness of Sodom, Job in his
Affliction was Tempted by his own Wife, and heavily grieved by his three
Friends, David Sojourned in Mesech, and dwelt in the Tents of Kedar, and this
marred and lessened their quiet, and deprived them of that content they could
have had in more agreeable Society; but the Blessed Harmony of the Saints,
increased the Comfort of all their Enjoyments, they are all so framed,
qualified, and adorned with Holiness, Righteousness, Love and Unanimity, as
they all mind the same things, and cannot jar or disagree, and their joint song
is, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabaoths, the whole Earth is full of thy Praise;
for through him, we both have an Access by one Spirit unto the Father, now
therefore ye are no more Strangers and Forraigners, but fellow Citizens with
the Saints, and the Household of God, and are built upon the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner Stone, in
whom all the Building fitly framed together, grows into an Holy Temple in the
Lord, in whom also ye are built together, for an Habitation of God through the
Spirit, Ephesians. 2.18. to 23.

See the Marks, Characters and Complexion of the Citizens of the New Jerusalem,
He that walks righteously, and speaks uprightly, and dispiseth the gain of
oppression, that shakes his Hand from holding of Bribes, that stops his
Ears from hearing of Blood, that shuts his Eyes from seeing of Evil, he
shall dwell on high, his Habitation shall be the Munition of Rocks, Is. 33.15.
Ps. 15. These are they which came out of great Tribulation, which have washed
their Robes in the Blood of the Lamb, no unclean thing can enter there, without
are Dogs and Swine, Rev. 14.45.

But we are come unto Mount Sion, and to the City of the living God, the
Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of Angels, to the general
Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn which are written in Heaven, and to God
the Judge of all things, and to the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, and to
the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the Blood of Sprinkling, which
speaks better things, than the Blood of Abel, Heb. 12.22, to 25.

The fourth thing relating to this State, are the Manifold Privileges
belonging unto them within it, which may be thus expressed,

First, They within this Covenant, are all Marked, Sealed and Recorded with God.

Secondly, They are under an everlasting Covenant with God, in Jesus Christ,

Thirdly, To them belong universal promises, both in Spirituals and Temporals,
and under every exigent.

Fourthly, All are united to God in Jesus Christ,

First, They are all Marked, Sealed, and Enrolled with God, as God Marked Cain,
to keep him from Man's Fury and Rage, for the Murder of his Brother Abel, when
Cain was accursed with Gods displeasure, for that Horrid Villainy; so God of his
Love to the Saints, Marks them with his own Image, to keep them from the
Destruction of Satan, and Inrolls them in the Book of Life, to be called by
Name in the Resurrection, Hurt not the Earth, nor the Sea, until we have Sealed
the Servants of God in their Foreheads; Is. 4.3. Rev. 7.3.

The Lord takes that care of his People, that as he commanded by the Passover,
the Door-Posts of the Israelites to be sprinkled with Blood, as the sign of his
Peoples Habitation, so he puts his Mark of Holiness in the Hearts of his own,
to distinguish them from the wicked, who in their Conversation and Hearts, have
Wickedness and Sin (the Mark of the Beast) and Worship his Image; he Writes on
his People his Name of Righteousness, and gives them for a Mark, The white
Stone, and in it a New Name, Rev. 14.9. by which white Stone or Holiness, they
are Distinguished from the Wicked in their Conversation, and the New Name is a
Badge of Honor, and ground of inward Consolation to themselves.

Secondly, The second advantage of this State is, that they are under an
everlasting Covenant with God.

Thirdly, To this Covenant do belong universal promises, both in Spirituals and
Temporals.

The fourth and great Privilege of this State, is that Mystical and never
enough admired Union of the Saints to God in Christ Jesus, That they all may be
one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us,
that the World may believe, that thou have sent me, Jo. 14.20. Chapter 17.21.

As Life Eternal is the reward of Faith and Patience, and as this Life Eternal
is the great Prize at the end of our Christian Race, and as we ought to use all
Diligence, to work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, there is no
greater Encouragement can be imagined for our help in this, than the faith and
due consideration that Believers are mystically united to God in Christ Jesus.

Although all the Creatures and Man especially are parts of God, as coming out
of the Mass of Gods Omnipotence, yet Man is no Natural, or Physical part of
God, so to speak; Though Man be Gods by Creation, and Man in Adam having fallen
from God by breach of the Divine Law given to him; God of his Infinite Wisdom
and Goodness has provided a remedy and mean to restore and unite lost man to
himself, and this Union is by the renewing of Man's Nature, and changing it unto
a Spiritual frame: When we were dead in sins has he quickened us together in
Christ. Now in Christ Jesus ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the
Blood of Jesus, for he is our peace, who has made both one, and broken down
the middle Wall of Partition between us, having in his Flesh abolished the
enmity in the Laws, Commandments contained in Ordinances, for to make to
himself of twain one new Man, so making peace, that he might reconcile both
unto God in one body by the Cross, having slain the enmity thereby, Ephesians. 1.5,
13, 14, 15. read all.

Thus by grafting the Soul on Christ by Faith, is made a Spiritual Union with
God, whereby they receive all Spiritual Blessings, by a Heavenly Communication
from Christ, as the Graft receives Sap, Substance, and made fruitful from the
Stock into which it is grafted; this mystical union of Believers between God
and them consists principally in these four.

First, In Unity of Spirit with God in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, In unity of holiness.

Thirdly, In unity of Love.

Fourthly, In unity of Glory.

Of all which Believers are partakers with God in Christ Jesus.

First, To be one in Spirit, is to be one in Wisdom, Knowledge and Purity of
understanding, now God is a Spirit, and must be Worshipped in Spirit and Truth,
and though God made Man consisting of a Soul and Body, and did illuminate him
with knowledge and understanding, though under a vail of restriction; and as
ambition, and the concupisence of his Heart, did deprive him of the advantage
of his first state, and the Wisdom of God intending to restore Man, and place
him in a surer Relation, to wit, (that everlasting Covenant of Peace) through
the vail of Christ's Cross.

He has to the renewed bestowed all Spiritual Light and Knowledge, yet because
we have this Heavenly Treasure in Earthy Vessels, and the heavy clogs of our
Carnal Bodies, and infirmities of the Flesh, hinder mortals (even though
renewed) to behold and apprehend these Heavenly excellencies, communicable
under that Spiritual Union; and Christ intending to have the Saints made fully
perfect and capable of union with himself, he prays the Father that they may be
one with the Father, as the Father and he is one. I in them, and thou in me,
that they may be perfect in one, that is to be of one Spirit, Wisdom, and
Understanding: it cannot be supposed that Christ's intention is, that the
Creature though first renewed, and afterward glorified, should be elevated to
that sublimity of perfection, equal with the Father and himself, but that their
perfection should be in kind nature, and purity of God and Christ's perfection,
knowledge, and wisdom, especially in these three respects.

First, In purity of Spirit and Spiritual mindedness.

Secondly, In oneness and union of mind and will.

Thirdly, In perfection of Knowledge and Understanding. So to understand things
as they are, and not only under the dark shadows of humane appearance.

First of unity of Spirit. As God is a Spirit, pure, holy, and undefiled, and
of purer Eyes than can behold Iniquity, and that he must have all his
Companions and Citizens of that new Jerusalem like himself, and as Christ's
promise is, to prepare a place for his people, in that promise; Let not your
Hearts be troubled, in my Fathers House are many Mansions, and I have prepared
a place for you, John 14.1, 2, 3. And will have them with him, so will he have
them to be like his Father and him, holy as they are holy: blessed are the pure
in Spirit, for they shall see God, Mat. 5.8.

The natural Man is so cloyed with the liquorish relish of carnal things, that
he cannot raise his affections to the true contemplation of the things of God,
and therefore the Children of God must be made spiritually minded. The Natural
man receives not the things of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither
indeed can he know them, because they are spiritually descerned, but he that is
Spiritual judges all things, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15, 16.

Christians are new Creatures, and with them old things are passed away, and
all things become new, they are the Temple of God, God dwells in them, who
can have no fellowship with the flesh, therefore they must be spirituallized,
for they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh, but they
that are after the Spirit the things of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 5.19. To be carnally
minded is Death, but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace, because the
carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be, so then they that are after the flesh cannot please God,
2 Cor. 6.15, 16, 17, 18.

Secondly, Union of the Spirit is to be of one Spirit, to mind the same things
as God and Christ did before the World began, they have and had one and the
same purpose, intention, and mind, to do the same things; Peace and Unity of
Spirit in Counsel and otherwise, is the greatest Comfort and Strength of a
Society, and this is the Harmony of Heaven; How does David magnify this choice
blessing? How pleasant a thing is it for Brethren to dwell together in unity?
it is like the precious ointment upon the Head, that ran down upon the Beard,
even Aarons Beard, that went down to the Skirts of his Garments, as the Dew of
Hermon, and as the Dew that Descended upon the Mountains of Zion, for there the
Lord commanded the Blessing even life for evermore, Psalm. 133. all.

The Lord is a Spirit of Meekness and Peace, and by Christ's Doctrine the
blessing is to the Meek: and his Command is to resemble him in the Spirit of
meekness; I am meek, humble, and lowly in mind, learn of me, Mat. 11.28, 29. He
unites all the Hearts of his People, to the unity of glorifying him, to have
their share of it in constant Hallelujah's: see Gods Promise to Christ; and the
Spirit of the Lord shall rest on him, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding,
the Spirit of Counsel and Might, and of the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11. to 10.

O the admiration of Gods free love and goodness, to the Godly in their
elevation to such a state of Glory, that he makes them all join in such Elogies
of his praises, that they prompt one another to their perpetual ecchoings of
his everlasting glory, see what the Apostle advises in this case. Keep the
unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, let the same mind be in you which was
in Christ Jesus, ye are all called to one hope in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4. to 7.

To be of the same mind with Christ Jesus, is to have the same Will and Purpose
which he had, as well in doing as in suffering, and to do and suffer to the
same Ends and Purposes, for which he did or suffered any thing.

Christ did and suffered all things by the joint advice and in obedience of his
Father. The Father works hitherto and I work. Lo I come to do thy Will, in
the volume of thy Book it is written of me, Psalm. 4.6, 7, 8. Heb. 10.5.

In his sufferings and acting in the mystery of Man's Redemption, he did all by
the resolution of Heaven, the Father and Son did agree and join in the Spirit.
God so loved the World that he gave his only begotten Son that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have Eternal Life, Joh. 3.16, 17.

Here the Father sends, and the Son obeys and comes, and both agree in one in
the Spirit.

In the matter of his Passion on the Cross they concur in one. Father if thou will let this cup pass over, but not my Will but thy Will be done, Mat. 26.39,
42. The Fathers purpose was that Justice should be satisfied by the Death of
the Son on the Cross, and the Son humbly submits. It is finished, and yields up
the Ghost, John 19.30. Romans 3.25, 26. And so in all the course of his Life, as
well as at his Death, all his steps are squared according to the Will and
Counsel of the Father, as we see in the History of the Gospel.

From hence in imitation of Christ are taught to us these two great Duties.

First, Submission.

Secondly, A resignation to the absolute Will of God.

First, Submission. In all Afflictions, Chastisements, and Sufferings in all
cases, we are to exercise the duty of Submission, My Son despise not thou the
chastning of the Lord, nor faint when thou art rebuked, Heb. 12.5, to 12.

Cheerfulness without murmuring, and a Patient bearing up under every
dispensation is the duty of submission, and with the Apostle to glory in the
Cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14. God forbid that I should glory in any thing save in
the Cross of Christ by whom the World is crucified to me and I to the World.
And with the Apostle James count it all joy when you fall into diverse
Temptations, Jam. 1.2.

The Holy Apostle Paul was a great Proficient in this learning of submission, I
know how to want and how to abound, and in every condition therewith to be
content, Phil. 4.11, 12. And this should be the course and care of all who
resolve to follow Christ Jesus, to frame their mind and will under all
dispensations to submit and acquiesce to the Will of God.

This was Holy David's practice, under his so severe and great affliction, when
he had fled from before his Son Absalom, who had usurped his Crown and when
weeping, barefoot, and ashes on his head, sent back from him the Ark of God,
the want of which was a great ingredient to his affliction. If I shall find
favor in the Eyes of the Lord he will show me both it and his Salvation, but
if he say, I have no pleasure in him, lo here I am, let him do to me what
seems good in his sight, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26.

He had the like submission, when he was reproached, railed at, and had stones
cast at him, and was cursed by Shimei; Let him Curse, for the Lord has said to
him, curse David, who then shall say, why have thou done so? let him alone, for
the Lord has bid him, it may be that the Lord will look on my Affliction, and
that the Lord will requite me good for his cursing this day, 2 Samuel 16.7, to 13.

But what is all this to that entertainment the Lord of Glory Jesus Christ met
with on Earth for our Sins, who knew no sin, who was buffeted and reviled after
the most outrageous manner, and bore it with incredible Courage, Patience and
Meekness. Who when he was reviled reviled not again, when he suffered he
threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously, 1 Pet.
2.21, to 25.

Holy Stephen suffered with that meekness of Spirit, that he gave up the Ghost
praying, Father forgive them for they know not what they are doing, Act. 7.59,
60.

The second Duty is resignation, as submission is the patient acquiescing to
the Will of God in all his dispensations, without murmuring, and a
contentedness in every condition, penury and want as well as in abundance, so
resignation is the cheerful giving our selves up to God to be disposed of by
him in every dispensation, trials, troubles, losses and crosses, under all the
exigences of Life.

Christ would not use the Arm of Flesh to rescue himself from being Crucified:
but the Cup which the Father put in his hand, even the bitter Cup of his
Fathers Wrath, he cheerfully drank it out, because it was his Fathers Will,
John 18.11.

Holy Job was a Pattern of Patience and Resignation: though thou would slay
me, yet will I trust in thee.

The Courageous three Children, who were not daunted with the Decree against
them, their Faith, Courage and Resolution brought them to a holy resignation;
We know our God is able to deliver us, and he will deliver us, however, be it
known to thee O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the Image
that thou have set up, Dan. 3.16, 17, 18.

Thus should Christians in imitation of Christ, not so much mind their present
sufferings, temptations, and condition, as the Duty of Faith and Resignation,
in giving themselves up to the Will of God, in Obedience, Faith, and Patience,
and for their encouragement in this, they have Gods Promise of deliverance from
his own immediate hands, if other helps appointed by him should fail: I looked
and there was none to help, I wondered that there was none to uphold, therefore
mine own Arm brought Salvation unto me, and my right hand it upheld me, Isa.
59.16.

That other famous place in the Prophecies of Jeremiah, is a great staff to
Faith and Resignation, under desertion of all helps even lovers, relations and
friends; all thy lovers have forsaken thee, they seek thee not, for I have
wounded thee with the wound of an Enemy, with the Chastisement of a cruel one,
for the multitude of thine Iniquities, because thy sins were increased,
therefore all that devour thee shall be devoured, etc.

And all thy Adversaries shall go into Captivity, and they that spoil thee
shall be a spoil, and all that Prey upon thee will I give for a Prey, for I
will restore health unto thee, and heal thee of thy wounds, says the Lord,
Jer. 30.14, to 18. and that other famous place in Isaiah, chap. 49.15. to end,
gives great encouragement to Faith and Resignation, under the greatest
extremities, as being forsaken of Friends, Relations, and much oppressed by
Enemies. All things which Christ did were holy and just, he minded only things
of a Heavenly and Spiritual Nature, as his Kingdom was not of this World, so
all his people mind Heavenly things, they are Strangers and Pilgrims here in
this World, and Travelers only with him to the new Jerusalem, and as Pilgrims
must not set their Hearts on things in the Way, but on their Heavenly
Treasures. Lay up to your selves treasure in Heaven, for where your Treasure is
there will your Hearts be also, Mat. 6.19, to 33. Love not the World nor the
things of the World; if any man love the World, the love of the Father is not
in him, for all that is in the World, the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the
Eye, the Pride of Life, is not of the Father but of the World, and the World
passes away and the Lusts thereof, but he that does the will of God abides
for ever, 1 John 2.15, 16, 17.

Hence we see, as Christ minded only Heavenly things, so he would raise his
People to Heavenly mindedness, and by his description of the World, his purpose
is to wean his Peoples affections from it.

Object. But it may be objected, that this Doctrine of the Contempt of the
World seems contrary to the Doctrine and Duty of Charity and Christ's new
Commandment, Love one another and love your Brethren as your selves, and that
to Believers is also allowed the comfortable use of the Creatures, must not
Parents love their Children, Husbands their Wives, and other Relations which in
Scripture is commanded as a Duty, like as Industry and Provision for Families,
how can this consist with the not loving of the World?

Answ. For answer to this, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is that wonderful
Counselor, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Wisdom it self, Prove.
8.1. in whom dwells the Godhead bodily, love it self, and Justice it self, does
not teach inconsistent Doctrines, neither that which is inconsistent with his
Holy Nature of Justice, Wisdom, Love, and Charity, but all his Doctrines are
Coherent and Harmonious, therefore we must understand him in the Language of
the Spirit,

The World may be taken up two ways.

First, As in Genesis 1. and 31. And God saw every thing that he had made, and
behold it was very good, and God rested on the Seventh Day, which was appointed
a Sabbath, and left off working, and Abode not in the glory or beauty of his
works, which were all good; but returned to himself, in that glory with his
Father.

Secondly, The World may be taken up, when for Man's sin it was Accursed, Genesis
3.17, 18, 19. and was given into the Hands of the Dragon, and the Prince of the
Power of the Air, was made Lord of it, Ephesians. 2.2. Now in the first sense to love
the World as God did, when Man and all things were in Integrity, and to behold
and enjoy the World, as God did resting into himself, so admiring God in the
Creature, and resting in the Creator; this loving and using the Creature or
World, is not inconsistent with the love of God; but to use and delight in the
Creature, when under the Curse, Power and Dominion of Satan, and rest on it,
and not on God, is inconsistent with the love of the Father.

Secondly, By the words of the Evangelist, If any Man love the World, the love
of the Father is not in him: and by the Apostle James's Doctrine, know ye not,
that the Friendship of the World is Enmity with God, whosoever therefore will
be a Friend to the World, is the Enemy of God, James 4.4. These words must be
meant in the second Sense, as when the World by Adams Transgression was
accursed, and as it were Escheated, and put in Bondage, To. 8.20, 21. to Satan
the Prince of the Power of Darkness: and not when it stood straight with God,
and was all good in his Sight: and by these words, the Love of the Father is
not in him, seems an Anathema, and Curse to all the Lovers of the World, as the
Apostle elsewhere pronounces a Curse, if any Man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema Marenatha, 1 Cor. 16.22. so that the love of the
World as it is under the Dominion of Satan in the second Sense, cannot be
consistent with the Love and Honor of God.

It cannot be doubted, that the Father having given his Son for a Ransom for
Sinners, but with him also he will give them all things, and that they have in
his right a surer and better Title to the World, and lawful use of the things
thereof, than the Wicked can pretend to, for that the Godly are Heirs of all
things, and the Wicked only Usurpers of what they have in possession without
right; therefore by the Doctrine of Mortification, Holiness, and Contempt of
the World, they are not forbid, and not only permitted, but commanded a lawful
Enjoyment of the Worlds good, but in these different respects.

First, That they shall use the World, as not abusing it, that is, they shall
use it as Pilgrims, for the present, sober, and moderate subsistence, to carry
them on in their Journeys Heavenward, and not to sit down under the shadows of
Worldly Pleasures, as the wicked do, whose Portion it is, with a Curse upon it
to them, Woe to you that are Rich, for you have received your Consolation, Luke
6.24. but the Godly are not to sit down with the Rich Husbandman, to Solace
their Souls only in the things of this Life, lest with him they share of his
Judgment, Thou fool, this Night will I require thy Soul at thy Hand, then whose
shall all these these things be which thou have? Luke 12.16, to 22.

Secondly, The Children of God do not, nor should rely only on the visible
Enjoyments of the Creature as capable of themselves to give satisfaction, but
on God by Faith, and on his Blessing to make them useful, Man's Life consists
not in the abundance of what a Man has, Man lives not by Bread alone, but by
every word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God, Luke 4.4.

Behold the Lillies who take no care, and spin not, how they are Clothed above
Solomon in all his glory, the Ravens Sow not, and yet are fed, Luke 12.22, to
32.

All the Power of the Creation is in Gods Hands, as he has the Power to
restrain, and suspend, or give a Blessing upon the Creatures, so has he the
Storehouse of Heaven in his Hands, and he can send such plenty, as there may
not be room to store it up in, Mal. 3.10. See all the great and Manifold
Promises to his People in Poverty, Streights, and Wants, Is. 41.17, 18. Is.
45.3. I will give thee the Treasures of Darkness, and the Hidden Riches of
Secret places.

Thirdly, The People of God do, and ought to use their Enjoyments virtuously,
and do not squander them on unlawful Lusts, and Pleasures, but Moderately use
them for their lawful and sober Subsistence, or in Charity, and do use virtuous
endeavors and improvements; but the Wicked feed their Lusts upon Gods bounty;
wherefore the Lord in his Justice often Blasts their Enjoyments, and either
takes them away from them, or makes them a Curse in the Enjoyment thereof, Ye
Eat, and have not enough, because ye spend on your Lusts, James 4.1, 2, 3. and
in that other place, therefore I will return and take away my Corn in the time
thereof, See Hosea 2. all.

The People of God use all the Dispensations of God to them, in Sobriety, and
virtuous Industry, and depend upon God for a Blessing to their Endeavors, but
the Wicked live voluptuously in their Enjoyments, and do not principally
ascribe to God, the success of their Husbandry, nor depend on him for it* and
therefore, in the Justice of God, he either takes from them what they have, or
Blasts their Enjoyments in the success of it; see the Parrable of the sluggish
Servant, in mis-improvement of the Talent, which was taken from him, and he
punished with utter Darkness; see Gods Judgment upon such as do not trust God
with a Blessing upon their Labors, Mat. 25. Because thou have forgotten the
God of thy Salvation, and not remembered the Rock of thy Strength, therefore
shall thou Plant pleasant Plants, and set them with strange Slips, in the Day
shall thou make thy Plant to grow, and in the Morning shall thou make thy Seed
to flourish; but the Harvest shall be a heap in the Day of grief, and of
desperate Sorrow, Is. 17.10, 11.

See that other Eminent place for this purpose, they Hatch Cockatrice Eggs, and
weave the Spiders Webb; he that Eats of their Eggs Dies, and that which is
crushed, braketh out into a Vyper, their Webbs shall not become Garments,
neither shall they cover themselves with their Works, their Works are Works of
Iniquity and Violence is in their Hands, Is 59.5, 6.

See farther to this purpose, Ye shall Sow your Seed in vain, and your Enemies
shall eat it, I will make your Heaven as Iron, and your Earth as Brass, and
your strength shall be spent in vain, for your Land shall not yield her
increase, neither shall the Trees of your Land yield their Fruit, Lev. 26.16,
to 22.

They shall eat, and not have enough, they shall commit Whoredom, and not bring
forth; because they have left off to take heed to the Lord, See Job 8.11. to
end. Hosea 4.10.

Consider that further Judgment upon the Wicked, who trust to the Flesh, and
not to God, ye have Sown much, and bring in little, ye eat, but ye have not
enough, ye drink, and are not satisfied, ye Cloth you, but there is none warm,
he that earneth Wages, earneth to put in in a bag that has holes, Haggai 1. to
11.

See the Manifold Judgments of God Denounced against Vanity, Pride, and
Prodigality, and it shall come to pass, instead of a sweet smell, there shall
be a stench, and instead of a girdle there shall be a rent, and instead of well
set Hair baldness, and instead of a stomacher a girdle of Sackcloath, and
burning instead of Beauty, Is. 3.16. to end.

Fourthly, The Wicked spend and use the Creatures to their own Pleasures, and
live in the delight of them, but the Godly are Dead to the World, and delight
in nothing but in Christ, I am Crucified to the World, and the World to me,
nevertheless I live, and yet not I, but Christ that lives in me, and the Life
that I live in the flesh, is by the Faith of the Son of God, that loved me, and
gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20.

From hence and other Scriptures and History of the Saints Lives, we see the
different usage of the Godly and Wicked, the Saints are Dead to the World, and
their Delight and chief Satisfaction is in God, the Wicked make the World their
God, and sole Delight, and glut themselves with Satiety in it; but the Godly
can find no Contentment in the Creature, but with Reference to God in Christ
Jesus, and make him their chief Delight, and cry out, none but Christ, and this
is the Prohibition of the Gospel, that we should not love Father, Mother,
Brothers, or Sisters, or our own Life more than God, Mat. 10.37, 38, 39. but
God does not forbid the lawful use of the Creatures, but only forbids using it
in Vanity, Superfluity, and Prodigality.

Secondly, In being of the same Mind with Christ, is not only to Act, Do, and
propose the same things with his Father, but also to do all, and suffer all for
the Glory of God.

The Worldlings kiss their own Hand, and Sacrifice to their own Net, and say,
their own Hand has done it, and ascribe the glory of all the Enjoyments they
have to themselves, or to the Creatures in which they delight, and say, These
are the Rewards which my Lovers and Companions have given me, Hosea 2.12, 13.

Nebuchadnezzar ascribed all to his own Power and Glory, Is not this great
Babylon that I have built for the House of the Kingdom, by the Might of my
Power, and for the Honor of my Majesty? and see the Event, and Gods Just
Judgment upon him, while the word was in his Mouth, there fell a Voice from
Heaven, saying, O King Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken, the Kingdom is
departed from thee, and they shall drive thee from Men, and thy dwelling shall
be with the Beasts of the Field, they shall make thee to eat Grass as Oxen, and
seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the most High Rules in
the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, Dan. 4.30, to 34.

See the Pride of Herod, and taking to himself the glory due to God, and the
fatal Judgment of God on him for it, And immediately an Angel of God smote him,
because he gave not God the glory, and was eaten of worms, and gave up the
Ghost, Acts 12.21, 22, 23.

On the other Hand Christ set the Fathers glory before him, as the chief Scope
and Design of all his Actions and Intentions: When his supposed Father Joseph,
and his Mother sought him with Care, and came back to Jerusalem, and found him
in the Temple disputing, they told him they had anxiously sought him, he
answered not with Apology or Excuse, but said, How is it that you sought me,
wist ye not, that I must be about my Fathers Business? Luke 2.46, to 50.

We see that he places all his Business in the Honor, and doing of the Will
of God, yea, he places his Esteem on all such, and accounts such only to be
his Relations, as obey his Fathers Will, And Jesus answered and said to them,
these are my Father, Mother, and Brethren, which hear the Word of God, and do
it, Luke 8.21.

We see in all the Miracles and Wonders Christ wrought Curing Diseases, and
Raising the Dead, he Exhorts to the giving of glory to God, and more
particularly in that Famous place. Thus says the Lord, let not the Wise Man
glory in his Wisdom, nor the Rich Man glory in his Riches, neither let the
Mighty Man glory in his Might, but let him that glories, glory in this that he
knows and understands me, that I am the Lord which exercises loving
Kindness, Judgment, and Righteousness in the Earth, for in these things I
delight, Jer. 9.23, 24.

Thus then ought all the Followers of Christ, to have the same mind that was in
Christ Jesus, that is to set Gods glory as the chief Scope of all Designs and
Actions before them, He that gloryeth, let him glory in the Lord, and
whatsoever we do, whether we Eat or Drink, let us do all things to the glory of
God, 1 Cor. 1.31.

The World was made by God, and for his Honor, therefore all should be
ascribed to him, hence we may find, whether the same mind be in us, which was
in Christ Jesus, if we do what he did, and to the same end and glory of God,
therefore it behooves us to bring all our Actions and Purposes to this Touch;
for if they be not of this stamp, they are Reprobated Counterfeit, and will not
be allowed in the Balance of the Sanctuary, for all the Children of God are
led by his Spirit, wherefore we must try the Spirits, whether the same mind be
in us, which was in Christ Jesus; know ye not that Christ is in you, except ye
be Reprobates, but ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that
the spirit of God dwells in you; now if any Man have not the spirit of
Christ, he is none of his; and if Christ be in you, the Body is Dead because of
sin, but the spirit is life, Romans 8.9, 10, 11. because of Righteousness; but if
the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the Dead, dwell in you, he that
raised Christ from the Dead, shall also quicken your Mortal Bodies, by his
spirit that dwells in you, To. 9.10, 11.

Thirdly, Unity of Spirit is to be one in Knowledge, there is nothing raises
Man's thoughts more than desire of Knowledge, and nothing Magnifieth Man more
than Knowledge, and herein does Man most excel all other Creatures, not only
that God has made them Lords over the Creatures, but that he hat endowed him
with a Rational Soul, capable of understanding above other Creatures, and in
nothing is the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God more eminent, than by the
different measure of Knowledge bestowed on Mankind; Man in general, exceeds all
other Creatures in Knowledge and Ingenuity, but every Generation and Nation
exceed others at such a Rate, so as what in one Age, or Generation, is a
Riddle, and hid as a Mystery, in another it is Perspicuous, clear and easy, so
that the knowledge of things is the darling of Ages.

Although we have the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the Fabric of Heaven, Earth, and
the Seas, the indefatigable and daily Travels of Discoverers, and the use of
Reading, and the Ancients to inform us, either of the parts of the Earth, and
Treasures thereof, yet are we still to seek, as well of the Parts, as Treasures
of things undiscovered.

The New Inventions of Men's Ingenuity, or the secrets of Nature and Power of
Art, make it true which Solomon says, he that increases in Knowledge,
increases in Sorrow, because the Soul of Man is restless, and the account of
the Idolatry, Wickedness, and Rebellion of Man on Earth, is just cause of
Sorrow, Grief, and Mourning, because of the Dishonor of God, and Destruction
of Souls by sin; nevertheless Knowledge is so choice a thing, that it makes
some Men eminent in understanding, as much differ from others, as Man generally
differs from a Bruit so that the Schools of understanding are both courted and
desirable.

Now if the knowledge of the things of this World, be so desirable and
excellent, how much more is the knowledge of God, things of God, and Eternal
Excellency, which Nature cannot Fathom? and though we had all the Books Written,
and attained to all Human Learning, and had all the Host of Heaven, and
Creation under the Sun to instruct us, yet thereby can we not be instructed, or
learn the Mystery of Man's Redemption, or know Regeneration and Newness of Life,
or power of God in the spirit, much less be able to find out the Eternal
purpose of God, to the souls of Believers, or to apprehend that fruition of
glory, that Believers are entitled unto, and shall enjoy. Eternally in Heaven,
wherefore if we must be Wise to eternal Life, we must be Fools to this World,
for according to Solomon, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom,
Prove. 1.7. So that if any Man lack Wisdom, he must ask it of God, who gives to
all Men liberally, and upbraideth not, James 1.5.

If the Excellency and Advantage of knowing the perishing shadows of Earthly
things, lead Men's desire so much after that, much more may we be Encouraged to
seek after the knowledge of God, and of spiritual things.

First, For that in Human knowledge, there is no perfection, we see in all
Ages, Countries and Nations, one Generation exceeds the other in knowledge
and experience, and in one and the same Age, one Man far exceeds another, in so
much that the Wisdom of one, is ridiculed by the other.

Secondly, All Human knowledge leaves a Man in this life, yea, a Man often so
Declines in his Intellectuals, that his own Life is his Burden, and he becomes
a Child or Bruit.

Thirdly, Man's knowledge is his Burden, because he can attain no satisfaction
thereby, it having no end or perfection, so as all his Life is Anxiety, Trouble
and Sorrow, Witness Solomon, Ecl. 2. Chap. 3. all. Ecl. 12.12.

Fourthly, The knowledge of Human things puffs up, and drives a Man often so
above his level, that many Learned in Discontent, have run into Distraction,
and strangled themselves; but the Sanctified knowledge of God and spiritual
things, have the quite contrary qualities and effects.

First, Divine knowledge is so choice a thing, that the more a Man has of it,
he becomes the humbler, abaseth himself, and adores God the more, therefore
have I uttered that I understood not, I have heard of thee by the Ear, but now
mine Eye sees thee, wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in Dust and Ashes,
Job 42.3, 5, 6.

Secondly, As Human knowledge is a Burden, Divine knowledge is a Delight,
because the more a Man knows, he humbles himself the more in sense of his
own Vanity, and is confirmed in his knowledge, because by Divine Wisdom, he
sees all the steps Coherent, and tend to his building up in God, and so
delights in that knowledge, then shall we know if we follow on to know the
Lord, Hosea 6.3. here is Assurance of Attainment, which is not in Human
knowledge, witness such who spend their Time, Life and Substance, in pursuing
after that phanciful Foppery, commonly called the Philosophers Stone) who for
most part dye fools or beggars, if not both.

Thirdly. As the knowledge of Human things fail and leave a Man in this Life
and the knowledge of God and spirituals attend a Man here to his Grave, and
grows and Conducts him, not only to his Grave, but also to Heaven, Bl^ssed are
the Dead that Dye in the Lord, they cease from their Labor, and their Works
follow them, Rev. 14.13.

Their knowledge of God in Faith is their Guide and Comfort, Christ has
promised to send to his People for their Guide, and Comfort the Holy Ghost the
Comforter, Even the Spirit of Truth, which the World receives not; because it
knows him not, but ye know him, and he dwells in you, and shall be in you;
I will not leave you, I will come to you, Jo. 14 16, 17.

Fourthly, As the knowledge of Human things is imperfect, and therefore Men's
burden, and the cause of such Imperfection may be,

First, Gods Wisdom to keep Man from boasting of himself, so it may be from the
changeableness of Human Objects, in reference to times and seasons, and also
from providential Influence, on the Speculative part, making it more acute in
one Age, than in another, to show the absolute Dependence of all Creatures on
the Influence of Providence, as shall best please God, so the Wisdom and
Knowledge, which is from above, and dispensed to Christians on this side of
time, is also clouded and narrow, imperfect, and but in part, not that the
Wisdom of God can be dark, but the manifestation thereof may be so said to be,
in relation to that full fruition after enjoyed, for that either Wisdom which
is God himself, Prove. 8.1. all. Thought fit to let out no more of himself to
Believers, then might be necessary to the Discovery of Carnal and Sinful
Vanities, and be a guide to lead them to Heaven, in longing Appetite after the
more Glorious knowledge of himself.

Or Secondly, For that our Crazy and Earthy Vessels, as old brittle Bottles,
were incapable to receive such inexpressible Communications of himself, and
these Eternal Mansions of Felicity, which are Treasured up in Christ Jesus for
the Saints, and therefore he allows them no more here, than is fit with Comfort
to waft them in upon Eternity, and then for the further Manifestation of his
own glory, goodness and wisdom, does exchange our Mortal and vile Bodies of
Dust, not able to receive such glory, into immortal Bodies, and then does
manifest himself to the full to the Saints, who then shall see, not in a shadow
only, but plainly as they are seen, that their glory may be full; for we know
but in part, and prophecy but in part but when that which is perfect is come,
than that which is in part shall be done away, for now we see through a glass,
darkly, but then face to face, now I know in part, but then shall I know, even
as I am known, 1 Cor. 13 9 to 13. and this is that Mystical Union of the
Spirit, by which the Saints are made one with God in Christ Jesus, in that
inexpressible knowledge and sight of God, whereby they shall be able to stand
in his presence, face to face, and behold his glory, and rejoice in it.

The Second Branch of Union with God is Holiness, God is essentially Holy, and
Holiness it self, [whose Name is Holy] Isa. 51.45. and can as well be divided
from himself, as from Holiness; so who are one with God, must be Holy, and to
be Holy, is to be partakers of the Divine Nature.

Christ the only begotten Son of God, and express Image of his Person, whose
Errand to the World was, only to Reconcile God to Man, knowing how Essential
Holiness was to the Bargain, he and all the Prophets and Apostles Preach up
Holiness.

Holiness and Righteousness is the chief piece of the Saints Armor, to fight
the Battles of Christ, Ephesians. 6.14. and is that Image of Christ, to which
Believers must be Conformed to, Ephe. 4.24. and Colo. 3.10. and by which they
are distinguished and known.

Holiness is that Clothing of the Saints, who sit with God on his Throne in
his Kingdom, these are the White Robes washed in the Blood of the Lamb, and the
Brides Wedding Garment, spoken of in the Gospel, for the clean Linen is the
Righteousness of the Saints, Rev. 7.14.

Object. But to this it may be Objected, that Christ is made to us of God,
Wisdom, Righteousness, Redemption, Salvation, and Sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.13.
so we need take no care for inherent Holiness in our selves, but may sit down
and rest on his imputed Righteousness, and Rely on his Justification.

Answ. To which may be answered thus, That it is most certain that Christ is
Sanctification and Redemption to Believers, and that they are Clothed with his
imputed Righteousness, in the Eyes and acceptance of God, and by his Stripes
they are healed, and all that Saints could do, would never make Atonement for
Transgression, and although Christ by his Death, has most sufficiently
satisfied Justice for our Offenses, and that thereby the Father in him is well
pleased, nevertheless, as he has promised to Reconcile us to the Father, and
has actually Reconciled such as believe in him, and has to them purchased
Eternal Salvation by his Blood, and having procured for them Heavenly Mansions,
to make them Companions with himself, and his Father, Angels and Saints, there
is a necessity for an Inherent Holiness, with which they must be clothed as
that Wedding Garment, and attire suitable to the Bride, in such Heavenly
Mansions, where no unclean thing can enter in, Rev. 21.27. and this clothing
and garment is the renewing the Children of God in their Nature, all things are
made new, old things are done away, 2 Cor. 5.17.

We must forsake and crucify the World, we must dye to sin and live to
righteousness, we must be planted in his Death, that we may live in the
likeness of his Resurrection, Romans 6. to 19. Gal. 3.27. Col. 2.10, to 14.

We must put on the Nature of Christ in Spiritual Holiness, Circumcised without
hands, putting off the Body of Sin, and are quickened with Christ by his
effectual working of Grace. The Affections must be above the Creatures, and the
new Man renewed by Knowledge after the Image of him who created him, Col. 3.10.
The Saints live no more to the Flesh, but are dead to it and live by Faith, I
am crucified to the World and the World to me, nevertheless I live, but not I,
but Christ that lives in me, and the Life that I live in the Flesh, is by the
Faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2.20. God
forbid that I should glory in any thing save in the Cross of Christ, in whom
the World is crucified to me, and I to the World, Gal. 6.14.

Thus then inherent Righteousness, and holiness of the Saints, is that which
qualifieth the Soul for union with God in Christ Jesus, and this holiness
though inherent to the persons of all Saints, is not their own growth or
product, but is the gift of, and special working of the Spirit of God, he it is
alone that gives the new Heart, and creates in them a clean Spirit, and takes
from them the Heart of Stone, and sits them for this union.

The Third branch of Saints Union with God, is their being one with him and
Christ in love. I in them and thou in me, that they may be perfect in one, and
that the World may know that thou have loved them, as thou have loved me,
before the World began, John 17.23.

Love in its perfection is the Darling of all Christian Virtues and Graces, and
is such essential part of Holiness and Divine Nature, that it cannot be without
it, as God is Holiness. Wisdom, Goodness and Righteousness, so is he love it
self; Let us love one another for love is of God, and every one that loves is
born of God, and knows God, and he that loves not, knows not God, for God
is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John
4.7, 8, 16.

Love is Christ's chief command, and from his own example, a new Commandment I
give unto you, that you love one another, as I have loved you, by this shall
all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another, John. 13.34, 35.

Love as the Character and Mark of a Christian, is not only a naked and bare
profession of kindness and friendship, but consists in these two:

First, In a firm and constant sympathy of, and with any, in any afflicted
state or condition.

Secondly, In a constant, cheerful, and ready supply of the wants of others, as
far as their abilities will reach.

First, This love consists in a constant and tender sympathy in all troubles,
afflictions, and distresses, in Body, Spirit, or Estate, like as Christ was; In
all their afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his Presence saved
them, in his love, and in his pity he redeemed them, and bore them all the days
of old, Isa. 63.9.

There is denounced a severe curse and woe against such as are at ease, and
unconcerned in the case of Gods afflicted People. Woe to them that are at ease
in Zion, and forget the afflictions of Joseph, Amos 6. to 7. Charity and
Sympathy either to the Church of God in general, or to any of the particular
Members or Saints, is the great badge ornament and character of Christians, 1
Cor. 13 3, to 7. Love is to be in amity and unity, and not in contention one
with another love thy Brother as thy self. But, if ye bite and devour one
another, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another, Gal. 4.14, 15.

Christians should consider the height, depth, and full extent of Gods love
toward them, which is a mystery passing knowledge, that we may be filled with
all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.

Christians in one another afflictions, should incorporate themselves in that
holy cement of love, or mutual sympathy and assistance, to comfort, uphold,
assist and relieve one another, under their several afflictions: see the woeful
character of such as do not relieve and love his Brother; If a Man say, I love
God, and hates his Brother, the love of God is not in him, he is a Liar, for
he loves not his Brother whom he has seen, and how can he love God whom he
has not seen, 1 John 4.20. And this command have we from him, that he that
loves God, loves his Brother also, and he that loves not his Brother is a
Murderer, and no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him, 1 John 3.15.

Secondly, The second branch of Divine Love, approved of God to make up the
Union of the Saints with God, is that laving out the Bowels of charitable
assistance, in the supply of the Saints necessities, like the good Samaritan in
the Gospel, not only to see and pity his affliction and condition, but to
support it: God is not only a bare Spectator of our misery and maladies, but
also a healer of all our wounds, and is that only Physician of Israel, and
has, and applies that balm of Gilead, even the Balsom of his own Blood to cure
us; hereby know we the love of God for us, because he laid down his Life for
us, and we ought to lay down our life for the Brethren, 1 John 3.16. But whosoever
has this Worlds good, and sees his Brother have need, and shuts up his
Bowels of compassion from him, how does the love of God dwell in him? 1 John
4.9. If God so loved us we ought also so to love one another. Greater Love has
no man than this, that a Man lay down his Life for a Friend, Joh. 15.13, to 18.
The Duty of Christian charity is recommended and commanded as the evidence of
Christian sincerity. The blessing is to the liberal, the liberal Soul shall be
made fat, and he that waters shall be watered himself, Pr. 11, 24, 25, 26.
See the exhortation from Christ's own example. But ye know the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that though he was Rich yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye
through his Poverty might be Rich: and that famous exhortation, consider them
that are in bonds as being bound with them, and such as are in adversity, as
being your selves in the Body, Hebrews. 13.3.

See how the Apostle James challenges a naked beholder of the poor, naked and
indigent; If a Brother or Sister be naked and destitute of daily food, and one
of you say, depart in Peace, and be you warmed and filled, notwithstanding ye
give them not these things which are needful, what does it profit? Jam. 2.15,
16. So that it is not bare profession which makes Love, but the fulfilling of
the Commandment, love thy Neighbor as thy self, as Christ loved his Church and
laid down his Life for her, so ought we also for whom Christ died. Hence we see
how great is the Privilege of Believers for whom Christ both died and is risen
again, and taken possession of Heaven for them, and that the Father will love
them with the same love, with which he loved his only Son, before the World
was, so Believers should not be afraid, for Love admits no fear; There is no
fear in Love, for perfect love casts out fear, because fear has torment, he
that fears is not made perfect in Love, 1 John 4.18.

What quiet and comfort therefore may Believers have, who find that love of God
constraining them to wait on him by Faith, may with David say, we will not fear
what man can do unto us, and with the Apostle, if God be with us who can be
against us? be of good courage for God will strengthen your Hearts.

Fourthly, As the Saints are one with God and Christ. 1. In Spirit. 2. In
Holiness. 3. In Love. So 4. In Glory, which is the highest privilege
imaginable, and is clearly held out in the Text; And the glory thou have given
me, I have given them, that they may be One even as we are One. Father I will
that they also which thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may
behold my glory which thou have given me, John 17.22, 24. And as God so loved
the World, that he gave his only begotten Son to dye for Sinners, so Christ
continues his Love, that he will have all for whom he died, to share of the
same glory with himself, and this is the highest exaltation and expectation of
the Saints, contrived by the Wisdom of God, and accomplished by the Death and
Resurrection of Christ, and his being set down at the right hand of Glory for
us.

This superexcellent state of the Saints Glory, and Eternal Happiness; is
branched out in a fivefold consideration. First, In their blessed Death.
Secondly, Their Spiritual and Immortal Bodies. Thirdly, Their being admitted
into the Presence of God and Host of Heaven. Fourthly, Their being continued in
that state for ever. Fifthly, All Sorrow, Tears and Mourning to be
everlastingly done away.

First, Man in his first Creation was made Lord of all Creatures; and though
after his Fall, by the Wisdom of God, and infinite Love of Jesus Christ, was
reconciled to God by a new Covenant of Peace, nevertheless was continued in a
Prison of Clay, subjected not only to all Natural weakness, sickness, cold,
hunger, thirst, and other natural infirmities of the Flesh, and uneasiness of
Life; but also while in the body, obnoxious to the Temptations of Sin, and
grief of Soul, through the weakness of the Spirit, under the clog and coverture
of the Flesh, as the experience of all Men Witness, that this Life is but
Labor and Sorrow; therefore the Wisdom and Goodness of God, and love of Christ
Jesus, has so contrived that the Soul (a Prisoner) to misery and infirmities,
should have the Chains of Mortality knocked off by Death, and be let free to
Eternal Life. And this is the first step of Saints effectual Happiness. The
Holy Apostle clearly testifies, that whilst we are in the Body we are absent
from the Lord, and therefore not only we but the whole Creation groan under
these Infirmities, and long for the Liberty of the Sons of God, even the
Redemption of our Bodies: and therefore it is revealed that Death is as it were
the opening of the Prison Door, to the Prisoners of Hope, to set them at
liberty from all the miseries of Mortality and Temptations to sin, and gives
them a free Pass to the Land of Rest. Blessed are the Dead thy dye in the Lord,
they cease from their Labors and their Works follow them. Rev. 14.13. And this
is a great Consolation to Believers, for as Death is the end of all Fleshly
pleasures, it is also the end of all sin and Misery, so the way of Death and the
Grave ought not to be loathsome or irksom to them, for that Christ the Captain
of our Salvation has proved both ways, and for us led Captivity Captive, O
Death where is thy Sting, O Grave where is thy Victory? and the last Enemy is
Death, who is led Captive by Jesus Christ, he will swallow up Death into
Victory, he will Ransom them from the power of the Grave, I will redeem them
from Death. O Death, I will be thy plague, O Grave, I will be thy Destruction,
Repentance shall be hid from mine Eyes, Hos. 13.14.

The Second instance of Eternal Happiness, is to have Spiritual Bodies. The
glory of Heaven and presence of God, which is Eternal Happiness, being designed
for the Saints, therefore the Lord in his Eternal Wisdom, has contrived and
fitted them for it; for as Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God,
nor Corruption Incorruption, so the Lord does provide his Saints Spiritual and
Incorruptible Bodies, capable to receive these Spiritual Manifestations of his
Glory, and of Christ, and all the Heavenly Host, 1 Cor. 15. read all.

As this is an Eminent Instance of Eternal Happiness, that Believers shall be
Clothed with Spiritual Bodies, like that of Christ's, so it may Minister great
Consolation to Afflicted Misers, that the time does not only hasten, in which
they shall be delivered from Misery, but that also they shall have Bodies
incapable of any misery.

The third Eminent instance of this Eternal Happiness, is to be admitted into
the Fellowship of Christ, and all the Heavenly Host, that they may be with me,
where I am, Jo. 17.24. It is usual to Strangers to inquire into all the
Magnificence of all Countries where they Travel, the Queen of Sheba came to see
the glory of Solomon, Hezekiah showed to the Ambassador of the King of
Babylon, all his Glory, Power, and Wealth, but what is all the Earthly glory,
but Poppet shows, to the glory of God, which is above Human reach? and as the
greatest Honor Kings can give their Subjects, is to admit them into their
presence, and constant Fellowship, so this is the Chief Dignity of Saints, that
they are admitted into the immidiate presence of God and Christ, and that not
under a Cloud or Vail of the Flesh, as Moses saw God in the Mount, and as the
Lord appeared in the Camp of Israel, and at the Door of the Tabernacle, but
face to face, to behold the fullness of his glory; for when we are under the
Clog of these Earthly Bodies, we cannot behold the Majesty of God, but when we
are Clothed with these immortal Bodies, we shall see as We are seen, and know
as we are known, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12. And as the glory of God himself is
sufficient for all admiration and Satisfaction, so the sight of the glorious
Host of Heaven cannot but be exceeding delightful, to see the sufferers for
Christ, enjoy the reward of their Patience and Faith; to him that overcomes,
will I grant to sit down with me on my Throne, even as I overcame, and am set
down with my Father on his Throne, Rev. 3.21. These are they which came out of
great Tribulation, and have washed their Robes in the Blood of the Lamb,
therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him Day and Night in his
Temple, and he that sits on the Throne, shall dwell amongst them, Rev. 7.14,
15. This is the patience of the Saints, these are they that keep the
Commandments, and the Faith of Jesus, these sing the Song of Moses, Rev. 14.4,
12, 13. These are the Souls of those who were beheaded for the Name of Jesus
and the Word of God, Rev. 15. 3, 4. chapter 19.7, 8, 9. Rev. 20.4. These are they
which were invited, and prepared for the Wedding of the Lamb. See the Apostles
Description of the Heavenly Society, but ye are come unto Mount Sion, the City
of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable Company of
Angels, to the General Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn, which are
written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just Men
made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, and to the blood
of Sprinkling, which speaks better things, than the Blood of Abel, Heb.
12.22, 23, 24.

As it is no small part of Eternal Happiness to be admitted into the immediate
presence of God, so is it to be continued there to all Eternity.

The greatest favorites have fallen, Haman was Hanged, and Achitophel Hanged
himself, because his Court fell, but the Favor of God is for ever, he that
abides in the Will of God, shall endure for ever, 1 Jo. 2.17. his People are
all Sealed and Marked, they are made Pillars of the Temple of God; have his
Name on them, and can go out no more, they are before the Lord Day and Night,
Rev. 3.12. and dwells with him, they are Heirs of all things, and can never
fall from the Favor of God, Rev. 21.7.

Fifthly, As the Saints of God are Eternally in his presence, and so confirmed
in their Happy State, that they cannot fail, so they have all after Pain,
Sorrow, Grief and Trouble, wiped off and secured from it, they shall Hunger no
more, nor Thirst any more, there shall no Sun light on them, nor any Heat, for
the Lamb shall feed them, and lead them unto living Fountains of Water, and God
shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, and there shall be no more Death,
nor Sorrow, nor Crying, neither shall there be any pain, for the former things
are passed away: This is the Portion of Believers in their Eternally Blessed
Estate; of all which, these improvements may be made.

First, Compare Man in his Estate of Nature and Misery with him, in his Estate
of Grace and Glory.

Secondly, Believe the promises to Believers.

Thirdly, Be Comforted, and rejoice in the Faith of Salvation promised in the
Gospel.

First, Man in his best Estate is altogether Vanity, Ecl. 2.11. chapter 13. chapter 4.
chapter 5.12, 17.

Secondly, In Relation to Corruption, his thoughts are impure, all his Thoughts
and Imaginations Evil, and only Evil continually, Genesis 6.15. Mat. 15.19.

Thirdly, As to performances, all our Righteousness are as filthy Rags, and
Menstruous Garments, the whole Head sick, the whole Heart faint, Is. 1.5, 6.
chapter 64.6.

Fourthly, Heart Deceitful, a Body of Death full of all Evil, Jer. 17.9. Romans
7.18.

Fifthly, Darkness without Light, or knowledge of God and his truth, or the
Redeemer, Tit. 3.3. 1 Cor. 6.9. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3, 11, 12. chapter 5.8. This being the
Picture of Man in Nature without Grace, Let us view him in Christ, and renewed.

First, All glorious within, Holiness to the Lord, Heir of all things, all
things yours, Rev. 21.7. Romans 8.32.

Secondly, Made sure a Pillar in the Temple of God, go out no more, has Gods
Name and City on him, his Robes washed in the Blood of the Lamb, Rev. 3.12. chapter
7.15, 16, 17.

Thirdly, Continually in Gods presence, God Dwells with them, Rev. 3.21.

Fourthly, Crowned with Everlasting Happiness and Glory, no more Sorrow nor
Pain, the former things are past away, Rev. 21.3, to 8.

Secondly, Believe Gods promises, and rejoice in them.

First, Is Man lost by Nature, and the Heir of Wrath, and has Christ dyed for
sinners? Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 5.6, 7, 8.

Secondly, Has God promised Redemption by his Blood, and Eternal Life on Faith
in him? Jo. 3.16, 17, 18. Romans 5.9.

Thirdly, Has he said in vain, seek ye my Face and live? Is. 45.19, 20.

Fourthly, Is he in Compliment, who is he that walks in Darkness, and has no
Light, let him Trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay on his God? Is. 50.10.

Fifthly, Are his professions of Love and Care a dry, and only Complimentive,
and not Real? Is. 49.15, 16. read all.

Sixthly, Does the free Market of Grace Merit no Admiration, Thankfulness and
Credit? Isa. 55, 1, 2, 3.

Seventhly, Are not these words of him that cannot lie, Dissemble or Deceive?
As I live says the Lord, I desire not the Death of sinner, but rather that he
should repent and live: Come and let us reason together says the Lord, though
your sins be as Scarlet, I will make them as Wool, though they be red as
Crimson I will make them as Snow. Come unto me all ye that Labor and are heavy
Laden, and I will give you rest, Is. 1.18. Mat. 11.28.

Eighthly, Is not this Christ's own Voice, Behold I stand at the Door and knock,
if any Man will open to me, I will come in, and he shall Sup with me, and I
with him. And to him that overcomes, will I give to sit with me in my Throne,
even as I overcame, and am set down with my Father in his Throne; Rev. 3.20,
21. Now how great was the Stupidity and Folly, not to believe these Fatherly
Invitations, and Comply with them, that we may be Eternally Happy.

Inference, Though Man by Nature in the above Description, be inexpressibly
Miserable, yet not without Remedy by Faith in Jesus Christ, who dyed for a
sinner, and Salvation and Eternal Life promised to Believers in him, Romans 5.5,
6, 7. Jo. 3.16, 17, 18. wherefore we should take Heart, Courage, and a patient
waiting on him. And for our Assistance and Encouragement,

First, Under the deep Sense of Man's Misery in the condition of Natural sin, as
in the preceding Description of Man with a continual Lowliness and Humility of
Mind, as a check to Pride, Self, and Sin, looking into Man's Character, when any
thing of Sin or Temptation offers, and with the Apostle cry out, O Wretched Man
that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Death, Romans 7.24.

Secondly, Have deep Admiration of the height and depth of the unsearchable
Love of God in Christ Jesus, who has made Christ to Believers all and in all,
Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. Col. 3.11.

Thirdly, Be Reconciled to the Cross of Christ and Affliction, as the happy
means of Reconciling thee to God; before I was Afflicted, I went astray, but
now have I learned to know the Law: I will return to my place, and hide my
Face, until they acknowledge their Iniquities, seek my Face, in their
Afflictions they will seek me early, Hos. 5.15. I have refined thee, but not
with Silver, I have chosen thee in the Furnace of Affliction, Is. 48.10. I will
bring her into the Wilderness, and there I will allure her, and speak
Comfortably unto her, Hos. 2.14. I reckon that the present Afflictions of this
Life, which are but for a Moment, are not worthy to be compared to that
exceeding weight of glory, that shall be revealed in us, 2 Cor. 4.17, 18.

Fourthly, Ly patiently under the Rod, until the time of thy Deliverance come,
and quarrel not with the Instruments of thy Chastisement, hear the Voice of the
Rod, and who has appointed, wait for the Vision, though it tarry it will
speak, Hab. 2.3. Say with David, Lo here am I, let him do with me, what seems
good in his sight, 2 Samuel 15.25, 26. as with the Apostle, I have learned in
every condition therewith be content. I know how to want, and how to abound,
Phil. 4.11, 12, 13. I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, until he plead my
Cause, and Execute Judgment for me, Mic. 7.9.

Fifthly, Believe it to be a Truth, and be Comforted in it, that all things
work together for good, to such as wait for him, and that the end is Eternal
Life in Jesus Christ, To. 8.28.

Faith and Salvation are inseparable Companions, as well from the Covenant of
God in Christ Jesus, as from the Fidelity, Power, Promise, and good Will of
God, and this alone is able to answer all the Cavils of Malice, and Disquiet,
or Discouragement; which may arise from the Consideration of the meanness or
misery by Nature, or under the sense of Man's weakness under his sinful
Condition; in this, that he that believes, shall have Eternal Life, Jo. 3.16,
17, 18. for though Man in his best Condition by Nature without grace, be a mere
Picture, Shadow, Vapor, Bubble, and like a Bell upon the Water, or dew on the
Grass that withers, his whole Life Labor, and Sorrow, Vanity, and lighter
than Vanity, so as he desires Death rather than Life, and at Death is the end
of all his glory, and his Misery is endless, in Everlasting Destruction, as in
the foregoing Description; hence is the unspeakable Consolation of Believers,
that the Covenant of God is everlasting, not of the things of this Life only,
but also of the Life t come, the gifts and calling of God are without
Repentance, and herein does the excellency of the Covenant of grace exceed that
of the Covenant of Works, with Man in his first Creation.

First, The first state and Condition of Man naturally considered, was of the
things of this Natural Life only; but the New and second Covenant, is of things
of this Life. and also of that which is to come, so that the New Covenant which
has the promise of this Life, and of that also which is to come, is more
valuable than the other: Godliness is great gain, 1 Timothy 4.8, etc.

Wherefore Christ advises us not to store up perishing things, but rather the
Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, Mat. 6.19 to 24.

Secondly, We see in Natural Man's Description, what a slippery thing he is, and
the meanness of his Condition, and where all with him ends; but the Enjoyments
of the New Covenant, is the Inheritance of all things which perish not, nor
change, To. 11.29.

Thirdly, To this New Covenant belong Privileges, which make Happiness here,
and Eternally hereafter, by all which the Fellows of this Covenant are endowed
with the greatest privileges, and assisted with the Richest promises that
infinite Wisdom, and Goodness, thought fit to make a happy State here, and
Eternally hereafter.

Fourthly, The excellency of this Covenant is such, that the privileges
thereto belonging, qualifies and secures the Heirs of this Covenant against all
vicissitudes in this Life, and fits and moulds them for the Enjoyment of that
Eternal State, provided and secured by this New Covenant, the infinite Wisdom
and Goodness of God, designing to make Believers, Citizens of the New
Jerusalem, made without Hands, eternal in the Heavens; alters and changes the
whole frame of Man from what it was formerly in Nature, and squares him to that
Heavenly building.

Although of Gods free Will and Pleasure for his own glory, without the
necessity of any further perfection, Man was at first Created by God, and as
the free love of God in Christ Jesus, is the only Rise of Man's Eternal
Happiness; nevertheless it is not only completed by Election, but also by
Regeneration, and newness of Life in Christ Jesus; and by being made Holy, as
God is Holy, and therefore the whole frame of the elect, as well of Soul as
Body, is changed into the likeness of Christ in Spirit and Body, If any Man be
in Christ, he is a New Creature, all things are made New, and old things are
done away, 2 Cor. 5.5, 17.

That you put off the Old Man which is corrupt according to the Deceitful
Lusts, and that you put on the New Man, which after God is Created in
Righteousness and True Holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24.

That such fashioning and change must be before the Elect can fully be admitted
into the presence of God, and enjoy him unchangeably, may appear by these
reasons;

First, for that the Wisdom and Goodness of God, intending to complete Man's
Happiness, and to magnify the Mystery of his love, by their immediate
enjoyment of himself in the Spiritual, Clear, and full presence of glory, That
they may be one with me, see me, and behold my glory, Jo. 17.24.

The Communication of Gods glory being so sublimely spiritual, and not
apprehendible, but by these who are purely spiritual, therefore our dark
understanding must be made spiritual, The Natural Man receives not the things
of the Spirit of God, neither indeed can do, because they are spiritually
discerned, but he that is spiritual, judges all things, 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. and
therefore in order to completing of the Saints Happiness, and to frame them
for that, he promises to put his spirit in them, and give them a New Heart,
and renew a right spirit in them, so as they may suitably enjoy God, Eze.
36.25, 26, 27.

Secondly, Divine Wisdom knowing how Earthly mindedness runs after the
Creature, and being entangled therewith, is clogged from thirsting after God,
and things spiritual; to be Carnally minded is Death, but to be spiritually
minded, is Life and Peace, for that they who are after the flesh, do mind the
things of the flesh, but they who are after the spirit, the things of the
spirit, because the Carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to
the Law of God, neither indeed can be, To. 5.5, 6, 7.

And therefore to wean their Hearts from the World, and to wind up the
Affections of the elect to himself, it behooves their frame to be made
spiritual, The Lord Jesus Christ gives this as his Command to his Disciples, to
be spiritually minded, and to mind Heavenly Treasures which are not
Corruptible, and uses this Argument, for where your Treasure is, there will
your Hearts be also, Mat. 6.19, 20, 21.

And thus the Lord Jesus making his People of a Heavenly and Spiritual frame,
chiefly to mind Heaven and Spiritual things, sets their Affections more
earnestly on himself, disengages them to Human Enjoyments, Reconciles them to
Afflictions, and makes them more easy under the Cross. If in Solomon's
experience, that all the World is but Labor and Sorrow, and Death is more to
be desired than Life, how much more easier will the Affections of the renewed
be under all Disappointments of Carnal things, when with the Apostle, they look
to Heaven, and the inseparable and everlasting Communion of God, will they not
count all things but Dung and Loss in Compare with the Excellencies of Christ?
To. 8.18. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present Life, are not worthy
to be compared to the glory which shall be revealed in us. And in that other
Famous Scripture, for our Light Afflictions, which are but for a Moment, work
for us a far more exceeding, and an Eternal weight of glory, whilst we look not
after things which are seen, but after things which are not seen, for things
which are seen are Temporal, but things which are not seen, Eternal, 2 Cor.
4.17.

Hence we see how great is the goodness and wisdom of God toward renewed
Mortals, entreating them with so great Mercy and Love, in convincing them of
the vanity of Earthly shadows, and discovering to them, that so High, Deep,
Long; and Broad Mystery of Love in Christ Jesus, which passes knowledge, and
the Riches of the glory of that Mystery, which is Christ the hope of all glory,
made manifest in the Saints, Ephesians. 3.9, 18, 19. Col. 2.26, 27.

And by their choice of these excellencies above the Creatures, to make all
things else, to be esteemed of no value, and in their Souls desire, to Echo
forth none but Christ, and having so spiritualized their minds, that they can
neither Touch, Handle, Smell, or delight in any thing but him, and what tends
to his glory, and their Enjoyment of him.

Thirdly, In the framing of the Saints Bodies at the Resurrection, in a
Spiritual and Incorruptible Body, for Christ's designing not only Man's
Redemption from wrath to come, but also to make them Coheirs, and participate
with him of his own glory, John 17.22.

And in respect, the frame of our Carnal and Corruptible Bodies, is not capable
to receive that glory, nor to continue under the Enjoyment of it, for that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of glory, nor Corruption inherit
Incorruption, he therefore changes that Corruption into Incorruption, and
makes Mortality put on Immortality, and changes our vile Bodies into the
fashion of his glorious Body, 2 Cor. 15.42, to 55. according to the working;
whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself, Phi. 3.21.

What then can or will be wanting, to complete the Eternal Happiness of the
Saints, seeing they have so sure a Cov^^ant, with such ample Privileges, and
that they are, and shall be fitted as well in Body, as Soul, to receive these
Rivers of Pleasures, in the Enjoyment of God, in whose presence is fullness of
Joy, and at whose Right Hand, there are pleasures for ever-more, Ps. 16.11.

What then remains for the Prisoners of Hope, but to sit down and admire the
Height, Depth, Length and Breadth of that Incomprehensible Mystery of the Love
of God in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 3.9, 18, 19. and by Faith, Love, and Patience, to
sit down under his shadow with great Delight, Cant. 2.2. and against all
Crosses, Temptations, and Difficulties to take Comfort in the Faith of Eternal
Happiness, there is therefore now no Condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, who walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, if God be for us,
who can be against us, who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it
is God that Justifies, who is he that Condemns, it is Christ that Dyed; yea,
rather that is risen again? who is even at the right Hand of God, who also
makes Intercession for us; who shall separate us from the love of Christ? I am
persuaded that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus.

From what has been said, we see Believers firmly stated to the Title of Joint
Heirs of glory with Jesus Christ, and in a firm Covenant through him with the
Father, and having so fair an interest at stake, their Duty is to pursue the
same with Faith, Courage, and Patience, and their great prize is not to be had,
but by a continued warfare, The Kingdom of Heaven is taken by violence, and the
violent take it by force.

We see in the foregoing Doctrine of Christ's sufferings. Saints Examples, and
Christ's Doctrine of Mortification, Resignation, and patient bearing of the
Cross, that the Christians Life is a continued warfare; through Tribulation and
Persecution, ye must enter into the Kingdom of God.

Nothing is more incumbent or necessary to Warriers, than cheerfulness, the
cheerful Champion gives glory to the cause, and assists the fellow Soldiers
expectation of Victory, quickneth Actions, and the glory of Victory hoped for
makes Combatants despise all Difficulties; if then in common Warfare, which is
only for Worldly Honor, Riches, or Interest (which when obtained) perish in
the using, the cheerfulness be requisite, much more in the War for Eternal
Glory.

In this warfare the Combatants have more reason than any others. First, For
that the prize fought for is eternal happiness. Secondly, The Victory they
fight for, is that which Christ has already obtained for them, to wit, their
Eternal Salvation, and Destruction of Death and the Devil; Christ is crowned
with glory and honor, he brings many ^ons to glory, and makes the Captain of
our Salvation, perfect by Sufferings, who by Death destroys him that has the
power of Death even the Devil, and delivers them who for fear of Death, were
all their Life time subject to bondage, and is the faithful High Priest
reconciling people to God; and having suffered being tempted is able to succor
them who are tempted, Heb. 2.9, to end.

If in the common case of War, Courage and Cheerfulness be a necessary duty,
much more in this Christian warfare for these three reasons:

First, Christians of all Warriors, have the most excellent privileges,
promises, and assistance.

Secondly, It is Christ's honor to fight cheerfully, under his Banner, in
imitation of himself, Prophets, and Saints.

Thirdly, They have Christ's Command for cheerful fighting. In all Warfare these
three things are to be considered,

First, Whether the War be offensive or defensive.

Secondly, The cause of the War.

Thirdly, The Means, Provisions, and Allies, to Prosecute and Defend the War.

First, The Christians War, is both Offensive and Defensive.

First, Defensive: The melancholy recital of the Annals of Man's Creation and
first Estate, and how he fell from the Original Righteousness he was Created
in, and that afterward enmity was sowed between the Seed of the Woman, and the
Seed of the Serpent, and a continual warfare, so as The Serpent shall bruise
Man's Heel, and Man the Serpents Head, Genesis 3.15. demonstrates to us that here
is a perpetual warfare denounced from enmity never to be reconciled.

Man being lost in Adam, of Gods Free Will, Christ the Mediator of the new
Covenant is early promised; this is the Covenant of Grace; By Grace ye are
saved, and not of works, ye are Sons and Heirs of that Covenant of Promise,
Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6, 7. chap. 2.5.

Hence arises this intestine War between the Creatures, the Seed of the Woman,
which are the Heirs of this Covenant and Elect in Christ, and the Seed of the
old Enemy the Devil, which in all Ages are of the World, and Emissaries of
Satan to Persecute the Woman and her Child, and spew forth floods of
Persecution on the Godly, Rev. 12. to 11.

Hence we see how this continued War is laid until the end of the World: It
appearing that Man's Enemy is the Devil, his Emissaries the World, and the
Flesh, who are no inconsiderable Enemies. We wrestle not against Flesh and
Blood, but against Principalities and Powers, against Spiritual wickednesses in
High Places, against the Rulers of Darkness of this World, Ephesians. 6.12. This
Enemy elsewhere is called the Prince of the Power of the Air, and is clothed
with all mischievous qualifications to fight.

First, He is clothed with subtilty and lying, by which at first he deceived
Eve, and by the Apostle his Temptations are called, Wiles of the Devil, Ephesians.
6.11.

Secondly, He is powerful, He is the Prince of the Power of the Air, that
rules in the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2.

Thirdly, He is restless and vigilant, going about night and day, seeking whom
he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.

Fourthly, His Malice is unplacable, see how he pursues Job from time to time,
with false insinuations to God against him, Job 1. to 12. chapter 2. to 7.

Fifthly, His Courage and Boldness is undaunted he dare tempt the Lord of Glory
with impudently renewed Temptations, Mat. 4. to 10.

He pursues the Woman and Child Christ to devour them, and speweth forth great
floods of Persecution to destroy them, Rev. 12. to 11.

He fights against the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Rev. 17.14.

This warfare is both defensive and offensive.

First, Defensive: In all Wars the Defensive is most favorable, nothing being
more just and natural than to defend ones own right, interest, and property,
and in the Christians case most justifyable and necessary, for Satan the first
old and continued Enemy of Mankind, having first invaded man's quiet and
felicity, and tempted him, to break Covenant with God, and continually envying
Man's better estate in the new Covenant rests not to assault him, and endeavor
to ruin him a second time, As he that was born after the Flesh persecuted him
that was born after the Spirit, Gal. 4, 29. So it is now, and this enmity of
bruising man's Heel is put upon him as a Judgment for tempting, and upon man as
a punishment for his yielding to the lying and treacherous insinuations under
the cunning and specious pretensions of Man's advantage, that Man should know
more, and better; but his malicious intention was to ruin Man with God
Eternally.

Have Christians then so powerful an Enemy, cunning, malicious and vigilant,
who is always on his Post to destroy, and have they so considerable an Interest
at Stake, how does it then behove them to stand fast to the liberty wherewith
Christ has made them free, and not to be weary in well doing, for if we faint
not, we shall reap in due season? Gal. 5.1. chap. 6.9.

Is any thing more worth contesting for, and worthy of defense, than that great
advantage of being redeemed from wrath to come, and title of honor to sit on
the Throne of Christ, and be heirs of all things, which is not given to the
lazy, but to the diligent and victorious. To him that overcomes will I give to
sit on my Throne, Rev. 3.12, 21. We must not slumber but be vigilant; Ye are
the Children of Light and of the Day, not of the Night and Darkness, therefore
let us not sleep as do others, watch therefore putting on the whole Armor of
God.

Secondly, This War is offensive, All Wars though at first but defensive, turn
for the most part to offensive, for that injuries may be so done by invaders;
that provoke the attacked to become an agressor, not only for reparation, and
satisfaction, but upon success in defense to invade the first agressor, to
confine him to such limits, as he may not for the future, be capable of doing
further injury; and thus of necessity it must be in the Christian Warfare,
against Satan, the World and the Flesh, so that this War is founded upon such
implacable enmity, that it must be continued without hope or expectation of any
peace, end, or terms of accommodation, for these three reasons;

First, The Sovereigns of this War are of Interests incompatible, so that of
necessity the victory must turn to one side, before the War can be ended.

Secondly, The Parties and Combatants are under different and incompatible
Laws, so can never be reconciled.

Thirdly, All terms of Treaty or Capitulation, are by command forbid in this
War.

First, The Sovereigns of this War are of incompatible Interest, and therefore
the War must be perpetual until one of the Parties be destroyed.

Christ is the Generalissimo of the Christians Army, Satan the Mammon of this
World, the Flesh and Lusts thereof makes up the competition; how incompatible
then must it be, with the right glory, honor and interest; of Christ, who in
his own right is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, to suffer a Rival to his
Inheritance: though for his wise ends, he let Satan loose for a while, to tempt
and sift the Nations, and draw the Children of Darkness into snares and
destruction, and to try the Faith and Patience of Gods own People in which the
wicked Men are Gods servants and instruments; however, to suffer their power to
prevail, is altogether inconsistent with the absolute power, and Sovereignty of
Jesus Christ, and although Satan and his Emissaries have fought many Battles
against Christ and his Church, they have still been overcome in all of them,
and shall be overcome until Christ bring Judgment into Victory and overcome
him, who has the power of Death, even the Devil, Rev. 12. to 12. chap. 17.14.
Oh Death I will be thy Plagues, O Grave, I will be thy Destruction, Repentance
shall be hid from mine Eyes, Hos. 13.14. Death is swallowed up into Victory; O
Death where is thy sting O Grave where is thy Victory, the Sting of Death is
Sin, and the strength of Sin is the Law, but thanks be to God who has given us
the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15.54, to 56.

The Lord of Life has told us, we cannot serve God and Mammon, we must reject
the one, if we serve the other, so that their Interest being inconsistent we
must only be of one side, there is no fellowship between God and Belial: So
that they cannot divide Interests, therefore there is a necessity to be on
Christ's side; The Son of the Bond Woman which is Sin and Satan, the World and
Lusts thereof cannot Inherit with the Son of the Free Woman, which is Christ
Jesus, Gal. 4.30.

Secondly, The Combatants of these two Armies, have different and inconsistent
Laws, and these Laws are so relative and in such affinity, with the several
interests of the Sovereigns, that of necessity perpetuates the War, so as no
end can be expected, except by absolute victory of one or other side.

All Christ's Soldiers are new Creatures, renewed in the Spirit of their Mind,
have the same Mind in them which was in Christ Jesus, are under Spiritual and
Holy Laws, subject to his Will according to that Portion of his Spirit, which
he has given them, spiritually not carnally minded, walk and live according to
the Law of the Spirit, and not of the Law of the Flesh; they are not led with
malice, revenge, envyings, slanderings, back-bitings, murmurings and cruelties,
which are the works of the Flesh, Gal. 4.19, 20, 21. But they are led after the
Laws of the Spirit, and live in all gentleness, meekness, holiness, charity,
and kindness, as the works of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.19. Ephesians. 4.22, to end.
Gal. 5.22, 23.

But on the other hand, these under Antichrists Banner, neither are nor can be
subject to the Laws of the Spirit, for they are of the Flesh, and live after
the Flesh; To be carnally minded is Death, but to be Spiritually minded is Life
and Peace, because the carnal Mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject
to the Law of God, neither indeed can be, so that they which are in the flesh
cannot please God, Romans 8.6, 7, 8. The Flesh Lusts against the Spirit, and
the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are contrary one to the other, Gal.
5.17. So we see that the Laws of these pretenders to Dominion are so opposite
to one another, that it is impossible to reconcile them.

Thirdly, The third thing which perpetuates this War, is that no treaty,
capitulation, or agreement, can be between these parties, this enmity is so
laid by God himself, that Satan must bruise Man's Heel, and the Seed of the
Woman must bruise Satan's Head, to the end of the World; Such enmity is between
God and Mammon, that the love of the one is inconsistent with the service of
the other. Know ye not that the Friendship of this World is enmity to God,
whosoever therefore will be a Friend to the World is the Enemy of God, Jam.
4.4. Love not the World nor the things of the World, if any man love the World
the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.15.

Thus the Interests and Laws of these two parties, being so inconsistent, there
is no Room for any treaty, hopes or possibility of accommodation; for that the
Spiritual Man, has antipathy to the Lusts of the Flesh, and the Carnal Man
cannot be subject to the Law of holiness, because of the enmity of his mind;
and therefore the holy Apostle is so far from accommodating the matter, between
Lust and Holiness, Flesh and the Spirit, that he would not have the Spiritual
Man to keep any Communication with the unfruitful works of Darkness; What
fellowship has God with Belial, a clean thing with an unclean; who can touch
pitch and not be defiled therewith? evil communication corrupts good manners;
Wherefore he forbids all tampering with the specious pretensions of the World
or Earthly things. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the rudiments of
the World, why as though living in the World are ye subject to Ordinances?
taste not, touch not, handle not these things, all which perish in the using,
after the Doctrine and Commandments of Men, Col. 2.20, 21, 22.

The Holy Apostle Paul in another place is more severe, where he commends the
Repentance not to be repented of, and in the effects of sorrow and repentance
he says, Behold this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a Godly manner,
what carefulness it wrought in you, yea what clearing of your selves, yea what
indignation, yea what fear, yea what vehement desire, yea what revenge, yea
what zeal? 2 Cor. 7.11. In which we see what expressions of vehement zeal
against corruption and sin, which are the works of the Flesh, by these
expressions, vehement desire, indignation and revenge is implied, such
implacable disposition, that nothing can satisfy except a total ruin and
exterpation of the Enemy, and their adherents in root and branch, and thus it
must be with Christians, they must not be Neuters, or lukewarm, but must be
mortified to the flesh and the Body of Death, Corruption and Sin must be so
subdued in them that they must be Dead to the World, and the World to them, so
as they can take no more pleasure therein, than the living can have in the
Dead, with which they can have no Communication. I am Crucified to the World;
and the World to me, nevertheless I live, but not I; and the life that I live
in the Flesh, is by the Faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. chap. 5.24.

Hence we see all the Combatants of Christ are wholly his, and not divided, and
can by no means Parley with the Enemies of his Cross, the Devil, the World, and
the Flesh, and this is their indispensable and commanded duty, that they must
fight till they overcome, for to such alone is the prize of Eternal Life; He
that overcomes shall sit with me in my Fathers Kingdom, even as I overcame and
am set down with my Father in his Kingdom, Rev. 3.21.

They must live to the Spirit, and not to the Flesh, with that holy fear over
themselves, having an Eye on the Enemies Camp, and watching against Sin and the
Flesh, that they may not again return to their folly, and that they may place
no Earthly thing in their Hearts above Christ, and all the days of their
appointed time they must wait till their change come.

As this Christian warfare is continuing, and must only end with our lives, we
are to consider for our encouragement, that Christ does not leave Christians
unprovided for such great expedients, but provides them a great Train of
Artillery, as the necessaries of their warfare, which is held forth to us in
that description of the Armor of the Spirit by the Apostle, put on the whole
Armor of God, etc. Ephesians. 6.13, to 19.

First, The Loins girt with Truth; which is inward sincerity and constant
loyalty to the Cause of Christ.

Secondly, The Breast Plate of Righteousness, to be blameless and of upright
conversation toward God, and to avoid scandal to the wicked, and be an example
of Justice and Godliness.

Thirdly, Feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace, to be
peaceable, charitable, humble, and meek, and conformable to the Laws of the
Spirit, and not of the Flesh.

Fourthly, The Shield of Faith, believing God in his Attributes of Omnipotency,
Holiness, Justice, Goodness and Faithfulness, and in Jesus Christ as the
Savior of the World, in all his Promises and Providence, by which we may be
able to resist the fiery Darts of Satan, in answering all objections of
unbelief and discouragements from Temptations in the World.

Fifthly, The Helmet of Salvation; to believe that Eternal Life is the prize,
at the end of the Christian race, and this is cure against all Trials, from
want, or difficulties, in the Way to Heaven, to be as assured of Eternal Life,
as we are clothed with that Helmet of Defense; It is Christ that died who
shall condemn.

Sixthly, Praying and Watching as good Soldiers, on their Posts waiting for
the word of Command, to march at all times after the General and Captain of our
Salvation Jesus Christ, and to be ready with Oil in our Vessels, and Lamps
burning, waiting for the approach of the Bridegroom, to enter into the Marriage
feast of the Lamb.

Thus seeing this War is constant, and for the greatest prize, even Eternal
Life, and though against the most Potent Enemies, Principalities, and Spiritual
Wickednesses, in High Places, yet Christ the unconquerable Champion is Captain,
and the Camp is furnished with such complete warlike provision, Christians
ought to fight cheerfully, for these following reasons.

First, Salvation and Eternal Happiness is the prize contended for.

And we have Christ's Promise if we fight in Faith, and continue to the end, we
shall obtain it, John 3.16, 17, 18. Gal. 6.9.

Secondly, As we are to fight and contend for Eternal Life, so it is not only
promised to us on our cheerful fighting, but it is also obtained for us by
Christ, who on the Cross fought that good fight, and freely gives us the booty,
and prize, when we were not capable to do any thing for our selves, For when we
were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly, God
commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet Sinners, Christ died
for us; much more then being now justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from
wrath through him, Romans 5.6, 8, 9. Ezekiel. 16. to 9.

This is that great bait for ambition and desire, this is that all, which
should swell the Thoughts and Affections of all Men.

This rightly considered is sufficient to invite all Courage, Patience, and new
Obedience; to fill all Hearts with Joy, gladness, and thanksgiving, and stifle
all murmurings, repinings and discontents under trials or difficulties of
worldly concerns, and in our Way to Heaven.

This should induce all to a hearty submission to the yoke and cheerful
fighting under Christ's Banner.

These Combatants of Christ have the greatest booty, rewards and privileges
that any Soldiers can pretend unto, and that both of Spirituals and Temporals,
and those Spirituals are in many respects;

First, They are under an everlasting Covenant with God, and God with them, I
will make with them an everlasting Covenant, Romans 11.27, 29. Isa. 60.20, 21.
Hos. 2.19, 20. Isa. 59.20, 21.

Secondly, They have remission of all sins, though of the highest and blackest
Nature, though never so numerous, and as a Cloud or a thick Cloud, Mat. 11.28,
29, 30. Isa. 1.18. chapter 44.22, 23.

Thirdly, They have comfort in Spiritual Darkness and Desertion, their case can
never be so cloudy, melancholy, and dark to them, but Gods word has a promise
for it, Light is sown to the righteous, and joy to the upright in Heart, Isa.
50.10. Mal. 3.12.

Fourthly, They are Heirs of all things, and shall inherit all things, they
have the Promise of the things of this Life, and of that which is to come, Gal.
3.29. chap. 4.17, 18. Ephesians. 1.11, 14. Col. 1.12, 13, 14. Rev. 21.7, Romans 9.7, 8,

Fifthly, They shall be united to God in Christ, in Spirit, Knowledge and
Glory, and be inseparable from him in Christ Jesus, John 17.21, to 25.

Sixthly, They shall be set down with Christ and God in Glory, and continue
with them for evermore, Romans 8.35, 38, 39. Rev. 3.21. Thus we see the
unquestionable Spiritual advantages of the Godly, which no other Interest can
bring, and as the Saints advantages and excellencies are Inexpressible as to
Spirituals, so the security and advantages are no less in Temporals, as we have
already in this Treatise discovered.

First, In general,

Secondly, His Promises in all particular cases, As

First, In Sickness.

Secondly, In Imprisonment.

Thirdly, In Poverty.

Fourthly, Under the unkindness and forsaking of Friends.

Fifthly, Under reproaches.

This great promise of general and particular assistance, and so many great
privileges being the first ground of Christian encouragement.

The second is, That they have the example of Christ, his Prophets and Saints
in Heaven, who have with undaunted courage, cheerfulness, and patience, fought
that good fight and have received their reward.

As it is great happiness in any warfare to be under wise, able and experienced
Commanders, and as the fame of the Captain raises Courage and hope of Victory,
so it is much more in this Christian warfare, where Christ is General and the
Saints in Glory are examples.

Whose Courage, Wisdom, or Power, can be comparable to Christ's, who is Wisdom
it self? Prove. 1.20. chap. 8.1. who is power infinite, Col. 1.15, 16, 17. and
for his experience he is the ancient of days.

First, He is Wisdom it self, wisdom is his style and name, and well it may be
so, for by his wisdom,

First, He made all things, and by himself he upholdeth all things; He is the
Image of the Invisible God, and in whom dwells all Power and the Godhead
bodily, Heb. 1. to 14.

Secondly, He is infinite in Power, and there is no searching of his
understanding, he has measured the Waters in the hollow of his hand, he metted
out the Heaven with his Span, and comprehended the Dust of the Earth in a
Measure, and weighed the Mountains in Scales, and the Hills in a Balance, The
Nations are before him as a drop of a Bucket; and are counted as the small Dust
of a Balance, he takes up the Hills as a very little thing, Job 32.8. chapter 38.
chapter 39. Isa. 40.12, to 16.

Thirdly, For Experience, he is the Ancient of days, the Firstborn of every
Creature, the Alpha and Omega: see that Description given him by Solomon, the
Wisest of Men, Prove. 8. all, Rev. 1.17, 18. Col. 1.17.

He is not only Wise, and Wisdom himself, but he is Wisdom diffusive to others,
gives them not only the precepts of Wisdom, but does infuse Wisdom into them,
and makes them docile and quick in Understanding, and in this he exceeds all
other Captains and Teachers, who may instruct, but cannot form the
understanding, as he does, I will pour my Spirit on you, I will make known my
words unto you, Pro. 1.23. John. 1. to 6. Isa. 61.1. He is the Spirit of
Wisdom, inlightning the World, he is sent of the Father, and has of him
received the Spirit, to Communicate Wisdom to others.

The Spirit of the Almighty gives him understanding, this Wisdom is such as
excels, because it is of Christ's own Spirit, Pure Truth, and tried, pure as
Gold, yea, purer than much fine Gold: see the excellent virtue of Gods Precepts
and Instructions, Converting the Soul, Enlightening the eyes, Clean, True,
Righteous, Sweet, Instructing, and in keeping of them there, is great reward,
and endure for ever, Ps. 19.7, to 1.

This Wisdom is the fear of God, from whence it has its rise, and how
excellent and desirous this is, see Prove. 1.8. and all chapter 8. all, James 3.17.
in which are made out all advantages, both Spiritual and Temporal.

See what account the Holy Prophet makes of this Wisdom and Knowledge of God,
above all Human Knowledge, or of things Earthly; let not the Rich Man glory in
his Riches, nor the Wise Man in his Wisdom, nor the Strong Man in his Strength,
but let him that glories, glory in this, says the Lord, that he understands
and knows me, that I am the Lord which exercises loving kindness, Judgment
and Righteousness in the Earth, for in these things I delight, says the Lord,
Jer. 9.24.

The Holy Evangelist testifies of this Wisdom, This is Life Eternal to know
thee, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, Jo. 17.23, 24.

The Holy Apostle also declares, what this Wisdom is, even Jesus Christ, Who of
God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1
Cor. 1.30.

Secondly, The second qualification of this great Christian General in his
power, joined with what is already said, he is infinite in power, He is King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, Rev. 17.14. he is the Blessed and only Potentate, 1 Timothy 6.15. He is the most High, and rules in the Kingdom of the Earth, and
gives them to whomsoever he pleases; of his Kingdom there shall be no end;
Dan. 4.17, 25. Luke 1.33.

He pours Contempt on Princes, and causes them to wander in the Wilderness,
where there is no way, yet sets he the poor on High, and makes him Families
like a Flock, Ps. 107.40, 41.

He can make Nations as stubble, and Kings of the Earth as nothing, he makes
wast Mountains and Hills, and dries up all the Rivers; he can make Rivers,
Islands, and dry upon the Pools; he can lead the Blind, the way they know not,
Is. 42.15, 16.

He can make Darkness Light, and Crooked things Straight, he can form Light,
and Create Darkness, he can make Peace, and Create War, Is. 45.7.

Thirdly, The third quality of this great General, is his great Experience,
Conduct and Valor.

Can the Ancient of Days, who has Conquered and Subdued all he ever
Encountered with, be without Victory on his side? had not he the better of the
Old Enemy the Devil, who beguiled Eve, and for his lying and presumption,
Condemned him to perpetual Enmity and Contempt?

Did he not Conquer Pharaohs Pride and stubbornness by Plagues, and overthrow
him wholly at last?

Did he not signalize his Power, Fame, and Goodness toward his People of
Israel, in Destroying their Enemies, and appearing for them in all the
Exigencies of their afflicted Conditions, see the great Series of his Care of
them.

Did not he overthrow the Devil, when under Temptation of Hunger, and would not
work a Miracle for his own Relief; but Preached up Faith, on the Word and Power
of God? Man lives not by Bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of
the Mouth of God, Mat. 4.2.3, 4.

Did not he when Tempted from Scripture, to trust to Gods Protection, in
throwing of himself headlong, reject that Insinuation of Satan by Scripture,
Thou must not Tempt the Lord thy God, Ps. 71.11. By which he Magnified the
Sovereignty of God, and would not Tempt Providence? Mat. 4.9, 10.

And being Tempted to Worship the Devil, for the gain of the World, he defeated
the Tempter from the Duty of Worshipping God only, Thou shall Worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Mat. 4.9, 10.

And lastly, by his Submission to the purpose, and Will of God on the Cross, he
overcame Death, the last Enemy, Mat. 27.50. chapter 28.60. and by his Resurrection,
Crowned Man's Eternal Happiness, O Death I will be thy Plague, O Grave, I will
be thy Destruction, Repentance shall be hid from mine Eyes, Hosea 13, 14.

Hence is this Admirable Instance of the Power, of that Champion of our
Salvation, who through the vail of his own Flesh, has made Conquest of Eternal
Life for us, and by his free Love, Power, and good Will, has given them the
Victory over all his Enemies, and the last Enemy, Death it self, by taking away
Sin the Sting of Death, and as the great Trophy of his Victory, has Blotted
out the Handwriting of Ordinances, which was against them, and contrary to
them, and Nailed it to his own Cross, and so has completed the Victory for
Believers, Col. 3.13, 14, 15.

From hence may be seen, the Truth of that great Mystery of Gods Love in Christ
Jesus, Eye has not seen, neither has Ear heard, etc. Is. 64.4. and how great
Reason then have sinful Mortals to be much in the Admiration of all the
Dimentions of that inexpressible Mystery of Christ's Love, which passes
knowledge? Ephesians. 3.18, 19.

As the many Advantages from the Booty, in this Conflict, and Christ's Example,
is an inducement for cheerful fighting, so is the Example of the cheerful
Companions of this Combat, of which see a great Tribe of the Royal Combatants
under this Banner of Christ, fighting to Death with Immortal Glory, set down
before: the Saints Banner, is the Cross of Christ, God forbid that I should
glory in any thing, save in the Cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14.

In this Cross or Banner, Christ carries in it, as the Trophy of his Victory
and Motto, for the Comfort of Sinners, that Handwriting of Ordinance above
mentioned, and this is the Magna Charta of Believers, Col. 2.14. He that
Believes on him, shall never perish, but have Eternal Life, John 3.14, to 18.

Thirdly, The third Encouragement for cheerful fighting, is Christ's express
Will and Command, Let not your Hearts be Troubled, you believe in God, believe
also in me, etc. Jo. 14. to 5.

Rejoice always, yea I say, rejoice evermore, Col. 3.16, 17.

The whole Scripture is full of Exhortations of the Godly's Rejoicing in God;
Let the Hearts of them that seek the Lord, rejoice, again rejoice in the Lord
always, I say again rejoice in the Lord, Ps. 105. all, Phi. 4.4. the Combatants
under Christ's Banner, have peculiar Reasons of cheerfulness beyond all others.

First, For that their General was never defeated, neither can be, for how is
it possible that Wisdom, Power, and Experience, which Christ is in himself, can
be Defeated?

Secondly, All other Soldiers fight in Hopes of Victory, here the Victory is
insured, and already obtained, Christ has already fought the Battle, and
Christians are but to follow cheerfully, and receive the Prize, He has trod
the Wine Press of his Fathers Wrath, and none of the People were with him; Is.
63. to 5.

He is that only High Priest and Sacrifice for Sinners, and is the Blood of
Sprinkling, Heb. 12.4. Heb. 4.15, 16.

He is our Forerunner and Harbinger, to take possession for us within the
Vail, Heb. 6.20.

He is able to save to the uttermost, Heb. 7.27.

He is offered up once for all, By his own Blood, he obtained Redemption for
Sinners, to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb. 12.27.

He is our Advocate, to make intercession for us, 1 Jo. 2.1.

Thirdly, All the Soldiers Wounded in this Conflict, are Healed and Cured by
the Balsom of his Blood, He was wounded for our Transgressions, he was bruised
for our Iniquities, the Chastisement of our Peace was upon him, and with his
Stripes we are Healed, Is. 53.5.

O Mistical Balm of Gilead! does any Generals Blood, prove the Soldiers Balsom,
but that of Jesus Christ? the lives of Millions of Soldiers are Sacrificed to
the Life of their General, but this General dyed, to save the Lives of his
Soldiers, God commends his Love toward us, for while we were yet Sinners,
Christ dyed for us, To. 4 25. To. 5.9, 10.

Fourthly, Those who fight under this Banner, shall never be overcome, even
though they fight to Death they may be troubled but not destroyed, perplexed
but not in despair, persecuted but not forsaken, cast down but not destroyed, 1
Cor. 4.8, 9, 10. They may be killed all the day long, and counted as Sheep for
the Slaughter, and yet in all this, be more than Conquerors, Ps. 44.22. To.
8.36, 37.

He has so Framed, Fitted, Fashioned, and prepared them in a spiritual
Building and Frame, by putting his invincible Spirit in them, Eze. 36.26, 27.
and so Armed, and Disciplined them in a Spiritual Warfare, that they are
invincible; they have on the whole Complete Armor of God, that though their
fighting be against Principalities and Powers, and spiritual wickednesses in
high places, they are secured against all assaults, enabled to fight all
Battles, and though they should and must resist unto Blood, and in this fight
lose their Carnal Life, yet shall they be gainers, and victorious, Ephesians. 6.12,
to 19.

He that saves his Life, shall lose it, and he that loses his Life, shall
find it, Mat. 10.29.

He that raises up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us up, and present us with him,
2 Cor. 4.14.

Fear not him that can kill the Body, and do no more, but fear him that can
destroy both Soul and Body in Hell, Mat. 10.28.

Fifthly, Christ's Soldiers are not straglers, but are all chosen of God, from
the beginning of the World, and before the World was, Romans 9.8, 11, 16. To.
8.29, 30.

They are all Named, Marked, Listed, and Entered in Christ's Muster-Roll of his
Saints, they have the Mark of God, The White Stone, and New Name, and on them,
the Name of God, and the Name of the City of God, Rev. 7.3. chapter 14.14. chapter 2.7.
chapter 3.8, 12. so that they cannot be lost, stolen, or forced from their Colors,
having Gods Name and Mark on them, Eze. 8.4, 5.

Sixthly, They are all given of God, to the General, Christ Jesus, and I have
manifested thy Name unto the Men which thou gave me out of the World, thine
they were, and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy Word, Jo. 17.6, 12,
15, 24.

They are peculiarly guarded, and kept by Christ, that they may not be lost,
but are preserved against all evil, Ps. 91. all, Is. 54.10. they are protected
against all Poisonous or hurtful Weapons, no Weapon framed against thee shall
prosper, and every Tongue which shall rise against thee in Judgment, shall thou
Condemn, this is the Heritage of the Lord, and their Righteousness is of me,
says the Lord; Is. 49.2, 16.

They are in Christ's own keeping, so that they are graven on the Palms of his
Hands, and are Eternally preserved to the enjoyment of God, and to be set on
his Throne, and When he makes up his Jewels, they are spared, Rev. 3.24. Mal.
3.17.

Seventhly, This one thing more is peculiar to Christ's Army, whereas in other
Armies the Soldiers, some are pressed, others hired, of diverse Nations,
Languages, Judgments, Interests, and Persuasions, all Christ's are Volunteers.

Thy People shall be a willing People in the Day of thy Power, Ps. 110.3. They
are all of one Spirit with Christ, he puts his Spirit within them, Eze. 36.25,
26. Jer. 32.39.

They are all united to Christ, and are of one mind, and Will with him, one in
us, as we are one, John 17.21.

They are all of one mind, and unanimous amongst themselves, with a Heavenly
Harmony, and their Sentiments is one amongst themselves, Like the precious
Ointment on the Head, which ran down upon the Beard, and as the Dew of Hermon,
and the Dew on the Mount of Zion, Ps. 133.

As they all accord in Sentiments, they are guilty neither of Murmuring,
Rebellion, or Mutiny, but Holy and Peaceable, therefore all their desires are
acceptable with God, and are written and recorded by him in his Book of Life,
and they that feared Lord, spoke often one to another, and a Book of
remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought
often upon his Name, Mal. 3.10.

Then to conclude, if it be of a Truth, that Believers shall have Eternal Life,
Jo. 3 16.

Are they under an everlasting Covenant with God, Hosea 2.19, 20, Is. 59.20,
21. Is. 60.20, 21. To. 11.27, 29.

Do Remission of Sins, of whatsoever degree or quality belong to them, Is.
1.18. Is. 43.26. Mat. 11.28, 29, 30.

Shall they have Comfort in Darkness? Is. 50.10. Mich. 7.8. Mal 3 16.

Shall they be Heirs of all things? Rev. 21.7. To. 8.32. Gal. 3.29. Ephesians. 1.11,
14.

Shall they be one with God in Christ Jesus, in Wisdom, Spirit and Glory, Jo.
17.21, to 25

Shall nothing present, or to come separate them from him, To. 8.35, 37, 38.

Shall they sit on the Throne of God with Christ, Rev. 3.21.

Shall Christ have Universal Sympathy with them in all their Afflictions, Is.
63.9.

Shall they have Universal Protection by Christ? Is. 43.2. Ps. 91 all. Ps. 107.
all.

Shall their Chastisement from God be in moderation? Is. 27.7, 8. Jer. 31.20.

Shall the end of their chastisement, be to take away their sin, and for their
good? Is. 27.9. Heb. 12.5, to 11.

Shall the Afflictions of the Godly, be but for a short time? Is. 54.7, 8. 2
Cor. 4.17.

Shall the Afflictions of the Godly, be exchanged with greater Mercies? 2 Cor.
4.17, 18. Hebr. 12.11.

Are the Chastisements of the Godly, with Reluctance from God? Jer. 31.20.
Hosea 11.8, 9, 10, 11.

Has he given to his People, Promises in Poverty? Ps. 25.4. Ps. 34.9, 10. Isa.
41, 17, to 21. Is. 44.2, 3. Is. 45.3.

Have they promises in Captivity? Jer. 30.18. chapter 31.10. chapter 32.37.

Have they promises under Reproaches, Ps. 22.6, to 11. Ps. 31.9, to 14. Ez.
36.3, 15. Ps. 38.10, 11, 12, 15. Pro. 42.10, 11. Ps. 51.7, 8.

Have they promises in Sickness? Is. 38. all, chapter 40.28, to 32. Jer. 33.6. Ps.
41.3. Is. 46.3, 4. Is. 47.18.

Have they promises when forsaken of Friends? Ps. 27.5, to 15. Is. 49.15, to
22. Is. 54.5, to 11. Is. 66.5. chapter 6 3, 15. Jer. 30.11, to 18.

Shall all their Trials and Troubles, turn to Everlasting Joy? Ps. 116.6, 10.
Ps. 91, all. Ps. 68.13.

Have they Christ for their General, and Saints their Companions in their
Warfare?

Is Christ Wise and Wisdom it self? Pro. 1.2. chapter 8. all.

Is Christ for Experience, the Ancient of Days, Maker and Preserver of all
things? Col. 1.15, 16, 17. 1 Cor. 8.6. Heb. 1. to 14.

Is his Wisdom unsearchable? Job 32.8. chapter 38. all. chapter 39. chapter 40. Pro. 8.

Is he who furnishes Wisdom? James 1.5. Pro. 1.23. John 1. to 6. Job 38.36.
chapter 32.8.

Is this Wisdom the fear of God? Pro. 1.7. chapter 9.10. Jere. 9.23, 24. Jo. 17.3,
7, 8.

Is Christ all in all to the Saints? 1 Cor. 1.30, 31.

Is he infinitely powerful, Omnipotent King of Kings, and Lord of Lords? Rev.
17.14. Is. 12, to 29. Job 38. chapter 49. chapter 40. chapter 41. Dan. 17.25. Jer. 27.5.
Is. 45.7.

Is he experience to fight for his People? see the large account of the Victory
for his People before.

Has he overcome the Devil the Ancient and Powerful enemy of Man? Mat. 4 to 8.

Has he overcome Death and the Cross, by his Death and Resurrection? Mat.
27.50. chapter 28.6. Hosea 13.14. 1 Cor. 15.54, to 57.

Has he in the Signal of his Victories, that rare Trophy, the Handwriting of
Ordinances blotted out, which was against Man? Col. 3.13, 14, 15. John 3.16,
17, 18. To. 5.5, to 9.

Is the Cross of Christ, the Standard Royal and Saints Glory? Gal. 6.14.

And has he in it the Motto of Saints Salvation? Jo. 3.14, to 18, and blotting
out of their Sins? Col. 2.14.

Have all the glorified Saints of Heaven Traveled thither, under the Cross of
Christ for our Example?

Is Christ's Command for cheerful fighting under his Banner? Jo. 14, to 5. Col.
3.16, 17. 1 These. 5.18. Phi. 1, to 8. Psa. 105. all. Heb, 12.1, 2.

Shall Christ's Combatants have Victory for them, before the fight? Is. 61. to
5. chapter 66.7, 8. Heb. 4.15, 16. chapter 6.9, 20. chapter 12.4. chapter 7.25, to 22. chapter
9.12, to 28.

Is Christ our Advocate, making intercession for us? 1. Jo. 2.1. Heb. 7.25.

Has he taken possession of Heaven for us? Heb. 6.20. chapter 12.1, 2.

Are the Wounds of Christ's Combatants, cured by his Blood? Is. 53.4, 5, 6. 1
Pet. 2.21, to 25.

Are the Combatants of Christ always Conquerors? To. 8.36 37 2 Cor. 4.14. Mat.
10.32.

Are all the Combatants of Christ so framed and armed; that they can resist all
Attacks? Ez. 36.26, 27. Ephesians 6 12, 13, 14, to 19.

Are all Christ's Soldiers choice, and chosen before the World began? To. 8.29,
30. Tit. 1.2. chapter 3.5, 6.

Are they all Marked, and listed in Christ's Muster-Roll? Isa. 5.3. Ez. 8.4, 5.
Romans 7.3. chapter 2.7. chapter 3.5, 12. Jo 17.6.

Are they all secured by Christ, that they shall never be lost? Jo. 17.24. Psa.
91. all, Isa. 54.17. chapter 59.2, 16.

Are all Christ's Combatants of one mind, of one spirit, will and harmony? Eze.
36.26, 27. Joh. 17.21. Ps. 133. Mal. 3.16.

If these be the undeniable Truths of God, and Privileges of such, who fight
the good fight of Faith under Christ's Banner, what should hinder but that they
should draw near with full Heart and Assurance, and rejoice in the great
Salvation purchased to them by Christ Jesus, and cheerfully close with the
Apostles Exhortation, wherefore seeing we are compassed about with such a Cloud
of Witnesses, let us lay aside every weight that hangs down, and the sin that
so easily beset us, and let us run with patience, the Race that is set before
us, looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy
that was set before him endured the Cross, dispising the shame, and is set down
at the Right Hand of the Throne of God; for consider him that endured such
Contradiction of Sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied, and faint in your
minds. Heb. 12.1, 2, 3.

And further, Let us draw near with a true Heart, and full Assurance of Faith,
having our Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our Bodies washed with
pure Water, let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith, without wavering, for
he is faithful, who has promised, Heb. 10.22, 23.

Let us imitate that Holy Apostle, I have fought the good fight of Faith, I
have finished my Course, henceforth for me is laid up a Crown of Righteousness,
which the Righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not only to me, but to
all them also that love his appearing, 1 Timothy 4.7.8.

What can or should hinder the Joy and rejoicing of the People of God, who are
so well secured and assured of their everlasting Interest in him? There is
therefore now no condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8.1. If God be for us who can be
against us? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that
Justifies who shall condemn? Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that
died, yea rather that is risen again, and sits at the right hand of God, and
makes Intercession for us, Romans 8.1, 31, to 35.

Are there, or can there be greater causes of Joy, and Satisfaction, than in
the assurance of Eternal happiness given in Scriptures to Believers, no
casualty of condition in life or death, can separate them from the love of God
in Christ Jesus, Heb. 2.9. to 15, Romans 8.35, to 40.

And whatever troubles or afflictions shall attend them in this World, though
their days may be spent in sorrow, labor, and tragical afflictions, their end
shall be joyous and comical; He that sows in Tears shall reap in Joy, he that
goes forth and weepeth bearing precious Seed, shall doubtless come again with
rejoicing, bringing his Sheaves with him, Psalm. 126.5, 6.

The condition of the Godly in the end shall certainly be happy; Though you
have lain among the Pots yet shall ye be like the Wings of a Dove, whose
Feathers are covered with Silver, and her Wings with yellow Gold, Psalm. 68.13.

Therefore to conclude all, let us imitate the Holy Apostle; Be ye steadfast,
unmovable, abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your
work is not in vain in the Lord, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8 1 Cor. 15 58. In all these
things we are more than Conquerours, Rom 8.35. to end, and let us in
thanksgiving acknowledge the Sovereign excellency of Christ's love with Psalms
148. Psalm. 149. Psalm. 150.

And lastly, Let us come boldly to the Throne of Grace that we may obtain mercy
and find Grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4.16.

Now unto him by whom the World was created and subsists, who bounds the Seas,
who reveals to man his Thoughts, who does in the Armies of Heaven and Earth
what he pleases, and none dares say to him, what do thou? Dan. 3.47. Who was
dead and is alive and lives for evermore, who has the Keys of Hell and Death,
Rev. 1.18. Who leads his people to the living Fountains of Water and wipes away
all Tears from their Eyes, and Crowns them with everlasting glory, Rev. 7.16,
17.

Who is the way, truth, life, light and resurrection, John. 14.6. Who shall
come in the glory of his power to restore all the Kingdoms of the Earth, from
Antichristian tyranny and servitude of Sin, and deliver up the Kingdom to his
Father, 1 Cor. 15.24. and who is now at the Right Hand of Glory, be all Honor,
Power, Glory, Praise, Majesty, and Dominion from henceforth and for ever.

FINIS.
The Index of the Contents.
1.. MAN was Created in Holiness, Righteousness, and knowledge, and has
Dominion over the Creatures, p. 2. by Righteousness is meant a Disposition to
do good, and shun Evil. p. 2. By Holiness, Integrity of Life and Manners, p. 3.
By Knowledge, Understanding of all things in reference to God, Man, and other
Creatures p 3. Man in his happy State, was a glorious thing, and all the
Creatures were pleasant, and in unity one with another, p 3 4, Man broke the
Chain of Obedience, is deprived of his Sovereignty, the Earth accursed and
Enmity sown, p. 4. What Original Sin is, 1. not of Ignorance, but wilful. 2.
Not of Infirmity, but against knowledge. 3. Of great Pride and Ambition, p. 5.
4. It was the Sin of Unbelief, p. 5. 5. Of Murmuring and Ingratitude. 6. Of
Imprudence, p 5, 6. 7. Had in it the Lust of the Eyes, Lust of the Flesh, and
Pride of Life, p. 6, 7, 8. It was the Corruption of the whole Nature of Man,
which has tainted the Blood to all Posterity, p. 7, 8, 9, 10. Man lately a
Sovereign, now Outlawed, a Rebel and Slave, p. 10. This Sin is charged on all
Posterity, by the Corruption of Nature, of which all Men are come, p. 10, 11,
12, 13, 14. Man's Posterity are thereby Subject, 1. To Death. 2. Disabled in
Natural Enjoyment, and Spiritual Capacities, p. 14, 15, 16. proved from the
Corruption of Nature, from Scripture, and from experience, p. 16. 17. In
Thoughts, Words, Actions, and Religious Duties, p. 17, 18. 19. Many Inferences.
1. All Men of one Blood, the Nobler should not despise the Base. 2. All Men are
of a bastard and defiled Blood, so no Man has cause to glory, p. 19, 20, 21.
3. Look on this sin, as a Fountain of all sins, p. 21. 4. Murmur not at Losses,
because by this sin Man grudgeth God, reserving from him the Tree of knowledge.
p. 22. 5. Let not the Richer despise the Poorer, he is his Brother of the same
Family, p. 22, 23. 6. All Men are Brethren and Members of each other, therefore
should have Simpathy, p. 24, 25. From this are two Duties. 1. We must seek
Reconciliation in Christ, p. 25. 2. We should seek for the second coming of
Christ, p. 26, 27, Use of Lamenting Man's lapsed State, p. 27, 28, 29, 30. The
Mystery of Man's Restoration by Christ, p. 30, 31. The Contrivance of Man's
Redemption, by the Covenant of Grace through Christ, p. 32, 33. The free- The
freedom of that Covenant, p. 33, 34, 35. The difference between Christ's
becoming surety for Man, and one Man's surety for another, p. 36, 37, 38. Use of
Watchfulness to the godly. p. 39, 40, 41. Reproof of Censoriousness and
Slandering, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45. Advice for Compassion and Charity, p. 46, 47,
48. The parts of the Covenant of Grace on Gods part a free Pardon, p. 49.
Christ to Man is a King, Priest and Prophet; and first a Prophet, p. 50. 51,
52. Christ a Priest, and the difference between his Priesthood and Man's, p. 52,
53, 54, 55, 56, 57. Christ a King to Believers, p. 58, 59. To Rule by his Law,
p. 60. To protect his People, p. 60, 61, 62. To reward by his bounty, p. 62,
63, 64. Use of Comfort to Believers from Christ's Mediation, p 64, 65. Use of
Comfort from his being King, p. 66. Man's part in the Covenant of Grace, p. 67,
68. As God requires performance, he assists with Grace and Ability, p. 69. He
Rewards Obedience, p. 70. The Difference between Christ's bounty to Man, and the
kindness of one Man to another, p. 70, 71. Exhortation to mutual Charity, p.
71, 72. Five Duties incumbent to Man, p. 73. 1. Trace Man from his beginning.
2. Set originally sin before us, p. 73, 74. 3. Mortification. p. 74. 75. 4.
Repentance. p. 75, 76, 77. 5. Search the Records of Scripture Promises, p. 77.
The Records of Scripture contain. 1. Gods love to sinners. 2. All Spiritual and
Temporal Blessings. 3. Life Eternal, and Christ's Love, p. 78, 79 Promises of
Spiritual Blessings, Eternal Life, promises of Temporal Mercies in general, p.
79, 80. Promises of Temporal Mercies in particular, p. 80 Promises when all
helps fail, p. 80. Method to be taken under Afflictions. 1. to look on sin as
the cause of all evil, p. 81. 2. Affliction from God, p. 82. 3. What Gods
purpose is in chastising his people. 1. To purge away their sin, p 83, 84. 2.
To call his people to him. 3. To Distinguish his People from Bastards, p. 84,
85. 4. To fix on their Hearts, the emptiness of Human things, as 1. Not our
own, but given of God, p. 86. 2. By showing the uncertainty thereof, p. 86. 3.
The emptiness thereof, in particular cases. 1. Honor. 2. Wealth. 3. Friends.
4. Health, Honor and Riches, p. 87, 88. 3. Friends, p. 88, 89. 4. Health, p.
89. The Dignity of Christ, above all other things 1. He of himself, and all
things from him. 2. He infinite in power. 3. Infinite in wisdom. 4. Matchless
in Beauty. -- 5. Of everlasting continuance. -- 6. Conqueror over all Enemies,
even Death it self, p. 90, 91. The sixth reason why God afflicts his people, is
to fix their Hearts on himself, and promises in these Cases -- 1. Darkness or
desertion -- 2. Under greatest sins -- 3. Under Relapses, p. 92, 93, 94, 95,
96, 97. God's promises to his people in Temporals in generals, p. 98, 99, 100.
His promises in particular cases. 1. In Sickness. 2. In Poverty. 3. In
Captivity. -- 4. Slander or Reproaches. -- 5. Under forsaking of Friends, 1.
Sickness, p 103, 104. 2. Imprisonment, p. 105, 106. The Lords goodness to to
his Prisoners appear. 1. In giving them a clear sight of himself. 2. By showing
his immediate hand in their Deliverance, -- by making Enemies means of their
help, -- In delivering by his immediate Hand, p. 107, 108, 109. The Lords
promises in poverty, -- that 2 ways. 1. In supplying their wants, -- 2. By
blessing a little to increase it, p. 110, 111, 112. Promises under unkindness
of Friends, p. 112, 113, 114. Promises under Reproaches, p. 115, 116, 117. The
Lord by Afflicting his people, instructs them of the different methods he takes
with his People, and the wicked in 4 respects, -- 1. He Corrects his People in
love for their good, but the wicked in Judgment, -- 2. He corrects his People
with reluctance, but pursues the wicked with fury, -- 3. He corrects his
People in moderation, but the dregs of his wrath is poured out on the wicked,
-- 4. God afflicts his People for a small time, but the wicked are punished
eternally, p. 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122. The Lord by chastising his People,
instructs them to distinguish between Spiritual and Temporal Mercies in these
instances. 1. Temporal Mercies are Trans^ent, and Subject to changes, but the
spiritual are permanent. -- 2. Temporals are imperfect. -- 3. All human
enjoyments are short of Christ, which is the inheritance of the Saints. 1. They
are Created, he the Creator -- 2. He subsists of himself, they by him. -- 2. He
perfect, they imperfect. -- 4. He the ancient of days. -- 5. Excells in wisdom,
he is wisdom it self, -- 6. In beauty. -- 7. He is Omnipotent, p. 122, 123,
124, 125, 126, 127. The Saints Kingdom begins, when the World fails, and it
continues to all eternity, -- It is incorruptible, not subject to change, p.
128. It is complete, p. 129. The great end why Christ chastises his People, is
to make them prize Eternal Life. p. 129. 1. God is glorified thereby, p. 130.
2. Our advantages are great, p. 131. 3. Our encouragements to seek it great,
nothing can stop the Current of his Mercies, neither the greatness nor
multitude of sins, -- No extremity of Condition can do it, p. 131, 132. The
greatness of Salvation consists. 1. In Restoring Man from the greatest misery,
to greatest happiness, p. 133. 2. The blessed are Heirs of all things, p. 133.
Exempted from all evil, p. 133. Have Complete Happiness, p. 133. Other
encouragements to seek Salvation, against all Temptations. 1. It is freely by
Christ. 2 The World made for Gods glory. 3. Instances of Christ's sufferings. 4.
The sure estate of the Redeemed above that of Man's first Estate. 5. The
Excellent Privileges of the Saints, p. 134. 1. Our Salvation freely of God. 2.
Man in the World freely Redeemed by Christ, p. 135, 136, 137, 138. 3. Examples
of Christ's abasement, p. 139, 140. Christ makes Man instrumental in his own
Salvation, p. 142. We are not only to have Christ's Doctrine, but to imitate in
Holiness, Patience, Suffering, Love and Charity, and love Enemies, p. 143. 144.
Duty of love, p. 145, 146. Faith on God and Providence. p. 147, 148. Bearing
the Cross commanded. p. 149, 150. Instances of Christ's and Saints sufferings.
p. 150, 151, 152, 153. Promises of Assistance, p. 154, 155, 156. bearing the
Cross is the road to Heaven, 157, 158. three objections answered. 1. Loss of
the World, dear rate for Heaven. 2. It seems contrary to Scripture, which
promises prosperous days to the Church. 3. It seems inconsistent with the
goodness of God to afflict his People at such a rate, p. 159. 160. The wickeds
prosperity stumbling in the days of David, Job, and Malachi, p. 160, 161 World
and things in it vanity; spiritual things above sensual, and in what do these
things consist. 1. Christ the Savior of the World. 2. In spiritual grace
bestowed by him. 3. In the sanctified use of Spiritual and Temporal Mercies. 4.
Eternal Life obtained by Christ, p. 162, 163. What Faith is, and the qualities
of it p. 164. What Holiness and the qualities of it, p. 165. What Mortification
is, and wherein consists. -- 1. Self-examination. 2. Preparation. 3. To spare
no sin, p. 166, 167. Mortification must have transplanting into Christ, p. 167.
Christians must have their Armor on them, -- Christians must advance, and not
fall back in their warfare. 1. As a Duty Commanded. 2. God promises assistance
in the Duty of Perseverance, p. 185, 186, 187. 188. 1. Their Duty, p. 168, 169,
170. 2. Gods promise of Assistance, p 171, 172. 3. How they thrive in
perseverance, p. 190, 191. The several steps of Mortification and Renovation,
from p. 171, to 189. All the wicked's enjoyments are Curses, p. 192. No
satisfaction without Christ. 1. For that nothing else is perfect or permanent.
p. 193. 194, 195, 196, 197. Christian contentment cannot fail, p. 197. four
differences of Gods dispensing the things of this Life to the Godly and the
Wicked, p. 199, 200. 201. The freedom of these Eternal Excellencies, p. 201.
The fullness thereof. p. 202. No Contentment in Clothes, p. 203, 204, 205. In
eating drinking, and lusts of the flesh, no satisfaction, but on feeding in the
Paradise of God, p. 206. Riches of the World exchanged with riches of Glory.
Children and Relations exchanged with fellowship in the new Jerusalem. -- Lusts
of the eye, exchanged with vision of God and Angels. p. 207, 208, 209, 210.
Pride of Life, Honor and Preferments of this Life exchanged with Eternal
Inheritance and Honor, 210, 211. Answer of the first Objection, p. 212, 213.
214. Second Objection. Answer, p. 215, 216. Answer to the third Objection, 216,
217, 218, 219, 220. The difference between the Covenant in Adam, and that in
Christ, in four respects p. 121, 122, 223. The manifold privileges of the New
Covenant, -- The Mystical union with God, in four respects, -- 1. In Spirit. 2.
In Holiness. 3 In Love. 4. In Glory, from p. 223. to 237. What to be of the
same mind with Christ, in suffering and acting, p. 242. 243. Submission what --
Resignaton what, -- Christians mind the same things with Christ, -- Christians
are Commanded to use, but not to abuse the World, p. 237, 238, 239. Trust
Providence, 240. Judgments on Righteous and Prodigal, p. 241, 242. Do all to
Gods glory, p. 240. Who live in the flesh, have not Christ's Spirit, -- One in
knowledge what, p. 245. Difference in knowledge of things spiritual, and things
Temporal, p. 245, 246, 247, 248, 249. Holiness what, p. 250. Objections against
inherent Holiness answered, p. 250, 251. Love consists 1. In Sympathy. 2. In
supply, p. 252, 253, 254, 255. With God, one in glory, p. 255, 256. The
fivefold Happy Estate of Christians, -- 1. Their Death, p. 256, 257. 2. Their
Spiritual Bodies, p. 257. 3. Admitted into the presence of God and Angels, p.
257, 258, 259. 4. Continue in the presence of God, p. 259. 5. All Sorrows wiped
away, p. 259. Man's State by Nature, in the several degrees of it compared with
his State, under the new Covenant, p. 260. Though Man by Nature be under wrath,
yet not without hope, p. 262. Encouragements, p. 261. 1. To be under deep Sense
of Natural Misery. 2. Have admiration of Gods love in Christ, -- 3. Be
reconciled to the Cross, -- 4. Be Patient under the Rod. 5. Believe all things
work for good, p. 282, 283. The Covenant of Grace, excels the Covenant with
Adam, p. 264. Christians must be new molded, Gods glory, p. 265, 266, 267,
268, 269. Saints Bodies are Spiritual and Incorruptible, p. 269. Cheerfulness a
Duty on Believers, Christians War is offensive, defensive and intestine, 269,
270. The power of Christians Enemies in five respects, p. 271. Christians must
be vigilant, not sloathful, p. 272. Christians war offensive, p. 272, 273.
Christians War with Satan perpetual, for three Reasons, 1. The Generals, Christ
and Belial have different interest. 2. Different Laws. 3. Have perpetual Enmity
to each other, p. 273. Christians under Spiritual Laws, the World under the
Laws of the flesh, p. 274, 275. Perpetual Enmity, must Capitulate none, p. 275,
276. The provision for Christian Warfare, p. 277, 278. Christians must fight
cheerfully, for these Reasons. 1. Life Eternal is the prize. 2. They have the
greatest booty of any Soldiers, p. 279, 280. Temporal Advantages. 1. Great
promises in all-afflictions in general. 2. In all particular cases in sickness,
Poverty, Captivity, under unkindness of friends, and under reproaches; all
particularly, p. 280, 281. Christ the most excellent General. 1. For his
Wisdom. 2. His Power. 3. His Experience, p. 281. Christ is diffusive Wisdom, he
Communicates to others, -- Christ's Power and Experience, p. 281, 282, 283, 284.
285. Christ's Soldiers have seven Reasons to encourage their cheerful fighting
above others, 1. Christ their General was never Defeated, nor can be. 2. They
fight, but he has already obtained the victory. 3 Their wounds are healed by
his Blood, -- 4. They shall not be overcome, -- 5 They are all choice Men, and
chosen of God, -- 6. They are all given to Christ by God, -- 7. They are all of
one Spirit, Presuasion and Interest, p. 286, 287, 288. The Conclusion with a
Series of the proofs of Man's Eternal and Happy State; Exhortation to Joy and
Praise.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. l. 34. r. employed. p. 11. l. 4. r. also. p. 27. l. 6. r. bondage. p.
36. l. 35. r. Men. p. 82. l. 22. r. Amos, 3, 6. p. 92. l. 26. r. Is. 27. p. 95.
l. 16. r. girded. p. 99. l. 14. r. like. p. 121. l. 21. r. under. p. 119. l. 3.
r. live. p. 139. l. 34. r. oppositely. p. 165. l. 32. r. after. p. 167. l. 3.
r. neither. p. 179. l. 25. r. heightning, p. 171. l. 33. r. Husbandry, p. 192.
l. 16. r. place, p. 213. l. 15. r. gave, p. 283. l. 12. r. is.


