THE MYSTERY OF INIQUITY UNVAILED: IN A DISCOURSE,

Wherein is held forth The Opposition of the Doctrine Worship, and Practices of
the Roman Church,

TO The Nature, Designs, and Characters of the Christian Faith.

By GILBERT BURNET, Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, and are to be sold by M. Pit, at the Angel over
against the Little North Door of St. Paul's. 1673.

THE Mystery of Iniquity UNVAILED.
HE that increases knowledge, increases sorrow, is an observation which
holds true of no part of knowledge, so much as of the knowledge of Mankind:
It is some relief to him, who knows nothing of foreign wickedness, to hope
there are other Nations wherein Virtue is honored, and Religion is in esteem,
which allays his regrates, when he sees Vice and Impiety abound in his Country;
but if by traveling or reading, he enlarge his Horizon, and know Mankind
better, his regrates will grow, when he finds the whole World lies in
wickedness. It argues a cruel and in humane temper, to delight in beholding
scenes of horror and misery; and certainly none, who either honors his Maker
and Redeemer, or is a lover of Mankind, can without sorrow look on, and see the
indignities done to God and his Son Christ, and see the Enemy of the humane
race triumphing over the World, with such absolute authority and so much
enraged cruelty; and that not only in the dark Regions of it, which the Sun of
Righteousness has not yet visited with his Gospel, but that where Christ
should have a Throne, Satan's Seat should also be, is justly surprising and
astonishing. That almost all Christendom has fallen from their first love, is
what none whose eyes are open can deny; and it is little less evident, that the
greater part of it has made shipwreck, and erred from the Faith; and that the
Church, whose Faith was once spoken of throughout the World, is now become the
Mother of the Fornications of the Earth. It is true, the Scriptures warned us
of a falling away, of a mystery of iniquity, of an Antichrist to be revealed in
due time, and of a Babylonish Rome, which should bewitch the Earth with her
Sorceries, but should be varnished over with fair colors and specious
pretenses, so that mystery should be on her forehead: Being then warned of so
much danger to the Christian Religion, it is a necessary (though painful)
enquiry to see if this Antichrist be yet come, or if we must look for another.

But because some have stretched the Notion of Antichristianism so far, that
things harmless and innocent come within its compass; and others have so much
contracted it, that they might escape free; we are to take a view of the Nature
and Designs of the Christian Religion, and to conclude from that what must be
Antichristianism: It being not only a bare contradiction to some branches or
parts of the Gospel (for then every error or heresy were Antichristianism)
but a design and entire complex, of such opinions and practices, as are
contradictory to, and subversive of, the power and life of Christianity: And if
we find any such thing to be broached and received in the World, we may with
the least hazard of uncharitableness, pronounce it to be Antichristianism, and
if it be acted or animated by any Head, he may be concluded Antichrist.

The Designs of the Christian Religion run betwixt these four heads: The first
is, to give us right apprehensions of the Nature and Attributes of God, that we
may conceive aright of him, and adore him sutably to his Nature, and according
to his Will, and thereby be admitted to a free converse with him, and become
partakers of the Divine Nature. How little of God was known by the twinklings
of Natures Light, even to the better and wiser part of the World, Tullies Books
of the Nature of the Gods do sufficiently inform us? But if the Philosophers
were so much to seek in it, what shall we expect from the Vulgar? And indeed
Homers Iliads, and Ovids Metamorphosis, were wretched Systems of Divinity; and
yet such, and such like, were the sentiments of the Nations about the Godhead.
It is true, the seed of Abraham were delivered from that darkness, and knew God
by his Name Jehovah, and had Laws and Ordinances given them by God; yet their
Worship was so carnal, and did so strike upon, and affect the senses, that we
will be soon satisfied, it was not so sublime and free as became the
Spirituality of the Divine Nature, and so was only fitted for the Infancy of
the People of God; but by Christ the mystery that lay hid from ages and
generations, was revealed; for he declared the Father, and revealed him, and
taught us to renounce Idols and vanities, and to serve the living God,
commanding all men every where to repent, the times of ignorance wherein God
winked at Idolatry, being then over. That so Mankind being Gods Offspring,
might feel after him, and not worship him any more in the blinding grossness of
Idolatry, but in a pure spiritual manner; and whereas the Law came by Moses, by
Christ came Grace and Truth. Grace, in opposition to the severity of the Law;
and Truth, as opposed (not to Falsehood) but to the Figures and Shadows of Moses
his Law; and therefore God is to be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, in
opposition to the Carnal Ordinances, and Typical Rites, which shadowed out the
Truth in the Law.

The second branch of the Christian Religion is, to hold forth the method of
man's reconciliation with his Maker. For the sense of all mankind agrees in
this, that sin is an indignity done to God, which deserves punishment, and
cannot be expiated by any service man can do: It was therefore necessary there
should be a mean found for encouraging sinners to embrace a Religious life; of
which all had reason to despair, without pardon were offered to penitents, upon
the change of their lives. Now this was that, the Heathen could not dream how
to procure: It is true the Jews had sacrifices for expiating of sin, but these
could never quiet their consciences; since the common sense of mankind tells,
that the blood of beasts cannot appease God. The mystery therefore of the
reconciliation of sinners to God, is the proper character of the
Christian-Religion: which holds forth to us how the eternal Word was made man,
and endured unspeakable sufferings for the sins of men, even to the death of
the Cross; and was raised up by God, and carried to Heaven, where he is vested
with all power and authority, and by the merits of his death has a right to
grant pardon, give grace, and confer eternal life on all that believe on him;
by whom God conveys all things to us, and through whom we are to offer up all
our worship to God, he being the Mediator betwixt God and man.

The third head of the Christian-Religion is, to teach the perfectest, clearest
and most divine rules, for advancing of the souls of men to the highest
perfection of their natures. It is true, noble pieces of morality were
acknowledged and taught by the Heathen Philosophers: and the Books of the Old
Testament have the Doctrine of virtue, purity, humility and meekness laid open
very fully: but without derogating from these, it must be acknowledged, that as
the Doctrine of Christianity, teaches all these precepts with clearer rules,
and fuller directions; so they were in it recommended by the example of its
Author, backed with the strongest Motives, and enforced with the greatest
Arguments. In these are the lessons of purity, chastity, ingenuity, humility,
meekness, patience, and generosity; so clearly laid down, and so fully evinced,
that no man who is so much a man, as to love these things whereby his mind may
be improved, to all that is truly great and noble, but must be enamoured of
the Christian-Religion, as soon as he is taught it.

The fourth design of Religion is, to unite mankind in the closest bonds of
peace, friendship, and charity, which it does not only by the rules prescribed
for the tempering our passions, forgiving of injuries, and loving our Enemies,
and by the Doctrine of obedience to those in authority over us, but likewise by
associating us into one Body, called the Church, wherein we are to worship God
jointly, and to be coupled in one by the use of the Sacraments, which are the
Ligaments of the Body.

Having thus viewed the great designs of the Christian Religion in the several
branches and parts thereof, I shall add to this, the main distinguishing
Characters of our Religion, which are also four.

The first is, its verity; that it is not founded on the tattles of Persons
concerned, nor on the reveries of Dotards, nor received with a blind credulity,
being founded on the Authority of the great God, which appeared visibly in
those that published it, chiefly in the Person of Jesus Christ, who by his
Miracles that were wrought in the sight of all the People, even his enemies
looking on, and not being able to deny them; but chiefly by his resurrection
from the dead, was declared to be the Son of God, which was seen and known by
many, who followed not cunningly devised fables, but were the Eyewitnesses of
his Majesty, who went in his Name, and published it to the World, confirming it
by miracles and mighty wonders, attesting it, notwithstanding of all the
persecutions they met with, most of them confirming it with their blood: And
this Doctrine was received and believed by the better part of Mankind, though
it being contrary to all the interests of the flesh, whose mortification it
teaches, its reception cannot be imputed to credulity or interest.

The second Character of our Religion is, its genuine simplicity and
perspicuity, that all its Doctrines and Rules are clearly and distinctly held
out to us, not like the Heathen Divinity, much whereof lay in dark Oracles in
the Books of the Sybils, and in other pretended Mysteries, which none but the
Priests might handle and expound. The Jewish Religion was also veiled with
Types and Figures, so that it was not easy to see the substance and truth
through all these foldings and shadows. But the glory of the Christian
Religion, as to this particular, is nobly laid out by St. Paul, in these words,
2 Cor. 3. 18. But we all with open face, as in a glass, beholding the glory of
the Lord, are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, as by the
Spirit of the Lord.

The third Character is, the reasonableness of the Christian Religion, it
containing none of these absurd incredible things, which abounded among the
Heathens; nor of these Rites of Judaism, the reasons whereof, beside the Will
of God in enjoining them, could not be assigned; but both the Doctrines and
Precepts of the Christian Religion are fitted for Mankind, and so congenial to
his Nature, that they well deserve the designation of reasonable service, or
rational worship, God having made our Souls and them of a piece.

And the fourth Character of our Religion is, its easiness; Christ's yoke is
easy, and his burden light, Mat. 11. 30. Wherein we are freed from all the
barbarous and cruel Rites of Gentilism, and from the oppressive Bondage of
Judaism, which was a Law of Ordinances, and a yoke that our fathers were not
able to bear; but that we are called to by Christ, is so simple, so easy, and
so plain, that well may we say, his Commandments are not grievous, 1 Ioh. 5. 3.

Having given this hint of the Design and Characters of the Christian Religion,
I hold it not necessary to dwell on a further deduction of those generals into
more particular branches, nor to make this scheme of Religion good by any
longer proof, the position I have laid down, being so obvious to the reason of
every considering person; wherefore I go on to examine if there be any such
system of Doctrins or Opinions, among pretenders to Christianity, which tends
to the overthrowing and enervating of this whole design, and whose Characters
are directly opposite to these I have mentioned; and the less avowed, and the
more disguised that Society be, as it is more likely to prevail, since Error
and Vice are not so formidable in their own colors, as when veiled with the
pretenses of Truth and Virtue, so it will better agree with that great
Character the Prophecies give of this defection, that it was a Mystery, and had
Mystery on its forehead, Rev. 17, 15.

And here remains the sad part of my discourse, for what lover of mankind can
with pleasure either satisfy his own reason, or convince the judgment of
others, in a matter the issue whereof is to prove so great a part of the
Christian Societies to be Antichristian and adulterate, and certainly if my
love to truth, and the honor of my Redeemer and his Gospel, and by consequence
a zeal for souls, did not engage me to this search, I could easily quit the
Task, and choose more easy and pleasant subjects for the exercise of my
thoughts; but the wisdom of God having declared it a part of wisdom to observe
the characters of the Antichristian beast, I therefore, though not without
pain, engage in the survey of it.

And first, in the entry it will be a bad Omen, of no good to be expected from
any society that shall study to keep her members in ignorance, and to bar them
the study of the holy Scriptures, which being the Revelation of the whole
counsel of God, and written by plain and simple men, and at first directed to
the use of the rude illiterate vulgar, for teaching them the Mysteries of
Godliness, and the path of Life; it is a shrewd indication that if any study
to hide this light under a Candlestick, and to keep it in an unknown Tongue, or
forbid the Body of Christians the use of it (though its native tendency be to
enlighten the understanding, and to inflame the will, it being given out by God
for that end) that those must be conscious to themselves of great deformity to
that rule, and apprehend, that if it were more known, their Doctrine would be
less believed, especially since the hardest part of the Scriptures are the
writings of the Old Testament: And yet these were communicated to all of that
dispensation, who were commanded by Christ to search them, and who did educate
their Children in them, continuing that Holy care to a high degree, even to
this day. Now except it be said that it is fitter all be kept under darkness in
the new Dispensation, than was in the Old, no account can be given, for the
zeal is used in any Church, to keep their Children in such ignorance; and yet
this is a part of the distinguishing Characters of the new Dispensation from
the old, that light has appeared in it. Now all may know how guilty those of
Rome are in this: What pains are taken to detract from the authority of the
Scriptures? how they quarrel? sometimes its darkness, sometimes its
ambiguousness, sometimes the genuineness of its Originals, and always complain
of its being too much perused, and therefore let as little of it be put in
vulgar Tongues as can be; read it publicly in an unknown Tongue, and permit no
private person the use of it, without allowance from his Confessor: Of which,
though in some places the Reformation has made them more liberal, yet where
there is no hazard of that, they betray their aversion for the Scriptures too
palpably in all their Writings and Discourses.

But now to pursue my design more closely, I must call to mind the first branch
of the Christian Religion, which teaches how God is to be worshipped in a pure
and spiritual way; and see how far this is contradicted. And here I must
consider the Idolatry of the Gentiles, which was of two kinds. The one was,
when the true God was worshipped in a false manner: The other was, when divine
adoration was offered to those who were no gods. Of the first I shall reckon
two kinds; the first was, when an Image or Figure was erected for representing
the Deity to the senses, and adoration offered to God through it: In which case
though perhaps the herd did formerly worship the Image, yet their Philosopher
declared, they meant these only for exciting the senses and imagination, and no
for being worshipped; much less that the Deity should be conceived like unt^
them, as we find both in Celsus Julian, an^ Maximus Tyrius. Now this form (...)
adoration is contrary both to the Divine Effence and Command. For God mu^
either be conceived like such an Image or not: If like to it, then a great
indi^ nity is done the Divine Nature; great than if a Toad or Worm were set out
the Image of a King, to have civil rev^ rence paid to it; since he is of his
ow^ Essence Incomprehensible, and Invi^ ble, and so has no shape nor figure.
In word, it abuses our thoughts of Go^ when we figure him to our selves. (...)
if we conceive God not like such Image; then why is it used, except to be a
snare to the vulgar, who will be ready to think God like unto it? and certain
it is, that whatever the more refined or abstracted Wits may conceive of these
Images, yet the vulgar offer up their Adorations directly to them, and conceive
God to be like unto them.

This Worship is also contrary to the Divine Precept, who made it one of the
ten Commandments, which himself delivered to his people, Exodus 20. 4. That no
graven Image nor likeness should be made to be worshipped. And the reason
given, shows the Law was perpetual, for God is ever jealous of the Glory due to
him. Now what kindness those of Rome have to this command, may be guessed by
their striking it out of their Catechisms, as if it were only an appendix of
the first: But if we read the whole Old Testament, it will furnish us with
large discoveries of Gods displeasure at this kind of worship, to which the
Jews were so inclinable; but God would not give his praise to graven Images,
Isa. 42. 8. Now here it is to be remembered, that the Jewish Dispensation was
low and carnal, when compared to that to which we are called: If then this
Worship was not allowed of to them, it is much less to be allowed of among
Christians.

Another part of the false Worship of the Heathens was, that they believed the
Deity and Divine Power was by mystical and magical ways affixed to some Bodies,
as the Sun or Stars are; or to some Temples, and to some Ancilia and Pal^ladia,
which they believed came down from Heaven, Acts 19. 35. to which they held God
to be present and adherent, and therefore worshipped them And of kin to this
was the Israelites the^ worshipping the Calf in the wilderness, Exo^ 32. for it
is clear, they looked on it their God who had brought them out Egypt, therefore
could not possibly be ad^ring the Egyptian God that was an Ox; b^ the Feast
that was to Jehovah, and (...) Psalm 106. verse. 20. that says, they ch^ged
their glory into the similitude of an O^ do show that they worshipped the t^
God, though in a false manner. Neither is it to be imagined, that Aaron the
Prophet and Saint of the Lord, though very guilty in this matter, could for all
that be so criminal, as to make a false god: But the most satisfying account of
his fault is, that when he saw God in the Mount, Exodus 24. 10. God appeared in
that figure that was afterward in the most Holy Place, which was to be framed
after the pattern seen in the Mount. And if so, then God appeared between the
Cherubims; now the Figure of a Cherub, was the same with that of a Calf in its
hinder parts, Ezekiel. 1. 7. And if we compare verse. 10. of that chap. with Ezekiel.
10. 14. what in the first place is called the face of an Ox, is in the second
called the face of a Cherub, which tells us clearly what was the Figure of the
Cherub. And therefore Aaron seeing the People desired a sensible Symbol of Gods
Presence among them, he made choice of that he had seen in the Mount about the
Divine Glory, and yet all that did not excuse his fault in the sight of God.

In like manner, after the Tabernacle and Temple were set up, wherein were the
Cherubin, when Jeroboam revolted, he set up Calves, 1 King. 12. 28, 29. as is
probable upon the same account, but no doubt continued in all points the
Worship of the true God, as it was at Jerusalem, as might be proved from many
particulars; but the sin where with he made Israel to sin, was the worshipping
of the true God by a false Symbol. The like account is to be given of the
Idolatry of Gideons Ephod, Judge. 8. 27. And of the worshipping the Brazen
Serpent, 2 King. 18. 4. where certainly the true God was adored, and yet the
People went a whoring from him in that Worship.

And here the Title of whoredom, given to Idolatry so often in the Old
Testament, is to be considered; the importance whereof is, that God by
covenanting with his People, is married to them, to be their God; and the
conjugal Duty they owe him, is Adoration: When therefore other Creatures have
any share o^ that bestowed on them, spiritual whore (...) is committed.

Now how sad the Application of this to the Christian Church must be, all may
judge, who know how great a part of Christendom worship God by Images; and how
the adored and incomprehensible Trinity is painted as an old man with a child
in his arms, and a dove over the child's head; though no man has seen the
Father at any time, Ioh. 6. 46. and the Son as God can no more be represented
by an Image, than the Father; and the Holy Ghost, though once appearing in the
symbolical representation of a Dove, cannot without Idolatry be represented and
worshipped under that figure. Neither can any apology be offered for this,
which could not with the same reason have cleared both Jews and Gentiles of
Idolatry. And whatever more abstracted Minds may think of these Images, yet
none that considers the simplicity of the Vulgar, the frailty of Man, and his
inclination to apprehend all things as sensible, can doubt but that the Rabble
do really conceive of God as like these figures, and do plainly worship them.
It is further to be considered, that though the Son of God was Man, yet as Man
he is not to be worshipped; and therefore the setting out of Figures and
Statues for his Humane Nature (which on the way are no real adumbrations, but
only the fancies of Painters) and worshipping these as the Images of the Son of
God, is no less Idolatry, than to worship the Father as an Old Man.

And further, the Worship of the Mass is Idolatry, as evidently as any piece of
Gentilism ever was: For if it be certain that Christ is not in the Hostie,
which shall be afterward made out, then to adore him as there, must be
Idolatrous. Neither will it serve for excuse, to say that Christ is truly
worshipped as present; and if he be not there, it is only a mistake about the
Presence, but no Idolatry can be committed, the Worship being offered to a
proper Object, who is God. But if this Apology free them of Idolatry, it will
also clear those Heathens, who worshipped some Statues or Creatures, in which
they conceived God was present; so that they might have pleaded, it was the
great and true God they adored, believing him there present, as their Fathers
had formerly believed. But he were very gentle to Idolaters, who upon such a
plea, would clear them of that crime. What then is to be said of that Church,
that holds it the greatest piece of her Religion, to adore the Bread with the
same devotion they would pay to Christ, were he visibly present; who call the
Bread God, carry it about in Processions, and worship it with all the Solemnity
imaginable. And finally, the Worship they give the Cross, is likewise an
adoring of God under a Symbol and Representation. And thus we have seen the
parallel of Rome-Heathen, and Rome-Christian, runs but too too just.

But the next kind of the Heathens Idolatry, was their worshipping of others
beside God, whom they held of two ranks: Some that were so pure, that they
never dwelt in Bodies: Others they judged to be the Souls of deceased Men,
after their death acknowledged and honored with divine honor. And this kind
of Idolatry was first begun at Babylon, where Nin is made the Statue of his
Father Belus be set up, and worshipped it: And from him all these lesser gods
were called Belim, or Baalim. Now concerning these, the Heathens believed that
they were certain intermedial powers, that went betwixt God and men, by whom
all good things were conveyed to mortals, by whom also all our services were
offered to the gods. Thus the Nations had gods many, and lords many, 1 Cor. 8.
5. And these lesser Deities or D^mons they adored, by erecting Statues to them
about their burial places, where they built Temples for them, and worshipped
them. And from this hint of Babylons being the Mother of this kind of Idolatry,
we may guess, why the Apostasy of that City, which in St. John's days, did
reign over the Kingdoms of the earth, Rev. 17. 18. is shadowed forth under the
name of Babylon; to hold out that the corruption it was to fall into, was to be
of a kind with that begun in Babylon; and the Character of the Whore does
likewise agree well with this.

Now if we compare with this the worship of Angels and Saints in the Roman
Church, we shall find the parity just and exact. For after the conversion of
the Roman Empire, it is not to be denied but that in order to the gaining of
the Heathen World to a compliance with Christianity, the Christians did as near
as was possible accommodate themselves to the Heathenish customs: And therefore
in stead of their gods, they set up the Demon and Baal-worship, to the
Apostles and other Saints and Martyrs; which Theodorat does most ingeniously
acknowledge to have been set in the stead of their gods. They became afterward
so exact in the parallel, that as the Heathens had of these lesser gods for
every Nation, so there was a Saint appointed for every Nation; St. Andrew for
Scotland, St. George for England, St. Patrick for Ireland, and many more for
other Nations: And as every house among the Heathens had their household god, so
every person was taught to have a tutelar Saint and Angel. And as among the
Heathen there were gods for all Trades, for all Sicknesses, and for every
Virtue; so in Antichristianism there were Saints for every Disease, for every
Profession, and for all the Graces. And as the Heathens built Temples for them,
so did also Babylonish Rome. And here an odd remark is in my way of this
conformity, that the Pantheon at Rome dedicated in Augustus his time to Cybele
the mother of the gods, and to all the gods, was afterward consecrated to the
Virgin and all the Saints. And as the Heathens offered Prayers, made Vows,
observed Days, brought Presents, used Processions in honor to these lesser
gods, and worshipped their Statues and Images. So all this by degrees crept into
Rome-Christian, as might be branched out in more particulars than the nature of
so short a discouse will allow of. It is true, the worship of Images came not
in before the eighth Century; but after that time it engaged all that received
it into a high degree of madness, for advancing that Heathenish piece of
Worship. And shall I here tell what is known to all who have seen the forms of
that Church? how you shall find their Churches all over dressed up with Images
and Statues, gorgeously apparelled, and well adorned; where the poor vulgar are
lying prostrate before them, saying their Devotions, and perhaps washing the
feet of their Shrines with their tears, and with great affection kissing the
hem of their Garments: And if through the tricks of the Priest, the Image seem
to nod or smile on them, (which is not unfrequent) with what joy do they go
away, as if some Angel had saluted them from Heaven. And here it were too long
to reckon up the Abominations of this Saint-worship which are offered to the
Virgin, with the Blasphemous Titles given her, and Prayers made to her; as if
she were more merciful and gentle to sinners, than her blessed Son. What shall
I tell of the whole Psalms turned to her? The words of Goddess and Lady, being
put in the place of God and Lord: And that from the eleventh Century, in which
the form of the numbering their Prayers by Beads was begun, ten Go to the
Virgin, for one, to God. How many more Worship her, then do her Son? How many
more Churches are built to her, than to her Son? And how many Pilgrimages are
made to her Shrines and Relics? And thus I think little doubting will remain,
that the worship of the Baalim begun at Babylon, is now set up in the Christian
Rome.

Now how contrary this is to the Divine Nature, common reason may suggest? as
also to the exaltation of the Person of Christ, Isa. 42. 8. God is a jealous
God, and will not give his glory to another. We have but one Lord Jesus Christ,
1 Cor. 8. 6. who by his most precious blood shed for us, purchased the honor
of being Mediator betwixt God and Man: And therefore Christians ought only to
make mention of his Name Beside the great evil of Idolatry is that it debases
the soul of the profane worshiper, for like them are all the^ that trust in
them, Psalm. 115. 8. I leads away the mind from that inward free and spiritual
converse, and fellowship with God, to which the Gospel invites us; and carries
it out into an external, sensible, and dead Religion: It stifles the power of
true Piety, making it die out in formal and stupifying superstition: And the
Plagues which Heaven pours out on those ungodly worshipers, are heavy, and
great. A black Roll of them in the end of the first Chap. to the Romans, which
were the Consectaries on their not glorifying of God, as God, which is branched
out into the two kinds I have discoursed of. The first is, v. 23. they changed
the Glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible man,
etc. And the second is, v. 25. Who worshipped and served the Creature more than
(or besides) the Creator. And it would raise horror in sober minds to tell how
much the sin of the flesh, particularly the sin of Sodom, which is first
reckoned in that dismal Catalogue, abounds with these of this spiritual Babylon.

And will the poor distinctions of Dulia and Latria save them from this guilt?
Alas! these are parts of the Mystery by which they would vail their
Abominations; but their nakedness is not hid with this thin vail. For we see
how simply all religious Worship offered to Creatures displeased God: Neither
did the Prophets tell the Israelites that a kind of Worship called Dulia, or
Service, might be paid to Creatures, but the Latria, or Adoration, was only
proper to God; indeed they dreamed not of this subtilty; and when St. John
offered to fall down before the Angel, he forewarns him not to do it, as being
not only his fellow creature, but his fellow servants, Revel. 19. 10. by which
all that Prostration for worship is declared unlawful, and what can be called
Adoration, if to offer Prayers, to make Vows, to sing Hymns, to observe^ Days,
and to build Churches, be not such? These nice distinctions which the Schoolmen
have devised, will serve in no stead in the great day when Gods jealousy shall
burn like fir^ against all that have dishonored him by this profane
worshipping of Creatures. And it is certain, that however some speculative
People may have distinct Notions of these kinds of Worship, yet the Vulgar, in
their Practice, make no difference at all, but place all their trust in them,
fly to them in their troubles as to their refuge and strong hold; whereby that
faith and confidence which is only due to God and his Son is abated, so much of
it being bestowed on Creatures. And what a baseness of Mind does it discover,
for Men, to whom God has revealed so much of the Riches of his Grace, and has
allowed constant and free access to his Throne, with the largest encouragements
and assurances of being heard and accepted by him; and who has given Mankind a
Mediator, who in the likeness of our flesh did express the greatest and freest
love imaginable, dying for us, and being now our Advocate and Intercessor with
his Father; that instead of conversing immediately with God and Christ in the
Exercises of Devotion, we should betake our solves to a dead and liveless in
vocating of those, of whose hearing us we can have no assurance, and in which
there can be no comfort nor true joy found.

So much of the Object of Worship, the Manner of it is next to be considered:
We observed before, that God called us in the Gospel to a lively and spiritual
Worship; and this was first in opposition to the sorceries of the Gentile
Worship, and next to the heavy yoke of the Jewish Bondage. How much of Sorcery
and Enchantments was used in Heathenism, every one that gives account of their
Forms do mention; but indeed all they used was nothing, if compared to the
Enchantments of the Roman Church; and first of all, can any thing look like^ a
Charm, than the worshipping God in an unknown Tongue? in which the Worshipper
is capable of no converse with God by these parts of Worship which he does not
understand. Next the muttering so large portions of the Worship, chiefly in the
Office of the Mass, what does it look like but the mumbling of Charm* But shall
I here tell of the charming of Water, of Salt, of Wax-candles, for driving away
of Devils? Shall I next tell of the christening of Bells, the hallowing of Oil,
the touching of Beads, the touching of little Pebbles; which shall have a
virtue against Sickness of all kinds, Thunders and Lightnings, and Tentations
of the Devil? Shall I next tell of the consecrating of Roses, Agnus Dei's,
Medals, and the like? Or, shall I tell of their Exorcisms and Charms for
driving out Devils, with all the strange actions used in them? Shall I mention
the Relics, and all the virtues believed to be in them, yea and derived from
them? Shall I mention their privileged Altars, their Jubilees, the Prayers
upon which Indulgences are granted, their solemn Processions, together with all
the small tricks are used in every part of their Worship? All this should be
endless. These things cannot but eat out the power of Religion, and introduce a
dry and empty skellet of enchanted Actions, instead of that lively Image of
God, which the Christian Religion designs to restore in us.

In a word, shall I tell how the Sacramental Actions are polluted by the
superfoetation of so many new Rites, whereby they are wholly changed from their
original Simplicity. In Baptism, instead of washing with Water in the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; how have they added so many adulterated Rites?
the Child must be thrice blown upon, then a Charm used for turning the Devil
out of him, he must be anointed with holy Oil, and hallowed Salt must be put in
his mouth, sanctified Garments also must be put on him, and a holy Wax* candle
in his hand, and the Priests Spittle must be gently stroaked upon him. Whether
does all this look like the Simplicity of the Spouse of Christ or the Attire of
the Harlot? And in the other Sacrament, a great dea^ more ado is made, so that
any indifferent Spectator, who were not wa^ned of it* would swear it were a
solem^ piece of Pageantry; the Priest mu^ come in clothed with rich
embroid^red Vestments, then he goes to the Altar, sometimes reads on the one
side, then he turns to the other; Often he bows, and kisses, and crosses,
sometimes single, sometimes thrice repeated crosses: Most of the Office he
mutters, though what he says is all alike understood, being in an unknown
tongue: Sometimes he turns to the People, and gives them a short Barbarian
Benediction: Then he goes on till he come to the five wonder-working words: And
then instead of the Bread, which the force of these words has driven to
nothing, behold a god, to be worshipped by the Spectators. And after the
adoration, the god is to be devoured by the Priest, which made the Arabian say,
he never saw a Sect of Religion so foolish as the Christians were, who with
their teeth devoured the god they had adored. Certainly all this looks so like
a piece of extravagance, especially if the simplicity of the first institution
be considered; that many will doubt if it be possible that such worship can be
received in any corner of the Christian World. And by these hints, though a
hundred more could be instanced, let it be guessed what is become of the
simplicity of the Christian Religion, when it is so vitiated in all the parts
and branches of it: And whether that genuine sincere spirituality appear in it,
which the Gospel holds forth to the world: These things having a native
tendency for leading away the soul from attending upon God, in her acts of
worship; which is the only thing for which external worship is to be continued
in* that (...) we may jointly concur to converse w^h our Maker. If from this I
should reckon up all the tricks are used in secreter worship, what stories
should I tell of the pattering over the Beads, of the multiplying little
unintelligible Prayers, the using of Penances, some whereof are ridiculous for
their gentleness, and others of them are as formidabl^ for their horror, and
fitter for the Priests of Baal, or the worshipers of Diana Taurica* then for
those that worship the living God with joy and gladness of heart* Now by the
performance of these, the simple deluded people imagine themselves reconciled
to God, and secured from his wrath: And so go about them merely in the opinion
of a charm.

But I must next show how the multiplicity of the Jewish rites was also brought
in upon Christendom, though Christ came to set us at liberty from that
Pedagogy, which was made up of Ordinances and lifeless Precepts, that could not
make the doer thereof perfect: nothing being enjoined in the Christian
Religion, but that which was of it self easy and proper for the great design
of purifying our souls. Now such as have brought in a yoke of ordinances, that
have no tendency to the cleansing of our souls, but oppress us with their
tyrannical burdensomness, being both heavy, and numerous, must be looked on as
the introducers, of a new Judaism, for oppressing the Christian world; what a
heap of new superadded forms have the High Priests of Rome brought upon these
who stoop to their tyranny? And how much sanctity do they place in them;
enjoining severer censures on the violation of these, than on the greatest
transgressions against either the Moral or Positive Laws of God? How many holy
days have they instituted? How much distinction of meats, of fasting, and
abstinence? And how like are their Jubilees and Pilgrimages to the Jubilees and
yearly trotting up to Jerusalem, which was among the Jews? In a word, there is
not a piece of worship about which there is not a greater appendage of vain
pompous, and withal burdensome Ceremonies, then were among the Jews. Shall I
here mention the five superadded Sacraments, to the two instituted by Christ,
with all the rites belonging to each of them, or recount all the rites in their
multifarious ordinations? Shall I tell of the laying up the Bodies when dead,
and of the forms of their Burials? The burning of Lamps in the clearest day,
together with the Incense that perfumes the worship, which are clear pieces of
antiquated Judaism. In a word, no part of the parallel holds more exactly, than
that they are zealous of the traditions of their Fathers, whereby the
Commandments of God are made of none effect; and that they honor God with
their lips, when their hearts are far form him: And worship him in vain,
teaching for Doctrins the Commandments of men, Matthew. 15. 8, 9.

And hitherto I have discoursed upon the first limb of Antichristianism, and
have discovered too evident indications of the contradictions is in it, to the
first branch of the design of Christianity; whereby the worship of God is
partly adulterate, and partly smothered by a heavy and troublesome load of
useless and lifeless per^ormances; which must needs lead out the soul from an
inward attending on God, or free converse with him.

The second branch of Christianity is, ^he holding forth that Mysterious
contrivance of the wisdom and goodness of God, for reconciling the World ^o
himself, by his dear Son; whom ^e gave to the death for us, and also raised up,
making him both Lord, and Christ* Whose glory and dignity is vulgarly branched
out in these his three Office^ of Prophet, Priest, and King. By the first of
which, he revealed the Father, and his whole council to manking, in plain and
simple discourses, afterward committed to writing by the faithful eye and
ear-witnesses of his Majesty. His Prophetiok office therefore is chiefly
acknowledged, in our grateful receiving these discoveries, and our studying to
adjust both our Faith and Practice to that unerring rule. But can any thing b^
more contradictory to this, than to keep the knowledge of these writings from
Christians, to accuse their darkness and defects, and to apprehend great danger
from their diligent perusal, to vilify that sacred study, preferring the lame
and lifeless discourses of men, to the words o^ eternal wisdom? For we must
consider that our study of the Gospel, is of the same nature with a personal
following o^ Christ, when on earth, to see his miracles and hear his doctrine,
the same is also to b^ said of the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles. Now to
bar the Vulgar from this, is to hinder them to hear and see Christ and his
Apostles* as if that were a Privilege restricted to Churchmen. What shall be
then said of these, who call the Scriptures a Nose of Wax, the Sourse of all
Heresies, a Book written not on Design, but upon particular Emergents; and do
assert its incompleatness, unless made up by the Traditions of the Church? Is
not this to add to the Words of that Book, and to accuse the faithful Witness
of unfaithfulness? But worse than all this is held by these, who will have all
the Authority of the Scriptures to depend on the Church, which must be believed
in the first place.

But here a great difference is to be made betwixt the testimony of a Witness,
and the authority of a Judge; the former is not denied to the Church, and so
the Jews had the Oracles of God committed to them; but that does not prove the
Authority of their Sanhedrim infallible, or superior to Scripture; and in this
case more cannot be ascribed to the Christian Church, than was proper to the
Jewish in our Saviors time. But further, if the Scripture be to be believed on
the testimony of the Church, then upon what account is the Church first
believed? It cannot be said, because of any testimony in Scripture, for if it
give authority to the Scriptures, it cannot receive its authority from their
testimony. How then shall it be proved that the Church must be believed? or
must it be taken from their own word? and yet no other reason can be given to
prove the Church infallible. For to say that they have continued in a
Succession of Bishops from the Apostles days, concludes nothing, unless it be
first proved that the Doctrine of the Apostles was of God; otherwise, the
Mohammedan Religion is as much to be believed, since for many Ages a Succession
of Priests have believed it. Further, the Greek Churches drive up the Series of
their Bishops to the Apostles days, as well as the Roman; why then should not
their Authority be likewise acknowledged infallible? In fine, must the Vulgar
go and examine the Successions of the Bishops, and judge about all the dubious
Elections, whether the Conveyance have been interrupted or not? Certainly were
this to be done, it were an impossible Achievement, and harder than the study
of the Originals of both Testaments: Therefore the Vulgar must simply believe
the Authority of the Church on her own testimony, which is the most absurd
thing imaginable, and this to every individual, will resolve into the testimony
of their Priest. Behold then a goodly Foundation for building our Faith upon!

Christ Prophetic Office is also invaded, by the pretense of the Churches
Infallibility in expounding Scriptures; for if this be granted, the whole
Authority will be devolved on the Church, for by this Doctrine she may teach
what she will, and were the Scripture evidence never so full to the contrary,
yet whatever wrested Exposition she offer, though visibly contrary to the plain
meaning of the words, must be believed. But with whom this Power and Authority
is lodged, is not agreed to among themselves; some yielding it to the High
Priest of the Church, when in his Chair, others to the great Sanhedrim of
Christendom in a General Council, others to both jointly* but all this is
asserted without proof, for that of Christ's, of telling the Church, Mat. 18.
17. so often repeated by them, is meant of particular offenses, and so is
restricted to the case of differences among Brethren, and relates not to points
of Doctrine. Besides, the Context of these Words does clearly show them
applicable to every Parochia^ Church, and yet their Infallibility cannot be
asserted. So it is clear, that Christ does only speak of a jurisdiction for
quieting of differences among the Brethren.

That of the gates of Hell their not prevailing against the Church, Mat. 16.
18. proves not the pretense of Infallibility. And indeed the Translation of
that place deserves Amendment and instead of hell, that Word is t^ be rendered
grave; so that the meaning of the Phrase is, Death (which is the mouth and gate
through which we pass unto the Grave, and is so used by Greek Writers) shall
never prevail against the Church; that is, the Church shall never die.

Neither will that of the Spirit of truth leading out into all truth, Joh. 16.
13. advance the Cause a whit, since that promise relates to all Believers; and
it is a part of the happiness of the new Dispensation, that all in it shall be
taught of God. And the promise of founding the Church on St. Peter, Matthew. 16.
says as ^ittle; for suppose the Rock on whom the Church were to be built, were
St. Peter himself, which I shall not much contravert, that is not peculiar unto
him, since we are all built on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and
on the twelve foundations of the new Jerusalem are written the names of the
twelve Apostles of the Lamb; but what will that prove for a series of the
Bishops of Rome?

And finally, for the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 16. 19. their
being given to St. Peter, that says no more, but that he was to open the
Gospel, which is usually called, the Kingdom of God, or of Heaven in the New
Testament. Now the use of keys being to open the door, this was peculiar St.
Peter's honor, who did first publish the Gospel both to Jews and Gentiles, and
in particular did first receive the Gentiles into the new Dispensation. But
this has no relation to the Bishops of Rome, nor to the pretended
infallibility of that See.

That which has the fairest appearance of reason is, that if there be no
absolute unerring Court on earth, for deciding of controversies, there shall be
no end of them; but every private man may upon the pretense of some ill
understood place of Scripture, break the unity of the Church, and so the peace
of the Church is in hazard of being irrecoverably lost. But how specious soever
this may appear, it has no weight in it: For it is certain that vice, as well
as error, is destructive of Religion, and it will be no ^mputation on our
Religion, that the one be no more guarded against, than the other is; if then
there be no authority for repressing Vice, but the outward discipline of the
Church; it is not incongruous there be no other authority for ^uppressing of
error, but that same of the Discipline of the Church. It is certainly, a piece
of humility, for a man to suspect his own thoughts, when they lie ^ross to the
Sentiments of the guides and ^eaders of the Church: But withal, a man ought to
be in all he does, fully perwaded in his own mind, and we are commanded to try
the spirits, and not to believe very spirit, 1 Ioh. 4. 1. Now reason being the
chief excellency of man, and that wherein the Divine Image does ^ainly consist,
it were very absurd to ^eny man a rational judging and discering of these
things wherein his eternal ^terest is most concerned. Besides the nature of
Religion, it being a thing suta^e to the powers of the soul, shows that man
must have a conviction of the truth of it on his mind, and that he cannot be
bound in contradiction to his own apprehensions, to receive any opinions ^rly
upon the testimony of others.

If to confirm all this, I should add all can be brought from History for
proving General Councils to have erred in matters of Faith; or that Popes have
bee^ Heretics, or that they have been ana thematized as such, by other Popes
and General Councils, I should be too tedious But in end, how shall the Vulgar
know the definitions of Councils, or the De crees of Popes? Or must they be
blindly determined by the Priests assertion Certainly, this were to expose the^
to the greatest hazards, since they a^ not suffered to found their Faith upon
the Scriptures: Nor does the Chur^ reveal her Doctrines to them, so the their
Faith must be resolved upon t^ bare Testimony of a Priest, who is pe^haps both
ignorant and licentio^ And by this we may judge to wh^ a pass the souls of the
people a brought by this Doctrine. In a wo^ we are not the servants of men, nor
bound to their Authority; for none can be a Judge, but where he has power both
to try and to coerce: Now none but God can either search our hearts, or change
them; for as no humane power can know our thoughts, so neither can it turn
them, which are not in our own power, much less in the power of others;
therefore our Consciences can, and must only fall within Gods jurisdiction: And
since the renovation of the Image of God consists in Knowledge, and Religion
designs an union of our souls to Divine Truth, that we may freely converse with
it, it will follow, that all these pretenses of absolute authority and
infallibility in Teaching, are contrary to Christ's Prophetic Office; who came
to reveal the Father to us.

The second of Jesus Christ's Offices, was the Priestly, without which the
former had never been effectual; for had we known never so perfectly the Will
of God, without a method had been laid down for reconciling sinners to him, it
was in vain to think of Religion, since nothing sinners could do, was able to
appease God, or expiate sin; but this was fully done by the Sacrifice of that
Lamb of God, Who became sin for us, and bare our sins on his own Body, In whom
we have redemption, even forgiveness of sin through his Blood, 2 Cor. 5. 21. 1
Pet 2. 24. Ephesians. 1. 7. If then any have derogated from the value of this
satisfaction, they have offered the utmost indignity to the highest love; and
committed the crime of the greatest ingratitude imaginable; who would requite
the most inconcieveable love, with such a Sacrilegious attempt: But, how guilty
are they of this, who would set the Merits and works of men, in an equality
with the Blood of God? as if by these, we were justified, or owed our title to
Glory, to our own performances, whereas we are taught by the Oracles of God,
that by grace we are saved, that God only has made the difference betwixt us
and others, and that he has freely chosen us in his Son Christ Jesus, Ephesians.
2. 5. 1 Cor. 4. 7. And alas! where are we, or what is all we do, that it can
pretend to the lowest degree of Gods acceptance, without he freely, both help
us in it, and accept of us for it? so that when he rewards us for our services
with Eternal Life, he freely crowns his own free gifts to us. For when we
consider how great a disproportion there is betwixt our best Services and
Eternal Glory, when we also remember how all our good actions flow from the
Principles of Divine Grace freely given, but withal, reflect on the great
defects and imperfections that hang about our best performances, we will not be
able to entertain any thoughts of our meriting ought at the hands of God* And
certainly, the deeper impressions we have either of the evil of sin, or the
goodness of God; we will be further from a capacity of swelling big in our own
thoughts, or of claiming any thing on the pretensions of justice or debt. It is
true, this Doctrine of Merit is so explained by some of that Church, that there
remains no ground of quarrelling it; except for the Terms sake, which is indeed
odious and improper (though early used by the Ancients in an innocent sense.)
But many of that Church acknowledge, there can be no obligation on God by ou^
Works, but that which his own promise binds upon him; which none, who believe
the truth of the promises of the Gospel, can question; but still we must
remember that we owe all to the love of Jesus, and nothing to our selves: which
as it is the matter of the Allelujahs of glorified Saints, so should be the
subject of our daily acknowledgements* wherefore, we must abominate every thing
that may seem to detract from this. But alas! were all this zeal, many of that
Communion own for Merits and good Works, meant for the advancing a Holy and
Spiritual Life, it would carry a good apology with it, and its noble design
would very much qualify the severity of its censure; but when these good works,
which for so many ages were highly magnified, were the building of Churches,
the enriching of Abbeys, Pilgrimages, and other trifling and voluntary pieces
of Will Worship, advanced for the Secular interests of the Church; what shall
be said of all that pains was used by the Monks for advancing them; but that
they were willing to sell the value of the Blood and Merits of Christ, for
advancing their own Secular interests, and divised practices? Alas! how far are
these from that Holiness and Sanctity, which must qualify us for the Kingdom of
God, and the inheritance of the Saints* And to end this matter, let me add one
thing, which is most evident to all who have observed the methods of the
directours of Consciences in that Church, that with whatever distinctions this
matter be varnished over among them; yet the Vulgar do really imagine they buy
and sell with Almighty God, by their undergoing these Laws of the Church, and
penances imposed by their Confessor: Which as it nourishes the life of Pride
and Self-love, so it detracts from the value they ought to set on the blood of
Christ, as their only title to Heaven and Glory.

And to this, I must add that distinction of the temporary and eternal
punishments sin deserves: The latter whereof they acknowledge are removed by
the Blood of Christ; but the former must be expiated by our selves; either by
sufferings in this Life, or those we must endure in Purgatory; unless by the
Popes charity we be secured or delivered from them. Now, how contrary this is
to the value we are taught to set on the Blood of Christ, all may judge. Ephesians.
2. 15, 16. By Christ peace is made, we are reconciled to God, he presents us to
the Father without spot and wrinkle. And much more of this nature meeting us in
Scripture, declares how plenary his satisfaction was; nothing being left undone
by him, for removing the guilt and demerit of sin. And what comfortless
Doctrine this is, we may soon apprehend, how it takes away that joy in God, at
the approaches of death: Since there is such a hazard of direful miseries
following. Now, this was no small part of the mystery, by which the World was
brought under their dominion; and therefore great pains was taken for rooting
the belief of it deep ^n all men's hearts, many Visions and Apparitions were
vouched for its proof, and all the Lives of the Saints, that were written for
diverse Ages, were full of such fa^ulous narrations; some Souls were said ^o be
seen standing in burning brimstone ^o the knees, some to the middle, some to
^he chin, others swimming in caldrons of ^elted Metal, and Devils pouring the
Metal down their throats, with many ^uch affrighting Stories.

But for all this, the proof from Scripture was only drawn from one wrested
^lace of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13, ^4, 15. who says, That in the day
of the Lord, such as built upon the foundation of Christ, superstructures of
wood, hay, and stubble, ^ould be saved, because they kept the founda^ion, yet
so as by fire. But this was only a ^roverbial form of speech, to express the
^isque they run to be such, as of one that ^scapes out of a fire; such
proverbial ^eeches being usual in Scripture, as that of the Prophet, Zach. 3.
2. Is not this brand plucked out of the fire? Or of the Apostle, Jude 23. Some
save with fear, pullin^ them out of the fire. And any considerin^ person will,
at first view, see how slende^ a foundation this was for the supe^ structure
built upon it.

But the way was contrived for prese^ ving Souls from, or rescuing them out
(...) Purgatory, will discover what were the inducements of advancing the
belief (...) it with such zeal, which was thus fr^ med: It is believed by that
Church, the beside the Commands that necessarily o^ lige all Christians, there
are many Cou^ sels in the Gospel, in order to the attai^ ing a higher pitch of
perfection, such a the counsels of poverty, and chastity, o^ the like; and they
teach, that such as d^ not obey these, cannot be said to have si^ ned; but on
the other hand, those wh^ have obeyed them, shall not want a r^ ward, by their
so supererrogating beyon^ what was strictly bound upon them, an^ the reward of
them is their meritin^ both for themselves and others, an exemption from the
pains of Purgatory. And of all these Merits, there is a common treasure of the
Church, wherein for good manners sake the Merit of Christ is the chief Stock;
and this is committed to the Successors of St. Peter, to whom the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven are believed to be given, who can communicate of that
spiritual Treasure as they will, either for preserving Souls from Purgatory, or
for delivering them out of it. This could not but work wonders for the
exaltation of the Papal Dignity, when he was conceited to be honored of God
with so high a trust. This was also made an engine for advancing all the Papal
Designs, for upon any quarrel he had with any Prince, the Popes proclaimed a
Croisade, promising exemption from Purgatory to all who hazarded their Lives
for the Service of the holy Church. And the contrivance of Purgatory being
universally believed, this could not fail to draw great numbers about his
Standards. And by this means he brought most Princes into that servile
subjection to him, under which they groaned for many Ages. Another practice yet
more base and sordi^ was, the selling of Indulgences and Pardons for money;
certainly here was Simon's crime committed by the pretende^ Successors of him,
who had of old accused him, that thought the gift of God might be purchased
with money, and thereupon di^ cast him out of the Church. It were endless to
tell the base Arts, and blasphemous Discourses of the Monks wh^ were sent
through the World to sel^ these Indulgences, which in the end proved fatal to
that Church, since the excessive magnifying of them did first provoke Luther to
examine their corruptions. It is true, they will not hear of the harsh word of
selling Indulgences, but disguise it with their giving them to such as will
offer Alms to the Church; but really, this whole contrivance is so base^ so
carnal, and so unlike the Spirit of Christianity, that to repeat it, is to
refute it* Here was a brave device for enriching the Church, when the making
great Donations to it, was judged so effectual for delivering out of Purgatory.
Who would not out of love to his Friends Soul, ^f he believed him frying in
these flames, give liberally of his Goods; but much ^ather would a man give all
that he had for his own security, especially when on his deathbed he were
beset with persons who were confounding him with dismal apprehensions, and thus
trafficking with him for the exchange of the Soul. Hence ^prung the enriching
of Abbeys and Churches, for every Religious Order has ^ts own peculiar Merits,
which they can communicate to one of their Fraternity: ^f then a dying man had
gained their ^avour so much, that he was received in^o their Order, and died
wrapped in one of their Frocks, then was his Soul secure from the grim
Tormentors below. And what an endless heap of Fables had ^hey, of Souls being
on the brink, or in ^he midst of the flames, and of a sudden ^natched out.

But now all this Trade has quite fai^ed them, therefore Indulgences are
fallen ^n their Rates, and in stead of them, there are Prayers to be used, and
especially to be said before privileged Altars, o^ at such times, or before
such Relics* that it is no hard work for any among them to ransom the Souls
of others, o^ to preserve their own. In a word, does not all this debase the
Spirit of true Religion, and expose it to the jealousy o^ Atheists, as if it
were a contrivance for advancing base, and secular Designs. An^ does it not eat
out the sense of true Piety* when the Vulgar see the Guides of Sou^ making such
shameful Merchandise o^ them, and doing it with such respect o^ persons, that
if a man be rich enough, he i^ secure; whereby our Lords blessing of the poor^
and passing a woe on the rich, is reverse^ But above all, what indignity is by
thi^ done to the Blood of the Son of God^ And how are the People carried from
their dependence on Him, and the^ value of His Sufferings, by these Practices!

Another Art not very remote from this, for detracting from the value (...)
Christ's death, and the confidence w^ should have in it, is, the Priestly
Absolution, wherein after the Sinner has gone over his sins without any sign
of remorse, and told them to the Priest, he enjoins a ^enance, the doing
whereof, is called a satisfaction; and the Vulgar do really ^magine, that the
undergoing the penance, does fully serve for appeasing Gods wrath against sin;
but as soon as the Priest has enjoined his penance, without waiting that they
obey it, he lays his hand on their head, and says, I absolve thee; and after
this, they judge themselves fully cleansed of sin, and that they may receive
the Sacrament, had their former life been never so bad. It is true, the
practice of the Priests in their slight penances, and hasted absolutions, and
promiscuous allowing of all the holy Sacrament, is condemned by many in that
Church, who complain of these Abuses with much honest zeal; but these
complaints are so little regarded, that their Writings are condemned, and the
Corruption continues unreformed. Now what can take off more from the value of
the Death of Christ, than to believe it i^ the power of a Priest to absolve
from sin* All the power of the Church being either Ministerially to declare the
absolution offered in the Gospel, upon the conditions in it, or to absolve from
the scandal which any public trespass has given. It was counted blasphemy in
Christ, when h^ said, Thy sins are forgiven thee, Mar. 2. 5, 10. of which he
cleared himself, from the power was committed to the Son of Man on earth, to
forgive sins; which shows it to be blasphemy in all others to pretend to
absolve from sin, it being an invasion of his Prerogative.

To this I might add the scorn put on Religion by many of the penances enjoined
for sin, such as the abstaining from flesh for so many days, the pattering over
so many Prayers, the repeating the penitential Psalms, the going to such
Churches, and such Altars, with other ridiculous Observances like these, which
cannot but kill the Vitals of true Religion, and lead away Souls from these
earnest Applications to Jesus Christ for pardon and renovation. And who can
have any sad apprehensions of sin, who is taught such an easy way of escaping
punishment?

I confess in this, as in all other parts of Religion, the Masters of that
Church have so contrived things, that their Doctrines might, according to the
fable of the Manna, taste pleasant in every man's relish; for if any be grave
and melancholy, then silence, solitude, and retirement are enjoined them; if
their tempers be more fiery and sullen, severe corporal mortifications and
disciplines are tasked on them, such as cruel and perhaps public whipping, or
other unspeakable austerities, with which the Lives of the modern Saints are
full; but if one be of a more jolly temper, who desires Heaven at an easy
rate, then some trifling penance shall serve turn. These are a few of their
Arts for diverting Souls from flying unto Jesus, as to the sure and safe refuge
from the Fathers wrath, in whom only we can find sanctuary, and whom the Father
has sent into the World to seek and save lost Sinners. Now whether the Priest
in the injunction of easy penances, and giving absolution, do not violate the
Prerogative of Jesus, and insensibly de^ bauch Souls from that affectionate an^
grateful Duty they owe their Redeemer* into their trifling methods and
appointments, I refer it to all who know them.

Another opposition made to the Priestly Office of Christ is, their conceit o^
the sacrifice of the Mass, which they believe is a formal expiation of sins,
both for the living, and dead, who are in Purgatory: Christ once offered
himself up for taking away sin, which he did b^ that one Sacrifice, and this is
by the Apostle stated amongst the differences which are betwixt the Sacrifices
of Moses, which were to be daily and yearly renewed and r^ peated, whereas
Christ offered one Sacrifi^ in the end of the World, so that there w^ no need
of more, Heb. 10. 1, 2, 3, 12, 14 Now, to imagine that the Priests goin^
through the Office of the Mass, and h^ receiving the consecrated Elements,
(...) have a virtue to expiate the sins (...) others, especially of the dead,
is a thing so contrary to the most common impressions, that it will puzzle a
man's belief to think any can credit it. And yet this is one of the
Masterpieces of the Religion of that Church. It is true, in a right sense,
that Sacrament may be called a Sacrifice, as it was by the Ancients, either in
general, as Prayers, Praises, and Almsdeeds are called so in Scripture; or as
it is a Commemoration of the Sacrifice of Christ; but to imagine the Action
has an expiatory force in it, is a visible derogation from the value of
Christ's Death; and all the value is in any outward Sacramental Action, can only
be derived into the Soul of the Receiver, but it is absurd to think one man's
action can be derived to another; and it clearly appears from the institution
of the Lords Supper, that its end was the joint communicating of Believers,
which is perverted manifestly by the practice of these Priests, who communicate
in name of the Spectatours.

Finally, what a derogation is it from the Priestly Office of Christ, one
branch whereof is his Intercession, to join Saint^ or Angels with him in that
work, nay, and prefer them to him? Which will be found too true, if the Office
of the Virgin, and the Prayers offered to her, be compared with those offered
to her Son. Did Christ by the Merits of his Passion acquire this honor at so
dear a rate? and shall we for whom he suffered, rob him so injuriously and
sacrilegiously of his honor, and bestow it on these who are our
fellow servants?

But having touched this in the former part of my Discourse, I advance my
Enquiry to the opposition given the Regal Office of Christ: And first, how
contrary is it to the glory wherewith even his humane Nature and Body is
refulgent in Heaven, to believe, that five words, muttered out by the Priest,
shall have the virtue to produce his real and glorified Body, instead of the
annihilated Elements of Bread and Wine, and yet under their accidents and
appearances? This is a new and strange kind of humiliation, if true, by which
he who is now clothed with Glory, must be every day exposed under so thick, so
dark, and so contemptible a covering, as are the resemblances of Bread and
Wine. What low thoughts of his Person must it breed in such minds as are
capable of believing this contrivance?

Again, he, as King of his Church, has given her Laws and Precepts, to whose
obedience she is obliged, to which none can add, without they acknowledge
another Head, and whose obligation none can untye or dispense with; for Christ's
dominion consists in this authority he has over our Consciences, which he has
vindicated into liberty, by delivering us from the bondage of corruption. If
then any pretend a power of obtruding new articles on our Belief, or
obligations on our Consciences, these must be confessed to be injurious to the
Dignity wherewith Christ is vested. What shall then be said of him, who
pretends an authority of dspensing with, and dissolving the obligation of
Oaths, of dissolving the Wedlock-bond, of allowing Marriage in the forbidden
degrees? And as for their additions to the Laws of Christ, they are
innumerable. And here what I mentioned last, calls me to mind of a pretty
device, to multiply the forbidden degrees of Marriage, yea, and add the degrees
of spiritual Kindred, that is, of kindred with our Godfathers or Godmothers
in Baptism, which is done upon no other design, but to draw in more to the
Treasure of the Church, by frequent Dispenses. If I should here reckon up all
the additions which by the Authority of that Church are made to the Laws of
Christ, I should resume all that I have hitherto alleged, they being visible
additions to the Doctrine and Rules of the Gospel, and imposed with such
unmerciful cruelty, that an Anathema is the mildest of the spiritual Censures
they thunder against such as comply not with their tyranny, and a faggot would
be its civil Sanction, were the secular Powers at their devotion. I do not deny
but there is an Authority, both in the Civil and Ecclesiastic Powers, of
enjoining things indifferent, but no Authority beside Christ's can reach the
Conscience: Besides, if these indifferent things swell so in their number, be
vain, pompous, and useless, and be imposed without all regard to the tender
scruples of weak Consciences, they become tyrannical; and such as do so impose
them, discover their affecting a tyrannical and lordly dominion over
Consciences, and that they prefer their own Devices to the simpler Methods of
Christ, and the plainer and easier Rules of his Gospel.

But one instance of their abrogating the Laws of Christ is more signal, in
their violating the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; wherein, though he
instituted it under both kinds, and did so distribute it, with the express
command that all should drink of it, yet they presumed, notwithstanding of
that, and though the Primitive Church distributed it in both kinds, which is
confessed in their Canon, to snatch the Cup from the Laity, and eng^oss it to
the Clergy. Now it is to be considered, that the value of the Sacramental
Actions flowing only from their Institution, the first Appointment should be
most religiously observed in them: Besides, the universal extent of Christ's
word, drink ye all of it, which was not used in the distribution of the Bread,
has a particular mystery in it, to guard against the foreseen corruption of
that part of it; and the reason given in the distribution of the Cup, shows, it
must reach to all that need the Blood of Christ for the remission of sins;
which not being restrained to the Priests, shows, that the Cup, without a
direct opposition to the Mind and Command of Christ, ought not to be taken from
the People; and any that will read the goodly reasons given for this
Sacrilege, will see what a low account they have of the Commands of Christ,
when, upon such trifling pretenses they will violate them. And with how much
cruelty they backed this invasion of Christ's Authority, the History will
declare, they beginning it with a perfidious burning of two witnesses who
opposed it at Constance: And occasioning so much War and Bloodshed against
those who adhered to the rule of the Gospel, in this matter, and refused to
stoop to their Tyranny.

But I advance to another invasion of Christ's regal authority, committed by him
who pretends to be the Universal Bishop of the Church, and to have authority
over all Churchmen; whom he makes swear obedience to him, and looks on them
but as his Delegates: It was unluckily done of Gregory the great, to be so
severe on this head, as to condemn the title of Universal Bishop, as
Antichristian: But little dreamed he in how few years his Successor would
aspire to that height of ambition. Now by this pretense, all these Officers
whom Christ has appointed to Rule and Feed his Church, are turned out of their
authority, and made subject to him: And with how much pride he treads on his
Fellow-Bishops, the Histories of many ages do declare. It is true, at first, as
being Bishop of the Imperial City, the Bishops of Rome were highly esteemed,
but Pride and Ambition, began soon to leaven them; yet they were for the first
four ages, looked upon, by the other Bishops, but as their Fellow-Bishops, and
by the Decrees o^ two General Councils, the Bishops of Constantinople were in
all things, except the precedence, make equal to them* And by the Decree of the
Council of Nice, other Metropolitans are levelled with them. And here I must
tell of a shameful forgery of three Bishops of Rome, who one after another,
would have obtruded on the African Churches, a Decree, allowing of appeals from
them, to the Roman See, as if it had been made at Nice: which they of Africa
rejected, and upon trial, found it to be none of the appointments at Nice, but
a Decree of the Council of Sardice.

But by degrees the Bishops of that City got up to the height they are now at;
and not content with their usurping over their Brethren and Fellow-Church-men;
their next attempt was upon Princes, who deriving their authrity from Jesus
Christ, the King of Kings* by whom Kings do reign, it was an invasion of his
power to attempt against his Vicegerents on Earth. But the Popes made no bones
of this, for being now held Christ's Vicars on earth, with other blasphemous
titles, as Vice-God, yea, and Lord God, they thought their power was limited,
as long as Kings and Emperors were not even in temporals subject to them. And
therefore from the days of Pope Gregory the 7th, they pretended to a power of
deposing Princes, disposing of their Dominions to others, and dispensing with
the Oaths of fidelity their Subjects had sworn to them; and it was easy for
them to make Crowns change their Masters, as they pleased: For there were
always other ambitious Princes ready for their own ends to invade the Dominions
of these deposed Kings, upon the Popes warrant, and the generality of the
People were so possessed with the Popes power of releasing souls from
Purgatory, and from the punishments due to sin* that they were easily prevailed
upon to follow his thunders^ And by that time the Popes had swarm^ of
Emissaries of the begging Orders* who under shows of austere Piety, gained much
reverence and esteem in the World; and so got all subjected to the Papal
Tyranny. Now, should I instance this in particulars, I should transgress the
limits of a short Discourse, by a long History; but the lives of Gregory the
7th Alexander the third, Boniface the 8th and Julius the second; to mention no
more, will sufficiently convince any who will be at the pains to read them, as
they are written by these who lived in that Communion. And Matthew of Paris
will at length inform his Reader, how much, and how often England smarted under
this Tyranny.

And all this is so far from being denied, that it is defended avowedly by no^
a few of the Canonists and Jesuits, and is a Doctrine dearly entertained in the
Court of Rome to this day; as appeared from the late attempt of Pope Paul the
fifth, upon Venice: But the World is now a little wiser, than to be carried
away by these Arts, and therefore that pretense is laid to sleep, till happily
the ^east be healed of the wound was given ^t at the Reformation.

But I cannot leave this particular, without my sad regrates, that too deep a
tincture of this spirit of Antichristianism is among many, who pretend much
aversion to it; since the Doctrine of resisting Magistrates, upon colors of
Religion, is so stiffly maintained, and adhered to, by many, who pretend to be
highly reformed, though this be one of the Characters of the scarlet-colored
whore. But thus far have we gone through the second part of Antichrists
Character, and have discovered too clear ^ndications of a difformity to the
spirit and truth of the Christian Religion, in all the branches of the Honor
and Worship due to Jesus the only Mediator of the new Covenant.

From this I proceed to the third part of my enquiry; which is, the opposition
made to the great design of Christian Religion, for elevating the souls o^ men
into a participation of the divine Nature, whereby the soul being inwardly
purified, and the outward conversation regulated, the World may be restore^ to
its Primitive innocence: And men admitted to an inward and intimate fellowship
with their Maker. The first step of this renovation, is repentance for God
commands men every where to (...), and repentance and remission of (...) are
always united: And this being (...) horror at sin upon the sense of its
native deformity, and contrariety to the Law of God* which makes the soul
apprehend the hazar^ it has incurred by it; so, as to study by (...) means
possible to avoid it in all time coming* nothing does prepare the mind more for
faith in Christ, and the study of (...) new life, than repentance; which (...)
needs be previous to these. But what devices are found to enervate this sins
must be divided into venial and mortal; the former deserving only some temporal
punishment, and being easily expiated by some trifling piece of seeming
Devotion, and hereby many sins are struck out of the Penitents consideration:
For who can have a great apprehension of that which is so slightly expiated.
And this may be extended to the easy Pardons, given for acknowledged mortal
Sins: For he who thinks that God can be appeased for them, with the saying by
rote, so many Prayers, cannot possibly have deep apprehensions of their being
either so displeasing to God* or so odious in themselves. But shall I to this
add their asserting, that a simple attrition, which is a sorrow flowing from
the consideration of any temporal evil, God has brought upon the sinner,
without any regard had either to the vileness of the sin, or the offense done
to God by it; that this (I say) can suffice for justifying sinners, and
qualifying them for the Sacrament, whereby the necessity of contrition and
sorrow flowing from the principle of the love of God, is made only a high
degree of perfection, but not indispensibly necessary? In the next place, all
these severities they enjoin for Penances, do but tend to nourish the life of
sin, when sinners see a trade set up by which they can buy themselves off from
the wrath of God To this, is to be added the Doctrine o^ Indulgences, which is
so direct an opposition to Evangelical repentance, as if (...) had been
contrived for dispossessing the World of the sense of it.

That which is next pressed in the Gospel for uniting the souls of mankind to
God, is that noble ternary of Graces, Faith, Hope, and Love, by which the soul
rests in God by a holy affiance in him, believing the truth of his Gospel,
expecting the accomplishment of his Promises, waiting for the full fruition of
him, and delighting in his glorious perfections, and excellencies* Now how much
all this is shaken by these carnal and gross conceptions, the Roman Doctrine
offers of God in their Image and Mass-worship, and by their Idolatry to Saints
is apparent? Are they not taught to confide more in the Virgin, or their
Tutelar Saints, than in the holiest of all? Does not the fear of Purgatory damp
the hopes of future blessedness? And finally, what impious Doctrine has been
publicly licensed and printed in that Church of the degrees of the love we owe
to God? Some blasphemously teaching, that we are not at all bound to love him,
others mincing it so, as if they were afraid of his being too much beloved. In
a word, there is an impiety in the Morals of some of that Church, particularly
among the Disciples of Loyola, beyond what was ever taught amongst the worst of
the Heathen Philosophers, which has been fully discovered by some of the
honester and more zealous of that communion. And though these corruptions have
not been avowed by the head of that Church, yet by their being publicly
vented, by the deaf ear he gives to all the complaints against them, and by the
constant caresses and privileges he heaps upon that Order which teaches them,
he discovers either his great satisfaction in that corrupt Doctrine, or that
upon the account of other interests, he is content to betray the souls of
Christians into the corruption of such impious and (...) godly leaders, since
the Order that (...) owned all these corruptions is yet (...) of the
Consciences of the greater (...) of them that own that Communion they being the
universal (...) And since they license the public (...) of so much corrupt
Doctrine printed Writings, what reason have (...) to suspect their base
compliance (...) sins in their more secret and (...) Practisings, with such
poor deluded (...) as trust to their conduct; of which (...) proofs are brought
by others of (...) same Church?

But I pursue my enquiry into the (...) traces of the Antichristian corruption
of the purity, and power, of our (...) holy Faith: Solemn Worship, and (...)
Devotion, are the great means of (...) souls to God, and of deriving the
sistance of his Spirit and Grace to us; when these are performed in an (...)
tongue, How incapable are they of (...) that end? And the Doctrine of efficacy
of the Sacraments, for coming of grace by the work wrought, looks like a design
against all serious preparation for the worthy receiving of them; since by that
doctrine, a man, be he never so ill prepared, yet is sure of their efficacy;
for if his Priest absolve him, and he have a simple attrition for sin, without
any thing of the love of God, he is by their Doctrine and Conduct qualified for
receiving worthily, were his heart never so much united to sin, or averse from
all Devotion, or application to Divine matters. And what complaints shall be
here made of these who teach, that the sure way of gaining the favor of God,
which they phrase by the keys of Paradise, is to say the Ave, to bid the
blessed Virgin good morrow every day, or to send our Angel Guardian to salute
her? or finally, to wear a Meddal or Rosary in devotion to her, though from the
first time we begin to wear it, we never again think of her; Does not all this
look like a conspiracy against the power of Godliness?

But shall we next consider the Moral Law, which though Christ said, h^ came
not to dissolve, but to fulfill, Mat* 5. 17. Yet they have found out distictions
and Doctrines to destroy it. It true, what may be said here, cannot directly,
as to every particular, be charg^ on the Roman Church, since, it has ^ been
decreed by Pope, or Council; b^ when profane Casuists have print^ Doctrines,
which tend to the subv^sion of the most common principles virtue, and morality,
and these are lic^sed according to the rule of that Church And for as public
as they are, and for ^ the censures and complaints others ha^ passed upon them,
yet they contin^ without any censure from the chair Rome, it is a shrewd
presumption that the are not unwelcome to that See: Thou^ for good manners sake
they have giv^ them no other owning, but a connivan^ joined with an
extraordinary cherishi^ of that School which vents them.

Two general Doctrines they have which at two strokes dissolve all t^ bonds of
Virtue. The one is, (...) Doctrine if probability; the other, good intention.
By the first, they teach, that if any approved Doctor of the Church have held
an opinion about any ^ractical thing, as probable any Christian ^ay with a safe
conscience follow it, were it never so much condemned by others; and did it
appear with the black^st visage: And by this it is, that scarce ^here is a sin
which may not be safely ^azarded on, since there have been of ^he approved
Doctors of that Church, who have made a shift by distinctions, ^o represent the
worst actions, not only ^s probable, but as really good. The next Doctrine is,
of good intention, where^y they teach a man to commit the grossest ^egerdemain
with God and his own conscience maginable; by which he may act any sin he will,
provided he intend not that, but some ^ther good design or motive: And any that
will read the Provincial Letters, or the Mystery of Iesuitism, and compare
their Citations with the Authors, whence they take them, will soon be sa^isfied
of the truth of this.

We have already seen how that Church violates the two first Commandments, by
her Idolatry: Whereby in opposition to the first, she worships Saints and
Angels, with those acts and expressions of adoration only due to God. The
second is also palpably violated by their Image Worship, and adoring God under
sensible and external representations. The third is made void by the Popes
pretending to dispense with Oaths, and to annual their obligation, as also by
their Doctrines of equivocation and mental reservations, in all Oaths, both
assertory, and promissory, besides the impious Doctrines of some Casuists, that
justify the profaning of Gods Sacred Name, i^ rash and common swearing. Their
contempt of the fourth Precept is not denied, it being usually among them a day
of mercating, dancing, and foolish jollity: Many among them teaching, that to
hear Mass that day, does fully answer the obligation for its observance. Their
contempt of the fifth follows, upon the Doctrine of the Popes power, of
deposing Princes, and freeing the Subjects from their obligation to them; by
which they are taught to rebel, and rest the Ordinance of God. Besides, their
Ca^uists allow it as lawful to desire the Parents ^eath, provided it be not out
of malice to him, ^ut out of a desire of good to themselves: That they may
enjoy their inheritance, or be ^id of their trouble. Yea, some of their ^mpious
Casuists say, that Children may lawfully intend the killing of their Parents,
and may disown them, and Marry without their consent.

For the sixth Command, their Casuists do generally allow, to kill in defense
of Honor, Life, or Goods, even though the hazard of losing them be not near
and evident, but afar off, and uncertain: And they teach, that a man is not
bound to stay till another smite him; but if he threaten him, or if he offend
with his words, or if one know that he has a design upon his Honor, Life, or
Goods, he may with a good Conscience prevent, and kill him. And this they
extend to all sorts of persons, both Secular and Religious; allowing it to Sons
against their Fathers. And they leave it free to them to execute this by
whatever means they judge most proper, whether by force, or supprize, or by the
service of others, if they dare not attempt to kill by their own hands; which
they stretch to the case of one who knows another guilty of a crime, and
intends to pursue him for it; and they allow the guilty person, if he know no
other way of escape, to kill him who intends his accusation, that he may
thereby preserve his life; in order to which they also allow it lawful to kill
the witnesses that may prove the crime.

As for the seventh Command, modesty cannot name their polluted Doctrines about
it: They barred the Clergy the lawful use of Marriage, but did allow them
Concubinate, and the public licenses given to base houses in the Popes
dominions, prove that See a Mother of Fornications, even in the letter, the
Religious Houses being likewise full of Irreligious intanglements, into a
course of life, which many times they are not able to bear; but being
restrained from the honorable Ordinance of God, many of these houses have
proved either nests of filthiness or of secret impurities; which it seems by
the rules of confession, and the questions their Confessors puts to them, are
known to abound among them. And any that have read these, will confess, that it
defiles a chaste mind to read them; but what must it be to ask them, especially
at those of a different Sex? Shall I also here mention the frequent dispensing
with Marriages within degrees forbidden, and their as frequent dissolving of
that sacred knot, though (as if they had resolved on a contradiction to all the
rules of the Gospel) they refuse to dissolve the bond on the account of
adultery, which Christ has made the only ground than can justify the
dissolution of it? But shall I add to this, the base impieties, of which not
only these of purple and scarlet Livery among them have been notoriously
guilty, but even the villainies of some that have worn the Triple Crown? As I
should grow too tedious, so I must needs tell things, which to a pure mind were
both nauseating to write and to read. Those that have been in that Spiritual
Babylon, know, that is a Sodom, even in the letter, none being more guilty of
that crying Wickedness, than those that bear the character of religious or
sacred Orders. And what shall we think of the Scarlet Fraternity, that produced
a Monster that attempted Heaven it self, by writing in defense of that impiety,
which it avenged by Fire and Brimstone, and yet had no Censure passed on him
for it? Whereas for the least tincture of Calvinism or Lutheranism, he had been
condemned to the Faggot. Some of them do also teach, that Fornication is not
forbidden by the Laws of Nature, and only by positive Precepts, so that it may
be dispensed with.

For the eighth Command, those profane Casuists have made such shifts for it,
that none needs to be guilty of Theft; for they teach it to be no sin to take
that from another which he made no use of, but may well want, and that in such
a case, he who steals, is not obliged to restitution: Others of them teach,
That he who stole a great sum, is not obliged to the restitution of the whole,
but only of so much as may make the theft not notable: But they teach, that
small thefts, even though often repeated, are but Venial sins, which is an
excellent Doctrine for warranting Servants insensibly to purloin their Masters
goods* They also teach Arts of escaping just Debts, beyond all the subtilties
of false Lawyers; which the Jesuits themselves have often put in practice* and
have found out Arts for justifying oppressive Usury, defrauding of Creditors,
ruining of Commerce, and making havoc of our Neighbors goods, without
Injustice.

For the ninth Command, though it be so contrary to Nature, that the worst of
men count it a reproach to be charged with Falsehood, and Lying; yet they have
favored it avowedly: For by their Doctrines of Equivocating and using Mental
reservations, the greatest Falsities in the World may be averred and sworn
without sin: And the value they set on a strict observance of promises, and
candor in them, appeared at Constance* where a whole Council required Sigismund
the Emperor, to burn John Huss, and Ierom of Prague, though he had given them
his safe Conduct; for they taught him, that faith was not to be kept to
Heretics. Another such like trip of one of the Popes, proved fatal both to
Ladislaus, and the Kingdom of Hungary, at Varna; where they breaking the Truce
they had sworn to the Turk, upon the Popes warrant, were signally punished for
their treachery. The Doctors of the forementioned School do also teach, that
he who has born false witness in a matter that may cost another his life, is
not bound to retract it, if that retractation may bring great evils upon him.
They also propose methods for suborning Witnesses, and falsifying of Writs and
Records, without any sin; and that all this may be done to defame a person with
some horrid imputation, who is led as a Witness to prove any thing against one,
that thereby he may be cast from witnessing.

And as for the tenth Command, they have struck out all the first motions of
the mind to Evil, from being accounted Sins; and by their division of Sins into
Venial, and Mortals, they make sure enough work of this Command, that it shall
not be broken mortally. It were an endless work to go and make out all these
particulars, of their dissolving the Moral Law by clear proofs: but he who
desires satisfaction in that, will find it in the Provincial Letters, or the
Morals of the Jesuits.

But if we pass from the Law, to the Gospel, we shall find they have made no
less bones of it. We are all over the Gospel called to be heavenly minded, to
despise the World, and to set our affections on things above; and particularly,
Churchmen are taught not to seek the riches, splendour and vanities of a
present World; which was most vigorously enforced by the example of Christ and
his holy Apostles. But how contrary to this is that Religion, whose great
design is, the enriching and aggrandizing of the Teachers and Pastors of it,
chiefly of him who pretends to be the supreme and sole Pastor? I need not here
re-mind the Reader, of the Trade of Indulgences, by which that Church rose to
its riches and pomp; nor need I tell what a value they set on outward actions
of piety, the chief of these being the enriching of Churches, and Abbeys; and
how these were commended to the World as the sure means of attaining Eternal
life. Shall I add to this, the visible and gross secularity and grandeur, in
which the Head, and other Prelates of that Church do live? The Head of it being
in all things a temporal Prince, perpetually busied in intrigues of State, and
ballancing the Princes of Europe, and chiefly of Italy; and what base and
Simoniac^ practices abound in that Court, all who have written of it with any
degrees o^ ingenuity, do acknowledge, all things are venal there: Money being
able to raise the basest and unworthiest to the highest promotions; the
Cardinals ar^ also named either upon the Interests (...) Princes, and chiefly
of the two gre^ Crowns; or to make the Popes Nephews have a greater stroke in
the next Conclave; or upon some such carnal account. And perhaps, for good
manners sake, a Scholar, or a person famous for Devotion, may get a red Hat,
but such are always the least esteemed in the College; all affairs being
governed by the Popes Nephews* or the Protectors of the Crowns. And who shall
expect that such a company of secular, ignorant, (I mean in matters of
Religion,) and oftentimes licentious men, should be the great Sanhedrim, by
whose advice all that belongs to Religion must be managed? These must be
likewise the Electors of the Pope, when the Sea is vacant; whom they choose out
of their own number, who is always elected by the prevailing Interests of one
of the Crowns, or by the Faction of the former Popes Nephews. And what
Caballings, what bespeaking of Suffrages, and what impudent ambitus is commonly
practiced in the Elections of Popes, is well enough known, nor can it be
denied? Now, what man of common sense can imagine, that a Pope thus elected by
Simoniacal Arts, and carnal Interests, can be Christ's Vicar on Earth, or have
the Holy Ghost always affixed to his Chair, that he shall never err in any of
his Decrees? Truly, he that can believe this, may believe any thing that is
gross and absurd. Is not the whole frame and contrivance of that Court turned
so entirely Secular, that not a vestige of the Character of a Church, or of
Churchmen, remains? And to this, shall I add all the splendour of their
Apparel, the state of their Processions, and the ceremonies of their
Coronation, and how they wear a Triple Crown? which being so well known to all
whoever were at Rome, need not be descanted on by me. But the mention of the
Crown calls me t^ mind of the literal accomplishment o^ that, of Mystery, being
on the forehead o^ the whore; since the word Mystery, was for a great while the
inscription on the front of their Triple Crown, though it be now altered; which
being proved by others, I may not stay to mak^ it good. From this I should
descend to the Cardinals, Bishops, and Abbots, and show how secular they are
become; all their design being to engross the power, and monopolize all riches:
which contagion is also derived into the inferior Orders of the Clergy, who by
the magnifying of their Images, Saints, and Relics, use all the Arts they can
devise for enriching of themselves and their friends. And even these Orders
that pretend to mortification, and abandoning the world, and talk of nothing
but their poor and austere manner of life, yet have possessed themselves of no
small part of the riches and glory of the world. It is true, there is a young
Brotherhood among them, which though the youngest yet has outstripped the
elder, and made them stoop to it, and serve it. And what base and sordid ways
that society has pursued, for arriving at the highest pitch of greatness, and
riches, and how successfully they have managed their designs, is sufficiently
cleared, what through the zeal of some of the honester of that Communion, what
through the envy of other emulating orders, all these things do fully prove how
unlike that Church is to the poor, and pure simplicity of Christ and his
Apostles, and of the first ages of the Church?

If we further examine the characters of Evangelical purity, we have them from
the mouth of our Savior, when he commands us to learn of him, for he was meek
and lowly in heart: and he made it the distinguishing badg of his disciples,
that they loved one another. Now for humility, it is true, the Head of that
Church calls himself the servant of the servants of God; but how far such
humility is from his design, his aspiring pretenses do loudly declare. All the
world must stoop to him; not only must his fellow* Bishops swear obedience to
him, and become his Vassals, but the Kings of the earth must be his footstool,
and all must pay him that servile homage of kissing his foot; an ambition as
insolent as extravagant. His power must be magnified with the most blasphemous
Titles of his being God, our Lord God on earth Omnipotent; with a great deal
more of such servile Adulations, offered to him from the Parasites of that
Court. In a word, a great part of that Religion, when rightly considered, will
be found on design contrived and abetted, for exalting him to the highest
degrees of insolence: but so many proofs of this were already upon other
occasions hinted, that it is needless to go over them again: and that same
leven, levens the whole lump of their Clergy; who all pretend that by their
Ecclesiastical character they are only subject to their Head, and so enjoy an
immunity from the Civil Authority, be their crimes what they may be. And an
in-road on this pretense of late, from the State of Venice, when they seized
two Churchmen that were highly guilty, drew out so much of their most holy
Fathers indignation, that he thundered against them, and finding the weakness
of the spiritual sword, resolved to try the edge of his temporal one upon them,
in patrociny, partly of these Villanes, and partly of the covetousness of the
Clergy, to which the Senate had set a small limit, by a decree; but finding they
were like to prove too hard for him, he was willing to put up his sword, rather
then to kill and eat, as one of his Cardinals advised him.

Shall I with this also tell the instances of the ambition of Cardinals, who
from their first* original of being Presbyters of Rome, have risen up to the
height of counting themselves the companions of Kings, and in their habits
affect a Princely splendour, but have unluckily chosen the Liveries of the
Whore; for they wear Scarlet as the Bishops do Purple, the foretold colors of
the Whores Garments. Shall I next show to what a height of pride the exaltation
of the Priestly dignity among them has risen? as if it were equal, nay
preferable to the condition of Princes. The Priests giving absolution, is a
sure device to make his power be much accounted of, since he can forgive sin.
The gorgeous and rich apparel they wear in worship, serves also to set off
their dignity. And what a goodly device is it, that their spittle must make one
of the sacred Rites in Baptism? Certainly that must be esteemed a mavelous
holy creature, whose very excrements are so sacred. Their enhansing the Cup to
themselves from the people, was another trick for raising of their esteem: but
above all things, their power of transmitting the substance of the Bread and
Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ, by uttering five words, was a
mavelous device, to make all the world admire them, who can so easily, and
every day work a miracle, compared to which, all the miracles of the Gospel may
pass for ordinary actions. What a great piece of wonder must such a man be held
to be, who can thus exercise his authority over the very person of Jesus
Christ, notwithstanding of all the glory to which he is now exalted? And it was
no contemptible Engine for that same design, to possess the people with a
belief of the Priests offering in Mass an expiatory Sacrafice, for the sins
both of the dead and living; which proved a Stock for them to trade on, both
for their ambition and covetousness, and from these evidences we may infer, how
little of the humility of Christ appears in the Church, from the highest to the
lowest.

The next branch of the Evangelical Spirit is, meekness and charity, which
leads me unto the consideration of the fourth design of the Christian Religion,
which was the uniting of mankind under one head, and into one body, and this it
designed to effectuate, not only by these sublime Precepts of the highest love,
and the outmost extent of the pardoning of injuries, and of returning them with
the best offices of love and prayer; which the blessed Author of our faith did
enact; but by the associating of the faithful into one Society, called the
Church, which was to be united with the closest Bonds of Brotherly love, and
Charity; and was to be governed by Pastors and Teachers, who should feed the
flock with the sincere milk of the Word; and was also to be cemented together
by the Ligaments of the holy Sacraments, by which, as by joints and bands they
are both united to their head, and knit together. Now we are from these things
to consider what opposition that Church we are now considering, gives to this
branch of the end of Christianity.

And first, whereas the Gospel pronounces us free, and that we are no more the
servants of men, but of God, if any attempt upon that liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free, he changes the authority of the Church into a tyrannical
Yoke; much more, if all the new articles of belief, and rules for practice, be
imposed under the severest certificats. But here we are to consider, that all
these things which that Church has imposed on all of her Communion, for which
we withdrew from her, are additions to our faith; for in this we mainly differ
from that Church, that whatever we acknowledge, they acknowledge likewise, but
with a great many additions, we believe the Scriptures are a rule for
Christians, and they believe the same; but they add traditions, and the
authority of the Church to the Scriptures. We believe that God is to be
worshipped spiritually, they believe the same; but add that he may be
worshipped by Images and sensible Figures. We believe Christ to be the Mediator
betwixt God and Man, they believe the same; but add to this the intercession of
Saints. We hold that God and Christ are to be worshipped, they hold the same,
but add Saints and Angels to our worship. We believe Heaven and Hell to be the
several States of the future life, they believe the same; but add Purgatory
betwixt them, to the day of Judgment. We believe Baptism and the Lords Supper
to be the Sacraments of the new Covenant, they believe the same; but add five
more. We believe Christ is spiritually and really present in the Lords Supper,
this they believe; but add the unconceivable Tenent of his corporal presence.
In a word, it might be instanced in many other particulars, how they have
driven us from their Communion, by their additions to the truth, and sincerity
of the Gospel, which they have adulterated by their Inventions; and not only
have they imposed all these things, but thundered out Anathema's on all that
question them, and have so wreathed all their fopperies, with that main and
fundamental article of their belief, of the infallibility of their Church, that
it is impossible to hope for their recovery, till they renounce that Principle
which is so dear to them. For if their Church be infallible, then in no matter
of faith or practice can she decree amiss, and therefore the lawfulness and
sanctity of all her decrees must be maintained with an equal vigor and zeal;
for if in one of them she step aside, her infallibility is for ever gone. And
by this we may see to how little purpose it is to treat of accomodating matters
with that Church, since there is no possibility of our union with them, without
we turn over entirely to them: since they cannot part with one of their errors,
without they first renounce that which is the dearest of them all, to wit, the
unerring authority of their Church. How cruel then is that Church, which adds
the severe sanction of an Anathema to all her decrees; even about the most
trifling matters? and about things that are by their Confession of their own
natures indifferent. And a consectary to this is, that cruel opinion they hold,
that none can be saved out of their Communion: pretending there is no Salvation
without the true Church, which they restrict to these who are under the
obedience of the Roman Bishop; and this is what they usually frighten all with.

But it is to be considered what the true notion of the Church is, that so we
may see through this frightful Vizar. The Church then is a Society of
Christians united in the same faith, for worshipping of God jointly. And
another definition of a Church cannot be proved from Scripture; for the Church
being called the Body of Christ, its union with him as its head, is held forth
by the Apostle in these words* Col. 2. 19. The head Christ, from whom the whole
body by joints and bonds, having nourishment ministered, and knit together,
increases with the increase of God. From which words, we see what constitutes
a man a member of the true Church; which is first, his union to Christ as his
head, together with a dependence on him for growth and nutriture: and next, his
being knit to all others who are thus united to Christ; which is first the
inward union of divine Charity, by which he loves all who cleave to Christ as
their head: and next, his associating himself with them in outward visible acts
of worship, which every Christian is bound to do, with all that worship God in
Spirit and truth. But if a Society of Christians do visibly swerve from Christ
in many great and signal contradictions to the honor due to his Person, and to
the obedience due to his Laws, and do grossly adulterate the worship, so that
communion cannot be had with that Church, without departing from the head
Christ, then it can be no departing from the Church, to adhere to Christ and
his true worship, and to separate from the corruptions are brought in upon the
Christian religion. If then it appear that the Church of Rome has departed
from the truth and simplicity of the Gospel, in so many great and main points,
these who attempted the reforming her to her first purity, and finding that not
to be hoped for, did unite among themselves for serving and worshipping God
aright, cannot be charged with separation from the true Church.

But by that cruel Tenent of theirs, they breed up all their Children in the
greatest uncharitableness imaginable, condemning all who cannot believe all
their strange Doctrines, or concur in their unhallowed worship. Thus they are
the Schismatiques who have departed from the true Church, and who force from
their Communion all who adhere to it: but this cruelty rests not in
uncharitable censures, but has extended it self to as much bloody and
barbarous rage, as ever sprung from Hell; for all the cruelty of the heathen
Persecuters, cannot match the practices of that Whore, that has been so often
drunk with the blood of the Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus. What enraged
cruelty appeared against the poor Waldenses, for the separating from their
Corruption? how many of all Sexes and Ages, were cruelly butchered down by the
procurement of the Rulers of that Church? and because the Albigenses lived
under the protection of Princes that favored them, how did the Popes depose
their Princes, and instigate other ambitious invaders to seize on their
dominions: which to effectuate, a Croissade was proclaimed, that had been
formerly practiced against the Enemies of the Christian Faith, and heaven was
promised to such as went against these poor innocents, whereupon they were
killed by thousands, without all mercy. Never was there any who had the zeal or
honesty in these dark ages to witness against the apostasy of the Church, but
the Pope and Clergy used all means to get his zeal rewarded with a faggot. And
when the time of reformation came, with what rage and spite did the Pope by his
Letters and Legates instigate all the Princes of Europe to cruelty against
them; but as these things were not done in corners, so they are still so fresh
in our remembrance, by the copious accounts we have of them, that I need not
tell what Arts the Popes and other Ecclesiastics used, to set all Germany on
fire upon this account: no^ need I tell the cruelty was exercised in the
Nether-Lands, in Charles the fifth his time, in which more than an hundred
thousand are said by Grotius to have been butchered on the account of Religion.
And in his Son Philips time, the D. of Alva, did in a short time cut down
36000. Nor need I tell the cruelties were practiced in France for about forty
years together; nor of that treacherous Massacre wherein there was an equal
mixture of perfidy and cruelty, which for all that was entertained at Rome with
great joy and applauses. It will be also needless to tell of their cruelty in
England in Queen Mary's days, which was chiefly managed by the Churchmen. And
many are yet alive who remember what enraged cruelty appeared in our
neighbour-Island, against all of our Religion, which did not only flow from the
fury of an oppressed People, but they were trained, encouraged, and waranded to
it, by their Priests, and the Nuntio who came afterward among them, discovered
who was the spring of all their motions. Shall I to this add all the private
assassinations committed on that account, which were not only practiced, but
justified? I might here congest many instances; Brother murdering Brother, on
the account of Religion. Neither is Clement a Dominican his murdering Henry
the third, nor Chastlets attempt, nor Ravallia^s fact on Henry the fourth,
forgotten. Q. Elizabeth's life, is full of these attempts, and the blackest of
them all was, the Gunpowder treason; all which are to be charged on that
Church, because the Doctrine of murdering Heretic Princes, was taught,
licenced, printed, and yet not condemned in it. From these hints we may guess,
how much of the lowly, meek, and charitable Spirit, is to be found with them.
But should I to this add the horrid cruelties exercised in these massacres, I
should be almost past belief, had I not undeniable Historians for verifying it?
but the mildest of them being to be burned alive, we may guess what the more
savage have done by their tortures and lingering Deaths. Next, shall I mention
their Courts of Inquisition which have been among them in the hands of
Churchmen, from the days of their pretended Saint Dominick, whose order have
been the great Instruments of the cruelties of that Church, and whose procedure
being tied to no forms of equity, or justice, is as unjust as unmerciful,
persons being haled to their black Courts, upon bare suspicions, or secret
Informations, without leading of proofs against them, are by Torture examined,
not only of their own opinions, but of all that are known to them, whose
Testimony though drawn from them by cruel Torture, will bring the same Tortures
on all they delate; neither is there any mercy or any whom this Court declares
Heretic, but the Civil Magistrate must condemn them to the fire. Now what man
that considers the meekness of Christ, and the Evangelical Spirit, can think
that Church the Spouse of Christ, that has rioted it with such savage rage,
against thousands of persons, for no other crime, but because they adhered
firmly to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and would not consent or concur with
these signal and palpable corruptions with which they have adulterated it.

But as from the constitution of their Church, we see their difformity from the
Gospel-rule; so we will next consider their Churchmen, and we shall find how
far they have strayed from the first Original. Churchmen ought to be the
Guides and Pastors of souls. Now, how little of this there is among them, we
will soon be resolved in? What do the Popes about the feeding of souls? when do
they preach the Gospel? or dispense the Sacraments? Alas! it were below the
height of his holiness, to stoop to such mean Offices. Does any vestige of a
Churchman remain in that Court? and do they not directly rule in the Spirit of
the Lords of the Gentiles? And in this the Cardinals, Bishops, and Abbots, do
to their proportion imitate their most Holy Father; abandoning wholly the work
of the Gospel, as if they bore an empty title, or at most, were only bound to
say Mass on some greater holy days; but in all other things do avowedly cast
off the care of their flocks. Shall I here tell of the relaxation of all the
ancient rules, about the offices and duty of Churchmen, which these latter
ages have invented, and mention how children are made Bishops, how they allow
of Pluralities, Non-residencies, Unions, Commendams, Gratia expectativa's, with
a great many more corruptions, which are every day authorized and granted at
Rome* and so zealous were they for these, that they strugled hard against the
honest attempt of some at Trent, who would have had residence declared of
divine right, and got it, though with much ado to be laid aside. And thus it is
that the Bishops and Abbots among them do for most part relinquish their
Charges, to live at the Courts of Princes, and insinuate themselves upon all
affairs and offices: and swarms of them go to Rome, gaping for preferment
there. I deny not but even these late ages have produced great men among them,
who seem to have designed the reviving of the Ancient Discipline, both among
the Clergy, and the People; but as these instances are rare, so they were hated
and persecuted at Rome for their zeal. Witness the condemning of Arnolds Book
of frequent Communion, and the severity Iansenius, and the Abbot of S. Gyran,
with their followers, have met with: and thus whatever individuals that Church
may have produced, yet the corruptions I have hinted, are notoriously,
publicly, and generally practiced in it, and no where so avowedly, as at the
Court of Rome. But to compened this defect of the Superior Clergy, they have
swarms of the inferior ranks, every where, both secular and regular, who seem
to mind the care of souls very seriously. But not to reflect again upon any
thing has been hitherto said of their bad conduct of souls, I shall now only
take notice of the authority they pretend to, as if the People were bound
blindly to follow their Confessors direction, as the voice of God, which
clearly makes them the servants of men, and subjects them to the heaviest yoke,
which is most directly contrary to the liberty where with Christ has made us
free: and what a rack to souls have they made Confession; and what an Engine to
get into the secrets of all the World, and to bring mankind under their
subjection, is obvious enough to any that considers it? and to enforce it the
more, as they teach it simply necessary to Salvation, so the authority they
made the World believe the Priests were vested with for pardoning sin, together
with their easy pardons and slight penances, did root it deep in the hearts of
all of that Communion.

But I go next to examine the Sacraments, of which so much being said already,
little remains to be added. By their dividing the Cup from the Bread, they
destroy Christ's Institution, and so make it no Sacrament, and the hearing of
Mass without communicating, though it make up the greatest part of their
worship, yet is purely a service of their ow^ devising, without warrant from
Christ^ Institution, who said, take, eat, this is my Body; thereby showing, he
intended the virtue and benefit of that Ordinance, only for those who received
it. And in a word, let any read and compare the Institution of the Lord Supper,
as it is in the three Gospels, and the Epistle to the Corinthians, together,
with the whole office of the Mass, as it is in the Roman Church, and then let
him on his Conscience pass his verdict, whether they have adhered to, or
departed from, Christ's Institution in that piece of their worship. Finally, one
great end of all solemn Worship, being the Communion of Saints, in their joint
adorations, and mutual occurrence in divine services, what union can they have
with God? or what communion can they hold one with another? who perform all
their Worship in an unknown Tongue, which is the rule and constant practice of
that Church beyond Sea; though for the better venting of their sophisticated
stuff among us, they give the people Books of devotion in their vulgar
Language, yet continue to say the Office of the Mass in Latin.

And thus far I have run a* round that great Circle, I proposed to my self in
the beginning of this discourse: and have examined the chief Designs of the
Christian Religion, and have found the great and evident contradictions, given
to them in all their branches, by the established and authorized Doctrines and
practices of that Church; in which I have fully justified the wise man's
observation, that he who increases knowledge, increases sorrow; and have said
enough to evince to all rational and considering minds, how unsafe it is for
any that would keep a good Conscience, to hold Communion with them. But I have
not finished my design, till I likewise examine the Characters of the Christian
Religion, and compare them with these are to be found in the Synagogue of Rome.

The first Character of our faith is, that it was delivered to the World by men
sent of God, and divinely inspired, who proved their Mission by Miracles. Now
these Doctrines about which we differ from that Church can pretend to no such
divine original, let them tell us what inspired man, did first teach the
worship of Images, of the Mass, of Angels, and Saints, and of Relics: what
man sent of God was the first Author of the belief, of the corporal presence,
of the Sacrifice of the Mass, of the Popes supremacy, of Purgatory, of
Indulgences, and of all these innumerable superstitions, of which the Scripture
is absolutely silent: for if these doctrines were not the offspring of
Revelations, they are none of the Oracles of God, nor can we be obliged to
believe them as such. It is true, they vouch Scriptures for proof to some of
these, but these are so far stretched, that their sure retreat is in the
Sanctuary of the Churches Traditions: but till a clear warrant be produced for
proving it was impossible that any falsehood could have that way crept into the
World, we must be excused from believing these. Neither is it possible to know
what Traditions came from the Apostles, for as the vulgar are not capable of
pursuing the enquiry, so the loss of most of the writings of the first two
Ages, makes it impossible to know what Traditions came from the Apostles.

But this I say not, that we need fear this trial, for the silence of the first
and purest Ages, about these things which are controverted among us, is
evidence enough that they were not known to them; especially since in their
Apologies which they wrote to the Heathens for their Religion and Worship,
wherein they give an abstract of their Doctrines, and a Rubric of their
worship; they never once mention these great evils, for which we now accuse
that Church. It is true, a late ingenious Writer, whose sincere zeal and candor
had much offended the Roman Court, and drawn censures on himself and his Book,
took a way to repair his reputation by a new Method of proving the truth of the
Opinions held in the Roman Church; which was, that since the present Church
held them, that shows that they had them so from their Ancestors, and they from
theirs, till you run backwards to the days of the Apostles: alleging that a
change in the Worship was unpracticable, since it could not be done in a
corner, but in the view of all the World; who it is not to be imagined were
capable of suffering any great or considerable change to be made in that which
was daily in their view, and much in their esteem; therefore he concludes, that
every Generation adhered to that belief, in which they were born: and so no
change in any great substantial and visible part of worship could be made. It
is true, he applies this only to the belief of the corporal presence, which he
attempts to prove could never have been introduced into the Church, had it not
been conveyed down from the Apostles. He has indeed set off this with all the
beauties of wit, and elegencies of style, and much profound reading. But with
how great and eminent advantages, both of reason, and learning, this pretense
has been baffled; I leave it to the judgment of all who have been so happy as
to read Mr. Claud his incomparable Writings? And the common sense of mankind
will prove this but an imposture, how fairly soever adorned; for if we find it
certain that any Doctrines, or main parts of worship are now received into that
Church, and if from the undeniable evidences of History, and Writings of
Ancients, it appear, that these things were not received in the ancient Church,
then it is certain there has been a change made from what was then, to what is
now, though an ingenious Invention may make it appear very difficult, to imagine
how and when the change came in; especially when it was insensibly, and by
pieces advanced. If then it be proved that the Fathers believed the Elements in
the Sacrament were really bread and wine, and not changed from their own
nature, but only types and figures of the Body of Christ, then we are sure a
change must have been made, though the ignorance of some ages makes it a hard
task to clear all particulars about it. It is true, the Fathers did highly
magnify this Sacrament, with many expressions, which (though the vehemence of
Divine Rhetoric can well justify, yet) will not bear a Logical Examen, but
when they speak in a cooler Style, nothing can be more clear, then that they
believed not the corporal presence. But may not that reasoning of the
impossibility of a change in a worship, be as well applied to the taking the
Chalice from the People, who in reason should be imagined so tenacious of so
great a privilege, that no consideration should have obliged them to part with
it? and yet we know, nor do they deny, how it was wrung from them, about 250
years ago. What may seem less credible then for the People to consent, to have
their worship in an unknown Tongue, and yet we know that all once worshipped in
their Mother Tongue, but that after (by the overthrow of the Roman Empire) the
Latin Tongue decayed, the barbarous worship was obtruded on the World? And
what piece of worship is both more visible, and more contrary to the clearest
evidence of Scriptures, especially to the commandments, in which the people
were always instructed, then the worshipping of Images? And though we know well
enough that for the first seven Centuries the Christian World abhorred them,
yet within a hundredth years after that, we find a great part of it bewitched
with them. And what can be thought more uneasy for the World to have received,
then the Popes absolute authority over all the Churches and States of the
World? One should think that though Religion and Reason, had lien out of the
way, yet Interest, and Ambition, had withstood this: yet we see clearly by what
steps they crept up, from being Bishops of the Imperial City, in an equality of
power with their neighboring Bishops, into that culminating hight, to which
they have now mounted. In a word, we refuse not to appeal to the first four
Ages of the Church, in these matters that we quarrel the Roman Church for; We
deny not but humane infirmity begun soon to appear in the Church, and a care to
gain on the Heathens, made them quickly fall upon some rites, and use some
terms, which after-ages corrupted. But the ruin of Religion was, when the Roman
Empire being overturned by the incursion of the Northern Nations, in the
beginning of the fifth Century, both piety and Religion being laid to sleep,
instead of the Primitive simplicity of the faith and worship of the Christians,
they turned all their zeal to the adorning of the outward of Religion, and
hence the corruptions of the Church took their rise.

But I had almost forgot to name some Revelations which that Church pretends
to, even for some of her most doubtful opinions: which are the visions and
extraordinary Inspirations of some of their Saints, from which they vouch a
divine confirmation to their Doctrines; I confess there is a great deal of
extraordinary Visions, Rapts and Ecstasies to be met with among the lives of
their Saints; and I fear a great deal more then truth: for really whosoever will
but read these writings, he must confess they are so far from being probable,
or well contrived, that they speak out their forgery. Alas! whereas St. Paul
being put to Glory, of Visions and Revelations, was to run back fourteen years
for one. Their Saints are found in them every day. Are they not very credible
Stories they tell of Christ's appearing to some of their She-Saints, and kissing
them, giving them Rings, being married to them, and celebrating nuptial rites,
making them drink out of his side, and leaving on them the prints of his
wounds, with many other such like apparitions of the Virgin, and other Saints,
which were either forgeries, dreams, or the effects of melancholy, or
histerical distempers; and yet these extravagant fables are given out to the
people, as sacred pieces of Divine Revelations.

But the inspiration of the holy Writers, on which we found our Faith, was
proved by their miracles which they wrought publicly in the sight of many, and
in the presence of their adversaries, many of whom were convinced by them; and
it is certain, that whosoever offers any thing to another belief, pretending
he comes to him in the Name of God, must have some evident proof of his Divine
Mission: since none are bound to believe him barely on his own Testimony:
Otherwise there should be no end of Impostures, if every pretender to Divine
Inspiration were to be believed without proof. Now the way it must be proved,
is by some evidence of Gods extraordinary assisting such a person, which
appeared always either in Prophesies, or Miracles, but chiefly in miracles
under the New Testament: and therefore both Christ and his Apostles appeal to
the mighty works they wrought, as the great confirmation of their Doctrine. If
then there be new Doctrines brought into the Church, they must have the like
confirmation, otherwise they are not to be believed.

But here those of that Church think they triumph: For miracles they have in
abundance; not a Relic they have, but has wrought mighty wonders, nor a
Countrey-Saint, but the Curat of the place can gravely tell a great many deeds
of his puissance; nor want the Images their mavelous atchievments, but
wondrously wondrous are the feats the Hosty has performed: Here I am upon a
sad Subject of that trade of lies and fictions, wherewith the Merchants of that
Babylon have so long traffiqued; of which the sincerer among themselves are
ashamed. How ridiculous are many of their miraculous narrations? Was it a
worthy piece of the Angelical Ministration, for Angels to go trotting over Sea
and Land with a load of Timber and Stones of the Virgins house, till at length
they set it down at Loretto, that great devotions might be shown to it? It is a
goodly story for to tell of a Saint that walked so far after his head was cut
off, with it in his arms, resting in some places to draw breath? yet he will
pass for an Infidel that should doubt of this, at St. Denis-Church. Who can
look on the lives of the late Saints of that Church, without nausea? Gregory's
Dialogues begun this trade, which indeed has thriven well since. The miracles
of the Christian faith were grave and solemn actions; but what ridiculous
scenical stories, not to say blasphemous ones, meet us about the miracles of
their Saints? He that would know this, may read the Lives of St. Francis, and
St. Dominic, St. Bridgit, and the two St. Catherines, and he will be satisfied
to a surfeit. The Miracles also of Christ and his Apostles were acted
publicly, in the view of all; but most of these narrations of their Wonders
were transacted in corners, none being witnesses but persons concerned to own
the cheat: And the Doctrine of Equivocating was a good cordial for the ease of
their Consciences, though they swore what they knew false, according to the
natural sense of the words which they uttered. Thus we have many fables of
Christ's appearing in the Hosty, sometimes as a child, and sometimes as
crucified, when but a very few of the whole company present, were honored with
that amazing sight.

Further, the Miracles of the Christian Faith were written in the times in
which they were acted, that so enquiries might have been made into their
falsehood; and the powers that then governed, being enemies to the Faith, it was
safe for its opposers, to have proved and discovered their forgery, had any
such been. But many of the Miracles of Rome are not heard of, till some Ages,
at least Years be past, whereby they are secure from the after-game of a
discovery; and he were a stout man that would adventure to question the verity
of these pretenses at Rome, where it is the interest of that Church to have
them all believed, without once questioning them. But how comes it, that in
Heretical Countries (as they call them) where there is more need of those
Miracles, and where they might be more irrefragably proved, if true, since the
Examiners of them were not to be suspected, yet none of these mighty works do
show themselves forth? Certainly, that they are to this day so rife in Italy
and Spain, and so scant in Britain, is a shrewd ground to apprehend
Legerdemain, and forgery, in the accounts we get of their later Saints. And
indeed the Contrivers of these Stories have not managed their design by half,
so well as need was; for they have bestowed as many of them on one person, as
might have Sainted the half of an Order. But the gain that is made by new
Saints, and new Relics, is well enough known; not to speak of the general
advantage that Church pretends to draw from it.

In end, though some things among them did seem to surpass the known powers of
Nature, these ought not to prevail upon us for departing from the truth; since
though an Angel from Heaven Preached another Gospel, he is to be accursed, Gal.
1. 8. If then they have so changed the Christian Doctrine by their Additions
and Inventions, that it is become thereby as another Gospel; none of the
seemingly Seraphical appearances they may have among them, though true, ought
to reconcile us to it, and that the rather, since we were expressly guarded
against this Imposture, by St. Paul, who gave it as an Indication of the Son of
Perdition, that his coming was after the power of Satan, with all power and
signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteouseness, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9, 10. And it is a part of their curse, that they are given up to
strong delusions, to believe lies: the Beast also that appeared to St. John
Rev. 13. 13. did great wonders, so that he made Fire come down from Heaven, in
the sight of men, and deceived many, that dwelt on the Earth, by these Miracles
which he had power to do. But to conclude this, my greatest quarrel, at these
forgeries of Miracles is, that the people being taught to believe them, and the
Miracles of the Gospel, with an equal certainty, since they have the Testimony
of the Church, for both, and they seeing such evident Characters of fraud and
forgery on these supposed miracles, whereby they are convinced of their
falsehood, are thereby in danger of suspecting all the Miracles of the Gospel,
as the tricks of subdolous and crafty men; whereby they run headlong to an
Atheistical disbelieving the truth of all alike. And thus far we have found how
opposite that Church is, to the Spouse of Christ, since her Doctrines are so
ill founded, and look so like cunningly devised fables, without the authority
of divine inspiration, or the proof of true Miracles.

The next Character of our Faith is, its perspicuity, and simplicity, all being
called to the clear light of the day in it, and every part of it being so
genuine, that it is apparent, it was not the contrivance of designing men, that
by the belief of it they might obtain the power, and possess the riches of the
World: And therefore there are no secret Doctrines in our Faith, which must be
kept up from the Vulgar, whereby the Pastors of Christendom may have dominion
over their souls. But what must we conclude of them, who by all means study to
keep all of their Communion ignorant, as if devotion were thereby nourished;
and allow them not the use of the Scriptures in their Mother Tongue, nor a
worship which they can understand, whereby it is, that they who occupy the room
of unlearned, cannot say Amen, at the giving of thanks, since they understand
not what is said. To this might be added their implicit Faith, to all the
Doctrines of the Church, without further inquiries; and their blind obedience
to the Confessarius, be (...) never so ignorant and carnal. These are certainly
darkening opinions, and practices, and far different from the methods of the
Apostles, in preaching the Gospel, who withheld from the people nothing of the
Counsel of God, and studied the enlightening their understandings, as well as
the enlivening of their wills.

But further, how much of interest appears in the Doctrines of Rome, which tend
to the exalting or enriching the Papacy, and inferior Clergy, for it is
visible what a trade they drive by them, and all the contrivances, all the
projectours in Europe ever fell upon for enriching their Masters Treasury,
falls short of the projects of Purgatory, the Treasure of the Church,
Indulgences, and the Popes absolute authority, in making abrogating, and
dispencing with all Positive Laws. Neither is there more of design to be found
in the Alcoran, than in the Mysteries of that Caliph of the Spiritual Babylon.
And we may guess of their concernedness in these matters, since a gentler
censure may be hoped for upon the violation of the greatest of the Laws of God,
than upon the least contradiction to their idolized Interests. The one is the
constant subject of their Studies, and Sermons, whereas the other is seldom
minded.

The third Character of our Faith, is, that it is rational and suitable to our
Souls, God having fitted it, and framed them so harmoniously, that they are
congenial one to another. It is true, the Mysteries about God and Christ are
exalted above the reach of our faculties, but even reason it self teaches that
it must be so, since if there be a God, he must be infinite and
incomprehensible, and therefore it is not to be wondered, if the Scriptures
offer some Mysteries to us about God and Christ, which choke and stifle the
impressions we are apt to take of things. But in these, it is visible, that the
Object is so disproportioned to our faculties, that it is impossible we can
reach or comprehend it; but as for the other parts of Religion, they are all so
distinctly plain, that the reasonableness, as well as the authority of them,
serve to commend them to us; but how void are they of this, who have made one
of the chief Articles of their Faith, and the greatest matter of their worship,
that which is, not only beyond, but contrary to, the most common impressions of
Nature, which teaches us, to believe our senses when under no lesion, and duly
applied to a proper object. For indeed, in that case, we cannot really doubt
but things are as they appear to us; for we cannot believe it midnight, when
we clearly see the Sun in the Meridian; nay, and our Faith rests on the
evidences our senses give, since we believe, because Miracles were clearly seen
by these who first received the Faith: And, Christ said, believe me, for the
very works sake, Ioh. 14. 11. And so their sight of these works was, a certain
ground for their belief, therefore the senses unvitiated, fixing on a proper
object, through a due mean, are infallible; therefore what our sight, our
taste, and our touch tell us, is Bread and Wine, must be so still, and cannot
be imagined to have changed its substance, upon the recital of the five words.
Shall I add to this, that throng of absurdities which crowd about this opinion?
For if it be true, then a body may be in more places at once, triumphing in
glory in one, and sacrificed in a thousand other places: And a large body may
be crowded into the narrow space of a thin Wafer* they holding it to be not
only wholly in the whole Wafer, but also entirely in every crumb of it: A body
can be without dimensions and accidents without a subject; these must be
confessed to be among the highest of unconcievables; and yet these Miracles
must be believed to be produced every day, in above a hundred thousand places.
Certainly, he has a sturdy belief who can swallow over all these absurdities,
without choking on them.

It is little less unconceivable, to imagine, that a man of no eximious
sanctity (nay, perhaps of noted impiety) nor extraordinarily knowing (nay,
perhaps grossly ignorant) in Theological Matters, shall have the Holy Ghost so
absolutely at his command, that whatever he decrees must be the Dictates of the
Spirit. And what an unconceiveable mystery is the Treasure of the Church, and
the Popes Authority to dispense it as he will? No less conceivable is the
efficacy of the Sacraments, by the work wrought; nor is any thing more
affronting to reason, than the barbarous worship. And of a piece with this is
the blind subjection is pleaded for the Confessarius his Injunctions, and their
opinions of expiating their sins by a company of little trifling penances,
which tend not to the cleansing the Soul, nor killing of the life of sin, much
less can be able to appease God, either of their own inbred worth, or by reason
of any value God is pleased to set on them, either by Command or Promise. But
should I reckon up every thing is among them that choaks reason, I should dwell
too long on this, and reckon over most of the things have been through the
whole Discourse hinted, which seem to stand in the most diametrical opposition
to the clearest impressions of all men's reasons.

But to bring my Enquiry to an issue, easiness and gentleness are by Christ
applied to his yoke, laws, and burden; and whatever opposition or trouble they
may give to the carnal man, by mortifying his lusts, and contradicting all his
inordinate and unlimitted desires, yet by the rational faculties and powers
they are both easily understood and practiced. Indeed Religion lies in few
things, and its chief work is the reforming and purifying the inward man, where
it mainly dwells and exerts its force and virtue; but these who have added so
much, both to be believed and done, beyond what our Lord prescribed, as they
accuse his unfaithfulness, so bring unsupportable burdens on the Consciences of
Christians: These therefore who lead out the mind, by presenting a great many
foreign objects to it, do introduce superannuated Judaism, instead of that
liberty Christ brought with him unto the World. But shall I number up here all
the Impositions of that Church, whose numbers are great as well as their nature
grievous; for it is a study to know them all, but what a pain must it be to
perform them? It is a work which will take up a great deal of time to
understand the Rubricks of their Missals, Breviaries, Rituals, and Pontificals.
In a word, they have left the unity and simplicity of Religion, and set up
instead of it a lifeless heap of Ordinances, which must oppress, but cannot
relieve the Consciences of their Disciples.

Shall I add to this, the severity of some of their Orders, into which by
unalterable Vows they are engaged their whole lives? Now whatever fitness might
be in such Discipline, upon occasions, for beating down the body or humbling of
the mind, yet it must be very tyrannical to bind the perpetual observance of
these on any by an oath, for thereby all the rest of their lives may become
insupportably bitter to them, wherein they stand obliged, under perjury, to the
perpetual observance of some severe Discipline; which, though at first in a
novitious fer^our might have had its good effects on them, yet that drying up,
it will afterward have no other effect but the constant dejecting of the soul,
and so their life will be a rack to them by their perpetual toil in these
austerities. This I speak of those who seem the chief Ornaments of that Church,
whose Devotion does for most part turn to outward, and rests in the strict
observance of their rules, not without voluntary assumed mortifications, which
they add to them, ^ut wherein they for most part glory, and so the life of
pride and self-love (the ^ubtillest of all our enemies) is fed and ^ourished by
them: Neither can we think, that these, whose exercises are so much external,
can be so recollected for the inward and serene breathings of the Mind after
God and Christ, without which, all externals, though they seem to make a fair
show in the flesh, yet are but a skelet of lifeless and insipid things. But
indeed they have studied to remove this objection of the uneasiness of their
Religion, by accommodating it so, that the worst of men may be secure of Heaven
and enjoy their lusts both, according to the corrupt conduct of some of their
spiritual Fathers: But what I have hinted of the uneasiness of their Religion,
is taken from the Nature of their Devotions, in their highest altitude and
elevation.

And thus far I have pursued my Design, in the tract whereof I have not been
void of a great deal of pain and sorrow, for what pleasure can any find by
discovering so much wickedness, and so many errors in the Christened Regions
of the World, and see the holy and beautiful Places, wherein the former Ages
worshipped God in the Spirit, turned to be habitations of Idols and graven
Images, by which God is provoked to jealousy* God is my witness, how these
thoughts have entertained me with horror and regret, all the while I have
considered them: And that I am so far from being glad, that I have found so
much corruption in the Roman Church, that it is not without the greatest
antipathy to my nature imaginable, that I have paid this duty to truth, by
asserting it with the discovery of so many Impostures, which have so long
abused the Christian world; and if any heat or warmth has slipped from my Pen,
I must protest sincerely, it is not the effect of anger, or passion, but of a
tender and zealous compassion, for those souls who are either already blinded
with these delusions, or do incline toward those paths which lead to the
chambers of death.

I am none of those who justify rage or bitterness against those in errors,
for if we had the Spirit of Christ in us, we should mourn over, and lament
their misery, who lie under so much darkness. And this is a sure character to
judge if our zeal for God and his truth be Divine and Evangelical, if it make
us pour out Rivers of tears for those that have gone out of the way, rather
than streams of Fire against them* That zeal which raises melting sorrow,
tender compassion, and fervent prayers for those we see erring, is Christ-like,
and worthy of that meek and charitable spirit which the Gospel so much
recommends: Whereas that which boils out in rage and foam against such as err,
and designs their ruin, and mischief, and studies how to persecute, rather than
convert them, and kindles in men bitter aversion to their persons, together
with rude harshness in their behavior to them is all Antichristian and carnal.
My design therefore in this discourse is to provoke pity rather than wrath, and
tears more than flames, toward those deceived multitudes, that we may pray for
them, rather than rail at them.

But my chief aim is to persuade all who love their souls, to consider the
danger of continuing in the Communion of a Church, that has not only fallen
from her first love and purity, but has in so many great and essential points
corrupted our most holy Faith, and adulterated the pure sincerity of our
worship.

I shall not here search into the depths of the Mercies of God, how far they
may reach any of that Communion, nor examine how far they hold the foundation
Christ, notwithstanding of all the base superstructures they have reared upon
it, nor shall I consider how far invincible ignorance may excuse the guilt of
an error, nor how applicable this may be to them, nor shall I discuss how far
the private differing from these errors may in many things secure some of the
individuals of that Communion from the general guilt lies over them; upon all
these particulars many things may be said, and none alive is more willing to
stretch his invention, for finding out grounds to fix his Charity on, than my
self. But all I can devise falls short of a full and satisfying excuse for
those who being educated in the knowledge of the truth and sincerity of the
Gospel, do fall away into the errors and superstitions of that Church; nor can
I imagine what their temptations should be to it, except one of two: The first
is, that they desire a sensible Religion, and therefore loath the simplicity
and spirituallity of the Gospel, and love to have some glorious objects in
Worship to strike on, and affect their senses: But however this may make
impressions on the grosser rabble, yet certainly, any that considers that the
perfection of man lies in his reason, and not in his outward senses, and that
the exaltation of reason is Religion; he must confess that the less it dwell in
the senses, and the more inward it become on the reason, it is the more
suitable both to the nature of God, of Religion, and of the rational faculties.
But the other consideration that may draw many to that Religion, is yet worse,
which is, because in it a great allowance is given to all manner of sin, by the
treacherous conduct of some Confessors, who persuade men of Heaven, on terms
very easy and pleasing to flesh and blood. And hence it is that we see very
few who have expressed any affection to a devout life, abandoning us to go over
to the Roman Communion, most of those who do so, (except it be one of a
thousand) being as void of virtue, is ignorant of the nature of true Religion;
that we may say, Ioh. 2. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us,
for if they had been of us, they had not gone out from us.

These being the only visible tentations to entice any from our Communion to
theirs, it is hard to preserve any great degrees of Charity for them: For a
third tentation being that only which can work on a devout mind, takes with so
few among us, that I need scarce name it which is the solitary and retired
houses among them for leading a devout and strict life, and the excellent Books
of Devotion have been published by many of that Communion. This I know wrought
mightily on one, and made him many times wish that he could with a good
Conscience throw himself into one of these Religious houses; but the
consideration of these great corruptions lay so in his way, that without the
doing the greatest force on his Conscience imaginable, and thereby securing
damnation to himself by complying with things he judged so damnable, he durst
not do it. Yet for his further satisfaction, he went among them, to see if
their Worship appeared more amiable in practice, then it did in Writings; but I
have heard him often declare, that though his mind was as free of
prepossessions, as perhaps ever man's was, yet all he conceived of them, even
from the Writings of their adversaries, was nothing compared to the impressions
which the sight of their Worship left upon him, it appearing so Histrionical in
all its circumstances, and so idolatrous in its substance, especially as he saw
the Vulgar practice it. And for their Religious Houses, he was among a great
many of all Orders, but was far from meeting with that spirit of devotion, he
had hoped to find among them, for they always magnified their Order, and the
little external austerities and devotions of it, but for genuine humility, a
delight in God, and Christ, abstraction from the world, (for all their frocks
and retirements,) sincere heavenly-mindedness, and fervent Charity to the
Brethren, he regrated he had met with little of it among them. And that he
found the several Orders full of emulation and envy at other Orders, and of
heats among themselves, which made him see, that he who meant to lead a devout
life, must choose another Sanctuary than any of these he saw in that Communion.

I deny not, that it is the greatest defect of the Reformation, that there are
not in it such encouragements to a devout life; though the intanglements of
Vows to things without our power, is a manifest invasion of the Christian
liberty; and to languish out ones life in a tract of lasie Devotion, without
studying to serve God in our Generation, seems contrary to the intendment of
Religion, a great many of its Precepts being about those Duties we owe our
Neighbors: Yet for all this, it is not to be denied to be a great defect that
we want recluse Houses, for a stricter training up of those who design to lead
a spiritual life, and to serve in the Gospel, that their minds being rightly
formed before their first setting out they may be well qualified and furnished
for their work. Such Houses might also be retreating places for old Persons,
after they had served their Generation, and were no more able to undergo toil
and fatigue; they might be also Sanctuaries for devout Persons, in times of
their greater afflictions or devotions. But for all this want, it fixes no
imputation on our Church, her Doctrine, or Worship, that she is so poor, as not
to be able to maintain such Seminaries. But on the way, it is no great
character of the Piety of their Church, that she abounds so with great and rich
dotations, when we consider the Arts they used for acquiring them, by making
People believe themselves secure of Heaven by such donations: Indeed, had we
got our People befooled into such persuasions, the cheat might have prospered
as well in our hands; but we are not of those, who handle the Word of God
deceitfully; nor will we draw the People even to do good with a crafty guile,
or lie for God.

But now, as a conclusion to this Discourse, I must consider, if all things
among us be so sound and well grounded, that with a quiet Mind and good
Conscience every one may hold Communion with our Church, and hope for Salvation
in it, I shall therefore briefly run over the Nature and Characters of the
Christian Faith, to see if any contradiction to them, or any part of them, be
found among us. And first of all, we worship God in Spirit, as a Spiritual
Being, with suitable Adorations, which we direct to no Image nor Symbol of the
Divine Presence, but teach, that we ought not to figure God to any corporeal
being, no not in our thoughts; neither do we worship any, beside God the
Father, Son, and Spirit: We also worship Christ, but as he is God, and has the
fullness of the Godhead dwelling in him bodily: Angels indeed we honor, but
knowing them to be our fellow servants, we cannot pray to them, or fall down
before them: We count the holy Virgin blessed among women, but dare give her no
share of the glory due to her Son: All the Saints we reverence and love, but
knowing God to be a jealous God, we cannot divide that honor among them, which
is only due to him, and therefore do neither worship them, their Images, nor
their Relics. We desire also to offer up to God such Sacrifices as we know
are well-pleasing to him, Prayers, Praises, broken and contrite Hearts, and our
Souls and Bodies, but reject all Charms and Enchantments from our Worship, as
contrary to the reasonable service which is acceptable to God, and do retain
the genuine simplicity of the Gospel Worship, in a plain and intelligible style
and form, without any mixtures drawn from Judaism or Gentilism: And thus there
is nothing among us contrary to the first design of Religion.

And as little will be found against the second, which is the honor due to
Christ in all his Offices: We teach our People to study the Scriptures, and to
examine all we say by them, and exhort them to depend on God, who by his Spirit
will teach them as well as us; neither do we pretend to an authority over their
Consciences, but acknowledge our selves men of like infirmities with the
People, who are all called to be a Royal Priesthood; and thus we honor Christ's
Prophetical Office, by founding our Faith only on the Divine Authority of the
Scriptures. We also believe, there is no Name given under Heaven by which we
can be saved, but the Name of Christ, who laid down his Life a ransom for our
Souls, that by his Cross we might be reconciled to God; and it is to that one
Sacrifice, that we teach all to fly for obtaining remission of sins and the
favor of God, trusting only to it, and to nothing we have done or can do,
knowing that when we have done all we can do we are but unprofitable servants;
much less do we hope for any thing from any of our fellow creatures: We apply
our Souls to no Intercessour but Christ, and trust to no Satisfaction but his,
and we acknowledge him the only King of his Church, whose Laws must bind it to
the end of the World. Neither do we acknowledge any other Authority, but his,
over our Consciences. It is true, in things indifferent, he has left a power
with his Church to determine in those Matters, which may tend to advance order,
edification, peace, and decency; but as the Church cannot add to our Faith, so
neither can it institute new pieces of Worship, which shall commend us to God,
or bind any load upon our Souls. We own a Ministerial Authority in all the
Pastors of the Church, which they derive from Jesus Christ, and not from any
visible Head on earth, and therefore they are only subject to Christ. We also
hold, that the Civil Powers are of Christ, whose Gospel binds the duty of
obedience to them more closely on us, and therefore if they do wrong, we leave
them to Christ's Tribunal, who set them up, but pretend to no power from his
Gospel to coerce or resist them; and thus we honor Christ in all his Offices,
and so are conform to the second branch of the design of our Faith.

We also receive the third with the same fidelity, and whatever the practices
of too too many among us be, yet there is no ground to quarrel our Doctrine; we
preach repentance to all, and study to convince them of their misery, and lost
estate, that they may mourn for their sins, and turn to God by a new course of
life; we preach Faith through Christ in God, as that which unites our souls to
him, by which we are in Christ, and Christ is in us. We stir up our people to
love the Lord their God with all their heart, strength, soul, and mind, and to
wait for his Son Christ Jesus, who is the hope of glory and shall change our
vile bodies into the likeness of his glorious Body. And from this great motive
do we press our people to the study of holiness, without which they shall never
see God. We send them to the ten Commandments for the rule of their lives,
whose exposition we chiefly take from Christ's Sermon on the mount; neither can
we be charged for having taught the People, to break one of the least of these
Commandments. We exhort all our hearers to make the life of Christ the pattern
of theirs, and to learn of him who was meek and lowly in heart; neither can our
Church be accused of having taught any Carnal Doctrines, for gratifying the
base Interests of the flesh, or for engrossing the power or treasure of the
World, the subsistence of our Churchmen, being but a livelihood, and not a
treasure. In a word, we preach Christ and him Crucified, and all the rules of
his Gospel, for ordering the conversation aright, without adding, or taking
from it; and thus our conformity to the third branch of Christianity appears.

We teach also according to the fourth branch of Christianity, the Doctrines of
Charity, neither do we condemn any who holds the foundation, though in some
lesser matter they differ from us; but hope they may be saved as well as we. We
abhor the Doctrine of cruel persecuting of any for their Consciences: The
outmost we allow of, or desire of that nature, being the preservation of our
own Societies, pure from the contagion of other Traffiquers, and the driving
from us those who do so disturb us. All the authority we give the Church, is
Paternal, and not Tyrannical, our Churchmen we hold to be the Pastors, but not
the Lords of the flock, who are obliged to feed them sincerely, both by their
Doctrine, Labors, and whole Conversation; but we pretend to no blind obedience
due to their directions, and count them noble Christians, who search and try
all they say by that Test of the Scriptures: We send the People to confess
their sins to God, from whom only we teach them to expect their pardon, and
pretend to no other keys, but Ministerial ones, over public and known
Scandals. In our Worship, as all do understand it, so every one may join in it.
And in the number, use, and simplicity of our Sacraments, we have religiously
adhered to the Rules of the Gospel, we holding them to be solemn federal Rites
of our Stipulation with God, in which if we do worthily partake of them, we are
assured of the Presence of the Divine Spirit and Grace, for uniting our Souls
more entirely to God, and advancing us in all the ways of the Spirit of Life;
and if the Institution of them in the Gospel, be compared with our
Administration of them, it will appear how close we have kept to our Rule.

And thus we see how exactly conform the Doctrine of our Church is to the whole
Branches of the Christian Design; upon which it is not to be doubted, but the
Characters of the Christian Religion will also fit ours: We found our Faith
only on the Scriptures, and though we pay a great deal of venerable esteem to
the Churches of God during their purity, which continued above four Centuries,
and so be very willing to be determined in Rituals and Matters that are
external and indifferent by their Opinions and Practices, yet our Faith settles
only on the Word of God, and not on the Traditions of Men; neither do we
believe every Spirit that pretends to Rapts and Visions, but try the Spirits,
whether they be of God or not, and though an Angel should preach to us another
Gospel, we would hold him accursed. The Miracles we trust to, as the Proofs of
the Truth of that Revelation which we believe, are only those contained in the
Scriptures; and though we believe there was a wonder-working power continued
for some time in the Church, yet we make a great difference betwixt what we
historically credit, and what we religiously believe; neither will we, for
supporting our Interest or Authority, have recourse to that base trade of
forging lying Wonders, but we rest satisfied with the Miracles Christ and his
Apostles wrought for the proof of the Religion we own, since what we believe,
is no other than what they taught; and therefore we leave the trade of forging
new Miracles, to them who have forged a new Religion.

And for the plain genuines of the Gospel, we have not departed a step from it,
since we call upon our People by all the motives we can devise, and with all
the earnestness we are Masters of, to receive full and clear Instruction in all
the Matters of our Religion, which we distinctly lay open to them. And nothing
of Interest or Design can be charged on us, who pretend to nothing but to be
the Stewards of the Mysteries of God; nor have we offered to sophisticate the
simplicity of our Worship by any additions to it, for the determining about
some particular forms is no addition to Worship, but only the following forth
of these Precepts of doing all things to edification, peace, and order: But an
addition to Worship is, when any new piece of Divine Service is invented, with
a pretense of our being more acceptable to God thereby, or of our receiving
Grace by that conveyance; and therefore any Rites we have, as they are not
without some hints from Scripture, so we pretend not to become any way
acceptable to God by them.

Further, we teach no irrational nor unconceivable Doctrine: It is true there
are Mysteries in our Faith, and even reason it self teaches, that these must
be unconceivable; but for all our other persuasions they are such as may be
well made out to the rational faculties of man; therefore we do not betake our
selves to that Sanctuary, that we must be believed, assert what we please; but
we assert nothing but what we offer to evince by the clearest proofs. And in
^ine, we add nothing to the burdensomness of the Laws of Christ, but teach and
propose them as we have them from his Gospel, without adding, changing, or
altering a tittle from the first Institution.

And so far have I considered the Doctrine and Worship of our Church; wherein
if I could justify all our Practices, as well as I can do our Principles, there
were no grounds to fear hurt from all the Cavils of Mortals. But for bad
practices, whatsoever matter of regrate they may furnish us with, they afford
none for separation: Therefore, there is no ground that can justify a
separation from our Church, much less warrant the turning over from us to the
Communion of Rome: And thus far have I pursued my designed Enquiry, which was,
if with a safe Conscience any might adjoin themselves to the Popish Religion,
or if Communion with our Church was to be kept and continued in; and have found
great grounds to assert the evident hazards of the former, so that no man to
whom his salvation and welfare is dear, can, or ought to join himself to that
Church; on the other hand, without renting the Body of Christ, none can, or
ought to depart from our Churches: But I leave the ^erusal and considering of
these things ^o the serious Reader, to whom I ^ope they may give some
satisfaction, ^f he bring with him to the Enquiry an attentive, serious, and
unbyassed mind. And I leave the success of this, and every other attempt of
this Nature, for the clearing of Divine truth, with him who is the only
Fountain of Blessings, who is over all, God blessed for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 16. line 6. for formerly read formally. l. 24. Abuses r. Abases. p. 30.
l. 14. forewarnes r. warne^. ^ ^1. l. 1. where r. what. p. 52. l 9. but r. yet.
p. 54. ^ 24. dele a. p. 64. l. 18. betwixt add that. p. 91. a r. ^is. p. 99. l.
5. enhansing r. engrossing. l. 8. transmit^ng r. transmuting. p. 103. l. 16.
since r. for. p. 110. ^ 18. or r. for. p. 138. l. 13. unity r. purity.

These Books are to be sold by Moses Pit, at the Angel, near the Little North
Door of St. Paul's Church.
A Table of ten thousand Square Numbers, by John Pell, D. D. stitcht, 1 s. 6 d.

Tuba Stentoro-Phonica, or Speaking-Trumpet, being an Instrument of excellent
use both at Sea and Land; by Sir Samuel Morland. Price of the Book 1 s. of the
Instrument 40 s.

Articles and Rules for the Government of His Majesty's Forces by Land, during
this present War, 1673. 1 s. 6 d.

Quarto.
Dr. Pell's Introduction to Algebra. 7 s.

Nich. Mercatoris Logarithmo-Technia, sive methodus construendi Logarithmos,
1668. and Iac. Gregorii Exercitationes Geometricae, 1668. 2 s.

Dr. Wallis Opera Mechanica. 22 s.

Love only for Love sake, a Dramatick Romance, by Sir Richard Fanshaw. 3 s. 6 d.

Mori Enchiridion Metaphysicum, 1671. 10 s.

Glisson de natura substantiae Energetica, 1672. 8 s.

Cumberland de Legibus Naturae contra Hobs. 7 s.

Snellii Typis Batavus, Lugd. Bat. 1624. 5 s.

Snellii Observat. Hussiacae. 5 s.

Petrus Paaw de Ossibus Amstelreod, 1633. 5 s.

Dr* Thomas Iacomb on the Eighth Chapter of the Romans. 8 s.

A Letter from a Gentleman of the Lord Howard's Retinue to his Friend in
London, Dated at Fez, Nov. 1. 1670. 6 d.

Octavo.
A Discourse of Local Motion, undertaking to demonstrate the Laws of Motion,
and withal to prove, that of the seven Rules delivered by Mr. Des Carts on
this Subject, he has mistaken Six: Englished out of French, 1671. 1 s.

The History of the late Revolution of the Empire of the Great Mogol, with a
Description of the Country, in two Volumes. 7 s.

The History of the Conquest of the Empire of China by the Tartars, 1671. 4 s.

Gualteri Needham, Disputatio Anatomica de Formato Foeru, 1667. 3 s. 6 d.

^xtorfius's Epitomy of his Hebrew Grammar Englished, by John Davis, 1658. 1 s.
6 d.

The Fortunate Fool, or the Life of the Dr. Cenudo, a Spanish Romance, 1670. 2
s.

The Adventures of Mr. T. S. an English Merchant, taken Prisoner by the Turks
of Argiers, with a Description of that Kingdom, and the Towns and Places
thereabouts, 1670. 1 s. 6 d.

Contemplations on Mortality, 1670. 1 s.

A Discourse written to a Learned Friar by Mr. Des Fourneillis, showing that
the Systeme of Mr. Des Carts, and particularly his Opinion concerning Brutes,
does contain nothing dangerous; and that all he has written of both, seems to
have been taken out of the first Chapter of Genesis: To which is annexed the
Systeme General of the Cartesian Philosophy. 1 s.

The Relation of a Voyage into Mauritania in Africa, by Roland Frejus of
Marseilles, by the French Kings Order, 1666. to Muley Arxid King of Taffaletta,
etc. with a Letter in answer to diverse Questions concerning their Religion,
Manners, etc. 1671. 1 s 6 d.

A Genuine Explication of the Visions in the Book of Revelation, by A. B.
Peganius, 1671. 2 s.

Prodromus to a Dissertation concerning Solids naturally contained within
Solids, laying a foundation for the rendering a rational account both of the
Frame and the several Changes of the Mass of the Earth, as also the various
Productions of the same. By Nich. Steno, 1671. 1 s. 3 d.

Basilius Valentinus, of Natural and Supernatural things; also of the first
Tincture, Root, and Spirit of Metals and Minerals, how the same are Conceived,
Generated, Brought forth, Changed, and Augmented: Whereunto is added Friar
Bacon of the Medicine or Tincture of Antimony, Mr. Iohn-Isaack Holland his Work
of Saturn, and Alexander Van Suchten of the Secrets of Antimony out of Dutch,
1671. 2 s.

The Poetical Histories, being a complete Collection of all the Stories
necessary for a perfect understanding of the Greek and Latin Poets and (...)
Ancient Authors, written Originally i^ (...), by the Learned Jesuit P.
Galtruchius (...) Englished and Enriched with Observation ^erning the Gods
worshipped by our Ance (...) in this Island, by the Phoenicians and Syrian in
Asia; with many useful Notes and occasiona Proverbs, gathered out of the best
Authors Unto which are added two Treatises; One o^ the Curiosities of Old Rome,
and of the difficul^ Names relating to the Affairs of that City; The other
containing the most remarkable Hieroglyphics of Egypt. The second Edition,
with Additions. By Marius D'Assigny, B. D. 3 s. 6.

An Essay about the Origin and Virtues of Gems, by the Honorable Robert
Boil. 1 s. 6 d.

Essays of the Strange Subtilty, Determinate Nature, and Great Efficacy of
Effluviums; to which are annexed, New Experiments to make Fire and Flame
ponderable; together with a Discovery of the Perviousness of Glass. By the
Honorable Robert Boil. 2 s. 6 d.

Twelves.
(...) Paradise of Delights, or an Elixir of Comforts offered to Believers, in
two Discourses, the first on Heb. 6. 17, 18. the second on Romans 8. 32. By
Robert Wine. 1 s.


