A LETTER FROM GILBERT BVRNET, D. D. TO Mr. SIMON LOWTH, Vicar of Cosmus-Blene
in the Diocese of Canterbury. Occasioned, by his late Book of the subject of
Church Power.
Reverend Sir,
I Know no other Address to you, but this of the Press, which I hope will find
you out: you have forced me to deal so publicly with you, by your beginning
with me; and, which is yet worse, by your refusing to give your own Eyes that
Satisfaction which I desired a neighboring Clergyman of yours to offer you.

When I saw your Letters to the two Deans, in which you accused the Dean of St.
Paul's for his copying out unfaithfully the Papers of Cranmer and the other
Deans, which he had published, and added, that I had also printed them
imperfect, and so had abused the House of Commons unto an approbation of my
History of the Reformation, (where by the way, I cannot imagine why you left
out the House of Lords, whose Approbation is printed with the other.) I
confess, I wondered upon what you could found so heavy a Charge: I printed no
Record in that Collection without comparing the Copies exactly with the
Original, for I thought that too important a thing to trust it to any Person
whatsoever: Therefore finding my self accused of a designed Fraud, which, if
true, must needs shake the credit of my whole Book; I did what I could to
prevent your bringing that Shame upon your self, which I do now unwillingly lay
on you, not so much for the support of my own Credit, as for maintaining the
Reputation of that Work. I therefore desired your Neighbor to tell you, that I
was sure I had printed all those Papers faithfully and exactly, without
departing from the Originals in any thing but the spelling: I added, that if
you thought fit to fall on any Discourse or Inference of mine, you might do as
you pleased, but if you accused me of Unfaithfulness, in publishing any of the
Papers that are in my Collection imperfect, I should be forced to justify my
self, tho to your cost: for in such Accusations a Man ought not to be over
patient. I bid him also tell you, that as I had printed those Papers exactly,
so if you had a mind to see the Originals themselves, I should procure them for
you: this was done many Months ago. He brought me an Answer from you, that I
could make nothing of; but now I see it in Print, and so I will examine it.

You say that if you may believe the Dean of Windsor, Dr. Durel, there is among
these Papers in Dr. Stillingfleet's MS. one of Dr. Leighton's, in which there
are two Assertions contrary to Cranmer's Opinion concerning Church Power, and
that Cranmer signed Dr. Leighton's Paper; from which he infers that Cranmer
changed his Mind, and subscribed to Leighton's Opinion; and of all this, you
say I have given no account to the World, but have omitted it in two
Impressions.

I would willingly believe the best of every Man, and make the best of all
things that I can, and therefore I should have imputed this to an extreme
carelessness in you; but since you have charged me so severely for
Unfaithfulness, and abusing the House of Commons in it, and since you refused
to accept of the Satisfaction which I had offered you, I must crave leave to
tell you (for it is a hard thing, and needs a Preface to soften it) that you
have accused me both uncharitably as to the manner of it, and unjustly as to
the matter: Since these very things that you say I have left out, are in my
Collection, taken verbatim from the Original, which will appear by my setting
down that which you cite from the Dean of Windsor, and that which is in my
Collection, over against one another.

There is indeed a variation in the Words, tho none in the Sense: mine is
exactly according to the Original: and the Variations of the Dean of Windsor
from it, tho they make no change in the Sense, yet are too many to be the
Mistakes of a Transcriber: therefore I am apt to think that as Dr. Durel writ
them out, he put them either in Latin or French, intending perhaps to make use
of them in one of these Tongues, and that afterward he translated them into
his own English when the Manuscript might be perhaps no more in his power to
copy them from the Original. The Reasonableness of this Conjecture will appear
from a view of the Words themselves, as he and I have published them; for I
have published all Leighton's Paper together with Cranmer's Subscription at the
end of it.

The Words that you cite from the Dean of Windsor, page 485. of your Book, l.
24. are these. The Words I have, Hist. Reform. vol. 1. Coll. Rec. Book 3. page
227. l. 36. are these. I suppose a Bishop according to Scripture, to have Power
from God as his Minister of creating a Presbyter; tho he ought not to promote
any to the Office of a Presbyter, or admit to any other Ecclesiastical Ministry
in a Commonwealth, unless the leave of the Prince be first had. But that any
other have Power according to Scripture I have neither read nor learned by
Example. 2. I suppose Consecration to be necessary as by imposition of hands,
for so we are taught by the Examples of the Apostles. I suppose that a Bishop
has Authority of God as his Minister by Scripture to make a Priest, but he
oug^t not to admit any Man to be Priest, and consecrate him, or to appoint him
to any Ministry in the Church without the Princes License and Consent in a
Christian Region. And that any other Man has Authority to make a Priest by
Scripture, I have not read, nor any Example thereof. And Page 230. l. 22. I
suppose that there is a Consecration required as by imposition of Hands, for so
we be taught by the Ensample of the Apostles.

And Page 243. l. 3. from the bottom, where Dr. Leighton's Subscription is set
down, there is set by it T. Cantuarien. Thus, Sir, you see you may believe the
Dean of Windsor, and believe this further, that you have slandered me falsely:
if there is any harshness in these Expressions, the things themselves draw them
from me, and your unaccountable Behavior in this matter has brought them on
you. I wish that instead of reading any other Books, you would read the Gospels
and Epistles more carefully; and before you venture to treat of such tender
points as Church Power, that you will learn to practice the Rules of Justice
and Christian Charity (not to speak of Prudence and common Discretion); and
then the Advices of your Friends will prevail more with you than your own
Heats: for tho you flatter your self so far as to fancy (as you began your
Preface) that there was a huged in and noise, Pannick almost and universal,
raised in London and elsewhere, for two full Years and upwards, occasioned by
your Treatise; I assure you I never heard of any; tho none, after the two
worthy Deans, were more concerned in it than I was; all that looked into it
(for I spoke with none that had quite read it) said it could hurt no body but
the Bookseller or your self: tho I have not heard that the Chancery ever gave
Equity against an Author for an unsaleable Book. Many wished for the Churches
sake, and for your own sake, that she might not suffer by so ill an Advocate,
and that you would not discharge your Spleen on two such eminent Men, whose
Works (as well as their Persons) will be had in Honor, long after both you and
your Book will be forgotten. You are indeed proud of the Honor of assaulting
two such Men, and tell the World that their Eminence was no small Motive to you
to undertake this Work, and give this modest account of your self ( Preface,
page 7. l. 22.) Does the King of Israel go out as against a Flea? I confess
this is a lofty Figure, and the Application of it to your self is somewhat
extraordinary. But there was a Roman Emperor that used to be shut up catching
Flies, and I am afraid some will think that since you will borrow a Figure from
a Crowned Head, this had become you better; but you have secured your self by
writing in a Style so unintelligible, that as I hear few read your Book, so I
am confident no body can understand it, and so to be sure they will not answer
it. Yet since you tell the World that here is a Course of Studies upon full
Thoughts and a thorough Consideration: you had best do as another Roman Emperor
did, write of your self, and illustrate your Book with Annotations, and I
suppose the Bookseller will take care that it shall only be to your self. You
tell us that your Book is born with a Beard, as the Jews say Esau was: it is
indeed hairy all over, and so rough is the shag, that it will not submit to the
Discipline of a Comb. I shall only offer to your Consideration, one Passage
which I hope you will not forget in your Annotations: it comes just after that
humble comparing of your self to the King of Israel, and I suppose your Spirits
were a little exalted upon so glorious a figure, and so you have risen above my
pitch. The words are remarkable: Nor do those of meaner Order and Qualily
undertake that Authority which is in it self none, falls of it self to the
ground, nor was ever influential upon any? This is but one of many, and is the
shortest I could pick out. I suppose you had a meaning when you writ it, tho
perhaps in the two full Years and upwards in which it stuck so that it is over
grown with Hair, you may have lost it. I shall conclude with two short Advices;
the first is* That if you intend to write any more, you will learn first to
write true English, and then to write good Sense: but I believe this will prove
so very hard a Task, that the best and easiest Advice can b^ given you, is,
that you will write none at all, but se^ about matters of a more close and
comfortable Importance in which I wish you better success than you are like t^
have by your Book, and am, notwithstanding the freedom with you,

Reverend Sir, Your most humble Servant. G. BURNET.
London, December the 20 th, 1684.
London: Printed for Richard Baldwin in the Old-Baily-Corner on Ludgate Hill,
1685.


