Four Discourses Delivered to the CLERGY OF THE Diocese of Sarum, CONCERNING

I. The Truth of the Christian Religion. II. The Divinity and Death of Christ.
III. The Infallibility and Authority of the Church. IV. The Obligations to
continue in the Communion of the Church.
By the Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, Lord Bishop of SARVM.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCIV.

Imprimatur,

JO. CANT.
Ian. 22. 1693/4.
TO THE CLERGY OF THE Diocese of Sarum.
My Reverend and dear Brethren,
THESE Discourses were at first prepared for you, and were delivered to you
among a great many more on other Subjects on several occasions: they were so
well received by you, that many of you desired that you might have them copied
out for a more lasting use. This has set me on publishing these that follow,
they relating to Four different sort of men with whom you may be engaged.

The first is against Atheists and Libertines, who grow to be so bold and
insolent, that it is of the last importance, that you should be well furnished
with Answers to those Objections with which they make the greatest noise. This
is the Pest of the Age we live in, the most dangerous as well as the most
contagious of all others: It strikes at all, and corrupts the whole Man, as
well as it dissolves all the bounds of Nature and Society. This promises such
an Indemnity, and gives so entire a liberty, that depraved Inclinations and
Affections will be always of its side; and it has some specious things to
allege, the Novelty and Boldness of which, makes them pass for Wit and Good
Humor, which will be always taking to those who want and desire supports and
excuses for sins, Upon all these accounts, and chiefly upon the fatal progress
which this Blasphemous Spirit of Infidelity has made among us, it becomes us to
consider these matters well, that we may be thoroughly acquainted with all those
depths of Satan, and know what to answer to all those false shows of Wit or
Reason, as wall as to the more petulant demands by which that profane Crew
study to undermine and beat down all Religion.

One of their common Topics, is the decrying all Mysteries; and in this they
fall in to the same opposition with the Socinians, tho upon very different
designs. For the Socinians run down all Mysteries, and think they can make it
appear, That those passages of Scripture by which they are commonly proved,
have another meaning; whereas Libertines do it, being persuaded that they are
indeed contained in the Scriptures; and therefore they hope that they will gain
their main end of decrying all Revealed Religion, if strong prejudices are once
formed against Mysteries; and yet they are at the same time considered as parts
of the Christian Religion, and are believed to be contained in the Scriptures.
I must also do this right to the Socinians, as to own that their Rules and
Morality are exact and severe; that they are generally men of Probity, Justice
and Charity, and seem to be very much in earnest in pressing the obligations to
very high degrees of Virtue. Yet their denying all secret Assistances, must cut
off the Exercises of many Devotions, that give a softness and tenderness to the
mind; which if once extinguished, it must of necessity draw after it a dry
flatness over all a man's thoughts and powers; their denying the certainty of
God's foreseeing all future events that depend upon the freedom of a man's
Will, must very much weaken our Confidence in God, our patience under all
misfortunes, and our expectations of a deliverance in due time. Their Notions
of another state, do also take off much of the terror under which Bad men ought
to be kept, and lessen the Ioys of Good men; On all these accounts, their
Opinions seem to have a great Influence upon practice; but with ^^lation to the
great Article of Christianity concerning the Person and sufferings of Jesus
Christ, their Doctrine gives so different a view of this Religion in its most
important Head, that either we have been guilty of a most Irreligious
profanation, in esteeming one to be God, and giving him all the
Acknowledgments and Adorations that belong to the Great and Eternal God, who
yet is a mere Creature; or they must be no less guilty, who if he be the Great
and the True God, do look on him only as a Creature, and yet offer him all
divine Honor and Worship: and if his Death was only a pattern, or any thing
else than a true propitiatory Sacrifice, then we who look on it as our
Propitiation and Redemption, who claim and trust to it, as our Ransom and
Atonement, do very impiously raise its value beyond the Truth, and fix our
Confidence, with relation to our Peace with God, upon a false foundation.
Whereas on the other hand, If God has set forth his death as a Propitiation for
the forgiveness of sin, then they are guilty of black Ingratitude, and of
defeating the chief design of the Gospel, who so far detract from its value, as
to reckon it only a pattern of dying, a confirmation of the Gospel, and
necessary preliminary to a Resurrection. Upon all these accounts it is that I
could never understand the Pacificatory Doctrines of those who think that these
are questions in which a diversity of Opinions may well be endured without
disturbing the Peace of the Church, or breaking Communion about them. They seem
to be the Fundamentals of Christianity, and therefore I thought it was very
necessary for me to give you a full and clear Instruction in this matter.

The 3d. Discourse relates to that upon which the whole Cause of Popery turns;
for if they are Infallib^e, it is to no purpose to dispute about any thing
else: and if they are fallible, their pretending to Infallibility, is of it
self a just prejudice against their whole Church, and against all their other
Doctrines, when they claim to so high an authority without good grounds. Since
therefore this is the most Important part of all our Controversies with that
Church, and since it is that to which they always turn themselves by which they
gain Prosclites, and est^blish their own Votaries, and set them out of the
reach of all Convistion, the understanding of this matter in its full extent,
seems to be a very necessary piece of study. We are apt upon a little Interval
of quiet to forget the practices of that Church; and because we do not think of
them, we may be apt to fancy that they think as little of us: but they do still
pursue their point with an unwearied diligence. They never give over, but when
one design fails, they either study to retrieve it, or to set another on foot,
with an Industry that ought to awaken us, and keep us always on our guard. The
Numbers of their Emis^aries are great and their Zeal is ever warm and active;
therefore we must never lose sight of them; and above all the other points of
Controversy, we must study to be most particularly conversant in this, and
expert at the management of it.

The Fourth Discourse relates to the various Bodies of the Dissenters among us,
and all the different grounds upon which they separate from us. The Toleration
that the Law gives them, does not alter the nature of things, nor make an
unjust Separation to be one whit the lawfuller than it was when they were under
a severe Yoke. The Law only gives a Civil Impunity, and does not punish: But
the Cause of the Separation is the same that it was, and is neither better nor
worse, whether the Separation is punished or not. They are now left to
themselves, and are so much the freer in their choice, the less restraint is
put upon them. Therefore it was never more seasonable than it is now, to set
the whole matter in a true light before all that may be concerned in it, that
they may weigh it the more impartially: And the less uneasy we seem to be, at
the ease which the Law gives them, we may have thereby the greater advantages
in endeavoring to bring them back to the Communion of the Church, by showing
both their obligations to it, and the weakness of those Reasons which have led
them to depart from it.

I think it is not necessary to say more, for justifying the choice that I have
made of these four Heads, as the first Essay that I offer you, of a great many
other Discouses, with which I have entertained you, when I have desired you to
meet in the sever^l parts and different Divisions of my Diocese: Some head of
Divinity being proposed as the Subject of a Conference, I have enlarged upon a
great many among you, and have laid bafore you all that my Studies and
Observation could suggest; and after that, have led you to discourse freely
upon it, This has seemed to me a proper method for awakening your Enquiries,
and for increasing your Knowledge: And those meetings have been so well kept by
you, and the Discourses so carefully attended to, that it has given me no small
encouragement to go on still in the same method, And as your thinking that you
have profited by my Labors, is a full and rich recompense, that does
abundently overbalance any pains they may put me to: So it is for your sake
that I do now publish these Discourses; and as they prove acceptable or useful
to you, I may, perhaps, publish others hereafter,

Certainly, next to a true sense of Divine Matters, and the inward belief and
impressions of Religion, Study, and a desire of useful knowledge, is that which
becomes our Profession the best. It is that which enables us both to understand
our business, and to do our duty. It is the noblest entertainment, and the best
preservative from idleness, and from all that dullness and weariness, all those
excesses and disorders that arise out of it. The mind will be always working,
and if we do not let it fly at nobler game, it will either sink into a
feebleness and stupidity, or look out for such Diversions as do offer
themselves, without a scrupulous regard to their unsuitableness to our
Caracter. These draw men down to a vicious familiarity with bad men, and do
fatally engage many to share with them in bad practices: either they make us
much the worse, or at the least we seem to be so to others, when we thou away
much of our time in levities, which do often end in gross Immoralities. In
which the World will be apt to give us a large share, often without a pretense,
but to be sure, if there is the least shadow for it, the chief part of the
blame will be cast on us. Nor will it be easy for us to be blameless, and
without rebuke, unless we maintain the other part of the Character given by St.
Paul, that as becomes the sons of God, We shine as lights in the world. And I
may well conclude, That a serious application to study, is the best fence, both
of the Probity, and of the Reputation of a Clergyman: It both teaches himself
all the parts of his duty, and creates to him that esteem which is necessary to
support him in the discharge of it.

And therefore, my dear Brethren, I do with all possible Earnestness call upon
you, to study to maintain the high Reputation for Learning, of which the Clergy
of this Church has been so long possessed; and to give your selves time and
leisure to peruse and digest the Learned Productions of those Great Men among
us; and not to be proud, or to boast that we belong to a Body that has produced
Men so deservedly admired, both by Friends and Enemies, while we our selves are
so little like them, that we are not a whit the wiser or the learneder for all
that they have left us. Some hours every day well placed would soon bring us
under such habits, that it would not be easy, if possible, for us to live out
of all commerce with Learning, and the learned World. I know the unhappy state
of many depauperated Benefices, puts it out of the Incumbent's power to furnish
themselves with Books; as much as their narrow Circumstances indispose them for
making use of them, if they had them. This is a crying grievance, and looks too
like a scorn put on the Gospel, when those who Minister in Spiritual things are
so slenderly supplied in Temporals, that nothing but extreme Necessity can
induce Men to serve in such Cures, who are put to wrestle still with the same
necessity, especially if they have Families that grow upon them. But as we have
at present just Grounds to hope, and to give you cause likewise to hope, that
if God blesses us with calm and settled times, effectual Remedies should be
found out to that great misery, under which many of you languish, which must
needs give very sad and afflicting thoughts to those who observe it, and who
ought to watch over you, and to take care of you; so the best method to move
our Princes, and to dispose the Nation to take pity on you, is for you to take
heed to your selves, and to the Flocks that are committed to you; to follow
your Studies and your Labors more diligently, and to raise your own Character
by your Exemplary Lives, and the painful discharge of your Duties. This, and
this only, will draw down the blessings of Heaven upon your Persons, and your
Labors; this will make your very Enemies to be at Peace with you, and will
force those who do now despise you, to esteem you, and to count you worthy of
double Honor, of a larger and easier subsistence.

I will employ the rest of this Discourse in pressing upon you one great part
of your duty, in which, as I am glad that so many among you set a good Example
to their Brethren, so I do earnestly wish that all the rest may follow it: It
is, To express an affectionate and hearty zeal for their Majesty's, and their
Government; and to endeavor to keep your People always in mind of the extreme
Miseries, as well as of the visible Dangers of Popery and Tyranny. This must
still be remembered as a lasting honor to this Church, That some years ago,
there was in a day of Trial, so noble an Opposition given to that Religion, and
the steps that were then made to bring it in upon us. We are still in the
struggle, and are strangely mistaken, if we imagine the Danger is past. We
plainly see the Clouds return after the Rain; and a Relapse into that State
would make the latter end much worse than the beginning: The Hope which then
supported, and afterward delivered us, would no more soften our Miseries with
the prospect of better Times. The Rage, as well as the Power of our Enemies,
would be much increased; and there is no doubt to be made, but that those who
have no Religion, whose numbers, God knows, do swell vastly, would hope to
atone for all that has been done with the change of their No-Religion, for that
to which their Interest should lead them. And if ever God, for our great and
crying Sins, is provoked to visit us in so terrible a manner; we, who have been
hitherto the most favored of all the Churches of God, must become the most
miserable. Whither can we fly for shelter, or where can we promise our selves
either Retreat or Relief?

The prospect of such a Calamity seems to be one of the blackest of all that
has been since the World begun; and yet how tamely do many look for it; while
others with a fury that is as much without bounds, as it is without sense, are
endeavoring to bring on that Evil Day; to make the Nation grow weary of its
Deliverance and present Quiet, and return back into Egypt. While they spread so
many False Reports, with a Spite that is as restless as it is insolent; shall
we at such a time stand as neutral, and unconcerned, while all is at stake?
Shall it be said, That whereas some years ago, during the Debates concerning
the Exclusion, we sided so openly, and with a Zeal that showed it self on all
occasions, and in Instances which were better forgotten than remembered; yet now
when all that can concern us, either as we are Men, and Englishmen, or as we
are Christians, and the Ministers of the Church of England, is in such eminent
danger, we seem to let all Parties fight it out the best they can, while we
only do what is enjoined, and express neither affection nor zeal.

I will not offer to say any thing to convince you of the Lawfulness of the
present Constitution: For I cannot admit so bad a thought of any of you, as to
imagine that you could take the Oaths, and continue to perform Divine Offices,
Ordinary and Extraordinary, unless you were fully satisfied in your Consciences
concerning the Lawfulness both of the one and of the other. This is so black an
Imputation, to suppose that Men of common Probity, not to say, Men that ought
to be the Paterns, as well as the Instructers of others, should swear an Oath
and adhere so long to it, which is an interpretative renewing of it, ever till
it is openly retracted, and should in those frequent returns of daily Prayers,
besides the special Offices of Fasts and Thanksgiving-days, offer up Devotions
to God contrary to their Persuasions, that no man is capable of so heinous, and
so continued a Prevarication, unless he is either a determinate Atheist, or a
man of a seared and hardened Conscience. Now as this is of so odious a nature,
that indeed it is not easy to find words severe enough to set it out by; so
supposing men once convinced of the Lawfulness of our present Situation, it is
very extraordinary if they are cold and unconcerned in a Point, which when it
is once yielded to be lawful, is unquestionably of the greatest importance and
consequence possible.

If Liberty and Religion are valuable things; and if they are not, what is
valuable? If the maintaining the Purity of the Christian Religion, free from
Idolatry and Superstition, from Imposture and Cruelty; if the maintaining a
Church that without partiality, is to be preferred to any Church now in the
World; and if the keeping out of a Religion, which is without partiality the
worst of any that carries the Name of Christ; If the preserving a Government
that is just and mild, that is guided by Law, and that maintains Property, and
that leaves Mankind to all the Liberties of a freeborn Nature, and of a well
Constituted Society: And if the withstanding an absolute and Despotical, an
Arbitrary and Violent Tyranny, that tramples on all thing Sacred and Human,
that oppresses Liberty, and destroys Property, and that makes men Slaves, and
treats them as brute Beasts; If, I say, all these things are well weighed, then
we must conclude, That we owe the utmost degrees of affection and zeal to Their
Majesty's, and to Their Government: We ought to make all our People sensible,
both of the Happiness that we do now enjoy, and of the Miseries that we are
preserved from, by Their means, and under Their Protection. We ought to set
Popery and Slavery before them in their true Colors, with all the light and
life that we can give them: We ought to set our selves against those false
Brethren, that pretend they are of the Church of England, but are not; and are
of the Synagogue of Satan, which in its strict notion signifying an Adversary,
we may without any breach of Charity affirm, that they associate themselves to
the Enemy of our Nation, and of our Religion; whose Person, Government, Forces
and Successes, they are always magnifying, on design to intimidate such as can
be wrought on by their false Surmises. These things we ought to repress and
oppose on all occasions with the Spirit and Courage that such matter require.

It is Stupidity and not Patience to be cold and lukewarm, while England and
the Protestant Religion are in the last struggles whether they must live or
die. If God does not bless so good a Cause in all the steps it makes, with the
Success that we ought to desire and pray for; we should teach our people not to
murmur, nor aggravate matters, not to sink or despond, but to consider how much
our sins have provoked God's Wrath, how small a share we bear of those
devouring Calamities that have ruined so great a part of Europe; while we only
bear the Charge, but feel few of the Miseries of War. If some years are less
prosperous than others have been, we ought to reflect on former Successes, and
the ill use that we have made of them, which may have provoked God to change
his methods: and yet take all together, it must be acknowledged, that we have
had of late more public Blessings and fewer Misfortunes, than any Nation under
Heaven. Can one reflect on the Blasphemy and Infidelity, the dissolution of all
good Morals, and the Impieties and Vices of all sorts that are among us, and
not wonder rather, that we have not been made a scene of Earthquakes and Ruins,
as Sicily, Malta and Jamaica have of late been. It is to these sins that we
ought to turn the minds of our people, when they are at any time dejected with
ill success; we ought to call upon them to repent of, and to reform their ways:
and when that is done, or even set about, we may then hope that God will change
his methods toward us; and continue his Gospel among us, together with the
Blessings of a Just and Wise Government, and of Peace and Plenty.

These are Subjects on which we ought to dwell much, and Preach often. But that
I may not dismiss this matter, without any thing that looks like an Argument; I
will open to you two great Precedents, which you have often heard me enlarge on
with much seeming satisfaction: and because you have thought that I laid them
out in a more particular manner, than you had otherwise met with them; I will
now spread them out before you: and that the rather, because Arguments from
Examples, and authorized practices, have upon many Accounts a stronger
Influence, than general reasonings. Matters of Fact are easier apprehended, and
more capable of full proof, than points of speculation; which do more easily
bend to any turn, that a Man of Wit may give them, than mere Facts, which are
stubborn and sullen.

The first of these is taken from the History of the Maccabees, which I desire
you will consider by these steps. That the Jews became the Subjects of the
Kings of Babylon by the Entire Conquest which Nebuchadnezzar made of that
Nation; that after the end of 70 Years, they continued to be subject to Cyrus,
who tho he sent them back to rebuild their Temple, and tho his Successors
suffered them both to finish that, and to rebuild and enclose Jerusalem, yet
they continued still to be the Subjects of the Kings of Persia; this was
transferred to Alexander the Great, when he conquered that Empire: And finally,
they fell to the share of the Kings of Syria, and were their Subjects above 140
Years. They proved hard Masters to them: Antiochus Epiphanes robbed the Temple
in the 143 Year of the Seleucida; a great Massacre followed; 1 Macc. 1.20, 24,
25.
but these were particular Acts of Tyranny; and so tho there was great mourning
upon this, yet it was submitted to: For certainly the Peace of Mankind, and the
Order of the World require, that special acts of malversation, and even of
Trranny, should be born, rather than that we should shake an established
Constitution: But in the year 145. he went on to a total Subversion of their
Religion, by an Edict which required that they should forsake their Law, V. 41.
V. 54. V. 57.
and become one People with him: In pursuance os which, the Altar at Jerusalem
was defiled; Idolatrous Altars were set up in all their Cities, and every Man
was to be put to Death that still adhered to the Law of Moses. Here then were
Subjects brought under a general Sentence of Death, unless they should depart
from the Laws of God: special Oppressions and violent Acts of Cruelty were
submitted to; but when they saw themselves involved all in the same common
fate, they defended themselves.

Mattathias not only refused to join in the Idolatry that they had set up, but
killed both him that went to offer the Sacrifice and likewise the King's
Commissioner; upon which the Historian adds this Reflection, Thus dealt he
zealously for the Law of God, like Pianehas; he a nimated his Children to
follow his Example, 2 chapter 24, 25. V. 26.
and to trust in God; but he vouched no immediate warrant that he had from God:
He charged his Children to be zealous for the Law, and to give their Lives for
the Covenant of their Fathers; to be valiant, and to show th^mselves Men in
behalf of it, V. 50. V, 64. V. 67, 68.
for by it you shall obtain glory; and he ordered them to take unto them all
that observed the Law, and to revenge the wrong of their People; to Recompense
fully the Heathen, and to take heed to the Commandment of the Law. Upon this
followed the Wars of the Maccabees, in which they never pretended to any
special Authority from any Prophet: On the contrary, their History tells us,
That they laid up the Stones of the Altar, that had been profaned by Idolatry,
in a convenient place, till a Prophet should come to show what should be done
with them. 4 Macc. 46.
Thus then we see Subjects defend themselves against their Prince, when he
designed a total Subversion of their Religion: and for this they vouched no
immediate nor extraordinary Authority.

But to give this Argument its entire force, We must next see upon what reason
we may conclude, that this was a justifiable, and by consequence an imitable
Action. As for this, tho I think it is scarce necessary to enlarge much on an
Apology for the Maccabees, their Wars having born such a venerable sound in a
course of so many Ages; 11 Dan. 31, 32, 33, 34.
yet to pursue the matter fully, we find a Prophesy concerning them in Daniel,
which is by all Commentators Ancient and Modern, applied to them, that alone
seems to import a full Justification of them; after mention is made of a King
that should defile the Sanctuary, and take away the daily Sacrifice, and set
upon it the abomination that makes desolate; to that, this is added, and such
as do wickedly against the Covenant, shall he corrupt by flatteries: but the
People that do know their God, shall be strong, and do exploits. And they that
understand among the People, shall instruct many; yet they shall fall by the
Sword, and by flame* by captivity, and by spoil many days: And when they shall
fall, they shall be helped with a little help; but many shall cleave to them
with flatteries. As these words import a plain Prodiction, in terms of
approbation of the Wars of the Maccabees, so all the Commentators that I have
yet seen, without exception, do apply them to them

There are also many Commentators who do apply likewise to them, those words of
the Epistle to the Hebrews, Who out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant
in fight, and turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens: 11 Heb. 34.
And there is a particular resemblance observed between these words, and some
Phrases that occur in the Books of the Maccabees: Yet I confess those words are
not so express as the former, nor are they so Universally expounded in this
sense. But to conclude this matter, The Authority of those Books, as it is an
Argument of full force against those who acknowledge them to be Canonical; so
since by the Articles of our Church, these Books are to be read for example of
Life, and for the Instruction of manners; tho it does not apply them to
establish any Doctrine; Art. 6.
and since we read so many Lessons taken out of the Apocrypha: These must be
acknowledged to be Books of great, tho not of Divine Authority. And tho
according to the Article of our Church, the arguing from any one passage in
them is not to be allowed; yet if Subjects standing on their own defense, in
the case of a total Subversion, is to be esteemed Rebellion, then we bind up
with our Bibles, and recommend to our People, two Books that set out a History
with great pomp, and with an Air of much Piety, which was no other than a down
right Rebellion.

To this, the only answer that I have ever yet seen made, is, That the Jewish
Dispensation being founded on Temporal Promises, whereas the Christian Religion
is a Doctrine of the Cross, things of this kind might have been Lawful among
them, tho they are not so to us: and that the rather, because by a Practice
that was authorized, from the Example of Phinehas, and the praise given him for
it, private Men might among the Jews, when the Magistrate was remiss, fall upon
Offenders, and punish them, especially in the case of Idolatry. This is all
that seems to be offered with any color of Reason, to take off the Argument
from the practice of the Maccabees: and therefore the considering and stating
it aright, will determine the whole matter. First, then, The true Arguments
against Resistance being drawn from the Magistrates having the Sword from God,
together with all the Topics that belong to that head, they are equally
obligatory to all Nations, and all Religions; it being no part of any special
Doctrine delivered in the New Testament, but arising from the Attributes of
God, and the Peace and Order of the World, which did bind Jews as well as
Christians: tho there are indeed Specialties in the Christian Religion, that do
enforce this the more, and aggravate the transgression of it more apparently.
So that if Subjects defending themselves in the case of a Total Subversion, (it
must ever be remembered, that I am now only arguing upon this Supposition) is
the sin of Rebellion, it was a sin to the Jews, to the Maccabees in particular,
as well as it is a sin to Christians. As for that of the Zealots, tho at first
appearance it seems to be of some force, yet when examined it will be found to
have very little in it. If we consider the first Authorities for Zealots, we
shall find, that the Jews stretched this matter beyond all bounds; so that to
their mistakes about it, they owed a great part of their last fatal Miseries,
which ended in their ruin. This matter has been also too implicitly taken by
many Christian Writers from them. The first beginning of Zealotism was in the
Instance of Phinehas his killing Zimri and Cosbi; but before this was done,
Moses, 25 Number. 5.
who was the chief Ruler, did command all the Judges of Israel, that every one
should slay his men that were joined to Baal-Peor. Phinehas was one of these
Judges; 3 Number. 32. 20 Number. 28.
for as Eleazar had been set over the Tribe of Levi when his Father was
High Priest, so Aaron being dead at this time, and Eleazar made High Priest in
his stead, Phinehas was now over the Tribe of Levi; and thus Moses Command was
in particular directed to him; therefore though the Zeal with which he executed
it, was highly acceptable to God, yet it was exactly Regular, since Moses had
given a general Order for it.

After this followed some Instances of Men eminently authorized by God, by the
Gifts of Prophecy and Miracles, who did in some Cases punish Idolaters; such
was Samuel's hewing Agag in pieces, in execution of the Divine Command; and
Elijah's ordering all the Priests of Baal to be killed, 1 Samuel 15.33.
after he had by an astonishing Miracle proved that Jehovah was the true God,
and that he was his Prophet. This was suitable to their Dispensation, which
being a Theocracy, 1 Kings 18.40.
an authorized Prophet might well have entered upon the Functions of the
Magistrate, when the King himself was in fault, and the Law was openly
profaned. Upon the same grounds our Savior, after his Miracles had openly
declared that he was sent of God, did whip the Buyers and Sellers out of the
Temple, when they had profaned the Court of the Gentiles, and had made that
House of Prayer a Den of Thieves. 21 Mat. 13.


Thus it is plain, That none of the Presidents from the Zealots of the Old
Testament, could justify private Men, such as Mattathias and his Children, to
do any thing that was of it felf irregular and unlawful. Phinehas his practice
was a Precedent for acting in the matters of their Law with much spirit and
courage, but it could not justify any man who should presume to do that, which
was not otherwise lawful for him to do; and though the Spirit of the Christian
Religion is very different from the Spirit by which Elijah and other Prophets
under the Old Testament were acted; 9 Luke 55, 56.
as our Savior told his Disciples, particularly in this, that whereas in the
one, Prophets did immediately by Miracles, or otherwise, punish some Offenders;
in the other, all was to be managed with a Spirit of Gentleness and Charity;
yet after all, the lasting Rules of Morality and Human Society, were the same
then that they are now.

This Instance, I think, does fully justify those who, seeing a total
Subversion of our Religion so far advanced, that the Pope's Authority was
publicly owned, and that all the Laws that secured it, were declared to be
under a Dispensing Power, which was in it self a total Subversion of our
Constitution, did think it lawful to accept of a Deliverance, to concur in it,
and to assist toward it.

The other Instance is taken from the first beginnings of Christianity's being
the Legal and Authorized Religion of the Roman Empire; and from the first
Council that is esteemed General, where a Precedent is laid down, that is, no
less full for justifying those who tho they did not concur in procuring our
Deliverance, yet have since closed in it, with all humble Gratitude and
Obedience to those whom God made the Instruments in so great a Work.

After Constantine and Licinius had given out those Edicts at Milan, by which
the Christians had full liberty both for their Belief and Worship, and had all
the Rights and Immunities of other Corporations granted them, Licinius being
still in his heart an Enemy to that Religion, Eus. Chron Theoph. Anonim. Vales.
began in the Year 319, to persecute the Christians: He durst not, for fear of
Constantine, fall upon them openly; but his Intentions being well understood by
his Ministers, the Governors of the Provinces committed in many places great
Cruelties. He likewise turned the Christians first out of his Houshoud, and
next out of all his Armies. He made a Law against relieving such as were in
Prison, Eus. l. 10. c. 8.
by which those who relieved them were to be punished as Accomplices of their
Crimes. He apprehending that most of the Bishops wished well to Constantine, and
that in their hearts they were set against himself, went on by degrees in his
design against them, Eus. de Vit. Con. l. 1. c. 5. c 53.
he by one Edict, forbade the Bishops to meet together, or to meddle with the
Concerns of one another's Churches. By another, he designed to expose them to
Scandal and Scorn. He forbade Men and Women to meet together to worship God, or
Bishops to visit Women; or Women to come to be instructed in their Schools; and
appointed that Women only should instruct Women. He also forbade their holding
Assemblies within Cities, and ordered them to meet in the open Fields. Some
Churches were pulled down by his Orders, Eus. l. 10. c. 8.
and others were shut up; and his first Successes made him resolve on a general
Persecution: For not only Eusebius, but both Socrates, Sozemen, De vit. Con, l.
2. c. 2. cap. 3.
and several other Writers, do all affirm, That there was no general
Persecution begun, but that there were visible steps made toward it. When all
this was represented to Constantine, he was much affected with it; and resolved
to help the oppressed, and thought it was a pious and holy Action to save a
mulitude, by the destroying of one Person: For he saw no other way was left to
relieve the Oppressed; (...).
and his engaging in a War with Licinius, was by the Bishops of the East, that
is, Licinius's own Subjects, ascribed to an immediate Conduct and Providence of
God. Eus. l. 10. c. 8.
It is true, Eutropius puts this upon Constantine's Ambition, and his aspiring
to be the single Monarch of the World: This is also insinuated by Aurelius
Victor, Lib. 10. Principatum totius Orbis affectans.
and more fully set out by Zosimus; whose hatred both of Constantine, and of
the Christian Religion, breaks out into so many Partialities, unbecoming an
Historian, and engages him into so many Stories that are evidently false, that
little regard is due to any thing he says.

I will not enlarge upon the War that followed, only I must observe, that tho
Constantine as the Senior Emperor, had the precedence of Licinius; yet he had
no sort of Authority over him: So here two Princes, both equally Sovereigns of
the Roman Empire, Colleagues and Brothers-in-Law, for Licinius had married
Constantine's Sister, were engaged in a War: the quarrel was not a general
persecution; but such steps made, as did plainly discover there was one
intended. A Peace soon after followed. The Cement of it was, The declaring
Licinius's Son Licinian Caesar, who was then 21 years of Age; this put him in
the Succession. But a second Rupture followed quickly after that. Licinius's
hatred to the Christians being rather increased than abated, since he observed
that they all loved Constantine; This proved fatal to Licinius, for he was
totally defeated at Andrianople the 3d of July 324. and after some fruitless
Attempts, he was forced to put himself in Constantines hand, on the 18th. of
September following. Whereupon he was sent to live a private man at
Thessalonica: but Constantine understanding that he could not rest, ordered him
to be put to death, in the beginning of the Year 325. Now we are in the next
place to see what was the sense of the whole Church, of this Transaction: I
confess we ought not to take it singly from Eusebius, for he is rather a
perpetual Encomiast of Constantine, than his Historian, but we have a much more
certain and Authentical Authority for this: Constantine in the same year in
which he had put Licinius to death, and had taken no notice of Lucinian, tho
but a year before made Caesar by his own Act, called the first General Council
to meet at Nice: Eus. Vit. Constable. l, 3 c. 12.
For in his Speech to them, he tells them, that he had given Orders to call
them together, as soon as he had overcome the Tyranny. The Council made no
Exceptions to Constantine as an Invader; they did neither enquire after
Lucinian, nor complain of Licinius's Fate: On the contrary, When Constantine
came in and harangned them, Eustathius of Antioch did entertain him with a
Panegyric, full of high Commendations; and another seems to have been made by
Eusebius, blessing Almighty God upon his account; which Speeches pronounced in
full Council, Theod. l. 7 De Vit. Constable. l. 3 c. 11.
are at least a strong Presumption, that they all approved of the War, and
rejoiced in i^ the deliverance. This is yet more evident from the 11th. Canon
of the Council, in which they reflect upon the late Tyranny of Licinius, which
shows that tho his death, and the ruin of his Family, must have naturally given
some Compassion for one that was then scarce cold, and that had so lately been
their Prince: for almost that whole Council consisted of those who had been the
Bishops in his share of the Empire; yet they considered the danger they and
their Religion had been in under him, and their deliverance by Constantine, as
vastly superior to their Ties to him; so that there was an Universal Joy over
the whole East upon the Successes of Constantine.

The having adhered to Licinius, and taking part with him in the War, tho he
was then actually their Prince, was a matter of such Scandal and Infamy, that
Constantine in a Letter which he writ to the Nicomedians against Ensebius their
Bishop, Theod. l. 1. c. 20.
reproaches him with this, That he had been always in Licinius's Councils and
Secrets, that he had all along stuck to him, and had treated himself with
Reproach; that he had employed Spies to procure Intelligence to Licinius, and
that he had given him all sort of Assistance, except the bearing of Arms for
him: all which Constantine affirms he is ready to prove, by some Priest and
Deacons who had adhered to Eusebius, and whom he had taken Prisoners. And thus
we see what the sense of the whole Church in one of its best Ages, and of the
first General Council, was of a Deliverance procured by one Sovereign Prince's
attacking, dethroning, and possessing himself of the Empire of another, who had
not yet set on foot a General Persecution, but had only violated the Laws,
which the Christians, had for the security of their Religion, had committed
many Acts of Injustice and violence against them; and had declared his
Intentions so visibly, that there was all possible reason to conclude that a
General Persecution was coming on. Not a Bishop, nor a Priest, stood out
against Constantine; not so much as a private Christian was of Licinius's
Party: All went into the Revolution, and rejoiced in their Deliverance,

I will not go on to show how parallel that Case was to ours; the attempt were
as needless, as it might seem invidious: Only I may well conclude, That it is
not easy to imagine how we can be better assured of the sense of the whole
Church in any point, then we are of the sense of the Christians of that Age, in
this particular.

I have not said any thing to justify my putting Constantine's prevail^ing over
Licinius in the Year immediately before the Council of Nice, tho Baronius puts
it six before it. But it is visible that he has disordered the whole History of
Constantine, on design to maintain his being baptized at Rome, with other
unjustifiable things; besides that, Eusebius's Chronology in this particular,
as it is of authority of it self, without any other support, so it is fully
confirmed by the dates of some Laws in the Code, and several other
Circumstances.

It should be hoped that so great and so plain a Precedent should conclude
those who have made the Primitive Church their Pattern; and who have always
reckoned this one of the special Glories of the Church of England, that she
built upon, and conformed her self to the first Ages of Christianity. I have
now opened these two Precedents very particularly to you; they seemed to weigh
much with you when I have laid them out to you in some Conferences that I have
held with you upon this Subject. I hope you will both feel the force that is in
them, and and will be able to manage them with more advantage now that you have
them lying before you.

To conclude all. I do charge you by all the Authority I have over you, and
beseech you by all the Interest that I have in you, to set your selves wholly
to your Studies and Labors; to be earnest in Prayer, to continue in it, and to
join fasting with it: Search the Scriptures diligently, give your selves to
reading and meditation, and be you wholly in them; that so your profiting may
appear unto all men; and watch over the Flock committed to your charge: Be
instant in season, and out of season; to instruct, admonish, exhort and
reprove; and by so doing, you shall both save yourselves, and them that hear
you: In doing these things, you shall always have the most constant Assistance,
and the most earnest Prayers of,

My Reverend and Dear Brethren, Your most Affectionate Brother, and Humble
Servant in the Lord, G. SARUM.
8. December. 1693.
PART I. Concerning the TRUTH OF THE Christian Religion.
THERE is not any one thing that we ought to enquire into with so peculiar
exactness, as the Truth of that Religion which we believe; nor is there any
thing in which we ought to be so conversant, and to which we should be so well
prepared, as to defend this great Argument, the Foundation of our Faith and
Hope. It is a very preposterous way of Study to be able to argue about the
retail of our Religion; I mean the particular Doctrines of it, and the
subdivisions into which it is broken, and not to know how to maintain it in
gross; when the truth of it is called in question, either in the petulant way
of profane Liberty, or with the subtilties of Philosophy and Criticism. We may
have to do with both in the Age in which we live.

The Divisions among Christians have made the World conclude, that they had a
right to prove all things, that so they may know how to hold fast that which is
good. The Enthusiasms and Hypocrisies of some, and the Looseness and Disorders
among others; the superstitious magnifying of small matters, and the contending
eagerly for them, while the greater, as well as the more useful and more
uncontroverted Rules have been too visibly and generally neglected; have
furnished them with prejudices, that must be confessed to be but too specious
and plausible: And I wish some of us may not have contributed, to make many
think we are scarce in earnest in arguing for the Truth of our Religion, while
our Lives do but too openly testify, that we do not firmly believe our own
Arguments.

The great Author of our Religion has left this woe upon the World, that
offenses must come; and the heaviest part of that woe will certainly fall upon
those by whom they come. But when we are enquiring into so Important a Matter,
it certainly becomes us to free our Minds from Prejudices as much as we can:
And neither to suffer our selves to be possessed by the first Impressions that
Education made upon us, nor by our present Stations and Engagements on the one
hand; nor to be led away by the fury of our Appetites and Passions, and the bad
Examples that the World abounds in on the other hand: That so we may more
freely search after Truth, and both find it out, and follow it.

As a Preamble to what is to come afterward, let us look into our Natures, and
see if we do not feel a Principle within us that both thinks and acts freely,
which is totally different from matter, which neither thinks nor chooses. This
Principle then feels that its thoughts do direct its freedom in all that it
does, and therefore is capable of good or evil, of reward and punishment. The
more distinctly that it thinks, and the more exactly that it follows those
Truths which by thinking it discovers, it feels it self become the more
perfect; the more that it can resist all the Impressions which arise either
from the constitution of the Body, or from outward Objects and Accidents, it
grows to enjoy a perfecter calm within, and is enabled to go through the
fatigues and chances of Life with much more ease and patience. The more it
resists the furious cravings of the Body, it enjoys a longer life, and
perfecter health. There is also a Chain of Rules which arise out of these two
Qualities, that in the opinion of all Mankind are the best our Nature is
capable of, which are Veracity and Goodness, which render all the Societies of
Men both safe and happy: They establish a confidence, and maintain an
intercourse in the World; they give credit, and draw esteem; they endear Men to
one another, and make all the Ties, and the whole Neighborhood and Commerce of
Life firm and useful: And there is also a train of thoughts which run through a
Man's mind and life, which makes him live with great advantage, and die with
much firmness; which give him much courage, and attract much esteem: These are
all things that a Man may safely affirm, since none question them; and as no
Man who sees the constant mirth in which some in Bedlam do pass their days,
will be from thence tempted to think that they are truly happy; so the mad
frolic in which some Libertines waste both their Bodies and Minds, their Lives
and Fortunes, has never imposed so far on the World, as to make Men so much as
to doubt, whether it were better to be as they are, or to be good and wise,
calm and sober.

This then being laid down, it is a great step made in favor of any Religion,
if it does exactly quadrat with it all: If the Principles that it contains, and
the Rules that it prescribes, are so much of a piece with this, that they do
both improve and fortify it. This does not prove it to be true indeed, but it
renders it probable; it makes us inclined to believe, or at least to wish it to
be true. The thoughts of a Supreme Being, who made and preserves all things,
who is everywhere, and can do whatsoever he pleases, raise vast Idea's in us,
and give a sort of opening and enlargement to our Powers: The sense of his
knowing all things, begets a composure, and creates an awe; the persuasion of
his governing the World, gives a quiet, when we know, that as Infinite Power
cannot be withstood, so Sovereign Wisdom cannot be mistaken: Nothing can have
such influence, both on our Lives, and in our Death, as the Belief of another
World, and of the Account that is to be made after Death: Nothing strikes the
hatred of Sin, or the obligations to Virtue deeper, than the whole Theory of
the Death and Sufferings of Christ. The Rules given in the Gospel to all the
Orders of Men, and in all the Relations of Life, would make all Families and
Societies both easy and happy; the obligation to strict justice to all others,
and to an abatement of what in justice we might demand from others, by doing as
we would be done by: The Rules of not only passing by, and forgiving Injuries,
but of loving Enemies, and doing good for evil; the tenderness, as well as the
extent of our charity, the measures and manner of our bounty to the Poor, the
modesty of deportment, the condescending gentleness, as well as the unaffected
humility that are enjoined, have all such Characters in them, so suited to our
Faculties, and to Human Society; to the calm of a man's mind, as well as to the
comforts of his life, to fortify him against misfortunes, and to support him
against the feebleness and frailties of his Nature; that he who will suffer
himself to weigh all this carefully, must feel a strong disposition to believe
a Religion to be true, that agrees with the highest thoughts that we can have
of God, and the best Seeds or Principles that we feel within our selves.

All this receives a vast accesfion from the simplicity of the Worship
prescribed by it, which consists chiefly in the exercise of the sublimest
thoughts that we can entertain of God, and the justest that we ought to have of
our selves; all which are to be expressed in the most genuine and simplest
manner possible, with the fewest, but the plainest and most significant Rites.
Thus a great advance is made, when a Man can be induced to lay all these things
together. The whole moral and practical part of Christianity, together with the
modesty and reasonableness of its Worship, are great Inducements, if not
Arguments, to believe all the rest of it: And this will appear the more
sensibly, if one sets by it the Idolatry and Magic, the Cruelties and
Brutalities that have defiled the whole Gentile World, either as we find them
anciently, even among the Politest Nations of Greece and Rome; and as they
continue to this day in so great a part of the World, which lies still under
the darkness of Paganism, according to the Descriptions that Navigators and
Travelers have given us.

Here is the first foundation to be laid: To this is to be added, That a Nation
which hates our Religion, does yet retain many Books that give a vast strength
to it; and so much the greater, as they (the Jews I mean) have preserved those
Books with great care. It was a remarkable step, when those Books were put in a
Language of greater extent, and more certainly understood, than that in which
they were first writ; and that long before our Religion appeared, which was
done by the Men of that Nation. That Translation was received, and long used by
them, which prevented endless Disputes that must have otherwise arisen in the
beginnings of Christianity, concerning the true rendering of many Passages in
them, which relate to an extraordinary Person, that was to be sent to them, and
was looked for by them, under the name of the Messiah: For the Hebrew Language,
as it was little known, so it was capable of such different Readings and
Interpretations, that if the matter had not been settled before by an
Authentical and Authorized Translation, it does not well appear how it could
have been done. A Christian would not have had credit enough, nor a Jew honesty
enough, to have given a Work of this kind, in which the World would have
acquiesced. Now in these Books, as there are some Predictions that seem looser
and more general, such as those concerning the Seed of the Woman, the Seed of
Abraham, and the Issue of David; so some, chiefly of the later Prophets, fixed
upon a period of time, as that he should come during the Second Temple, and
within a limited course of Years; and that he should be cut off, but that
afterward the City and Sanctuary should be destroyed: That Desolations were
determined till the War should be at an end. 9. Dan. 24, 25, 26, 27.
Now, without entering into the exact adjusting of the time limited of 70 Weeks,
we do certainly know that their Temple and City were destroyed many Ages ago;
and but a few Years after, that he, whom we believe to be that Messiah, had
appeared among them, and was cut off by them: So that either it must be owned
that this was not a true Prophecy, or the Messiah came before the destruction
of Jerusalem: This Argument receives a vast strength by those who have made out
the point of Chronology of the 70 Weeks of Years, that is 490 Years, which does
exactly agree to the interval of time.

This whole Matter receives a great confirmation from that Unvaluable History
which Josephus a Jewish Priest, and a Man of great Learning and Judgment, well
skilled both in Civil and Military Affairs, and full of zeal both for his
Country and Religion, has writ in so particular a manner, he having been an
Eyewitness, and a considerable Actor in the whole Affair. Whosoever is at the
pains to compare that dismal Scene with our Savior's Predictions, sees such an
agreement between them, that this is no small Argument to prove the truth of
the whole Religion. Nor is it to be past over without a special remark, that we
have this piece of History writ by a Jew, who cannot be suspected; had a
Christian writ it, he might, perhaps, have been thought too partial to his
Religion; or had a Roman writ it, he might have been suspected to have
aggravated matters for raising the Triumphs of his Country; but there lies no
possible color of suspicion against Josephus: And since he mentions the Story
both of the Forerunner, and of the Disciple of our Savior, this is a great
presumption, either that the Passage relating to our Savior himself is
genuine, or that if he said nothing of him, it was because he knew he could say
nothing that could derogate from his Credit, and that he would say nothing to
raise it: For it is plain from those Relations concerning St. John Baptist and
St. James, that he was acquainted with the beginnings of our Religion; besides,
that we see a particular Curiosity possessed him, of being well informed
concerning all the different Sects that were among them, and their particular
Tenets and Customs.

There are so many Passages in the Gospel, of which the Jews must have had such
Full and Authentical Information, that if they had been falsely related, it must
have been in their power to have confuted them beyond the possibility of a
contradiction. So that as to this part of the Argument, so much is certain,
That the Jews looked for their Messiah during the Second Temple, and about the
time that our Savior appeared, which disposed them so easily to hearken to
every Impostor. Their Temple has been destroyed, their Nation dispersed, their
Genealogies lost, by which the certainty of their being Abraham's Seed,
subsists no more, and their Sacrifices have ceased now above 1600. Years. So
that their hatred of us, and yet their Books agreeing with ours, when joined
together, make no small part of our Argument. But now to come to the strength
of our Cause, I lay it thus.

The Gospels were published in the time when many persons were yet alive, who
knew, and were appealed to, for the Passages contained in them: Which is made
out thus: First, They mention the Temple and Nation of the Jews as still in
being, which shows they were written before the Destruction of Jerusalem: More
particularly, St. Luke writ the Acts of the Apostles two Years after St. Paul's
going to Rome, with which he ends that Book: And he begins it with the mention
of his Gospel, as writ some time before that. His Gospel also begins with an
Account of some other Gospels that had been then writ. Now St. Paul's going to
Rome happened two or three and twenty Years after the time of our Savior's
Passion and Resurrection, so early were these things put in writing. They were
no sooner written than they were read in the Assemblies of the Christians, as
the Jews were wont to read the Law and the Prophets in their Synagogues. This
we do find from St. Iustin's Apology, Justin. Apol. 2.
was the practice of his time, which was less than an hundred Years after they
were written. So that we clearly see, these Writings were not kept as Secrets
to be divulged as the Depositaries of them thought fit, according to the way
that the Romans had used about the Sybilline Oracles; but were immediately
copied out for the use of all the Churches, and of as many private Christians
as could compass the Copying them. The Epistles of the Apostles do carry in
them Characters that lead us very near the time in which they were written: And
by comparing those of St. Paul with the Books writ by St. Luke, we see when
most of his Epistles were writ, many of them being before his going to Rome:
Now these Epistles were addressed to whole Bodies and Churches, and they do
often appeal to the Life, Death, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, as
matters which were then well known, and firmly believed by all Christians: From
all which I at present infer no more, but that these things were published in
the time, and were known in many remote Provinces, soon after they were
transacted; and were not kept close to be published in some other Age, when it
might have been easy for bold Impostors to make any thing pass with a
credulous multitude. Now all this was published near the Fountain, and was so
soon spread, that in Nero's time we know by Tacitus, that there were great
numbers of them at Rome, who had fallen under a public Odium, and on whom
Nero, though he had burnt Rome himself, threw the hatred of that Conflagration,
and punished them with the severity that such a Crime, if truly proved against
them, had well deserved. In the Gospels we have the Relations of our Savior's
Miracles, of many of his Transactions with the Jewish Nation, so
circumstantiated, more particularly the Account of his Death and Resurrection,
is given so minutely, that the Jews, who might have been easily Masters of the
Books in which these were contained, had it in their power to have overthrown
the credit of them, in many Instances, if they had found any falsehoods in them.
If they had not sealed the Sepulcher, or asked of Pilate a grant to watch it;
if that Guard had not run away in the night, and given out a story of their
having fallen asleep, the Jews could have well disproved this, upon which the
whole depended. Now as the Jews were engaged, both out of their hatred of our
Savior and his Doctrine, and to justify themselves from the Imputations of
having shed his Blood, and that of his Followers, to have pursued this matter
so close, as to have convinced the World of its falsehood; so the progress that
it made, did alarm them too much, to make any one imagine that they could
despise it. They had it also in their power, by the Registers which were in
their hands; and at least, during Agrippa's Reign, they were in so happy and
flourishing a condition, that it cannot be said, that the ill state of their
Affairs took from them either the heart or the leisure to look after this. All
which received a great confirmation from St. Paul's Conversion, who from being
one, not only of their Zealots and Pharisees, but of the most furious
Persecutors of this Religion, was so strangely struck down, and changed, while
a company of their own People were about him, that he became afterward the
most successful of all the first Planters of Christianity. He did very
frequently appeal to that matter of Fact, in which it had been easy to have
taken away his Credit, if they could have denied it. So far then I have gone to
show that this matter was published early, and in the sight of those who were
both most concerned, and most able to have detected any deceit that might have
been in it; who did not by any Act, of which there remains the least print,
among either the Writings of their own Nation, or of the other Enemies to
Christianity, attempt to discredit it.

Had not the Genealogies of Christ been taken exactly out of the
Temple-Registers, the bare showing of them had served to have confuted the
whole; for if in any one thing, the Registers of their Genealogies were clear
and uncontroverted: Since these proved that they were Abraham's Seed, and
likewise made out their Title to the Lands, which from the days of Joshua were
to pass down, either to immediate Descendants, or as they failed, to Collateral
Degrees. Now this shows plainly, that there was a double Office kept of their
Pedigrees, one was natural, and might be taken when the Rolls of Circumcision
were made up; and the other related to the Division of the Land, in which when
the Collateral Line came instead of the Natural, then the last was dropped, as
extinct, and the other remained: It being thus plain from their Constitution,
that they had these two Orders of Tables, we are not at all concerned in the
diversity of the two Evangelists on this head, since both might have Copied
them out from those two Offices at the Temple; and if they had not done it
faithfully, the Jews could have Authentically demonstrated their Error, in
entitling our Savior to that received Character of the Messiah, that he was to
be the Son of David by a false Pedigree; therefore since no Exceptions were
made in the time when the sight of the Rolls must have ended the Enquiry, it is
plain that they were faithfully Copied out: Nor are we now bound to answer such
difficulties as seem to arise out of them, since they were not questioned in
the time in which only an Appeal could be made to the Public Registers
themselves. If then it is yielded, that those Public Actions done in the sight
of many Witnesses, passed, without being challenged or disproved in that time,
here was a series of most wonderful things, done by a man with a word: He
calmed Seas and Winds, he fed great multitudes out of a very small Store, which
increased vastly as it was distributed; he cured the most desperate Diseases,
such as Palsies and Leprosies: He gave sight to the Blind, strength to the
Lame, and hearing to the Deaf; he healed many of their Infirmities; and which
was more than all the rest, he raised some that were dead, to life again: One
was indeed but newly dead, but another was led out to be buried, and a third
had been four days dead: His own Resurrection, Ascension, and the wonderful
Effusion of the Holy Ghost, surpassed all, and were the confirming Seals and
Testimonies of his whole Doctrine; and proved that he was sent and Authorized
by God. And besides the Miracles which were wrought by those whom he sent to
Preach his Doctrine, the Gift of Tongues that they had, as it was absolutely
necessary for the discharge of their Commission, of going to teach all Nations;
so it was of a nature not to be capable of an Imposture; since it was in the
power of every single man to have discovered the truth or falsehood of it. In
other Miracles it may be suggested, that Witnesses might be so managed, as to
carry on the credit of them, true or false: But the Apostles having given this
out as a part, and a main part of their History, we cannot suppose but that
this was true, otherwise the falsehood of it must have been discovered, and with
it the whole must have sunk.

If these extraordinary things were really transacted as they are related, it
cannot be pretended that they were the effects of some Secrets in Nature, which
our Savior might know: For though the Loadstone may be played with so much
variety, as to amuse a simple man; and though Jugglers by a slight of hand seem
to do wonders; yet the vast variety, as well as the great usefulness of our
Savior's Miracles, shows he was not limited to a few Secrets, which work
always one way: Nor were the Wonders he did, shows of Pomp, that do only amuse;
but they were things of such use to Mankind, that it very well became one who
was sent of God to prove his Mission by them: Nor can it be said that
Imagination wrought powerfully, and made People fancy they saw things that they
saw not; or that the persuasion which some took up, might so strike their
Fancy, as really to cure their Diseases; for though a Hypochondriacal person
may be deceived, especially in the dark or twilight, yet numbers of People in
full daylight could not agree in the same Mistakes: Some Effects were too
signal to be so mistaken; such, as for a Man born blind, to be made to see by a
word; or for a Storm to be calmed with a Rebuke: And though in critical Diseases,
such as Fevers, which lie in the fermentations of the Blood, a strong Conceit
may have a real Operation; yet Chronical Distempers, and Natural Defects go not
off by Fancy. Nor can it be thought that these wonderful Operations could come
from the assistance of an Evil Spirit; for since our Savior's Doctrine tended
wholly to pull down the Kingdom of Satan, to destroy Idolatry and Magic, and
to root out all Immorality, an Evil Spirit could not cooperate to carry on so
good a Design; otherwise it had changed its nature, and from being bad, must
have grown good; so that our Savior's Answer to this Objection was full and
clear; that if Satan was divided against himself, his kingdom could not stand:
For our Savior's Doctrine being so totally opposite to him, if he had joined
his force to give it credit, he must thereby have pulled down his own Kingdom.

But to give Infidelity its utmost advantage, we shall now consider that which
is its last refuge, and chief strength; which is, That in all Ages some Men
have been so bold and crafty, while the Herd has been so simple and credulous,
that many Impostors have past upon the World in such different shapes, that
though we cannot discover the conduct of them, yet we are not for that to judge
in favor of them; and therefore though it is not easy to assign the method
how Christianity came to be received, we may still have reason to mistrust the
whole matter. This might be tolerably alleged, if there were any one thing in
our Religion that gave the least shadow to suspicion: if the Teachers of it had
pretended either to Authority, Wealth, or Pleasure; if, on the contrary, the
Rules that were laid down in it, did not shut out all these: For whatsoever
corrupt Men may have brought in since by an after-game, that has no relation to
the Beginnings and Doctrines of our Religion, which does directly contradict
them. So far were the first Publishers of this from expecting advantages by it,
that they knew they were to be exposed to much contempt and hatred, and that by
their own Countrymen, in which there is a peculiar sting: They looked for
severe Persecutions, nor were they disappointed; they endured great Hardships,
by Want and Poverty, by Imprisonments, and Cruel Whippings, and in conclusion,
they lost their Lives in the Cause: And they did so certainly reckon for all
this, that they warned their first Converts of a fiery trial that was to come
upon them, 1 Pet. 4.12.
and of much tribulation through which they must enter into the kingdom of
heaven. ^^ Acts 22.
Impostors must draw on their Followers by specious Promises, and flattering
Hopes; and it argues a great certainty of success, as well as an assurance of
the truth of a Cause, when those who promote it, are so far from drawing on Men
by Allurements, till they are once engaged, that they warn them early of the
dangers and difficulties that are before them: With this our Savior begun,
when he said, 16. Matthew. 16, 25.
If any man will come afcer me, let him deny himself, take up his cross daily,
and become my disciple. The severe Morals which accompany this Doctrine, and
are indeed a main part of it, are a very lively character of Integrity. The
true Secret of all Corrupt Religions is, That they propose somewhat to be done
for the honor of the Deity, by which their Votaries may compensate with God,
and may buy off their Obligations to solid and true Virtue: But a Religion that
proposes a simple and naked Worship, with such easy performances in it, that
no Man can suppose the bare doing of them is any way meritorious; and that
proposes these, not as compensations, but as helps to real Holiness, and that
carries the obligation to it, into the secret recesses of the heart, to our
very thoughts, words and looks, has nothing of the air or genius of Imposture
in it.

A Religion that flatters no part of Mankind, no not those who are in
possession of the greatest esteem, has a farther character of truth in it. The
Jews valued themselves upon their being Abraham's Posterity, and their having a
Law of many Precepts given them by God; among them the most popular were the
Pharisees, who valued themselves chiefly upon many voluntary Observances, as
fences and outworks to the Law, which kept them out of danger of disobeying.
Now a great part of the Doctrine of our Savior, and his Apostles, was designed
to beat them out of these, to discover the Hypocrisy of the Pharisees; to show
them that all the Gentile Nations were now to be set on the same level with
them, and that thenceforth the obligation and virtue of all their Legal
Performances was at an end. The Apostles showed as little inclination to
gratify or flatter the most admired part of Heathenism, I mean the
Philosophers, who delighted in lofty Eloquence, refined Subtilty, and sublime
Metaphisicks: But nothing of all this appearing among them, they were despised
by the Philosophers, who esteemed all Inspiration, Madness; and were
prepossessed against both Miracles and Prophecies, as no better than
Juggleries. There was nothing left to gain, but the Rabble and Herd, and yet
these were not flattered neither. They are always struck with Pomp and
Magnificence, they love Sights and Shows, and a splendid Exterior in Religion,
to which both Jews and Gentiles had been so much accustomed, that besides the
difficulty of making them forsake the Religion of their Fathers, in which they
had been educated, which is always a thing of an ill sound, and of a bad
appearance; they were to draw them from Pageantry to Simplicity; and from
outward and costly Shows, to a naked, plain way of strictness and purity. In
all these things it must be confessed, that there is nothing of the methods of
Imposture: Now to suspect that any Artifice lies hid, when all appearances
contradict it, is a very unreasonable piece of jealousy, and looks as if Men
were resolved to suspect only for suspicion's sake. When therefore there is
positive proof brought on the one side, of Miracles publicly done, attested by
great numbers of Witnesses, published in the same Age, while great multitudes
were yet alive, who were appealed to, and who did so confirm these Books, that
they were read in all the Assemblies of the Saints or Christians, as the Text
and Rule of their Belief, as well as of their Manners; when, I say, all this is
proved, and when there appears nothing, neither in the Doctrine it self, nor in
the management of the Apostles, and their first Converts, to furnish us with
any color of apprehending any foul dealing, it is an unreasonable thing, still
to stand upon the general Argument, of the possibility of an Imposture.

But though it be not necessary, and indeed in many cases not possible, to
prove a Negative, yet this Argument is so full of evidence, that even that may
be undertaken here. There are four things possible that may be alleged as
methods to support the possibility of a Deceit, put on the World in this matter.

The 1 st is, That the Apostles intended a Deceit, which they contrived and
managed successfully.

The 2 d is, That they themselves were dcceived, and were made Tools to abuse
others.

The 3 d is, That the whole Matter went about in Tales and Stories, till by
every one's magnifying them, they grew to be believed without strict enquiry,
and due proof made.

And the 4 th is, That the Books which contain this Doctrine were at first more
sparingly writ, but were afterward interpolated, many Passages being put in
them that had not been in them at first. I have never met with, nor can I
imagine any other Hypothesis for Infidelity to found upon; and I am not afraid
to name all these, because I am very certain I can demonstrate the absolute
Incredibility of every one of them.

As to the first, Of the Apostles having contrived and managed this, on design
to abuse the World. We see nothing in them that looks like this; a plain
Simplicity and unaffected Honesty appears in all their Discourses and Actions:
They were not bred to Literature, Eloquence, or Policy; some one or all of
which are necessary for Men who venture upon such Undertakings: And therefore
Persons utterly unfurnished in them are little to be suspected. But if Men be
without all these helps, at least they must be naturally subtle and dextrous,
bold and daring: Since Nature, when well molded, may be capable of great
matters, without the refinings of Art. Now the Apostles, as they were all,
except St. Paul, of Galilee, which bred the most contemptible Men of all Judea;
so they were Fishermen by their Trade, which of all the Employments that we
know, does naturally flat the Spirits the most: They are in the Water much, in
the Night for most part, and in open Boats, which exposes them to such cold and
phlegmatic Air, that this must needs dull their Spirits exceedingly. But let us
suppose them to be as capable, either of the wickedness of contriving, or of
the skill in managing such a Fraud, as profane Men can fancy them to be. I go
next to show, that the Supposition is absurd. The Resurrection of Christ was
the main point upon which all the rest turned. I am now to suppose what shall
afterward be proved, That this matter went abroad at first in the same manner
in which we do now read it in the Gospel; and so in this place I am only to
show, that the Relation which we now have, could not be the contrivance of the
Apostles. Our Savior was laid in a new Tomb, not an Ancient Sepulcher, to
which there might have been secret Avenues, that had been so long forgot, that
they were known only to some few persons. This was both newly made, and hewn
out of a Rock: So it might have been well examined, and a passage could not be
wrought into it in a night or two. This happened likewise in the beginning of
the Paschal Solemnity, when it was Full Moon, which in so pure an Air gives a
very bright light. At that time Jerusalem was so full of People, all the Jews
coming up to keep the Feast, that it being then their Summer, since we see
handfulls of Corn were to be offered up at that time, as the First Fruits of
the Years growth; we have reason to believe, that great numbers, who could not
be conveniently lodged in Jerusalem, were in so pleasant a time, and at so
great a Rendezvous, walking in the Fields in the nightime. These things
cannot be denied: The Apostles had also seen, that one of their number, of whom
they had suspected no such thing before, had betrayed our Savior; that the
fear with which they themselves were struck upon his-apprehension, had made
them all run away, and forsake him; and in particular, that he who had been on
other occasions the forwardest of them all, and who had been warned by our
Savior of his danger, and so was, by consequence, on his guard, and less
likely to fall, had yet upon a remote apprehension of danger, with repeated
Oaths denied that he knew him. Now he who through fear will deny a truth, is
much more like, upon the same, or a greater danger, to discover a falsehood.
This being the state of that matter, let us now see how we can possibly imagine
the Apostles, who knew what effects fear had so lately upon themselves, and who
had also seen to what a degree one of them might he corrupted, could so far
trust either themselves or one another in such a matter, in which they had
reason to believe, that the Jews, who had gone so far with their Master, would
spare neither arts nor violenee to fetch out the Secret: Besides, that to
venture on an Imposture, which goes so much against Human Nature, and which
naturally strikes Men with fears and jealousies, Men must be long practiced to
boldness, and must have made such essays upon themselves, and upon one another,
as to think they are secure of all that are in the Confidence. But let us pass
over all this, and then see how the matter, when resolved on, could have been
managed. Either they were to steal away the Body of Christ, or to leave it in
the Sepulcher. If they had left it, all must have broke out immediately; the
bare exposing the Body must have confuted all that they could have said; so it
must be supposed that they carried it away: Now how this could be done when a
Watch was set, when the Moon shone bright, and such numbers of Men were
wandering about in every corner, is not easy to be imagined. Some persons to a
considerable number must be employed, if it had been to be carried to any
distance, and they could not think themselves safe if it had been laid near the
place of the Sepulcher: Some trace or print must have remained, if they had
broke ground; which they must have expected would have been looked for; and
being found out, would have discovered all; not to mention the natural horror
that all Men have, at the handling dead Bodies, even in what is necessary for
their burial, but most of all Jews, who by their Law became defiled to a high
degree by it. But suppose the dead Body so disposed of, that they apprehended
to hear no more news of it, how is it to be imagined, that those frequent
Apparitions of our Savior's, particularly that in Galilee, to Five hundred at
once, which is appealed to, while many of them were yet alive, could have been
manageed. Here then, we have first twelve Witnesses, against whom no just
exception lies, even to feed suspicion, who affirm a matter of fact, and call
in many others as their Vouchers to support their Testimony: They stand to it
to the last, though they suffered much for it, and could not possibly gain any
thing by it; and yet are supposed by Infidels to contrive and stick to a
Forgery, merely to persuade the World to Virtue and Purity, and to Sincerity
and Truth; which they begin with a train of falsehood and deceit, without any
other visible Bait but their love to their dead Master; that they might
magnify him, and give him a lasting Name, and wipe off the reproach of his
infamous Death, by this bold Contrivance of theirs. A Man that can suppose all
this to be possible, will suppose any thing; and shows, that he has no regards,
so much as to the colors of Truth, but will advance any thing, rather than be
beaten out of his Infidelity.

But to follow this matter more home; a part, and a great one, of the History
of the Gospel, is, That ten days after our Savior ascended up into Heaven, in
the sight of his Apostles, which with Infidels will pass for a part of the
contrivance, they received such extraordinary Illapses and Powers from Heaven,
in consequence to the Promises that our Savior had made them, that they were
enabled to work Miracles, and to speak with diverse Tongues: and the first essay
of this appeared at the next Festival of the Jews, in which Jerusalem was again
filled, not only with all the Jews of Judea, but also with those of the
dispersion, who from all Quarters were come up at Pentecost, from the East, as
far as from Persia and Media, from the West, as far as from Rome and Libia,
from the South, as far as from Arabia, and from the North, as far as from
Parthia, and many Provinces of Asia the Less, and from several Islands, as well
as from the Continent. Here was an astonishing thing, to see unlettered men,
all of the sudden break out in speaking of Languages* in which they had no sort
of Education or Practice: Fevers or Enthusiastical Heats may inflame men so
far, as to make them speak those Languages which they understand, though they are
not otherwise ready at them; for the Prints being already in their Brains, a
strong exaltation of their Spirits, may fetch those out much better than they
themselves in a cooler and more sedate state could have done; but where there
are no previous Impressions, no heat whatsoever can fetch out that which is not
within: Now as this was the most necessary of all other things to qualify men
to execute their Commission, of going to teach all Nations, in which they must
have made a very slow progress, if they must have learned the Language of every
Country to which they were to go; so it was the most signal of all others, Rom
15.19.
and as was formerly hinted at, was that which must have been presently
discovered if it had not been notoriously and unquestionably true. With these
Powers, 1 Cor. 14. 2 Cor. 12.12.
and those Languages, the Apostles went every where; and promised to confer the
like gifts on those that should receive and believe their Gospel: 3 Gal. 5. 1
These. 1.5. 1 Timothy 1.20. Heb. 2.4.
And in the Epistles which they writ afterward to those Churches, even when
their Authority was called in question, they appealed to the gifts of the Holy
Ghost conferred by their means; so that either these things were notoriously
true, or they must have been despised as the most assuming and impudent of all
Impostors: These were their Credentials that procured them a hearing; and as
men were disposed to eternal Life, so they received and entertained their
Message. Thus we have seen by a great variety of Considerations which this
matter presents to us, that not only there is no color of Reason, to incline a
man to think that the Apostles designed to impose upon the World, but that
there is all possible Reason to the contrary, to persuade us, that they were in
no respect capable of projecting any such thing, nor of effecting it if they
had intended it.

The 2 d. Supposition of Infidelity is, That they themselves might have been
deceived by two or three designing persons, who might have imposed upon them:
that in the twilight a troubled fancy might be made imagine, that they saw
Christ, which being affirmed by those who were on the secret, the rest might so
far comply with those who said they saw him, as either to imagine it, or at
least to yield to the rest, so as to say, that they saw him; for so conceits do
sometimes spread, and whole crowds fancy they see or hear things, being faced
down by the boldness of a few impudent persons; and this being once set about,
the same Artifices might prevail again and again upon the same weaknesses. This
might look tolerable, if there were no more to be said for the Resurrection of
Christ than one or two transient views; but continued discourses, the reaching
his Hands and Side to be felt to; Christ's appearance to numbers in full
daylight, with all the Series of what passed between him and his Disciples;
and finally, his blessing them, and being parted from them, and ascending up to
Heaven; but above all, the wonderful Pentecosts that followed it, the strange
Effusion of the Holy Ghost, and the extraordinary Gifts that were then given,
were things in which it was not possible for men to be deceived. So that the
Apostles did either certainly know that all those things which they attested
were true, or that they were false; there can be no mean in the matter; and
indeed this objection is so slight, that it scarce deserved to be considered.

The 3 d. pretense is more specious; That the History of the Gospel passed
easily upon the World, without due Examination, that it appears both by some
hints that are in the New Testament, and several passages in Josephus, that the
Jews were at that time very credulous, and were apt to follow every Pretender:
they were broken into several Sects, and under great Distractions and
Oppressions, which prepare men to hearken after Novelties: so that great
numbers might run in upon Rumors, and they being once engaged, they might
reckon, that in honor they could not go off, and would stick to it even to the
hazard of their Lives. So we see some Enthusiasts and Sectaries in all Ages,
have courted Martyrdom, and endured great Misery with a triumphant Firmness.
But to answer all this, a great difference is to be made between points of
Speculation, and matters of Fact; in the former, men drink in persuasions, and
then they grow to be so full of them, especially when a conceit of their own
understanding is twisted with them, so that they think it an Affront to their
own Reason, at least a detracting from its reputation, to confess so publicly
that they were mistaken; but in matters of Fact the thing is quite otherwise,
these are to be strictly enquired into, and a man's believing them imports no
more, but that he had a good Opinion of those that informed him, nor is it any
reproach to be too easy in this; it rather argues a man to be candid and good in
himself, which makes him to apt too think well of others, and to believe them:
and how firm soever men may be to Opinions, when they have once approved
themselves, so that Self-love works secretly, yet they are still ready to
re-examine matters of Fact, when their first Informations are called in
question; especially if they are like to suffer considerably for owning and
espousing them. It is very true, that the Jews had so general an expectation of
a Messiah about this time, that they were apt to run after every Pretender, yet
they were as apt to forsake him, when their hopes failed them. But all their
expectations run in so different a Channel, from what they saw in our Savior,
that how much soever their Curiosity might have prompted them once to run to
him, their prejudices drew them so strongly from him, that nothing but mighty
and unanswerable Evidence could make them still adhere to him. They had groaned
long under the Slavery of a bloody Tyrant, they hated Herod and his Family,
they could not bear the Roman Yoke, that was coming over them. They fancied a
Messiah should come, in whom the Characters of a Moses and a David should meet,
that he should raise the Honor of their Nation, and establish the Observances
of their Laws. There were three things in our Savior and his Doctrine, any one
of which was sufficient to disgust them. 1 st. His mean and humble Appearance;
whereas they looked for a glorious Conqueror and a magnificent Prince. When he
made nothing of paying tribute to Caesar, and despised the offers of a Crown,
they could not but despise him for it, according to their Notions. 2 ly. His
seeming to set a low value on the Observances of the Law, and his Disciples
setting the Gentiles at liberty from them, was of all things that which
appeared to them the most odious and impious: they were so accustomed to a
Reverence for those Rites, that no sort of Immorality could strike them, so
much as a coldness in them, and therefore they could not bear some Liberties
which our Savior or his Disciples took on the Sabbath day, even though those
could have well been reconciled to the Letter of the Law; And 3 ly. besides the
common fondness that all men have for their Country, they had so particular a
value for their own, for Abraham's Circumcised Posterity, and such a contempt
for all the Heathen Nations, who were no better than Dogs in their esteem; that
the many broad hints that appeared in our Savior's Parables and Discourses in
favor of the Gentiles, and the open Declaration which the Apostles soon after
made, of bringing them into an equality of Dignity and Privileges with
themselves, was such a stone of stumbling to every natural Jew, that nothing
besides a full and uncontested Evidence could have balanced it: Therefore though
it may be confessed, that the Circumstances the Jews were in, made them easy to
be practiced upon, and to run as often as any said, see here is the Messiah, or
there he is; yet their Prejudices and false Notions were so rooted in them,
that as a great many of them left our Savior, and fell off from his Apostles,
when they understood the Tendencies of his Doctrine; So those that stuck to
him, were without doubt so far shaken by those prejudices, that they made them
examine all things the more critically, and particularly look into those
wonderful matters of Fact that were believed among them; so that how easy
soever their first Credulity might have been, they must have re-consider'd the
matter more narrowly before they could overcome Principles and Notions that
were so deeply rooted in them. Men are not easily carried to forsake their
Friends and Families, to draw upon them the Hatred and Curses of their
Countrymen. These things have a Charm and Authority in them, which few can
withstand; but when it rested not there, but went on to all sorts of Outrages,
to the spoiling their Goods, the imprisoning their Persons, to cruel Whippings,
to the beheading some, and the Stoning others, when this Fury grew so general,
that even devout and honorable Women in contradiction to the Gentleness and
Decencies of their Sex, went in to it; then at least it is reasonable to
suppose, that they made all possible enquiries into the matters of Fact. I do
acknowledge that the Martyrdoms in the succeeding Ages, are no concluding proof
in the behalf of our Religion, but in the first Age, in which the question was,
Whether such things were seen and heard, or not; Men's suffering so much for
their persuasions, shows this at least, that they were so persuaded. Therefore
when this was the point, Whether they had seen or heard such or such things?
Their adhering firmly to it, showed that they did so believe.

The case was yet more amazing with relation to the Gentiles, who were
generally given up to a sensual as well as to a sensible Religion, that was
overrun with Idolatry and Magic; who were not acquainted with the Prophecies
that were among the Jews, and despised them as a mean and a factious Nation,
that had an ill-natured Religion; so that they had not that disposition among
them, which awakened the Curiosity of the Jews. They had been so accustomed to
gross and lewd Fables concerning their gods, that it was the moulding them
anew, to talk of One Invisible Deity, and of a Spiritual Worship, or a severe
Morality, especially in some Particulars, such as the restraint of Appetite, or
the loving an Enemy. Add to all this, that the Heathen Priests were soon aware,
that this Doctrine would have very ill effects upon their Profits and
Authority; therefore they animated the World into a most implacable Hatred of
them, which broke out soon into most violent Persecutions: and as the Governors
of the Provinces and subaltern Magistrates were willing enough to gratify the
People in their Fury, so the Emperors themselves were soon set on against them.
The restless Tempers of the Jews at that time had so provoked them, that it was
crime enough for the Christians to be considered as a Sect of the Jews; and so
careless were they in Rome, of enquiring exactly into those Matters, Sueton. in
Claudio.
that we find by Suetonius, that they believed that Christ had set on the Jews
to all their Seditions, by which they must have been enflamed so much the more
against the Christians; and if such a Monster as Nero was rightly informed of
the exactness of their Morals, that must have sharpened him so much the more
against them. Tacit. annal. 15.
There was in his time a vast multitude of them at Rome, the matter of fact
concerning Christ's being put to Death in Tiberius's Reign by Pontius Pilate,
Procurator at Judea, was so well known, that it was put in the Annals of that
time; and the Christians appealed to the Public Registers for many other
Particulars relating to it. No wonder if the Singularity of their Doctrine, and
the Strictness of their Lives, draw a general Hatred upon them; Nero laid hold
on this, and he having once fastened the burning of Rome upon them, was obliged
to follow that with a severity proportioned to the heaviness of the Imputation.
Upon all these Accounts we see how little the Gentiles were disposed to hearken
to our Savior's Doctrine, or to the Testimony of his Apostles; and as for the
few Philosophers that were among them, as they were more likely to look into
the Proofs that were offered, or the Evidence that was given, with an
inquisitive Strictness, so they were as strongly prejudiced against it, as
either their Pride or their Principles could make them; they were haughty and
scornful men, they despised the vulgar as a contemptible Herd, and undervalued
all that were not formed into their Notions, and accustomed to their Cant. They
had such a high Opinion of their own Understandings and their Theories, that
they were possessed against Inspiration, Miracles and Prophecy; they could not
digest Mysteries, nor hear any thing that seemed to rise above a Man's
Understanding: nor could they endure a Doctrine that took in all sorts of
People within it; reckoning, that only men of a peculiar frame of Mind, and of
a singular Education, were capable of true Philosophy; and they were men that
studied both to be popular and safe: so that howsoever Socrates had exposed
himself to the fury of the Athenians, by contradicting the received Opinions
concerning the Divinity; yet all the later Pretenders had avoided his fate, by
complying with received Opinions and Practices. So that upon all these accounts
we see, that all sorts of people were at the beginnings of Christianity so
strongly prejudiced against many things in it, that nothing but a very
extraordinary Evidence could have overcome it; nothing less than the
demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.4.
that is of the Inspiration that did actuate them, which was given with power
in mighty Signs and Wonders, could have overcome it. It was to this that they
always appealed, and this only could conquer such mighty Prejudices. When the
love of this World, together with the fears of suffering, made many fall back,
chiefly to Judaism, we do not find that they furnished the Enemies of this
Religion with any thing to object to it, or detract from it; though Apostases,
who to justify their own change, and to beat off the Reproaches of those whom
they forsake, are observed to have a peculiar sharpness against those of whose
Sect they once were. They may be apt to forge unjust Slanders and Calumnies,
but are not like to suppress any scandalous Truth that they can suggest against
them: and yet we find no Prints of any such things alleged by any of them; If
there had been either Delusion, Imposture or Magic in those great
Performances, those Apostates could have discovered all such Secrets; some
having fallen away that had been partakers of the Holy Ghost, 6 Heb. 4.5. Plin.
Lib. 10. Ep. 97.
and of the Powers of the World to come; that is of the Dispensation of the
Messiah. We see by Pliny's Epistle how early Christianity had spread it self
over the Northern parts of Asia the Lesser, filling not only their Towns and
Cities, but even their Villages and Hamlets, to such a degree, that the Temples
of the gods were forsaken, and no more Sacrifices were offered at their Altars:
He adds, that many had of their own accord returned back from that Religion,
before he had begun to prosecute them; some three years before, others more,
and one five and twenty years before that time: Which is a good Character, to
show us how early Christianity had been spread in those parts; he adds, that an
Incredible Multitude was informed against, and that his severity had brought
back a great many; by these he might have been well informed concerning them.
He adds, that since he saw such numbers in danger of falling under the severity
of the Imperial Edicts, he had tortured two of their Deaconesses, that he might
draw from them all the secrets that were amongst them: but he found nothing,
only an inflexible aversion to the Worship of the gods, and the Genius of the
Emperor; and that they met and Sung Hymns to Christ as a God, and were tied by
Vows not to commit Adultery, nor to Steal, or deceive, or commit other Crimes;
and that their Feasts were Innocent and harmless. This happening not above
Seventy Years after our Savior's Death, shows us how fast this Doctrine did
spread, and what vast number had then embraced it; and yet these being all born
and bred with such prejudices against it, cannot be supposed to have received
it too rashly, or to have believed it implicitly.

The last supposition of Infidelity yet remains to be considered, which is,
That something must be yielded to have been published and received concerning
this Religion, soon after its first appearance; but that in process of time the
Books might have been Interpolated, after all the Eyewitnesses were dead, and
many Additions of great Importance might have been clapped in afterward. And
this indeed is the plausiblest part of their whole Plea; for if they yield that
the Books which we now have, were given out in the same manner as we have them,
and that they were received in the Age in which many Eyewitnesses were alive
to vouch them, then all that can be cavilled at, after this is once yielded, is
so poor and slight, that it only shows the incurable obstinacy of those who
maintain it. This last has more color: there were many Gospels given out at
first, as St. Luke informs us, some false Gospels there were; and there was a
consierable diversity among some Copies; parcels were in some, that were left
out in others: and it could scarce be otherwise, while many were Writing what
they themselves knew and saw, and others might Copy these too hastily, and
uncorrectly: Yet within a hundred years after our Savior's Death, we find this
matter was so settled, that we see these Books were cited by Justin, and
Iremaeus, not to mention the Epistles of Clemens, Ignatius and Policarp; and
from them downward, in a continued succession of Writers, and they were such as
we now have them. I except only such small variations, as might be the mistakes
and errors of Copies; all which when put together, amount to nothing that is
of any Importance to the matters of our Belief, or the Rule of our Life. Now,
when we consider how near St. John lived to that time, and that Irenaeus was
instructed by Policarp, who was ordained by St. John, and lived not far from
him, when we see what weight Irenaeus lays on the Scriptures, in opposition to
all Oral Tradition, and how positively he makes his appeals to them: when we
see how soon after that time, both the Greek and Latin, the Roman and Affrican
Churches, those of Syria and Egypt, do all agree to cite the same Books, in
the same words, or with inconsiderable variations, we have all reason to
conclude, that this great point of the Books was settled much sooner: since by
the end of a hundred years they were in all Peoples hands, and were read in all
the Assemblies of Christians; they were also read by their Enemies, Trypho in
particular, as Justin informs us: we see also soon after this, that Celsus had
read them; and indeed, it is plain from all the Christian Writers in those
Ages, that the Books of the N. Testament were in all men's hands; they quote
them so often in their Apologies, and other Books, as Writings that were
generally read and known: such a spreading of Books, and multiplying of Copies,
was a work of time, when all was to be writ out; and this was so near the
Fountain, that we have all reason to believe that the Originals at least of St.
Paul's Epistles to the Churches, were still preserved: and tho an Oral
Tradition of a Doctrine, even for so short a period, is so doubtful a
conveyance, that it were not easy to think, that it might not have enlarged a
little beyond the truth; yet a Tradition of some Books could hardly in so very
short a time have been varied, or altered, chiefly in so important a point, as
the Resurrection of Christ, which was the main Article of their belief, and
that which runs as a Thread through all the Sermons and Epistles of the
Apostles: and indeed, this being once yielded, settles all the rest with it.
Therefore since we have such a Copious concurrence of Authors that cite those
Books all-a-long, from that time downwards, besides the Epistles of those
Apostolical Men, St. Clement, St. Ignatius, and St. Policarp, the first having
writ in that very time, probably before the destruction of Jerusalem, and the
other two soon after it; in which several of the Books of the N. Testiment are
cited, as Writings then well known, and in all men's hands: we must from all
this firmly conclude, that the Books, as we now have them, are not altered from
the form in which they were at first writ.

They were quickly Copied out for the use of the Churches; they were read at
the Assemblies of the Christians; they were Translated into the vulgar Tongues,
particularly the Latin and Syriach, very early; so that they becoming so soon
public, and getting into so many hands, it was not possible for any one, who
might have had the wickedness to have attempted the corrupting them, to have
compassed it afterward. And what noise soever the Enemies of our Faith may
make of the various readings, and how much soever the bulk of them, as they are
added to the Polyglot Bible, may at first view strike the eye; yet when all
these are examined, they amount not to any one variation in any Article of our
Faith, and they appear so plainly to be the slips of the Writers, that this can
never shake any man who will be at the pains to search it to the bottom. So
that I have now gone round all the suppositions of Infidelity, and have, I
hope, clearly evinced, that there is not any one of them which is in any sort
credible, or even possible.

I will in conclusion consider some few of their Objections, indeed all that I
have ever met with, which seem to have any force; Some cannot imagine why our
Savior, after his Resurrection, showed himself only to a few, and did not come
in next day to the Temple, and show himself to that vast Assembly, which was
then to be there; since that must for ever have put an end to all doubting, and
have silenced all his Enemies. This were a very reasonable Objection, if God's
ways were as our ways: our warm tempers that boil with resentment, and that
pursue eagerly our own Vindication, would have no doubt wrought this way; but
if we go to ask an account of all God's Works or Ways, we shall find them very
different from our own Notions. A great part of his Creation seems useless to
us: much of it seems defective, as well as another part seems superfluously
redundant to us: there are many very unaccountable things, both in the
structure of our Bodies, and the temper of our Minds; and if we will quarrel
with every thing that does not suit our own Notions, we will be very uneasy in
our Thoughts. There are some Sins, for which God gives over all further dealing
with Persons and Nations, and upon which he delivers them up to their own
reprobate minds: and when he has used such sufficient means, as might well
serve to convince and reform them, he lets them alone, and leaves them to their
own hearts lusts: Those who had seen so many of our Savior's Miracles, which,
instead of having a good effect on them, did only serve to harden them the more
in their opposition to him, did well deserve that God should suffer them to
harden themselves still more and more: and it was enough that Christ showed
himself so often to such a competent number of unexceptionable Witnesses, and
give them full powers to prove their Testimony concerning him, by working such
Miracles as he himself had wrought. Why he did it in this way, and in no other,
is among the Secrets of his Councils, which are to us unsearchable. When our
Souls become more perfect, our Capacities and Faculties more enlarged, and our
Thoughts more exalted, then we may come to understand the reason of these
things more perfectly than it is possible for us to do in this depressed and
darkened state. One thing after all we may gather from our Savior's words, who
has pronounced them blessed who have not seen, and yet have believed; and from
the value that in many places of the New Testament is set on faith and on
believing, that God did not intend to give the World such an undeniable
Evidence, as that it should be out of their power to disbelieve: for to believe
either such things as our Senses do plainly perceive, or to believe
Mathematical Truths, is that to which our Nature constrains us, and for which
we can deserve no sort of commendation. Therefore to make our Faith to be both
well grounded, and also highly acceptable to God, it is enough that there are
sufficient Reasons offered to us, to persuade our belief, and that there is no
good reason to the contrary, though we may start possibilities of imaginary
reasons against it; and a Man who is so far convinced by those, that he is from
thence determined to believe all the other parts of that Revelation, both the
Promises and the Precepts of it, so that he gives himself up to its conduct in
the whole course of his Life, in the assured expectation of the Promises it
sets before him; has such a Faith, that must certainly be of great value in the
sight of God; because it has a great effect on the believer himself. There is
Beauty enough in the Rules of our Religion, to oblige every Man to examine well
the Authority upon which it rests, and to him that will set his thoughts a
working upon it, this Authority will soon appear strong enough to determine his
assent: and when that has its due operation upon him, then his Faith has had
its full effect. So that it is no dull, nor lazy or implicit Faith on which
the New Testament sets so high a value; it is a Faith that purifies the Heart,
that works by Love, that makes us new Creatures, and engages us to keep the
Commandments of God. So that this Objection has no other force in it but this,
That God's Ways are a great depth, and to us are past finding out.

A second Objection is, That if our Savior and his Apostles gave such Proofs
of their Mission, how is it to be imagined, that any Man could be so obstinate,
as to stand it out against so full a Conviction? These things were probably
enquired into at that time, by Men of all sides; Curiosity might work on some,
and Fear on others: and those who had drawn the Guilt of his Blood upon them,
were most particularly concerned to examine the matter carefully, since Blood
is apt to raise a Clamor within, which is not easily silenced: Besides,
according to the Acts of the Apostles, the Jews, and even their Sanhedrin, seem
to have been struck with the Reports of his Resurrection, so that they knew not
how to gainsay it, and were concerned only to stifle and silence it. Now it
seems somewhat unaccountable, how it came that they still stood out, and were
not overcome with all that Evidence, if it was so full as we do now represent
it? But in answer to this, it is to be considered, That there is a perverseness
and depravedness in Humane Nature that cannot be accounted for. To some of the
Enemies of our Religion, I mean the Jews, this can be no Objection, since
Pharaoh's hardening himself against all Moses's Miracles and Messages, and even
the murmurings of their Forefathers the Israelites, in the Wilderness, are
every whit as extraordinary Instances of the depravation of Humane Nature, as
these we now consider were: but indeed we need not go so far to seek for
amazing Characters and Instances of the Madness of Mankind; no Laws, no
Rewards, no Punishments, no Experience nor Observation can make Men wise or
good. When Men are once engaged in ill Courses, they quickly contract Habits,
and are soon hardened in them; and when Pride and Interest are got on the side
of that, which of it self was strong enough to overcome them, then they become
intractable and fierce against every opposition, and become really the worse,
the more they are pursued and dealt with.

Another Objection is, Why do not some of those Miracles that seem to have been
with a sort of profusion thrown out abundantly at first, now appear to convince
the World, for these would certainly have a great effect? What was said to the
first Objection, belongs in a great measure to this. We are not to ask of God
an account of his ways, if he has laid enough before us for our conviction; and
if that is rejected by us, we have no reason to expect that he should disturb
the Order that he has settled in the Creation, to gratify our humors. It were
not suitable to that Order, that he has so wisely and usefully established,
that it should be too often put out of its channel: It is enough that at the
first openings of the Two Revealed Religions that he delivered to the World, he
gave evident Signs, both of his Dominion over the Works of his Hands, and of
his having authorized those whom he sent to speak in his Name. That being then
fully done, and the Precepts of this Religion bearing such an apparent
suitableness to our Natures, and to the Interests of all Humane Societies,
there is no sort of reason for us to demand more proof, than that which God was
pleased to give at first. Besides, that all Ages and Nations have the same
pretended claim to Miracles, for they are equally his Creatures; and we can
fancy no reason why he should be partial to some, more than to others: Now if
there were such a constant return of Miracles, the whole Argument from them
would in a little time be lost; Men grow accustomed to what they see daily, and
it makes no impression, otherwise the Wonders of Day and Night, of Summer and
Winter, the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, would work more powerfully on us,
than they do. A superfetation of Miracles would have no effect, if it were not
a bad one, to make the Divine Power in working them be called in question, and
to lead Men to impute them to some Natural Cause, or to some Secrets known only
to a few. In all which we may conclude, that according to what our Savior said
of Moses and the Prophets, If Men believe not Christ and his Apostles, they
would not believe, Luke 16.31.
though a Man should rise from the dead, or that the most uncontested Miracle
that they would call for, should be wrought for their conviction.

Another Objection of the Infidels is taken from the differences that are
between the Gospels, in which the same passages seem to be variously related in
different words, and in another order of time; things being by some set down as
done after those things before which they are set by others. Questions and
Answers are variously stated; they also find some reasonings that do not seem
concluding, even those that are brought to convince gainsayers, where there
ought to be more exactness. There is also a lowness and flatness of style, that
makes the Books seem but mean; nor are they laid in any exactness of method,
but seem to run in a loose ramble; besides, that there are many passages in
them that look staring, as that of Christ's preaching to the Spirits in Prison,
that of Melchisedeck, and some other things that we scarce know what to make
of. These things look not like the Products of Divine Inspiration.

But in answer to all this, we are to consider the different Orders of
Inspiration, Numb. 12.8.
according to the different ends for which it is given. Moses had the Law, as
the Jews confess, by an immediate Communication with God, as one Man converses
with another, expressed by the phrase of face to face, or mouth to mouth; such
a degree seemed necessary for one who was to deliver an entire System of a
Religion of Sacred Rites, as well as Binding Laws to that Nation. But those who
were only sent to call on the People to the obedience of the Law, and to
denounce Judgments upon their disobedience, and give out Predictions, received
a lower degree of Inspiration; the Will of God being represented to them in
Dreams and Visions, in which several Representations were drammatically
impressed on their Imaginations, and explained by a secret Intimation made by
God to them: Others had yet a lower degree, being animated by a Divine
Excitation to compose Holy Hymns and Discourses to the edification of the
People: now as the Jews divide the Books of the Old Testament in three
different Volumes, according to these various degrees of Inspiration; according
to which division our Savior himself cites the Old Testament; in all of which,
we find that those holy Penmen writ in such a diversity, that it is apparent
every one was left to his own Way and Geni^us, as to Style and Composition,
some being much loftier than others. Now to apply this to the New Testament; It
was necessary that Men sent to publish such a Doctrine, should be so divinely
filled with the knowledge of it, and should be so actuated by that same
Influence that assisted them miraculously, as neither to be able to mistake,
nor misrepresent any part of it; for the Miracles that they wrought, bringing
the World under an obligation to believe them, it was not possible that they
could be left to themselves, and be subject to mistakes: But after all this,
every one acted according to his natural Temper, and writ in his natural Style;
so we see a great variety in the whole Composition and Method of their
Discourses and Epistles. The Gospels were writ either by Apostles, or by those
who were their companions in labor, and whose Books were authorized by them;
but it does not clearly appear what method they intended to follow, whether to
observe the order of Time, or the relation that one Passage might have to
another: in this they were left to their natural Faculties; all that was of
consequence, was to have the Doctrine and Discourses of Christ, his Action and
his Miracles, faithfully stated to us: but in the method of ordering or
expressing these, they might be left to their natural Powers; and in this there
might be a particular ordering of Providence, that every thing should not be
said in the same way by every one as by concert, which might have looked liker
a contrivance; it being more genuine, when different persons write in different
ways, and all agree in the same account of the Doctrine and Miracles. There may
be also many ways of reconciling small diversities, which at this distance may
be lost to us: things may appear to be different, that yet may very well agree;
of which we find innumerable Instances in Critical Authors: and those passages
whose agreement they have made out, give us very good reason to believe, that
if we had a greater number of contemporary Books now extant, we might
understand many more better than we can do in this want of them. Passages very
like one another might have happened in different times of our Savior's Life;
and that which seems to be one story, related two different ways, may be really
two different stories, and both may be exactly related. So that all this
Objection, instead of derogating from the credit of the Gospel, does really
heighten it. As for many Answers and Reasonings that do not seem to us to be
very concluding, we are to consider, that in a short Relation, in which hints
are only given, it was impossible to open every thing fully: we are also little
acquainted with the methods of the Jews Arguings at that time. Philo and
Josephus are the only Writers that remain. The one is short upon their Customs
and Notions; and he affecting to write elegantly for the Romans and Greeks,
gives us very little light this way. Philo does indeed much more; though living
long at Alexandria, and studying the Greek Philosophy, he is so mystical and
sublime, that it is not easy always to comprehend him; yet in him we plainly
see, how much the Jews were delighted with very dark allusions and reasonings:
and since it is a just and allowable way of arguing with any, to argue from
Suppositions granted by them, and suitably to their Principles and Notions, we
who plainly see in Philo, that the Jews used them to explain a great deal of
Scripture by a dark Cabbala, are not to wonder if some Arguments run in that
strain. For instance, we do not see how the last words of the 102 Psalm,
concerning God's creating all things, and his Eternity and Unchangeableness,
belong to the Messiah, which yet are applied to him in the Epistle to the
Hebrews; Heb. 1.10, 11, 12. V. 15, 16.
but we see clear Characters in that Psalm, to show us that the Jews did so
expound it; Since those words, the Heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord, and
all the Kings of the Earth his Glory; and when the Lord shall build up Sion, he
shall appear in his Glory; together with several passages that follow, could
not according to the Cabbala of the Jews be understood of any thing but of the
Messiah, and of the Divine Shechinah, that was to rest upon him, and so
according to this all the other parts of the Psalm were also applicable to him.

If St. Paul argues, that the Promise was not made to Seeds, but to the Seed of
Abraham, which seems a bad inference; since Seed, though in the singular, Gal.
3.16.
is yet of a plural signification; this may perhaps be bad Greek, unless some
corrupt form of Speech had made Seed stand for Son; but though the Greek is not
pure, yet the Sense is true, and the Argument in it self is good; St. Paul's
design being to let them see, that their being the Seed of Abraham alone, was
not enough to assure them of the favor of God: It was not to all Abraham's
Posterity that the Promise was made, since neither Ishmael nor Keturah's
Children were comprehended within it: But it belonged only to Isaac; and in
that contracting the Promise to one, an emblem was given of the Messiah, in
whom singly the blessing of that Covenant was to center, and was not to be
spread into the whole Nation that descended from him. So that what fault soever
we may find with the Greek, the Sense is true, and the Application is useful;
and we do not know, but such a form of Speech might have been then used in
common discourse. It is certain, that the Apostles had no Rhetoric, and often
their Grammar is not exact: But this, instead of making against their Writings,
does really make for them; since it shows, that they used no enticing Words,
nor labored Periods; no lively Figures, nor studied Sentences; all was
natural, without Art or Study; which showed that they knew they needed no
borrowed help to support a Cause in which they were sure Heaven would
interpose, and promote its own concerns; and the veneration with which their
Writings were received, and in which they were held, shows that there was
somewhat else than the Skill or Eloquence, the Persuasives or Arguings of the
Authors, that begat and maintained their Reputation.

If we find here and there a Passage that we know not well what to make of,
this is the fate of all Books that were writ at a great distance from us; The
Customs and Manners of Men change strangely in a course of many Ages; and all
Speech, especially that which is figurative and dark, has such relation to
these, that if in a Book full of many plain, useful and excellent Theories and
Rules, some Passages come in amongst them which we plainly see relate to some
Practice or Opinion of which we are not sufficiently informed, such as the
being baptized for the dead; having power on the head because of the Angels, or
the like: This is nothing but what occurs to us in all ancient Books, and what
we easily bear with in all other Writings, even of a much later Antiquity:
Wear therefore to make the best use we can of that which we do understand; and
to let those other places lie till we can find out their true meaning.

1 Pet. 3.19.
That of Christ's going in the Spirit, to Preach to the Spirits now in Prison,
is perhaps one of these, unless we believe that by Prison is to be meant,
according to the use of that word, and others like it in the Septuagint, the
darkened state of the Gentile World, Isa. 61.42. Isa. 7.49. Isa. 9.1, 2.
who were shut up in Idolatry, as in a Prison, or in Chains, under the power of
the God of this World. In this sense there is nothing easier to be apprehended
than that period; which imports only, that Christ by virtue of the Holy Ghost
that he had poured out upon his Apostles, was calling the Gentile World out of
their Ignorance and Idolatry: And as in the days of Noah, those who were
disobedient perished in the Flood, while there was an Ark prepared for those
who would go into it: So says he, our rising out of the Waters, that being the
last piece of the Baptismal Ceremony, as it was then practiced, and being the
representation of our rising again with Christ, was that which now saves us. In
all this the sense is clear and good, tho the manner of the expression be a
little dark.

The way of all the Easterns, even to this day, in all their discourses, being
obscure and involved, where a great deal is supposed to be already understood;
we are not to wonder, if we should find some parts of the New Testament writ in
that strain. As for that of Melchisedeck, as the words lie, they seem to be a
riddle indeed; but with a little observation we will find that passage
concerning him in the Epistle to the Hebrews, to be as plain as any thing can
be. The design of a great part of this Epistle is to show, Heb. 6.20. Heb. 7.3.
that the Messiah was to be a Priest, and was to offer up a Sacrifice; but not
to be of the Family of Aaron, since he was to spring out of the Tribe of Judah;
nor to be a Priest after that Order, or according to the Rules of that
Institution; but according to the Psalm, to be a Priest after the Order of
Melchisedeck: Psalm, 110 4. Lev. 21.7, 13.14.
Now the Rules or Order of the Aaronical Priesthood were, that every Priest was
to be descended from that Line, to be born of a Mother that had not been a
Widow, or Divorced; and this gave him who was thus received, a right to
transmit his Priesthood to his descendants in a Genealogy derived from him.
These Priests were also tied to their Turns in attending on the Temple, which
were called their Days, in which they were admitted to serve at Thirty, which
was therefore the Age of the beginning of their days; and at Fifty they were
dismissed and were no more bound to attend, than if they had been naturally
dead; so this was the end of their Life, as to their Priesthood. Now in
opposition to this, Melchisedeck was a Priest without Father and Mother; that
is, He was immediately called to it of God; and it did not devolve on him by
descent, nor was he to derive this in a Genealogy to his Posterity: He came ^ot
on to an attendance on the service of God at such an Age, nor went he out at
another, but was a Priest of God for ever; that is, of a long continuance,
according to the common use of that word, which only imports a constancy in any
thing. Melchisedeck was a Priest for term of Life, which answers the
signification of the word; but was a Type of him that in the strictest sense
was to be a Priest of God for ever. Thus if we conster that verse by a reverse,
which is very ordinary, of bringing the last word the govern the whole period,
placing the word Priest at the head of it* nothing can be plainer and more full
to the point that is there driven at. And thus many passages that appear
difficult, when they are but slightly looked at, become very intelligible when
more attentively examined; and as we can make this out in a great many
Instances; so if there are others in which we do still stick, we have all
possible reason to impute our Ignorance to our wanting a sufficient number of
helps, and of Books writ in that Country, and at that time, from which we might
better collect the Opinions, Customs, Phrases and Allusions of those Parts and
Times: For since the Books of our Religion were writ for the use of plain and
simple People, to whom they were addressed, and in whose hands they were to be
put; they must have been writ in a popular, and not in a Rhetorical or
Philosophical Style; which tho it is more correct and more lasting, yet it is
both drier and more labored, and shows always more of Art than of Nature.

I have now gone over all the Heads that I thought necessary to make this
discourse full in all its parts: I have left nothing behind me that seemed to
be material: I have not been afraid to lay open all the secrets of Infidelity,
with the utmost strength that I could ever find them urged in; because I was
fully satisfied in my own mind, that I could answer them all. There is only one
particular remaining, which I have reserved to the last place, because it
affords a proper conclusion to this Discourse. One of the main things in which
Infidels support themselves, is, that tho they speak out, yet let others deny
or disguise their Thoughts as much as they please, either out of Interest or
Modesty, since their Doctrine has an ill sound in the World; yet they think
with them, because they live with them, and not according to the Doctrine which
they espouse: and they seem to conclude with some advantage, That we collect
what men think, much more infallibly from what they do, than from what they
say; And this they urge with much Malice; And would to God that I could add
with as much injustice against too many of our selves; Whose arguings upon
these Heads are so much the less to be regarded than other Men's, because we
have espoused the Cause, and have made it our own, both in point of Reputation
and Interest: I wish and pray that we may all resolve on the only effectual
Confutation of which this is capable, by setting such a pattern to the World,
and leading such exemplary Lives, that in these they may see how firmly we
believe that to which we endeavor to persuade others, who wait for our
halting, and are critical in observing our failings, and malicious in
aggravating them. It gave the chief strength to the first Apologies that were
made for Christianity, that they durst appeal to the Lives of the Christians,
to give the World a right Idea of their Doctrine; whereas we must now decline
that Argument, and appeal from the Lives of Christians to their Doctrine: Yet
wheresoever numbers embrace any thing, there must especially in a course of
many Ages, follow upon it a great declining from what was while they were fewer
in number, and that the thing was newer and fresher upon their Thoughts.
Besides, that the best Christians are those who are the least known, their
Modesty and Humility leading them to hide their best Actions; whereas those who
make the most noise, and the greatest show, are for the most part hot or
designing Men. A Man may also be really a much better Man than one would take
him to be, that sees him only on one side, and does not know him wholly.

The frailties of some Men's natures will hang heavy upon them, and sometimes
burst out even in scandalous instances, notwithstanding all their principles
and struglings to the contrary: Therefore upon the whole matter, tho we cannot
deny but that there is too much truth in this prejudice, yet it is but a
prejudice, and cannot bear much weight: So that it is a most unaccountable
piece of folly to venture Men's Souls and their eternal Concerns upon a
reflection, that as it is not generally true, so has no solidity in it: Yet
after all, the use that we ought to make of it is, that we ought to frame our
own Lives, and the Lives of all that are in our Power, as much as may be to a
Conformity to our Doctrines, that so the World may observe in us such a true
and unaffected course of solid Virtue and useful Piety, that we may again
recover that Argument, which we have too much lost, for the truthand beauty of
our Religion, from the Lives of those who believe and practice it; and that so
the Apologies now writ, which in all other respects are the strongest that ever
were, may again have their full perfection, and their entire effect upon the
World.

DISCOURSE II.
Concerning the Divinity and Death OF CHRIST.
THE main Articles of the Christian Religion, as it is distinguished from all
other Religions, are those which relate to the Person and Sufferings of Christ;
and therefore it is of the last importance for us to have our Notions
concerning these, right and truly stated: and that the rather, because in the
Age in which we live, the laughing at every thing that is resolved into a
Mystery, passes for a piece of Wit, and has the Character of a free and
inquisitive Mind. And while some would have every thing taken for a Mystery,
others set their strength to the decrying of every thing that is proposed as
such, as if that were an Imposition upon Human Nature, and the bringing Mankind
under a Yoke that it cannot and ought not to bear.

Therefore, that I may treat of this Matter in a proper method, and with a due
clearness, I shall first in general consider this Prejudice against all
Mysteries; and when I have thus prepared my way, I shall come to the
consideration of those which I intend now to treat upon. Mystery in its first
and common signification, stood for some Sacred Rites by which Men were
initiated into any form of Religion, which the Priests of corrupt Religions
kept as Secrets, that either they might by that concealment, increase the value
of them, which if they had been generally known, might have appeared so slight
and mean, as to have become contemptible, or that they might hide some
Immoralities or Frauds in the management of them; and all those Theories which
were kept up from the Herd, and only communicated to confiding persons, were
also given out under this Name, as things known only to those that were
initiated. In this sense there is no secret in Christianity, no hidden Rites,
nor concealed Doctrines that are not trusted to the whole body of Christians.
But by an extent of the use os this word, it came to be applied among the
Christians of the first Ages, to those Holy Rites of our Religion that were
Instituted by our Savior, and which they also called Sacraments; because in
those, the Vows that tie us to God in this Religion, were both made and
renewed: The Venerable Truths of this Faith, and Secrets then made public,
were also by S. Paul expressed by this Name, which as it is now commonly
understood, signifies some Theory, or point of Doctrine that we believe;
because we are persuaded that it is revealed to us in Scripture, though we cannot
distinctly apprehend how it can be; and that in the common view which is
offered concerning it, it seems to contradict our common Notions.

In this sense it is opposed by many, who say, There can be no such thing in
Religion: that every thing of which we can form no distinct Idea, is nothing to
us, and that we cannot believe it: since we can only believe that of which we
have some thought; God having made us reasonable Creatures, cannot intend that
we should act contrary to our Natures; and believing any thing contrary to our
apprehensions, seems to be a flat contradiction to our faculties; and it is a
question, whether those who plead for Mysteries, can believe themselves, after
all their Zeal for them since a Man can no more think that to be true, of which
he has no Idea, than a Man can see in the dark; for let him affirm ever so much
that he sees, all other persons who perceive it to be dark, are sure that he
sees, nothing. It seems to be the peculiar Character and Beauty of the
Christian Religion, that it is our reasonable service, or the Rational way of
Worshipping God: and therefore those who would propose it as containing
Mysteries, under a pretense of magnifying it, do rather lessen it, and give
advantages to the Enemies of it to expose it on that account. For upon this
supposition of there being some Mysteries in it, those who corrupt it, seem to
have a ground given them for raising a much greater super structure, and for
silencing all objections against their unconceivable Doctrines, with this word
Mystery, which being so apt to be abused and carried too far, seems to give a
just prejudice against it: upon this ground they conclude, that we are to
believe nothing but that which we can distinctly apprehend: and that if any
word or expression in Scripture seem to import any other thing, we must soften
these to a sense agreeable to our faculties, but that we ought never to yield to
a sense that is unconceivable; which as they argue, is still nothing to us.

This is the Foundation of their Reasonings: and upon this it is that they
justify or excuse some expositions that seem forced and unnatural: for they
say, they are sure they are not to be understood in the Mysterious sense,
because of this general Theory; and therefore they must give them the best
sense that they can find that is suited to their Principles. Upon the right
stating of this, the whole matter turns; and because this whole Speculation is
urged to much worse purposes by Atheists and Deists, it will be necessary to
consider it carefully.

It is certain we can apprehend nothing, but as our faculties represent it to
us, no more than we can see Sounds, or hear Colors: it is also certain, that
we can receive nothing that contradicts our faculties: for let a Man strain for
it as much as he will, he cannot believe that any thing both is, and is not at
the same time; or that two and three do not make five, and neither more nor
less. The objects of sense do also determine us; for when we see a thing
clearly before us, we cannot force our selves to think, or so much as to doubt
that we see it not. But after all, there are many things which we believe upon
the report of others, or upon the Consequences of our own Observation, that
seem to be so far out of our own reach, that our faculties cannot easily
receive them: For instance, let us make a discourse of light, and of seeing, to
a Blind-man: Let us tell him, that a vast Globe, called the Sun, which as he
feels, creates a great heat in the Air at some Hours, in some Seasons of the
Year, gives such pushes to infinite numbers of small parts of matter, that they
are upon that put in a vast motion; and that as these strike upon every
resisting body, and recoil from it, they carry in them some mould of its figure
and bigness; and of another thing too called Color, of which he can frame no
sort of Notion; and that these in this motion, striking upon that which he can
feel to, which is his Eye, do go through it, and enter at a small passage; that
is, in a second Coat of his Eye, which an Anatomist may make him feel to: and
within it, as they have passed through those humors that he can also feel,
those small movers do at last so strike against the most inward Coat, that from
thence a Man may know the figure, matter, bigness, and distance, of such
objects as the blind Man can only feel to, and that a great many Miles of; and
that with one glance of his Eye, he can see many Millions of objects at once,
and be able to judge concerning them, and concerning their distance from him,
and from one another, a great way off: and that he can see the Sun and Stars,
though distant from us many Millions of Millions of Miles. Now though it is to be
confessed, that a blind Man can form no true Idea of all this, yet he may be
bound to believe it, not only from the testimony of all seeing Men, but from
his own observation: for by setting a Man at a considerable distance from him,
and holding up toward him all such things as he knows by feeling, he by the
other Man's answers may perceive plainly that he knows them, though he not only
cannot apprehend how this is done, but seems to raise whole Schemes of
Impossibilities against it. But to give another Instance of this, that will be
more universally sensible; let a Man practiced in Geometry, show a Clown a
small Quadrant, and tell him that by it he can measure the Compass of the whole
Earth, and the distance between the Earth and the Heavenly Orbs: he will laugh
at him as a boasting vain Man, or one that intends to impose upon his
credulity: but if this Mathematician will, to convince him, take the heigt of
any Building, or Precipice that he can measure; the Clown, when he finds that
the Observation agrees with the length of his Plumbline, is somewhat convinced,
and is apt to think, either that the two Stations, and the Computations which
he saw him make on Paper, were Magical Spells, or that he has a Method that
leads him to this by degrees of which he himself is utterly ignorant: so by all
this it is plain, that a Man may be bound from some Authorities and
Observations, to believe some things of which he not only has no Notion, but
fancies he has very clear ones to the contrary.

From hence I will make another step to show, that indeed we believe almost
every thing that we do believe, under the like difficulties and disadvantages:
for Instance, we know that we move, and yet there is something very like a
demonstration against Motion; let A. move from B. to C. two supposed contiguous
Points in a supposed Instant D. A. when it moves, is supposed to be in B. so in
that Instant it cannot go to C. because it is supposed to be in B. and it
cannot be in the same Instant both in B. and C. for then it should be in two
places at once, that is, in the same Instant; therefore in the Instant in which
it is in B. it cannot go to C. and so it cannot do it in any other Instant,
because it is still supposed to be in B. When a Man has turned this over and
over in his Thoughts, he is indeed very sure that it is false, and is very
certain that he moves; yet he feels a contradiction to that in his reasoning,
from which it is not so easy for him to free himself, as he might at first view
apprehend.

This of Motion carries me on to a greater difficulty, whether there are
vacuities in Nature, or not; that is, distances between Bodies in which there
is no sort of Body at all. It is very hard to apprehend how things can be
either of these ways. Motion it self, Condensation and Rarefaction, Weight, and
the crouding of all things to the Center, can hardly be explained without
admitting a Vacuum. And yet as our thoughts cannot receive the Idea of it; so
the whole connection of things, the whole Chain of Matter, and the Communication
of Motion from the Heavenly Orbs down to us, is all broken and interrupted; nor
can we see how the Frame of Nature can hold together, if a Vacuum is once
allowed. So that though we are certain that either it is, or it is not; yet when
one weighs well the difficulties of both Hypotheses, he is so equally
balanced, that he is apt to lean against that whose difficulties were the
last, and are the freshest in his thoughts. If from this we go into the
Compositions of Matter, we are sure that either it is divisible on to Infinity,
and that there are no Indivisible Points in it; or that it has Points, either
such as have no Parts, or extended Atoms that may have Parts, but that are
Indiscernible. It must be one or other of these that must be true: for they may
be reduced to the terms of a Contradiction, since either Matter is divisible
into Infinity, or not; if not, then either those Indivisibles have parts, or
they have not: So that it is plain one of them must be true; and yet every one
who has gone through that famous question, must see that there are such
Insuperable difficulties against every one of them, that they seem to amount to
a demonstration.

I shall Instance but in one other particular, which though it is that of all
others that we should understand the best; yet carries no fewer nor less
difficulties in it, and that is our own Composition. We plainly perceive that
we think, and that we act freely: Then either this rises out of mere Matter, or
we have another principle in us of another nature and order of beings, that
thinks and moves, both it self and also our Bodies. That mere Matter can have
no liberty, and that it cannot think, seems to be evident of it self; all our
Observations of Matter show it to be passive, and to act necessarily, and that
it neither has in it self a power of motion, nor liberty, but always goes in a
Chain: and thought being perceived by us to be one simple act, it must flow
from a single principle that is uncompounded: but on the other hand, what
should Chain down such a subtle being, into so gross a one as body; and how a
thought should move it, or how the motions of Matter should affect the
thinking-principle; how they should give it either pleasure or pain; how the
mind should be furnished from the body with such Images and Figures, by which
it remembers, imagines, argues and speaks; how these should be so subtle, and
yet stick so long, and lie in such order, are things that the more a Man dwells
upon them, and spreads them out before himself, he not only comprehends them
the less, but seems to find such difficulties against them, that he is lost,
and knows not what to think of himself. When a thinking man lays all these, and
a great many more, which will arise from these hints, if he has a mind to look
for them, together, they show him how limited our faculties are, how little
able we are to dive into the nature of things; and that we can much more easily
raise difficulties, than solve them. Yet the use that I plead for in all this
is, neither to lead men to be skeptical, and believe nothing, nor to be too
implicit to believe every thing: but only to evince this, That we may be bound
either from our own Observation, or upon the Authority of other Persons, to
believe some things, of which we are not able to give our selves a distinct
account, nor to answer the objections that may lie against them.

Great difference is to be made between the believing a thing, and the
apprehending the manner of it. If we have sufficient Authority to guide our
Belief, it will be no just objection against it, that the manner of it cannot
be explained: And this is yet more evidently true, if the Being in which a
thing is proposed to our Belief is of an Order and Rank above us; and most of
all, if it is infinitely above us. We perceive in the gradations of our own
being, that a Child is not capable of those Thoughts which he himself will come
to have when he is more ripened: And a man of low Education cannot frame those
apprehensions which are easy to those who are born and bred in better
circumstances. If then the difference of Age and Education make thoughts that
are plain and easy to some, seem unconceivable to others; this ought, when
applied to the Divine Essence, make us conclude, that there may be Mysteries in
that Being, of infinite Perfection and Elevation above us, far beyond all our
apprehensions: And therefore, if God lets out any hints of any such to us, we
are to receive them in such a plain sense as the words do naturally bear: And
if this should happen to import that which does not at all agree with our
Conceptions of other things, we ought not to wrest it to another sense that
seems easier to us.

We can frame no distinct Idea of that Infinite Essence, and it were not
Infinite if we could. How things were made out of nothing, is above our reach;
how it thinks, is an amazing difficulty, whether its Acts are, as is commonly
believed, one with the Essence, or distinct from it. This Essence having
necessary Existence in its first Conception, those free Acts that might not
have been, are not easily apprehended to be one with his Essence; and if those
Acts are said not to be free, then all things exist by the same necessity by
which God exists; for if the Immanent Acts of God are one with his Essence,
then since all the Transient Acts do certainly follow his Immanent ones, there
is an Universal Necessity equally spread over the whole frame of Nature; and
God can do nothing otherwise than he does: But if those Acts of God are
different from his Essence, and distinct from it, such as our Thoughts are;
then here are Accidents in God, and a succession of Thoughts, which seem
inconsistent with infinite Perfection, that is, all one Eternal and
Unchangeable Act. Here is a difficulty that perhaps few reflect on; but it is
every whit as great and as unaccountable as any of the Mysteries of Revealed
Religion can be pretended to be; tho this arises out of Natural Religion. If to
this we add all that we be believe concerning the Attributes of God, his being
every where, his knowing every thing, his Providence in governing all things,
together with those unsearchable Methods in which it exerts it self; we must
acknowledge that he dwells in a Light to which we cannot approach: But that as
the present frame of our Bodies, and structure of our Eyes, cannot bear the
looking steadfastly on the Sun, or the being brought much nearer him, of which
yet we may be capable in another texture of our Eyes and Bodies; so in this
state in which we have narrow Notions, and gross Imaginations, we are not able
to frame distinct Ideas even of those Attributes of God, of which we make no
doubt, but yet we find such difficulties in apprehending them, that they do
blind and confound us, and put us to a stand in all our thinkings about them:
But for all that we still go on, believing firmly those his Attributes.

In fine, We are to make a great difference between those plain perceptions we
have either of the objects of sense, or of simple Theories, and the
difficulties and deductions that belong to them: The one is the voice of our
Faculties, and we cannot oppose it, or believe against it, because it is in
some sort the voice of God within us, since it is the natural result of those
powers that he has put in us; but it is quite another thing when we go to
Inferences, and to frame difficulties. In this appears our Ignorance of the
nature of things, of the several ways and manners in which they may operate,
and of the Consequences that seem to belong to them; because we are apt to
judge of every Being by our selves, and have not extent enough of thought and
observation to reason always true, or to judge exactly: So that this must be
settled as a clear difference between plain perceptions, and a train of
Consequences; we are always to be determined by the one, but not by the other.
To instance it then in that which is now before us; we have a plain perception,
that no Being can be both One and Three in the same respect, because we are
sure that is a plain Contradiction, which cannot possibly be true; but if a
thing is represented as both One and Three, this in different respects may be
true.

Thus I have dispatched this first part, in which it seemed the more necessary
to state this matter aright, that so it may appear, that no part of the plea
for Mysteries, belongs to Transubstantiation, since here is the fullest
evidence of sense, in an object of sense, which plainly represents to us Bread
and Wine to be still the same after Consecration, that they were before; and
therefore we can never be certain of any thing, if in this case we are bound to
believe in contradiction to such a plain and simple perception; but this is not
at all applicable to any speculations concerning the Divine Nature.

I go on from this Previous Discourse, to the Subject it self that I am now
upon; in which there have been three different Opinions: the one is, That
Christ was a Divine Person, miraculously conceived, and wonderfully qualified
for revealing the Will of God to the World; which he did in so excellent a
manner, and set so perfect a pattern both in his Life and Death, that in Reward
of that, God has given him the Government of the World; putting the Divine
Authority in him, and commanding him to be Worshipped and Acknowledged as God,
and has subjected both Angels and Men to him; tho he had no Existence before he
was formed in the Virgin's Womb, and no other nature but that which he derived
from his Miraculous Conception.

Others have thought that there was an Essence created by God before all
Worlds, by which he made and governs all things, and that this Essence which
was like God, dwelt in Christ Jesus, and was by the Gospel revealed to the
World: So that all were bound to honor and obey him. Some of these called him
a Being of a Nature quite different from, and unlike the Divine Nature; which
was found to be of an unacceptable Sound; so others softened it by saying, that
he was of an Essence like the Father: But this was only a milder way of
speaking, since if this Being was created, so that once it was not, its nature
must be essentially unlike the Father; for sure nothing can be more unlike,
than created and uncreated. And by Likeness, such Men could only understand a
Moral Likeness of imitation and resemblance; so that he might be like God, as
we are called to be like him, though in vastly higher degrees.

The 3 d. Opinion is, That the Godhead, by the Eternal Word, the Second in the
Blessed Three, dwelt in, and was so inwardly united to the Human Nature of
Jesus Christ, that by virtue of it, God and Man were truly one Person, as our
Soul and Body make one Man. And that this Eternal Word was truly God, and as
such is worshipped and adored as the proper Object of Divine Adoration. By
those of this Persuasion, the Name Person came to be applied to the Three,
which the Scripture only calls by the Names of Father, Son, or Word, and Holy
Ghost, on design to discover those who thought that these Three were only
different names of the same thing: But by Person is not meant such a Being as
we commonly understand by that word, a complete intelligent Being, distinct
from every other Being: but only that every one of that blessed Three, has a
peculiar distinction in himself, by which he is truly different from the other
two.

This is the Doctrine that I intend now to explain to you. When I say Explain,
I do not mean, that I will pretend to tell you how this is to be understood,
and in what respect these Persons are believed to be One, and in what respects
they are Three. By explaining a Mystery, can only be meant the showing how it
is laid down and revealed in Scripture; for to pretend to give any further
account of it, is to take away its Mysteriousness, when the manner how it is in
it self is offered to be made intelligible. In this too many both Ancients and
Moderns have perhaps gone beyond due bounds; while some were pleased with the
Platonical Notions of Emanations, and a Fecundity in the Divine Essence: For we
have footsteps of a Tradition as Ancient, even among Heathens, as any we can
trace up, which limited the Emanations to Three: And these thought there was a
Production, or rather an Eduction of two out of the first: In the same manner
that some Philosophers thought that Souls were propagated from Souls; and the
figure by which this was explained, being that of one Candle's being lighted at
another; this seems to have given the rise to those words, Light of Light. It
is certain, many of the Fathers fell often into this conceit, and in this way
of explaining this matter, they have said many things which intimate that they
believed an inequality between the Persons and a Subordination of the Second
and Third to the First: So that by the same Substance or Essence, they do in
many places express themselves as if they only meant the same Being in a
general Sense, as all human Souls are of the same Substance; that is, the same
order or sort of Beings; and they seemed to entitle them to different
operations; not only in an Oeconomical way, but thought that one did that which
the other did not. This was indeed more easily to be apprehended; but it seemed
so directly to assert Three Gods, which was very contrary to many most express
Declarations both in the Old and New Testament, in which the Unity of the Deity
is so often held forth, that therefore others took another way of explaining
this; making it their Foundation, that the Deity was one Numerical Being. They
then observed, that the Sun, besides his own Globe, had an Emanation of Light,
and another of Heat, which had different Operations, and all from the same
Essence; and that the Soul of Man had both Intellection and Love, which flowed
from its Essence: So they conceived that the primary Act of the Divine Essence,
was its Wisdom, by which it saw all things, and in which, as in an inward Word,
it designed all things: This they thought might be called the Son, as being the
Generation of the Eternal Mind; while from the Fountain-Principle, together
with this inward Word, there did arise a Love that was to issue forth, and that
was to be the Soul of the Creation, and was more particularly to animate the
Church: And in this Love, all things were to have Life and Favor. This was
rested on, and was afterward dressed up with a great deal of dark nicety by
the Schools, and grew to be the Universally received Explanation: Tho many have
thought, that the term Son, did not at all belong to the Blessed Three, but
only to our Savior, as he was the Messiah; the Jews having had that Notion of
the Messiah, that as he was to be the King of Israel, so he was to be the Son
of God: We find Nathanael addressed himself thus to him; and when the
High Priest adjur'd our Savior to tell if he was the Messiah, he knits these
two together, Art thou-the Christ the Son of the most High God? which shows,
that they did esteem these two as one and the same thing. Now some Critics do
apprehend, that since in many places the term Son of God, has manifestly a
relation to Christ as the Messiah; there is in this an Uniformity in the whole
Scripture Style, so that every where by the phrase Son of God, we are to
understand Jesus, as the Messiah, in which the human Nature being the first
Conception, they conceive that all the places importing an Inferiority of the
Son to the Father, have no difficulty in them, since they are only to be
understood of Jesus as the Messiah; but that the Divine Principle that was in
him, is in the strictness of Speech to be called as St. John does, the Word. So
that by this, if true, all the Speculations concerning an Eternal Generation,
are cut off in the strict sense of the words, tho in a larger sense every
emanation of what sort soever, may be so called. These, and a great deal more
of this kind that might be further branched out, and enlarged upon, are the
Explanations that Divines have offered at upon this Mystery. But it may be
justly questioned, whether by these they have either made it to be better
understood, or to be more firmly believed; or whether others have not taken
advantage to represent those subtilities as dregs, either of AEones of the
Valentinians, or of the Platonical Notions; which last being in so high and
just a Reputation among the Greeks, it is plain, that many of the Ancients
thought it was no small service to the Christian Religion, to show a great
Affinity between it and Plato's Theology: and it being long before these
Theories were well stated and settled, it is no wonder if many of the Fathers
have not only differed from one another, but even from themselves in speaking
upon this Argument. While men go about to explain a thing of which they can
frame no distinct Idea, it is very natural for them to run out into a vast
Multiplicity of words; into great length, and much darkness and confusion. Many
improper Similies will be urged, and often impertinent reasonings will be made
use of. All which are the unavoidable Consequences of a man's going about to
explain to others that which he does not distinctly understand himself.

This in general is the sum of the Received Doctrine, That as there is but One
God, so in that undivided Essence, there are Three that are really different
from one another, and are more than only three Names, or three outward
Oeconomies, and that the Second of these was in a most intimate and
unconceivable manner united to a perfect Man; so that from the Human and Divine
Nature thus united, there did result the Person of the Messiah, who was both
God and Man.

Here new Subtilties have been found out, to state the formal Notion of a
Person, which was supposed to consist in a special Subsistence, so that it has
been thought, that the Human Nature in Christ, had no special Subsistence of
its own, tho it was not easy to explain this Notion; since if Subsistence
belonged to the Human Nature, it might seem that it was not perfect, if it had
not a proper Subsistence. A Hypostatical Union was proposed as a term fit to
explain this by, that is to say, the Human Nature was believed to subsist by
the Subsistence of the Word; but it was not easy to make this the more
intelligible, by offering a Notion full as unintelligible as it self, to
explain it by. Tho indeed this is a point, in which it is more possible for us
to arrive at distinct Ideas, or somewhat very like them, than the other. We
plainly see, that the Union of our Souls to our Bodies, consists in a Harmony
that God has settled between such an Organization of matter, and such Sensations
that arise out of the different motions of this Matter so organized: Upon which
this Matter is in many things under the power of the Mind, which by its
thoughts commands and moves it, and it has from it a continual Influence and
Actuation that is called Life; so that the Union of the Soul and Body is the
result of such a proper Harmony of the Body, according to the Mechanical
Structure of its necessary parts, as makes it fit to give proper Sensations to
the Mind, and to receive and obey the Impressions of the Mind, the breaking of
which Harmony brings on death.

From hence we may apprehend several degrees of the Union of thinking being
with Matter: The lowest, is that if Infants, where there is a thought, but a
thought so entirely under the Impressions of Matter, that it is not able to
rise above them, and either to think of any thing else, or to stop the Violence
of these Impressions: So here is a Spirit wholly immersed in Matter, that is in
every thing under its dominion, and is a slave to it; and in this state Idiots
continue their whole life long. A second degree is that of men in this Life
duly ripened, in which their Minds are as to their Sensations still subject to
Matter; that is, they must feel pain or pleasure, according to the dispositions
of Matter; but then there is a power in the Soul to govern Matter, and not to
yield to those Sensations: So that there is a lasting struggle between the
Sensations that arise from the Body, and the Cogitations that spring in the
Mind, which have the better of one another by turns. Here the Soul and Body are
as it were equally yoked together, only the Soul may by the use of Reason and
Liberty be so assisted, as to have the ascendant over the Body for the greatest
part.

From these we may conceive two other degrees of Union, which may be between
Souls and Bodies. The one is a State in which the Soul shall have an entire
Authority over Matter, but yet shall need the assistance of it, as a necessary
mean of Motion, and as having in it a repository of Images and Figures, for
memory and imagination: So that in such a state, the Body shall have no power
at all over the Mind, but shall only serve it as Instruments do a Mechanic:
and this seems to be a Philosophical Notion of the use that our Bodies, shall
be of to us in another State; in which they shall be no more clogs upon us, to
give us uneasy or grievous sensations, but shall only be the proper Machines
for Motion and Memory, and for such like uses, in which the Body when well
tuned can serve the Mind. A Fourth degree may be a State in which a Mind may be
so entirely perfect in its self, and in its own acts, that it may have no need
of a Body upon its own account, but only in order to the ministering to another
Spirit that is yet under the power of Matter, to give it either Warnings, or
Assistances; which perhaps it cannot communicate, but through the Conveyance,
or by the Mechanical Motions and Impressions of one piece of Matter upon
another. Upon this account, and for this end, Spirits of the highest form, nay
God himself, may at some times, and for some unknown ends, make use of a Body,
and put it in such a form, and so actuate it, as thereby to communicate some
Light or Influence to minds that are yet much immersed in Matter. These are all
the ways that we can apprehend of a Mind's assuming Matter, and being united to
it, which is the having it under its Actuation, or Authority; so that the Acts
of the Mind give such Impressions to the Body, as govern and command it. By the
same way of thinking, we may apprehend yet more easily, how one Spirit may be
united to another; which is, when a superior Spirit has another of an Inferior
Order so entirely under its conduct and Impressions, that the Inferior receives
constant Communications of Light and Impulse from the Superior: And as the Body
lives by the presence of the Soul, even when it does not by any distinct Act
work upon it, or enliven it; so a superior Mind may have a perpetual conduct of
an inferior, even when it leaves it to its own liberty, and does not break in
upon it by any immediate enlightening or animating of it. And thus we may
conceive the Subsistence of an Intelligent Being to be its acting entirely in
it self, or upon Matter united to it, without any other Spirit's being
constantly present to it, actuating it, or having it under any immediate Vital
and inseparable Influence. This seems to give some light toward the Idea of a
Subsistence, as separated from the Essence, and by consequence, of one person's
Subsistence in, by, and from another. I do not pretend to say, that this is the
strict Notion of Subsistence, but it is the nearest thing that I can imagine to
it, which will at least help to form some general Idea of it; for these being
all the distinct Notions that we can frame of the Union of Spirits to other
Spirits, or of Spirits to Matter, they will help us to a more distinct
Apprehension of the Union of the Eternal Word to a Human Nature, by which it
assumed the Man into such an inward and immediate Economy, that it did always
actuate, illuminate and conduct him, as we perceive our Souls do our Bodies.

This is the clearest thought that we give our selves of that Human Nature's
subsisting by the Subsistence of the Word that dwelt in it. This also agrees
well with the Expressions of the Word's dwelling in Flesh, and of the bodily
Indwelling of the Fullness of the Godhead in Christ Jesus. But having now showed
how far these things may become in some sort intelligible to us, I go to my
main Design, which is to examine no longers whether this ought to be believed
or not, in case we should find it very expressly affirmed in the New Testament,
for I hope I have already made that out fully: Therefore the only question that
now lies before me, is, Whether this is contained in the New Testament, or not?
for if it is in it, and is a part of its Doctrine, then since that Doctrine is
proved to be all true, and revelled by God, this must be likewise true, if it
is a part of it. This I will also yield, That Authorities brought to prove
Articles that are so sublime^ as to rise above our ways of Apprehension, ought
to be made out by a greater fullness of express Proofs, and bare Precepts of
Morality, or more easily received Notions; for as among men, every thing
requires a proportioned degree of proof, as it is more or less credible of it
self: So in Religion, we ought not to suppose, that if God intended to reveal
any thing to us, that should pase our Understandings, he would only do it in
hints or in words, and in expressions of doubtful signification; therefore I
yield, that those who deny Mysteries, have a right to demand full, express and
copious proofs of them. I will therefore only dwell upon those proofs that are
very comprehensive, and will not rest upon single passages, which I leave to
Books of Controversy or Criticism, in which they are fully opened and made out:
My not using these, is not from the distrust that is in them, but I intend to
lay this matter before you, in some observations that take in a great deal, and
that if they are true, do give a clearer Light, and a more unquestioned
Authority to single passages, since those agree with the frame of the whole.

I need not spend many words to prove, that the main Design of Revealed
Religion, was to drive all Idolatry out of the World, either the worshipping of
other Gods besides the true, or the worshipping the True God under a Bodily
Representation. This is so expressly set out by Moses, and so much insisted on,
and prosecuted by the Prophets, that it will admit of no dispute; nor is there
any made about it. To guard this Capital Article of Religion, God, when he sent
Moses to be the Deliverer and the Law giver of the Jews, gave himself a
particular Name that was to be peculiar to himself; so that the Kings or false
Gods might be called by the other Names of the Deity, yet this was never given
to any of them. The Old Testament being put in Greek by the Jews, the Name
Jehovah was throughout Translated by them (...). I do not insist upon the
Article being prefixed to it; for tho it is so very often, yet I am convinced
that there is no arguing from that, since there is such variety in the use of
it. Now the Greek Translation of the Old Testament being that which was the
most read and used by the Jews in our Savior's time, in the whole Phrasiology
of their Sacred reading, (...) and Jehovah were one and the same thing. The
Authors of the New Testament, as they were Jews by Birth and Education, so they
offered the Gospel first to the Jews. In all that they writ, we see plainly
that they had them in their eye, either to convince them, or at least to answer
their Prejudices and Objections. And it is certain, that how much soever that
Nation was Anciently bent to Idolatry, they were ever after the time of the
Maccabees so entirely cured of it, that they could not bear any approachs to
it, or shadow of it. Yet the Apostles through the whole New Testament call our
Savior by the Name of (...); sometimes he is called Lord, or the Lord, that
is, with or without the Article, and that simply without any Addition;
sometimes my Lord, or our Lord; but most frequently the Lord Jesus Christ, or
Jesus Christ our Lord: These indeed return so often, especially in the Acts of
the Apostles, and in the Epistles, that they could not be all copi'd out in
many pages. Now this being so Sacred a Name to the Jews, it is impossible to
imagine that the Apostles could intend other in it, but that the Jehovah dwelt
so immediately and bodily in Christ Jesus, that by that Indwelling he was truly
Jehovah. This will be more evident, if we consider the Glorious Appearance of
God in the Holy of Holies, in which there was a Cloud, and within the Cloud a
Glory that did often shine out, to show an acceptance of their Sacrifices and
Prayers, or to give particular Answers, when the Holy Priest came with the Urim
in the Breast Plate to consult God. This was a continued Miracle, and a lively
Emblem of the Deity, which is full of Light and Glory in it self, but is
environed with such impenetrable darkness to us, that we can neither comprehend
his Nature nor his Operations, but as he is pleased to shine out and show
somewhat of himself to us. But this was yet more than a bare Miracle, it was a
constant Presence and Inhabitation of God, who not only kept the Cloud and
Light from being dissipated, which otherwise must have happened according to the
Laws of Matter and Motion; but he was so signally present in it, that in the
wholeStyle of the Old Testament, Jehovah was said to dwell between the
Cherubins, to shine out, to show the Light of his Countenance, or to hide his
face, and cover himself with a thick Cloud. He was said to be in his Temple, to
sit on his Throne; with a great many other expressions, which relate to this;
The Lord of Glory, and the God of Glory, his appearing in Glory, his coming
with Glory, do all belong to this. Fron whence it is plain, that a constant and
immediate visible Indwelling of the Jehovah was according to the
Scripture Phrase, said to be Jehovah, which was applied to nothing else. It is
further to be observed, That as the Jews called this the Glory simply, or the
Schechinah, that is, the Inhabitation, so it was wanting in the Second Temple;
and this was indeed its greatest want, which no doubt occasioned the chief
Grief of those who mourned when they saw the Second Temple; since to one who
was an Israelite indeed, this was the real Glory; the Gold and the Silver being
poor matters in comparison with this. These were comforted by the Prophet
Haggai, who promised to them in the Name of God, 2 Hag. 6.7, 8, 9.
that God wouid fill the house with his Glory; he also takes off meaner minds
from their opinion of a defect for the want of Gold and Silver, since that was
all God's: So they offered up nothing in that to him, that was not his already.
The Glory that is promised, was to exceed the Glory of the former House; to
which two great Characters are added, the one, that he would shake all Nations;
that is, an Appearance should come, in which the Gentiles should be concerned
in an eminent manner: The other is, that in that place he would give Peace. Now
let any unprejudiced man consider, if Herod's rebuilding the Temple can in any
sort be thought to answer this; especially the Glory being both in the true
Value of thing, and in the Prophetic Style, to be understood of that signal
Presence of God in the Temple, which was its solid and true Glory. Since then
the Jews looked for this, and that by many Prophecies concerning the Messiah,
mention was made of his appearing in Glory; this could be meant no other way by
them, but that either he was to restore that Glory to the Temple, or that he
was to have it in himself; and since it was to be greater than that of the
former House, there must have been some eminent Character in it beyond the
former: In particular, the whole World was to be struck with it, which is
expressed in the Prophetic Strain, by the shaking the Heavens and the Earth,
the Sea and the dry Land; and the shaking of all Nations. I do not argue from
that which follows, of the desire of all Nations, because I know it is capable
of another Translation, and I will build upon sure grounds. This Glory was
likewise to bring Peace with it; which cannot be literally understood, since
the Jews had very little Peace, either from the days of Herod, to whom they
apply this; or from the days of our Savior, to whom the Christians apyly it.
Now from all this it is to be inferred, that the Apostles applying universally
the name (...) to our Savior, could mean no other, but that he was the true
Jehovah by a more perfect Indwelling of the Deity in him, than that had been
which was in the Cloud. This Glory was greater than the other; for the other
dwelt in a Mass of mere Matter, whereas this dwelt in the Soul and Body of our
Savior; and a Soul is much a perfecter sort of Being than the purest Matter
possible. This was also to last for ever, whereas the other had a determined
Duration, and came to a period: and the other did shine out only upon special
Occasions, whereas in this we all with open face as in a glass beholding the
Glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3, 18
are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory; a period made up of the
Phraseology that belonged to the Schechinah: as is also that of his being the
Brightness of the Father's Glory, 1. Heb. 3.
and the express Image, or Character, of his Person; that of the Word which was
made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his Glory, 1. John 14.
the Glory as of the Only Begotten Son of the Father; that of the light of the
Glorious Gospel, or rather of the Gospel of the Glory of Christ; 2 Cor. 4.4.
and that of the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face or
person of Jesus Christ; all these, with many more that might be quoted; do so
plainly allude to the Phraseology of the Cloud of Glory, Verse 6.
that it is not possible for any who consider things carefully, to avoid the
Evidence of it. If it had not been so, what can be said to justify this manner
of expression, especially the giving the Translation of the Incommunicable Name
that was in the Old Testament, in a thread all over the New, to our Savior?
This was the laying snares for the first Believers, and that in the most
important Point of all Religion; so that since our Savior denounced a Woe to
him, by whom Scandals should come; the Apostles were the first that incurred
it, 18. Mat. 7.
if they by a continued course of Style led the world to believe that a mere
man was the great Jehovah. If that had occurred only now and then, the extent
of the signification of the Greek word might be alleged; but it being the
Title which they constantly give him, as well as it was that by which the Jews
understood the Jehovah to be meant, this cannot in any sort be justified from a
gross Abuse put on the World, if the Messiah was not the Jehovah. The great
Objection that arises against this is, that tho (...) is indeed the common
Translation for Jehovah, yet sometimes it is put for the other Hebrew words,
both Elohim and Adonai; and that in the New Testament it is used rather in
opposition, or more properly in subordination to the Name of God, which seems
to be stated very plainly by St. Paul, when he says, there were many that were
called Gods, 1 Cor. ^ 5, 6.
whether in Heaven or in Earth, as there were Gods many, and Lords many; in
opposition to all which he asserts, that to Christians there is but one God the
Father, of whom were all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus, by whom
were all things, and we by him: From hence it seems that the true Notion of
this, according to St. Paul is, That as the Heathen Nations believed some
supreme Deities, and other deputed or lower Deities, that watched over
particular Nations; so we Christians do own only one Eternal God, the Creator
and Preserver of all; and one Lord, to whom he has given the Government of all
things: So that this, as it favors the Notion of one exalted to divine
Authority and Honor, it does likewise take away quite the whole force of this
Argument: and so it cannot be well established without considering this very
carefully. It is then to be observed, that through the Old Testament, God is
spoken of under two different Notions; the one is general, as he created and
governed all things; and the other is special, as he was in Covenant with the
Jewish Nation, and as he governed them particularly by his Laws, was present
among them in a Visible Symbol, and watched over them by a distinguishing
Providence. In this last sense Jehovah is the Name by which he is strictly
expressed, as their Federal God, that had an immediate Care over them, and a
Right to them. The Nations that lived in Idolatry, had Notions which seem to be
taken from this: For as they believed some supreme and some subaltern Deities,
so they also fancied that some, even of those supreme Deities, were more
especially related or appropriated to some places: Thus as they conceived them
to be Supreme, they held them to be Gods; and as they believed them to have a
special Relation to any Place or Nation, they were esteemed according to this
piece of Jewish Phraseology here used by St. Paul, Lords as well as Gods. In
opposition to all which, we Christians own but one Supreme God: and we do also
believe, that this great God is also our Federal God, or Jehovah, by his
dwelling in the Human Nature of Jesus Christ: So that he is our Lord, not by an
assumption into high Dignity, or the communicating Divine Honor to him, but as
the Eternal Word dwelt bodily in him; and thus he is our Lord, not as a Being
distinct from, or deputed by the great God, but as the great God manifesting
himself in his Flesh or Human Nature; which is the great Mystery of Godliness,
or of true Religion: And this will give a clear account of all those other
passages of the New Testament, in which the Lord Jesus is mentioned as distinct
from, or subordinate to God and his Father. The one is the more extended Notion
of God, as the Maker and Preserver of all things, and the other is the more
special Notion, as appropriated to Christians, by which God is federally their
God, Lord, or Jehovah. This I think does fully establish this Argument, and
takes away the whole force of the Objection against it. But to carry this yet
further, the Apostles do not only name him thus, in all their Writings, but
they do propose him as the proper Object of Adoration, at the same time that
they commanded the World to renounce all Idolatry, and to serve the living God.
St. Paul gives this Definition of Heathenish Idolatry, 1 These. 1.9.
that it was a worship given to those who by nature were not Gods; yet he prays
to Christ, he prays for Grace, Mercy and Peace from him to all the Churches he
writes to; 4 Gal. 8.
he gives him Glory for ever and ever; a Phrase expressing the highest Act of
Adoration: he believes in him, he serves him, 2 Phil, 10.
he gives Blessing in his Name; he says, That all in Heaven and Earth must
confess him, and bow before him; a Phrase importing Adoration; he says, the
Angels of God worship him. Heb. 1.6.
In other Epistles this is also often mentioned, and in St. John's Visions,
Rev, 5.8.
all the Hosts above are represented as falling down before him to worship him.
Now the bare Incurvation does not import Divine Worship, but may be made ^o a
Creature; yet Incurvation joined with Prayers, Acts of Faith and Trust, and
Praises, is certainly Divine Worship. Since then our Savior in his Temptation
said to the Devil, that according to the Law we must worship the Lord our God,
and serve him only; since also the Angel when he reproved St. John for falling
down before him, 4. Mat. 10. 19 Rev. 10.
bids him worship God; then when these things are laid together, and it appears
that all the Acts of Adoration by which we worship God, are also ascribed to
Christ, and offered up to him, either it must be confessed, that he is truly
God, or that the Christian Religion sets up Idolatry at the same time that it
seems to design the pulling it down every where; as if Idolatry had only been
to be changed in its object, and to be transfered from all others to the Person
of our Savior.

This point of the worship of Christ is so plainly set forth in the New
Testament, that the chief Opposers of the Article of his Divinity have asserted
it with so much Zeal, that they deny, that such as refuse to pay it to him,
deserve to be called Christians: and yet there is not any one point that is
more fully and frequently condemned through the whole Scriptures, than the
worshipping a Creature. It is also a main part of all the Exhortations of the
Apostles. Angels were often sent on Divine Deputations, as the Instruments of
the great God, but yet they were never to be worshipped. Idolatry is an Evil in
it self, and is not only the Transgression of a positive precept, but it is a
transferring of the Honor and Homage due to the Author of our Being, and the
Fountain of all our Blessings, and the ascribing these to a Creature; it is a
worshipping the Creature besides the Creator: And if the same Acts of Prayer
and Thanksgiving in the same words, can be offered up both to the Creature and
the Creator, then how can we still think that God is a jealous God, and that he
will not give his Glory to another? Isa. 42.8.
In a word, this is that which seems so sensible, that one does not know what
to think of those men's Reasons, who cannot bring themselves to believe any
thing concerning the Divine Nature, which differs from their own Notions, and
yet can swallow down so vast an Absurdity, that is more open to the compass of
their Understandings, as that the same Acts in which we acknowledge and adore
God, should be at the same time offered up to a Creature.

But to urge this a little more closely, it is well known how averse the Jews
were to all the appearances of Idolatry, in our Savior's time; their Zeal
against the figures of the Roman Eagles, set over the Temple-gates by Herod,
and against the Statue of Caligula, besides many other Instances, prove this
beyond all question. They were much prejudiced against the Apostles, as well as
they had been against our Savior; and the Apostles do in several passages of
their Epistles set down these their prejudices, together with their own Answers
to them: They excepted to the abrogating the Mosaical Ordinances, and to their
calling in the Gentiles, and associating themselves with them; but it does not
appear that they did ever charge them with Idolatry, nor do the Apostles in any
hint ever offer to vindicate themselves from that Aspersion. Now if Christ had
been only a Man Defied, advanced to Divine Honor, or if he had been ever so
Noble a part, and even the first part of the Creation, and had been now made
the Object of the worship of the Christians, let any Man see, if it is
conceivable, that the Jews who were such implacable Enemies to Christianity,
should not have held to this as their main Strength and chief Objection: Since
as this was a very popular thing, in which it was easy to draw in all their
Country men; so it was the easiest, as well as the most important part of their
Plea, they might have yielded, that all the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles
were true, and yet upon this pretense of Idolatry, they had the express words
of their Law on their side. If there arises among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer
of Dreams, and gives thee a Sign or a Wonder; Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2.
and the Sign or the Wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying,
Let us go after other Gods which thou have not known, and let us serve them:
Thou shall not hearken to the words of that Prophet, or that Dreamer of Dreams,
for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God
with all your Heart; and with all your Soul. This was such an express and full
Decision of the Case, that he may imagine any thing, that can imagine that they
could have past it by, and that they should not have objected it, or that the
Apostles, if their Doctrine had been either that of the Arians, or of the
Socinians, should not have either answered or prevented the Objection, since
they dwell long upon things that were much less important. Several that joined
themselves to Christianity were scandalized, and fell back to the Jews; but it
does not appear, that any of them ever charged them with Idolatry, or that the
Jews ever reproached them with it; which yet we cannot think they would not
have done, if the Christians had offered Divine Adoration to a Creature, to one
that was a mere Man newly dignified, or that had been made by God before all
his other Works. Here a Creature was made a God, and the Christians were guilty
of serving other gods, whom their Fathers had not known.

This cannot be retorted on us, who believe that Christ was God by virtue of
the Indwelling of the Eternal Word in him. The Jews could make no Objection to
this, who knew that their Fathers had worshipped the Cloud of Glory, because of
God's resting upon it: So the adoring the Messiah upon the supposition of the
Godhead's dwelling Bodily in him, 2 Col. 9.
could bear no debate among the Jews; and since it was singly upon this point,
that they could let it pass without raising Objections or Difficulties about
it, and since we find in fact, that they did let it pass, and that the Apostles
made no Explanations upon it, we have all possible reason to conclude, that it
was thus understood of all hands at that time. I think it is not possible to
imagine, that this could be otherwise: so that upon these Reasons, we may well
and safely determine, that Christ was truly both God and Man; and that the
Godhead did as really dwell in his Human Nature, and became united to it, as
our Souls dwell in our Bodies, and are united to them.

Having then laid down this Matter from Authorities that run through the whole
New Testament, and that return often in every Book of it, I may now upon
greater Advantages refer such as will descend to a more particular Enquiry, to
all those passages that assert Christ's having created all things, 1. Col.
16.17.
Angels as well as Men; that he is over all and in all; before all things; in
whom all things do subsist; that he is the Lord of Glory, 2 Jam. 1. 1 Cor. 2.8.
2 Tit. 13. 1 John 5.20.
the Great God, and the true God; the Lord Almighty; who was, is, and is to
come; who knows all things, and can do whatsoever he will; who is the first and
the last, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; who alone has Immortality; who
was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God; who
will raise the dead at the last day, and judge the World; who is God manifested
in the Flesh, 1 Rev. 8.21. Joh. 17. 3 Phil. 21. 1 Timothy 6.17, 18. 2 Phil. 6. 5
John 21. to 29.
the great Mystery of Godliness; who is over all God blessed for ever. These
and many more such like passages, but above all, the beginning of the Gospel of
St. John, on which I need not insist, since that has been done with such
Strength and Clearness of Reason by a much better Hand; All these single
passages, I say, are so many express Proofs of this great Article of our
Religion, that I am confident, those who have cleared themselves of that great
prejudice against it, to which the first part* of this Discourse was directed,
cannot read them without feeling that they are wrestling against the full
current of the whole New Testament, 6 John 54. 1 Timothy 3.16 9 Romans 5.
who oppose this.

I know a great deal has been said to take off the force of every one of them;
for if a Man resolves beforehand not to believe a thing, he may easily bring
out matter enough to avoid the most express words that can be invented: yet
this I dare positively affirm, that at their rate of answering passages, with
which we urge them, it were easy to answer the most express words that we could
be capable to contrive, for setting out our Doctrine: to which this is likewise
to be added, That it will be very hard to preserve any respect for Writings
that are filled with such Intimations of so Important a Doctrine; all which at
first view seem to carry a Sense which they judge Monstrous and Impious, and
that with much labor and difficulty are wrought to another sense. It will not
be easy to think, those men had the common degrees of Honesty and Discretion,
not to speak of Inspiration, who writ in such a Style, with such Phrases, and
in such a continued Strain, that ordinary Readers must stumble in every step;
and that in a point of such vast Consequence, as whether a mere Creature is the
great and true God, or not? and that a great deal of Dexterity and Diligence is
necessary to give them another sense. I must own, that if I could think so of
the Scriptures, I should lose all Esteem for them, and could think no other of
the Penmen of them, but that their great Affection for their Master had led
them to say many things concerning him, that were Excessive and Hyperbolical,
and not strictly true. This is literally, and without any aggravation, the
sense that I have of this Matter: and the profane Tribe of Libertines go all
into this, of laughing down all Mysteries; knowing well, that when they have
once gained that point, the New Testament it self will be laughed down next, in
which they are so plainly contained: And indeed, the Christian Religion must be
the most self-contradicting of all the Religions in the World, since it does so
often condemn the worshipping of Creatures, and yet heaps all sorts of Divine
Honors on a Creature; and St. John must be a most incongruous Writer, who could
at the conclusion of his first Epistle, say of Christ Jesus, This is the true
God, and Eternal Life, and in the very next words add, Little Children keep
your selves from Idols, when in the very preceding words he had been setting
them on to it, if St. Paul's definition must hold true, that Idolatry is a
service to those who by nature are not gods.

It is true, upon this they will recriminate and say, That there being nothing
more expressly and frequently contained in Scripture, and that indeed arises
more plainly out of our Idea of God, than that he is One, we destroy that by
setting up Three. This would press hard, if we did affirm three distinct
Beings; but since that which is One in it self, may be Three in other respects,
it is only a consequence that they infer, but which we deny, That we set up
more Gods than one; and no man is to be charged with the supposed Consequences
of his Doctrine, when he himself does not own them, but denies them, and thinks
he can plainly show that they do not necessarily follow from it. We do plainly
perceive in our selves two, if not three different Principles of Operation,
that do not only differ, as Understanding and Will, which are only different
modes of thinking, but differ in their Character and way of Operation. All our
Cogitations and Reasonings are a sort of Acts, in which we can reflect on the
way how we operate; we perceive that we act freely in them, and that we turn
our Minds to such Objects and Thoughts as we please. But by another Principle
of which we perceive nothing, and can reflect upon no part of it, we live in
our Bodies, we animate and actuate them, we receive Sensations from them, and
give Motions to them; we live and die, and do not know how all this is done. It
seems to be by some Emanation from our Souls, in which we do not feel that we
have any liberty, and so we must conclude, that this Principle in us is natural
and necessary. In Acts of Memory, Imagination and Discourse, there seems to be
a mixture of both Principles, or a third that results out of them: for we feel
a freedom in one respect, but as for those Marks that are in our Brain, that
set things in our Memory, or furnish us with words, we are necessary Agents,
they come in our way, but we do not know how. We cannot call up a Figure of
things of words at pleasure. Some disorder in our Mechanism hides or flattens
them, which when it goes off, they start up and serve us, but not by any Act of
our Understanding or Will: Thus we see that in this single undivided Essence of
ours, there are different Principles of Operation, so different as Liberty and
Necessity are from one another: I am far from thinking, that this is a proper
Explanation or Resemblance of this Mystery; yet it may be called in some sort
an Illustration of it, since it shows us from our own Composition, that in one
Essence there may be such different Principles, which in their proper
Character, may be brought to the terms of a Contradictition, of being free and
not free. So in the Divine Essence, which is the simplest and perfectest Unity,
there may be Three, that may have a diversity of Operations as well as
Oeconomies. By the first, God may be supposed to have made and to govern all
things: by the second, to have actuated and been most perfectly united to the
Humanity of Christ; and by the third, to have Inspired the Penmen of the
Scriptures, and the Workers of Miracles, and still to renew and fortify all
good Minds. But tho we cannot explain how they are Three, and have a true
diversity from one another, so that they are not barely different Names and
Modes; yet we firmly believe that there is but one God; and with this I
conclude all that I have intended to say on the Head of the Divinity of Christ.

The next Head that I have now before me, is his Death and Sufferings. Which I
intend to treat in the same general way in which I considered the former. I
must first observe, that Schoolmen and the Writers of positive Divinity, have
upon this Head laid down a great many Subtilties, in which the Scripture is
absolutely silent.

They begin with a Position, that is the Foundation of all their Calculations,
that God cannot freely forgive sin; that purishing as well as remunerative
Justice, are essential to him; that God being Infinite, every Offense against
him has an infinite Guilt, and must be expiated either by Acts of infinite
Value, or of infinite Duration; and that a Person of an infinite Nature, was
only capable of Acts of an infinite Value; that such a one was necessary for
expiating sin. But in all this gradation, there is one main defect, That the
Scripture sets none of these Speculations before us; nor is it easy to
apprehend, that a right of punishing, which is in the Legislator, and a right
to a Reward, which passes from him to the person that acquires it, should be
equally essential to God. In the one, his Fidelity and Justice are bound,
because of the right that accrues to another; but the other of punishing, seems
to be a Right that is vested in himself, which he may either use or not, as he
pleases: and if every sin, as being of infinite Guilt, must be expiated by an
infinite Act, it will not be easy to make this out, how the Acts of Christ, tho
infinite in Value, should stand in a strict Equality with all the sins of so
many men, every one of which is of infinite guilt. Therefore these being a
subtle Contexture of Legal Metaphysics, of which the Scripture is silent, it
best becomes us to take our Notions from the Scriptures themselves. It is true
Justice and Justification being the terms used upon this Head, in some of the
Epistles, that seems to give some Authority to those reckonings which are laid
down to make out a Justice in all God's Proceedings. But those who observe the
Style of the Scriptures more narrowly, will see, that those words import no
more but a state of Favor and Acceptance with God; for the Righteousness of
the Law, was a man's acceptance that had served God in the Mosaical
Dispensation; and the Righteousness of Faith was the Acceptance that a man in
the Gospel Dispensation had in the sight of God; so that the frequent use of
those words will be found to have no relation to those subtle weighings of
Infinities one against another.

But I go next to show in what Notion, and under what a set of Phrases this
matter is stated to us in the New Testament: It is then to be considered, that
when the New Testament was writ, there was not any one thing that all people
understood better, than the Sacrificatory Style, and all the Phrases that
belonged to it. The Jews were much accustomed to it, and had a great variety of
Sacrifices that they offered up to God; and the Gentiles were likewise well
acquainted with all the several sorts of Sacrifices that used to be offered up
among them. And this was not one of the secrets of their Religion, that was
kept only among the Priests, and was not to be communicated to the people; it
was known to them all most particularly, for they were to bring and offer those
Victims. Therefore it is plain, that no Forms of Speech were then so fully and
so generally understood, as those which related to Sacrifices. The Heathens had
their Expiatory and Piacular Sacrifices, by which they did reckon that they
transferred their sins on the man or beast that was devoted, and that they
thereby expiated them; and those they reckoned atoned the offended Deity by
their death, which they suffered in their stead: They also had many Lustrations
and Ablutions upon their offering their Sacrifices, to import the Atonement
that was made by them; and at the making their Covenants, they had Sacrifices
with which they propitiated Heaven, and sealed their Covenant: This practice of
Expiatory Sacrifices had been indeed both so Ancient and so universally spread,
that it is not an unreasonable Conjecture, to think that there was a Tradition
in favor of it, conveyed down from Noah. We are very sure, that both Greeks
and Romans were at the time that the New Testament was written, very full of
the Style and Phrases that belonged to Expiatory Sacrifices. The Jews were no
less acquainted with them; they had both their Sin and Trespass Offerings;
their great yearly Expiation by the Sacrifice of a Goat; they burnt a Red-Cow
in a peculiar manner, and with its Ashes they were purified and sprinkled. They
had also their daily Offerings of two Lambs, and their Peace Offerings, and
Free Will Offerings; and in their Law the Sacrifice was called their Atonement,
by which their sin was forgiven; it was also said to bear their Iniquity, which
was among them a Phrase importing Guilt. For while a man stood under the guilt
of his sin, liable to punishment, he was said to bear his Iniquity: Their
Sin Offerings were in their Language called simply their sins; to which, tho
our Translators have added the word Offering, yet in the Hebrew they are called
Sin or Trespass, and in the Greek, rendered for Sin; and in this all the people
of that Nation were certainly well instructed, it being by these that their
Consciences were quieted, their Sins pardoned, and God reconciled to them.

So this ground that I lay down is certain, That there was not any one sort of
things, which the whole World knew better than all that belonged to Sacrifices.
At the time of writing the New Testament they certainly were more accustomed to
it, and understood it much better than we generally do now, in Ages in which
those practices have so long ceased, that the Memory of them is quite
extinguished. It is indeed very probable, that many particular Phrases
belonging to them, might have been by a Poetical Liberty, extended to other
Matters: for things of the sacred'st nature are by Poets and Orators made use
of to give the liveliest Illustrations, and raise the strongest passions
possible: yet after all, an entire Thread of a sacrificatory Style, was a form
of description, that the World must have known could belong only to an
Expiatory Sacrifice, that is, to some person or thing that was devoted to God
by a Sinner in his own stead, and upon the account of his sin and guilt was to
be some way destroyed, in sign of what he owned he had deserved; and this was
to be done in order to the reconciling the guilty Person to God, the Guilt
being transferred from the Person to the Sacrifice; and God by accepting the
Sacrifice, was reconciled to the person, whose sin was upon that account
forgiven. This being thus laid down, let us look next to the whole strain of
the New Testament, particularly to those parts of it in which this matter is
more fully treated about.

Here I will again follow the method that I took upon the former Head, and not
enter so particularly upon the Criticisms of some passages, but will view the
thing in gross, that seeming to be both the most convincing way in it self, and
the best suited to my present purpose. I must further observe, that this was a
point of vast Consequence, as being that which concerned men's Peace with God,
the pardon of their sins, and their hopes of God's Favor, and of Eternal
Happiness. Therefore we ought not to imagine, that Rhetoric or Poetical Forms
of Speech could be admitted here, to the aggravating of so solemn a piece of
our Religion boyond its true value; so that we must conclude, that here, if in
any thing, the Apostles writ strictly, besides that their manner of writing is
always plain and simple. When then they set forth the Death of Christ with all
the Pomp of the sacrificatory Phrases, we must either believe it to be a true
Propitiatory Sacrifice, or otherwise we must look upon them as warm indiscreet
men, whose Affections to our Savior heated them so far, as to carry them in
this Matter out of all measure far beyond the truth.

Those who oppose this Article, believe that Christ only died for our good, but
not in our stead; that by his Death he might fully confirm his Gospel, and give
it a great Authority, that so it might have the more Influence upon us: they
also believe, that by his dying, he intended to set us a most perfect pattern
of bearing the sharpest Sufferings, with the perfectest Patience and Submission
to the Will of God, and the most entire Charity to those at whose hands we
suffer; and that by doing this, he was to Merit at God's hands that supreme
Authority, with which he is now vested for our good, that so he might obtain a
Power to offer the World the pardon of sin upon their true Repentance; and
finally, That he died in order to his Resurrection, and forgiving a sensible
Proof of that main Article of his Religion, That we shall all be raised up at
the last day; therefore he was to die, and that in such a manner, that no man
might question the truth of it, that so his Resurrection might give a most
demonstrative Proof both of the possibility of it, and of our being to be
raised up by him, who was thus declared to be the Son of God, by his Rising
from the dead.

On the other hand, we believe that God intending to pardon sin, and to call
the World by the offers of it to Repentance, designed to do it in such a
manner, as should both give us the highest Ideas of the guilt of sin, and also
of his own Love and Goodness to us, which he thus ordered: That after that
Divine Person in whom dwelt the Eternal Word, had sufficiently opened his
Doctrine, and had set a perfect pattern of Holiness to the world, he was to be
fallen on by a company of perfidious and cruel men, who after they had loaded
him with all the spiteful and reproachful Usage that they could invent, they in
conclusion Crucified him; he all the while bearing, besides those visible
Sufferings in his Person, most inexpressible Agonies in his Mind, both before
and during these his Sufferings; and yet bearing them with a most absolute
Submission to his Father's Will, and a perfect Charity to those his
Persecutors; and that in all this, he willingly offered himself to suffer both
upon our account, and in our stead, which was so accepted of God, that he not
only raised him from the dead, and exalted him up on high, giving to him even
as he was Man, all power both in Heaven and Earth, but that upon the account of
it, he offered to the World the pardon of sin^, together with all those other
Blessings which accompany it in his Gospel, and that he will have us in all our
Prayers for pardon, or other favors, claim them through that Death, and owe
them to it.

These are two contrary Doctrines upon this Head. Now let us see which of them
come nearest the Manner and Style in which the Scriptures set it out in the New
Testament. Christ is said to have reconciled us to his Father; 1 John 2.2. 1
Pet. 2.24. 1 Cor. 15.3 2 Cor. 5.21 1. Gal. 4. 3. Gal, 13. 2 Tit. 14. 20 Mat.
28. 3 Romans 25. 4 Romans 25. 5 Romans 6.10; 11. and to the end. 1 Cor. 1.30.
to be our Propitiation, to have born our sins, and to have been bruised for
our Iniquities; to have been made sin for us; to have been accursed for us; to
have given himself for our sins; that he might redeem us from all Iniquity; he
is said to have died for: or in the stead of our sins; to have given his life a
ransom for us, or in lieu of us; he is said to have born our sins on his own
body; he has appointed a perpetual Remembrance of his Death in these words,
That his body was broken for us; and that his blood was shed for many for the
Remission of sins; Remission of sins is offered in his name, and through his
blood; God laid upon him the iniquities of us all; he was our justification,
our peace and our redemption; He is called the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the World. His Death and intercession are very copiously compared to
the Expiation made on the solemn day of the Atonement for the whole Nation of
the Jews, on which after the Sacrifice was offered on the Altar, the High
Priest carried in the Blood to the Holy of Holies, and set it down before the
Cloud of Glory, as that which reconciled that people to God. 1 Ephesians. 7. 1 Col.
14.20, 21. 1 John 29. 9 Heb. 11, 12, 13, 14. and 8.26.28. 10. Heb. 10, 12, 14,
19.
This is done in so full a Discourse, and with such a variety of Expressions,
that it is not easy to imagine, how any thing could be more plainly told. He is
called the High Priest that was consecrated to offer up Sacrifices for the
people; it is said, That he has entered into the Holy Place by his own Blood,
having obtained Eternal Redemption for us; his Blood purges our Consciences
from dead woks, to serve the living God; he has put away sin by the Sacrifice
of himself, and was once offered to bear the sins of many; we are Sanctified by
the offering of the Body of Christ once for us all; and after he had offered
one Sacrifice for sins, he for ever sat down on the right hand of God, having
by that one Offering for ever perfected them that are sanctified: so that we
enter into the holiest by the Blood of Jesus: 13. Heb. 12.20.
He is also compared to the Sacrifice that was burnt without the Camp; and that
he might Sanctify the people with his own Blood, he suffered without the Gate;
and he is called that great Shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the
everlasting Covenant.

Now let it be considered, That as this Argument is in some places closely
pursued in many chosen and strict Expressions, so it returns in a great variety
of Phrases through the whole Epistles, in so many different places, and on so
many several occasions, that nothing can appear plainer in words, than that the
Apostles cosider'd this as the Capital Article of their whole Doctrine, and the
Main Point given them in Commission. In their preaching to all Nations they
inculcate it chiefly, they repeat it often, and for ought I have been able to
judge, they have not left one single Phrase that belonged to Sacrifices in the
Old Testament, which they have not applied to the Death of Christ in the New.
It is true, they mention his Resurrection often, as the Great and Eminent Proof
of Christ's being the Messiah; but they never apply that with those lively and
inflamed Expressions to men's Consciences, that they do his Death and
Sufferings. The Merit is plainly put there; the Resurrection being the Glorious
Reward and Consequence of it. Upon his Death and Cross it is that they dwell
the most; they set an infinite Value upon his Loving us, and dying for us: Now
if he had only di'd, for our good, tho it is not to be denied, but that this
was a great Evidence of perfect Love; yet the world was full of Stories of men
that had di'd for their Country; so that barely the dying for our good, if it
had not been likewise in our stead, could not have born such a sublime Strain
as that is in which they set this out.

If our Savior had only been to endure those bodily Torments, how violent
soever, it does not give any extraordinary Character of him, that the very
night before, he was so exceedingly amazed at the prospect of what he was
entering upon, that he became sorrowful even to the death; 22. Luke 44.
and was in such a bodily Agony, that his Sweat fell down as great drops of
Blood; which shows that his Mind was then in a much more unconceivable and
unsupportable Agony; 26. Mat. 36, 37, 38.
so that an Angel was sent from Heaven to comfort him. Now if there was no more
in his Sufferings than that which we see, here is a depression far below what
great Heroes have expressed, even during the most extreme Sufferings; and yet
it was at a distance from them, only upon the prospect of their coming on. All
the while before, our Savior knew they were coming, and yet till then, no
Agony is heard of; which intimates, that there was somewhat peculiar in it,
which some Churches have in their Liturgies called very properly his
unspeakable and unutterable Sufferings. They are so indeed; for we who have
only a Notion of vast Agonies in the Mind, when Racked with the Horror of
guilt, it cannot bear the apprehensions of the Wrath of God, and the reproaches
that arise from a wounded Conscience; cannot apprehend what could have raised
such amazing Sorrows in so pure and unspotted a Soul, that was conscious to it
self of no sin, and so could fear nothing from a just and good God: therefore
we must not pretend to explain what we cannot understand.

But to return to the main Argument: When this whole Collection of the ways in
which the Death of Christ is proposed to the World in the New Testament, is
laid together, we must conclude, that either this Death was a propitiatory
Sacrifice, or we must for ever despair of finding out the meaning of any thing
that can be expressed in words: Nothing could be plainer said, nor oftener
repeated in a greater variety of Expressions, proper to signify this, and not
proper for any thing else. I do not deny, but those who would turn all this
another way, have found to every one of these passages somewhat that seems to
favor the diverting them to another signification; but as it was observed
before, if some of the Sacrificatory Phrases have by some Authors, and upon
some occasions been brought down to a signification less important, it will not
from thence follow, that Discourses that are a contexture of those Notions and
Forms of Speech, should be so wrested from their natural Signification, to a
sense so far below the genuine and received Importance of the words. And indeed
I do not see what we can make of any part of the New Testament, or how much of
it we can receive with any degrees of Esteem, if we do not believe the Death of
Christ to have been a truly Expiatory Sacrifice offerr'd up to God in our stead.

Nor does this at all contradict the freedom of the Grace of God in pardoning
sin, which is so much set forth in Scripture, since there is matter enough for
Free Grace to exert it self, notwithstanding the Atonement made by Sacrifice.
For God might have, in the strictness of Justice, demanded satisfaction from
our selves; so his commuting the matter, and accepting of it in the person of
another, is a very high Act of his Grace; then our Savior's offering himself
up so freely for us, was a signal as well as an undeserved Act of Love, in that
he died for us while we were yet Enemies: and tho this Act belonged to his
Human Nature, yet the Union between it and the Eternal Word that dwelt in him,
may very well entitle God to it, so that in that respect this also may be
called an Act of God's Grace. The offering this to us on such easy terms, and
the exacting only a sincere obedience as the condition of it, without insisting
on an entire Obedience, is another part of the Grace of it: and finally, The
proposing such vast Rewards to our poor services, and the conveying the
knowledge of this to some Nations, when others are left in Darkness and
Ignorance, are very great and undeserved Acts of Love and Mercy: so that the
sense of our Savior's dying for us as our Sacrifice, does not at all derogate
from, or lessen our acknowledgments of the Love and Goodness of God.

Nor are those Objections of more value that are taken from the shortness of
the continuance of Christ's Sufferings, since besides what is commonly urged to
this purpose from the infinite Dignity of the person, we are to consider, that
in Sacrifices it is the Appointment and the Acceptance that makes the
satisfaction; for God's accepting a Sacrifice, is an abatement of the Rigor of
Justice, and a declaring that he will pardon sins in such a Method, and upon
such a Consideration: and there appear very good Reasons, even to us, for the
method that God thought fit to take in this great Transaction. He intended to
call the World to Repentance and Reformation: Now it had been a vain attempt to
have persuaded men to repent, without an offer of pardon; for if men are made
desperate, there is no great hope of prevailing on them; so an offer of pardon
was necessarily to be made; yet this was to be made in such a way, as to have
the greatest effect possible on men. If the offer of pardon had been made upon
too slight a consideration, the World might have been tempted to have had
slight thoughts of sin, as a thing of no such black nature, since it was so
easily forgiven: and therefore to heighten the sense of the odiousness of sin,
God would pardon it in such a manner, as should show how much he hated it, at
the same time that he showed such Love and Compassion to sinners. Since then
the great Design of this whole Economy was to reform the World, we see in
every step of it a tendency to that; a pardon was offered to give men hopes,
but the consideration of it was so amazing, as to increase their Horror at
sin, and their strict watchfulness against that, which was so hard, and stood
so dear to expiate.

Further, The rule of life that was proposed, was so exactly pure and holy,
that it well became a God of Infinite Purity to impose it on us, since it has
in all its parts such a tendency to the making us perfect, even as our Heavenly
Father is perfect. It begins at the cleansing our hearts, and from thence it
goes the whole round of our lives, in all our Actions, Circumstances and
Relations: It neither dispences with an idle word, a lewd look, nor a defiling
thought; but is a Law of life and love, that will sanctify every individual
Nature, and settle every Society that comes under its conduct. But that, as the
holiness of this Rule is no small honor to the Religion of which it is so main
a part; so that the strictness of it might not frighten men from embracing it,
tho there is no slackning of the obligation of the Law, but that every offense
against any part is a sin; yet there is an abatement made, as it is a Condition
of Salvation: And thus it is not an entire, but a sincere obedience that is
made the Condition upon which we are admitted to the Gospel Covenant. Every sin
gives a wound, and requires repentance to wash and heal it; but every sin does
not shut us out from a right to the blessings of this Covenant: So that here is
a main distinction never to be forgotten. We are under the whole Gospel, as it
is a law and role of life; and every time that we break any part of it, we
ought to be humbled for it before God; but nothing that does not defile our
hearts, and make us go off from the sincerity of our Obedience, breaks our
Relation to Christ, and dissolves our being in a state of Grace and Salvation,

It may seem a diminution of the Purity of our Religion, that an entire
holiness is not made the Indispensable Condition, as well as the absolute Duty
of Christians; since God might have furnished us with such degrees of Grace, as
might have conquered every Corrupt Inclination: Besides, that this Doctrine of
the Unattainableness of Perfection, and Invincible Infirmity, does furnish Bad
men and cold Christians with many Pretenses to hide or excuse their Faults, and
makes the greater part sit down contented with very low degrees, in which they
quiet themselves with this seeming Defectiveness of the New Covenant. But it is
certain, that every man who deals honestly and impartially by himself, does
perceive that he might be much better than he truly is; and that God's
assistances are not wanting to him, but that he is wanting to them: Every man
feels, that it is by the vicious use of his own Liberty, and not by reason of
any Impotency that is in his Nature, that he falls in sin: And the eminent
strictness and victory over Sin, that some men arrive at, who shine as Lights
in the World, serves to let the rest see what they might come to, if it were
not for their own fault: So that God's accepting a sincere Obedience, instead
of an entire one, is no encouragement to Sin; but is a condescension to Humane
Infirmity: And it seems that God does, while he continues us here on Earth,
suffer our Natures still to hang so heavy about us, and sometimes to prevail so
fatally over us, that we may be thereby obliged to live in a more constant
distrust of our selves, and a more humble dependence on him, to make us feel
the necessity of applying our selves often to him for pardon and assistance,
and also to beget in us more tender Compassions for the Frailties of others,
which we can more easily bear with, and forgive, when we reflect on our selves,
and what we are capable of. This gives a more melting Charity than could flow
from a severer Virtue, that had never felt the weight of Nature, nor the
strength of Temptations: If this is abused by some who turn the Grace of God
into Lasciviousness, it is a very ungrateful return to God for his Mercy, and a
signal abuse of his Goodness. But if this Gospel is bid, it is bid to them that
are lost.

There remains yet one Article to be well stated, relating to this matter, and
that is to give the true notion of Justification, of which there seem to be two
such different accounts given by St. Paul and St. James, that this has led men
into a great many Subtilties. I shall first open this matter, as it is spoke of
by these two Apostles: The Design of St. Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans,
was to oppose that Conceit of the Jews, who thought it impossible to be in the
favor of God without observing the Mosaical Rites. This he beats down, by
leading them up to their Father Abraham, and showing them how he came into a
state of favor with God, before he had received the Covenant of Circumcision;
and that his believing in God, was accepted of God, and reckoned to him, or
imputed to him for righteousness; or in order to his being in the favor of
God. 4. Romans 3.
The Inference that he naturally drew from this, was, that he was justified
without the works of the law: And by the tenor of the whole Discourse, it is
plain, That by the works of the law, 2. Romans 12.
are meant the Mosaical Precepts, and not the Works of Moral Virtue. For St.
Paul had divided Mankind into those who were in, or under the law, and those
who were without law; that is, into Jew and Gentile. The design of the Epistle
was not to give us Metaphysical Abstractions and Distinctions between Faith, as
it is a special Grace, and Works or Obedience to the Laws of God; but by Faith
he means the entire receiving of the whole Gospel in its Commands, as well as
Promises; for so he reckons Abraham's readiness to offer up his Son Isaac, as
an Act of his faith; so that faith stands for the complex of all the Duties of
Christianity; and therefore his Assertion of our being justified by faith
without the works of the law, signifies no more, than that those who received
the Gospel, who believed it, 3. Romans 28.
and lived according to it, were put in the favor of God by it, without being
brought under the obligation of the Mosaical Precepts.

The same Argument is handled by him upon the same grounds in his Epistle to
the Galatians, 5. Gal. 6.
only there he gives a more explicit notion of that faith which justified,
that it was a faith that wrought by love; So that in all St. Paul's Epistles,
he understands by faith the complete receiving the Gospel in all its parts. But
whether these Expressions were any of those that St. Peter says, the unstable
wrested to their own perdition, or not, we see plainly by St. James's Epistle,
that some began to set up the Notion of a bare believing the Gospel, as that
which justified; as if the mere profession of Christianity, or the persuasion
of its truth, without a suitable Conversation, justified. For St. James speaks
not of the works of law, but of works simply; and as he had just reason to
condemn a Doctrine that tended to the total corruption of our Faith; so he
plainly shows, that he did not differ from St. Paul, since he takes his chief
Instance from Abraham's Faith, 2 James 12. to the end.
which made him offer up his Son Isaac upon the Altar, by which he was
justified; so that faith wrought in his works, and by works faith was made
perfect: And he concludes all, That as the body without the spirit was dead, so
faith without works was dead also: From whence it is plain, that faith in St.
James stands strictly for a believing the Truth of the Christian Religion, and
not for an entire receiving the Gospel, which was the faith that St. Paul had
treated of. These things will appear so clear to any one who will attentively
read and consider the scope of St. Paul's Epistles to the Romans and Galatians,
and the Discourse in St. James's Epistle, that I am confident no scruple can
remain in men, that are not possessed with prejudices, or overrun with a nice
sort of Metaphysics, that some have brought into these matters; by which they
have, instead of clearing them, rendered them very intricate and unintelligible:
Their stating the instrumentality of faith in Justification; their
distinguishing it from Obedience in this, but joining it with it in
Sanctification, are niceties, not only without any ground in Scripture, but
really very hurtful, by the disquiet they may give good minds: For if the
Christian Doctrine is plain in any one thing, it must be in this, which is the
foundation of our quiet, and of our hope. It would make a long Article to
reckon up all the different Subtilties with which this matter has been
perplexed: As whether Justification is an immanent or transient Act; whether it
is a Sentence pronounced in Heaven, or in the Conscience; or whether it is only
a Relation, and what constitutes it; what is the efficient, the instrument, and
the condition of it; these, with much more of the like nature, filled many
Books some years ago.

The strict sense of Justification, as it is a legal term, and opposite to
Condemnation, is the absolution of a Sinner; which is not to be solemnly done
till the final Sentence is pronounced after death, or at the day of Judgment:
But as men come to be in the state to which those Sentences do belong, they in
a freer form of speech are said to be justified or condemned. And as they who
do not believe, 3 John 18.
are under condemnation, and said to be condemned already; that is, they are
liable to that Sentence, and under those Characters that belong to it,
blindness, obduration of heart, and the Wrath and Judgments of God: So such
Believers, to whom the Promises of the Gospel belong, and on whom the final
Sentence shall be pronounced, justifying them, are said now to be justified,
since they are now in the state to which that belongs: They have the Characters
of it upon them, Faith, Repentance, and Renovation of heart and life, by which
they come to be in the favor, and under the protection of God.

The Gospel is of the nature of a public Amnesty, in which a Pardon is offered
to all Rebels, who return to their duty, and live peaceably in obedience to the
Law; and a day is prefixed to examine who has come in upon it, and who has
stood out; upon which final Acts of Grace or Severity are to pass. It is then
plain, that though every man is pardoned in the strictness of Law only by the
final Sentence, yet he is really in the construction of Law pardoned upon his
coming within the Terms on which it is offered; and thus men are justified, who
do truly repent of, and forsake their sins, who do sincerely believe not only
the truth of the Gospel in general* but do so firmly believe every part of it,
that acts proportioned to that belief, arise out of it; when they depend so
much on the Promises, that they venture all things in hope of them; and do so
receive the Rules and Laws given in it, that they set themselves on obeying
them in the course of their whole life, and in a most particular manner, when
they lay claim to the Death of Christ, as their Sacrifice, and the means of
their Reconciliation; with such a Repentance as changes their inward Natures
and Principles, and such a Faith as purifies their hearts, and makes them
become new Creatures.

These are the Conditions of this Covenant; and they are such Conditions, that
upon lower than these it became not the Infinite Purity and Holiness of God to
offer us pardon, or to receive us into his favor: For without these, the
Mercies and Favors of the Gospel had been but the opening a Sanctuary to
Criminals, and the giving encouragement to Sin, if a few howlings to God for
mercy, and the earnest imploring it, for the sake of Christ, and on the account
of his Death, would serve turn. This every man, under the least agony of
thought, will be apt to do, especially when death seems to be near him, and yet
be still in all respects as bad as ever, this indeed is so slight a thing, that
a greater disparagement cannot de offered to our Religion, nor can a greater
strengthening of sin be contrived, than the giving any sort of encouragement to
it; for it is one of the greatest, and the most mischievous of all those
practical Errors which have corrupted Religion.

These are the most important parts of our whole Commission; and therefore we
ought to state them first aright in our own thoughts, that so we our selves may
be fully possessed with them, that they may sink deep into our own minds, and
show their efficacy in the reforming of our Natures and Lives* and then we
shall be able to open them to others with more clearness, and with better
advantages, when our hearts are inflamed with an overcoming sense of the Love
and Goodness of God. If the Condition of this New Covenant were deeply
impressed on our thoughts, then we should publish them with more life and joy
to others, and we might then look for the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel
on our selves, and on our labors.

DISCOURSE III.
Concerning the INFALLIBILITY AND AUTHORITY of the CHURCH.
AFTER we are well settled in the Belief of the Christian Religion, our next
enquiry must naturally be into the Way and Method of being rightly Instructed
in the Doctrine, and other parts of this Religion; and that chiefly in one
great Point, Whether we ought to employ our own Faculties in searching into
this, and particularly into the meaning of those Books in which it is
contained? or, Whether we must take it from Oral Tradition, and submit to any
man, or body of men, as the Infallible Depositaries and Declarers of this
Tradition.

In this single point consists the Essence of the differences between us and
the Church of Rome: While we affirm that the Christian Doctrine is completely
contained in the Scriptures, and that every man ought to examine these with the
best helps, and all the skill and application of which he is capable: and that
he is bound to believe such Doctrines only, as appear to him to be contained in
the Scriptures, but may reject all others that are not founded upon that
Authority. On the other hand, The foundation upon which the Church of Rome
builds, is this, That the Apostles delivered their Doctrine by word of mouth to
the several Churches, as the Sacred Depositum of the Faith: That the Books of
the New Testament were written occasionally, not with intent that they should
be the Standard of this Religion; that we have these Books, and believe them to
be Divine, only from the Church, and upon her Testimony; that the Church, with
the Books, gives us likewise the Sense and Exposition of them, they being dark
in many places; and that therefore the Traditional Conveyance, and the Solemn
Decisions of the Church, must be Infallible, and ought to be submitted to as
such, otherwise there can be no end of Controversies, while every man takes
upon him to expound the Scriptures, which must needs fill men's Minds with
Curiosity and Pride, as well as the World with Heresies and Sects, that are
unavoidable, unless there is a living speaking Judge: This they also prove from
some places of Scripture, such as Christ's words to St. Peter, Upon this Rock
will I build my Church, 16, Mat. 18, 19. 18. Mat. 20 28 Mat. 20. 16. Joh. 13.
1. Tim. 3.16.
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it; and unto thee will I give
the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven: Tell the Church, I am with you always, even
to the end of the World; the Spirit shall lead you into all Truth; and the
Church is the Pillar and Ground of Truth. This is their Doctrine, and these are
their chief Arguments upon which it is founded.

There is no point in Divinity that we should more clearly understand than
this: for it is in it self of great Consequence, and is that which determines
all the rest; if it is true, it puts an end to all other Controversies; and if
it is false, it leaves us at liberty to examine every thing, and gives us the
justest and highest prejudices possible against that Church that pretends to it
without just grounds. It is also that which of all others the Missionaries of
that Church understand the best, and manage the most dexterously; they are much
practiced to it, and they begin and end all their practice with this, which has
fair appearances, and will bear a great deal both of popular Eloquence, and
plausible Logic: so if men are not on the other hand as well fortified, and as
ready on the other side of the Argument, they will be much entangled as often
as they have occasion to deal with any of that Church. There is not indeed any
one point that I know of, that has been opened and examined, both with that
Beauty and Force, that is in Chillingworth's Unvaluable Book upon this Subject.
Few things of this nature have ever been handled so near a Mathematical
Evidence, as he has pursued this Argument; and his Book is writ with such a
thread of Wit and Reason, that I am confident few can enter upon it without
going through with it. I shall now endeavor, in as narrow a compass as is
possible, to set this matter in its true Light.

We must then begin with this, That the freedom of a man's Thoughts and
Understanding, is the most Essential Piece of his Liberty, and that in which
naturally he can the least bear to be limited: therefore any Restraints that
are laid upon him in this, must be well and fully proved; otherwise it is to be
supposed, that God could never intend to bring us under the yoke in so sensible
and so valuable a thing, without giving clear and evident warrants for it: And
as every Invasion on the Liberties of the Human nature, ought to be well made
out; so every Privilege which any person claims against the common fate of
Mankind, ought to be also fully proved, before others can be bound to submit to
it: We perceive in our selves, and we see in all others, such a feebleness of
understanding, such an easiness to go too quick, and judge too fast, and such a
narrow compass of knowledge, that as we see all Mankind is apt to mistake
things, so we have no reason to believe, that any one is exempted from this,
but as there are evident Authorities to prove it. Since then this is a
Privilege in those that have it, as well as an Imposition on those that have
it not, it ought not to be offered at, or obtruded on the world without a full
Proof. Probabilities, forced Inferences, or even disputable Proofs, ought not
to be made use of here, since we have reason to conclude, that if God had
intended to put any such thing upon us, he would have done it in so plain and
uncontested a way, that there should have been no room to have doubted of it.

Besides, all such things as do naturally give jealousy, and offer specious
grounds of mistrust, ought to be very clear. Since then all Companies of men
that lodge themselves in any Authority, and more particularly those who manage
men's Consciences, and the Concerns of Religion, have been too often observed to
enlarge their powers, and to make the most of them they could, and that by
their means, Religion has been often and much corrupted, the World has from
hence a Right to exact very full proofs before they can be bound to believe any
such body of men to be exempted from Error. This will yet appear the more
evident, if that very Body in which this Infallibility is supposed to dwell,
has manifestly corrupted the Morals, and the order or discipline of this
Religion; if they have filled the world with Fables, if they have fallen under
gross Ignorance, and have been overrun with Vice and Disorder; these must
afford great occasion of suspecting them in all other things, If Impostures
have been set up and promoted with great Zeal in some Ages, which have in other
Ages of more Light and Knowledge been thrown out and disclaimed; and if we find
that the same Methods of Craft and Violence which have been practiced in all
other Societies, have been more notoriously and scandalously practiced by the
men of Infallibility, then we have from all these things just prejudices given
us against this pretension. Now a just prejudice amounts to this, That we have
no reason to believe a thing, unless we see very good grounds to believe it;
and it gives us all reason to suspect those grounds, and to examine them well,
before we are concluded by them.

Further, This being so great a Matter, and that which must settle all other
things, we have just reason to believe, That if God has left such Authorities
in the World, that he has also made it plain where they lie, and with whom they
are to be found; for it is not imaginable that God should have concluded
Mankind under such an Authority, and yet not have explained so necessary a
Point, as, Who are the Depositaries of it, but to have left men to their shifts
to find that out the best way they can: since till this is cleared, the other
is of no use. There is a dormant Infallibility, they say, in the Church, but no
body knows where; for it is no Article of Faith in whom it is vested. We are
where we were, only with this disadvantage, that if we think we are sure there
is an Infallibility in the Church, but are not sure to whom it is trusted, we
may be resisting this Infallibility by opposing those who indeed have it, while
we adress our selves for it to others who have it not, tho we fancy it belongs
to them.

In all Constitutions among men, the most evident thing is this, Where rests
the Supreme Authority of that Constitution? And if this is necessary for the
order and policy of the World, it is much more necessary, that if God has
devolved so main a part of his own Authority, and indeed the dispensing of one
of his own Attributes, this should be so described and circumstantiated, that
there should be no danger of mistaking; and that there should have been such
Characters given, by which all the World should have been as infallibly
directed to this Authority, as it was to be infallible in its Decisions. When
God consigned such a Character to the Jewish Nation, that the Symbol of his
presence was to appear, and that Answers were to be given out as he was
consulted, it was expressly declared with whom it was lodged, and in what Method
the High Priest was to appear before the Lord, with the Vrim in the
Breast Plate; that so there might be no room left for Imposture or even for
suspicion.

Upon all these reasons, we have a very just right to demand of those who call
us to submit to their Infallibility, to give us such plain, express and
determinate proofs for it, as are proportioned to the Importance and
Unusualness of that which they impose upon us. It is a vain thing to prove that
this must be in the Church, because otherwise a great many Absurdities must
needs follow, if it were not in it. When it is once proved that God has given
it to his Church, we shall very willingly yield, that he had very good reasons
for it; since so extraordinary a Power, which might be easily employed to very
bad purposes, certainly was not to be given but for very good ones; but it is a
very preposterous way to argue, That God must have done such a thing, because
we fancy that it is necessary to prevent some great Evil, or to procure some
very great Good. For this is only to pretend to prove, that God ought to have
done somewhat that he has not done; unless they can at the same time prove,
that God has done it: this is to conclude, That his Ways must be as ours are,
and that his Thoughts must be as our Thoughts. We may at this rate prove as
well, that the Messiah should have appeared much sooner than he did; have
showed his Miracles, and even his Body after his Resurrection more publicly
than he did: This will prove, that the Gospel should have been preached to many
Nations yet in Paganism; and this will rather, with an advantage in the
Argument, prove, that there should be no sin left in the world, and that no man
should be left to perish in his sins, and so be damned for them. It will
require no great Art to make it appear, that these are much more dreadful
things, and seem to be much more contrary to God's Nature, to his Love to
Mankind, and to his Church: but indeed if we will give our selves scope upon
this Argument, to fancy that God must do every thing, which we imagine would be
very convenient, we should soon frame an Idea both of his Creation and his
Providence, that is wholly different from what we perceive it to be.

We are not capable of so vast a Thought, as to take in a Scheme of those great
Designs that lie in the Eternal Mind, and that are scattered in a seeming
Confusion through his Works and Ways, but are beautiful and orderly as they are
gathered together in his Ideas. We cannot say what is good or evil with
relation to the whole; nor what are the properest Methods of bringing about the
one, or of diverting the other: so, to conclude, the arguing that Christ had
dealt ill with his Church, if he had not made her Infallible, unless it is made
out that he has done it, is only a reproaching him with this, That he has not
done that which he ought to have done, and that he has not been faithful in
discharging the Trust committed to him of his Father. Therefore all these are
false ways of arguing, which cannot work on any, but such as measure God by
themselves. The Argument if true, is Infinite, and has no bounds.

It does seem to agree much better with the Jewish Economy, that an
Infallibility should have been lodged among them. Their being Typical, it was
much more reasonable to have expected an Oral Tradition of its signification.
Their Prophets expressed themselves in a very dark and figurative way, full of
strange Allusions, and lofty Phrases; and since these were to lead them to the
Messiah, and yet seem capable of very different Senses, all this required an
Infallible Expounder. They were one Nation, so that Unity was in many respects
most necessary to their Preservation; they were for many Ages strongly set on
Idolatry, so that a solemn, public and Infallible Authority was the more
necessary. 17. Deuteronomy. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
There were also provisions in their Law, much more express than any can be
pretended in the New Testament, requiring them when they had any Controversies
within their Gates, to come up to the Temple to the Priest that stood there, to
minister before the Lord, as well as to the Judge; and they were upon pain of
death to submit to their Determinations. This matter is set out in such a
variety of large and positive Expressions, that tho perhaps that passage
belongs to their Law Suits, (But by the way, that of tell the Church, seems to
be limited to the same sort of matters) yet if a parity of Reason, or if the
Letter of the Law is considered, this will go much further toward an absolute
Submission, which seems to suppose an Infallible Authority, than any thing that
can be alleged for the like out of the New Testament; not to mention other
Expressions of asking the Law at the Priest's mouth, and that his Lips should
preserve knowledge, for he was the Minister of the Lord of Hosts: 2. Mal. 7.
These things, I say, seem to make out a very fair Title to Infallibility under
the Mosaical Dispensation; and they continued to be not only the True, but
indeed the Only Church that God had on Earth, till the Dispensation of the
Gospel was opened: They had still among them the Federal Means of Salvation,
which is all that is necessary to the Being of a Church. Our Savior joined
both in Temple and Synagogue-Worship, which alone is enough to prove them to
have been a true Church.

In this we plainly see the Sophistry of one Argument, which perhaps makes some
Impression on weak minds, That a True Church must be true in its Doctrine: it
must indeed have those things that are necessary to keep up its Federal
Relation to God; so the Jews had their Circumcision and Sacrifices, together
with the rest of the Temple-Service: But yet that Church had fallen under two
great Errors, that had a vast Extent, as well as a very fatal Consequence. They
understood all the Prophecies of the Messiah in a literal sense of a Temporal
Prince, and a Glorious Conqueror. Here Oral Tradition failed, in that, which of
all other things was the most important for them to understand aright, since
their mistakes in this occasioned their rejecting the True Messiah, which drew
on their final Ruin. The other Error was also very fatal, for it brought them
under a vast Corruption of their Morals. They thought the ritual part of their
Religion was of such high Value in the sight of God, that this alone, together
with many invented Rites that had been handed down to them by Tradition, were
of such Value in the sight of God, that they did compensate for the grossest
Immoralities, and excuse from the most important Obligations of the Moral Law.
These things had passed down among them by Tradition from their Fathers, and
had corrupted all their Notions about Religion: so that here we see all the
arguings from a seeming necessity of things for an Infallible Authority, are
only vain Imaginations, which do not hold in Instances, in which we have all
the plausible Reasons of looking for them.

Nor does it appear, that it is any greater Imputation on the Goodness of God,
that he has not provided an Infallible Remedy against Error, than that he has
not provided an Infallible Remedy against Sin. Sin is that which of its own
nature bears the greatest opposition to the Attributes of God, and to his
Dominion. and that does defile and corrupt our Souls the most. We can much more
easily apprehend, that God can bear with a man that lives in Error, than with
one that lives in Sin: The one can consist with good Intentions and a Probity
and Integrity of heart: for he who is in Error, may think that he is serving
God in it, and so it can dwell in the same breast with the Love of God, and of
our Neigbhour, which are driven out by Sin. The true design of Religion, is to
give us such degrees of Light and Knowledge, as may preserve us from Sin, and
purify our Hearts and Lives. Holiness is a much more certain Character of a
man's being in the favor of God, than all the degrees of Knowledge possible.
Upon all these grounds we may conclude, that there is no reason to think, that
God should have made a more certain Provision against Error, than he has made
against Sin. Now what are the Provisions against Sin? God offers the free
pardon of all past sins, to encourage us to forsake them; he gives us secret
Assistances to fortify our Endeavors against sin; he sets before us
unspeakably vast Rewards and Punishments; and he accepts of a sincere, tho
imperfect Obedience; so here a great deal is left to the freedom of our Wills.
God will not work in us as in necessary Agents; but having made us capable of
Liberty, he leaves us to the use of it, and if we perish, our perdition is of
our selves. And therefore, if we will not apply our Faculties, and use our best
Endeavors to become truly Holy, the blame must lie upon our selves; for God
will not convey into us by his Power, such Principles and Dispositions as shall
force us to be good; and unless we do what lies in us at the same time, that we
pray to him for inward Aid from him, we have no reason to hope that he will
hear us.

In like manner, He has called us to a Religion that lies in a very little
compass; he has ordered it to be delivered to us in Books, writ in a great
simplicity of Style; he has given us Understandings capable of knowledge, and
of great Industry in the pursuit of it; and we feel this difference in our
natures, in seeking after Truth, from following after Holiness; that there is
no natural disposition in us to Error, or against Truth; whereas there are born
in us Propensities, that we feel to be deeply rooted in us against Holiness,
and in favor of sin. Among men, some are naturally inquisitive, made and
fitted to dive deep into profound Searches; these men do in Religion, as well
as in all other Arts and Sciences, so open and clear the way to slower and
lazier minds, that they render things easy to them. And as we have no reason to
imagine, that God should have laid insuperable Difficulties in the way to
Divine Knowledge; so those few that are in it, have been so overcome by the men
of Labor and Learning, that even the Church that boasts of Infallibility,
would have made a small progress without their Endeavors. And why should we
imagine, that a Religion which we feel to be so hard in practice, should be
made so easy in the speculative part, that we should be in no danger, and need
no Industry to understand it.

A Promise of the Spirit is indeed pretended, that the Church should be thereby
guided into all Truth. But it is to be considered, that this Promise was made
personally to the Apostles, who were Inspired, and so were infallibly guided,
which appears more plainly from the following words, 16. John. 13.
and he shall show you things to come; that is clearly a promise of the Spirit
of Prophesy, to which, since no Body of men can now pretend, they cannot claim
the other neither; for both must go together, according to the force of those
works: Nor is there any reason from those words to conclude, that this, any
more than the Inspiration of the Apostles, was to descend to others after them;
or if any will, through a parity of Reason think, that this was to continue in
the Church, why should it not belong to every Christian, and not be confined to
any Body or Succession of men? especially since those who think that the same
parity will hold as to the other effects of the Spirit promised there, of its
dwelling in them, of bringing things to their remembrance, of giving them
Confort, Peace, Joy and Victory over the World, and that these do descend to
others after the Apostles, do believe that they belong to all Christians, and
are not to be contracted to a small number. Now if all the other promises were
to descend thus, why not this of being led into all Truth, as well as the rest?
For all promises, even tho expressed in positive words, do carry a condition
naturally in them: so that when this promise is believed to belong to all
Christians, yet it is not absolute, but supposes men's using their utmost
Endeavors with an honest and good Mind; in which case no man can deny, but
that whether that promise was specially meant to them or not, yet it shall be
so far accomplished in them, that they shall be left in no Error that shall be
fatal to them; but that either they shall be delivered from it, or that it
shall be forgiven them, since it is inconsistent with the Notion of infinite
Goodness, that any man should perish, who is doing all he can in order to his
Salvation.

If it be said, That Error does disturb the Peace and Order of the Church,
beyond what is to be apprehended from Sin. Error runs men into parties, and out
of those, Factions do arise, which break not only the Peace of the Church, but
the whole order of the World, and the Quiet of Civil Society: whereas Sin does
only harm to those who are guilty of it, or to a few who may be corrupted by
their ill example. But to this it is to be answered, That Sin does naturally
much more mischief to Mankind, than Error: he that errs, if he is not Immoral
with it, is quiet and peaceable in his Error: therefore still the greatest
mischief is from Sin, which corrupts men's Natures through its own Influence.
And the mischief that Error does procure, arises chiefly from the pretensions
to Infallibility, or something that is near akin to it; for if men were
suffered to go on in their Errors with the same undisturbed quiet that they
have for most of their sins, they would probably be much quieter in them; since
Sin of its nature is a much fiercer thing than a point of Speculation can be
supposed to be: but if men apprehend Inquisitions, or other Miseries, upon the
account of their Opinions, then they stand together, and combine for their own
Defense and Preservation; so that it is not from the Errors themselves, but
from the methods of treating them, that all those Convulsions have arisen,
which have so violently shaken Churches and Kingdoms.

But the last and Main thing that is urged on this Head is, That no private
Understanding is strong enough to find out Truth, in all the points of
Religion: that it is an indecent and an insolent thing for private men, for
Tradesmen perhaps, or for Women, to pretend to expound Scripture, or to judge
in points of Religion: This feeds Pride and self-conceit beyond any thing that
can be imagined; whereas a Spirit of Submission and Humility, of thinking
others, particularly Superiors, wiser than our selves, has so great a
resemblance to the Spirit of the Gospel, and seems to agree so well with the
design of this Religion, that we must believe it to be a part of it. This is
indeed specious; but after all, it is to be considered, that God has made us of
such a nature, that our apprehensions of things must determine us whether we
will or not; and it is not likely that God would make us as he has done, and
yet at the same time so limit our Faculties, that they should not be employed
in the Matters of Religion. We naturally love Freedom, and we believe things
the more firmly, the more profoundly we have inquired into them; when we come
to be once fully satisfied about them; when we find our selves often called on in
the Scriptures to search them, to prove all things, to try the Spirits; when we
see a great part of the New Testament was directed to whole Churches, to all
the Saints, that is, to the whole Body of the Christians; when so much of it is
writ in the Style of one, that argues, that descends from that Apostolical
Authority by which he might have commanded those he writes to, to receive and
rest in his Decisions; and that lays things in their natural Connexions and
Consequences before those he writes to; we see in that such an appeal to their
Reasons, and that even in the Age of Miracles, in which there was another sort
of Characters of the Divine Commission, that rendered the Apostles Infallible;
when I say, this Appeal was made to their Reasons and Understandings at that
time, it seems much more reasonable, that in the succeeding Ages men should
have a right to employ their Faculties in finding out the Sense, and examining
the Books of the New Testament.

Here let us consider the state of every Jew at that time, and see if this
reasoning for Authority and Infallibility was not then as strong to keep him in
Judaism. There was a Controversy between the Apostles and the Sanhedrim,
whether Jesus was the Messiah, or not? A decision of this was in a great
measure to be made from the Prophecies in the Old Testament concerning the
Messiah, which were urged by the Apostles; but the Rabbis, the Scribes and
Pharisees, put other senses on these. Now what was a private Jew to do? Must he
take upon him to judge so intricate a Controversy? Must he pretend to be wiser
than all the Doctors of their Law, or the Conveyers of their Traditions to
them? Must he set up his Skill and Reason above theirs? Thus we see that if
this Reasoning is true, it being founded on Maxims that are equally true at all
times, then it was as true at that time as it is now. It is of no force to say,
that the Miracles which our Savior and his Apostles wrought, gave them such
Powers, that the people were upon that account bound to believe them, rather
than their Teachers: For one part of the Debate was, both the truth of the
Miracles, and the Consequences that arose from them. So the Appeal, according
to this way of Reasoning, did still lie to their Sanhedrim.

In a word, In such Matters every man must judge for himself, and every man
must answer to God for the Judgment that he has made; he judges for no body
else, but for himself. He, and He only can be the Judge; and if he uses a due
degree of Industry, and frees himself from every corrupt Biass, from Pride,
Vainglory, and affectation of Singularity, or the pursuing any ill ends; under
those appearances of searching for Truth, and the adhering to it, he is doing
the best thing, which according to that nature of which God has made him, he
can do; and so he may reasenably believe, that he shall succeed in it: Nor is
there any pride in this, for a man to think according to his own Understanding,
no more than to see with his own Eyes. His Humility ought to make him slow and
cautious, modest and fearful; but no humility can oblige him to think otherwise
than he feels he must needs think.

Among the Works of the flesh, Heresies or Sects are reckoned as one sort and
species. Now by Works of the flesh, are to be understood the appetites of a
vicious and depraved nature: the meaning therefore of reckoning Heresies among
these is this, 5. Gal. 20.
That when a man out of a bad disposition of mind, and on ill designs, chooses
to to be of a party, he then is a Heretic; but he that in sincerity of Heart
goes into persuasions, from an overcoming sense of their Truth, cannot be one,
because he does not choose his persuasion out of a previous ill design; but is
of it, not out of choice, but necessity; since his Understanding, in which
those matters may be variously represented, offers them so to him, that he must
believe them to be true; in the same manner in which he apprehends them.

If upon this Principle there happen to be many Sects and Divisions in the
Church, this is a part of that Woe that Christ left upon the World, by reason of
Offenses and Scandals; for he forsaw that they must needs come. God has made
this present Scene of Life, to be neither regular nor secure: The strange
Follies and Corruptions of Mankind must have their Influence on Religion, as
well as they have on all other things. God has reserved a fullness of Light and
of unerring Knowledge to another State: Here we are in the dark, but have light
enough, if we have honest Minds to use and improve it aright, to guide us
thither; and that is the utmost share that God seems to have designed for us in
this Life: we must therefore be contented, and make the most of it that we can.

I go next to show; That the same Difficulties, if not greater ones, he upon
those who build on Infallibility: for before they can arrive at the use of it,
they must have well examined and be fully assured of two things, either of
which has greater Difficulties in it, than all those put together with which
they press us. First, They must be convinced that there is an Infallibility in
the Church; and next, they must know to which of those many Churches into which
Christendom is divided, this Infallibility is fastened. Unless the design is to
make all men take their Religion implicitly from their Forefathers, these
things must be well considered: If men are obliged to adhere blindly to the
Religion in which they were bred, then Jews, Heathans and Mahometans must
continue still where they are. If this had been the Maxim of all times,
Christianity had never got into the World.

If then men are allowed to examine things, they must have very good reason
given them for it, before they can believe that there is an Infallibility among
men: Their own Reason and Observation offers so much against it, that without
very clear grounds they ought not to receive it. Now the reasons to persuade
it, must be drawn either from Scripture, or from outward visible Characters
that evidence it. The Scriptures cannot be urged by these men, because the
Scriptures, as they teach, have their Authority from the Testimony of the
Church; Therefore the Authority of the Church must be first proved, for the
Church cannot give an Authority to a Book, and then prove its own Authority by
that Book: This is plainly to prove the Church by her own Testimony, which is
manifestly absurd; it being all one, whether she affirms it immediately; or if
she affirms it, by affirming a Book in which it is contained; here a Circle is
made to run for ever round in, Why do you believe the Church? because the
Scriptures affirm it; and why do you believe the Scriptures? because the Church
affirms them. I do not deny, but they may urge the Scriptures for this, very
pertinently against us, who acknowledge their Authority: but I am now
considering upon what grounds a man is to be instructed, in the stating the
grounds of his own Faith, and resolving it into Principles. In this an Order
must be fixed, and in the progress of it, every step that is made must be
proved without any relation to that, which is afterward to be proved out of
that: and therefore, either the Church or the Scriptures must be first proved,
and then other things must be proved out of that which is once fixed and made
good.

But in the next place, if we should suffer them to bring Proofs from
Scripture, how shall it he proved that the true sense of them is that which
makes for infallibility? Other senses may be given to them, which may both
agree to the Grammatical Construction of the words, to the contexture of the
Discourse, and to the Phraseology of the Scriptures: who shall then decide this
Matter? It were very unreasonable to prove what is their true Sense by the
Exposition that any Church puts on those passages in her own favor; that were
to make her both Judge and Party in too gross a manner. Therefore at least
th^se passages, and all that relates to them, must fall under the private
Judgment: and in these Instances, every man must be suffered to expound the
Scriptures for himself; for he cannot be bound to submit to any exposition of
them, but that which satisfies his own Reason: and if this step is once
admitted, then it will appear as reasonable to leave a man all over, to the use
of his Faculties; since these passages, and that which necessarily relates to
them, will lead a man into the understanding of the hardest parts of the whole
New Testament.

If this method is let go, they must prove the Infallibility of the Church by
Arguments drawn from some other Visible Characters, by which a man is to be
convinced that God has made her Infallible: If there were such eminent ones, as
the gift of Tongues, Miracles or Prophecies, that did visibly attest this, here
were a proof that were solid indeed; It were the same with that, by which we
prove the Truth of the Christian Religion: But then, these Miracles must be as
uncontestedly and evidently proved; they must also belong to this point, that
is, they must be Miracles publicly done to prove the truth of this Assertion.
But to this Appeal they will not stand, what use soever they may make of it to
amuse the weaker and the more credulous. The Character of an uninterrupted
Succession from the days of the Apostles, is neither an easier nor a surer one,
since other Churches whom they condemn, have it likewise; nor can it be
searched into by a private man, unless he would go into that Sea of examining
the History* the Records and Succession of Churches. This is an Enquiry that
has in it, Difficulties vastly greater and more insuperable, than all those
that they can object to us. If they will appeal to the vast Extent of a Church,
that so many Nations and Societies agree in the same Doctrine, and are of one
Communion; this will prove to be a dangerous point; for in the state in which
we see Mankind, Numbers make a very bad Argument. It were to risque the
Christian Religion too much, to venture on a Poll with the Mahometans: In some
Ages the Semi-Arrians had the better at numbers, and it is a question, if at
this day, those that are within or without the Roman Communion make the
greatest body: Nor must a man be put to choose his Religion by such a laborious
and uncertain way of Calculation.

To plead a continuance in the same Doctrine that was at first delivered to the
Church by the Apostles, is to put the matter upon a more desperate issue: For
as no man can hope to see to the end of this, so it lets a man in, into all
Controversies; when he is to compare the present Doctrine with that which was
delivered by the Apostles. Let then any Character be assigned that shall oblige
a man to believe the Church Infallible, and it will soon appear very evidently,
that the searching into that, must put the world on more difficult Enquiries,
than any of those, that we are pressed with: and that in the issue of the
whole, the determination must be resolved into a private Judgment.

Another Difficulty follows close upon this, which is, In what Church this
Infallibility is to be found? Suppose a man was born in the Greek Church, at
any time since the IX. Century, how shall he know that he must seek the
Infallibility in the Roman Communion, and that he cannot find it in his own? He
plainly sees, that the Christian Religion began in the Eastern parts; and by
every step that he makes into History, he clearly discerns that it flourished
for many Ages most eminently there; but now that there is a breach between them
and the Latins he cannot judge to which Communion he is to adhere, without he
examines the Doctrine: for both have the outward Characters of a Succession of
Martyrs and Bishops, of Numbers, and an appearance of continuing in the same
Doctrine; only with this difference, that the Greeks have the advantage in
every one of these: they have more Apostolical Churches, I mean founded by the
Apostles, than the Latins; and they have stuck more firmly with fewer Additions
and Innovations, to their Ancient Rituals, than the Latins have done: How can
he then decide this matter, without examining the grounds of their difference,
and making a private Judgment upon a private Examination of the Scriptures or
other Authorities? If it be said, that the present depressed and ignorant state
of those Churches makes it now very sensible, that there can be no
Infallibility among the Easterns. To this it is to be answered, that I have put
the case all-along from the 9th. Century downward; In many of those Ages the
Greeks were under as good Circumstances, and had as fair an appearance as the
Latins had, if not better: for the outward appearances of the Roman Communion
in the next Centuries, the 10th. and 11th. are not very favorable, even by the
Representation that their own Writers have made of them; and if we must judge
of the Infallibility of a Church by outward Characters, it may be urged with
great shows of Reason, that a Church which under all its Poverty and
Persecutions, does still adhere to the Christian Religion, has so peculiar a
Character of bearing the Cross, and of living in a constant state of
Sufferings, that if Infallibility be in the Church as a favor and privilege
from God; and not as the effect of human Learning and other Advantages, I
should sooner believe the Greek Church Infallible, than any other now in the
World.

But when these difficulties are all got over, there remain yet new and great
ones. Suppose one is satisfied that it is in the Roman Church; he must know
where to find it: without this, it is of no more use to him, than if one should
tell a hungry man that there is food enough for him, without directing him
where to seek for it; he must starve after all that general Information, if he
has not a more particular direction. And therefore it seems very absurd to
affirm, that the believing of Infallibility is an Article of Faith, but that
the proper Subject in whom it rests, is not likewise an Article of Faith. This
is the general Tenet of the whole Roman Communion, who that they may maintain
their Union, notwithstanding their difference in this, do all agree in saying,
that the subject of this Infallibility is not a matter of Faith. This destroys
the whole pretension; for all the Absurdities, of no end of Controversies, of
private Judgment, and every man's expounding the Scriptures, do return here,
and the whole design of Infallibility is defeated: For how can a man be bound
to submit to this in any one Instance, or to receive any proposition as coming
from an Infailible Authority, if he does not know who has it? Thus, according
to that Maxim of Natural Logic, that a Conclusion can have no certainty beyond
that which was in both the Premises; if it is not certain with whom the
Infallibility dwells, as well as that there is an Infallibility in the Church,
all the noise about it will be quite defeated, and of no use: If a man had many
Medecines, of which one was an Infallible Cure of such or such Diseases, can it
be supposed that he would communicate these to the World, and tell that one of
them was infallible, without specifying which of these was the infallible one?
There are some things that look so extravagant, that really it is an absurd
thing to suppose them, of which this seems to be evidently one, That God should
have left an Infallibility to his Church, and not have declared with whom this,
the greatest of all Trusts, to which probably many would pretend, was lodged.
So that this, which is the general Doctrine of the whole Roman Communion, has
an absurdity in it that cannot be reconciled to common sense and reason. Many
among them put it in the whole diffusive body of all Christians; to which
purpose the words of Vincentius Lirinensis are perpetually repeated; but after
all, this is only to abuse people: for if the sense of the Church in all Places
and Ages must be sought for, here come endless enquiries, and some of them
cannot possibly be made, the History of many Ages and Churches being lost. If
this is made the Standard, as the labor becomes Infinite, so after all, it
resolves into private Judgment, since every man must judge as he sees cause,
and must collect the sense of Ages and Churches from Authors, which as they are
often both dark and defective, so he must understand them as well as he can, by
his own Judgment and Observation, unless some Infallible Expounder, or Declarer
of their Sense, is set up, and then the Infallibility is translated from hence
to the Expounder. And indeed, it is so hard to trace a great many points of
Controversy, through even the first and best Ages, that the Church must fall under
great Difficulties, if this Hypothesis is assumed for maintaining the
Infallibility. And when all is done, we see by the performances of the Writers
of Controversy, that both sides think they can justify themselves by the
Ancient Fathers as well as by the Scriptures: So that all these Absurdities
that are urged against apealing to the Scriptures, or arguing from them, as
that to which all Heretics do fly and in which they shelter themselves, will
return here with the more force; because these Writings are much more
Voluminous, and are writ in a much more entangl'd and darker Style; so that
these two Objections lie against this way, That it is both vast, if not
impossible as to the performance of it; and next, that after all the pains that
can be taken in it, it is of no use, for private Judgment will still remain; so
that Controversies cannot be ended in this way. Others are for the diffusive
Church of the present Age, and put Infallibility there: for they reckon thus;
That every Age of the Church believes as the former Age believed, till this is
carried up to the Apostles themselves. This is to resolve all matters into Oral
Tradition, and to suppose It infallible: and indeed, if we can believe that the
generality of Christians have in all Ages been wise, honest and cautious, and
that the generality of the Clergy have in all Ages been faithful and
inquisitive, we may rely upon this, and so believe an Infallibility: But at the
same time, and upon this Supposition, we shall have no occasion for it; since
if Mankind could be brought to such a pitch of Reformation, there would be no
Controversies, and so no need of a Judge to decide them Infallibly: But if we
will admit that, which we see to be true, and know to have been true in all
Ages, that men are apt to be both ignorant and careless of Religion; that they
go easily into such Opinions as are laid before them by men of Authority and
Reputation; and that they have a particular liking to superstitious Conceits,
to outward Pomp, and to such Doctrines as make them easy in their ill
practices; then the supposition of every Age's believing nothing but that which
it learned from the former, falls quite to the ground. If we can also imagine,
that the Clergy have been always careful to examine Matters, and never apt to
add explanations or enlargements even in their own favors; or if on the
contrary, we see a gross Ignorance running through whole Ages; if we find the
Clergy to have been ambitious and quarrelsome, full of Intrigues and Interests,
then all this general specious prejudice in favor of Oral Tradition, vanishes
to nothing. All this will be easier to be conceived, if we state aright the
difference between those times and our own. Now, Printing has made Learning
cheap and easy, the disposition of Posts, the commerce of Letters, the daily
publication of Gazettes and Journals, fill the World with the knowledge of such
things as are now in agitation. But when all was to be learned from
Manuscripts, Knowledge was both dear and difficult; and the methods of
communicating with the rest of the World, were both slow, and often broken; so
that this thread of Oral Tradition will not prove a sure Guide.

There is an humor in men to add to most things, as they pass through their
hands; if it were but an Illustration, which seems not only innocent, but
sometimes necessary: Those Enlargements would very naturally be soon considered
as parts of the Doctrine: and to these in a constant gradation, new Additions
might still be made, and Inferences from Illustrations would in conclusion
become parts of their Doctrine. If I did not limit my self in this Discourse,
it were easy to apply this both to the Doctrines of Redeeming out of Purgatory,
to those of praying for the dead, or invocating Saints, and the worship of
Images. It is confessed by the Assertors of this Hypothesis, that the whole face
of the Latin Church is changed both in her Worship and Discipline; tho these
are more sensible things, than points of mere Speculation, which in dark Ages
could not be much minded; whereas the other are more visible, and make a more
powerful Impression; besides, that all those changes arise out of some new
Opinions to which they related, and on which they are founded: A change then
that is confessed to be made in the one, does very naturally carry us to
believe that a change was also made in the other. We do all plainly see, that
some Traditions that come very near the Age of the Apostles, and that seem to
be Expositions of some parts of the New Testament, were changed in other Ages.
The belief of Christ's reigning a Thousand years on earth, is one of these; for
which, tho it is now laid aside in that Church, there is another face of a
Venerable Tradition, than for most of their Doctrines. We see a practice that
was very Ancient, and that continued very long, which arose out of the
Exposition of those words, 6. Joh. 5 3.
Except ye eat my Flesh, and drink my Blood, ye have no life in you, by which
Infants were made partakers of the Eucharist, was afterward changed in that
Church; tho it is much less easy to think how that should be done, than almost
how any other should be brought about: for those words being understood of an
Indispensible necessity of the Sacrament to Salvation, and all Parents having
naturally a very tender Concern for their Children, nothing but an absolute
Authority, against which no man durst so much as whisper, could have brought
the world to have parted with this. It were easy to carry this to many other
Instances, and to show, that not only Ritual Traditions, but Doctrinal ones,
such as were found on Explanations of passages of Scripture, have varied. It
were perhaps too invidious to send men to Petavius, to find in him how much the
Tradition of the several Ages has vari'd in the greatest Articles of the
Christian Doctrine. It is no less certain, that Origin laid down a Scheme with
relation to the Liberty of man's Will, and the Providence of God, that came to
be so universally received by the Greek Church, that both Nazianzen and Basil
drew a sort of System out of his Doctrine, in which those Opinions were
asserted, and large Quotations were gathered out of him, explaining them with
most of the Difficulties that do arise out of them: and as this Book had not
only Origen's own Authority to support it, but likewise that of those two great
Men who compiled it; so it passed down, and was the uncontested Doctrine of the
Greek Church: But St. Austin being engaged into Disputes with Pelagius, framed
a new System that had never been thought of before him; and yet the Worth and
Labors of that Father gave it so a vast Reputation, that this was looked on in
several Ages as the Doctrine of the Church; and Learning vanishing at that
time, the Roman Empire being then overrun by Barbarians, his Book came to be
so much read, and so universally received, that it gave no small suspicion, if
any one opposed his Tenets: yet Cassian, who was a Greek, and was formed in
their Notions, writ a Book of Conferences, which contained the Precepts of a
Monastic State of life, that were digested in so good a method, and writ with
so true an Elevation, that it is perhaps one of the best Books that the
Ancients have left us. This came to be held in such Esteem, that all the Monks
read it with a particular Attention and Regard. In it the Doctrine of Origin
and the Greek Church was so fully set forth, that this, and perhaps this alone,
kept up a secret opposition to St. Austin's Doctrine, tho that came to receive
a vast strengthening from Aquinas and the Schoolmen that followed him: and yet
at the time that Luther and Calvin, in opposition to the Church of Rome, built
much upon St. Austin's Authority, almost all all that writ against them, argued
according to the Sentiments of the Greek Church: but those of Louvain, and the
Orders of the Dominicans and Augustinians did so maintain St. Austins and
Aquinas's Doctrine, that tho it was not liked, because it seemed to be too near
theirs who were to be condemned as Heretics; yet the Council of Trent seemed
still to stick to St. Austin. Since that time the Jesuits Order, who tho they
at first set up for St. Austin's Doctrine, yet since have changed their minds,
and taken themselves to the other side, have by their Influence both at Rome
and in other Courts, so changed the Sense of the greater part of that Church,
that it is plain, tho St. Austin's Name is too great to be openly disparaged,
yet they are now generally in the contrary Hypothesis.

This I only instance to show, that in Speculative Points it is no hard matter
to make multitudes go from one Opinion to another, and to alter the Tradition
of the Church, that is, to bring one Age of the Church to think otherwise than
another did. But after all, Oral Tradition cannot be set up as the Judge of
Controversies, much less as the living and speaking Judge, it is no real being,
nor do we know where to find it: The Tradition of one Body among them differs
from another, as in the point of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed
Virgin, in which an Opinion has been lately started, which is now received into
all their Rituals, and has given occasion to many Acts of Worship and public
Devotions, which is most expressly contrary to all Ancient Tradition; and yet is
become now so Sacred, that the whole Dominican Order feels no small
Inconvenience by their being obliged, as the Followers of Aquinas, to maintain
the contrary. The Traditions of one Nation are questioned by another,
particularly in this important Point of the Subject of this Infallibility. It
is also impossible for any man to find this out; must he suspend his Opinion
till he has gone round the Church, to ask every man what he was bred to? This,
as it could not be suffered, so it could not be so fully found out, as to put a
man in the way to end all Controversies; in this a private Judgment must again
come in: For tho it were granted that Oral Tradition is a Rule to judge
Controversies by, it can never be pretended that it is the living and speaking
Judge that must determine them.

I come now to the two more received Opinions in this matter; the one puts it
in a General Council, and the other puts it in the Pope; and both the one and
the other pretend that the Church Representative is in them. As for the
pretense of some who seem to make a Third party, and believe it to be in a
Council confirmed by the Pope; this is only a plausible way of putting it
wholly in the Pope; for if the Definitions of a Council have no Infallibility
in them, till the Pope's Consent and Approbation is given; then it is plain,
that all the Infallibility is in him, and that he only chooses to exert it in
that solemn way: For either Christ gave it to St. Peter and his Successors, or
he gave it not; if he gave it not, that pretension is out of doors; if he gave
it to them, we plainly see no Limitations in the grant; and whatsoever Rules or
Methods may have become authorized by Practice and Custom, they are only
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, but can never be supposed to limit Christ's
Grant, or to give any share of it to others.

It will be to no purpose to object here, That as some Constitutions, our own
in particular, are so framed, that the Legislative Authority, tho it flows only
from the King, yet is limited to such a Method, that it cannot be exerted but
with the Concurrence of Lords and Commons, so it may be also in the Church; and
thus the Pope can only use his Infallibility in Concurrence with a General
Council, or at least, that both together are Infallible. But tho human
Societies may model themselves as to their Legislation which way they will,
this will only prove, that as to the Government and Administration of the
Church, she may put her self into such a method as may be thought most regular
and expedient; and thus the Council of Nice limited the Bishops of a Province,
to do nothing without the consent of the Metropolitan: yet whatever may be done
in sub^ltern Bodies, where things that are done amiss may be rectified by
Appeals, the Supreme and last Resort must be left to the full freedom in which
Christ has constituted his Church. It must be further considered, That
Infallibility is not like ordinary Jurisdiction or Legislation, which may be
molded according to the conveniences of Society; it is a Privilege, which if
the Church has it at all, she has it by an immediate Grant from Heaven; and so
she must enjoy and apply it according to the Ten or of that Grant, and she
cannot expect to have it continued to her, but as she observes the nature of
the Grant. Indeed if it were given her at large, to be modeled and lodged as
she pleases, there might be a power in her to limit the use of it to such forms
as should be least liable to Exception or Abuse: But either it is granted to a
single person, or to the body in general: If it is granted to a single person,
then he, and he only has it. He may indeed, if he pleases, in order to his
being better informed or obeyed, call a General Council; but their proceedings
are only preparatory to his using the Infallibility, which is singly in
himself: Nor can the Divine Grant be limited as to the exercise or use of it;
all such Rules must still be at the Pope's discretion. On the other hand, If
the Grant is given to the Community of the Pastors, then the Infallibility must
be in them, and cannot be limited or supposed to stay for the Consent of any
one Bishop; for whatsoever regard may he had to any one man, by reason of the
Dignity of his See, or his other Circumstances; yet still this must be but a
point or form of human Prudence: for the Infallibility must be where Christ has
placed it, and cannot be transferred from thence, or be put any where else: So
unless it is said, that Christ has put this Infallibility between Pope and
Council in so express a manner, as all Constitutions do, which are under a
mixed Legislation, which is not pretended; then it must be lodged either in a
General Council, or in the Pope, and cannot be in both. This then is to be
examined in the next place.

I begin therefore to examine the Plea for the Infallibility of Councils. It is
at first no small prejudice against this Opinion, that the Church was
Constituted, and had continued 300. years before any thing that has the shadow
of a General Council was called: so if an infallible Judge of Controversies be
necessary to the Church, here we see she subsisted, in her hardest times, in
which she was the most distressed both by Heresies and Persecutions, without one.
We also see, that she has been these last 130. years without one, tho there are
warm Disputes among them, both in Speculative and Practical Doctrines, both
sides reproaching one another with Heresy: and as there is little prospect of a
Council, neither the Court of Rome, nor the Courts of other Princes, who have
among them taken away all the Primitive and Canonical Rights of the Church,
which an honest Council must desire to regain, being concerned ever to have
one: So if a Council were necessary, it is not very easy to see how it should
be brought together. During the Greatness of the Roman Empire, it was in the
Emperor's power to have brought the Bishops together at his pleasure; but now
this depends upon the Pope, who summons them, having obtained the consent of
the Princes of Christendom, which is subdivided into many different
Soveraignties, This Matter depending then so entirely upon the Sea of Rome,
there is no reason to look for one from them; for they pretending to have the
Infallibility in themselves, should very much derogate from that, if they
summoned a Council for a decision in Doctrinal Matters, they being in
possession of judging these at Rome: And as for Matters of Discipline, except
we can imagine, that they will be content to part with that Authority which
they have assumed over all Sees and Churches, and over all the Canons of the
Church, we cannot see reason to fancy that they will ever call one. If they
should, the consent of all Sovereigns must likewise be obtained; for it being a
part of the Civil Authority, to keep Subjects within the Princes Dominions,
they cannot be obliged to send their Bishops and Divines to a Council, unless
they please. This is a power which seems to belong to them, it is certain they
claim it, and very probably would put it in execution, if that matter came to
be contested: So here are very great Contingencies to be conquered before a
General Council can be brought together. Now it is not very likely that Christ
should have left so great and so necessary a power to his Church, by which all
Controversies must be judged, which yet must be at the mercy of so many
Accidents before it can be brought to work; and that the bringuing together of
those Councils should depend so entirely upon them, against whose Pretensions
or Usurpations it seems to be most necessary.

But to go more closely to this Opinion, If the Infallibility lies in a General
Council, it is first necessary that we know who are the Members that must
constitute this Council; whether the Laity have a right to be in it, and to
Judge, or not? We find the Brethren as well as the Elders joined with the
Apostles in that first Council, to which all subsequent Councils pretend they
have succeeded, and whose Style, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us,
15. Act. 23. to 30.
is one of the Foundations of this Authority. Why then are the Brethren, or the
whole Church, that is, Lay Christians, whom even the Apostles, tho Inspired,
took to consult and judge with them; Why, I say, are they now excluded? It is
also probable, that by Elders or Presbyters, are to be meant those to whom that
name was afterward appropriated; why then are they shut out? In a word, If by
a Divine Grant Infallibility belongs to a General Council, we have a just Right
to ask for a Definition of the Council, by the same Authority; otherwise we may
ascribe Infallibility to those to whom God never meant to give it. Must this
Council consist of all the Bishops of the Christian Church? For tho this is
both unreasonable, and scarce possible, yet if the Infallibility is given in
common to the Pastors and Bishops of the Church, then it will be hard to shut
out any from it, if because of their distance, their Age, or their Poverty,
they cannot come to it; and if tho a general Summons is pretended, to give all
men a right to come, yet it is certain, that only a few of those who have lived
at a distance have come, even in the best Ages; those few will either be men of
a greater degree, of Wealth, of Heat, or of Health, and will be probably men
picked out by their Princes, as the fittest to serve their ends. Now if the
Divine Grant be to the whole Body, it will not be easy to show, that even the
most numerous of those Meetings, that pass for General Councils, were truly
such. Or if it is said, that those few of remote Provinces come in the name of
the rest, and so represent them; it must first appear, whether such a thing as
Infallibility can be deputed: indeed where a Controversy is already known,
Churches may send men fully instructed in their Doctrine, who may be thereby
well empowered to declare, how the Doctrine and Tradition has been settled among
them: But if a Judgment is to be made upon the hearing of Parties, and the
discussing their Reasons on both sides, which must be the case, otherwise here
is no Infallible Judge; then in that case, men at a distance, who never heard
the matter, but very generally and partially, cannot do this: therefore such as
come to a Council, must have the full power of Judging. We know, that in Fact
such Powers or Instructions are seldom given, and in these latter Ages they
will not at all be allowed; for the Bishops so instructed, must be considered
as the Proxies of their Principals, and vote in their name, which is contrary
to the practice of all Councils exept that of Basile, and can never be endured
at Rome, where every Italian Bishop, tho his See is in some places but a small
Parish, is reckoned in the Vote equal with any of those few that come from
great Provinces.

Now these are all Difficulties of such weight, that it will not be easy to
settle them with any Divine Warrants, the Scripture being silent as to all such
matters. Nor is it clear, whether the whole Council must agree in the same
Sentence; or if a major number, tho exceeding by one single voice, is
sufficient. If the Council at Jerusalem is insisted on, as the Precedent to
other Councils, we see that All agreed there: And if this Infallibility is a
power that Christ has left in his Church, as necessary for her Peace and
Preservation, it may be reasonable enough to suppose, that for giving their
decisions the more Authority, he should so order this matter by his Providence,
that they should all agree in their Judgments: For after all, when a thing is
carried but by One vote, tho according to the Rules of all Human Courts, it
must be good in Law; yet it is not easy to think, that God would lodge such an
Authority, and suffer it to turn upon so small and so despicable an Inequality.

In conclusion, It does not appear from the Scriptures, whether in such
decisions the Bishops should expect a Divine Inspiration, such as that which
settled the Judgment in the Council of Jerusalem, or not. The meaning of those
words, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to Us, seems to be this; That as
they of themselves were resolved on making that decision, so an immediate
Inspiration, which was owned by them all, did finally determine them in their
Resolution: Or it may be supposed to relate to that Effusion of the Holy Ghost
upon Cornelius and his Friends, that being a solemn Declaration, that men might
be accepted of God, while they were yet uncircumcised; and that by consequence,
the Gentiles were not bound to the observance of those Precepts, which did not
oblige any but such as were circumcised. So that what they then decreed, was
only a general Inference which they drew from that particular case: And so they
made a decision in favor of all the Gentiles, from that which had happened to
Cornelius. This is the clearest account that can be given of these words, which
understood otherwise, look as if they had added their decision, as the giving a
further weight to that made by the Holy Ghost, or as a Vehicle to convey it,
which is too absurd to suppose: Now if any build upon that Council, they must
make the parallel just, and show that the Holy Ghost interposes in their
Conclusions.

To all these Considerations we must add this, That the first Councils are to
be supposed to have understood their own Authority; or at least the sense of
the Church at that time concerning it. They considered the several Passages of
Scripture, and framed their Decisions out of them; which were afterward
defended by some who had been of their Body; not as if their Authority or
Decision had put an end to the Controversy. They urge indeed the great numbers
of the Bishops that made those Decisions; Athan. de Deer. Sin. Nicen.
but use that rather as a strong Inducement to beget a prejudice in their
favor, than as an Authority that could not be contradicted. In this strain
does Athanasius defend the Council of Nice: For indeed even that of Numbers was
to be sparingly urged, after the Council at Arimini, Aug. con. Maxim. l. 3. c.
19.
where Numbers were on the other side. The chief Writers of those times make
their Appeals to the Scriptures, they bring many Passages out of them, and are
very short and defective in making out the Doctrine of the Church from
Tradition, or Fathers. Athanasius names not above four, and these had lived
very near that time; two of them, Origin and Dionysius, were claimed by the
other Side. There are but few, and very late Authorities, alleged in the
Council of Ephesus; and those at Chalcedon made their definition chiefly upon
the Authority and reguard to Pope Leo's Letter, in which there are indeed very
many Allegations from Scripture, but not so much as one from any Father. Thus
it is plain, both from the Practice of those Councils, and the Disputes of
those who writ in defense of their Decisions, that it was not then believed
that they had any Infallible Authority, since that is never so much as once
claimed by any of that time, that I know of, a great deal being said to the
contrary by many of them. It is true, there are some high Expressions, both in
some of the Councils, and in some of the Fathers of that time, which import
that they believed they were directed by God: But this is no other, than what
may be said concerning any Body of Good and Learned men, who use a great deal
of pious caution in forming their Decisions. Therefore great difference is to
be made between a plain assuming an Infallible Authority, and Rhetorical Hints
of their being guided by the Holy Ghost; the former does not appear, and the
latter shows that such as used those ways of speaking, did not think them
infallible; but they believing that they had made good Decisions, did upon that
presume that they were guided by the Holy Ghost.

And thus it appears in a great variety of Considerations, that we have no
reason to believe that there is an Infallibility in a General Council, and that
we do not so much as know what is necessary to make one. And to sum up all that
belongs to this Head, The Decisions of those Councils must have an Infallible
Expounder as well, as it is urged, that the Books of the Scriptures cannot be
of use to us, if there is not in the Church a living speaking Judge to declare
their true sense. Now this is rather more necessary with relation to the
Decrees of Councils, which as they are Writings, as well as the Scriptures, so
they being much more Voluminous, and more artificially contrived, and couched,
need a Commentary much more than a few plain and simple Writings, which make up
the New Testament. If then the Councils must be expounded, there must be,
according to their main reasoning, an Infallibility lodged somewere else, to
give their sense: And the necessity of this has appeared evidently since the
time of the Council of Trent; for both upon the Article of Divine Grace, and
upon their Sacrament of Penance, there have been, and still are, great debates
among them concerning the meaning of the Decrees of that Council, both Parties
pretending that they are of their side. Who then shall decide these
Controversies, and expound those Decrees? This must not be laid over to the
next General Council, for then the Infallibility will be in an Abeyance, and
lost during that Interval.

So this Inference leads me to the last Hypothesis, That the Infallibility is
in the Pope, and in him only. And it must be confessed, that this is the only
Opinion that is consistent to it self in all its parts: Here is a living and
speaking Judge, and if he is not Infallible, it is plain that they have no
Infallibility at all among them. And yet his Infallibility, as it is a thing of
which no man ever dreamt for the first nine or ten Ages, so it has such violent
presumptions against it, that without very express proof it will not be
reasonable to expect that any should believe it. The Ignorance of most Popes,
the Secular Maxims by which they are governed, the Political Methods in which
they are elected, the Forgeries, chiefly of their Decretal Epistles, by which
their Authority was principally asserted, and which are now as universally
rejected as spurious, as they were once owned to be genuine; their aspiring to
the same Authority in Temporals, for many Ages, which they have gained in
Spirituals; their having dissolved the whole Authority of the Primitive
Constitutions, and Ancient Canons of the Church, and all that practice of
Corruption that is in all their Courts, by which the whole order of the Church
is totally reversed: All these are such lawful and violent Prejudices against
them, that they must needs fortify a man in opposition to any such Pretensions,
till it is very plainly proved.

These Characters agree so very ill with Infallibility, that it is not easy to
believe they can be together: Since for above 800 years together the Papacy, as
it is represented by their own Writers, was, perhaps, the worst Succession of
men that can be found in any History; And it will seem strange, if God has
lodged such wonderful Power with such a sort of men, and yet has taken so
little care of them, to make them look like the proper Subjects of that
Authority. We do plainly see, that the Primitive Church, even when they
enlarged their Papal Authority, as to Government, did it, what out of a respect
to St. Peter, and St. Paul, who they believed founded that Church, and suffered
Martyrdom in it; and what, or most chiefly, out of their regard to the dignity
of that City, it being the Head of the Empire, under which they lived; and this
appeared by their giving the same Privileges to Constantinople, when it became
the Imperial City, which was made second to the other, and equal to it, except
only in order and rank: But as for the Doctrine of the Church, tho still the
regard to St. Peter went far; yet when Liberius subscribed to Semiarianism, it
was never pretended that his Authority had in any thing altered the case, which
must have been urged, if he had been believed Infallible.

The Case of Honorius does fully discover the sense of the Church in the Sixth
Century, concerning their Infallibility: He was condemned as a Monothelite, by
a General Council, which was confirmed by several Popes, who did by name
condemn him. Now we are not, a whit concerned in his Cause and Condemnation,
whether it was just or not; and whether it was upon a due examination or not;
It is enough for us that a General Council, as well as several Popes in that
Age, had never dreamt of Infallibility; otherwise they could not have condemned
him, or believe him capable of Heresy. This might be brought down to many later
Instances, in which several Popes have been charged with Heresy; one shall
suffice.

They have pretended to an Authority from Christ, to depose Kings, and to
transfer their Dominions to others: This they have not only done by force and
violence, but by many solemn Decisions, in which this Authority has been
claimed as founded on several Passages of Scripture, not forgetting those, In
the beginning, not, In the beginnings, did God create, and the great light that
rules the day; these, with many more, they have urged both from the Old and New
Testament. This they did with the utmost pomp of solemn Declarations, and upon
this Head they filled the World with Wars: Some few writ against these
Pretensions, but the Popes stood to them, and carried them on in a course of
five or six Centuries with all possible vigor: And during those Ages this
Doctrine grew to be universally received by the Learned and Unlearned, by all
the Universities, all the Divines, Canonists, and Casuists, not one single
Person daring to oppose so strong a Current: So that Cardinal Perron was in the
right, when he affirmed that this was the Doctrine universally received in the
Church for the last six Centuries, without contradiction, before Calvin's days;
and those few that seemed to write against it, durst only oppose the Pope's
direct Power in Temporals as the Superior Lord, to whom Kings were but Vassals,
but durst not contradict his Authority over them in case of Heresy.

This then being so public and uncontested a Point, as it shakes the Authority
of Oral Tradition, and shows how Doctrines, even in points in which men's
Interests did strongly oppose them, could get into the Church, though not
derived down from the Apostles; so it totally destroys the Pope's Pretensions
to Infallibility, in the Opinion of all such as think this to be simply
unlawful; and that it subverts the Order which God has settled in the World. For
there is not any one Fact in History that can be less contested, than that the
Popes have assumed this Authority, and that they have vouched Divine Warrants
for it.

To this also we may well add another train of Difficulties, about the Right to
choose this Pope; in whom it is vested; what number is necessary for a Canonical
Election; and how far Simony voids it; and who is the Competent Judge of the
Simony; or in the case of different Elections, who shall judge which of the two
pretending Popes was truly chosen. It must also be cleared in what form he is
to proceed, when Infallibility accompanies his Decisions; whether he may
proceed upon his own sense, or with the advice of others, and who these must
be; and what Solemnities in the Publication are necessary to make him speak ex
Cathedra. Here a great variety of Difficulties arise, which ought to be well
cleared to us, before we can be bound to acquiesce in so great a Point as his
Infallibility: And we ought to have these things made out by a Divine
Authority; for if Christ has made a special grant of Infallibility to the
Bishops of Rome, no Forms nor Rules invented by men can limit that. These may
be Rules agreed on as fit to be observed; but after all, if a Pope is
Infallible, by a Commission from Jesus Christ, he must be believed Infallible,
tho he should break through all those Forms, that men have only invented.

It remains then, that we consider those Proofs that are brought to confirm
this; since without very good ones, it is extreme unreasonable to urge such a
Point, or to expect that it should be submitted to. Here all that was said
formerly against proving this matter from Scripture, is to be remembered: But
waving that in this place, the Passages that seem to be formal, for the Church
in general, are brought to support the Papal Authority: For if great Powers are
given to the Church, and if it does not appear that they are any where else,
then they must be found in him, he being the Church-Representative. But this is
an absurd Imagination, unless they can show us, that God has lodged that
Representation in that See. As for that of 18. St. Matthew 17. for telling the
Church, and that such as do not hear it, shall be to us as Heathens and
Publicans, it must be confessed, that these words barely in themselves, and as
separated from all that went before, seem to speak out all that they plead for;
but when the occasion of them, and the manner that governs them, is considered,
nothing is plainer, that our Savior is here speaking only of such quarrellings
and differences as may happen to fall out among Christians, who are by these
words obliged to try all amicable ways of settling them: First by private
endeavors, then by the interposition of Friends, and finally, by the Authority
of that Body or Church to which they belonged; and such as could not be
prevailed on by those methods, were to be esteemed no true Christians, but to
be looked on as Heathens, or as very bad men. They might upon that be
excommunicated, and prosecuted afterward in Civil Courts: since they had no
right any more to the Tenderness and Charity that ought to be among the Members
of the Church. This Exposition has a fair appearance, and looks like being
true, to say no more at present, for that is enough, according to what was
formerly laid down, since the proofs of such a matter as this is, ought to be
full and home: This seems to look more favorable toward the way of the
Congregational Churches, in which the whole Assembly of the Brotherhood govern
all their Concerns; but does not so much as by a hint seem to favor the
pretensions, either of Popes or Councils.

That Character of the Church given by St. Paul, that it is the Pillar and
Ground of Truth, is a figurative form of Speech, 1 Timothy 3.15.
upon which it is never safe to build, much less to lay so much weight upon it:
It is a Description that the Jews gave to their Synagogues, and is by St. Paul
applied to the Church of Ephesus; for it is visible, that it has no relation to
the Catholic Church, it being only an enforcing consideration to oblige
Timothy to a greater caution in his Behavior there. It has visibly a relation
to Inscriptions that were made on Pillars: but what ever be the strict
Importance of the Phrase, it is clear, that it is but a Phrase, and therefore
it cannot bear that which is raised upon it.

Some Reflections have been already made on those Promises of Christ to his
Apostles, that the Spirit should lead them into all Truth, which plainly
related to the infallible Conduct under which they were to be put; but from
these words themselves there is no reason to infer, that the Promises were to
descend to any after them, they relate to an immediate Inspiration; so if they
prove any thing, they prove too much, That the Church must still have in it a
successive Inspiration. It is urged, that a parity of Reason leads us to
conclude, That this Promise was still to continue, tho not in the same manner,
in the Church: But all such Arguments are only conjectural Inferences, and are
at best but probabilities; so that there is no arguing from them, and therefore
this can signify nothing.

Those words of our Savior's, with which St. Matthew concludes his Gospel, Lo
I am with you always, even to the end of the world, infer no Infallibility, 28.
Mat. 20.
but import only a promise of Assistance and Protection, which was a necessary
encouragement to the Apostles, who were sent out upon so hard and laborious, as
well as dangerous Commission. In both Testaments, by God's being with any, by
his walking with them, his being in the midst of them, 2 Cor. 6.16. 13 Heb. 5.
his never leaving them, nor forsaking them, no more is meant, but that he
watches over them; that he directs, assists and protects them; and there being
a vast difference between all this and Infallibility, it can prove noting of
that kind.

So that in conclusion, the whole matter must turn upon the words of Christ to
St. Peter; for these do not relate to the Church in general, but seem to belong
particularly to him: yet there is not so much as a hint given to lead us to
apply them to his Successors; nor does he give any himself when he was writing
his Second Epistle, not long before his death, since he mentions a Revelation
that he had of its being near him; yet he does not in those last Warnings
against the Corrupters of this Holy Religion, give so much as a remote
Intimation of any Authority that he was to leave behind him for the Government
of the Church, and preserving it pure both from Error and Immorality. Nor were
these words of Christ's so much as pretended for many Ages, to import any
Authority or Infallibility lodged with St. Peter's Successors. I do not now
question his being at Rome, tho that matter is really so doubtful, that even
there, we are far from any degree so much as of human Certainty. But to go on
with those words of our Savior's to St. Peter, there is one great presumption
that lies against any pecular Authority given to him by them, since we see not
the least appearance; either in the Acts of the Apostles, or Epistles, of any
peculiar Appeals or References made to him: On the contrary, he seems to be
called to an account for his going to Cornelius, and baptizing the Gentiles; he
only delivers his Opinion as one person in the Council of Jerusalem, but St.
James gives the definitive Sentence. St. Paul never makes any Appeal to him, in
the Contests of which he writes; He settles matters, and makes Decisions,
without ever having recourse to his Authority. He seems on the contrary to
avoid it, and when probably some of the Judaisers among the Galatians were
appealing to him, or at least to some practices of his, St. Paul shows how he
had failed in those matters: for tho the Apostles were so governed by Divine
Inspiration, that they could not err nor be mistaken in points of Doctrine; yet
as to their Actions, they were left to the freedom of their own Wills, and so
humane frailty might in some Instances have prevailed over them. It is evident
from that Epistle, that St. Paul owned no dependence upon him, nor did he
submit in any sort to him, as having any degrees in his Commission or Authority
superior to his own. These are all such pregnant Intimations, as make it more
reasonable to give such a sense to those words, as will import no special
Authority given to St. Peter, since it does not appear, that either St. Peter
or the Apostles themselves understood them so: for since they persist
afterward to have their Disputes, which of them was the greatest, it is plain,
they did not understand this to be the Importance of our Savior's Words; And
it is as plain, that no part of the Scripture-History makes for this, but very
much against it.

Now as to the words themselves, they begin with an Allusion to his Name, and
Phrases built upon such Allusions, are seldom to be strictly and Grammatically
understood. 16. Mat. 18, 19.
By, Upon this Rock will I build my Church, many of the Fathers have understood
the Person of Christ; others, which amounts to the same thing, faith in him, or
the Confession of that faith; for strictly speaking, the Church, can only be
said to be founded upon Christ and his Doctrine. In a secondary Sense, it may
indeed be said to be founded on the Apostles, and upon St. Peter as the first
in Order, as well as the forwardest among them: and since the Apostles are all
reckoned Foundations, tho this should be allowed to be the meaning of these
words, 2. Ephesians. 20.
which yet is a sense in which they were not taken for many Ages, it will
import nothing peculiar to St. Peter. What follows, of the gates of hell's not
being able to prevail against it, may either be understood according to the
Greek Phrase, Death, which is often thus represented as the entrance to the
Grave, which is the signification of the word rendered Hell; and then the
meaning is, That the Church which Christ was to found, was never to come to a
period, and to die, as the Jewish Religion was then to do: Or by a Phrase
common among the Jews, who understand by Gates, the Wisdom and Strength of a
Place, since their Court and Councils were held near their Gates, these words
may signify, That all the powers of Darkness, with all their force and spite,
should not be able to bear down or destroy this Church; but this does not bar
any Errors or Corruptions from creeping into any part of it: for the word
rendered prevail, properly signifies an entire Victory, by which it should be
conquered and extirpated.

As for the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, that Christ promised to give to him,
it must again be considered, that these words are figurative; so that it is
never safe to argue from them, since Figures are capable of larger and narrower
Significations. No man will carry them so far, as to think that the power of
giving or denying Eternal Life, is hereby put in St. Peter; for that is singly
in the Mediator's hands. This shows how difficult it is to know how much is to
be drawn from a Figure.

By Kingdom of Heaven, through the whole Gospels, with very few or no
exceptions, we find that the Dispensation of the Messiah is to be understood;
this appears evident from the first words with which both St. John Baptist, and
our Savior begun their preaching, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand: and this is the sense in which it is taken in all those Parables to which
our Savior compares the Kingdom of Heaven; and in those words, the Kingdom of
Heaven is among you, and it comes not with observation, or the like. This
being laid down, as that which will soon appear to every one that shall
attentively read the Four Gospels; then by the Keys of the Dispensation of the
Messiah, the most natural and least forced signification, and that which agrees
best with those words of the same figure, he that has the Key of the house of
David; he that opens and no man shuts; and that shuts and no man
opens: 3. Rev. 7.
and also with the Phrase of the Key of knowledge, by which the Lawyers were
described; for they had a Key with writing Tables given them as the Badge of
their Profession, 11. Luke. 52.
which naturally imported that they were to open the door for others entering
into the knowledge of the Law: With which our Savior reproached them, that
they entered not in themselves, and hindered those that were entering. From all
these hints, I say, we may gather, that according to the Scripture Phrase, by
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, is meant, that St. Peter was first to open
the Dispensation of the Gospel; which he did in the first preaching of it to
the Jews, after the wonderful Pentecost: and this was yet more eminently
performed by him, when he first opened the door to the Gentiles: to which the
words of the Kingdom of Heaven seem to have a more particular respect. This
Dispensation was committed to him, and executed by him, and seems to be claimed
by him, as his peculiar Privilege in the Council at Jerusalem; so we may
safely conclude, that this is the natural meaning of these words, and is all
that was to be imported by them; and those who carry them further* must use
several distinctions, lest they give St. Peter that which belongs only to our
Savior himself.

What follows concerning the binding and loosing in Heaven, whatsoever he
should bind or loose on earth, is no special Privilege of St. Peter's, since
we find the same words said by our Savior to all his Apostles; so that this
was given in common to all the Apostles. 18. Mat. 18.
According to the sense now given of the Kingdom of Heaven, these words will be
easily understood, which are otherwise very dark: but they are full of Figures,
and so are not to be too far stretched. By binding and loosing, we find the
Rabbis do commonly understand the affirming or denying the Obligation of any
Precept that was in dispute. This then being a common form of speech among the
Jews, a genuine Paraphrase of these words is, That Christ committed to the
Apostles the dispensation of his Doctrine to the World; in which they should be
authorized to dissolve the Obligation of the Mosaical Laws, and to confirm such
parts of them as were Moral, and perpetually binding; which the Apostles should
do, with such visible Characters of a Divine Authority, empowering and
conducting them in it, that it should be very evident, that what they did on
Earth was ratified in Heaven. These words thus understood, carry in them a
plain sense, which agrees well with the whole design of the Gospel; but
whatsoever may be their sense, it is plain, that there was nothing here
peculiarly given to St. Peter.

As for our Savior's praying for St. Peter, that his faith might not fail, and
his restoring him to his Apostolate by a threefold charge, 22. Luke 32.
feed my sheep or lambs; it has such a visible relation to his fall, and
threefold denial, that it is not worth the while to enlarge on; 21. Joh. 15.
or to show, that it is capable of no other signification, and cannot be
carried further.

And thus I have gone through all that is brought from the Scriptures, for
asserting the Infallibility of the Church, and in particular of the Pope's; and
have I hope fully showed, that they cannot bear that sense, but that they must
genuinely bear a plainly different sense, which does no way differ from our
Doctrine. It was necessary to clear all this; for tho, as was before made out,
it is no proper way for them to resolve their Faith by passages out of
Scripture; yet these are very good objections to us, who upon other Reasons do
submit to their Authority.

There remains but one thing now to be cleared, which is this; If the Church is
not Infallible, it does not easily appear what certainty we can have concerning
the Scriptures, since we believe them upon the Testimony of the Church; and we
have no other knowledge concerning them, but what has been handed down to us by
Tradition: If therefore this is fallible, we may be deceived in our persuasion
even concerning them. But here a great difference is to be made, between the
carrying down a Book to us, and the Oral Delivering of a Doctrine; it being
almost as hard to suppose how the one could sail, as how the other should not
fail. The Books being in many hands, spread over the whole Churches, and read
in all their Assemblies, makes this to be a very different thing, from
discourses that are in the Air, and to which every man that reports them, is
apt to give his own Cue.

A great difference is also to be made between the Testimony of a Witness, and
the Authority of a Judge. If in any Age of the Church, Councils had examined
controverted Writings, and had upon that past Sentence, this had been in deed a
judging the matter, but no such thing ever was. The Codex of the Scriptures was
settled some Ages before any Provincial Council gave out a Catalogue of the
Books which they held as Canonical: For no ancient General Council ever did it;
and tho the Canonical Epistles, of which there not being such a certain
Standard, they not being addressed to any particular Body that had preserved the
Originals, were not so early nor so universally received as the others were,
yet the matter was settled without any Authoritative Judgment, only by examining
Originals, and such other Methods by which all things of that nature can only
be made out. But this matter having been so fully considered and stated in
another Discourse, I shall dwell no longer on it in this.

As for the Authorities which are brought from some of the Ancients, in favor
of the Authority of the Church, and of Tradition; it is to be considered, that
though the word Tradition, as it is now used in Books of Controversy, imports a
sense opposite to that which is written in the Scripture, yet Tradition is of
its own signification, a general word, that imports every thing which is
delivered: And in this sense the whole Christian Religion, as well as the Books
in which it is contained, was naturally called the Tradition of the Apostles:
So that a great many things said by Ancients to magnify the Tradition of the
Apostles, and by way of Appeal to it, have no relation to this matter. Besides,
when men were so near the Apostolical Age, that they could name the Persons
from whom they had such or such hints, who had received them from the Apostles,
or from Apostolical men, Tradition was of another sort of Authority, and might
have been much more safely appealed to, than at the distance of so many Ages:
Therefore if any thing is brought either from Irenaeus or Tertullian, that
sounds this way, here is a plain difference to be observed between their Age
and ours, which does totally diversify it.

But to convince the World how early Tradition might either vary or
misrepresent matters, let the Tradition not only in, but before St. Irenaeus's
time, concerning the observation of Easter, be considered, which goes up as
high as St. Polycarps's time. We find, that as the several Churches adhered to
the practices of those Apostles that founded them, so they had quite forgot the
grounds on which it seems these various Observations were founded: Since though
it is very probable, that those who kept Easter on the Jewish day, did it, that
by their condescendence to the Jews in that matter, they might gain upon them,
and soften their Prejudices against Christianity; yet it does not appear that
their Successors thought of that at all, for they vouched their Custom, and
resolved to adhere to it; nor is there any thing mentioned on either side, that
give us the account of those early, but different Observations. If then
Tradition failed so near its Fountain, we may easily judge what account we
ought to make of it at so great a distance.

Many things are brought with great pomp out of St. Austin's Writings,
magnifying the Authority of the Church, in terms, which after all the
allowances that are to be made for his diffuse and African Eloquence, can
hardly be justified: Yet when it is considered, that he writ against the
Donatists, who had broke the Unity of the Church upon the pretense of a matter
of fact, concerning the Ordainers of Cecilian, which had been, as to the point
of fact, often judged against them: And yet as they had distracted the whole
African Churches, so they were men of fierce and implacable Tempers, that broke
out daily into acts of great fury and violence, and had set up a principle that
must for ever break the Peace and Union of the Church; which was, that the
virtue of all the public Acts of Worship, of Sacraments and Ordinances
depended upon the personal worth of him that officiated; so that his Errors or
Vices did make void all that past through his hands. Now when so warm a man as
St. Austin had so bad a Principle, and so ill a disposition of mind in view, it
is no wonder if he brought out all that he could think on upon the subject; so
no wonder if he raises the Authority and the Privileges of the Church to a
vast height: Yet after all, these were not his settled thoughts; for he goes off
from them, whenever he has an eye on his Disputes against the Pelagians; for
the System which he had framed in those Points, could not bear with any other
Notion of the Church, but that of the persons predestined, to whom all the
Promises belonged. And thus whatever he himself asserts in his zeal against the
Donatists, comes to be thrown down, when the Pelagians are in his view; so we
see from hence how much deference is due to his Authority in this Point.

The last head relating to this whole matter, is to explain in what the
Authority of the Church does consist; what it is both in matters of Faith and
Discipline. As to matters of Faith, it is certain, that every Body of men is
bound to study to maintain its own Order and Quiet, and must be authorized to
preserve it; otherwise it cannot long continue to be one Body. This binds the
Body of Christians yet much more, who are strictly charged to love one another,
to worship God with one heart and mouth, to be of the same mind and judgment,
to assemble themselves together, and to withdraw from all such as cause
divisions, or corrupt the great Trust of the Faith committed to their keeping.
It must be therefore a great part of the duty of those that are bound to feed
the flock, to observe when any begin to broach new Opinions, that they may
confirm the weak, and stop the mouths of gainsayers: which as the Apostles
themselves did during their own lives; so by the charges that they gave to the
Churches in their Epistles, and more fully by those given to Timothy and Titus,
it appears that a main part of their Care and Authority was to be employed that
way. When therefore any new Doctrines are started, or when there arise Disputes
about any part of Religion, the Pastors of the Church ought to consider,
whether or not it is in a matter of any great consequence, in which the Faith
or Lives of men may be concerned? If the point is not of a great importance, it
is a piece of wisdom to connive at lesser matters, and to leave men to a just
freedom in things where that freedom is not like to do hurt; only even there,
care is to be taken to keep men in temper, that they become not too keen in the
management of their Opinions; and that they neither disturb the Peace of the
Church, nor State, upon that account.

If the matters appear to be great, either in themselves, or in the
consequences that are like to follow upon them, then the Pastors of the Church
ought to consider them with an equal and impartial mind; they ought to here
Parties fully, and weigh their Arguments carefully; they ought to examine the
sense of the Scriptures, and of the best times of the Church, upon those Heads,
and finally to give Sentence: In which two things are to be considered; the one
is, That great regard is due to a Decision made by a Body of men, who seem to
have acted without prejudice or interest. For I confess it will be very hard to
maintain such a respect for a Company, in which matters are carried with so
much Artifice and Intrigue, as even Cardinal Palavicini represents in the
management of the Council of Trent, where Bishops were caressed or threatened,
well paid, or ill used, as they gave their Voices: Such a proceeding as this
will rather inflame, than allay the opposition; but a fair and equitable, a
just and calm way of examining matters of dispute, will naturally beget a
respect, even in such as cannot yield a submission to their Decrees.

After all, it must be confessed, That no Man can be bound to a blind
Submission, unless we suppose an Infallibility to be in the Church; yet Private
Men owe to Public Decisions, when decently made, a due respect; they ought to
distrust their own judgments, and examine the matter more accurately: But if
they are still convinced that the Decision is wrong, they are bound to persist
in their own thoughts, only they ought to oppose modestly; to consider well the
Importance of Order and Peace, and whether their Opinion, even suppose it true,
is worth the Noise that may be made about it, or the Disorders that may follow
upon it. After all, If they are still convinced that their Opinions are true,
and that they relate to the indispensible Duties of Religion, or the necessary
Articles of Christianity, they must go on, as they will answer it to God, upon
the sincerity of their Hearts, and the fullness of their Convictions: So that
the Definitions of the Church may have very good Effects, even when it is not
pretended that they are Infallible.

Another thing to be considered in those Decisions is, That though they are not
Infallible, yet they may have Authority, in this respect, That they are the
established Doctrine of such a Body of Christians, who will have no other to be
taught among them, and will admit none to be of their Body, or at least to be a
Teacher among them, who is not of the same mind. In this, it is certain, great
Tenderness and Prudence is to be used, and the natural liberty of Mankind is
not to be too much limited: But yet as any Man may fix and declare his own
Opinion; so certainly by a much greater parity of reason, any Society or Body
of Men may declare their Opinions, and so far fix them, as to exclude all other
Doctrines, and the Favorers of them, from being of their Body, or from bearing
any Office in it: So that though such Decisions do not enter into Men's
Consciences, nor bind them further than as they are convinced by the Reasons
and Authorities upon which they are founded; yet they may have a vast influence
on the Order and Peace of Churches and States.

As to Rituals, it is certain that there are many little Circumstances and
Decencies that belong to the Worship of God, the Order of Religious Assemblies,
and their Administrations; and that in these, the Pastors of a Church, by the
Natural Right that all Societies have to keep themselves in order, must have a
Power to determine all things of this nature. This becomes yet clearer in the
Christian Societies, from the Rules that the Apostles gave to the Churches, To
do all things in Order, and for the ends of Edification and Peace. There is not
one of the Rules laid down in Scripture, concerning the Sacraments, or the
Officers of the Church, to which many Circumstances do not belong; now either
these must be all left to every Man's liberty, which must needs create a
jarring disagreement, in the several parts of this Body, that would both breed
confusion, and look very ridiculous and absurd; or there must be an Authority
in the Pastors of the Church to meet together, and to settle these by mutual
consent. All the greater Bodies of those who divide from our Constitutions,
have some Rituals of their own; so the Dispute in this, must only be concerning
the degrees and extent of this Power: For if any Authority is allowed, it will
not be easy to fix any other Bounds to it, but this, that it must not invade
the Divine Authority, nor do any thing beyond the Rules and Limits set in the
Scriptures; for if there is the least degree of Authority in the Church, the
grounds upon which it is founded, must carry it to every thing that cannot be
proved to be unlawful. Bare unfitness, though it ought to be a Consideration of
great weight when such things are deliberated about; yet when they are once
concluded, can be no reason for disobeying them, since the fitness of Order,
and the decency of Unity and Obedience, is certainly of much more value, than
any special unfitness that can be supposed to be in any particular Instance. So
that one of these two must be admitted, either that the Pastors of the Church
have no sort of Authority, even in the smallest Circumstances, but are limited
by the Rules of the Scripture, and can only execute them strictly, and not go
beyond them in a title; or this Authority must go to every thing that is
lawful. On that I will dwell no longer here, the fuller discussion of this
matter belonging to another Discourse,

It is a natural Consequence of the Authority given to the Pastors of the
Church, That they having declared and fixed their Doctrine, and having settled
Rules for their Rituals, may excommunicate such as either do not live according
to the Rules of their Religion, which are a main part of their Doctrine, or do
not obey the Constitutions of their Society. Excommunication, in the Strictness
of things, is only the Churches refusing to receive a person into her
Communion; now as every Private man is the Master of his own Actions, it is
clear that every Body of Men must also be the Masters of theirs: And thus,
though Excommunication in some respects is declaratory, it being a solemn
denunciation of the Judgments of God, according to the tenor of the Gospel,
against persons who live in an open violation of some one or more of its Laws;
so it is also an authoritative Act, by which a Church refuses to communicate
with such a Person. In this, it is true, Churches ought to make the terms of
Communion with them as large and extensive as may consist with the Rules of
Religion, and of Order; but after all, they having a Power over themselves, and
their own Actions, must be supposed to be likewise clothed with a Power to
communicate with other Persons, or not to do it, as they shall see cause; in
which, great difference is to be made between this Power in it self, and the
use and management of it: for any Abuses, whether true, or only pretended,
though they may well be urged to procure a proper Reformation of them, yet
cannot be alleged against the Power it self, which is both just and necessary.

It is not so very clear to state the Subordination in which the Church is to
be put under the Civil Power, and how far all Acts of Church Power are subject
to the Laws and Policies of those States to which the several Churches do
belong. It is certain, that the Magistrate's being a Christian or not, does not
at all alter the Case, that has only a relation to his own salvation; for his
Authority is the same, whatever his Belief may be in matters of Religion. His
design to protect or to destroy Religion, alters the Case more sensibly; for
the regards to that Protection, and to the Peace and Order that follow upon it,
together with the Breaches and Disorders that might follow upon an ill
understanding between Church and State, are matters of Such Consequence, that
it is not only mere Prudence, which may give perhaps too strong a Bias to
carnal Fears and Policies; but the Rules of Religion, which oblige the Church
to study to preserve that Order and Protection, which is one of the chief
Blessings of the Society, and a main Instrument of doing much good. Great
difference is to be made between an Authority that acts with a visible design
to destroy Religion, and another that intends to protect it, but that errs in
its conduct, and does often restrain the Rules of Order, and impose hard and
uneasy things: Certainly in the latter much is to be born with, that may be
otherwise uneasy, because the main is still safe; and private slips, when
endured and submitted to, can never be compared to those public disorders,
that a rigid maintaining of that which is perhaps in it self good, must
occasion. But when the design is plain, and that the Conduct of the Civil
Powers goes against the Truth of Religion, either in whole, or in any main
Article of it, then the Body of the Christians of that State ought to fortify
themselves, by maintaining their Order, and their other Rules, in so far as
they are necessary to their preservation.

Upon the whole matter, it does not appear that the Church has any Authority to
act in opposition to the State, but merely in those things in which the
Religion that she professes is plain and positive; so that the Question comes
to be really this, Whether is it better to obey God, than Man? There the Rule
is clear, and the Decision is soon made: So when the Church acts merely in
obedience to Rules and Laws laid down in Scripture, such as, in declaring the
Doctrine, in administering the Sacraments, and maintaining the settled Officers
of the Church, she is upon a sure Bottom, and must cast her self upon the
Providence of God, whatever may happen, and still obey God; but in all things
that have arisen out of ancient Customs and Canons, in every thing where she
has not a Law of God to support her, I do not see any Power she has to act in
opposition to Law, and to the Supreme Civil Authority.

In this the constant practice of the Jews is no small Argument; whose
Sanhedrin, that was a Civil Court, and the Head of their State, did give Rules
and Orders, which their Priests were bound to obey, when not contrary to the
Law of God. We are sure this was the Rule in our Savior's time; and it was
never censured nor reproved by him, nor by the Apostles. The Argument is also
strong, that is drawn from the constant practice of the Church, from the time
that she first had the protection of the Civil Authority, till the times of the
Papal Domination, in which we find, the Emperors all along making Laws
concerning all the Administrations of the Church: we find them receiving
Appeals in all Church matters, which they appointed such Bishops as happened to
be about their Courts, to examine: This was like our Court of Delegates; for
the Bishops, who judged those matters, did not act according to Canon, or by
the Ecclesiastical Authority, which had put the Church in a stated line of
Subordination, according to the division of the Provinces of the Empire: They
acted only by an Imperial Authority; so that though they were Bishops, they
acted by the Emperor's Commission. Such Authorities as these, drawn from the
practices of the Jewish and the Primitive Church, are at least strong
Inducements to believe this to be true. But the Argument that seems to
determine it, is, That Men cannot be obliged to obey two different Authorities,
that may happen to contradict one another; this were a strange distraction in
Men's Thoughts and Consciences, and therefore it cannot be supposed that God has
put them under such a divided Authority; for all Temporals will easily be
fetched within an in ordine ad spiritualia. Since then every Soul is bound
under the hazard of damnation to obey the Supreme Powers, we must be bound to
obey their Laws in every thing that is not contrary to the Law of God; which
seems to be the only Limitation that this can admit of. That settles this whole
matter, which otherwise must be ravelled out into vast Intricacies; and yet it
must be supposed for certain, that the Rule for Men's obedience must be distinct
and fixed.

To conclude this whole matter; The best and surest way for preserving the
Order and Authority of the Church, as well as its Peace and Prosperity, is for
the Clergy to live and labor so, to be so humble and modest, so self-denied
and heavenly-minded, that from thence the Laity may be brought to see, that
whatsoever Power they have, will be employed for the Public good of the whole.
This will make them to be less jealous, and more submissive; and this will
secure to them, most commonly, the protection and encouragement which they may
expect from the Civil Powers; who will be apt to have regard to their Clergy,
according to the esteem which they observe their other Subjects have for them.

DISCOURSE IV.
Concerning the OBLIGATIONS To continue in the COMMUNION of the CHURCH.
THERE is nothing that concerns the Peace and Order of Churches, and indeed the
quiet and good Government of Mankind more, than rightly to understand our
Obligations to continue in the Communion of that Church in which we were born,
or which is the main Body of that Society of Christians among whom we live. The
extremes in this matter are dangerous on both hands. A lazy Compliance with
every thing that is uppermost, because of the Law and Advantages that may be on
its side, and an implicit believing and receiving of every thing that happens
to be proposed to us, does on the one hand depress our Faculties, render us so
easy to every Form in Religion, that we become at last indifferent to all, and
concerned in none; it makes way for tyranny in those that govern, and sinks
those that are governed into a sottish stupidity. On the other hand, a wanton
cavilling at every thing, thebreaking of an Established Order, the making
Divisions, and the drawing of Parties, the quarrelling about nicer points of
speculation, or some lesser matters in Rituals, do occasion much passion and
animosity, they take men much off from the great ends of Religion, they divide
Christians from one another, and sharpen them against one another; all which
are Evils of so high a nature in themselves, and in their Consequences, that it
will be of great advantage to find so true a mean in this matter, that in it we
may avoid the mischiefs of both extremes.

The foundation then to be laid here, is first, to consider the natural
obligation that all men, who are united by any common Bond, come under to
maintain a cordial affection, and a mutual good understanding among themselves;
both as it is an instrument to preserve and strengthen their Body, and as it
makes such a Body of men easy and happy. But this, that is a consideration
common to all joint Bodies of men, becomes much stronger in the Christian
Religion; one of its main designs being to knit men's hearts to one another, by
a tenderness of brotherly kindness and charity, our Savior having made this
the distinction, 13 Joh. 35.
by which all the world might know who were his disciples, and who were not so.
And all his Apostles, have in every one of their Epistles, not excepting the
shortest, pressed this in such a variety of copious and most earnest Directions,
that whosoever reads the New Testament carefully, must see that this is
enlarged on beyond all the other Duties of our Religion, and pressed in the most
comprehensive words, and with the most enforcing considerations possible, the
chief of all being the love which our Savior himself bare to us; in imitation
of which, he has required us to love one another, to love enemies, to pass by,
and to forgive injuries, doing good for evil; to relieve the necessitous, and
have bowels of compassion for all men.

This is a main part of the glory, as well as of the duties of our Religon. To
advance this, and to endear us to one another, we are obliged to pray with, and
for one another, we are bound to assemble our selves together, that by our
seeing of one another, and meeting in the same Acts and Duties of Religion, our
love and union may become stronger, and more firmly cemented. Sacraments are
sacred Rites, instituted not only to maintain our Devotion toward God, as Acts
of Homage and Solemn Vows made to him, but likewise as Bonds to knit us
together, as well as to unite us to our Head: And it is no small confirmation
of all this, that our Savior in his last and longest Prayer to the Father,
when he was interceding for his Church, has repeated this Prayer so often, no
less than five times, 17. St. Joh. verses 11, 21, 22, 23.
in no very long Prayer, that they might be one, and be kept and made perfect
in one; and the Unity prayed for is so sublime, that it is compared to that
unconceivable Unity or Union that was between the Father and the Son; and by
this the world was to be convinced of the truth of his Religion, Verse 23.
That the world might believe that the Father had sent him.

More needs not be said upon this Head to make it evident, that it is of the
greatest importance to the Christian Religion, to maintain an entire union
among its Members; and that the chief mean of doing this, is their uniting
themselves in the same Acts of Worship. Now the only Question that will remain,
will be, How far must this go? and the only Answer that can be made to it, is,
That it must go, till the Body, in which we happen to be engaged, imposes
unlawful terms of Communion on its Members: In that case we must remember, that
it is better to obey God than man; and that we must seek peace and truth; since
an Union on unlawful terms is a combination against God and his Truth, and is
no piece of Christian Charity. This will be agreed to on all hands in the
general. So I will go next to examine the Pretenses for disjointing this Union
among our selves, and see whether the main Body among us, I mean our Church,
has imposed unlawful terms of Communion on her Members; for if that is true, we
by so doing have broke this Union: or whether any who have separated from us,
have not done it upon less binding Considerations, for then they have broken
the Union.

This I will manage with all possible fairness, and without the least
reflection on Persons and Parties. I will state their grounds, and put their
Arguments, with the utmost force that I can apprehend belongs to them; and when
I have weighed them, I will leave the whole matter to an Impartial
consideration. The first point, in which every man must fix his thoughts, is,
that it is not free to him to choose to which Body he will join himself, as it
is free to him to choose in which Parish he will settle himself; for since all
Parishes make but one Communion and Church, the one cannot be compared to the
other: And if all that was said before, is true, then certainly it is not
lawful for any man to break the Union of the Body, unless he is persuaded that
it cannot be maintained but upon unlawful terms. Therefore except a man is
under this persuasion, he sins if he departs from the Union of the Body. But
since Conscience is a word that may be used in the following part of this
Discourse, its true notion ought to be well settled; which is, according to the
natural signification of the word, in all Languages, an inward persuasion,
founded upon some reason, apprehended to be true, concerning the lawfulness or
unlawfulness of a thing. By this it will appear, that a bare aversion or
dislike to a thing, without any reason on which that dislike is grounded,
cannot be called Conscience; since things with which we are not acquainted, or
that are uncouth to us, which we have often heard spoken against, are disliked
by us, through a habit or prejudice conceived against them: but unless this is
founded upon some reason, that appears to us true, drawn either from the nature
of things, or from the Scriptures, it is not Conscience. I do not say, that
every man under these Convictions must be able to maintain those his Reasons to
others, to be just and good; for then a better Arguer, who can silence him,
should be able to alter his Conscience: But though he cannot answer Objections,
yet as long as his Persuasion appears to be well grounded to himself, such a
man is still under the bonds of his Conscience. I am not now to examine how far
an erring Conscience obliges, or at least excuses, it is enough to have stated
in general the true Notion of Conscience, by which every man that does not
intend to deceive himself, may certainly know, whether he is really under the
persuasions of Conscience, or if he is only guided by Humor, Conceit, or the
power of Education and Prejudice.

The main Foundation out of which most of the Objections against some of the
Terms of our Communion are raised, is this, That the Church is only empowered
to execute those Rules and Orders that are set Christians in the Scriptures;
That the pretending to add to these, is to accuse the Scripture as defective;
That all Additions to those Rules set us in Scripture, are Superstitious
Usages; That they impose a yoke upon us, and so deprive us of our Christian
Liberty; That if some Rites may be added, others upon the like reasons may be
also added to these, and so on without bounds, as in Fact it appears; That when
the Church went once off from the first simplicity, in which the Apostles
delivered the Christian Religion to the World, and that new Rites were invented
to beautify the Worship, these Additions did at last swell up to that
intolerable height in which they are now in the Church of Rome. In Religious
Matters, it is not enough, according to St. Paul's Rule, that a thing is
lawful, it must also be expedient: But for that pretended expediency which is
alleged for some Rites, that they are expressive and significant, it is rather
an Argument against them; for a significant Ceremony is of the nature of a
Sacrament, the common definition of which, 1 Cor. 10.23.
that it is a visible sign of an invisible Grace agreeing to it; and certainly
the appointing Sacraments is above the power of the Church, and can belong only
to Jesus Christ, who is its Head and Founder. But all this is in appearance the
stronger, if Rites so enjoined have been abused to Idolatry, and are parts of
an Idolatrous Worship: To retain these, is to conform our selves to it, tho the
Scriptures command us to come out from among all such, and not to be
conformable to them. Hezeki^ broke the Brazen Serpent, tho a Memorial of a
signal Miracle, 2 Kings 18.4.
in which it had been in some sort an Instrument, yet when even that was abused
to Idolatry, a good King broke it to pieces. This will hold stronger against
things that are but of human Institution, That they ought to be taken away, how
innocent soever they may be in themselves, after they are grossly abused. To
keep up the use of such things, is to scandalize and offend the weaker
Christians, tho St. Paul lays great weight upon this, and charges all
Christians not to lay a stumbling block in one another way; 14. Romans 13.^
he calls the doing otherwise, the destroying a weak Brother; and in
conclusion, since St. Paul said, whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, these
Rites therefore not being warranted from Scripture, Verse. 23.
cannot be of Faith, the Object of which is a Divine Revelation; they must
therefore be sinful.

And thus I have set down all the Branches of the Plea against Ceremonies, with
as much advantage as I can imagine belongs to them. I go therefore in the next
place to take it to pieces, and to examine the strength of the whole, and of
every part of this Reasoning, that, as must be acknowledged, wants not fair and
specious colors.

The main stress lies upon this, Whether the Church in her Rituals is so
limited to the Scriptures, that she has no power to add any thing to what is
prescribed in them? Great difference is to be made between matters of Doctrine,
Rules of Life, Foederal Acts, together with the other Acts of Worship which are
parts of the New Covenant, or conditions of it; and some Ritual Appointments,
such as the Circumstances of those Instituted Acts, the forms for the Solemn
Acts of Worship, together with some other Institutions which are helps to
Devotion, and do fix or raise the attention. For the former sort, it is
confessed, That Christ and his Apostles having delivered this Religion to the
World, it must continue in the same state in which they settled it, without
additions or variations: but since all instituted Actions must be determined by
the Circumstances of persons, places, times, words and postures, these must be
all managed with such Deceency and Beauty, as may carry on the Order and
Edification of the Church; and since some Actions seem to have a very natural
tendency to give good Impressions, and to raise a seriousness and awe for
Divine Performances, these may be also appointed by those who are to feed,
teach and guide their people.

We see the Jews, tho their Religion seems to have in it a sufficient share of
Rituals, did add a great many Ceremonies to those which Moses gave them. They
had in their Pascal-Supper a thick sauce of Dates, Almonds and Figs, pounded
together, and wrought up into the form of Clay, to remember them of the Clay of
which their Fathers had made Bricks in the Land of Egypt; and yet our Savior
observed this Paschal-Supper with the same addition: for this was probably the
sauce into which Judas dipped the Sop. They had likewise a form of Initiating
Proselytes into their Religion by Baptism, not mentioned in the Old Testament;
and after this Paschal-Supper, the Table was spread a second time, and nothing
but Bread and Wine was set on it: yet tho these two last mentioned were Rites
added by them to the Divine Institution, our Savior was so far from condemning
them for those additions, that he took these, and hallowed them to be the two
Foederal Rites of his own Religion: Nor does he so much blame the Pharisees for
the observation of those Rites which Tradition had handed down to them, as
because they set that value on them, as to make the Laws of God of no effect
upon their account, when those voluntary assumed Ceremonies were preferred by
them to the Moral Law it self; so that the over-valuing of Rituals, and the
imagining that by them Compensation can be made to God for the weghtier Matters
of the Law, Faith, Justice, and the Love of God, is indeed severely reprimanded
by our Savior; but the bare observance of them is no where censured by him. On
the contrary, The whole service of the Synagogues was only a human Institution,
no print of any Divine Precept appearing for it in the whole Old Testament; yet
our Savior came to their Synagogues, and bore a share in the Acts of Worship
that were performed there. A Feast was Instituted by the Maccabees, in
commemoration of their having purged the Temple from Idolatry, which was
observed by our Savior; and the whole New Testament is full of allusions to
some Forms and Rites which were their practiced by the Jews in their Worship,
tho no where instituted in the Old Testament.

There are also some Precepts given in the New Testament about Ritual Matters,
which are now taken away only by disuse; that is, by the Authority of the
Church that has discontinu'd the practice of them: such is the Decree that the
Apostles with the rest at Jerusalem made against the eating of meats strangled,
15. Act. 9.
or offered to Idols, or of blood; which as they are joined with Fornication,
so the prohibition of them is reckoned among necessary things; yet these are
now no more considered, as forbidden, that prohibition being looked on either as
a compliance with the Jews, in those precepts which they believe were given to
the Sons of Noah; or as a direction to keep the Christians at a due distance
from all compliances with the Gentiles in their Idolatrous practices. And now
that all regards to the Jews have ceased with God's rejecting them from being
his people, at the destruction of Jerusalem, and all danger of coming too near
the practices of the Gentiles, is likewise at an end, we living no more among
Heathenish Idolaters; the nature of the things prohibited by that Decree, not
being evil in themselves, when the ground of the Prohibition ceases, all men
reckon that the Prohibition must be at an end. Here then the Authority and
Practice of the Church seems to be strong, even in bar to an Apostolical
Decree; and none of those Bodies that are offended at our Rituals, have revived
this: So at least this Argument is of force against those who do it not; for
certainly a greater degree of Authority is necessary to take away a practice
that has the face of a plain Commandment in Scripture enjoining it, than for
adding such Rites as are recommended by new Emergencies. To this may be added
the Practice and Rules given by the Apostles concerning Deaconesses: Phoebe and
others are mentioned that served in that Function. St. Paul also in the Rules
that he gives concerning the Age, the Qualifications and the Functions of the
Widows, seems plainly to mean them; and we do certainly know, 16. Romans 1. 1 Timothy 5.9.
that they were in the first Ages of Christianity, and were employed in the
Instruction, and about the Baptism of such women as were converted to the
Faith. But when afterward some Scandals rose upon them, as the Council of Nice
prohibited the Clergy to keep any women that were not very nearly related to
them, in their houses; so in the Fifth Century, upon some public Scandals
given by them, we find, that as they were put down in the Western Church by
several Provincial Synods, so they insensibly wore out of the Greek Church; and
yet none in our days have endeavored to revive this Institution. The kiss of
peace was likewise used in the Apostles times, and is mentioned in their
Epistles; yet that Rite being perhaps made use of by profane Scoffers, 1 Pet.
5.14. 16. Romans 16.
to represent the Assemblies of the Christians as too licentious, for the black
and unjust Imputations cast on their Meetings seem to have no other Foundation
but this, 1 Cor. 16.20.
it wore out of practice; and I do not hear that any in our days have
endeavored to bring it again in use. 2 Cor. 13.12.
We see likewise, that they had Love Feasts before the Eucharist, which was
taken from the Jews; and tho St. Paul complains of some abuses in this
practice, 1 Cor. 11.21.
he does not condemn it, nor order it to be let fall; yet it wore out, and is
not now offered to be revived by any among us. Thus we see, that as to Matters
that are expressly mentioned in Scripture, with warrants that seem to impose
them as standing Rules upon succeeding Ages, the abuses or unfitness which
afterward appeared in them, were thought sufficient Reasons for departing from
them.

To these Instances another may be added, that must needs press all that differ
from us, one Body only excepted, very much. We know that the first Ritual of
Baptism, was by going into the Waters, and being laid as dead backwards
all-along in them; and then the persons baptized were raised up again, and so
they came out of them. This is not only mentioned by St. Paul, but in two
different places he gives a Mystical Signification of this Rite; that it
signified our being buried with Christ in Baptism, and our being raised up with
him to a new life; 6 Romans 3, 4, 5.
so that the Phrases of rising with Christ, and so putting on Christ, as often as
they occur, do plainly relate to this: 2 Col. 12.
and yet partly out of modesty, partly in regard to the tenderness of Infants,
and the coldness of these Climates, since such a manner might endanger their
lives, and we know that God loves mercy better than sacrifice, this form of
baptizing is as little used by those who separate from us, as by our selves.

If we consider only the words of the Scripture, without regarding the
subsequent practice of the Church, we see reason enough to imagine, that the
washing of feet should be kept up in the Church. We have our Savior's practice
for it, 13. John 14, 15.
and words that seem to import an obligation on us to wash one another feet,
together with the moral use and signification of it, that it ought to teach us
Humility. From all these things this Inference seems just, That according to
the practices of those who divide from us, the Church must be supposed to have
an Authority to adjust the Forms of our Religion, in those parts of them that
are merely Ritual, to the Taste, to the Exigencies and Conveniences of the
several Ages and Climates. I say in things that are merely Ritual; for I do not
think that these Instances can justify a Church that should alter any main part
of a Foederal Rite instituted by Christ, such as the giving the Chalice in the
Sacrament; since this Institution is delivered with so particular a Solemnity,
and in express words is appointed to be continued till Christ's second coming;
and the Cup is given as a Seal of the New Covenant in his blood, for the
remission of sins; which therefore all are required to drink.

We are to consider, that in matters that are merely Ritual, unless we suppose
that Charms are ti'd to particular Rites, there could be no other design in
them, but to secure some good purpose, or to keep off some bad practice by
those outworks: If then the state of Mankind does so alter, that what is good
in one Age, is liable to abuse, mistake or superstition in another; there must
be supposed to be a power in the Pastors of the Church, to alter or add as they
see real occasions or good warrants for it. Outward appearances work much on
Mankind; things that look light, must dissipate men's Thoughts, as much as
graver methods do recollect them. Dancing in the praises of God, would look
very wild now; but in other Ages it had a better effect. Since therefore the
Christian Religion was to last to the end of the World, and to be spread to
very different Climates; and since there is no special Rubric of Forms
digested in it; since there is also no Limitation put upon the Church in this
point, but rules are given that sound very much to the contrary, of doing all
things that tend to Order, Edification and Peace; 14. Romans 19.
this great prejudice seems to be fully taken off and answered.

Nor do such Institutions lead to Superstition, but rather to the contrary. 1
Cor. 14.26, 40.
Superstition, in its strict Notion is a baseness of mind, that makes us fear
without cause, and overvalue things too much; imagining that there is more in
them than really there is. If things that are ritual were unalterable, there
might be from thence more occasion given to Superstition, according to the
conceit of the Jews, who thinking that their Rites were unalterable, came to
fancy from thence, that there was a real value in them, which upon their own
account rendered men the more acceptable to God: Superstition is more
effectually beat down by the opinion of the alterableness of all external
forms, according to the different Exigencies of times and places; since this
shows, that Rites are only matters of Order and Decency, which have no real
value in them, because they are alterable. If any grow superstitious in the
observance of them, this is an abuse to which all things, even the most Sacred,
the Sacraments themselves, are liable.

It can as little be said, That these Rules in Ritual Matters are Impositions
on our Christian Liberty; they are rather the exercise of a main part of it, 5.
Gal. 1.
which is our not being tied up so strictly by a Law of Commandments, as the
Jews were. The Notion of Liberty, as it is stated by St. Paul, is the Exemption
under which Christians were brought from the Precepts of the Mosaical Law: for
those who asserted the standing Obligations of that Law, were bringing
Christians under a heavy Yoke, in opposition to which, the Apostles asserted
their Liberty. But it is likewise a true piece of Liberty, and a very necessary
one for the Societies of Christians, to have among them a power of of using or
forbearing to use, such external things, as do either advance or obstruct the
main ends of Religion. That some Churches may abuse, and that others have
abused this Authority by carrying it too far, and imposing too great a load of
external performances, is not to be denied: The number of them may become a
vast burden, and a distraction rather than a help toward the main Design of
Religion. Ludicrous Rites beget^ profaneness, and Pompous ones and undue
gaity: But the apprehension of an abuse in the extent of an Authority, cannot
justify the quarrelling at a few Rites, when it is visible there is no
disposition to swell or increase them. If every year were producing some new
Rite or other, there might be good ground to fear, that there would be no end
of such Impositions; but this cannot be applied to our Circumstances. It is
also a question, whether in case that there were indeed too many Rites
enjoined, every one of which were innocent in it self, so that no special
Objection lay against any one, but against them all, as too many; whether, I
say, in such a case, private persons were not obliged rather to bear their
burden, than by shaking it off, to rend the Body, and disturb the Peace and
Order of the Church? It seems they ought rather to bear it: The Rulers of a
Church have indeed much to answer for, who press her too hard, with burdens
that are both useless and heavy to be born; but the obligations to Peace seem
to conter-ballance this inexpediency. For tho private persons must judge for
themselves, whether things required of them are lawful or unlawful, and must
act accordingly; yet Expediency or Inexpediency is only to take place, in cases
in which they are entirely at their own disposal, and where the rules of
Prudence or Charity can only determine them. But where the quiet and order of
the Body is concerned, Public orders and determinations being interposed, they
are not to depart from those, upon their conceiving them inexpedient; for it is
certainly more inexpedient and mischievous to break Public Order, than it can
possibly be to practice any Rite, which perhaps if left free to us, might seem
not expedient, and were better let alone. The expediency of Forms and Rites is
a very proper Subject of public Consultations; and those who are concerned in
them, will have much to answer for to God if they do not weigh this, together
with all that counterbalances it, very critically: but in a settled state of
things, exceptions to the expediency of them can never justify the interrupting
the Order and Quiet of the Society.

On of the chief of these Expediences is, that those Rites have a real tendency
to make good Impressions on peoples minds; that they put those who practice
them in mind of their duty; so that there is some good signification in them.
The objection against Significant Ceremonies, as being of the nature of
Sacraments, will appear to be founded on a great mistake: If we state a little
the difference between the signifying or expressing some part of our duty, with
such proper acts of our minds, as do become the occasion, and the signifying
some blessing that is offered or conveyed to us by God, in the use of that
Action; The former is far from the nature of a Sacrament; and indeed is only a
mute way of speaking: For actions as well as words may become instituted Signs
to express our thoughts. But indeed if we should fancy, that such Rites did
offer or convey into our minds those things that are signified by them, as a
foederal Institution, to which a Divine Virtue were annexed, this were to
consider them as Sacraments; the Institution of which is unquestionably beyond
the power of the Church: but it is quite another thing, when Rites are
appointed as means only to raise in our minds suitable and corresponding
thoughts.

To instance this in one particular; If we pretended that by the use of the
Cross in Baptism, a divine virtue were conveyed to the Person baptized, that
deadned him more entirely to the World, and wrought him up to a greater
conformity to Christ; then here were a new Sacrament set up, which could not be
justified: But when it is only meant, as an exhibiting the form of the Cross of
Christ, to put us in mind of our obligation to imitate him, and to suffer for
him; here is only a Rite that speaks to us in an ^ction, which is explained by
the words that accompany it.

It is more important which is urged from the abuse of Rites to Idolatrous
Practices: This was the first objection that was started among us against the
Habits in the Worship of God; and had without doubt a very plausible
appearance; since a great part of the Mosaical Law seemed to be the
establishing many Rites, merely to put them in a great opposition to the
Gentiles, and to set them at the vastest distance possible from their
Idolatrous or Magical Practices: Yet at the same time many others of those
Instituted Rites, are by some very Learned Men proved to have been taken from
other Practices of the same Idolaters, that were more innocent in themselves,
tho abused, as the rest of their Rites were, to Idolatry. The Jews had
certainly very much corrupted their Religion by the addition of many Rites, and
by their over valuing those Additions: And yet two of these were made use of by
our Savior to be the Sacraments of his Church. But besides this, a great
difference is to be made between Rites that were in their first use invented
for the pomp of Idolatry, and were in their first use applied to it, and those
which had been in use long before those Idolatrous Practices begun, and were
afterward applied to them. In these last, if their abuse is taken away, and
the first and simple usage is revived, this seems to be no compliance with
either Idolatry or Superstition. To go on with the former Instance; we find the
Primitive Christians used the making a Cross in the Air, or upon their Bodies
on many occasions; afterward, when a Divine Virtue was fancied to accompany
that Ritual Action, it was used in Baptism as a sort of Incantation; for with
the use of it, the Devil was adjured to go out of the person that was to be
baptized; such an usage made it a Sacramental and a Superstitious Action; and
if it had been still retained in that form, as it was in the first Reformation
of our Liturgy in King Edward the VIth's time, I do not see how it could have
been justified; but since it had been an ancient Form to use the Sign of the
Cross, the Church might well have retained this in some of her Rites; and it
belonged to none of them so properly, as to the Initiatory Sacrament, in which
the first use of it was retained, and the succeeding abuse was laid aside.
Since also we find that the Primitive Christians received the other Sacrament
in the posture in which they prayed to God; and since the posture in which all
our Prayers are now made, is kneeling, it might be very proper to go through
this whole Office from beginning to end, in the posture of Prayer: But this
could not be so well excused if the posture were left free till the
Consecration; and if then only kneeling were required, this were indeed to
continue a practice that had been abused by Idolatry, which could not be
justified: So that the abuse of Forms may require the altering them from that
method in which they were abused, but cannot import an obligation to abstain
wholly from the use of them in another method. It may be a very just matter for
a public deliberation, whether such things ought to be retained, they being
freed from such Abuses, or not. On the one hand, The People who are apt to be
much struck with a total change of outward Forms, especially when that is
suddenly made, may be more easily brought about, if the Alterations are not too
sensible, but that some things seem to remain, to which they had been
accustomed, and for which they retained a value. Now since Mankind is so weak,
that some lesser Frailties ought to be indulged, while more Criminal ones are
not to be spared, here was a very specious ground to persuade the continuance
of those Rites; and that the rather, because we find the Apostles themselves
complied with the Jews in Instances of a much higher nature. 16 Acts 3.21 Acts
24. 1 Cor. 9.20.


They circumcised some; they observed Jewish Rites, and to the Jews they became
Jews, as they became all things to all men. St. Paul took vows on him, and went
to the Temple to be purified, which could not be done but with a Sacrifice: And
though he still stood upon the exemption of the Gentiles from the obligations
of their Law; yet he himself, together with other born Jews, complied with them
in their Observances. Now when it is considered, that these were typical Laws
that were accomplished by the coming of our Savior, and that the Jews pleaded
still for the continuance of them, so that it was indeed the main controversy
of that time; it will appear, that the compliance of the Apostles in such
things, was liable to much juster Objections than any that can be brought
against obedience to Constitutions, that are about things of their own nature
innocent and indifferent. But yet we see the Apostles judged, that as long as
the Temple stood, and that God's Wrath was not yet poured out on that Nation,
there were still some among them, that as a remnant were to be gained to
Christianity, and therefore while there was ground to hope for that, they went
on in that condescension to their infirmity, observing that very Low which was
then maintained by the Jews with the highest insolence and cruelty possible
against Christ and his Followers. When this Point is well weighed in its full
extent, and in all its consequences, it will, I hope, satisfy many, how far so
great an end as the public Peace, and the edification of the whole Body, ought
to be pursued, when the Apostles went so far in order to the gaining of a few.

And here it will be no impertinent digression, to observe the Rules that St.
Paul lays down to Christians in this whole matter: I cannot think that it was
so fully opened in Epistles that have been preserved down to our days, as a
main part of the Canon of our Faith, without a special Providence of God, that
in those Rules we might see our own duty in the management of such
Controversies as should afterward arise: Since besides a historical knowledge
of the state of that time, this is all the use that it seems we can now make of
such long Discourses, and Arguings; and if this can be well stated, it will be
a sure thread to guide us.

First then, St. Paul leads men above the valuing such matters too much; as if
the being of the one or the other side, signified any thing toward their peace
with God: For all fierce Zealots are apt to imagine, that by their zeal they
please God, and atone for great faults. Therefore to take away that false
Conceit, this is often repeated, That in Christ Jesus neither Circumcision nor
Uncircumcision a veiled any thing, 5 Gal. 6. 6 Gal. 15.
but a new creature, or faith which works by love, and the keeping the
Commandments of God; and that the Christian Religion, 14. Romans 17.
or the Kingdom of God consisted not in meat and drink, that is, in Rituals,
concerning the distinction of Meats clean and unclean, but in much higher
things, V. 18.
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost: And he seems to assert, that
whosoever served Christ in these things, was acceptable to God, and ought to be
approved of men; V. 5.
whatsoever his sense might be as to all other things.

Another Position laid down, is, That every man ought to he fully persuaded in
his own mind; to have clear Principles, and to frame these into as distinct
Rules as possibly he could: And this is the meaning, of doing all things in
faith; which word signifies persuasion, and ought to have been so rendered
here: V. 23.
And then all those difficulties that arise out of the misunderstanding of that
word, would cease; so that the paraphrase of those so oftencited words will run
thus, Have thou a persuasion? have it within thy self; so that then may
appeal to God upon it: For happy is the man that is so settled, that he does not
waver in a distraction of thoughts, sometimes approving, and at other times
condemning the same thing; for while a man is still doupting, he is condemned
within himself. For instance, If he eats freely of all Meats, without regarding
the Jewish distinctions, and yet has within him an opinion of the obligatory
force of those Laws; he does not act upon clear Principles and Persuasions; for
while a man acts without these, not knowing but that he may be sinning against
God, he does then really sin, since he does things which he thinks are sins, so
that they become sins to him. This is a plain account of those words, which as
it agrees exactly to their natural signification, so it shuts out all the
difficulties which arise out of them. For the word rendered by doubting,
according to the sense in which it stands in all the other parts of the New
Testament, signifies the making distinction; so that the meaning of it is, He
who thinks that there is still a distinction between meats clean and unclean,
is very guilty if he eats as long as he is under that persuasion.

A third Rule laid down by St. Paul, is, Teat in all such matters, men ought
not to assume an Authority to judge others; that is, to impose things upon
them, as if they had a Judiciary Authority over them. 2 Col. 16.
Let not man judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of a holy day: that
is, Let no man in matters left at liberty, pretend to an Authority over
another; for God is the sole Judge of all men: And let no man judge his
Brother, that is, offer to call him to an account of his Actions; for we must
all stand at the judgment seat of Christ, where he who is our only Judge, as a
Law giver, will then be our Judge, by calling us to an account of our Actions:
Upon this follow the Rules of men's deportment toward one another. Those that
have larger Principles, and higher Notions; who in that respect are stronger,
and who by that freedom of mind and thought, did eat without those nice
distinctions of clean and unclean, ought not to despise such as were yet
fearful and straightened in their thoughts, and durst not emancipate themselves,
as if they were men of low thoughts, and narrow minds: On the other hand, Those
who were still entangled with an opinion of the obligation of the Mosaical Law,
ought not to condemn such as acted with more freedom, as if they were loose and
lawless men.

To this a fourth Assertion is added, That in such diversities of
apprehensions, men of both sides might be received and accepted by God, both
acting with good Intentions, and following sincerely their Persuasions. 14.
Romans 6.
One man regarded a day: He observed the Jewish Festivities, their New Moons,
and days of rest, called by the general word of Sabbaths; yet in doing this,
under the sense of the Obligations of that Law lying still over him, be
regarded it to the Lord: Another, who reckoned himself freed from that Yoke,
did acknowledge, that this his Liberty was occasioned by the Christian
Religion; so he, in not observing it, acknowledged that Religion which had set
him free. The same Rule is also instanced in observing the distinction of
Meats; the one did eat freely, and thanked God for that liberty: while the
other did abstain from forbidden Meats, and thanked God for that Law by which
the Jewish Nation had so many special Privileges beyond all other Nations, so
that God was honored by both, even in all that diversity of practices: And
perhaps, a diversity of practices, if with that, a tender and perfect Charity
could be maintained, might be yet a greater honor to Religion, than an
absolute ageement in all points; since it is a higher Instance of the power of
Religion, if men can love one another, notwithstanding a diversity in opinion
and practice; than if they loved one another, being in all points of the same
mind, and agreeing in the same practices.

After these, came two Rules relating to private men's behavior toward one
another in such cases: The one is, not to set a stumbling block, or an occasion
to fall, in another man's way; V. 13.
that is, not to use our liberty in such instances, or on such occasions, as
may draw other men to act in imitation of us, against their own Consciences.
This is the true notion of giving scandal, or the laying a trap in the way of
another, by which he may fall, or be catched: And this every man is to avoid,
when it is free for him to act, or not, as he pleases; for in that case only,
he is under this obligation and caution; since otherwise, if he is determined
by any Law, Divine or Humane, he must go on and do his duty, without
considering what consequences may happen upon it, for which he is not
accountable; since he is not at liberty to dispose of himself, but is concluded
by a higher Authority. The other Rule is, That we ought, as much as may be, to
avoid doing any thing that may grieve other Christians, which is said to be
walking uncharitably; V. 15.
since we ought to have such regard, even to the tenderness and weakness of our
Brethren, as not to do such things as may wound or trouble them, still under
the former supposition, that we are fully at our own liberty, and under no law
nor obligation to the contrary.

These are the Rules laid down by St. Paul; which, when well considered, and
rightly understood, will give a great light into this whole Controversy. By
these it will appear, that even the Apostles themselves, who might have assumed
a higher strain of Authority, yet had great regards to the frailties of those
they governed: And although most of these Positions and Rules do suppose men to
be in a state of an unrestrained liberty, so that they do not belong to our
case, in which Laws and Constitutions have already determined us; yet they
ought still to have great weight with those that are not concluded by Laws, and
all such as may have the making or reviewing of Laws under their care and
deliberation.

But I have opened this matter more fully than was, perhaps, necessary to my
present purpose, which only required, that I should clear some Passages in St.
Paul's Epistles that are applied to the Points now under examination, though
they do not at all belong to them; since all that is in St. Paul, relates only
to such things as were entirely left to men's own liberty, and in which it was
free to them to act which way soever they pleased; which are not at all
applicable to established rules, settled by Law, and recommended by Ancient
practice. It is true, that no Age of the Church since the Apostles days, can
make Laws for succeeding Ages; since the Pastors of every Age have the same
Authority that the Pastors of any precedent Age had after the times of
Inspiration: Whatever was done in a former Age, may be altered in a subsequent
one: And therefore all those Rules, of the subordination of Churches one to
another, being taken from the disposition of the Roman Empire, Europe being now
totally molded into another frame, are now at the discretion of Princes to
continue or change them at their pleasure: And all the Rituals of the Church are
in the power of every Age to alter or continue them as they shall see cause;
but till they are altered, they bind, not by reason of any Authority that
former Ages had over the present; but because the present Age, by not repealing
former Rules and Canons, does tacitly and interpretatively confirm and renew
them: For if the Pastors of the present Age, in concurrence with, and a due
subordination to the Civil Powers, have an Authority to make Laws or Canons in
such matters, they have likewise a power to continue such as were made in any
former Age, and they are presumed, and in Law taken to do that, till they
repeal them.

I have now gone through the general Plea that is brought against our
Constitutions from general Topics; and have, I hope, showed that there is no
force in any part of it. I come next to consider such things as are objected
more specially to several particulars in our Constitution.

They except to the Government of the Church, because of the different Ranks of
Bishop, Priest and Deacon, whereas the Scriptures use Bishop and Priest so
promiscuously, that from thence it seems reasonable to infer, that they are one
and the same Function, and that there ought to be but two Ranks, Bishop and
Diacon, in the Church; But those who object this, have really among them but
one Function and Order, since they have no Diacons, in the sense of St. Paul's
Epistles, who are a Degree of Men dedicated to the Service of God, out of
which, as any served well in it, they were advanced to a superior Degree, and
were ever esteemed a Sacred Order of Men. There are none such among those who
urge this Matter against us. The Promiscuous use of Names does not prove the
Offices the same. The Apostles are called, sometimes, Deacons or Ministers, and
so are their Companions in Labor; for the term Diacon, 1 Cor. 3.5. 2 Cor. 3.6.
and 6.4. and 11.23. 3 Ephesians. 7. 1 Col. 23, 25.
signifying any one that Ministered: It was not then appropriated to the lowest
Order, no more than Presbyter was to the second; for the Apostles call
themselves sometimes Deacons; so that from hence an Argument might be drawn, as
well to prove that Deacons are equal in Rank to the highest Order of Bishops.
We plainly see, That God settled three Orders of Officers in the Jewish Temple:
We see also, in their Synagogues, that there were three different Ranks taken
probably from the Model of the Temple: 6 Ephesians. 21. 4 Col. 7. 1 Thessalonians. 3.2.
We see our Savior chose twelve Apostles, and afterward Seventy Disciples,
having in that, no doubt, a regard both to the numbers of their Tribes, and of
their Sanhedrin: We plainly see, that during the Apostles lives, the governing
and ordering of the Church was in them, yet they constituted some in their Name
to govern a large extent of Churches; and by their Epistles to these, it is
plain, That the Power of governing those Churches, and of ordaining new
Officers in them, belonged to them; they being the Persons to whom that trust
was committed, with solemn Charges given them for it by the Apostles: We
plainly see two distinct Orders of Bishop and Deacon, as two Sacred Functions
that were to labor in the work of the Gospel; and we find by the short
Epistles in the beginnings of the Revelation, that there was one Man who had
the Immediate Charge of those Churches, to whom every thing relating to them is
addressed, as to a Person that was accountable for the rest, and that by
consequence must be supposed to have an Authority over them: We see immediately
after the days of the Apostles, that all the Churches were cast into one Mould,
of Bishop, Priest and Diacon: This taking place every where, and that at a time
when no Meetings of the Clergy could be held to establish any such Form, and
that no Laws of Princes were made to Enact it, and no Men of Authority could so
early and so universally have brought such a change into the Order of the
Church; when there was nothing to tempt any to affect Pre-eminence: Labor and
Sufferings being all that then followed this Superior Rank; and yet within
less than one Century after the days of the Apostles, we do plainly see, that
this was the Constitution, even of those Churches that had been gathered and
settled by the Apostles themselves. Among whom so visible a thing as the Order
in which they had put the Church, could not possibly be soon forgotten, and
this was not complained of by the Sects of those days, particularly the
Montanists, that had so fair an appearance by their praying and fasting so
much, that not only Tertullian was drawn away by it, but even the Church seems
to have taken a Tincture from some of their Methods; whether in imitation of
them, or on design to outdo them, is not so easy to determine; yet nothing of
this kind was ever objected, as if the Church had by the Authority given to
Bishops, departed from the Apostolical Customs.

Now I will acknowledge, that a bare practice, tho very Ancient, such as the
giving the Eucharist to Infants, without a color for it in Scripture, ought
not to conclude us: but when there is a great deal in Scripture that looks
favorably to a thing, tho the proof from the words alone should not seem full
and positive, and when the first Writings and clearest Practices of the Ages
that immediately followed, confirms such an Exposition, then we have all that
is possible for us to pretend to, for giving a fixed and determinate sense to
such passages. From all this then it is clear, that we are now upon the same
Constitution as to the main, on which the Apostles settled the Churches, and
that we have all the reason that a thing of this nature is capable of, to
conclude, That the distinction of Bishop, Priest and Deacon, was settled by the
Apostles themselves, and is related to by many places in the New Testament.

The division of the World into Diocesses, larger or narrower, as well as of
Parishes, some being excessively large, and others as unreasonably small, does
not a whit alter the nature of the thing in it self; since though it were to be
desired, that Parishes were nearer an equality in point of Labor and Cure; yet
this is an Inconvenience that we must bear, and not disturb the Church, by
seeking undue Remedies for it: So such Disorders, as a length of time, a
corruption of Manners, a change of Governments, and Civil Policies, has brought
into a Constitution, may put it out of our Power to procure the Redress of many
things, that yet will as little warrant a renting the Body, or dividing the
Church upon any such account, as it would justify the lazy Sloth of such as may
bring things to a better State, and yet do not set about it, nor do heartily
endeavor it.

Another head of Objections is to set-forms of Prayer in general, as a stinting
of the Spirit of Prayer; of which mention is often made in the New Testament,
and which ought to have scope given to it; since it is a mean to rouse up and
quicken heavy minds, which become flat when accustomed to a constant form of
Words, that render both the Clergy lazy, and the People Dead: But when it is
considered, that every Man's words become a form, to which all the rest of the
Assembly is limited; the question then lies naturally between the sudden
conceptions of one Man, who is often young, rash, without Judgment, and who
always speaks on the sudden; and between a form well digested and prepared by a
Body of wise and good Men: Since then the People must be under a Form, it may
seem much more reasonable that they should be under such a form, than under the
other; and that the rather, since we see Moses, David, and the Prophets of old,
gave the Jewish Church so many forms, both for Prayers and Praises: We know
that in our Savior's time, the Jews had a stated Liturgy of their own; which
our Savior was so far from blaming, that he himself prescribed his Disciples a
Form, and composed it out of theirs; laying together so many Petitions drawn
out of their Prayers as answered his end, in appointing his own: And Praises
seeming to be the sublimest Acts of Worship, in which the Soul ought to arise
to its highest Elevation; it is not easily accountable why so much excitation
should be required in Prayer, while Men are left to be still flat and formal in
their Praises. It is not to be denied, but that among the extraordinary Gifts
that followed the wonderful Effusion of the Holy Ghost, one was, That Men were
Inspired to offer up such Prayers to God as comprehended the necessities of
whole Congregations; it appearing in those Prayers, that the Spirit in him that
prayed, searched all their Hearts, and so did prompt him with groanings that
were unutterable; and it thus appearing, that the Spirit, 8. Romans 28, 29.
or Inspiration which moved any to pray in this sort, searched all things;
every Man finding the sense of his own Heart thus opened, together with
suitable Intercessions, it was from thence evident, that this was the Spirit of
God, making Intercession for the Saints, in the mouth and words of the Inspired
Person. This being a plain account of those words of Praying in or by the
Spirit, and well agreeing with every thing said concerning it in the New
Testament, it is a great mistake, if we in these days, should expect any such
Assistances from God: So that now a readiness of new or tender Expressions in
Prayer, is an effect of a quickness of Thought, a liveliness of Imagination,
together with a good Memory, much conversant in Scripture-Phrases, and long
practiced in that way. All things by a long use grow flat to minds that are not
seriously awakened; but extemporary Prayers do rather kill than feed true
Devotion, since they must be hearkened to as Discourses, which is a distraction
to him that Prays after them, whereas those accustomed to set-forms, have only
the things themselves that their Devotion relate to in their view; so they are
certainly less tempted to distraction, than they must be who follow the other
way.

Those sudden starts that are given to the mind by soft Words, and melting
Images of things, may be according to the different Compositions of Men more or
less useful to them in their secret Exercises, but they ought not to be let in
upon public Assemblies, which being made up of a great variety of Tempers,
must be entertained only with such Devotions that suit with all their
Conditions, and do equally quadrate to all their necessities; and thus it is
not only natural, but necessary for all Men who will maintain Order in their
Worship, and will frame it in so diffused an extent, as to take all equally
within it, that they have set and stated Forms; and these ought to be cast into
the plainest and most comprehensive simplicity possible, since that is always
suited to all Mankind, whereas Men are vastly diversifi'd in every thing that
is lively or fanciful Such a way of Worship ought neither to be unreasonably
long, nor excessively short. The length must be proportioned to what the
greater part of Mankind can bear; it ought also to be so diversifi'd, that Men's
minds be not kept too long at any one part of it, or their Bodies in any one
posture; and there should be as great a compass in it, for taking in the
several Acts and Offices of Devotion, as may be; and in all these respects, it
may be safely affirmed, That our Forms have as few defects, are as little
liable to Objections, and are indeed as perfect, not only as the Forms or
Liturgies of any Church, that we know of, Ancient or Modern, but are as perfect
as we can in reason expect in any thing that came from Men not immediately
inspired. Any small exceptions that may be made, as they do all admit of very
good Answers, so can never be put in the Balance with the Peace and Order of
the Church, and the Edification that the Members of our Body might receive from
such Pure and Spirital Devotions. If Men grow too languid and flat in them,
even this is much more supportable than the gross Affections, and the
scandalous Indecencies that are so common, to say no worse, in the tumultuary
way. Man is indeed so made, that he grows soon corrupt and Dead in what method
so ever he is put: but as Mankind bears the longest and the most generally with
common food, and is less disgusted at the continuance of it, than it would be
with more chosen Delicacies, which would become much sooner nauseous than
simpler Nourishment; so it may be positively affirmed, that grave and
well-compos'd Devotions, fitly diversifi'd, and often broken, as ours are, have
not only Reason and Authority clearly on their side, but have great Advantages
in them, and few disadvantages to balance those. They are such as are proper
for us to offer up to God; they have in them all the Gravity and Solemnity that
becomes a Religious Assembly; they comply with our very Infirmities, and give
us such breathings as may be necessary for loose and vagrant minds; and they
carry in them the whole Complex of a Religious Service: So in going that round
with due degrees of Attention, we are sure we offer up to God the several
Branches of that Reasonable Service, 12. Romans 1.
or Rational Worship, that we owe him.

The more particular exceptions lie chiefly against our forms in the two
Sacraments: The Anabaptists object our not Dipping when we Baptize; which was
not only the practice of Christ and his Apostles, but seems to be recommended
by the Mystical Allusions made to the being Buried in the Water, and the being
again Raised up out of it, as was formerly observed. Indeed if we could think
that a Divine Virtue followed the application of the Water only to the parts
washed with it, so that there were a sort of a Charm in it, we must acknowledge
our Baptism to be defective; but since Water is only used as an Emblem of the
Purity of our Religion, it seems in the nature of things to be all one, whether
the Person Baptized is put into the Water, or if the Water is put upon him. The
design of Baptism is a Foederal Sponsion, upon which Water is to be used, with
a determined form of words; and when these are observed, all that is primarily
intended in it, is observed; nor will Allusions made to the Rites with which
this was at first managed, prove that those ought to be perpetual, these being
only devout and instructive Thoughts offered upon the occasion of such forms.
Yet after all, our Church is so little liable to censure in this matter, that
the Rule given in the Rubric is first for Dipping; Sprinking is only allowed
of; so that tho it comes to be more commonly practiced, yet no Person that
desires it in the form of Dipping can be denied it among us, since it is the
form that is chiefly favored by the Rubric, tho the practice runs in a
current the other way.

There is a more important Scruple raised upon Infant Baptism, since the
Persons mentioned to be Baptized in the Scriptures were all of Age, capable to
answer and promise for themselves; and since by the Institution of Baptism, the
making of Men Disciples is set before it, and the Teaching them to observe all
that Christ has Commanded comes immediately after it, both these seem to be
Characters importing that they should be of an Age capable of Instruction,
since They only can make the answer of a good Conscience: So that the Baptizing
upon a Vow or Promise made by another, seems to be a new sort of Foederal
Sponsion, not instituted by Christ, and by consequence not warranted by the
Gospel. Nor will the Argument from Circumcision appear conclusive, when it is
considered that Females not being capable of it, that Rite seems rather to have
been a national Mark, to distinguish them as Abraham's Posterity from other
Nations, than a Rite relating to the Blessings of a future state.

But to all this we must answer, That since our Savior took Baptism from the
Jews, it being visible that they were not at all surprised at St. John
Baptist's Baptizing, they only questioning him upon his Mission and Authority
for it; we have reason to conclude, that he took it from them as they practiced
it: And we find by their Writings, that when any Proselytes came over to their
Religion, they not only Baptized them, but also their Children. This being
their practice, and our Savior making no Exceptions as to this Particular, but
saying words that plainly favor it, Suffer little Children to come unto me,
and forbid them not: for of such is the Kingdom of God, or the
Gospel Dispensation, 10. Mark 13.
this is no small Argument for it: But that which seems to determine the
matter, is the resolution that St. Paul gives in a Case that must have been
very common in those days, when one of the married Parties was converted to
Christianity, the other remaining still in Infidelity, he determines that the
Husband ought not to put away the Wife, nor the Wife leave the Husband; and the
reason he adds is, That there was a Communication of Sanctification from the
believing to the unbelieving Party, which descended to their Children, who
should be otherwise Unclean, but now they were Holy. Now it is to be
considered, that in the New Testament Holy, or Saint, and a Christian, 1 Cor.
7.14.
stand promiscuously for one another; and the word Holy, can only signify
either a real inward Holiness, or a Holiness of dedication, in which sense all
things appropriated to God are said to be Holy. A Believer could not
Communicate a real Holiness either to the unbelieving Yoke Fellow, or to the
Issue, since that is personal, and cannot be derived, or descend. The only
Holiness that he could derive, was a right to consecrate the common Issue to
God; which is in some sort a Sanctifying of one another. This is a plain and
natural meaning of these words; and tho they should not seem to im^port it so
necessarily, but that other glosses might be put upon them, yet the early
practice of the Church mentioned by Irenaeus, Tertullian, and most copiously by
St. Cyprian, seems to be a sure Commentary upon them, this being a ritual and
visible thing, in which we may much more safely have recourse to Tradition,
than in matters of Doctrine; it being here remembered, That a Practice without
warrant in Scripture, is not to be so regarded as a Practice that seems to have
favorable, if not clear warrants for it in Scripture. This also agrees with
the natural Order of the World: Children being put in the power of their
Parents, by the Laws of Nature, who, considering their Incapacity, must act in
their Name, and may both procure Rights and Privileges to them, and also lay
ties and engagements upon them. It is then suitable to the extent of the mercy
of God in the Gospel, that Parents may offer up their Children to Christ, that
they may be tied by them to his Religion, and received into the blessings and
privileges of it. When this whole matter is thus laid together, I doubt not but
the lawfulness of Infant Baptism will evidently appear; and if it is Lawful,
then according to what was at first made out, the Church may oblige all her
Members to it.

The Practice of having Sponsors, being but an increase of the security given
for the Person's Education in Christianity, the care of the Parents being
supposed, as already bound upon them by their natural Relation to their
Children, and it being a great mean, if well managed, of knitting Neighbors
together in new and Christian Bonds, all Exceptions to such a Custom seem very
illgrounded; and their answering so positively in the Name of the Child, does
according to the nature of all Acts in the Name of Infants, import only, that
as far as in them lies, care shall be taken that the Infant shall make good
those engagements in due time. Our affirming so positively, That all Children
who are Baptized, and die before they grow to be capable of committing any
actual Sin, are certainly saved; does not only agree with the Idea's of the
infinite goodness of God, but also with this declaration, That the Promises of
the Gospel are made to all Christians, and to their Children.

2 Acts 39.
The most general Scruple against our Form in Baptism, remains yet to be
discussed: That we have added to it the Sign of the Cross, which is a piece of
Popish Superstition. Indeed, if we use it as was formerly observed, as they do,
with an adjuration of the Devil to go out, and not to presume to violate the
Sign of the Cross; if we breathed cross-ways, and pretended by that to infuse
Divine Virtues and Blessings, here were just objections; for in so doing, we
should assume a power to make Sacraments, and to affix Divine Powers to
Institutions of our own: Therefore nothing of this being retained among us, all
the Papistical and Superstitious use of the Cross in Baptism is thrown out: But
since the Primitive Christians did so glory in the Cross, that in stead of
being ashamed of the Reproach of it, they used it upon most occasions: Our
Reformers designing to restore Primitive Christianity, thought, that though the
abuse of this to so much Superstition, made them supercede the frequent
practice of it; yet in this first initiation to Christianity, it was reasonable
to use it, once for all, but with words that showed they retained none of the
Superstitious Conceits of Popery, and meant only thereby to own the receiving
all Christians into the Doctrine of the Cross, and to an obligation to follow
Christ, bearing his Cross. And thus it is plain, that this practice is in it
self not only innocent, but decent: and that there were very plausible Reasons,
to say no more, for enjoining it; so that the not using it, is the disobeying a
just Authority, in a lawful Injunction.

Kneeling in the Eucharist, seems not only liable to an imputation of Idolatry;
but is also under this further prejudice, that it is in none of the Ancient
Rituals: On the contrary, we have all reason to believe, that for many Ages
they did communicate standing: since all kneeling in Churches on Sundays, or in
the time between Easter and Whitsunday, was esteemed a crime in Tertullian's
time, and was forbidded by a Canon of the Council of Nice.

This Being that, of all the Objections raised against us, that touches in the
tenderest part, since this is the great Symbol of the Union of Christians, and
that in which most formally the Communion of the Church consists, it will be
necessary to examine it very narrowly. It is then, first, to be considered,
that outward Actions do signify only that which by a general consent, or an
express declaration is agreed on as their sense and importance. Kneeling to
Kings, is understood to be only the highest Act of Civil Respect; and therefore
it is liable to no imputation of Idolatry, Therefore if there is an express
declaration made of the importance of this Action, that it is neither an
Adoration of the Bread and Wine, nor of the Person of Christ, as supposed
Corporally present, but only a worshipping of God in the acknowledgment of the
great Blessings there exibited to us, then this Posture cannot be stretched
beyond this express Declaration; nor is this that kneeling which is enjoined by
the Church of Rome; for that is only a falling down at the Elevation, in
acknowledgment of the miraculous change then made: Whereas ours is a continued
posture of Prayer, in which we continue during the whole Office: So that
Kneeling, as used by us, does in many respects differ from the Knoeling used in
the Church of Rome.

As for that specious Pretense, That in the Primitive times they did not kneel
at the receiving the Sacrament; it is only an appearance of a Reason. In the
Primitive times, they had a notion of Kneeling as an abject Posture, which only
became Penitents, or the times of fasting: They thought that upon other
occasions standing in Prayer had an appearance of faith and confidence in God;
and agreed with those comfortable assurances, and that joy to which we are
called in the Gospel: And therefore those who were in the full peace of the
Church, were to stand up at Prayers; which was most indispensably observed on
Sundays, and the Fifty days from Easter to Pentecost. But standing was then
their posture of Prayer, so they received the Sacrament in the posture
appropriated to Prayer; and it were easy to show, from those weary Fathers who
mention standing as the posture in which the Eucharist was received, that they
did consider it as a posture of Adoration, and so required all Christians to
adore as they received it. Now in a course of many Ages, this difference of
several degrees in Prayer, and the postures proper to them, is quite worn out;
so that kneeling is become the common posture of all Prayer whatsoever:
Therefore we receiving in a posture of Prayer, do in that follow the constant
practice of all Christians, in all the best Ages.

Kneeling is a matter merely ritual; and being now grown the common Rite,
expressing our humility in Prayer, we do not depart from the Spirit and
Intentions of the Primitive Church; since we receive the Eucharist in our
posture of prayer, as they did in theirs. The plausible Exception to all this,
is, That since our Savior did institute this Sacrament, at a Table after
Supper, it is a needless departing from his Practice, and the Pattern that he
has left us, to receive it in any other posture. If this Objection had any
force, it should oblige us to receive leaning along, according to the posture
of sitting at table in those days; and if we must adhere to the Circumstances
of the Institution, the time after Supper, and the place an upper room, will be
as obligatory upon us as the Posture, since all these things are of the same
order and value. But to go to the bottom of this Objection, and to show by a
clear parity the just reason of departing from our Savior's practice in this
particular.

It is to be remembered, That when Moses gave out the Institution of the Paschal
Festivity, he limited that people by express words to a posture, They were to
eat it with their loins girt, and their shoos on their feet, with staves in
there hands, 12. Exodus 11.
thus ready to march. There is nothing in the Institution that gives the least
hint, as if this was not meant to be a lasting Precept: So here is much more
than a bare Example, a Precept given in very plain words, without any
limitation of time: And yet when the Israelites were settled in the Land of
Canaan, at rest, and no more obliged to march, this change of their
Circumstances did, from the natural suitableness of things, bring on a change
in this part of that Festivity: They sat about their Tables, or rather leaned,
and so they did eat the Lamb in that lazy posture, that expressed the Rest
which God had given them. And we are sure, that in this they committed no
error, since our Savior himself justified their practice, by conforming to it.
So here more than a bare practice, an express Institution in a ritual matter,
is changed by a Church, that in all such things seems to have been much more
tied up to the letter of their Law, than the Christian Church is; yet a great
alteration in their Circumstances made them conclude, that this ought to be
altered, and in that they did right. Now if we will apply this to the Christian
Passover; Christ being in a state of Humiliation, and in the form of a Servant,
institutes it; and does it in a familiar posture of Equality with his Disciples
at Table, but gives no rule how, as to that particular it ought to be observed
for the future, as Moses had done. Afterward, a vast change happens in his
visible Condition; he is raised from the dead, and exalted up into Heaven: Upon
this change therefore, with relation to his Human nature, that was vastly more
important than that which had happenened to the Jews when they were brought
into the Land of Promise; it seems to have been highly congruous to that
practice of the Jews, with which the first Christians could not be
unacquainted, for them to have changed the posture from the appearance of
Familiarity, to that of Respect; and to have brought it to the Posture which
they use in Prayer, and their other Devotions. And this I think is a full
answer to every thing that can be objected to our Posture in Receiving.

Another exception some have to our Administration of this Sacrament, That
there is no previous examination of those who are admitted to it; that a
promiscuous multitude comes without any notice given, or enquiry made after
them; tho we are commanded to note such as walk disorderly, and to have no
fellowship with them, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
that they may be ashamed: nay, with Brethren, that is, Christians who live
scandalously, not so much as to eat. To this it is to be answered, 1 Cor. 5.11.
That a great difference is to be made between a Church that lies yet under
some defects, which she laments and cannot get them to be effectually supplied,
and a Church that is viciously faulty, and blamable in any thing she does. If
the acts of Church Communion are in themselves lawful and good, so that
particular persons are obliged to nothing that can be made appear to be
unlawful; it can be no reason for them to separate from it, because other
things are not done which perhaps are fitting and may seem necessary. But a
further distinction is to be made, between things commanded by a Divine
Precept, and such things as are only recommended by the Practice and Rules of
the Church. St. Paul does only prescribe this, That every man examine himself,
but does not impose it upon any to examine others; and the true Importance of
the word rendered Examine, is Approve; that is, Let a man so consider himself,
as to see whether he is approved of by his own Conscience: but this gives no
other person an Authority to search into, examine, or approve such us come to
the Sacrament. There is therefore no Rule given in the New Testament for any
such previous enquiry: it was indeed a very Ancient, 1 Cor. 11.28.
and is upon very many accounts a good and useful practice so to do. But how
criminal soever a defect in obeying a Divine Law may be, it can be no such
matter not to observe even the ancientest Rules of the Church, that after all,
do rest only upon a human Authority: Those rules concerning scandalous persons,
belong to the Body in general; and if there should be Errors and
male-Administrations, the Body, or rather its Pastors when in a Body, are
accountable for that, and not the the Individuals of the Society, who cannot be
further concerned in them, than to lament such defects, and to use their best
endeavors to help them to be redressed; so this can never justify a
separation, because there may be erroneous or scandalous men in a Society, who
are too much connived at.

St. Paul finds great fault with many Errors; some bad Practices and Scandals
among the Corinthians; yet tho in one case he thunders a severe Sentence upon a
more eminently scandalous man, he never so much as insinuates that the rest of
the body should separate themselves from those erroneous or irregular men: On
the contrary, he presses the Obligations to Unity, most vehemently on the
Corinthians, tho that was the Church which he charged the most severely of all
others, both with Errors, Disorders in Worship, and scandalous Practices.

It was no wonder, If after the Church of Rome had enervated the whole Ancient
Discipline, and had turned it all to be a secret practice between the Priest
and the Penitent in Auricular Confession; and that Dispensations and
Commutations were brought in; by which men know the price of sin, and how to
buy it off, that all of the sudden this Church could not be brought back to the
Primitive Constitutions: tho we see that our Reformers did sincerely intend it,
and prepared a Model for it. But our bad Circumstances have made, that this
great and good Design could never be effected since that time; for which we
still continue to make a public Acknowledgment in the Preface to the Office of
Commination. But after all, How faulty soever particular persons may be in not
obeying the Rules of the Church, the Clergy are obliged to Catechize the Youth,
and when they are duly prepared for it, they ought to offer them to the Bishop
to be Confirmed; and this ought to precede their being at first admitted to the
Sacrament. If this is not duly and punctually executed, it is the fault of
those who fail in their Duty; and one of the best and most effectual Answer
that we can make to this prejudice, is to endeavor to do in this point what
lies in us, toward the Instructing and Confirming the Youth. As for the
Scandals of men's lives, much more certainly might be done, both in the way of
private admonition, and public censure, than is done; so here the best answer
will still return upon us: We ought to do all that is incumbent on us, for
watching over those that are committed to our Care, for correcting their
Manners, for making the incorrigible ashamed, and for cutting off corrupt and
gangreen'd Members, that they spread not their Infection to those that are yet
found. Yet if another man fail of his Duty, that can never excuse any one from
doing his; and so it can never be a just ground of separation.

Some except to our habit, as a Ceremony taken from the Service of the Jewish
Temple: and this, tho it is now esteemed the least considerable of all the
exceptions made against us, yet was that which first began those unhappy
disputes that have since increased so fatally upon us. The chief thing stood
upon at first, was, That it was a compliance with the Supestitions of Popery;
but that has been considered already; to which I shall in this place only add
this one Consideration more to justify those Compliances in matters that are in
themselves innocent; That in Fact, the body of this Nation was in a very few
years brought off from Popery; to which it is highly probable, that those small
Compliances contributed not a little; so that the single reason upon which this
was at first opposed, was the chief Reason for its continuance.

All public Functions are performed in some special Habits; and White being
among both Greeks and Romans, the color that expressed Joy it bearing also a
Signification of Purity and Innocence, it was natural for the Primitive
Christians, both to put such as were newly baptized in white, and also to have
Divine Offices performed by persons habited in the same manner. It is true,
Popery had brought in much Superstition upon all this; the several parcels of
the habits were delivered with particular Devotions in the conferring of
Orders; which imported a peculiar Virtue and Sanctity to be in them, and they
were to be used with such constant Devotions, that did all signify that a
Sacramental Virtue was believed to be lodged in them. Now all this was taken
away by our Reformers; only for the decency of Worship, in compliance with
Ancient Practices, they retained the Habits themselves; and since the greatest
Bodies of those who divide from us, have used Black Gowns, which is both a
peculiar form of a Habit, and in a special Color, that signified Gravity, it
will not be easy to find a good reason, why a peculiar Habit in a Color that
expressed both Innocence and Joy, might not be as well used. If we pretended
that Innocence is by this conveyed to us, here were a just exception; but we
using it only as a decent Habit, that is enjoined by Law, it is enough to
justify our Obedience, if the thing is lawful; and it is enough to justify the
Law, if this Robe was Ancient, and have in it a proper expression of that
temper of mind, in which we ought to be, when we go to perform Divine Offices.

And thus it appears on how weak grounds the first disputes concerning Rituals
among us were begun; upon the progess of which, and the effects that have
followed upon them, one can never reflect without remembering those words of St.
James, Behold how great a matter a little fire has kindled.

3. Jam. 5.
Some have excepted to our observing Holy Days, as if this was an Invasion upon
that Liberty which the Fourth Commandment gives for Work, all the six days of
the Week; and as if Men pretended to an Authority to make any parcels of time
Holy. Some quarrel with the days for the honor of the Apostles, as if this was
a remnant of Popery: others except even to the observance of Christmas and
Ascension-day, together with those other days that relate to our Savior
himself; as if the observing them were a reproaching the Apostles with want of
regard to the Person of Christ, which we pretend to supply. But those words of
six days Labor, are not to be understood as a perpetual Command, otherwise God
himself had appointed a violation of this, by all those other days of Rest that
were enjoined the Jews, all which were called Sabbaths. Every seventh year was
to be one continued Sabbath; Therefore the Importance of the 4 th. Commandment
is only this, That when that Precept was first given, God left Mankind free for
six days, and only reserved a seventh for Rest and Religion; but that did not
limit himself, nor all other Lawful Powers, from making further Impositions for
Rest and Religious Exercises. It is also certain, that Men cannot make a Day
Holy in one sense, that is, affix a special Purity, or particular Virtue to any
one day; but the larger sense of a Holy Day, being a day dedicated to Religious
Exercises, it seems to be in the power of every Society to appoint such
Anniversary days, as well as to appoint special times of Fasting and
Thanksgiving upon one particular day, and for one turn: for since all do agree,
that this may be done for once, the Arguments from the Fourth Commandment, and
against appointing a holy day, are out of doors; so it remains only to
consider, whether Anniversary Days may be appointed.

We see the Jews, during the seventy years of the Captivity, 7. Zech. 5. 8
Zech. 19.
observed the Fast of the Fourth, the Fifth, the Seventh and Te^nth Month; and
the Prophet expostulating in the Name of God upon that Head, does neither
except to the Imposition, nor the fixing Anniversaries, but only complains of
their being ill kept; which plainly imports the acceptance of them, if well
kept. The Jews also fixed one Anniversary in commemoration of their Deliverance
from Haman's wicked designs against them; and another for remembering the
Purifying the Temple from its Idolatrious Defilement by Antiochus Epiphanes.
This last was observed by our Savior, 9. Esther 21.27, 10, John 22.
at least we find him in the Temple on that day. Now can any reason be
assigned; either from the nature of things, or from any special limitations in
the Scripture, that should restrain the Power that is naturally in every body
of men, for appointing things of this nature?

The commemorating the Dispensation of the Gospel committed to the Apostles,
has nothing of the Superstition of Popery in it: No Invocations or Addresses
being made to them, and no Sacraments administered for their Honor, or
recommended to their Intercession. God is only blessed for those several
Dispensations, of which they were made the Channels and Instruments. But we
ought rather to be concerned, That these Commemorations are practiced in so
slight a manner, that we seem much more liable to an Objection upon that
account; and tho in the first fervor of Christianity, in which those early
Converts lived almost wholly in the Meditations of Christ, and of what related
to him, some Institutions of days for more special remembrances of particular
Circumstances had not been made, there might have been very good reason for the
succeeding Ages to have studied to keep alive that fervor by such appointments
of days, for the more solemn Commemoration of such signal Blessigns: and tho
there were not the same clear warrants from Antiquity for every one of these,
yet it was still in the Power of the Church to make such new Orders, as should
seem necessary for carrying on the main Design of Religion.

The Ancient Church thought that the whole fifty days between Easter and
Pentecost ought to be kept with a special Solemnity of Rejoicing, for the
Resurrection and Ascension of our Savior, and for the Effusion of the Holy
Ghost; since some more particular Devotions on those heads, during that whole
time, did not break off the labors of their other Employments, nor interrupt
the common business of life; upon the same parity of reason they might appoint
some time before that season of Joy, to be spent in confessing past sins, and
mourning for them in higher degrees of Prayer and Fasting. This being only the
prescribing a method for appropriating such Exercises in Devotion to the
several seasons of the year, an over-valuing of these things, together with a
nice distinction of Meats, was a piece of Superstition which might corrupt that
which was good in any Constitution. The distinction of Meats for that season,
is among us founded merely on a Law of the Land, for Civil and Political Ends,
since the Church only recommends Prayer and Fasting in general, witout any
further Specialities as to the measure of the Fast; so no just exception lies
to any part of this whole matter, concerning days and times appropriated to
particular Exercises. I wish our Practice in these were such, that this part of
our Constitution were not too evidently a matter of Form, and observed with too
visible a slightness.

And thus I have gone round ^ll that I remember ever to have met with in Books
or Discourses from any of the Dissenters, except from those called Quakers,
against our Constitution, and have offered you those answers, which to me,
after the most impartial search that I am capable of, seem full to satisfy 'em
all. It remains, That I consider such as are offered by those who are called
Quakers.

First, They are against all sorts of stated Forms; their main Principle being,
That nothing is to be done by us, by virtue of any outward warrant, unless
there is an inward excitation or opening of the Spirit that leads to it: And
therefore all fixed Rules being contrary to the freedom of the Spirit, they are
against them all. But either this Principle must have some limitation to
restrain it, or it will cast open a door to subvert all Religion and Policy;
for those inward Excitations being only known to those who have them, every
man's word must be taken concerning them. If then a man by affirming that he
had, or had not, such or such an excitation, will be thereby justified or
excused; then he may do, or not do what he will, and the whole Order of
Religion, Morality and Civil Society will be thereby dissolved: but if they
say, that there is that Harmony between the secret leadings of the Spirit and
the Scriptures, that whatsoever is commanded in the one, is always witnessed to
by the other; then we are to examine this matter by the Scriptures, and to
conclude, That if there are rules given in them for the constant use of the
Sacraments, then they are hereby condemned who have laid them aside.

Our Savior encouraged his Apostles to go and execute the Commission that he
gave them, to make Disciples, and Baptize all Nations; with this Promise, That
he was to be with them always, 28. Mat. 20.
even to the end of the World. The promise is given as as an encouragement to
the duty enjoined; and from hence we may conclude, that the precept of Baptism
must continue likewise to the end of the World. To this we must join those
other words of our Savior, Except a man is born of Water and of the Spirit, 3.
John 5.
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven which is affirmed without any
limitation of time. By the Kingdom of Heaven is plainly meant the Dispensation
of the Gospel; and since Baptism was then practiced, and was well understood by
them, who were born Jews, nothing in reason can be understood by the being born
of Water and of the Spirit, but the being initiated by Baptism, and the being
inwardly Sanctified: The one as well as the other, is made indispensably
necessary to the being a member of this new Dispensation. St. Mark also has
recorded those words of our Savior: He that believes and is baptized stall be
saved, 16. Mark 16.
but he that believes not shall be damned: Now since Baptism is only enjoined
by Precept, and is not necessary as a mean, but only as an act of Obedience:
therefore tho the doing it is commanded in order to Salvation, yet Damnation is
not the consequent of its not being done, since one may be prevented in it by
death, or other Impossibilities may put it out of his power to procure Baptism
to himself: And therefore, as the one branch of this period shows the
obligation laid on us to be baptized in order to Salvation, so the leaving it
out in the other branch, shows that our not coming within the rites of our
Religion, when that failure is no fault of ours, does not exclude us from
Salvation, or bring us to a state of Damnation.

In the beginnings of Christianity, the wonderful effusion of the Holy Ghost
was thought a true reason for baptizing such persons on whom it fell; and
therefore St. Peter said, 10 Act. 47. 11 Act. 17.
when the Holy Ghost fell visibly on Cornelius and his Friends, Can any man
forbid water, that those should not be baptized, who have received the Holy
Ghost as well as we? And with this he settled the minds of those who were a
little offended at that action. This shows that no pretense to a high
dispensation of the Spirit, can evacuate that Precept; since, on the contrary,
an evidence of the giving the Holy Ghost, was pleaded as an Argument for
baptizing: Nor does any one passage in which Baptism is mentioned in the New
Testament, limit it to that time, and intimate that it belonged only to the
beginnings of Christianity, or that it was to determine when it was more fully
settled: so that this, with the constant practice of all succeeding Ages,
without a shadow of any Exception, must conclude us as to this Point.

Our Savior did also appoint the other Sacrament to be continued in
remembrance of him; by which St. Paul says, we show forth his death till he
come. 1 Cor. 11.26.
Now these words cannot be understood of any supposed inward and spiritual
coming, since the most signal coming in that sense, was the effusion of the
Holy Ghost at Pentecost, and yet after that time the Apostles continued to
practice it, and delivered it to the Churches as a Precept still obligatory,
till Christ should come. If then we ought still to remember him, and show forth
his death; if it is the Communion of his Body and Blood; if it is the new
Covenant in his Blood for the remission of sins; then as long as these things
are Duties incumbent on us, so long we must be under the obligation of eating
that Bread, and drinking that Cup.

Further, If Christ has left different Gifts to different Orders of men, some
Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangeliste and some Pastors and Teachers, for
the perfecting the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, 4 Ephesians. 11, 12, 13, 14.
and for edifying the Body of Christ, till we come unto a perfect man, and are
no more in danger of being tossed to and fro, and carried away with every wind
of doctrine. These words do plainly import, That as long as mankind is under
the frailties of this present state, and in this confused Scene, that some of
these Orders must still be continued in the Church, and that those Rules and
Preceps given to Timothy and Titus concerning such as were to be ordained
Bishops or Elders, that is, Priests and Diacons, were to be lasting and
standing Rules; 1 Timothy 3. 1 Tit. 1.
for indeed if the design had not been to establish that Order for the
succeeding Ages, there was less need of it in that, in which there was such a
plentiful Measure of the Spirit poured out upon all Christians; that such
Functions in that time might have been well spared, if it had not been for
this, that they were then to be settled under the Patronage, if I may so speak,
of the Apostles themselves, from whom they were to receive an Authority, which
how little necessary soever it might seem in that wonderful time, yet was to be
more needed in the succeeding Ages.

Therefore we may well conclude, That whatsoever was ordered concerning those
Offices or Officers of the Church, in the first Age, was by a stronger parity
of reason to be continued down through all the Ages of the Church; and in
particular, if in that time in which Women received the Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 14.34, 35.
so that some prophesied, and others labored much in the Lord, that is in the
Gospel; yet St. Paul did in two different Epistles, particularly restrain them
from teaching or speaking in the Church; 1 Timothy 2.11.
to which he adds, That it was a shame for Women to speak in the Church; that
is, it might turn to be a reproach to the Christian Religion, and furnish
Scoffers with some colors of exposing it to the scorn of the Age. This was to
be much more strictly observed, when all those extraordinary Characters, that
might seem to be exemptions from common Rules, did no longer continue.

As for those distinctions into which they have cast themselves, of the Hat,
and the denying Titles, and speaking in the singular Thou and Thee, it is to be
considered, That how unfit soever it be, and how unbecoming Christians to be
conformed to this world, yet it rather lessens than heightens the great Idea
that the world ought to have of the Christian Religion, when it states a
diversity among men about mere Trifles. Our Savior and his Apostles complied
as much in all innocent Customs, 13 Romans 7.
as they avoided all sinful ones. Honor to whom honor is due, is a standing
Duty; and though the bowing the Body, and falling prostrate, are postures that
seem liker Idolatry, and more abject in their nature than the Hat; yet the very
Prophets of God paid these respects to Kings. 2 Samuel 20.41.
Outward Actions or Gestures signify only what is intended to be expressed, 1 Samuel 24.8.
and what is generally understood by them; so that what is known to be meant
only for a piece of Civil respect, can never be stretched to a Religious
respect; 1 Kings 1.23.
and though that abject homage under which the Jewish Rabbis had brought their
Disciples, and which they had expressed in Titles that imported their profound
submission to them, was reproved by our Savior; yet we see that the word
(...), 23 Mat. 8.9, 10.
Sir, or Lord, was then used as commonly as we now do; since Mary Magdalen
called him, whom she took for a Gardener, Sir, or Lord. And St. Paul gave
Festus the Title which belonged to his Office, it being the same that Claudius
Lysias gave Felix, 20 John 15.
who certainly was not wanting in that; and that being the Title of men of
Rank, St. Luke adresses both his Books to Thephilus, 26 Acts 25. 23 Acts 26. 1
Luke 3.
designing him in one ofthem in the same manner. Words signify nothing of
themselves, as they are mere sounds, but according to the signification in
which men agree to use them; so if the speaking to one man in the plural
number, is understood only as a more respectful way of treating him, then the
plural is in this case really but a singular. Indeed these things scarce
deserve to be so narrowly looked into.

The Scruple against Swearing, is more important both to them and to the
Public. 5 Mat. 34. 5 Jam 12.
They have indeed the appearance of a plain Command of our Savior's against
all manner of Swearing, which is repeated by St. James; but this must be
restricted to their communication, according to the words that follow, since we
find Swearing not only commanded in the Old Testament, but practiced in the
New, The Apostles swear, at every time they say God is witness; 1 Romans 9. 1 Thessalonians. 2.10.
and more solemnly, when God is called for a record upon their Soul. The Angel
of God lifts up his hand, and swears by him that lives for ever and ever. God
swears by himself, 2 Cor. 1.23 10 Rev. 5, 6 6 Heb. 16.17, 18. Lev. 7.
and an Oath for confirmation, that is, for affirming any matter, is the end of
all Controversy. We find our Savior himself answered upon Oath, when adjured
by the High Priest to tell, If he was the Christ, the Son of the most high God;
for according to the Mosaical Law, when any Soul sinned, and heard the voice of
Swearing, that is of Adjuration, and was a witness whether he has seen it or
known of it, if he do not utter it, then he shall hear his Iniquity; that is,
he shall be guilty of Perjury. It were easy to show from several Passages of
the Old Testament, That Superior, whether Parents or Princes, 1 Samuel 14.24, 38,
39. 17. Judge. 2.
could put others under a Curse, and by that either bind them in a Promise of
Vow, or oblige them to declare the truth. This being then the custom of the
Jews, our Savior, though silent, as long as it was free to him to speak or
not, 26. Mat. 63, 64.
he in that showing his patience and meekness; yet as soon as he was adjured,
he then answered; for he was bound by that Oath to declare the truth: Therefore
since among the Jews the Party did not take the Oath, but was only passive to
the Judge that imposed it upon him, those cited words of our Savior cannot be
extended beyond Oaths in communication, that is in common discourse, or the
common business of life: For indeed to end all matters by a solemn Appeal to
God, is a natural piece of Worship and Religious Adoration.

They load us with another prejudice, in which, tho we may seem to much parties
to it, yet it is not to be passed over: They call us Hirelings for receiving
those supports and rewards for our labors that are appropriated to us. Those
who run into these Employments only with such views, and desire to be put in a
Priest's Office, that they may eat a piece of bread, 1 Samuel 2.36.
must feel somewhat within them that testifies to the truth of this Imputation:
But such as do dedicate themselves to the Gospel, and serve at the Altar, may
well live of the Altar, and of the Gospel, or the reward of the glad tidings
that they publish; for so, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 9.11, 13, 14*
has the Lord ordained. All persons will yield it to be lawful to accept the
bounty that is freely offered, by private persons to such as labor among them;
so it will not be easy to show why publik Bodies may not by settled Laws give
those bounties for ever, as well as particular persons do it for once. And
therefore not to enter upon the discussion of any antecedent right to Tithes,
it is certain that Public Laws may appropriate such proportion of Soil, or of
its growth, to such uses as they think fitting: And when that is once done,
private persons must bear that, even when they do not approve of the use. Those
very people think that all Wars are unlawful, and yet they pay Taxes, tho
levied in express words to carry on a War. Thus then, when any proportion of
the growth of a Nation is applied to any use by a Law, that proportion becomes
a rent due to the Public, in consideration whereof, there is a full abatement
made, as it is bought and sold: And whosoever purchases with such abatement,
can have no right to that for which they paid nothing. Now it is certain, that
no man can pretend to possess himself of that which is not his own; on this
color, that he who does then possess it, has no good Title to it. That man
knows that he himself has no right to it, whether the Possessor's Title is good
or bad, and that is enough for him not to challenge or invade it: Every man
knows that his Tithes are not his, he never bought them; on the contrary, he
made a considerable diminution of the price that he would have paid, if the
Land had been Tythe-free: And therefore this being of the nature of a Quit
rent, that the Law has laid on an Estate, any opinion that a man may have of
the lawfulness of the use to which it goes, can never justify him, who keeps
that which is not his own, from the person to whom the Law has appropriated it.
If therefore these men would govern themselves by the Maxims of strict Justice,
as long as they cannot overcome this scruple, they ought to make no purchases,
but where they buy out the whole Increase of the Soil, and pay its full price:
And as there are fair portions over the whole Nation, that are Tythe-free, this
were a way of dealing that would look like a strictness of Conscience, a regard
to their own peace, and the quiet and peace of the Society; By so doing, they
should possess nothing that were not their own, and invade nothing that were
any other man's.

Thus, I think, I have omitted no material Objection that is made to the terms
of communion among us as to our Worship and Rituals; and I think I have offered
sufficient reason, not only to justify the concurrence of all the single
Members of our Body in every one of them, but also to justify our Forms and
Constitutions in themselves: It is enough to prove that they are lawful, to
oblige all the Members of the Body or Society to observe them; but the fitness
and usefulness of them must also be made out, to justify the Laws and
Constitutions that are made concerning them. But tho lawful and unlawful are
severe and rigorous things, and of a fixed and determinate nature; yet fit or
unfit are of a more loose and unstable Order: And in this respect things may
have different faces; what is fit in one respect, and at one time, may be much
otherwise at other times: And therefore, tho this is not a consideration strong
enough to dissolve the Obligation, under which private persons lie to
obedience, yet it ought to be well considered by those to whom that care may
belong. It is certain, that a long continuanc of any Custom is a very powerful
Argument, enforcing any antecedent fitness that might have been at the first
settling of such matters: For all Novelties, as they gratify the levity of more
inconstant Minds, so they grate no less upon men of more staid tempers; who
naturally are not given to change: Yet when all things are well weighed, there
may be upon some occasions very good reasons for altering some things, which
were at first established upon as good and just Considerations; since there is
nothing in any Human Constitution, which comes not from an immediate Divine
Authority, that may not be brought under second thoughts, and become the matter
of new deliberations.

To conclude, those Divisions from us, and the Prejudices that are raised
against us, ought to make us watch the more carefully over our selves, since we
have so many severe observers: They ought to oblige us to such an exactness of
deportment, and such diligence in our labors, that our behavior, both in our
Persons and Callings, may not inflame and heighten, but on the contrary, very
much allay and soften those Prejudices: since after all that is said in the way
of Speculation and Argument, the numbers are most wrought on by visible and
sensible Prejudices. If we see among those who divide from us, any of the
appearances of virtue, in a sober and grave deportment, a modest and humble way
of behavior, a solemn seriousness, the fear of an Oath, a plain simplicity of
living, a mutual union and tenderness for one another, and a seeming to be in
earnest in the matters of Religion, together with a true strictness in breeding
their Youth to understand Religion, and study the Scriptures; let us not deny
that which we see to be true, but let us study to bring our selves, and our
people, to outdo them in these things: and to add to these, an exact probity
and justice, candor and truth, fidelity and integrity, a meek and gentle
behavior, free from rash censuring, and evil speaking, a universal Charity to
all Mankind, a readiness to forgive Injuries, to do good for evil, and
liberality in our bounty to the necessitous; straitning our selves to relieve
others: And if we can bear with them by our charity, as well as the Law
tolerates them in their Opinions, we may hope, by the blessing of God, in a
competent time to overcome all their Prejudices, and so to heal all our
Divisions, and to become of one heart and mind.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
DISCOURSE I.
COncerning the Truth of the Christian Religion. Page 1.
DISCOURSE II.
Concerning the Divinity and the Death of Christ. 25.
DISCOURSE III.
Concerning the Infallibility and Authority of the Church. 52.
DISCOURSE IV.
Concerning the Obligations to continue in the Communion of the Church. 83.
Books lately Printed for R. Chiswell.
A Discourse of the Pastoral Care; By the Lord Bishop of Sarum. 8 vo.

An Imperial History of the Late Wars of Ireland, from the beginning to the
end. In two Parts. Illustrated with Copper Sculptures, describing the most
Important Places of Action Written by George Story, an Eyewitness of the most
Remarkable Passages, 4 to.

A Discourse of the Government of the Thoughts. By George Tully. Sub-Dean of
York 8 vo.

Memorials of the Most Reverend Thomas Grammar, Archbishop of Canterbury.
Wherein the History of the Church, and the Reformation of it, during the
Primacy of the said Archbishop, are greatly illustrated, and many singular
Matters relating thereunto now first published in Three Books. Collected
chiefly from Records, Registers, Authentic Letters, and other Original
Manuscripts. By John Strype, M. A. Fol.

Origo Loegum; Or, A Treatise of the Origin of Laws, and their Obliging Power.
As also of their great Variety, and why some Laws are immutable, and some not;
but may suffer change, or cease to be, or be suspended or abrogated. In Seven
Books. By George Dawson, M. A. Fol.

A Brief Discourse concerning the Lawfulness of Worshipping God by the Common
Prayer; in Answer to a Book Entitled, ( A Brief Discourse of the Vlawfulness
of Common Prayer Worship) By John Williams, D. D. 4 to.

A True Representation of the Absurd and Mischievous Principles of the Sect
commonly known by the name of the Muggletonians. 4 to.


