THE BISHOP of SALISBURY's EASTER SERMON, School.

EDWIN Mayor.

Cur' Special' tent' apud Domum Mansional' Jacobi Collett Mil' un' Vic', die
Mercur' xxvij. die Aprilis in Hebdomada Paschae School. Annoque R. Rs. Wilhelmi
tertii Angliae, etc. decimo.

THIS Court does desire the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of
Sarum, to Print his Sermon preached on Monday last at the Parish Church of St.
Brides, before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Governors of the several Hospitals
of this City.

GOODFELLOW.

Of Charity to the Household of Faith.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD MAYOR, THE ALDERMEN,
and Governors of the Several Hospitals of the City, AT St. BRIDGET's CHURCH, On
Easter-Monday, School.

Being one of the Anniversary Spittal-Sermons.

By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARVM.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. School.

GAL. VI. 10. As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto all men,
especially unto them who are of the household of Faith. Or according to the Old
Translation, While we have time, let us --
WHILE we are receiving the greatest Blessings of Heaven, it is very seasonable
to put us in mind of the most proper Returns that we can make for them. When we
have the Pledges of the pardon of Sin and of a happy Immortality given us, it
becomes us also to bring our Gift, and to leave it on the Altar. What can we
render unto God? Our Goodness extends not to him: but it may reach him in his
Members, for he reckons that what we do to the least of those whom he calls his
Brethren, we do it unto him.

As this season of the year is the most proper for calling on those whom God
has blessed with a full measure of the good things of this life, to give a
portion to seven, and also to eight; that is, to give not only according to
regular proportions, but even beyond them, to lend a little to the Lord, for
all the good things that he has given to them, and after such a harvest of
spiritual things, as they have been reaping, to call on such as want that with
which they overflow, to let them reap of their worldly things: So this time or
season, in a larger sense, seems to provoke us to love and to good works.

We have passed through great and threatening Dangers; as well those of a long
and slothful Peace, with all the surfeits of luxurious Plenty, as the more
critical Turns of a devouring War, with all the Charge and Losses that have
accompanied it: while great Numbers of wicked Men engaged in a most desperate
Conspiracy at home, were at work in the corrupting our Coin, to undermine us,
or to blow us up. We have got through all this, though perhaps the scars that
remain, and the ill effects that follow it, will not be so easily worn off. We
are now like a man recovering out of a long sickness, that had a great variety
of symptoms with it; these will hang about him, even after the happy Crisis is
past; and the seeds of life, being much weakened, they, in that tenderness, will
soon take a new ill ply, and contract diseases, as dangerous as those were, out
of which he thinks he is delivered.

It may seem a very improper time to call on a City to a new Harvest of
Charity, that is yet struggling with great Difficulties. The Losses that many
have suffered, the Taxes that all are charged with, and the stop in the Gains
of most, are such discouragements, that unless the strength of the Argument for
Charity were to be trusted to, one could scarce hope to succeed in it, where
the Objections are so many and so sensible. But if the Sinner will remember,
that he may redeem his iniquities by giving alms to the poor; if even the
Covetous will consider how certain a Fund he deals in, when he trusts his
Wealth to God; Both will conclude, that the surest way to secure to us those
Blessings that we still enjoy, as well as to procure new additions to them, is
to make the best use of what we do possess, and so form the most generous
Resolutions upon what further Increases God may bless us with.

As we have opportunity, or while we have time* we ought to do good, and that
in the most extended and largest manner, to all men; but with this specialty,
that the fullest measure of it, and the tenderest care in it, ought to go to
the Household of Faith: that is, to the Christians, who in those days were but a
small and select number. Now indeed all pass for such; but if we may judge of
those of the Household of Faith, either by him who is the Author of it, or by
that Rule which he has made the measure of it, we shall soon find, that among
those who carry the name of Christians, and pass for the Domestics of this
Household, there are few, very few, who deserve the Name, or that answer the
Obligations that belong to it.

1. Here, in General, Beneficence is charged on us, Let us do good. 2. We see
the Extent of it, To all men. 3. We have here a more particular Restriction,
Especially to the Household of Faith. 4. This we ought to pursue, as often as we
have opportunity, or as long as we have time; for the word signifies either a
fit and proper season, or time at large; that is, as long as we live, and can
do good.
It is needless to dwell long on the Character of Beneficence in general.
Nothing makes a Man so truly great, for nothing makes him so like God as to do
much good. Nothing is more useful and amiable to all the rest of Mankind, than
a cheerful and diffusive bounty: Nothing gives a Man a more solid Joy, a truer
Title to what he has, and a better Relish of what he enjoys, than a large and
bountiful Heart, with an open and liberal Hand. This is the best use Wealth can
be put to, and is the noblest part of the Distinction between the Rich and the
Poor; that the one must submit to the Humility of receiving, while the other
has the Blessing as well as the Glory of giving. In a word, he that does not
feel the Manly Pleasure that arises from doing good, or that needs to be
pressed to it, has a Soul of a very degenerate Make, and is not like to be
moved much by Argument. Vanity or Interest may draw somewhat from him, but if
he has not this Principle of Charity within him, though he should give all his
Goods to the Poor, yet he is nothing in the sight of God, and he has nothing,
he has no reason to expect the rewards of true Charity, if what he does is only
to be seen of Men, or to trade and truck with God. To be good, and to do Good,
is the greatest Perfection of the Human Nature, as it carries in it the highest
Idea that we can form of the Divinity.

But though the Characters of this noble and heroical Temper of Mind seem very
inviting, yet the extent that is here given to it, may justly affright us.

To do good to all, is too great a compass for any Goodness that is not
Infinite. It is certainly a peculiar Character to which no Creature can arrive,
that God's Goodness is over all his Works. We are limited Beings, and have a
narrow Sphere as well as a short Time. It is true, the Charity of our
Affections, of our good Wishes and our Prayers, of our Bowels, and our
Compassions, ought to be enlarged to all Mankind: We ought to pray for the
whole Race, and to be tender when any Object is before us that may be either
relieved by us, or at least comforted by our Sympathy. We ought to exclude none
by Prejudices, Aversions, or Passions; but must carry about us a constant
Disposition to do all the good we can, and that to as many Persons, and upon as
many Occasions as it is possible for us to overtake.

The Jews thought they owed a great deal to all the Race of Abraham, and to the
Strangers that sojourned among them, by whom they understood such Proselites as
came under the Obligations of their Law. There was a liberal Provision made of
a whole Tenth, with the Gleanings in Harvest which were copious, for the Poor,
the Widow, the Fatherless, and the Strangers, besides the Community that was
every Seventh Year of all that sprung out of the Earth. But this was confined
to their Country, or to their Religion, to such as were Strangers to both, they
were so sullen, as not to do them the most common Favor; to show Travelers
the way, or tell them where a Spring of Water might be found. This Enclosure is
pulled up by the Christian Doctrine; we are not to confine our Charities to any
Religion, or Country, or to any Form or Division in Religion; every Man has a
right to some share in them. For though in the larger Effusions of our Bounty,
we may prefer some to others, yet in the Supplies of pressing Necessities, none
ought to be excluded, all have the Human Nature in them, and some degrees of
the Image of God on them.

The more enlarged our Inclinations and Dispositions are, it argues the greater
Extent and Elevation of Goodness. We have indeed a small proportion of help to
afford; but there are several Channels in which that may flow. Those of great
Talents may subdue the World by their Reason, they may triumph over Men by
Argument, and overcome them by Persuasion: Instruction, Conduct, and Advice,
are Charities that cost little to him that gives them, and yet may be more
beneficial to those who receive them, than the profusest Liberalities. Men of
Authority can protect and encourage the oppressed, and that often at a small
cost: A little countenance and some distinction of Behavior may be of more use
than a large Distribution. So there are great varieties of doing good according
to Men's different Capacities and Stations. He who studies to do all the good he
can to the Neighborhood, by setting a good Example in it, and maintaining Love
and Peace among Men, by observing order, and living regularly, is a great
Benefactor, how narrow soever his Fortunes, and how small soever his Capacity
may be of doing great Charities.

Besides all this, such as abound in Wealth, chiefly if they have not a
numerous Posterity to share it to, most particularly those whose Wealth has
been of their own acquisition; that is, the Effect of the Blessings of
Providence, favoring their Endeavors, ought to be, of all others, the most
forward in the largesses of Charity. Those who see many who did set out with
them, and that perhaps upon great Advantages beyond them, and who have been
both as skilful and industrious as themselves, and yet have long struggled with
great Difficulties, and have at last sunk under them, ought, when they reflect
on their own happier Circumstances, think who it is that has made the
difference? and for what end has he made it? They ought to consider, that in
all accounts, a Balance must be stated between Receipts and Disbursements. They
must give an account, not according to what others have received, but according
to what they themselves have received; and to the Charge they stand under, and
the Circumstances they are in.

Much will be required of them, to whom much is given; and if we expect a full
reward, a measure shaken together and pressed down, we must abound in the
riches of our liberality. The liberal man devises liberal things, and by
liberal things he shall stand. These may seem at present to dissipate his
Stock, but they bring large Returns. There cannot come a nobler Meditation into
the Mind of a Man whom God has eminently blessed, than to think often within
himself, What shall I render unto God for all his benefits toward me? Our
first Returns ought to be Praise and Thanksgiving: but our next ought to be, to
lay out our Plenty in the best manner, and to the best uses we can. Many have
such an abundance, that it is a trouble to them either to keep it, or to use
it. They might ease themselves of the trouble, and trust it to God's keeping;
who will either return it to them again, or preserve it to set it to their
account, in that great Reckoning that all must come to.

Happy they who to their strength, yea and beyond their strength, are ever
employed in doing Good. The height of Charity, is to give not only of our
abundance, that is, out of that which is over and above what we need, but to
give out of our penury; to abridge a narrow condition, and study to be without
many things that we thought we needed, but find we can live without them; that
so shortning even a scanty allowance, we may give some relief to those who
languish under the Extremities of Want.

After all the good we can do to any that are oppressed with Misery, there is a
strain of doing good that is far above it: and to this the Charity to their
Persons may be a great furtherance. The greatest Charity is the delivering Men
from the extremest Dangers: If to save a Life is a noble piece of Charity, how
much more to save a Soul? If we can be the happy Instruments of bringing those
who have gone astray, to love the Truth, and to follow it; if we can allarm an
impenitent Sinner, or reclaim one that is engaged in ill Courses; if we can
help Men to live Religiously, and to die comfortably, then we may reckon that
we are exalted to the greatest Honor that our Natures are capable of, in being
Instruments of the greatest Good, that either we can do, or that others can
receive. This is indeed to be managed with discretion, and without affectation;
with zeal, but without heat. Happy those who find out the best Methods, and the
properest Times for it! This is both the greatest Charity and the noblest
Employment we are capable of.

But since our Capacities as well as our Fortunes, and our Strength as well as
our Time, are limited, we ought to see what Objects, as well as what Acts of
Charity we must prefer to all others. That proportion of our Time, of our
Talents and our Fortunes, that we can bestow on others, ought to be so well
managed, that it may be applied both to the best Persons and the best Purposes
that may be. While therefore all Mankind have title to such a share, as extreme
Misery may give them a right even to demand of us, there is still a great
distinction to be made.

There is somewhat of the Image of God on all Men; but there is a more peculiar
measure of it on those who are made conformable to Christ. All men have the
same common Nature; but the Regenerate have in them, besides that, a
participation of the Divine Nature. We who are Christians, are born again, and
in that we acquire a new relation: We are all Brethren, joint-heirs of the same
common salvation: We are members of the same body; we have one head, and ought
also to have one heart. We are all sharers in one common Baptism; The bread
that we break is the communion of his body, and the cup that we bless, is the
communion of his blood, by whom we are called. We hope to live to all Eternity
together, partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in light. These are
Relations of so close a Nature, that as they tie us much more firmly to one
another, so they ought to give us a more particular concern in one another, and
therefore there is a peculiar strain of Charity that ought to be reserved to
such as we have reason to believe are of this Household. In the beginnings of
Christianity the number was small, but their Zeal and their Charity was then in
its first fervor. Then the Widows and the Fatherless were supplied by a daily
Ministration: Such was the Zeal of their Charity, and such were the Necessities
of that time, that the Rich sold their lands and possessions, and laid the
price of them down at the Apostles feet. That seems peculiar to that time and
place, for in the Epistles to the other Churches, mention is often made of the
Rich that were among them.

The Enemies of our Faith made this a part of their Satyr against it, that the
Bounty with which the Rich supplied the Poor, made that the Poor seemed as
hired to come among them. They acknowledge the Charity of the Christians was
not restrained to those of the same Faith, but was extended even to Strangers
and Enemies. If the carrying the name Christian, or the being baptized into it,
makes all to be of the Household of Faith, then we have no more this restriction
to our Charity. All, or almost all, among us are of this sort. But this is more
the effect of Law or Custom, than of Choice: therefore we must now take other
measures, for judging who are of the Household of Faith.

Can those who are a Reproach to it by their most unchristian Lives, and who
seem weary of the very Name, which they are ready to throw off, if they could
do it without hazard to their worldly Interests, be esteemed a part of this
Household? If they are, then this is fulfilled, that a man's enemies are those of
his own household.

Oh, the Venom that is daily thrown out by them against that Faith which would
reform form and save the World, if it were sincerely believed and followed by
it! They judge of it by the effects it has on themselves, and on such as
themselves: and having never felt more in it than a Form of Words, or a Set of
Rites and Performances, they call it foolishness: But let them Blaspheme that
Worthy Name as much as they will, Christ is to all who are called of God, both
the power and the wisdom of God. They discern a Wisdom in his Doctrine, and
they feel a Power in it, overcoming their Hearts, subduing their Appetites,
changing their Natures, and governing their Actions.

Those of this Household do not only wear its Livery, and carry its outward
Appearances; they are faithful to their Trust, zealous for the Honor of their
Master, and careful of every thing that concerns the good, either of the whole,
or of any particular Member of it. They study to keep it in Peace, and to
maintain the Honor and Dignity of their Profession. They endeavor to resemble
the Master whom they serve, and to walk in all things, even as he walked. In a
word, whenever we see these Characters in any that calls himself of this
Household, even though they are yet but defective, we ought to judge charitably,
and to conclude that such a Person either already is, or may become truly one
of this Household; and that therefore he has a right to the more endearing
specialties of our Love. We ought not to judge too severely of any, nor quite
to exclude them, though we may see good reason still to give others the
preference, and a double Portion in our Charity. If we love our Brethren from
the Motive of the Love of God, and from Principles of true Charity, we will
feel the Consideration of a higher measure of God's Image, and a nearer
Conformity to his Nature, the strongest of all ties.

This will melt and overcome every devout Mind; and that the rather, because
such Persons are not clamorous and importunate: they do not publish their
Necessities till the last extremity forces it. Nor do they attack us with
violence. They are patient and modest, hardly brought to trouble others, and
soon dashed when they do it: And indeed a great deal of what of right should be
reserved for them, is often intercepted by the noise and importunity, the
affected Looks and Voices of a sort of people, that go about, with too much
success, while others are starving at home in silence. This is one of the
justest Reproaches of our Nation, that notwithstanding all the Authority that
Law gives to Magistrates for correcting it, yet a false compassion, and a
feebleness of good nature, proves too hard, even for the Law, in its execution.
It is the Honor of Magistracy to be vigilant and severe in executing Laws,
that how unacceptable soever the first prosecution of them may seem to be, yet
are as Charitable as they are Just. There are tender Mercies that are Cruel, as
well as Severities that have Charity and Kindness in them.

Among all the Objects of Charity, as there are none that are more helpless, or
more crying than young Children, who are initiated into this Household, and have
not yet forfeited that Innocence to which the sacred Rites have restored them;
so there are none from whom we may so reasonably expect the Returns of thirty,
sixty, or an hundredfold: A Child well educated may become an industrious,
virtuous and religious Man. His Education may follow him down through the whole
course of his Life, and go to his Posterity after him. This is always the most
hopeful and most fruitful Application of Charity. Next to these, the most
pressing are those who are under the double Misery both of Poverty, and of
Sickness or Pain: who may be near the giving their last accounts; and therefore
need more than at any time, to be freed from Temptations, and every other
burden except that which the ill state of their Body brings them necessarily
under; and even in that, need most of all to be so supplied, that they may be
either quite relieved, or at least that their burden may be lightened, and their
last Agonies made less dreadful and more tolerable to them. The reducing ill
people by the severity of discipline to a better course of life, is a Charity
well becoming that Religion which regards the good of the Soul in the first
place. And the care of the Lunaticks and Franticks has so much of a just
Compassion in it, that humane Nature is at first sight struck with it.

The Pious Provision, and Royal and Noble Endowments for these Ends, are to be
reckoned among the chief Securities, as well as the fairest Ornaments and
Glories of this Great City. But the overflowings of Charity here, which support
these Foundations in an Expense far beyond their certain Revenues, is the
peculiar Glory of the present Inhabitants, as well, as it is the City's chief
Preservative. What but some such Acts of Love could cover such a multitude of
Sins, secure us so long from the Returns of sweeping Plagues and consuming
Fires? What has preserved us from all that Train of Mischief, both from within
and without, that had long ago wrought our Ruin, if the happy Interpositions of
Providence had not been always at hand to give us a fresh Deliverance, as often
as we were threatened with a new Mischief? What could resist so loud a Cry of so
much Impiety, such bold Attempts against our God and his Christ, as are too
common? What else could keep off those Judgments, which our adding new and
unheard of Abominations to the old stock of our former crying Sins, must have
brought down upon us, even in Fire and Brimstone? In opposition to all these,
by which we are filling up the measure of our Iniquities, we have still the
Tears and Prayers of many in and about this Great City, which support and
preserve it, more than even the Trade and Industry of the Citizens. We have the
Noble Charities of those whom God has blessed among us, which ascend before the
Throne as a sweet smelling Savor; We have the grateful Prayers and
Thanksgivings of such as having no other Returns to make for what they receive,
may be supposed to offer these up heartily for their Benefactors, and for this
City in which they find such mighty Comfort and Relief. These do still keep off
the Judgments that otherwise we should long ago have smarted under; and
therefore here is a proper place to make a stand, and to set before you what
the Worthy Governors of those Endowments have done for this last Year, that so
those whom God has eminently blessed, may see what is reserved for them yet to
do.

A True REPORT, etc.
It remains now to consider the Measure by which we ought to pursue our
Charity: As we have opportunity, or according to the other Reading, While we
have time. Every time of our receiving special Blessings from God, whether in
our Spiritual or Temporal Concerns, chiefly when unlooked for, and great
Successes in our Affairs, do as it were surprise us, we ought to reckon a
special Opportunity for doing Good: We have then a new Capacity put in our
hands. If those who meet with particular Blessings are yet so straightened, that
they having nothing to spare, express their willingness to give liberally if it
were in their power, even that will be accepted by him who in such a case does
certainly take the will for the deed; but that is never to be expected, when it
is in our power to do as well as to will: then not to do, and only to pretend
to will, is but to mock God.

When fit Occasions and proper Objects come in our way, at a time when we feel
we have it in our power to do good, we ought to look upon that as a
determination of Providence, to lodge the Good that we are disposed to do, on
such Objects: When at any time we re-double our Prayers with more than ordinary
Vehemence, for any Deliverance or Blessing, we ought to proportion some
overplus in our Charity, to the Grace that we then beg from God. We may expect
that our Prayers shall be best heard, when we open our Ears and our Hands to
those who call to us. As we would desire that God should prevent us with his
Favor, we ought to seek out the Necessitous, chiefly the Domestics of this
Family, to prevent them with our Liberality. We ought not to shake off pressing
Occasions, that call for present Help. In such cases often a Delay is a Denial;
the Opportunity may be lost for ever. The Invitations of Providence, in some
happy Encounters, are to be tenderly received as special Favors, and to be
carefully managed. So far we ought to be from letting them slip from us, that
we ought to seek them out, and to wait for them. The improving these, is as it
were the putting God in our debt, or rather the putting us out of his. We ought
to reckon it a Favor when he sends any of his Family to us in his Name. We
ought to receive them well, and to dismiss them the better for his sake, in
whose Name they come. Under all our Plenty, we cannot have a surer Indication,
that it is sent to us, and blessed of God, than that we have it in our Will as
much as it is in our Power, or rather more than our Power reaches to, to do all
the Good with it that possibly we can. This is one Article in making up our
accounts, which we may then do with joy, when we feel a heartiness in our
Bounty; that we part with it, not only easily, but cheerfully; that it is not
extorted from us by Importunity or Decency, but is given with a willing Heart;
and that in the Measure of it, we feel a disposition to give rather more than
less than our Condition can afford. Nor are we to complain that Opportunities
return too thick upon us; but are rather to rejoice, that when we have
dispersed abroad, a new Harvest returns soon after that sowing. After all,
there is Prudence and Discretion even in this, and Bounds must be set to it,
within which we ought to restrain our selves: but so few are apt to exceed on
this hand, that there is little occasion to insist much upon it.

The other reading of the word is, While we have time: As long as we live, and
have the free use of that Plenty with which God blesses us. Death will quickly
come upon us, and then perhaps a fraudulent Man or an Usurer, when he can enjoy
his Wealth no longer, will think of redeeming his iniquities by some Endowment,
in which he may intend both to gratify his Vanity, and to quiet the Horrors of
his Conscience; but Restitution were the better and the more necessary Cure,
since it is as it were a calling God to share with them in their unlawful
Gains, when they offer him some part of them, before they have endeavored to
make restitution to the righteous Owners, whom they had defrauded. Such
Endowments coming from defiled Hands, will not be accepted.

It is true, if a special Restitution, after a Life of numberless and small
Injustices, cannot be made, a liberal Distribution will be accepted of God, if
made without the superstitious Conceit of compounding with Him: Yet that which
is made by Men in Health, who outlive their parting with it, looks liker a
willing Sacrifice, than that which is only let go to pious Uses, when they can
hold it no longer. It savours too little of Charity, and too rankly of Vanity,
to hoard up and to give nothing during one's Life, that he may have wherewith
to leave some splendid piece of Magnificence at his Death. While we have time
therefore, that is, while we live and are in Health; while we see Objects that
call aloud upon us, and that perhaps perish for the want of that which is in
our power to give them; Let us show a Pleasure as well as a Zeal in Good Works;
for this is the only part of our Wealth that we may be said in some sort to
carry along with us into another World; our works will follow us; and the
Friends whom we have made by our Mammon, will be ready to receive us into their
eternal habitations.

Another view of the word while we have time, is, In this our day, knowing the
time. We are now again in Peace, and all things considered, in a high degree of
Plenty. We do not know how long the present Quiet shall continue, or how soon
the Clouds shall return after all the Rain that is fallen. Whatsoever our
Dangers or Difficulties have been, they are now over, and we forget them, and
take little care to provide for the Evil Day, which may be much nearer than we
will suffer our selves to think it is. A shaking may come that may drive us
from our Seats and our Wealth: It is not hard to apprehend from what Accidents,
and by what Hands the Evil Day may come.

The best way to prevent it, is to think often that it may come; and instead of
hoarding up a great deal, which may prove only the heaping up of Treasure, both
to invite and to glut our Enemies, instead of the profusion of Waste and Riot,
of Luxury and Vanity, to be laying it up in such Acts of Charity as will stand
us in more stead in the Evil day, than the best secured Wealth we have; we will
then the more easily bear Want if we use our present Abundance well. Have other
National Churches been plucked up by the Roots, and scattered all about in
strange Countries, and why may not we expect some such dreadful Sentence, Cut
it down, why cumbreth it the ground? It will be the easier to us to encounter
some such Calamity, if while we have now both Time and Plenty, we use it
prudently, and bestow it Charitably: We may then with confidence trust that God
will raise up, even in strange Countries, Benefactors to us, if we do now deal
our bread to the hungry, and hide not our selves from our own flesh.

In a word, it will be the more easy to part with the Remnants of our Wealth
when we have accustomed our selves beforehand to make liberal Distributions
out of it, and to live upon a small part of it, especially for those who have
secured the best part of it, where neither rust nor moth does corrupt, nor
thieves break through and steal; and so have the promises both of this life,
and of that which is to come. To conclude with the Words that go before my
Text, Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap. For he that sows to
his flesh, shall of his flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the
spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. Therefore let us not be
weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Ri. Chiswell.
BIshop Patrick's Commentary on Genesis, Exodus, and Leviticus. In Three
Volumes. Quarto.

-- On Numbers, is in the Press.

Archbishop Tillotson's First, Second, Third, Fourth Volumes of Sermons.
Published from the Originals. By Dr. Barker.

-- A Fifth Volume is in the Press.

Dr Outram's Twenty Sermons. Published by Dr. Gardener, now Lord Bishop of
Lincoln. The Second Edition.

Dr. Hezek. Burton's Sermons and Discourses. Published by Archbishop Tillotson,
with an Account of the Author. In Two Volumes. Octavo.

Dr. Conant's Sermons. In Two Volumes. 8vo. Published by Bp. Williams.

Dr. William Wake's Sermons and Discourses. Octavo.

Dr. Henry Bagshaw's Diatribae, or Discourses upon Select Texts against the
Papist and Socinian. Octavo.

Mr. Henry Wharton's Fourteen Sermons preached at Lambeth Chapel before
Archbishop Sandcroft, in the Years 1688, and 1689. With an Account of the
Author's Life.

-- A Second Volume containing his remaining Sermons, is in the Press.

The Fathers Vindicated, or Animadversions on a late Socinian Book, [The
Judgment of the Fathers touching the Trinity, against Dr. Bull 's Defense of
the Nicene Faith] By a Presbyter of the Church of England.

The Bishop of Sarum's Sermon before the King on Christmas Day, 1696. on Gal.
IV. 4.

-- His Lent-Sermon before the King, 1696/7. on Ephesians. V. 2.

-- His Thanksgiving-Sermon for the Peace, before the King, on December 2.
1697. on 2 Chronicles. IX. 8.

A New Account of India and Persia, in Eight Letters, being Nine Years Travels,
begun 1672, and finished 1681. Containing Observations made of the Moral,
Natural, and Artificial Estate of those Countries: Namely of their Government,
Religion, Laws, Customs. Of the Soil, Climates, Seasons, Health, Diseases. Of
the Animals, Vegetables, Minerals, Jewels. Of their Housing, Clothing,
Manufactures, Trades, Commodities. And of the Coins, Weights, and Measures,
used in the Principal Places of Trade in those Parts. Illustrated with Maps,
Figures, and useful Tables. [This is in the Press, and will shortly be
Published]

SCRIPTORUM ECCLESIASTICORUM Historia Literaria, facili and perspicua methodo
digesta. Pars Altera Quae plusquam DC Scriptores novi, tam Editi quam
Manuscripti recensentur Prioribus plurima adduntur; breviter aut obscure dicta
illustrantur; recte asserta vindicantur. Accedit ad finem cujusvis Soeculi
CONCILIORUM omnium tum Generalium tum Particularium Historica Notitia. Ad
Caelcem vero Operis Dissertationes tres, (1.) De Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis
incertae aetatis. (2.) De Libris and officiis Ecclesiasticis Graecorum. Adjecti
sunt Indices utilissimi Scriptorum and Conciliorum Alphabetico-Chronologici.
Studio and labor GULIELMI CAVE. S. T. P. Canon. Windesoriensis. Fol.

* This Book will be finished in Trinity Term next, and is intended to be
Published by Subscription, with advantage to the Buyer. Proposals will shortly
be published. Or some time before the Book will be Extant.


