TWO PROPOSALS, Humbly Offered to the Honorable House of Commons, Now
Assembled in PARLIAMENT. I. That a Duty be laid on Malt, in the stead of the
present Duty on Beer and Ale; and likewise, that the several Engagements that
Revenue lies under, be Transferred on that of Malt. II. That a Duty be laid on
Malt, and the present Duty on Beer and Ale be continued.
To which is Annexed An Account, what in all Probability the Frauds of Brewers
do amount to, and wherein such Frauds are Prejudicial to the King, to the
Subject, and to the Trade it self: Likewise by what Means such Grievances are
most properly Redressed.

By A. Burnaby of the Middle Temple, Gent.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1696.

A PROPOSAL humbly Offered to lay a Duty upon Malt, instead of the present Duty
on Beer and Ale; and likewise, That the several Engagements the present Revenue
lies under, be transferred on that of Malt.
IT is proposed, That 8 s. per Quarter be laid on all Malt made, and to be
made, to be paid by the Maker thereof monthly, and the Duty to be received by
the Maltsters from their Customers, before they deliver their Malt, so that the
Credit they give may be the same, and not other than now it is: Besides, that
Brewer or Retailer that cannot pay the Duty down, is not a fit Person to be
trusted with the other; and thereby in some measure the Maltster will be the
better able to judge who is, or who is not fit to be trusted with his Commodity.

It is humbly presumed, That there can be no Tax levied that will be more Easy
and Satisfactory to his Majesty's Subjects, that carries with it such a visible
Advantage to His Majesty, as this does; as is hoped will appear by the
following Reasons.

First, Such a Tax will be less felt than usually Taxes are, by reason every
Person will pay Proportionable in the Price of Malt. The more universal any Tax
is, it is to be supposed (unless in some Particular Cases) to be the more
equal; and I presume, no Person will deny that such a Tax will prove so
universal, that not any Person will Escape paying his Proportion according to
his Consumption; Ergo, No Person can complain; who Consumes little, will have
but little to pay.

Secondly, No Tax has yet been levied that can so speedily, and with so little
difficulty, be Collected, as that on Malt; by reason the Maltsters are few in
number.

Thirdly, It is to be hoped there will not be such Arrears as usually are of
Taxes, by reason the Maltsters are most, if not all of them, very rich Men,
besides (as is said before) few in number.

Fourthly, The present Stock of Malt that lies in the Maltsters and Brewers
Hands, will amount to a large and present Sum of Money; I hope I need say
nothing to evince the Truth of this Asfertion.

Fifthly, Those People that buy their Drink from the Common Brewer, will have
their Drink Cheaper than now they have, by reason the 8 s. Proposed to be
levied, does not amount to so much as the Excise of a Quarter of Malt does by 5
s. when put into Drink; for every Brewer makes at least Two Barrels and Three
Fourths of Ale or Strong Beer of each Quarter of Malt, when Malt is at a
moderate Price, and so more according as it rises in Price; and Two Barrels and
Three Fourths, according to the present Duty, will appear to be 13 s. or
thereabouts. By this it does appear, the Brewer will get 5 s. per each Quarter
of Malt more than now he does under the present Duty; and by the same Rule
those Persons that buy of the Common Brewer will have their Drink cheaper than
now they have: And likewise I may add this further, (viz.) The Considering
Housewives will tell you, That according to the present Duty on Ale and Beer,
there is very little, if any at all, between buying their Drink of the Brewers,
and making it themselves; whether it be that the Quantity they brew is not
great, so that they waste as much Coals as if the Quantity were as much more,
Servants time the same, or the want of Skill in making the most of their Malt,
or the want of Judgment in choosing what is fittest for their purpose, I will
not pretend to dedermine. But I have some Reason to believe all what I have
named have in their several Circumstances an equal share; however, I leave this
Matter to those who have made more Experiment than I have; but, if this
Position be true, then I may venture to fay, There will very few or none feel
this Tax, but, instead thereof, may prove both a Convenience and an Advantage
to almost all Persons; however it may be a sufficient Encouragement that such a
Tax be Levied, since likewise it is to be feared there will be a Necessity of
Levying of some sort of Tax or other; therefore may presume this will not be
left destitute of Hope of Success.

Sixthly, It will put a mighty Equality on the Brewing Trade, even to the
Preservation of a great Number of Brewers, that are at this time almost at the
Brink of Ruin, and have Strugled under the Disease for several Years last
past, by reason of the Great Brewers, who by their great Trades having a mighty
Opportunity of Defrauding more than the Lesser Ones have, to keep up and
advance their Trades, do sell better or stronger Drink, more Measure and
Cheaper than the Lesser Brewers (who, by reason of the Smalness of their
Trades, have not such Advantage by Frauds) can afford to do: And by this means
it does appear, they cannot have any Customers that can be supposed to make
good Payment for what they buy of them; for if they could, most certainly they
would apply themselves to the Great Brewers, where they will receive such
visible Advantages, different from what the Lesser Brewers can afford to let
them have, and consequently those few good Customers the Lesser Brewers have,
they get nothing by, perhaps lose; since then, the only Customers the Lesser
Brewers have, that they can hope to get by, are bad, it may be concluded, Such
an Employment must end in Destruction.

Seventhly, Every 100 l. so Collected, is better by 3 l. or 4 l. per Cent.
(according to the Interest His Majesty pays for Money) than any Tax that has
yet appeared, by reason Malt cannot be made in the Summer; so that the
Maltsters are forced to make the Quantity of the whole Year in the Winter
Season, and consequently the whole Tax will be received in less than Seven
Months.

Eighthly, The Charge of bringing this Tax into the Exchequer, will not be above
One Third Part so much as that of the Excise on Ale and Beer now is. Every
Person that knows a Malt-house, and a Brewhouse, knows the Tediousness of the
First, and the Nimbleness of the Latter; insomuch, that One Officer may serve
one Malt-Kiln (by the way, it is reasonable to believe there are Twenty
Brewhouses to One Kiln) better Three Officers can One Brewhouse, according to
the present Laws and Management of the Excise: Besides, the Proposer humbly
presumes he has Framed such a Method, that it shall be morally impossible,
That the Maker of Malt can defraud the Tax or any part thereof.

How much this will advance beyond what now it does, I will not pretend to say;
because I think no Just or Certain Estimation can be made thereof; but when
once we reflect on the great Quantities of Stout or Double-Ales, and Stout or
Double-Beer, that the several and almost all the Counties in England, nay, that
pass by the Names of each County or Town, that is Consumed in this Town, not to
mention what every Town or County Consumes it self of those sorts of Liquors,
even London and Middlesex not exempted, which Pay, as it is laid on the Drink,
no more Duty than the Common Ale and Strong Beer the Common Brewers brew, which
consumes five times the Malt in proportion, to every Barrel of those sorts of
Liquors that the Common Ale and Beer does; and perhaps it is not very difficult
to prove, were it Necessary, that it was the Chiefest Cause (the Humor of this
Town, as well as the Country, running more of late upon these very Strong
Liquors than heretofore) that the Excise on Ale and Beer, when Doubled, did not
amount to twice the Value of the Excise, when Single, together with the
difficulty of Detecting the Frauds of Brewers, which they were encouraged to,
so much the more, by so much the greater the Duty was; Nay, the Commissioners
of Excise can, if they please, tell you, it did not amount to much more than
One Third Part more than when Single; but when likewise we come to reflect what
great Quantities necessarily must be used by all the Private Families that Brew
their own Drink, together with the Yearly large Quantities that are Exported
beyond the Seas, I say, when we once come to reflect on the several ways that
necessarily must be, of the Consumption of that sort of Grain, together with
these Visible Advantages, that this will be Managed with less than One Third
Part of the Charge that the other is; the Prevention of the Brewer's Frauds,
and the Money all brought into the Exchequer in Seven Months; when I come and
tell you likewise, that the Frauds of Brewer's, together with the many bad
Debts the Victuallers and Kettle Brewers do make, and unavoidable too, will, in
all probability, amount, with the two Thirds saved in the difference of
Management, to at least 220000 l. per Annum, which bad Debts cannot be supposed
to be Contracted with the Maltsters, who, (as is hinted before,) are all rich
Men, which I hope I have sufficiently proved in my Proposals, now before the
Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury, Entitled,
Proposals for the better Management of the Brewery; there needs nothing more,
in my Humble Opinion, to induce a Compliance with such a Proposal; However, to
give it yet a greater Credit, let us but look what Effects the Coffee-Berry has
had; which will appear Visible to any Capacity, (comparing the one with the
other) to be a very Parallel Case; Nay, even in this; that the Coffee-houses
contracted a great many bad Debts that are not yet, and it is to be feared never
will be paid, now upon the Berry quite the contrary: I think no Person a
Stranger to the Effects of that Act, especially not any of the Honorable House
of Commons to whom this is chiefly Intended, because there scarce ever yet was
any thing of this kind that had not its Enemies, though it were but for
Argument sake over a Dish of Coffee in a Coffee-House; therefore I cannot hope
this should escape, were it much better than what it is, I take the Liberty of
laying down what I humbly Conceive are the most Material or Probable Objections
that can be made to it.

The Enemies of this Proposal will be apt to make these three following
Objections, which, according to my Apprehension, are all the thing can be
supposed to bear.

Objection I.
It is not so Equal as the Proposer would have the World believe, by reason the
Tax will fall entirely upon one sort of Grain, and consequently upon one sort
of Land that bears such Grain.

To which I make Answer; The Difference of affecting the Land or Grain more by
this Duty, than it is affected, by that of the Excise on Beer and Ale, is only,
it pays the Duty in one when Malt, in the other, when that very Malt is made
into Drink; and Malt is of little or no other use, or at least it is not put to
any other than the making of Drink in this Nation; besides, there is this
general Argument to back it, that the Seller always Commands the Buyer;
Consequently, the Farmer and Maltster will get more than now they do, and this
Encouragement given to other People as well as the Brewers, of having their
Drink Cheaper than now they have, as I hope I have already before made it
plainly appear, and the Brewer to have the Visible Encouragement of 5 s. per
Quarter, I say both these must necessarily cause the Greater Consumption of
that sort of Grain. It is to be hoped from these Considerations, that Malt will
be one of the Chiefest and most Advantageous Grain the Farmers will employ
themselves in; Consequently, that sort of Land will bear to the Landlord a
greater Price.

Objection II.
That Private Families, and those Strangers that carry this sort of Grain
beyond the Seas, will be Subject to a Duty in this, that were not by that of
the Excise on Beer and Ale.

To which I make this Answer; I hope I have made it appear, that Private
Families will rather be Gainers; Especially, all those that buy their Drink
from the Common Brewer, and those that do not, the Difference so little, I
believe will (according to what I have hinted of this matter before) be scare
discernable; unless it be to some few that cannot have the Convenience of a
Common Brew House to supply them; and as for what Corn is Exported beyond the
Seas, I must own 'twill Entirely fall upon them; but in a thing of this Nature
it cannot be expected, a Shoe should be made that can fit every Person's Foot,
but in my Humble Opinion, if a Shoe be made that fits the Generality of
Mankind, it is sufficient.

Objection III.
How the Present Engagements on the Revenue of Excise on Beer and Ale, can be
transferred on Malt to the Satisfaction of the King and Subject; Which in truth
is rather a Question, and the Lawyers are the fittest Persons to reconcile that.

However! I beg leave humbly to offer something on the King's Behalf, that his
Subjects security on this of Malt, will be much Greater and the Duty much
Quicker brought into the Exchequer, though they will not have the same Security
for their Money, as they had when they Lent their Moneys; Yet if they have
instead thereof a much Greater, and a Quicker return, there is very little
Danger of their receiving any Prejudice thereby; but it is plain they will
receive an Advantage from both (viz.) the Moneys coming into the Exchequer
quicker, and the Securities being much greater.

It this Honorable House shall not think it advisable to make so great an
Alteration of so weighty a Concern, without first making Experiment on some
part.

It is further humbly proposed, That 2 s. per Quarter be laid on all Malt, as
by former Proposals, and the present Duty of Excise be continued: By such a
Proposal (were it but to continue till the next Session of Parliament) a
sufficient Experiment in all probability would by that time be made thereof, by
which this Honorable House would be the better able to make Judgment, whether
there really were such Advantages to the King and Subject, as I have in the
former Proposal mentioned, and consequently, whether it were for the Advantage
of both, that such an Alteration were made, and the Engagements* that should
then happen to be, be transferred.

It is humbly hoped 'twill appear, That even this Proposal is not wholly
destitute of Reasons to justify it, from the following Considerations.

First, It is humbly presumed the 2 s. thus Levied, will be as Universal as any
Tax that has yet been Levied. Now if the Universality of a Tax proves its
Equality, as indeed it seems (at least to me) so to do, (unless in some very
few particular Cases) this Position allowed, I may venture to say it will be as
Equal as Universal, by reason every Person will pay his Proportion according to
his Consumption.

Secondly, That the Common Brewers, notwithstanding the 2 s. thus Levied, will
not be so high Taxed by 2 s. 9 d. per Quarter or thereabout, as they were when
the Double Duty was laid on the Excise; for at 6 s. 6 d. per Barrel (which was
the Double Duty) Two Barrels and Three Fourths amounts to 17 s. 10 d. 1/2. at 4
s. 9 d. per Barrel (which is the present Duty;) Two Barrels and Three Fourths
amounts to 13 s. 3/4 which deducted from 17 s. 10 d. 1/2. remains 4 s. 9 d.
3/4. Two Shillings deducted, which is the present. proposed Tax on each Quarter
of Malt, still there will remain 2 s. 9 d. 3/4. This, I humbly presume, is a
demonstration sufficient, (viz.) To prove the Brewers have been more Taxed,
than what they will be by this Proposal, and I presume likewise 'twill scarce
be denied, the present Affairs seem to want as great Supplies this Year, as any
since the Revolution, and this is not proposed for a longer time.

Thirdly, Those that Brew Double Drinks will be in some measure by this: Tax
(which they are not as it lies on the Drink) equally charged with the Common
Brewers, which they at this time seem to have got the upper hand of, by taking
Advantage of the Laws of Excise, which makes no other distinction in the
Strength of Drink, than thus Generally, (viz.) for all Drink worth above 6 s.
per Barrel to pay as Strong, and all under 6 s. as Small.

To prove this Assertion, I need say no more than what every Persons knows,
That the one Consumes at least five times the Quantity in Proportion to every
Barrel brewed, more than the other.

Fourthly, The Distillers that brew Drink from Malt, on purpose to make Spirits
or Strong Waters, will also be charged equally with the other Brewers in this;
there needs nothing I presume* to evince the Truth of this Assertion. I humbly
beg leave to take notice of those sort of Gentletlemen the Distillers in this
place, though altogether foreign to this present Subject, but ought to have
been in the former Proposal; that is, (viz.) They Consume great quantities of
Malt; likewise, they commit great Frauds, many bad Debts contracted, and a
great Charge to His Majesty for the Management of it: All which would be
prevented, if the whole Tax was laid on Malt, and the few other Materials the
Distillers use in their Business, which are not very many.

Fifthly, That there ought to be a difference between Private Families brewing
their own Drink, and Drink, brewed by the Common Brewers, or Retailers for
Sale, does appear by the first Institution of this Tax; for by the Acts of
Parliaments relating to those Matters, none ought to pay that Duty but such as
was supposed to make Profit by what they brewed; ergo, a difference is just,
especially if made, by an Authority too great to be questioned (at least by me,
or any private Person) an Act of Parliament.

If this Honorable House shall not think either of the former Proposals worthy
of being complied with, I humbly beg leave to inform this Honorable House,
what in all probability the present Frauds of the Brewers do amount to, being
such, as it is to be feared, if this Honorable House does not take some Care to
prevent them, will mightily increase, even beyond one Third Part of that
Revenue, notwithstanding the great Charge (not to mention the great Trouble)
His Majesty is at, at present, and the greater perhaps (under the present Laws
of Excise) he must be at hereafter, to keep it at the Ebb it is now at, viz.
That only one Third Part be defrauded.

To Prove which, it is but looking back to what former Years has produced, and
comparing them with the latter, when they had not such Temptations to Defraud
as now they have; by reason the Duty even at this time is almost double to what
then it was, and has been almost treble since His Present Majesty's Reign,
which will not be denied, I presume, (viz.) That they have a much greater
Temptation to put them upon the Contrivance of Frauds more now than formerly;
For the PENALTIES are the same now as then, which is all the Check the Brewers
have. The Trouble and Charge they are at in committing their Frauds are the
same, and not other than heretofore. The Excise when at 2 s. 6 d. per Barrel
Strong, and 6 d. per Barrel Small, did amount to about 680334 l. per Annum, now
at 4 s. 9 d. per Barrel Strong, and 1 s. 3 d. per Barrel Small, does amount to
about 900000 l. per Annum, according to the additional Duty, that is (from 2 s.
6 d. Strong and 6 d. small, to 4 s. 9 d. Strong and to 1 s. 3 d. Small, which
is almost double; the Excise ought to come to at least 1330000 l. per Annum;
according to this Computation it comes short 430000 l. per Annum: Suppose an
allowance of 30000 l. per Annum be made for the Humor of this Town as well as
the Country, running more of late (as is hinted in the first Proposal) upon the
very Strong or Double Ales than formerly, when the Excise amounted to the
abovementioned Sum of 1330000 l. per Annum. Suppose likewise an allowance of
20000 l. per Annum be made, for the Declension of the Brewing Trade of late
years; though I should think it no very great Task to prove, were it necessary,
That that Trade of late is not in the least declined. But I shall have room to
make large allowances; therefore, lest that Objection should arise, that also
ismade here out. Suppose likewise an allowance of 10000 l. per Annum, be made
in the stead of Excise on the Retailers of Coffee, which is more than ever was
received by that Duty, when the Excise did amount to 680334 l. per Annum, that
Duty helped to make up the aforesaid Sum, which at this time is on the Berry,
and the Duty received at the Custom-House. Suppose likewise the Distillery be
the same now as then, according to the Additional Duty on it, though in fact it
is considerably advanced even according to the Additional Duty. All these
Deductions amount to but 60000 l. per Annum, which deducted from 430000 l.
there will still remain 370000 l. It Is to be supposed that even then (when the
Excise was at but 2 s. 6 d. per Barrel Strong, and 6 d. per Barrel Small) the
Brewers were not all Puritans; but suppose an Allowance be made for the then
supposed Frauds of 30000 l. (though upon a Nicer Examination, there would be
good reason to suspect twice that Sum did not serve their Turns) then the
Brewers Frauds will amount to Four Hundred Thousand Pound per Annum, which is
considerably above One Third Part. There might be much more said to swell the
aforesaid 400000 l. per Annum, to a much greater Sum; but it is to be feared
that even that is much too great to be well spared at this time. I humbly beg
leave to show this Honorable House, wherein in my humble Opinion, the Frauds
of Brewers are Prejudicial to the King, to the Subjects in General, and to the
Trade it self.

First, These Frauds are a Disappointment to the King, by Reason that thereby
the Excife does not answer the Sum it was given for; Consequently, the Fund to
the Lender of Moneys is not so Good or Large, as if it did fully Answer.

Secondly, They are prejudicial to the Public in General, by reason that if
the Brewers paid for all they brewed (as in Conscience and Truth they ought)
the less Taxes would serve turn, Consequently, are prejudicial to the Subject.

Thirdly, These Frauds are prejudicial to the Brewing Trade; Every Person that
knows the Brewing Trade, knows the greater the Trade, the greater Opportunity
they have to Defraud; Insomuch, that the very small Brewers can scarce Defraud
any, the great Brewers having such advantage, do sell Stronger or better Drink,
more Measure, and Cheaper than the Lesser ones can, who by reason of the want
of such great Trades, have not such great Advantages by Frauds; the lesser
Brewers by this means (as is said in the First Proposal) cannot be supposed to
have any Customers that can make good Payment for what they buy of them, for if
they could, no doubt they would apply themselves to the great Brewers, where
they will receive such visible Advantages, different from what the lesser
Brewers can afford them, so that what few good Customers the lesser Brewers can
be supposed to have, they get nothing by, perhaps lose; since then, the only
Customers the lesser Brewers have that they can hope to get by are bad, it will
not be denied, I presume, that the Trade thereby is greatly prejudiced; there
will also this Consequence necessarily follow (if the Trade it self be thus
prejudiced) the Public will be yet further prejudiced, who will be obliged to
bear some Tax levied on them to make good such Deficiency, as may accrue
therefrom.

The Prevention of which, in my Humble Opinion, lies most properly and entirely
in the Breast of this Honorable House, that it may be prevented without any
other Laws than what already are made, there is no doubt; But what is the
Consequence? Perhaps it will cost as much to have it done, as will be saved,
which is the same thing, almost, as if it were permitted; it cannot be imagined
such an Abuse would have been permitted so long, did it lie in the Power of
Art, with a Reasonable Charge to have prevented it; but when we come to reflect
under whose Management this Affair has been for this many Years past, and at
present is, namely that Honorable Person who is at the Head of the Treasury,
there will not be the least hope left us to believe any Judgment or Art has
been wanting, or can be improved, but what must necessarily owe its birth to
this Honorable House, and where those Grievances can best be Redressed.

Now suppose there were a Penalty inflicted, that every Brewer that should
erect and make use of a Private Back, a Private Tun, or a Private Storehouse,
should pay 500 l. That every Brewer that should Conceal the Quantity of a
Barrel of Strong Beer, Ale, or Small Beer from the Sight of the Gager, should
pay 15 l. for each Barrel; That every Brewer that should mix Small Beer to
Strong Beer or Ale, after the Gager has taken his Morning Gage, unless it be in
the Presence of a Gager, to pay for every Barrel so mixed 15 l. For denial of
Entry 50 l. and the other Penalties in Proportion, and a Plentiful Reward out
thereof to the Informer. I say, did this Honorable House think it advisable,
that some such Penalties were Inflicted, not any Brewer of them all would dare
attempt committing the least kind of Fraud; by which, it is plain, the great
Grievance before spoken of, would be Redressed by such Penalties, for the
Brewer has even under the present Penalties these Considerations, (viz.) What
Advantage he is like to reap; the hazard he runs; which are three sorts, (viz.)
The Penalty, the Charge he is to be at, and the Confidence he is necessitated
to Repose in his Servants, which, to say the Truth, are not Persons of the
greatest Faith; Suppose the Master would commit a Fraud, and run the hazard of
the supposed Penalties, he would not dare to entrust his Servants therewith,
and without their Privity the Master cannot commit the Fraud; Besides, by such
Penalties (as is before spoken of) His Majesty would save at least 40000 l. per
Annum, in the Management; for where there is a Necessity now to employ Four
Officers, Two would serve turn, and so in proportion in most of the other
Employments. I humbly hope it will appear by these following Reasons, that such
Penalties are not only of use to the King, to the Public in General, by
Redressing the Great Grievances that fall out in the matter of the Excise, and
the Equality and Preservation of the Trade it self which I humbly presume have
before sufficiently proved) but also, that every Brewer will be left destitute
of the least ground to Complain thereof, Consequently, will be presumed to be
Just and Reasonable.

As thus, Every Brewer that shows the Gagers all he has Brewed, and does not
Conceal or Defraud any, is not Subject to the Penalties; Consequently, he will
have no cause to Complain, if he Defrauds not, he will not have (...) thing to
pay, I mean of the Penalties; He that will by Daylight burn his Fingers,
cannot expect less than to feel the smart thereof.

All the Objection that be raised against it; in my humble Opinion, is this,
(viz.) if the Brewers Servants should Defraud any without the Master's privity,
(supposed to do it on purpose to get the Reward proposed to the Informer) it
would be a Hardship upon the Masters. True, I say so too; but there is this
Remedy provided by the present Laws of Excise, (for that very purpose) that it
does lie in the Breast of the Commissioners, to mitigate any Penalty to any
degree they please, taking nothing less than the double Duty and the Charge the
Officer is at in finding out the Fraud; It will not be supposed, I presume, any
thing that has but a Countenance like that, would be Inflicted by the
Commissioners, that make no profit thereby, but set to deal Equally between the
King and the Brewer. I humbly presume, what is said before, is sufficient to
Convince any Person, at least this Unbiased Honorable House, that the
Objection is fully Answered; and I defy the Brewers themselves, I mean the
Great ones that have made large Estates solely out of Frauds, to make any other
Objection; and for the lesser Brewers, (the greater Number of the two) I will
take the Liberty to Answer for them, that they shall (if required) Petition
this Honorable House that such an Act should pass for the Preservation of
their Trade.

Note, That upon a Modest Computation, every Brewer that makes use of a Private
Back, a Private Tun, or Private Storehouse, of but a Moderate Size or Bigness,
makes at least 20 l. per Week, which used but six Months will make 480 l. which
will almost Answer the Penalties proposed. This, in my humble Opinion, shows,
the Penalties proposed are not Extravagant.

If any Part of the Foregoing Matter shall happen to prove Advantageous either
to the King or to the Subject, I shall obtain my Ends: The Whole is humbly
Submitted to that Great and Honorable House the House of Commons their Great
Wisdom.

FINIS.

