A Collection of PAPERS AGAINST POPERY AND Arbitrary Government.

Written by G. BVRNET, D. D.

Printed at Amsterdam, and sold by J. Robinson in London, MDCLXXXIX.

A Letter, containing some Remarks on the two Papers, writ by his late Majesty
King Charles the Second, concerning Religion.
SIR,
I thank you for the two Royal Papers, that you have sent me: I had heard of
them before, but now we have them so well attested, that there is no hazard of
being deceived by a false Copy: you expect that in return, I should let you
know, what Impression they have made upon me. I pay all the reverence that is
due to a Crowned Head, even in Ashes; to which I will never be wanting: far
less am I capable of suspecting the Royal Attestation that accompanies them; of
the truth of which I take it for granted no man doubts; but I must crave leave
to tell you, that I am confident, the late King only copied them, and that they
are not of his composing: for as they have nothing of that free Air, with which
he expressed himself; so there is a Contexture in them, that does not look like
a Prince; and the beginning of the first shows it was the effect of a
Conversation, and was to be communicated to another: so that I am apt to think
they were composed by another, and were so well relished by the late King, that
he thought fit to keep them, in order to his examining them more particularly:
and that he was prevailed with to Copy them, lest a Paper of that nature might
have been made a crime, if it had been found about him written by another hand:
and I could name one or two Persons, who as they were able enough to compose
such Papers, so had power enough over his Spirit to engage him to Copy them,
and to put themselves out of danger by restoring the Original.

You ought to address your self to the learned Divines of our Church, for an
answer to such things in them as pussle you, and not to one that has not the
honor to be of that Body; and that has now carried a Sword for some time, and
imploys the leisure that at any time he enjoyes, rather in Philosophical and
Mathematical Enquiries, than in matters of Controversy. There is indeed one
Consideration that determined me more easily to comply with your desires, which
is, my having had the honor to discourse copiously of those matters with the
late King himself: and he having proposed to me some of the particulars that I
find in those Papers, and I having said several things to him, in answer to
those Heads, which he offered to me only as Objections, with which he seemed
fully satisfied, I am the more willing to communicate to you, that which I took
the liberty to lay before his late Majesty on several occasions: the
particulars on which he insisted in discourse with me, were the uselesness of a
Law without a Judge, and the neecssity of an infallible Tribunal to determine
Controversies* to which he added, the many Sects that were in England, which
seemed to be a necessary consequence of the Liberty that every one took to
interpret the Scriptures: and he often repeated that of the Church of Englands
arguing, from the obligation to obey the Church, against the Sectaries, which
he thought was of no force, unless they allowed more Authority to the Church
than they seemed willing to admit, in their Disputes with the Church of Rome.
But upon this whole Matter I will offer you some Reflections, that will, I
hope, be of as great weight with you, as they are with my self.

I. All Arguments that prove upon such general Considerations, that there ought
to be an Infallible Judge named by Christ, and clothed with his Authority,
signify nothing, unless it can be showed us, in what Texts of Scripture that
nomination is to be found; and till that is showed, they are only Arguments
brought to prove that Christ ought to have done somewhat that he has not done.
So these are in effect so many Arguments against Christ, unless it appears that
he has authorized such a Judge: therefore the right way to end this dispute,
is, to show where such a Constitution is authorized: So that the most that can
be made of this is, that it amounts to a favorable presumption.

II. It is a very unreasonable thing for us to form Presumptions, of what is,
or ought to be, from Inconveniences that do arise, in case that such things are
not: for we may carry this so far, that it will not be easy to stop it. It
seems more suitable to the infinite Goodness of God, to communicate the
knowledge of himself to all Mankind, and to furnish every Man with such
assistances as will certainly prevail over him. It seems also reasonable to
think, that so perfect a Savior as Jesus Christ was, should have showed us a
certain Way, and yet consistent with the free Use of our Faculties, of avoiding
all sin: nor is it very easy to imagine, that it should be a reproach on his
Gospel, if there is not an Infallible Preservative against Error, when it is
acknowledged, that there is no infallible Preservative against Sin: for it is
certain, that the one Damns us more Infallibly, than the other.

III. Since Presumptions are so much insisted on, to prove what things must be
appointed by Christ; it is to be considered, that it is also a reasonable
Presumption, that if such a Court was appointed by him, it must be done in such
plain terms that there can be no room to question the meaning of them: and
since this is the hinge upon which all other matters turn, it ought to be
expressed so particularly, in whom it is vested, that there should be no
occasion given to dispute, whether it is in One Man or in A Body; and if in a
Body, whether in the Majority, or in the two thirds, or in the whole Body
unanimously agreeing: in short, the Chief thing in all Governments being the
Nature and Power of the Judges, those are always distinctly specified; and
therefore if these things are not specified in the Scriptures; it is at least a
strong Presumption, that Christ did not intend to authorize such Judges.

IV. There were several Controversies raised among the Churches to which the
Apostles writ, as appears by the Epistles to the Romans, Corinthians, Galatians
and Colossians, yet the Apostles never make use of those passages that are
pretended for this Authority to put an end to those Controversies; which is a
shrewd Presumption, that they did not understand them in that sense in which
the Church of Rome does now take them. Nor does St. Paul in the directions that
he gives to Churchmen in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus, reckon this of
submitting to the directions of the Church for one, which he could not have
omitted, if this be the true meaning of those disputed passages: and yet he has
not one word sounding that way, which is very different from the directions
which one possessed with the present, view that the Church of Rome has of this
matter must needs have give^.

V. There are some things very expressly taught in the N. Testament, such as the
rules of a Good Life, the Use of the Sacraments, the addressing our selves to
God for Mercy and Grace, through the Sacrifice that Christ offered for us on the
Cross, and the Worshipping him as God, the Death, Resurrection and Ascension of
Jesus Christ, the Resurrection of our Bodies and Life Everlasting: by which it
is apparent, that we are set beyond doubt in those matters; if then there are
other passages more obscure concerning other matters, we must Conclude, that
these are not of that Consequence, otherwise they would have been as plainly
revealed as the others are; but above all, if the Authority of the Church is
delivered to us in disputable terms, that is a just prejudice against it, since
it is a thing of such Consequence, that it ought to have been revealed in a way
so very clear and past all dispute.

VI. If it is a presumption for particular persons to judge concerning
Religion, which must be still referred to the Priests and other Guides in
sacred matters; this is a good Argument to oblige all Nations to continue in
the Established Religion, whatever it may happen to be; and above all others,
it was a convincing Argument in the mouths of the Jews against our Savior. He
pretended to be the Messiah, and proved it both by the prophesies that were
accomplished in him, and by the Miracles that he wrought: as for the
Prophesies, the Reasons urged by the Church of Rome will conclude much
stronger, that such dark Passages as those of the Prophets were, ought not to
be interpreted by Particular persons, but that the Exposition of these must be
referred to the Priests and Sanhedrin, it being expressly provided in their law
( Deuteronomy. 17.8.) That when controversies arose, concerning any cause that was too
intricate, they were to go to the place which God should choose, and to the
Priests of the tribe of Levi, and to the judge in those days, and that they
were to declare what was right, and to their decision all were obliged to
submit, under pain of death: so that by this it appears, that the Priests in
the Jewish Religion were authorized in so extraordinary a manner, that I dare
say the Church of Rome would not wish for a more formal testimony on her
behalf: As for our Saviors Miracles, these were not sufficient neither, unless
his doctrine was first found to be good: since Moses had expressly warned the
people ( Deuteronomy. 13.1.) That if a Prophet came and taught them to follow after
other Gods, they were not to obey him, tho he wrought miracles to prove his
Mission, but were to put him to death: So a Jew saying, that Christ, by making
himself one with his father, brought in the wors^hip of another God, might well
pretend that he was not obliged to yield to the authority of our Saviors
Miracles, without taking cognizance of his doctrine, and of the Prophesies
concerning the Messiah, and in a word, of the whole matter. So that, if these
Reasonings are now good against the Reformation, they were as strong in the
mouths of the Jews against our Savior: and from hence we see, that the
authority that seems to be given by Moses to the Priests, must be understood
with some Restrictions; since we not only find the Prophets, and Jeremy in
particular, opposing themselves to the whole body of them, but we see likewise,
that for some considerable time before our Savior's days, not only many
ill-grounded traditions had got in among them, by which the vigor of the moral
law was much enervated, but likewise they were also universally possessed with
a false notion of their Messiah; so that even the Apostles themselves had not
quite shaken off those Prejudices at the time of our Savior's Ascension. So
that* here a Church, that was still the Church of God, that had the appointed
means of the Expiation of their sins, by their Sacrifices and Washings, as well
as by their Circumcision, was yet under great and fatal Errors, from which
particular persons had no way to extricate themselves, but by examining the
Doctrine and texts of Scripture, and by judging of them according to the
Evidence of Truth, and the force and freedom of their Faculties.

VII. It seems Evident, that the passage [ Tell the Church] belongs only to the
Reconciling of Differences: that of [ Binding and of Loosing,] according to the
use of those terms among the Jews, signifies only an Authority that was given
to the Apostles, of giving Precepts, by which men were to be obliged to such
Duties, or set at liberty from them: and [ the gates of Hell not prevailing
against the Church] signifys only, that the Christian Religion was never to
come to an end, or to perish: and that of [ Christ's being with the Apostles to
the end of the world] imports only a special Conduct and Protection which the
Church may always expect, but as the promise, I will not leave thee nor
forsake thee; that belongs to every Christian, does not import an
infallibility: no more does the other: And for those passages concerning [ the
spirit of God that searches all things] it is plain, that in them St. Paul is
treating of the Divine inspiration, by which the Christian Religion was then
opened to the world; which he sets in opposition to the wisdom or Philosophy of
the Greeks; so that as all those passages come far short of proving that for
which they are alleged, it must at least be acknowledged, that they have not
an evidence great enough to prove so important a truth, as some would evince by
them; since it is a matter of such vast consequence, that the proofs for it must
have an undeniable Evidence.

VIII. In the matters of Religion two things are to be considered, first, the
account that we must give to God, and the Rewards that we expect from him: and
in this every man must answer for the sincerity of his heart, in examining
divine Matters, and the following what (upon the best enquiries that one could
make) appeared to be true: and with relation to this, there is no need of a
Judge* for in that Great Day every one must answer to God according to the
talents thar he had, and all will be saved according to their ^incerity; and
with relation to that judgment, there is no need of any other judge but God. A
Second view of Religion, is as it is a Body united together, and by consequence
brought under some regulation: and as in all States, there are subalterne
Judges, in whose decisions all must at least acquiesce, tho they are not
infallible, there being still a sort of an appeal to be made to the sovereign
or the supreme legsliative Body; so the Church has a Subalterne Jurisdiction:
but as the Authority of Inferior Judges is still regulated, and none but the
Legislators themselves have an Authority equal to the Law; So it is not
necessary for the preservation of Peace and Order, that the Decisions of the
Church should be infallible, or of equal Authority with the Scriptures. If
Judges do so manifestly abuse their Authority, that they fall into Rebellion
and Treason, the subjects are no more bound to consider them; but are obliged
to resist them, and to maintain their obedience to their Sovereign; though in
other matters their Judgment must take place, till they are reversed by the
Sovereign. The case of Religion being then this, That Jesus Christ is the
Sovereign of the Church; the Assembly of the Pastors is only a subalterne
Judge: if they manifestly oppose themselves to the Scriptures, which is the Law
of Christians, particular persons may be supposed as competent Judges of that,
as in Civil Matters they may be of the Rebellion of the Judges, and in that
case they are bound still to mantain their Obedience to Jesus Christ. In
matters Indifferent, Christians are bound, for the Preservation of Peace and
Unity, to acquiesce in the Decisions of the Church, and in matters justly
doubtful, or of small Consequence, tho they are convinced that the Pastors have
erred, yet they are obliged to be silent, and to bear tolerable things, rather
than make a Breach: but if it is visible, that the Pastors do Rebel against the
Sovereign of the Church, I mean Christ, the People may put in their Appeal to
that great Judge, and there it must lie. If the Church did use this Authority
with due Discretion, and the People followed the rules that I have named with
humility and modesty, there would be no great danger of many Divisions; but
this is the great Secret of the Providence of God, that men are still men, and
both Pastors and People mix their Passions and Interests so with matters of
Religion, that as there is a great deal of Sin and Vice still in the World, so
that appears in the Matters of Religion as well as in other things: but the ill
Consequences of this, tho they are bad enough, yet are not equal to the Effects
that Ignorant Superstition, and Obedient zeal have produced in the World,
Witness the Rebellions and Wars for establishing the Worship of Images; the
Croissades against the Saracens, in which many Millions were lost; those
against Heretics, and Princes deposed by Popes, which lasted for some Ages;
and the Massacre of Paris, with the Butcheries of the Duke of Alva in the last
Age, and that of Ireland in this: which are, I suppose, far greater Mischiefs
than any that can be imagined to arise out of a Small Diversity of Opinions:
and the present State of this Church, notwithstanding all those unhappy Rents
that are in it, is a much more desirable thing, than the gross Ignorance and
blind Superstition that reigns in Italy and Spain at this day.

IX. All these reasonings concerning the Infallibility of the Church signify
nothing, unless we can certainly know, whither we must go for this Decision:
for while one Party shows us, that it Must be in the Pope, or is no where, and
another Party says it Cannot be in the Pope, because as many Popes have erred,
so this is a Doctrine that was not known in the Church for a thousand Years,
and that has been disputed ever since it was first asserted, we are in the
right to believe both sides; first, that if it is not in the Pope, it is no
where; and then, that certainly it is not in the Pope; and it is very
Incongruous to say, that there is an Infallible Authority in the Church, and
that yet it is not certain where one must seek for it; for the one ought to be
as clear as the other; and it is also plain, that what Primacy so ever St.
Peter may be supposed to have had, the Scripture says not one word of his
Successors at Rome; so at least this is not so clear, as a matter of this
Consequence must have been, if Christ had intended to have lodged such an
Authority in that See.

X. It is no less Incongruous to say, that this Infallibility is in a General
Council: for it must be somewhere else, otherwise it will return only to the
Church by some Starts, and after long Intervals: and as it was not in the
Church, for the first 320 years, so it has not been in the Church these last
120* years. It is plain also, that there is no Regulation given in the
Scriptures, concerning this great Assembly, who have a right to come and Vote,
and what forfeits this right, and what numbers must concur in a Decision, to
assure us of the Infallibility of the Judgment. It is certain, there was never
a General Council of all the Pastors of the Church: for those of which we have
the Acts, were only the Councils of the Roman Empire, but for those Churches
that were in the South of Africa, or the Eastern Parts of Asia* beyond the
bounds of the Roman Empire, as they could not be summoned by the Emperors
Authority, so it is certain none of them were present: unless one or two of
Persia at Nice, which perhaps was a Corner of Persia belonging to the Empire;
and unless it can be proved, that the Pope has an Absolute Authority to cut off
whole Churches from their right of coming to Councils, there has been no
General Council these last 700. years in the World, ever since the Bishops of
Rome have excommunicated all the Greek Churches upon such trifling reasons,
that their own Writers are now ashamed of them; and I will ask no more of a Man
of a Competent understanding, to satisfy him that the Council of Trent was no
General Council, acting in that Freedom that became Bishops, than that he will
be at the pains to read Card. Pallavicins History of that Council.

XI. If it is said, that this Infallibility is to be sought for in the
Tradition of the Doctrine in all Ages, and that every particular Person must
examine this: here is a Sea before him, and instead of examining the small Book
of the N. Testament, he is involved in a study that must cost a Man an Age to
go through it; and many of the Ages, through which he caries this Enquiry, are so
dark, and have produced so few Writers, at least so few are preserved to our
days, that it is not possible to (...) out their belief. We find also
Traditions have varied so much that it is hard to say that there is much weight
to be laid on this way of Conveyance. A Tradition concerning Matters of Fact
that all People see, is less apt to fail than a Tradition of Points of
Speculation: and yet we see very near the Age of the Apostles, contrary
Traditions touching the Observation of Easter, from which we must conclude,
that either the Matter of Fact of one side, or the other, as it was handed
down, was not true, or at least that it was not rightly understood. A Tradition
concerning the Use of the Sacraments being a visible thing, is more likely to
be exact, than a Speculation concerning their nature; and yet we find a
Tradition of giving Infants the Communion, grounded on the indispensible
necessity of the Sacrament, continued a thousand Years in the Church. A
Tradition on which the Christians founded their Joy and Hope, is less like to
be changed, than a more remote Speculation, and yet the first Writers of the
Christian Religion had a Tradition handed down to them by those who saw the
Apostles, of the Reign of Christ for a thousand Years upon Earth; and if those
who had Matters at second hand from the Apostles, could be thus mistaken, it is
more reasonable to apprehend greater errors at such a distance. A Tradition
concerning the Book of the Scriptures is more like to be exact, than the
Exposition of some passages in it; and yet we find the Church did unanimously
believe the Translation of the 70. Interpreters to have been the effect of a
miraculous Inspiration, till St. Jerome examined this Matter better, and made a
New Translation from the Hebrew Copies. But which is more then all the rest, It
seems plain, that the Fathers before the Council of Nice believed the Divinity
of the Son of God to be in some sort Inferior to that of the Father, and for
some Ages after the Council of Nice, they believed them indeed both equal, but
they considered these as two different Beings, and only one in Essence, as,
three men have the same humane Nature in common among them; and that as one
Candle lights another, so the one flowed from another; and after the fifth
Century the Doctrine of one Individual Essence was received. If you will be
farther informed concerning this, Father Petau will satisfy you as to the first
Period before the Council of Nice, and the learned Dr. Cudmorth as to the
second. In all which particulars it appears, how variable a thing Tradition is.
And upon the whole Matter, the examining Tradition thus, is still a searching
among Books, and here is no living Judge.

XII. If then the Authority that must decide Controversies, lies in the Body of
the Pastors scattered over the World, which is the last retrenchment, here as
many and as great Scruples will arise, as we found in any of the former Heads.
Two difficulties appear at first view, the one is, How can we be assured that
the present Pastors of the Church are derived in a just Succession from the
Apostles: there are no Registers extant that prove this: So that we have
nothing for it but some Histories, that are so carelessly writ, that we find
many mistakes in them in other Matters; and they are so different in the very
first links of that Chain, that immediately succeeded the Apostles, that the
utmost can be made of this is, that here is a Historical Relation somewhat
doubtful; but here is nothing to found our Faith on: so that if a Succession
from the Apostles times, is necessary to the Constitution of that Church, to
which we must submit our selves, we know not where to find it: besides that,
the Doctrine of the necessity of the Intention of the Minister to the Validity
of a Sacrament, throws us into inextricable difficulties. I know they generally
say, that by the Intention they do not mean the inward Acts of the Minister of
the Sacrament, but only that it must appear by his outward deportment, that he
is in earnest going about a Sacrament, and not doing a thing in jest; and this
appeared so reasonable to me, that I was sorry to find our Divines urge it too
much: till turning over the Rubricks that are at the beginning of the Missal, I
found upon the head of the Intention of the Minister, that if a Priest has a
Number of Hoslies before him to be consecrated, and intends to consecrate them
all, except one, in that case that Vagrant exception falls upon them all: it
not being affixed to any one, and it is defined that he consecrates none at
all. Here it is plain, that the secret Acts of a Priest can defeat the
Sacrament* so that this overthrows all certainty concerning a Succession: But
besides all this, we are sure, that the Greek Churches have a much more
uncontested Succession than the Latins: So that a Succession cannot direct us.
And if it is necessary to seek out the Doctrines that are universally received,
this is not possible for a private Man to know. So that in Ignorant Countries,
where there is little Study, the People have no other certainty concerning
their Religion, but what they take from their Curate and Confessor: since they
cannot examine what is generally received. So that it must be confessed that
all the Arguments that are brought for the necessity of a constant infallible
Judge, turn against all those of the Church of Rome, that do not acknowledge
the Infallibility of the Pope: for if he is not Infallible, they have no other
Judge, that can pretend to it. It were also easy to show, that some Doctrines
have been as Universally received in some Ages, as they have been rejected in
others which shows, that the Doctrine of the present Church is not always a
sure measure. For five Ages together, the Doctrine of the Popes Power to depose
Heretical Princes was received without the least Opposition: and this cannot be
doubted by any that knows what has been the State of the Church since the End
of the eleventh Century: and yet I believe, few Princes would allow this,
notwithstanding all the concurring Authority of so many Ages to fortify it. I
could carry this into a great many other Instances, but I single out this,
because it is a point in which Princes are naturally extreme sensible.

Upon the whole Matter, it can never enter into my mind, that God, who has made
Man a Creature, that naturally enquires and reasons, and that feels as sensible
a pleasure when he can give himself a good account of his actions, as one that
sees, does perceive in comparison to a blind man that is led about; and that
this God, that has also made Religion on design to perfect this humane Nature,
and to raise it to the utmost height to which it can arrive, has contrived it
to be dark, and to be so much beyond the penetration of our Faculties, that we
cannot find out his mind in those things that are necessary for our Salvation:
and that the Scriptures, that were writ by plain men, in a very familiar style,
and addressed without any discrimination to the Vulgar, should become such an
unintelligible Book in these Ages, that we must have an Infallible Judge to
expound it: and when I see not only Popes, but even some Bodies that pass for
General Councils, have so expounded many passages of it, and have wrested them
so visibly, that none of the Modern Writers of that Church pretend to excuse
it, I say I must freely own to you, that when I find I need a Commentary on
dark passages, these will be the last persons to whom I will address my self
for it. Thus you see how fully I have opened my mind to you in this matter; I
have gone over a great deal of ground in as few Words as is possible, because
hints I know are enough for you; I thank God, these Considerations do fully
satisfy me, and I will be infinitely joyed, if they have the same effect on you.

I am yours.

THis Letter came to London with the return of the first Post after his late
Majesty's Papers were sent into the Country; some that saw it, liked it well,
and wished to have it public, and the rather, because the Writer did not so
entirely consine himself to the Reasons that were in those Papers, but took the
whole Controversy to task in a little compass, and yet with a great variety of
Reflections. And this way of examining the whole Matter, without following
those Papers word for word, or the finding more fault than the common concern
of this Cause required, seemed more aggreeing to the respect that is due to the
Dead, and more particularly to the Memory of so great a Prince; but other
Considerations made it not so easy nor so advisable to procure a License for
the Printing this Letter, it has been kept in private hands till now: those who
have boasted much of the Shortness of the late Kings Papers, and of the length
of the Answers that have been made to them, will not find so great a
disproportion between them and this Answer to them.

FINIS.
REASONS Against the Repealing the ACTS of PARLIAMENT Concerning the TEST.

Humbly offered to the Consideration of the Members of both Houses, at their
next Meeting On the 28th of April 1687.

Printed in the Year 1687.

REASONS against the Repealing the Acts of Parliament concerning the TEST.
Humbly offered to the consideration of the Members of both Houses, at their
next Meeting on the 28th of April 1687.
I IF the just apprehensions of the Danger of Popery gave the Birth to the two
Laws for the two Tests, the one with relation to all public Emploiments in 73.
and the other with relation to the Constitution of our Parliaments for the
future in 78. the present time and conjuncture does not seem so proper for
repealing them; unless it can be imagined, that the danger of Popery is now so
much less than it was formerly, that we need be no more on our guard against
it. We had a King, when these Laws were enacted, who as he declared himself to
be of the Church of England, by receiving the Sacrament four times a year in
it, so in all his Speeches to his Parliaments, and in all his Declarations to
his Subjects, he repeated the assurances of his firmness to the Protestant
Religion so solemnly and frequently, that if the saying a thing often gives
just reason to believe it, we had as much reason as ever People had to depend
upon him: and yet for all that, it was thought necessary to fortify those
assurances with Laws: and it is not easy to imagine, why we should throw away
those, when we have a Prince that is not only of another Religion himself, but
that has expressed so much steadiness in it, and so much zeal for it, that one
would think we should rather now seek a further security, than throw away that
which we already have.

II. Our King has given such Testimonies of his Zeal for his Religion, that we
see among all his other Royal Qualities, there is none for which he desires and
deserves to be so much admired. Since even the passion of Glory, of making
himself the terror of all Europe, and the Arbiter of Christendom, (which as it
is natural to all Princes, so must it be most particularly so to one of his
Martial and Noble Temper) yields to his Zeal for his Church; and that he, in
whom we might have hoped to see our Edward the third, or our Henry the 5th
revived, chooses rather to merit the heightning his degree of Glory in another
World, than to acquire all the Laurels and Conquests that this low and vile
World can give him: and that, instead of making himself a terror to all his
Neighbors, he is contented with the humble Glory of being a terror to his own
People; so that instead of the great Figure, which this Reign might make in the
World, all the news of England is now only concerning the practices on some
fearful Mercenaries. These things show, that His Majesty is so possessed with
his Religion, that this cannot suffer us to think, that there is at present no
danger from Popery.

III. It does not appear, by what we see, either abroad or at home, that Popery
has so changed its nature, that we have less reason to be afraid of it at
present, than we had in former times. It might be thought ill nature to go so
far back, as to the Councils of the Lateran, that decreed the extirpation of
Heretics, with severe Sanctions on those Princes that failed in their Duty, of
being the Hangmen of the Inquisitors; or to the Council of Constance, that
decreed, that Princes were not bound to keep their faith to Heretics; tho it
must be acknowledged, that we have extraordinary Memories if we can forget such
things, and more extraordinary Understandings if we do not make some inferences
from them. I will not stand upon such inconsiderable Trifles as the Gunpowder
Plot, or the Massacre of Ireland; but I will take the liberty to reflect a
little on what that Church has done since those Laws were made, to give us
kinder and softer thoughts of them, and to make us the less apprehensive of
them. We see before our eyes what they have done, and are still doing in
France; and what feeble things Edicts, Coronation Oaths, Laws and Promises,
repeated over and over again, prove to be, where that Religion prevails; and
Louis le Grand makes not so contemptible a Figure in that Church, or in our
Court, as to make us think, that his example may not be proposed as a Pattern,
as well as his aid may be offered for an encouragement, to act the same things
in England, that he is now doing with so much applause in France: and it may be
perhaps the rather desired from hence to put him a little in countenance, when
so great a King as ours is willing to forget himself so far as to copy after
him, and to depend upon him: so that as the Doctrine and Principles of that
Church must be still the same in all Ages and Places, since its chief
pretension is, that it is infallible, it is no unreasonable thing for us to be
afraid of those, who will be easily induced to burn us a little here, when they
are told, that such fervent zeal will save them a more lasting burning
hereafter, and will perhaps quit all scores so entirely, that they may hope
scarce to endure a Singing in Purgatory for all their other Sins.

IV. If the severest Order of the Church of Rome, that has breathed out nothing
but Fire and Blood since its first formation, and that is even decryed at Rome
it self for its Violence, is in such credit here; I do not see any enducement
from thence to persuade us to look on the Councils that are directed by that
Society, as such harmless and inoffensive things, that we need be no more on
our guard against them. I know not why we may not apprehend as much from Father
Petre, as the French have felt from Pere de la Chaise, since all the difference
that is observed to be between them, is, that the English Jesuit has much more
Fire and Passion, and much less Conduct and Judgment than the French has. And
when Rome has expressed so great a Jealousy of the Interest that that Order had
in our Councils, that F. Morgan, who was thought to influence our Ambassador,
was ordered to leave Rome, I do not see why England should look so tamely on
them. No reason can be given why Card. Howard should be shut out of all their
Councils, unless it be, that the Nobleness of his Birth, and the Gentleness of
his Temper, are too hard even for his Religion and his Purple, to be mastered
by them. And it is a Contradiction, that nothing but a Belief capable of
receiving Transubstantiation can reconcile, to see Men pretend to observe Law,
and yet to find at the same time an Ambassador from England at Rome, when
there are so many Laws in our Book of Statutes, never yet repealed, that have
declared over and over again all Commerce with the Court and See of Rome to be
high Treason.

V. The late famous Judgment of our Judges, who knowing no other way to make
their Names immortal, have found an effectual one to preserve them from being
ever forgot, seems to call for another Method of Proceeding. The President they
have set must be fatal either to them or us. For if 12 Men, that get into
Scarlet and Furrs, have an Authority to dissolve all our Laws, the English
Government is to be hereafter looked at with as much scorn, as it has hitherto
drawn admiration. That doubtful Words of Laws, made so long ago, that the
intention of the Lawgivers is not certainly known, must be expounded by the
Judges, is not to be questioned: but to infer from thence, that the plain
Words of a Law, so lately made, and that was so vigorously asserted by the
present Parliament, may be made void by a Decision of theirs, after so much
Practice upon them, is just as reasonable a way of arguing, as theirs is, who
because the Church of England acknowledges, that the Church has a Power in
Matters of Rites and Ceremonies, will from thence conclude, that this Power
must go so far, that tho Christ has said of the Cup, drink ye all of it, we
must obey the Church when she decrees, that we shall not drink of it. Our
Judges, for the greater part, were Men that had past their Lives in so much
Retirement, that from thence one might have hoped, that they had studied our
Law well, since the Bar had called them so seldom from their Studies: and if
Practice is thought often hurtful to speculation, as that which disorders and
hurries the Judgment, they who had practiced so little in our Law, had no bias
on their Understandings: and if the habit of taking Money as a Lawyer is a
dangerous preparation for one that is to be an incorrupt Judge, they should
have been incorruptible, since it is not thought, that the greater part of them
got ever so much Money by their Profession, as paid for their Furrs. In short,
we now see how they have merited their Preferment, and they may yet expect a
further Exaltation, when the Justice and the Laws of England come to be in
hands, that will be as careful to preserve them, as they have been to destroy
them. But what an Infamy will it lay upon the Name of an English Parliament, if
instead of calling those Betrayers of their Country to an account, they should
go by an after-game to confirm what these Fellows have done.

VI. The late Conferences with so many Members of both Houses, will give such
an ill-natured piece of Jealousy against them, that of all Persons living, that
are the most concerned to take care how they give their Votes, the World will
believe, that Threatenings and Promises had as large a share in those secret
Conversations, as Reasoning or Persuasion: and it must be a more than ordinary
degree of Zeal and Courage in them, that must take off the Blot, of being sent
for, and spoke to, on such a subject and in such a manner. The worthy Behavior
of the Members in the last Session, had made the Nation unwilling to remember
the Errors committed in the first Election: and it is to be hoped, that they
will not give any cause for the future to call that to mind* For if a
Parliament, that had so many Flaws in its first Conception, goes to repeal
Laws, that we are sure were made by Legal Parliaments, it will put the Nation
on an Enquiry that nothing but necessity will drive them to. For a Nation may
be laid asleep, and be a little cheated; but when it is awakned, and sees its
danger, it will not look on and see a Rape made on its Religion and Liberties,
without examining, from whence have these Men this Authority? they will hardly
find that it is of Men; and they will not believe that it is of God. But it is
to be hoped, that there will be no occasion given for this angry question which
is much easier made than answered.

VII. If all that were now asked in favor of Popery, were only some Gentleness
toward the Papists; there were some reason to entertain the Debate, when the
Demand were a little more modest: If Men were to be attainted of Treason, for
being reconciled to the Church of Rome, or for reconciling others to it; if
Priests were demanded to be hanged, for taking Orders in the Church of Rome;
and if the two thirds of the Papists Estates were offered to be levied, it were
a very natural thing to see them uneasy and restless: but now the matter is
more barefaced; they are not contented to live at ease, and enjoy their
Estates; but they must carry all before them: and F. Petre cannot be at quiet,
unless he makes as great a Figure in our Court, as Pere de la Chaise does at
Versailles.

A Cessation of all Severities against them, is that to which the Nation would
more easily submit; but it is their Behavior that must create them the
continuance of the like Compassion in another Reign. If a restless and a
persecuting Spirit were not inherent in that Order, that has now the Ascendant,
they would have behaved themselves so decently under their present Advantages,
as to have made our Divines, that have charged them so heavily, look a little
out of countenance: and this would have wrought more on the good Nature of the
Nation, and the Princely Nobleness of the Successors whom we have in view, than
those Arts of Craft and Violence, to which we see their Tempers carry them even
so early, before it is yet time to show themselves. The Temper of the English
Nation, the Heroical Virtues of those whom we have in our Eyes, but above all,
our most holy Religion, which instead of Revenge and Cruelty, inspires us with
Charity and Mercy, even for Enemies, are all such things, as may take from the
Gentlemen of that Religion all sad apprehensions, unless they raise a Storm
against themselves, and provoke the Justice of the Nation to such a degree,
that the Successors may find it necessary to be just, even when their own
Inclinations would rather carry them to show Mercy. In short, they need fear
nothing but what they create to themselves: so that all this stir that they
keep for their own Safety, looks too like the securing to themselves Pardons
for the Crimes that they intend to commit.

VIII. I know it is objected as no small prejudice against these Laws, that the
very making of them discovered a particular Malignity against His Majesty, and
therefore it is ill Manners to speak for them. The first had perhaps an Eye at
his being then Admiral: and the last was possibly levelled at him: tho when
that was discovered, he was excepted out of it by a special Proviso. And as for
that which past in 73, I hope it is not forgot, that it was enacted by that
Loyal Parliament, that had settled both the Prerogative of the Crown and the
Rites of the Church, and that had given the King more Money than all the
Parliaments of England had ever done in all former Times. A Parliament that had
indeed some Disputes with the King, but upon the first step that he made with
relation to Religion or Safety, they showed how ready they were to forget all
that was past: as appeared by their Behavior after the Triple Alliance. And in
73, tho they had great cause given them to dislike the Dutch war, especially
the strange beginning of it upon the Smirna Fleet: and the stopping the
Exchequer, the Declaration for Toleration, and the writs for the Members of the
House, were Matters of hard Digestion; yet no sooner did the King give them
this new Assurance for their Religion then, tho they had very great Reasons
given them to be jealous of the war, yet since the King was engaged, they gave
him 1200000 Pounds for carrying it on; and they thought they had no ill
Penniworths for their Money, when they carried home with them to their
Countries this new Security for their Religion, which we are desired now to
throw up, and which the Reverend Judges have already thrown out, as a Law out
of date. If this had carried in it any new piece of Severity, their Complaints
might be just; but they are extreme tender, if they are so uneasy under a Law
that only gives them Leisure and Opportunities to live at home. And the last
Test, which was intended only for shutting them out from a share in the
Legislative Body, appears to be so just, that one is rather amassed to find that
it was so long a doing, than that it was done at last: and since it is done, it
is a great presumption on our Understandings to think, that we should be
willing to part with it. If it was not sooner done, it was because there was
not such cause given for Jealousy to work upon: but what has appeared since
that time, and what has been printed in his late Majesty's name, shows the
World now, that the Iealousies which occasioned those Laws, were not so ill
grounded, as some well meaning Men perhaps then believed them to be. But there
are some times in which all Men's Eyes come to be opened.

IX. I am told, some think it is very indecent to have a Test for our
Parliaments, in which the King's Religion is accused of Idolatry; but if this
reason is good in this particular, it will be full as good against several of
the Articles of our Church, and many of the Homilies. If the Church and
Religion of this Nation is so formed by Law, that the King's Religion is
declared over and over again to be Idolatrous, what help is there for it? It is
no other, than it was when His Majesty was Crowned, and Swore to maintain our
Laws.

I hope none will be wanting in all possible respect to his sacred Person; and
as we ought to be infinitely sorry to find him engaged in a Religion, which we
must believe Idolatrous, so we are far from the ill manners of reflecting on
his Person, or calling him an Idolater: for as every Man that reports a Lie, is
not for that to be called a Liar; so tho the ordering the Intention, and the
prejudice of a mispersuasion are such abatements, that we will not rashly take
on us to call every Man of the Church of Rome an Idolater; yet on the other
hand, we can never lay down our Charge against the Church of Rome as guilty of
Idolatry, unless at the same time we part with our Religion.

X. Others give us a strange sort of Argument, to persuade us to part with the
Test; they say, the King must employ his Popish Subjects, for he can trust no
other; and he is so assured of their Fidelity to him, that we need apprehend no
Danger from them. This is an odd Method to work on us, to let in a sort of
People to the Parliament and Government, since the King cannot trust us, but
will depend on them: so that as soon as this Law is repealed, they must have
all the Employments, and have the whole power of the Nation lodged in their
hands; this seems a little too gross to impose, even on Irishmen. The King saw
for many Years together, with how much Zeal both the Clergy, and many of the
Gentry appeared for his Interests; and if there is now a Melancholy Damp on
their Spirits, the King can dissipate it when he will; and as the Church of
England is a Body that will never rebel against him, so any Sullenness, under
which the late Administration of Affairs has brought them, would soon vanish,
if the King would be pleased to remember a little what he has so often
promised, not only in Public but in Private; and would be contented with the
Exercise of his own Religion, without imbroiling his whole Affairs, because F.
Petre will have it so: and it tempts Englishmen to more than ordinary degrees
of Rage, against a sort of Men, who it seems, can infuse in a Prince, born with
the highest sense of Honor possible, Projects, to which without doing some
Violence to his own Royal Nature, he could not so much as hearken to, if his
Religion did not so fatally mufle him up in a blind Obedience. But if we are so
unhappy, that Priests can so disguise Matters, as to mislead a Prince, who
without their ill Influences would be the most Glorious Monarch of all Europe,
and would soon reduce the Grand Louis to a much humbler figure; yet it is not
to be so much as imagined, that ever their Arts can be so unhappily successful,
as to impose on an English Parliament, composed of Protestant Members.

FINIS.
SOME REFLECTIONS On his Majesty's PROCLAMATION Of the 12th of February 1686/7
for a Toleration in Scotland, together with the said Proclamation.
I. THe Preamble of a Proclamation, is often writ in have, and is the flourish of
some wanton Pen: but one of such an Extraordinary nature as this is, was
probably more severely examined; there is a new designation of his Majesty's
Authority here set forth of his Absolute Power, which is so often repeated,
that it deserves to be a little searched into. Prerogative Royal, and Sovereign
Authority, are Terms already received and known; but for this Absolute Power,
as it is a new Term, so those who have coined it, may make it signify what they
will. The Roman Law speaks of Princeps Legibus solutus, and Absolute in its
natural signification, importing the being without all Ties and Restraints;
then the true meaning of this seems to be, that there is an Inherent Power in
the King, which can neither be restrained by Laws, Promises, nor Oaths; for
nothing less than the being free from all these, renders a Power Absolute.

II. If the former Term seemed to stretch our Allegiance, that which comes
after it, is yet a step of another nature, tho one can hardly imagine what can
go beyond Absolute Power; and it is in these Words, Which all our Subjects are
to obey without reserve. And this is the carrying obedience many sises beyond
what the Grand Seigneur has ever yet claimed: For all Princes, even the most
Violent pretenders to Absolute Power, till Lewis the Great's time, have thought
it enough to oblige their Subjects to submit to their Power, and to bear
whatsoever they thought good to impose upon them; but till the Days of the late
Conversions by the Dragoons, it was never so much as pretended, that Subjects
were bound to obey their Prince without Reserve, and to be of his Religion,
because he would have it so. Which was the only Argument that those late
Apostles made use of; so it is probable this qualification of the duty of
Subjects was put in here, to prepare us for a terrible le Roy le veut; and in
that case we are told here, that we must obey without reserve; and when those
severe Orders come, the Privy Council, and all such as execute this
Proclamation, will be bound by this Declaration to show themselves more forward
than any others, to obey without reserve: and those poor pretensions of
Conscience, Religion, Honor, and Reason, will be then reckoned as reserves
upon their obedience, which are all now shut out.

III. These being the grounds upon which this Proclamation is founded, we ought
not only to consider what consequences are now drawn from them, but what may be
drawn from them at any time hereafter; for if they are of force, to justify
that which is now inferred from them, it will be full as just to draw from the
same premises an Abolition of the Protestant Religion, of the Rights of the
Subjects, not only to Church Lands, but to all Property whatsoever. In a word,
it asserts a Power to be in the King, to command what he will, and an
Obligation in the Subjects, to obey whatsoever he shall command.

IV. There is also mention made in the Preamble of the Christian Love and
Charity, which his Majesty would have established among Neighbors; but another
dash of a Pen, founded on this Absolute Power, may declare us all Heretics;
and then in wonderful Charity to us, we must be told, that we are either to
obey without Reserve, or to be Burnt without Reserve. We know the Charity of
that Church pretty well: It is indeed Fervent and Burning: and if we have
forgot what has been done in former Ages, France, Savoy, and Hungary, have set
before our eyes very fresh instances of the Charity of that Religion: While
those Examples are so green, it is a little too imposing on us, to talk to us
of Christian Love and Charity. No doubt his Majesty means sincerely, and his
Exactness to all his Promises, chiefly to those made since he came to the
Crown, will not suffer us to think an unbecoming thought of his Royal
Intentions; but yet after all, tho it seems by this Proclamation, that we are
bound to obey without Reserve, it is hardship upon hardship to be bound to
Believe without Reserve.

V. There are a sort of People here tolerated, that will be very hardly found
out: and these are the Moderate Presbyterians: Now, as some say, that there are
very few of those People in Scotland that deserve this Character, so it is hard
to tell what it amounts to; and the calling any of them Immoderate, cuts off
all their share in this Grace. Moderation is a quality that lies in the mind,
and how this will be found out, I cannot so readily guess. If a Standard had
been given of Opinions or Practices, then one could have known how this might
have been distinguished; but as it lies, it will not be easy to make the
Discrimination; and the declaring them all Immoderate, shuts them out quite.

VI. Another Foundation laid down for repealing all Laws made against the
Papists, is, that they were enacted in K. James the Sixth's Minority: with some
harsh expressions, that are not to be insisted on, since they show more the
heat of the penner, than the Dignity of the Prince, in whose name they are
given out; but all these Laws were ratifyed over and over again by K* James,
when he came to be of full Age: and they have received many Confirmations by K.
Charles the First, and K Charles the Second, as well as by his present Majesty,
both when he represented his Brother in the year 1681. and since he himself
came to the Crown: so that whatsoever may be said concerning the first
Formation of those Laws, they have received now for the course of a whole
hundred years, that are lapsed since K. James was of full Age, so many
Confirmations, that if there is any thing certain in Humane Government, we
might depend upon them; but this new coined Absolute Power must carry all
before it.

VII. It is also well known, that the whole Settlement of the Church Lands and
Tithes, with many other things, and more particularly the Establishment of the
Protestant Religion, was likewise enacted in K. James's minority, as well as
those Penal Laws: so that the Reason now made use of, to annul the Penal Laws,
will serve full as well, for another Act of this Absolute Power, that shall
abolish all those; and if Maxims that unhinge all the Securities of Humane
Society, and all that is sacred in Government, ought to be looked on with the
justest and deepest prejudices possible, one is tempted to lose the respect
that is due to every thing that carrys a Royal stamp upon it, when he sees such
grounds made use of, as must shake all Settlements whatsoever; for if a
prescription of 120. years, and Confirmations reiterated over and over again
these 100. years past, do not purge some Defects in the first Formation of
those Laws, what can make us secure: but this looks so like a Fetch of the
French Prerogative Law, both in their processes with Relation to the Edict of
Nantes, and those concerning Dependences at Mets, that this seems to be a Copy
from that famous Original.

VIII. It were too much ill nature to look into the History of the last Age, to
examine on what grounds those characters of pious and blessed given to the
Memory of Q. Mary are built; but since K. James's Memory has the character of
glorious given to it, if the civility due to the fair sex makes one unwilling
to look into the one, yet the other may be a little dwelt on. The peculiar
Glory that belongs to K. James's Memory, is, that he was a Prince of great
Learning, and that he employed it chiefly in writing for his Religion: of the
Volume in folio, in which we have his works, two thirds are against the Church
of Rome; one part of them is a Commentary on the Revelation, proving that the
Pope is Antichrist; another part of them belonged more naturally to his Post
and Dignity; which is the warning that he gave to all the Princes and states of
Europe, against the Treasonable and bloody Doctrines of the Papacy. The first
Act he did when he came of Age, was to swear in person with all his family, and
afterward with all his people of Scotland, a Covenant, containing an
Enumeration of all the points of Popery, and a most solemn renunciation of
them, somewhat like our Parliament Test: his first Speech to the Parliament of
England was Copious on the same subject: and he left a Legacy of a Wish on such
of his posterity as should go over to that Religion, which in good manners is
suppressed. It is known, K. James was no Conqueror, and that he made more use
of his Pen than his Sword: so the Glory that is peculiar to his Memory must
fall chiefly on his Learned and Immortal Writings: and since there is such a
Veneration expressed for him, it agrees not ill with this, to wish, that his
Works were more studied by those who offer such Incense to his Glorious Memory.

IX. His Maj. assures his people of Scotland, upon his certain knowledge and
long Experience, that the Catholics, as they are good Christians, so they are
likewise Dutiful subjects: but if we must believe both these equally, then we
must conclude severely against their being Good Christians; for we are sure
they can never be Good Subjects, not only to a Heretical Prince, but even to a
Catholic Prince, if he does not extirpate Heretics; for their beloved Council
of the Lateran, that decreed Transubstantiation, has likewise decreed, that if
a Prince does not extirpate Heretics out of his Dominions, the Pope must
depose him, and declare his Subjects absolved from their Allegiance, and give
his Dominions to another: So that even His Majesty, how much soever he may be a
Zealous Catholic, yet cannot be assured of their fidelity to him, unless he
has given them secret assurances, that he is resolved to extirpate Heretics
out of his Dominions; and that all the Promises which he now makes to these
poor wretches are no other way to be kept, than the assurances which the Great
Lewis gave to his Protestant Subjects, of his observing still the Edict of
Nantes even after he had resolved to break it, and also his last promise made
in the Edict, that repealed the Edict of Nantes, by which he gave Assurances,
that no Violence should be used to any for their Religion, in the very time
that he was ordering all possible Violences to be put in execution against them.

X. His Majesty assures us, that on all occasions the Papists have showed
themselves Good and faithful subjects to him and his Royal Predecessors; but
how Absolute soever the Kings Power may be, it seems his knowledge of History
is not so Absolute, but it may be capable of some Improvement. It will be hard
to find out what Loyalty they showed on the occasion of the Gunpowder Plot, or
during the whole progress of the Rebellion of Ireland; if the King will either
take the words of K. James of Glorious Memory, or K. Charles the first, that
was indeed of pious and blessed Memory, rather than the word of the penners of
this Proclamation, it will not be hard to find occasions where they were a
little wanting in this their so much boasted Loyalty: and we are sure, that by
the Principles of that Religion, the King can never be assured of the Fidelity
of those he calls his Catholic Subjects, but by engaging to them to make his
Heretical Subjects Sacrifices to their Rage.

XI. The King declares them capable of all the Offices and Benefices which he
shall think fit to bestow on them, and only restrains them from invading the
Protestant Churches by force: so that here a door is plainly opened for
admitting them to the exercise of their Religion in Protestant Churches, so
they do not break into them by force; and whatsoever may be the sense of the
term Benefice in its ancient and first signification, now it stands only for
Church Preferments; so that when any Churches, that are at the Kings gift, fall
vacant, here is a plain intimation, that they are to be provided to them; and
then it is very probable, that all the Laws made against such as go not to
their Parish Churches, will be severely turned upon those that will not come to
Mass.

XII. His Majesty does in the next place, in the virtue of his Absolute Power /
Annull a great many Laws, as well those that established the Oaths of
Allegiance and supremacy, as the late Test, enacted by himself in person, while
he represented his Brother: upon which he gave as strange an Essay to the World
of his Absolute Justice in the Attainder of the late Earl of Argile, as he does
now of his Absolute Power in condemning the Test it self; he also repeals his
own Confirmation of the Test, since he came to the Crown, which he offered as
the clearest Evidence that he could give of his Resolution to maintain the
Protestant Religion, and by which he gained so much upon that Parliament, that
he obtained every thing from them that he desired of them; till he came to try
them in the Matters of Religion. This is no extraordinary Evidence to assure
his People, that his Promises will be like the Laws of the Medes and Persians,
which alter not; nor will the disgrace of the Commissioner that enacted that
Law, lay this matter wholly on him; for the Letter, that he brought, the Speech
that he made, and the Instructions which he got, are all too well known to be
so soon forgotten: and if Princes will give their Subjects reason to think,
that they forget their promises, as soon as the turn is served for which they
were made, this will be too prevailing a temptation on the Subjects to mind the
Princes promise as little as it seems he himself does; and will force them to
conclude, that the truth of the Prince, is not so Absolute as it seems he
fancies his power to be.

XIII. Here is not only a repealing of a great many Laws, and established
Oaths and Tests, but by the Exercise of the Absolute Power / a new Oath is
imposed, which was never pretended to by the Crown in any former time; and as
the Oath is created by this Absolute Power / so it seems the Absolute Power
must be supported by this Oath: since one branch of it, is an obligation to
Maintain His Majesty and his Lawful Successors in the exercise of this their
Absolute Power and Authority against all deadly, which I suppose is Scotch for
Mortals: now to Impose so hard a yoke as this Absolute Power on the Subjects,
seems no small stretch; but it is a wonderful exercise of it to oblige the
Subjects to defend this: it had been more modest, if they had been only bound
to bear it, and submit to it: but it is a terrible thing so far to extinguish
all the remnants of natural Liberty, or of a legal Government, as to oblige
the Subjects by Oath to maintain the exercise of this, which plainly must
destroy themselves: for the short execution by the Bow-strings of Turkey, or by
sending orders to men to return in their heads, being an exercise of this
Absolute Power / it is a little hard to make men swear to maintain the King in
it: and if that Kingdom has suffered so much by the many Oaths that have been
in use among them, as is marked in this Proclamation, I am afraid this new
Oath will not much mend the matter.

XIV. Yet after all, there is some Comfort; his Majesty assures them, he will
use no Violence nor force, nor any Invincible Necessity to any man on the
account of his Persuasion: It were too great a want of respect to fancy, that a
time may come in which even this may be remembered, full as well, as the
Promises that were made to the Parliament after His Majesty came to the Crown:
I do not, I confess, apprehend that; for I see here so great a caution used in
the choice of these words, that it is plain, very great Severities may very
well consist with them: It is clear, that the general words of Violence and
Force are to be determined by these last of Invincible Necessity / so that the
King does only promise to lay no Invincible Necessity on his Subjects; but for
all Necessities, that are not Invincible, it seems they must expect to bear a
large share of them; Disgraces, want of Employments, Fines, and Imprisonments,
and even Death it self are all Vincible things to a man of a firmness of mind:
so that the Violences of torture, the Furies of Dragoons, and some of the
Methods now practiced in France, perhaps may be Included within this Promise;
since these seem almost Invincible to humane nature, if it is not fortified
with an Extraordinary measure of Grace: but as to all other things, His Majesty
binds himself up from no part of the Exercise of his Absolute Power by this
Promise.

XV. His Majesty orders this to go Immediately to the Great Seal, without
passing through the other Seals: now since this is counter-signed by the
Secretary, in whose hands the Signet is, there was no other step to be made but
through the Privy Seal; so I must own, I have a great curiosity of knowing his
Character in whose hands the Privy Seal is at present; for it seems his
Conscience is not so very supple, as the Chancellors and the Secretaryes are;
but it is very likely, if he does not quickly change his mind, the Privy Seal
at least will very quickly change its Keeper; and I am sorry to hear, that the
L. Chancellor and the Secretary have not another Brother to fill this post,
that so the guilt of the ruin of that Nation, may lie on one single Family, and
that there may be no others involved in it.

XVI. Upon the whole matter, many smaller things being waved, it being extreme
unpleasant to find fault, where one has all possible dispositions to pay all
respect; we here in England see what we must look for. A Parliament in Scotland
was tried, but it proved a little Stubborn; and now Absolute Power comes to set
all right; so when the Closetting has gone round, so that Noses are counted, we
may perhaps see a Parliament here, but if it chances to be untoward, and not to
obey without Reserve / then our Reverend Judges will copy from Scotland, and
will not only tell us of the Kings Imperial Power, but will discover to us this
new Mystery of Absolute Power, to which we are all bound to obey without
Reserve.

These Reflections refer in so many places to some words in the Proclamation,
that it was thought necessary to set them near one another, that the Reader may
be able to Judge, whether he is deceived by any false Quotations or not.
By the King. A PROCLAMATION.
JAMES R.

JAMES the Seventh by the Grace of God, King of Scotland, England, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc To all and sundry our good Subjects, whom
these presents do or may concern, Greeting. We having taken into Our Royal
Consideration the many and great inconveniences which have happened to that
Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland of late years, through the different
persuasions in the Christian Religion, and the great Heats and Animosities
amongst the several Professors thereof, to the ruin and decay of Trade, wasting
of Lands, extinguishing of Charity, contempt of the Royal Power, and converting
of true Religion, and the Fear of GOD, into Animosities, Names, Factions, and
sometimes into Sacrilege and Treason. And being resolved as much as in Us
lies, to unite the Hearts and Affections of Our Subjects, to GOD in Religion,
to Us in Loyalty, and to their Neighbors in Christian Love and Charity. Have
therefore thought fit to Grant, and by Our Souveraign Authority, Prerogative
Royal, and Absolute Power, which all Our Subjects are to obey without Reserve;
Do hereby give and grant Our Royal Toleration, to the several Professors of the
Christian Religion after-named, with, and under the several Conditions,
Restrictions, and Limitations after-mentioned. In the first place, We allow and
tolerate the Moderate Presbyterians, to Meet in their Private Houses, and there
to hear all such Ministers, as either have, or are willing to accept of Our
Indulgence allanerly, and none other, and that there be not any thing said or
done contrary to the Well and Peace of Our Reign, Seditious or Treasonable,
under the highest Pains these Crimes will import; nor are they to presume to
Build Meeting Houses, or to use Outhouses or Barns, but only to exercise in
their Private Houses, as said is: In the mean time, it is Our Royal Will and
Pleasure, that Field Conventicles, and such as Preach, or Exercise at them, or
who shall any way^ assist or connive at them, shall be prosecuted according to
the utmost Severity of our Laws made against them, seeing from these
Rendezvouzes of Rebellion, so much Disorder has proceeded, and so much
Disturbance to the Government, and for which after this Our Royal Indulgence
for tender Consciences there is no excuse left. In like manner, we do hereby
tolerate Quakers to meet and exercise in their Form, in any Place or Places
appointed for their Worship. And considering the Severe and Cruel Laws, made
against Roman Catholics (therein called Papists) in the Minority of Our Royal
Grand Father of Glorious Memory,
without His Consent, and contrary to the Duty of good Subjects, by His
Regents, and other Enemies to their Lawful Sovereign, Our Royal Great Grand
Mother Queen Mary of blessed and pious Memory, wherein under the pretense of
Religion, they clothed the worst of Treasons, Factions, and Usurpations, and
made these Laws, not as against the Enemies of GOD, but their own; which Laws
have still been continued of course without design of executing them* or any of
them ad terrorem only, on Supposition, that the Papists relying on an External
Power, were incapable of Duty, and true Allegiance to their Natural Sovereigns,
and Rightful Monarchs; We of Our certain Knowledge, and long Experience,
knowing that the Catholics, as it is their Principle to be Good Christians, so
it is to be dutiful Subjects; and that they have likewise on all occasions
shown themselves Good and faithful Subjects to Us, and Our Royal Predecessors,
by hazarding, and many of them actually losing their Lives and Fortunes, in
their Defense (though of another Religion) and the Maintenance of their
Authority against the Violences and Treasons of the most violent Abettors of
these Laws: Do therefore with Advice and Consent of Our Privy Council, by Our
Sovereign Authority, Prerogative Royal, and Absolute Power, aforesaid* Suspend,
Stop and disable all Laws, or Acts of Parliament, Customs or Constitutions,
made or executed against any of our Roman Catholic Subjects, in any time past,
to all Intents and Purposes, making void all Prohibitions therein mentioned,
Pains or Penalties therein ordained to be inflicted, so that they shall in all
things be as free in all Respects as any of Our Protestant Subjects whatsoever,
not only to exercise their Religion, but to enjoy all Offices, Benefices and
others, which we shall think fit to bestow upon them in all time coming:
Nevertheless, it is Our Will and Pleasure, and we do hereby command all
Catholics at their highest Pains, only to exercise their Religious Worship in
Houses or Chapels; and that they presume not to Preach in the open Fields, or
to invade the Protestant Churches by force, under the pains aforesaid, to be
inflicted upon the Offenders respectively; nor shall they presume to make
Public Processions in the High-streets of any of Our Royal Burghs, under the
Pains abovementioned. And whereas the Obedience and Service of Our Good
Subjects is due to Us by their Allegiance, and Our Sovereignty, and that no
Law, Custom or Constitution, Difference in Religion, or other Impediment
whatsoever, can exempt or discharge the Subjects from their Native Obligations
and Duty to the Crown, or hinder Us fiom Protecting, and Employing them,
according to their several Capacities, and Our Royal Pleasure; nor Restrain Us
from Conferring Heretable Rights and Privileges upon them, or vacuate or annul
these Rights Heretable, when they are made or conferred: And likewise
considering, that some Oaths are capable of being wrested by Men of sinistrous
Intentions, a practice in that Kingdom fatal to Religion as it was to Loyalty;
Do therefore, with Advice and Consent aforesaid, cass, annull and Discharge all
Oaths whatsoever, by which any of Our Subjects are incapacitated, or disabled
from holding Places, or Offices in Our said Kingdom, or enjoying their
Hereditary Rights and Privileges, discharging the same to be taken or given in
any time coming, without our special Warrant and Consent, under the pains due
to the contempt of Our Royal Commands and Authority. And to this effect, we do
by Our Royal Authority aforesaid, stop, disable, and dispense with all Laws
enjoining the said Oaths, Tests, or any of them, particularly the first Act of
the first Session of the first Parliament of King Charles the Second; the
eleventh Act of the foresaid Session of the foresaid Parliament; the sixth Act
of the third Parliament of the said King Charles; the twenty first and twenty
fifth Acts of that Parliament, and the thirteenth Act of the first Session of
Our late Parliament,
in so far allanerly as concerns the taking the Oaths, or Tests therein
prescribed, and all others, as well not mentioned as mentioned, and that in
place of them, all Our good Subjects, or such of them as We or Our Privy
Council shall require so to do, shall take and swear the following Oath
allanerly* I A. B. do acknowledge / testify and declare / that JAMES the
Seventh, by the Grace of God, King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. is rightful King, and Supreme Governor of these
Realms, and over all Persons therein; and that it is unlawful for Subjects, on
any pretense, or for any cause whatsoever, to rise in Arms against Him, or any
Commissionated by Him; and that I shall never so rise in Arms, nor assist any
who shall so do; and that I shall never resist ^is Power or Authority, nor ever
oppose his Authority to his Person, as I shall answer to God; but shall to the
utmost of my power Assist, Defend, and Maintain Him, His Heirs and lawful
Successors, in the exercise of their ABSOLUTE POWER and Authority against all
Deadly. So help me God. And seeing many of Our good Subjects have, before Our
Pleasure in these Matters was made public, incurred the Guilt appointed by the
Acts of Parliament abovementioned, or others; We, by Our Authority, and
Absolute Power and Prerogative Royal abovementioned, of Our certain Knowledge,
and innate Mercy, Give Our ample and full Indemnity to all those of the
Roman Catholic or Popish Religion, for all things by them done contrary to Our
Laws or Acts of Parliament, made in any time past, relating to their Religion,
the Worship and Exercise thereof, or for being Papists, Jesuits, or
Traffickers, for hearing, or saying of Mass, concealing of Priests or Jesuits,
breeding their Children Catholics at home or abroad, or any other thing, Rite
or Doctrine, said, performed, or maintained by them, or any of them: And
likewise, for holding or taking of Places, Employments, or Offices, contrary to
any Law or Constitution, Advices given to Us, or Our Council, Actions done, or
generally any thing performed or said against the known Laws of that Our
Ancient Kingdom: Excepting always from this Our Royal Indemnity, all Murders,
Assassinations, Thefts, and such like other Crimes, which never used to be
comprehended in Our General Acts of Indemnity. And we command and require all
Our Judges, or others concerned, to explain this in the most Ample Sense and
Meaning Acts of Indemnity at any time have contained: Declaring this shall be
as good to every one concerned, as if they had Our Royal Pardon and Remission
under Our Great Seal of that Kingdom. And likewise indemnifying Our Protestant
Subjects from all Pains and Penalties due for hearing or Preaching in Houses;
Providing there be no Treasonable Speeches uttered in the said Conventicles by
them, in which case the Law is only to take place against the Guilty, and none
other present; Providing also that they Reveal to any of Our Council the Guilt
so committed; As also, excepting all Fines, or Effects of Sentences already
given. And likewise Indemnifying fully and freely all Quakers, for their
Meetings and Worship, in all time past, preceding the Publication of these
Presents. And we doubt not but Our Protestant Subjects will give their
Assistance and Concourse hereunto, on all occasions, in their respective
Capacities. In consideration whereof, and the ease those of Our Religion, and
others may have hereby, and for the Encouragement of Our Protestant Bishops,
and the Regular Clergy, and such as have hitherto lived orderly, We think fit
to declare, that it never was Our Principle, nor will We ever suffer Violence
to be offered to any Man's Conscience, nor will We use force, or Invincible
Necessity against any Man on the Account of his Persuasion, nor the Protestant
Religion, but will protect Our Bishops and other Ministers in their Functions,
Rights and Properties, and all Our Protestant Subjects in the free Exercise of
their Protestant Religion in the Churches. And that We will, and hereby
Promise, on Our Royal Word, to maintain the Possessors of Church Lands formerly
belonging to Abbays, or other Churches of the Catholic Religion, in their full
and free Possession and Right, according to Our Laws and Acts of Parliament in
that behalf in all time coming. And We will employ indifferently all our
Subjects of all Persuasions, so as none shall meet with any Discouragement on
the account of his Religion, but be advanced, and esteemed by Us, according to
their several Capacities and Qualifications, so long as We find Charity and
Unity maintained. And if any Animosities shall arise, as We hope in God there
will not, We will show the severest Effects of Our Royal Displeasure against
the Beginners or Fomenters thereof, seeing thereby Our Subjects may be deprived
of this general Ease and Satisfaction, We intend to all of them, whose
Happiness, Prosperity, Wealth and Safety, is so much Our Royal Care, that we
will leave nothing undone which may procure these Blessings for them. And
lastly, to the End all Our good Subjects may have Notice of this Our Royal Will
and Pleasure, we do hereby command, Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethern
Heralds, Macers, Pursevants and Messengers at Arms, to make timous
Proclamation thereof at the Market Cross of Edinburgh; And besides the Printing
and Publishing of this Our Royal Proclamation, it is Our express Will and
Pleasure, that the same be past under the great Seal of that Our Kingdom per
saltum, without passing any other Seal or Register.
In Order whereunto, this shall be to the Directors of Our Chancellary, and
their Deputes for writing the same, and to Our Chancellor for causing our Great
Seal aforesaid, to be appended thereunto, a sufficient Warrant.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal the twelfth day of Febr. 168^. and of Our Reign
the third year. By His Majesty's Command MELFORT.

God save the King.
FINIS.
A LETTER, Containing some REFLECTIONS On His MAJESTY'S DECLARATION For LIBERTY
of CONSCIENCE. Dated the Fourth of April, 1687.
SIR,
I. I Thank you for the Favor of sending me the late Declaration that His
Majesty has granted for Liberty of Conscience. I confess, I longed for it with
great Impatience, and was surprised to find it so different from the Scotch
Pattern; for I imagined, that it was to be set to the second part of the same
tune: nor can I see why the Penners of this have sunk so much in their style;
for I suppose the same men penned both. I expected to have seen the Imperial
Language of Absolute Power, to which all the Subjects are to obey without
reserve; and of the cassing, annulling, the stopping, and disabling of Laws set
forth in the Preamble and body of this Declaration; whereas those dreadful
words are not to be found here: for instead of repealing the Laws, His Majesty
pretends by this only to suspend them; and tho in effect this amounts to a
repeal, yet it must be confessed that the words are softer. Now since the
Absolute Power, to which His Majesty pretends in Scotland, is not founded on
such poor things as Law; for that would look as if it were the gift of the
people; but on the Divine Authority, which is supposed to be delegated to His
Majesty, this may be as well claimed in England as it was in Scotland: and the
pretension to Absolute Power is so great a thing, that since His Majesty
thought fit once to claim it, he is little beholding to those that make him
fall so much in his Language; especially since both these Declarations have
appeared in our Gazettes; so that as we see what is done in Scotland, we know
from hence what is in some peoples hearts, and what we may expect in England.

II. His Majesty tells his people, that the perfect Enjoyment of their Property
has never been in any Case invaded by him since his coming to the Crown. This
is indeed matter of great Encouragement to all good Subjects; for it lets them
see, that such Invasions, as have been made on Property, have been done without
His Majesty's knowledge: so that no doubt the continuing to levy the Customs
and the Additional Excise (which had been granted only during the late Kings
Life,) before the Parliament could meet to renew the Grant, was done without
His Majesty's knowledge; the many Violences committed not only by Soldiers, but
Officers, in all the Parts of England, which are severe Invasions on Property,
have been all without His Majesty's knowledge; and since the first Branch of
Property is the Right that a man has to his Life, the strange Essay of
Mohammedan Government, that was showed at Taunton; and the no less strange
proceedings of the present Lord Chancellor, in his Circuit after the Rebellion
(which are very justly called His Campaign, for it was an open Act of Hostility
to all Law) and for which and other Services of the like nature, it is believed
he has had the reward of the Great Seal, and the Executions of those who have
left their Colors, which being founded on no Law, are no other than so many
Murders; all these, I say, are as we are sure, Invasions on Property; but since
the King tells us, that no such Invasions have been made since he came to the
Crown, we must conclude that all these things have fallen out without his
Privity. And if a standing* Army, in time of Peace, has been ever looked on by
this Nation as an Attempt upon the whole Property of the Nation in gross, one
must conclude, that even this is done without His Majesty's knowledge.

III. His Majesty expresses his Charity for us in a kind wish, that we were all
Members of the Catholic Church; in return to which we offer up daily our most
earnest prayers for him, that he may become a Member of the truly Catholic
Church: for Wishes and Prayers do no hurt on no side: but His Majesty adds,
that it has ever been his Opinion, that Conscience ought not to be constrained,
nor people forced in matters of mere Religion. We are very happy if this
continues to be always his sense: but we are sure in this he is no obedient
Member of that which he means by the Catholic Church: for it has over and over
again decreed the Extirpation of Heretics. It encourages Princes to it, by the
Offer of the Pardon of their Sins; it threatens them to it, by denouncing to
them not only the Judgments of God, but that which is more sensible, the loss
of their Dominions: and it seems they intend to make us know that part of their
Doctrine even before we come to feel it, since tho some of that Communion would
take away the Horror which the Fourth Council of the Lateran gives us, in which
these things were decreed, by denying it to be a General Council, and rejecting
the Authority of those Canons, yet the most learned of all the Apostates that
has fallen to them from our Church, has so lately given up this Plea, and has
so formally acknowledged the Authority of that Council, and of its Canons, that
it seems they think they are bound to this piece of fair dealing, of warning us
before hand of our Danger. It is true Bellarmin says, The Church does not
always execute her Power of deposing Heretical Princes, tho she always retains
it: one reason that he assigns, is, because she is not at all times able to put
it in execution: so the same reason may perhaps make it appear unadviseable to
extirpate Heretics, because that at present it cannot be done; but the Right
remains entire; and is put in execution in such an unrelenting manner in all
places where that Religion prevails, that it has a very ill Grace, to see any
Member of that Church speak in this strain: and when neither the Policy of
France, nor the Greatness of their Monarch, nor yet the Interests of the
Emperor joined to the Gentleness of his own temper, could withstand these
Bloody Councils, that are indeed parts of that Religion, we can see no reason
to induce us to believe, that a Toleration of Religion is proposed with any
other design but either to divide us, or to lay us asleep, till it is time to
give the Alarm for destroying us.

IV. If all the Endeavors, that have been used in the last four Reigns, for
bringing the Subjects of this Kingdom to a Unity in Religion have been
ineffectual, as His Maj. says; we know to whom we owe both the first beginnings
and the progress of the Divisions among our selves; the Gentleness of Q.
Elisabeth's Government, and the numbers of those that adhered to the Church of
Rome, made it scarce possible to put an end to that Party during her Reign,
which has been ever since restless, and has had credit enough at Court during
the three last Reigns, not only to support it self, but to distract us, and to
divert us from apprehending the danger of being swallowed up by them, by
fomenting our own Differences, and by setting on either a Toleration, or a
Persecution, as it has happened to serve their Interests. It is not so very long
since, that nothing was to be heard at Court but the supporting the Church of
England, and the Extirpating all the Nonconformists: and it were easy to name
the persons, if it were decent, that had this ever in their Mouths; but now all
is turned round again, the Church of England is in Disgrace; and now the
Encouragment of Trade, the Quiet of the Nation, and the Freedom of Conscience
are again in Vogue, that were such odious things but a few years ago, that the
very mentioning them was enough to load any man with Suspicions as backward in
the King's Service, while such Methods are used, and the Government is as in an
Ague, divided between hot and cold fits, no wonder if Laws so unsteadily
executed have failed of their effect.

V. There is a good reserve here left for Severity when the proper Opportunity
to set it on presents it self: for his Majesty Declares himself only against
the forcing of men in matters of mere Religion: so that whenever Religion and
Policy come to be so interwoven, that mere Religion is not the case, and that
Public Safety may be pretended, then this Declaration is to be no more
claimed: so that the fastening any thing upon the Protestant Religion, that is
inconsistent with the Public Peace, will be pretended to show that they are
not persecuted for mere Religion. In France, when it was resolved to extirpate
the Protestants, all the Discourses that were written on that Subject were full
of the Wars occasioned by those of the Religion in the last Age, tho as these
were the happy Occasions of bringing the House of Bourbon to the Crown, they
had been ended above 80. years ago, and there had not been so much as the least
Tumult raised by them these 50. years past: so that the French, who have
smarted under this Severity, could not be charged with the least Infraction of
the Law: yet Stories of a hundred years old were raised up to inspire into the
King those Apprehensions of them, which have produced the terrible effects that
are visible to all the World. There is another Expression in this Declaration,
which lets us likewise see with what Caution the Offers of Favor are now
worded, that so there may be an Occasion given when the Time and Conjuncture
shall be favorable to break through them all: it is in these words, So that they
take especial Care that nothing be preached or taught amongst them, which may
any ways tend to alienate the Hearts of our People from us or our Government.
This in it self is very reasonable, and could admit of no Exception, if we had
not to do with a set of men, who to our great Misfortune have so much Credit
with His Majesty, and who will be no sooner lodged in the Power to which they
pretend, than they will make every thing that is preached against Popery pass
for that which may in some manner alienate the Subjects from the King.

VI. His Majesty makes no doubt of the Concurrence of his Two Houses of
Parliament, when he shall think it convenient for them to meet. The Hearts of
Kings are unsearchable; so that it is a little too presumptuous to look into
His Majesty's Secret Thoughts: but according to the Judgments that we would
make of other men's Thoughts by their Actions, one would be tempted to think,
that His Majesty made some doubt of it, since his Affairs both at home and
abroad could not go the worse, if it appeared that there were a perfect
understanding between Him and his Parliament, and that his People were
supporting him with fresh Supplies; and this House of Commons is so much at his
Devotion, that all the world saw how ready they were to grant every thing that
he could desire of them, till he began to lay off the Mask with relation to the
Test, and since that time the frequent Prorogations, the Closetting, and the
Pains that has been taken to gain Members, by Promises made to some, and the
Disgraces of others, would make one a little Inclined to think, that some doubt
was made of their Concurrence. But we must confess, that the depth of His
Majesty's Judgment is such, that we cannot fathom it, and therefore we cannot
guess what his Doubts or his Assurances are. It is true, the words that come
after unriddle the Mystery a little, which are, when His Majesty shall think it
convenient for them to meet: for the meaning of this seems plain, that his Maj.
is resolved, that they shall never meet, till he receives such Assurances, in a
new round of Closetting, that he shall be put out of doubt concerning it.

VII. I will not enter into the dispute concerning Liberty of Conscience, and
the Reasons that may be offered for it to a Session of Parliament; for there is
scarce any one point, that either with relation to Religion, or Politics,
affords a greater variety of matter for Reflection: and I make no doubt to say,
that there is abundance of Reason to oblige ^ Parliament to review all the
Penal Laws, either with relation to Papists, or to Dissenters: but I will take
the boldness to add one thing, that the Kings's suspending of Laws strikes at
the root of this whole Government, and subverts it quite: for if there is any
thing certain with relation to the English Government, it is this, that the
Executive Power of the Law is entirely in the King; and the Law to fortify him
in the Management of it has clothed him with a vast Prerogative, and made it
unlawful upon any pretense whatsoever to resist him: whereas on the other hand,
the Legislative Power is not so entirely in the King, but that the Lords and
Commons have such a share in it, that no Law can be either made, repealed, or
which is all one suspended, but by their consent: so that the placing this
Legislative Power singly in the King, is a subversion of this whole Government;
since the Essence of all Governments consists in the Subjects of the
Legislative Authority; Acts of Violence or Injustice, committed in the
Executive part, are such things that all Princes being subject to them, the
peace of mankind were very ill secured if it were not unlawful to resist upon
any pretense taken from any ill Administrations, in which as the Law may be
doubtful, so the Facts may be uncertain, and at worst the public Peace must
always be more valued than any private Oppressions or Injuries whatsoever. But
the total Subversion of a Government, being so contrary to the Trust that is
given to the Prince who ought to execute it* will put men upon uneasy and
dangerous Inquiries: which will turn little to the Advantage of those who are
driving matters to such a doubtful and desperate issue.

VIII. If there is any thing in which the Exercise of the Legislative Power
seems Indispensable, it is in those Oaths of Allegiance and Tests, that are
thought necessary to Qualify men either to be admitted to enjoy the Protection
of the Law, or to bear a share in the Government; for in these the Security of
the Government is chiefly concerned; and therefore the total extinction of
these, as it is not only a Suspension of them, but a plain repealing of them,
so it is a Subverting of the whole Foundation of our Government: For the
Regulation that King and Parliament had set both for the Subjects having the
Protection of the State by the Oath of Allegiance, and for a share in places of
trust by the Tests, is now plucked up by the roots; when it is declared, that
these shall not at any time hereafter be required to be taken, or subscribed by
any persons whatsoever: for it is plain, that this is no Suspension of the Law,
but a formal Repeal of it, in as plain Words as can be conceived.

IX. His Majesty says, that the Benefit of the Service of all his Subjects is
by the Law of Nature Inseparably annexed to and inherent in his Sacred Person.
It is somewhat strange, that when so many Laws, that we all know are suspended,
the Law of Nature, which is so hard to be found out, should be cited; but the
Penners of this Declaration had b^st let that Law lie forgotten among the rest;
for there is a scurvy Paragraph in it, concerning self Preservation, that is
capable of very unacceptable Glosses. It is hard to tell what Section of the
Law of Nature has marked out either such a Form of Government, or such a Family
for it. And if His Majesty renounces his Pretensions to our Allegiance as
founded on the Laws of England, and betakes himself to this Law of Nature, he
will perhaps find the Counsel was a little too rash; but to make the most of
this that can be, the Law of Nations or Nature does indeed allow the Governors
of all Societies a Power to serve themselves of every Member of it in the cases
of extreme Danger; but no Law of Nature that has been yet heard of will
conclude, that if by special Laws, a sort of men have been disabled from all
Employments, that a Prince who at his Coronation Swore to maintain those Laws,
may at his pleasure extinguish all these Disabilities.

X. At the end of the Declaration, as in a Postscript, His Majesty assures his
Subjects, that he will maintain them in their Properties, as well in Church and
Abbey Lands, as other Lands: but the Chief of all their Properties being the
share that they have by their Representatives in the Legislative Power; this
Declaration, which breaks through that, is no great Evidence that the rest will be
maintained: and to speak plainly, when a Coronation Oath is so little
remembered, other Promises must have a proportioned degree of Credit given to
them: as for the Abbey Lands, the keeping them from the Church is according to
the Principles of that Religion Sacrilege; and that is a Mortal Sin, and there
can no Absolution be given to any who continue in it: and so this Promise being
an Obligation to maintain men in a Mortal Sin, is null and void of it self:
Church Lands are also according to the Doctrine of their Canonists, so
immediately Gods Right, that the Pope himself is only the Administrator and
Dispencer, but is not the Master of them; he can indeed make a truck for God,
or let them so low, that God shall be an easy Landlord: but he cannot alter
Gods Property, nor translate the Right that is in him to Sacrilegious Laymen
and Heretics.

XI. One of the Effects of this Declaration, will be the setting on foot a new
run of Addresses over the Nation: for there is nothing how Impudent and base
soever, of which the abject flattery of a Slavish Spirit is not capable. It
must be confessed, to the reproach of the Age, that all those strains of flattery
among the Romans, that Tacitus sets forth with so mueh just Scorn, are modest
things, compared to what this Nation has produced within these seven years:
only if our Flattery has come short of the Refinedness of the Romans, it has
exceeded theirs as much in its loathed Fulsomness. The late King set out a
Declaration, in which he gave the most solemn Assurances possible of his
adhering to the Church of England, and to the Religion established by Law, and
of his Resolution to have Frequent Parliaments; upon which the whole Nation
fell as it were into Raptures of Joy and Flattery: but tho he lived four Years
after that, he called no Parliament, notwithstanding the Law for Triennial
Parliaments: and the manner of his Death, and the Papers printed after his
Death in his Name, have sufficiently showed, that he was equally sincere in
both those Assurances that he gave, as well in that Relating to Religion, as in
that other Relating to Frequent Parliaments; yet upon his Death a new set of
Addresses appeared, in which all that Flattery could Invent was brought forth,
in the Commendations of a Prince, to whose Memory the greatest kindness can be
done, is to forget him: and because his present Majesty upon his coming to the
Throne gave some very general Promise of Maintaining the Church of England,
this was magnified in so Extravagant a strain, as if it had been a Security
greater than any that the Law could give: tho by the regard that the King has
both to it and to the Laws, it appears that he is resolved to maintain both
equally: since then the Nation has already made it self sufficiently ridiculous
both to the present and to all succeeding Ages; it is time that at last men
should grow weary, and become ashamed of their Folly.

XII. The Nonconformists are now invited to set an Example to the rest: and
they who have valued themselves hitherto upon their Opposition to Popery and
that have quarrelled with the Church of England, for some small Approaches to
it, in a few Ceremonies, are now solicited to rejoice, because the Laws that
secure us against it, are all plucked up: since they enjoy at present and
during pleasure leave to meet together. It is natural for all men to love to be
set at ease, especially in the matters of their Consciences; but it is visible,
that those who allow them this favor, do it with no other design, but that
under a pretense of a General Toleration, they may Introduce a Religion which
must persecute all equally: it is likewise apparent how much they are hated,
and how much they have been persecuted by the Instigation of those who now
Court them, and who have now no game that is more promising, than the engaging
them and the Church of England into new Quarrels: and as for the Promises now
made to them, it cannot be supposed that they will be more lasting than those
that were made some time ago to the Church of England, who had both a better
Title in Law and greater Merit upon the Crown to assure them that they should
be well used than these can pretend to. The Nation has scarce forgiven some of
the Church of England the Persecution into which they have suffered themselves
to be cosened: tho now that they see Popery barefaced, the Stand that they have
made, and the vigorous Opposition that they have given to it, is that which
makes all men willing to forget what is past, and raises again the Glory of a
Church that was not a little stained by the Indiscretion and Weakness of those,
that were too apt to believe and hope, and so suffered themselves to be made a
Property to those who would now make them a Sacrifice. The Sufferings of the
Nonconformists, and the Fury that the Popish Party expressed against them, had
recommended them so much to the Compassions of the Nation, and had given them
so just a pretension to favor in a better time, that it will look like a curse
of God upon them, if a few men, whom the Court has gained to betray them, can
have such an ill Influence upon them as to make them throw away all that Merit,
and those Compassions which their Sufferings have procured them; and to go and
court those who are only seemingly kind to them, that they may destroy both
them and us. They must remember that as the Church of England is the only
Establishment that our Religion has by Law; so it is the main body of the
Nation, and all the Sects are but small and straggling parties: and if the Legal
Settlement of the Church is dissolved, and that body is once broken, these
lesser bodies will be all at Mercy: and it is an easy thing to define what the
Mercies of the Church of Rome are.

XIII. But tho it must be confessed, that the Nonconformists are still under
some Temptations, to receive every thing that gives them present ease, with a
little too much kindness; since they lie exposed to many severe Laws, of which
they have of late felt the weight very heavily, and as they are men, and some
of them as ill Natured men as other people, so it is no wonder if upon the
first surprises of the Declaration, they are a little delighted, to see the
Church of England, after all its Services and Submissions to the Court, so much
mortified by it; so that taking all together it will not be strange if they
commit some Follies upon this occasion. Yet on the other hand, it passes all
imagination, to see some of the Church of England, especially those whose
Natures we know are so particularly sharpened in the point of Persecution,
chiefly when it is levelled against the Dissenters, rejoice at this
Declaration, and make Addresses upon it. It is hard to think that they have
attained to so high a pitch of Christian Charity, as to thank those who do now
despitefully use them, and that as an earnest that within a little while they
will persecute them. This will be an Original, and a Master piece in Flattery,
which must needs draw the last degrees of Contempt on such as are capable of so
abject and sordid a Compliance, and that not only from all the true Members of
the Church of England, but likewise from those of the Church of Rome it self;
for every man is apt to esteem an Enemy that is brave even in his Misfortunes,
as much as he despises those whose minds sink with their Condition. For what is
it that these men would thank the King? Is it because he breaks those Laws that
are made in their Favor, and for their Protection: and is now striking at the
Root of all the Legal Settlement that they have for their Religion? Or is it
because that at the same time that the King professes a Religion that condemns
his Supremacy, yet he is not contented with the Exercise of it as it is
warranted by Law, but carries it so far as to erect a Court contrary to the
express words of a Law that was so lately made: That Court takes care to
maintain a due proportion between their Constitution and all their proceedings,
that so all may be of a piece, and all equally contrary to Law. They have
suspended one Bishop, only because he would not do that which was not in his
Power to do: for since there is no Extrajudiciary Authority in England, a
Bishop can no more proceed to a Sentence of Suspension against a Clergyman
without a Trial, and the hearing of Parties, than a Judge can give a Sentence
in his Chamber without an Indictment, a Trial, or a Jury: and because one of
the Greatest Bodies of England would not break their Oaths, and obey a Mandate
that plainly contradicted them, we see to what a pitch this is like to be
carried. I will not Anticipate upon this illegal Court, to tell what Judgments
are coming, but without carrying our Iealousies too far, one may safely
conclude, that they will never depart so far from their first Institution, as
to have any regard, either to our Religion, or our Laws, or Liberties, in any
thing they do. If all this were acted by avowed Papists, as we are sure it is
projected by such, there were nothing Extraordinary in it: but that which
carries our Indignation a little too far to be easily governed, is to see some
Pretended Protestants, and a few Bishops, among those that are the fatal
Instruments of pulling down the Church of England, and that those Mercenaries
Sacrifice their Religion and their Church to their Ambition and Interests; this
has such peculiar Characters of Misfortune upon it, that it seems it is not
enough if we perish without pity, since we fall by that hand tha^ we have so
much supported and fortifyed, bu^ we must become the Scorn of all the world
since we have produced such an unnatural Brood, that even while they are
pretending to be the Sons of the Church of England, are cutting their Mother's
Throat: and not content with Judas's Crime, of saying, Hail Master, and kissing
him, while they are betraying him into the hands of others; these carry their
Wickedness further, and say: Hail Mother, and then they themselves Murder her.
If after all this we were called on to bear this as Christians, and to suffer
it as Subjects, if we were required in Patience to possess our own Souls, and
to be in Charity with our Enemies; and which is more, to forgive our False
Brethren, who add Treachery to their Hatred; the Exhortation were seasonable,
and indeed a little necessary* for humane Nature cannot easily take down things
of such a hard digestion: but to tell u^ that we must make Addresses, and offer
Thanks ^or all this, is to Insult a little too much upon ^s in our Sufferings:
and he that can believe that a dry and cautiously worded promise of maintaining
the Church of England, will be Religiously observed after all that we have
^een, and is upon that carried so far out of ^is Wits as to Address and give
Thanks, and will believe still, such a man has nothing to ^xcuse him from
believing Transubstantiation (...) self; for it is plain that he can bring
himself ^o believe even when the thing is contrary to ^he clearest Evidence
that his senses can give ^im.

Si populus hic vult decipi decipiatur. POSTSCRIPT.
THese reflections were writ soon after the Declaration came to my hands, but
the Matter of them was so tender, and the Conveyance of them to the Press was
so uneasy, that they appear now too late to have one effect that was Designed
by them, which was, the diverting men from making Addresses upon it; yet if
what is here proposed makes men become so far wise as to be ashamed of what
they have done, and is a means to keep them from carrying their Courtship
further than good words, this Paper will not come too late.

FINIS.
An ANSWER To Mr. Henry Payne's LETTER, Concerning His Majesty's DECLARATION of
INDULGENCE, Writ to the Author of the Letter to A Dissenter.
Mr. PAIN,
I Cannot hold asking you, how much Money you had, from the Writer of the
Paper, which you pretend to Answer: for as you have the character of a man that
deals with both hands, so this is writ in such a manner as to make one think
you were hired to it, by the Adverse Party: but it has been indeed so ordinary
to your Friends, to write in this manner of late, that the Censures upon it are
divided, both fall heavy: some suspect their Sincerity others accuse them for
want of a right Understanding: for tho all are not of the pitch of the Irish
Priests Reflections, on the Bp of Bath and Wells's Sermon, which was indeed
Irish double refined; yet both in your Books of Controversy, and Policy, and
even in your Poems, you seem to have entered into such an inter-mixture with the
Irish, that the thread all over is Linsey-woollsey. You acknowledge that the
Gentleman whom you answer has a Polite Pen, and that his Letter is an Ingenious
paper, and made up of well-Composed Sentences and Periods. Yet I believe he
will hardly return you your Complement. If it was well writ, your Party wants
either Men or Judgment extremely, in allowing you this province of answering
it. If the Paper did you some hurt, you had better have let the Town be a little
pleased with it for a while; and have hoped that a little time or some new paper
(tho one of its force is scarce to be expected) should have worn it out, then
to give it a new luster by such an Answer.

The Time of the Dissenters Sufferings, which you lengthen out to 27 years,
will hardly amount to seven. For the long Intervals it had, in the last Reign,
are not forgot: and those who animated the latest and severest of their
sufferings are such, that in good manners you ought not to reflect on their
Conduct. Opium is as certain a poison, tho not so violent, as Sublimate; and if
more corrosive Medicines did not work, the Design is the same, when
soporiferous ones are used: since the Patient is to be killed both ways: and it
seems that all that is in debate is, which is the safer: the accepting a
present ease when the ill intent with which it is offered, is Visible, is just
as wise an action, as to take Opium to lay a small Distemper when one may
conclude from the dose, that he will never come out of the Sleep. So that after
all, it is plain on which side the Madness lies. The Dissenters for a little
present ease, to be enjoyed at Mercy, must concur to break down all our hedges,
and to lay us open to that Devouring Power, before which nothing can stand that
will not worship it.

All that for which you reproach the Church of England amounts to this, that a
few good words, could not persuade her to destroy her self; and to Sacrifice
her Religion and the Laws to a party that never has done nor ever can do the
King half the service that she has rendered him. There are some sorts of
propositions that a man does not know how to answer: nor would he be thought
Ungrateful who after he had received some Civilities from a person to whom he
had done great service, could not be prevailed with by these so far as to spare
him his Wife or his Daughter. It must argue a peculiar degree of confidence to
ask things, that are above the being either asked or granted. Our Religion and
our Government are matters that are not to be parted with to show our good
breeding: and of all men living you ought not to pretend to Good Manners, who
talk as you do, of the Oppression of the last Reign. When the King's
Obligations to his Brother, and the share that he had in his Councils, are
considered; the reproaching his Government, has so ill a grace, that you are as
Indecent in your Flatteries as Injurious in your Reflections. And by this
gratitude of yours to the Memory of the late King, the Church of England may
easily Infer, how long all her Services would be remembered, even if she had
done all that was desired of her.

I would fain know which of the Brethren of the Dissenters in foreign
Countries sought their Relief from Rebellion. The Germans Reformed by the
Authority of their Princes, so did the Swedes, the Danes, and like wise the
Switsers. In France they maintained the Princes of the Blood against the
League: and in Holland the Quarrel was for Civil liberties; Protestant and
Papist concurring equally in it. You mention Holland as an Instance that
Liberty and Infallibility can dwell together: since Papists there show that
they can be friendly neighbors, to those whom they think in the wrong: It is
very like they would be still so in England, if they were under the lash of the
law, and so were upon their good behavior, the Government being still against
them: and this has so good an effect in Holland, that I hope we shall never
depart from the Dutch Pattern: some can be very Humble Servants that would
prove Imperious Masters. You say that Force is our only Supporter: but tho
there is no force of our side at present, it does not appear that we are in
such a tottering condition, as if we had no Supporter left us. God and Truth
are of our side: and the indiscreet use of Force, when set on by our Enemies,
has rather undermined than supported us. But you have taken pains to make us
grow wiser, and to let us see our Errors, which is perhaps the only obligation
that we owe you; and we are so sensible of it, that without examining what your
Intentions may have been in it, we heartily thank you for it.

I do not comprehend what your quarrel is at the squinting Term of the next
heir, as you call it; tho I do not wonder that squinting comes in your mind
whenever you think of HER; for all people look asquint at that which troubles
them: and her being the next heir is no less the delight of all good men, than
it is your affliction: all the pains that you take to represent her dreadful to
the Dissenters, must needs find that credit with them, that is due to the
Insinuations of an Enemy. It is very true, that as she was bred up in our
Church, she adheres to it so Eminently, as to make her to be now our chief
Ornament as we hope she will be once our main Defense. If by the strictest form
of our Church you mean an Exemplary Piety, and a shining Conversation, you have
given her true Character: But your design lies another way to make the
Dissenters form strange Ideas of her, as if she thought all Indulgence to them
Criminal: But as the Gentleness of her nature is such, that none but those who
are so guilty, that all mercy to them would be a Crime, can apprehend any thing
that is terrible, from her, so as for the Dissenters, her going so constantly
to the Dutch and French Churches shows, that she can very well endure their
Assemblies, at the same time that she prefers, ours. She has also too often
expressed her dislike at the heats that have been kept up among us concerning
such Inconsiderable Differences, to pass for a Bigot or a persecutor in such
matters: and She sees both the mischief that the Protestant Religion has
received from their subdivisions, and the happiness of granting a due Liberty
of Conscience, where she has so long lived, that there is no reason to make any
fancy that she will either keep up our Differences, or bear down the Dissenters
with Rigor. But because you hope for nothing from her own Inclinations, you
would have her terrified with the strong Argument of Numbers, which you fancy
will certainly secure them from her recalling the favor. But of what side
soever that Argument may be strong, sure it is not of theirs who make but one
to Two hundred: and I suppose you scarce expect that the Dissenters will rebel,
that you may have your Masses, and how their numbers will secure them, unless
it be by enabling them to Rebel, I cannot Imagine: this is indeed a squinting
at the Next Heir, with a witness, when you would already muster up the Troops
that must rise against her. But let me tell you, that you know both Her
Character and the Prince's very ill that fancy, they are only to be wrought on
by Fear. They are known to your great grief; to be above that: and it must be
to their own Merciful Inclinations, that you must owe all that you can expect
under them, but neither to their fear nor to your own Numbers. As for the
hatred and Contempt, even to the degree of being more Ridiculous then the Mass
under which you say Her way of Worship is in Holland, this is one of those
figures of speech that show how exactly you have Studied the Jesuits Moralls.
All that come from Holland, assure us, that she is so Universally beloved and
esteemed there, that every thing that she does, is the better thought of even
because she does it. Upon the whole matter, all that you say of the Next Heir,
proves too truly that you are that for which you reproach the Church of
England, a Disciple of the Crown only for the loaves; for if you had that
respect which you pretend for the King, you would have showed it more upon this
occasion.

Nor am I so much in love with your style, as to imitate it, therefore I will
not do you so great a pleasure, as to say the least thing that may reflect on
that Authority, which the Church of England has taught me to reverence even
after all the Disgraces that she has received from it: and if she were not
Insuperably restrained by her Principles, instead of the Thin Muster with which
you reproach her, she could soon make so thick a one as would make the Thinnes
of yours, very visible upon so unequal a division of the Nation: But she will
neither be threatened nor laughed out of her Religion and her loyalty: tho such
insultings as she meets with, that almost pass all humane Patience, would tempt
men that had a less fixed principle of submission, to make their Enemies feel
to their cost, that they owe all the Triumphs they make, more to our
Principles, than to their own Force. Their laughing at our Doctrine of non
resistance, lets us see, that it would be none of theirs under the Next Heir,
at whom you Squint, if the strong Argument of Numbers made you not apprehend
that Two Hundred to one would prove an Unequal Match.

As for your Memorandums, I shall answer them as short as you give them

1. It will be hard, to persuade people, that a Decision in favor of the
Dispencing Power, flowing from Judges that are both made, and paid, and that
may be removed at pleasure, will amount to the recognizing of that Right by law.

2. It will be hard to persuade the world, that the Kings adhering to his
Promises, and his Coronation Oath, and to the known Laws of the land, would
make him Felo de se. The following of different methods were the likelier way
to it, if it were not for the Loyalty of the Church of England.

3. It will be very easy to see the use of continuing the Test by Law; since
all those that break through it, as well as the Judges, who have authorized their
Crimes, are still liable for all they do: and after all your huffing, with the
Dispencing Power, we do not doubt but the apprehension of an after reckoning
sticks deep somewhere, you say, it may be supposed, that the aversion of a
Protestant King to the Popish party, will sufficiently exclude them, even
without the Test. But it must be confessed, that you take all possible care, to
confirm that Aversion so far, as to put it beyond a it may be supposed. And it
seems you understand Christ's Prerogative, as well as the Judges did the Kings,
that fancy the Test is against it: it is so suitable to the nature of all
Governments, to take Assurances of those who are admitted to Places of Trust,
that you do very ill to appeal to an Impartial consideration, for you are sure
to lose it there.

Few English men, will believe you in earnest when you seem zealous for public
liberty, or the Magna Charta: or that you are so very apprehensive of Slavery:
And your Friends must have very much changed both their Natures and their
Principles, if their conduct does not give cause to renew the like Statutes
against them, even tho they should be repealed in this Reign, notwithstanding
all your confidence to the contrary. I will still believe that the strong
Argument of Numbers will be always the powerfullest of all others with you:
which as long as it has its Force, and no longer, we may hope to be at quiet. I
concur heartily with you in your Prayers for the King, tho perhaps I differ
from you in my Notions, both of his Glory and of the Felicity of his People:
and as for your own particular, I wish you would either not at all Employ your
Pen, or learn to write to better purpose: but tho I cannot admire your Letter,
yet I am

YOUR HUMBLE SERVANT T. T.

THE EARL of MELFORT's LETTER To the Presbyterian-Ministers IN SCOTLAND, Writ
in his Majesty's Name upon their Address; Together with some Remarks upon it.
The Earl of Melfort's Letter.
Gentlemen;
I Am commanded by his Majesty, to signify unto you his gracious acceptance of
your Address, that he is well satisfied with your Loyalty expressed therein;
for the which he resolves to perpetuate the favor, not only during his own
Reign, but also to lay down Ways for its Continuance, and that by appointing in
the next ensuing Parliament the taking off all Penal Statutes contrary to the
Liberty or Toleration granted by him.

His Majesty knows, that Enemies to Him, to You, and this Toleration, will be
using all Endeavors to infringe the same; but as ever the Happiness of his
Subjects Standing in Liberty of Conscience, and the Security of their
Properties (next the Glory of God) has been his Majesty's great end, so he
intends to continue, if he have all suitable Encouragement and Concurrence from
you in your Doctrine and Practice; and therefore as he has taken away the
Protestant Penal Statutes lying on you, and herein has walked contrary not only
to other Catholic Kings, but also in a way different from Protestant Kings who
have gone before him, whose Maxim was to undo you, by Fining, Confining, and
taking away your Estates, and to harrass you in your Persons, Liberties and
Privileges; so he expects a thankful acknowledgment from you, by making your
Doctrine tend, to cause all his Subjects to walk obediently, and by your
Practice walking so as shall be most pleasing to his Majesty, and the
concurring with him for the removing these Penal Statutes: and he further
expects that you continue your Prayers to God for his long and happy Reign, and
for all Blessings on his Person and Government; and likewise that you look well
to your Doctrine, and that your Example be influential: all th^se are his
Majesty's Commands.

Sic subs. MELFORT.

REMARKS.
THe Secretary hand is known to all the Writing Masters of the Town; but here is
an Essay of the Secretary's Style for the Masters of our Language: This is an
Age of Improvements, and Men that come very young into Employments, make
commonly a great progress; therefore common things are not to be expected here:
it is true, some Roughnesses in the Style seem to intimate that the Writer
could turn his Conscience more easily than he can do his Pen, and that the one
is a little stiffer and less compliant than the other. He tells the Addressers,
that His Majesty is well satisfied with their Loyalty contained in their
Address; for the which he resolves to perpetuate the favor. It appears that
the Secretary Style and the Notary Style come nearer one another than was
generally believed: For the which here, and infringe the same afterward, are
beauties borrowed from the Notary Style: the foresaid is not much courser. The
King's perpetuating the Favor is no easy thing, unless he could first
perpetuate himself. Now tho his Majesty's Fame will be certainly immortal, yet
to our great Regret his Person is mortal; so it is hard to conceive, how this
perpetuity should be settled.

The Method here proposed is a new Figure of the Secretary Style: which is the
Appointing in the next ensuing Parliament the taking off all Penal Laws. All
former Secretaries used the modest Words of proposing or recommending; but he
who in a former Essay of this Style, told us of his Majesty's Absolute Power,
to which all the Subjects are to obey without reserve, furnishes us now with
this new term of the King's appointing what shall be done in Parliament. But
what if after all, the Parliament proves so stubborn, as not to comply with
this Appointment, I am afraid then the Perpetuity will be of a shrort
continuance. He in the next place, mentions the Liberty or Toleration granted
by the King. Liberty is not so hard a Word, but that it might be understood
without this Explanation or Toleration, unless the Secretary Style either
approaches to the Notary Style in some nauseous Repetitions, or that he would
intimate by this, that all the Liberty that is left the Subjects is
comprehended in this Toleration. And indeed, after Absolute Power was once
asserted, it was never fit to name Liberty without some restriction. After this
comes a stately Period, The Enemies to him, to you, and to this Toleration. Yet
I should be sorry if it were true; for I hope there are many Enemies to this
Toleration, who are neither Enemies to the King, nor to these Addressers; and
that on the contrary they are Enemies to it, because they are the best Friends
that both the King and the People have. It is now no secret, that though both the
Prince and Princess of Orange, are great Enemies to Persecution, and in
particular to all Rigor against the Presbyterians, yet they are not satisfied
with the way in which this Toleration is granted. But the reckoning of them as
Enemies either to the King or the People, is one of the Figures of this Style,
that will hardly pass: and some will not stick to say, that the Writer of this
Letter, has with this dash of his Pen, declared more Men Enemies to the King,
than ever he will be able to make Friends to him. He tells them next, that
these Enemies will be using all endeavors to infringe the same. This is also a
strong Expression. We know the use of the Noun Infraction, but Infringe is
borrowed from the Notaries; yet the plain sense of this seems to be, that those
Enemies will disturb the Meetings, of which I do not hear any of them have the
least thought, yet by a secret Figure of the Secretary Style, perhaps this
belongs to all those who either think that the King cannot do it by Law, or
that will not give their Vote to confirm it in Parliament: but I am not so well
acquainted with all the Mysteries of this Style, as to know its full depth.

There comes next a long period of 50 words, for I was at the pains to count
them all, which seemed a little too prolix for so short a letter, especially in
one that writes after the French pattern. But as ever the Happiness of his
Subjects, Standing in Liberty of Conscience, and the Security of their
Properties, next the Glory of God, has been his Majesty's great End; So he
Intends to continue, if he have all suitable Encouragement and Concurrence from
you, in your Doctrine and Practice. The putting ever at the beginning of the
Period, and at so great a Distance from that to which it belongs, is a new
beauty of Style. And the Standing of this Happiness, makes me reflect on that
which I hear a Scotch Preacher delivered in a Sermon, that he doubted this
Liberty would prove but like a Standing Drink. The King's receiving suitable
Encouragement from his Subjects, agrees ill with the height of Style that went
before, of appointing what the Parliament must do. Kings receive returns of
Duty and Obedience from their Subjects; but hitherto Encouragement was a word
used among Equals: the applying it to the King, is a new figure. A man not
versed in the Secretary Style would have expressed this matter thus. His
Majesty has ever made the Happiness of his Subjects, which consists in Liberty
of Conscience, and the Security of Property, his great end, next to the Glory
of God: and he intends to do so still, if he receives all suitable returns from
you in your Doctrine and practice. I have marked this the more particularly, to
make the difference between the Common and the Secretary Style the more
sensible. But what need is there of the Concurrence of the Addressers, with the
King, if he appoints the next Parliament to take off all the Penal Laws. Must
we likewise believe that His Majesty's Zeal for the Happiness of his Subjects,
depends on the Behavior of These Addressers: and on the Encouragement that he
receives from them, so that he will not continue it, unless they Encourage him
in it. This is but an Uncertain tenure, and not like to be perpetual. But after
all the Secretary Style is not the Royal Style, so notwithstanding this
beautiful Period, we hope our Happiness is more steady, than to turn upon the
Encouragings of a few Men: otherwise if it is a standing Happiness yet it is a
very tottering one. The Protestant Penal Statutes, is another of his
Elegancies: for since all the Penal Laws as well those against Papists, as
those against Dissenters, were made by Protestant Parliaments, one does not see
how fitly this Epithete comes in here; another would have worded this, thus,
the Penal Statutes made against Protestants. But the new Style has figures
peculiar to it self, that pass in the Common Style for Improprieties.

This Noble Lord is not contented to raise His Majesty's Glory above all other
Catholic Kings, in this grant of Liberty or Toleration, in which there is no
competition to be made; for tho the Most Christian King, who is the Eldest son
of that Church, has indeed executed her Orders in their full extent of
severity, yet His Majesty, who is but the Cadet in that Church's Catalogue of
honor, it seems does not think that he is yet so much beholding to his Mother
as to gratify her by the Destruction of his People: yet I say, as if this were
too little, the King's Glory is here carried farther, even above the Protestant
Kings, who have gone before him: whose Maxim was to undo you, by Fining,
Confining and taking away your Estates, and to harrass you in your Persons,
Liberties and Privileges. Here is an honor that is done the King's Ancestors
by one of his Secretaries, which is indeed new, and of his own Invention: the
Protestant Kings can be no other than the Kings Brother, his Father, and his
Grandfather. Kings shut out Q. Elisabeth, who might have been brought in if the
more general term of Crowned heads had been made use of; but as the Writer has
ordered it, the satyr falls singly on the King's Progenitors: for the Papers
that were found in the Strong Box, will go near to put the late King out of the
list of Protestant Kings: so that this Reproach lies wholly on the King's
Father and his Grandfather. It is a little surprising, after all the Eloquence
that has been Employed to raise the Character of the late Martyr to so high a
pitch, that one of his Sons Secretaries should set it under his hand in a
letter that he pretends is written by the King's Commands, that he made it a
Maxim to undo his People. The Writer of this Letter should have avoided the
mentioning of fines, since it is not so long, since both He and his Brother
valued themselves on a point that they carried in the Council of Scotland, that
Husbands should be fined for their wives not going to Church, tho it was not
founded on any Law. And of all Men living he ought to be the last that should
speak of the taking away Estates; who got a very fair one during the present
Reign, by an Act of Parliament, that Attainted a Gentleman in a Method as new
as his Style is; Upon this ground, that two Privy Councillors declared, they
believed him guilty. He will hardly find among all the Maxims of those
Protestant Persecuting Kings any one that will Justify this.

It seems the New Style is not very Copious in Words, since Doctrine is three
times repeated in so short a Letter: He tells them* that their Doctrine must
tend to cause all the subjects to walk obediently; now by obediently in this
Style, is to obey the Absolute Pomer without reserve; for to obey according to
Law, would pass now for a Crime: this being then his meaning, it is probable
that the Encouragements which are necessary to make His Majesty continue the
happiness of his Subjects, will not be so very great, as to Merit the
perpetuating this favor. There is with this a heavy charge laid upon them as
to their practice; that it must be such as shall be most pleasing to His
Majesty; for certainly that can only be by their turning Papists: since a
Prince that is so zealous for his Religion, as His Majesty is, cannot be so
well pleased with any other thing as with this. Their concurring with the King
to remove the Penal Laws, comes over again; for tho Repetitions are
Impertinencies in the Common Style, they are Flowers in the new one.

In Conclusion, he tells them, that the King expects, that they will continue
their prayers for him; yet this does not agree too well with a Catholic Zeal:
for the prayers of Damned Heretics cannot be worth the asking; for the third
time he tells them to look well to their Doctrine: now this is a little
ambiguous; for it may either signify, that they should study the Controversies
well, so as to be able to defend their Doctrine solidly, or that they should so
mince it, that nothing may fall from them in their Sermons against Popery; this
will be indeed a looking to their Doctrine; but I do not know whether it will
be thought a looking well to it or not. He adds, that their Example be
Influential: I confess this hard new Word frighted me: I suppose the meaning of
it is, that their practice may be such as that it may have an Influence on
others: yet there are both good and bad Influences, a good Influence will be
the animating the people to a Zeal for their Religion; and a bad one will be
the slackning and sofning of that Zeal. A little more Clearness here had not
been amiss.

As for the last Words of this Letter; that all these are his Majesty's
Commands; it is very hard for me to bring my self to believe them. For
certainly he has more Piety for the Memory of the late Martyr, and more regard
both to himself, to his children, and to his people, than to have ever given
any such commands.

In order to the communicating this Piece of Elegance to the World, I wish the
Translating it into French were recommended to Mr. d' Albeville: that it may
appear whether the Secretary Style will look better in his Irish French, than
it does now in the Scotch English of him who pen dit.

FINIS.
AN ANSWER To A PAPER Printed with Allowance, Entitled, A New Test of the
Church of England's Loyalty.
I. THe Accusing the Church of England of Want of Loyalty, or the putting it to
a new Test, after so fresh a one, with relation to His Majesty, argues a high
degree of Confidence in him who undertakes it. She knew well what were the
Doctrines and Practices of those of the Roman Church, with Relation to
Heretics; and yet She was so true to her Loyalty, that She shut her eyes on
all the Temptations, that so just a fear could raise in her: and She set her
self to support His Majesty's Right of Succession, with so much Zeal, that She
thereby not only put her self in the power of her Enemies; but She has also
exposed her self to the Scorn of those who insult over her in her Misfortune.
She lost the Affections even of many of her own Children; who thought that her
Zeal for an Interest, which was then so much decry'd, was a little too fervent:
and all those who judged severely of the proceedings, thought that the
Opposition which She made to the side that then went so high, had more Heat
than Decency in it. And indeed all this was so very Extraordinary, that if She
was not acted by a principle of Conscience, She could make no Excuse for her
conduct^ There appeared such peculiar Marks of Affection and Heartiness, at
every time that the Duke was named, whether in Drinking his Health, or upon
graver Occasions, that it seemed affected: and when the late King himself
(whose Word they took that he was a Protestant) was spoke of but coldly, the
very Name of the Duke set her Children all on fire; this made many conclude,
that they were ready to Sacrifice all to him; for indeed their behavior was
inflamed with so much Heat, that the greater part of the Nation believed they
waited for a fit opportunity to declare themselves. Faith in Jesus Christ was
not a more frequent Subject of the Sermons of many, than Loyalty; and the Right
of the Succession to the Crown, the Heat that appeared in the Pulpit, and the
Learning that was in their Books on these Subjects, and the Eloquent Strains
that were in their Addresses, were all Originals; and made the World conclude,
that whatever might be laid to their charge, they should never be accused of
any want of Loyalty, at least in this King's time, while the remembrance of so
signal a service was so fresh. When His Majesty came to the Crown, these men
did so entirely depend on the Promise that he made, to maintain the Church of
England, that the doubting of the performance appeared to them the worst sort
of Infidelity. They believed, that in His Majesty, the Hero, and the King,
would be too strong for the Papist: and when any one told them, How weak a tie
the Faith of a Catholic to Heretics must needs be, they could not hearken to
this with any patience; but looked on His Majesty's Promise as a thing so
Sacred, that they employed their Interest to carry all Elections of
Parliament Men, for those that were recommended by the Court, with so much
Vigor, that it laid them open to much Censure. In Parliament they moved for no
Laws to secure their Religion; but assuring themselves, that Honor was the
Kings Idol, they laid hold on it, and fancied, that a public reliance on his
Word, would give them an Interest in his Majesty, that was Generous, and more
suitable to the Nobleness of a Princely Nature than any new Laws could be: so
that they acquiesced in it, and gave the King a vast Revenue for Life: In the
Rebellion that followed, they showed with what Zeal they adhered to His
Majesty, even against a Pretender that declared for them. And in the Session of
Parliament, which came after that, they showed their disposition to assist the
King with new Supplies; and were willing to Excuse and Indemnify all that was
past; only they desired with all possible Modesty, that the Laws which His
Majesty had both Promised, and at his Coronation had Sworn to maintain, might
be executed. Here is their Crime, which has raised all this Outcry; They did
not move for the Execution of Severe or Penal Laws, but were willing to let
those sleep, till it might appear by the behavior of the Papists, whether they
might deserve that there should be any Mitigation made of them in their Favor.
Since that time, our Churchmen have been constant in mixing their Zeal for
their Religion against Popery, with a Zeal for Loyalty against Rebellion,
because they think these two are very well consistent one with another. It is
true, they have generally expressed an unwillingness to part with the two
Tests; because they have no mind to ^ust the keeping of their Throats to those
who they believe will cut them: and they have seen nothing in the conduct of
the Papists, either within or without the Kingdom, to make them grow weary of
the Laws for their sakes; and the same principle of common sense, which makes
it so hard for them to believe Transubstantiation, makes them conclude, that
the Author of this Paper, and his Friends, are no other, than what they hear,
and see, and know them to be.

II. One Instance in which the Church of England showed her Submission to the
Court, was, that as soon as the Nonconformists had drawn a new Storm upon
themselves, by their meddling in the matter of the Exclusion, many of her
Zealous Members went into that Prosecution of them, which the Court set on
foot, with more Heat, than was perhaps either justifiable in it self, or
reasonable in those Circumstances; but how censurable soever some angry men may
be, it is somewhat strange to see those of the Church of Rome blame us for it,
which has decreed such unrelenting Severities against all that differ from her,
and has enacted that not only in Parliaments but even in General Councils. It
must needs sound odly to hear the Sons of a Church, that must destroy all
others as soon as it can compass it, yet complain of the Excesses of Fines and
Imprisonments, that have been of late among us. But if this Reproach seems a
little strange when it is in the Mouth of a Papist, it is yet much more
provoking, when it comes from any of the Court. Were not all the Orders for the
late Severity sent from thence? Did not the Judges in every Circuit, and the
Favorite Justices of Peace in every Sessions, employ all their Eloquence on
this Subject? The Directions that were given to the Justices and the Grand
Juries were all repeated Aggravations of this Matter: and a little Ordinary
Lawyer, without any other visible Merit, but an Outrageous Fury in those
Matters, on which he has chiefly valued himself, was of a sudden taken into His
Majesty's special Favor, and raised up to the Highest Posts of the Law. All
these things, led some of our Obedient Clergy, to look on it as a piece of
their Duty to the King, to encourage that Severity, of which the Court seemed
so fond, that almost all People thought, they had set it up for a Maxim, from
which they would never depart. I will not pretend to excuse all that has been
done of late years: but it is certain, that the most crying Severities have
been acted by persons that were raised up to be Judges and Magistrates for that
very end: they were Instructed, Trusted, and Rewarded for it, both in the last
and under the present Reign. Church-preferments were distributed, rather as
Recompenses of this devouring Zeal, than of a real Merit; and men of more
moderate Tempers were not only ill looked at, but ill used. So that it is in it
self very unreasonable to throw the load of the late Rigor on the Church of
England, without distinction: but it is worse than in good manners it is fit to
call it, if this Reproach comes from the Court. And it is somewhat unbecoming
to see that, which was set on at one time, disowned at another; while yet he
that was the Chief Instrument in it is still in so high a post; and begins now
to treat the Men of the Church of England, with the same Brutal Excesses, that
he bestowed so lately and so liberally on the Dissenters; as if his design were
to render himself equally odious to all Mankind.

III. The Church of England may justly expostulate when she is treated as
Seditious, after she has rendered the highest Services to the Civil Authority,
that any Church now on Earth has done: She has beaten down all the Principles
of Rebellion, with more Force and Learning, than any Body of men has ever yet
done; and has run the hazard of enraging her Enemies, and losing her Friends,
even for those, from whom the more learned of her Members knew well what they
might expect. And since our Author likes the figure of a Snake in ones Bosom so
well; I could tell him, that according to the Apologue, we took up and sheltred
an Interest, that was almost Dead, and by that warmth gave it Life, which yet
now with the Snake in the Bosom, is like to bite us to Death. We do not say, we
are the only Church that has Principles of Loyalty; but this we may say, that
we are the Church in the World that carries them the highest; as we know a
Church that of all others sinks them the lowest. We do not pretend that we are
Inerrable in this point, but acknowledge that some of our Clergy miscarried in
it upon King Edwards Death: Yet at the same time, others of our Communion
adhered more steadily to their Loyalty in favor of Queen Mary, than She did to
the Promises that she made to them. Upon this Subject our Author by his false
Quotation of History, forces me to set the Reader right, which if it proves to
the disadvantage of his Cause, his Friends may thank him for it. I will not
enter into so tedious a digression as the justifying Queen Elisabeths being
Legitimate, and the throwing the Bastardy on Queen Mary must carry me to; this
I will only say, that it was made out, that according to the best sort of
Arguments used by the Church of Rome, I mean the constant Tradition of all
Ages, King Henry the VIII. marrying with Queen Katherine, was Incestuous, and
by Consequence Queen Mary was the Bastard, and Queen Elisabeth was the
Legitimate issue. But our Author not satisfied with defaming Queen Elisabeth,
tells us, that the Church of England was no sooner set up by her, than She
enacted those Bloody Cannibal Laws, to Hang, Draw and Quarter the Priests of
the Living God: But since these Laws disturb him so much, what does he think
of the Laws of Burning the poor Servants of the Living God, because they cannot
give Divine Worship to that which they believe to be only a Piece of Bread? The
Representation he gives of this part of our History, is so false, that though
upon Queen Elisabeth's coming to the Crown, there were many Complaints
exhibited of the Illegal Violences that Bonner and other Butchers had
committed, yet all these were stifled, and no Penal Laws were enacted against
those of that Religion. The Popish Clergy were indeed turned out; but they were
well used, and had Pensions assigned them; so ready was the Queen and our
Church to forgive what was past, and to show all Gentleness for the future.
During the first thirteen years of her Reign, matters went on calmly, without
any sort of Severity on the account of Religion. But then the restless spirit
of that Party, began to throw the Nation into violent Convulsions. The Pope
deposed the Queen, and one of the Party had the Impudence to post up the Bull
in London; upon this followed several Rebellions, both in England and Ireland,
and the Papists of both Kingdoms entered into Confederacies with the King of
Spain and the Court of Rome; the Priests disposed all the People that depended
on them, to submit to the Popes Authority in that Deposi^ion, and to reject the
Queens: These endeavors, besides open Rebellions, produced many Secret
Practices against her Life. All these things gave the rise to the severe Laws,
which began not to be enacted before the twentieth year of her Reign. A War was
formed by the Bull of Deposition, between the Queen and the Court of Rome, so
it was a necessary Piece of Precaution, to declare all those to be Traitors who
were the Missionaries of that Authority which had stripped the Queen of hers: yet
those Laws were not executed upon some Secular Priests who had the Honesty to
condemn the Deposing Doctrine. As for the Unhappy Death of the Queen of
Scotland, it was brought on by the wicked Practices of her own Party, who
fatally Involved her in some of them; She was but a Subject here in England;
and if the Queen took a more Violent way, than was decent for her own Security,
here was no Disloyalty nor Rebellion in the Church of England, which owed her
no sort of Allegiance.

IV. I do not pretend that the Church of England has any great cause to value
her self upon her Fidelity to King Charles the First, though our Author would
have it pass for the only thing of which She can boast: for I confess, the
cause of the Church was so twisted with the King's, that Interest and Duty went
together: tho I will not go so far as our Author, who says, that the Law of
Nature dictates to every Individual to fight in his own Defense: This is too
bold a thing to be delivered so crudely at this time. The Laws of Nature are
perpetual, and can never be cancelled by any special Law: So if these Gentlemen
own so freely, that this is a Law of Nature, they had best take care not to
provoke Nature too much, lest She fly to the Relief that this Law may give her,
unless she is restrained by the Loyalty of our Church. Our Author values his
Party much upon their Loyalty to King Charles the First: but I must take the
Liberty to ask him, of what Religion were the Irish Rebels; and what sort of
Loyalty was it, that they showed either in the first Massacre, or in the
progress of that Rebellion? Their Messages to the Pope, to the Court of France,
and to the Duke of Lorrain, offering themselves to any of these, that would
have undertaken to protect them, are Acts of Loyalty, which the Church of
England is no way inclined to follow: and the Authentical Proofs of these
things are ready to be produced. Nor need I add to this, the hard terms that
they offered to the King, and their ill usage of those whom he Employed. I
could likewise repress the Insolence of this Writer, by telling him of the
Slavish Submissions that their Party made to Cromwell, both Father and Son. As
for their Adhering to King Charles the First, there is a peculiar Boldness in
our Authors Assertion, who says, that they had no Hope nor Interest in that
Cause: The State of that Court is not so quite forgot, but that we do well
remember what Credit the Queen had with the King, and what Hopes She gave the
Party; yet they did not so entirely espouse the Kings Cause, but that they had
likewise a flying Squadron in the Parliaments Army, how boldly soever this may
be denied by our Author; for this I will give him a proof, that is beyond
exception, in a Declaration of that King's, sent to the Kingdom of Scotland,
bearing date the 21. of April 1643. which is printed over and over again, and
as an Author that writes the History of the late Wars, has assured us the clean
draught of it, corrected in some places with the King's own hand, is yet
extant: so that it cannot be pretended, that this was only a bold assertion of
some of the Kings Ministers, that might be ill affected to their Party. In that
Declaration the King studied to possess his Subjects of Scotland with the
Justice of his Cause, and among other things, to clear himself of that
Imputation that he had an Army of Papists about him, after many things said on
that head, these words are added: Great numbers of that Religion have been with
great alacrity entertained in that Rebellious Army against us: and others have
been seduced, to whom we had formerly denied Employments; as appears by the
Examination of many Prisoners, of whom we have taken twenty and thirty at a
time of one Troop or Company of that Religion. I hope our Author will not have
the Impudence to dispute the Credit that is due to this Testimony: but no
Discoveries, how evident soever they may be, can affect some sort of men; that
have a Secret against blushing.

V. Our Author exhorts us, to change our Principles of Loyalty, and to take
Example of our Catholic Neighbors, how to behave our selves toward a Prince,
that is not of our Persuasion: But would he have us learn of our Irish
Neighbors, to cut our Fellow Subjects Throats, and rebel against our King,
because he is of another Religion? for that is the freshest Example that any of
our Catholic Neighbors have set us: and therefore I do not look so far back,
as to the Gunpowder-plot, or the League of France in the last Age. He
reproaches us for failing in our Fidelity to our King. But in this matter we
appeal to God, Angels, and Men; and in particular to His Majesty: Let our
Enemies show any one Point of our Duty, in which we have failed: for as we
cannot be charged for having preached any Seditious Doctrine, so we are not
wanting in the Preaching of the Duties of Loyalty, even when we see what they
are like to cost us. The point which he singles out is, that we have failed in
that grateful Return, that we owed His Majesty for his Promise, of Maintaining
our Church as it is established by Law; since upon that we ought to have
repealed the Sanguinary Laws, and the late Impious Tests: the former being
enacted to maintain the Usurpation of Queen Elisabeth; and the other being
contrived to exclude the present King. We have not failed to pay all the
Gratitude and Duty that was possible, in return to His Majesty's Promise; which
we have carried so far, that we are become the Object even of our Enemies Scorn
by it. With all Humility be it said, that if His Majesty had promised us a
farther Degree of his Favor, than that of which the Law had assured us, it
might have been expected, that our return should have been a degree of
Obedience beyond that which was required by Law; so that the return of the
Obedience enjoined by Law, answers a Promise of a Protection according to Law:
yet we carried this matter further; for as was set forth in the beginning of
this Paper, we went on in so high a pace of Compliance and Confidence, that we
drew the censures of the whole Nation on us: nor could any Jealousies or Fears
give us the least Apprehensions, till we were so hard pressed in matters of
Religion, that we could be no longer silent: The same Apostle that taught us to
Honor the King, said likewise, that we must obey God rather than man. Our
Author knows the History of our Laws ill; for besides what has been already
said, touching the Laws made by Queen Elisabeth, the severest of all our Penal
Laws, and that which troubles him and his friends most, was past by K. James
after the Gunpowder-plot; a Provocation that might have well justified even
greater Severities. But tho our Author may hope to Imp^se on an Ignorant
Reader, who may be apt to believe Implicitly, what he says concerning the Laws
of the last Age, yet it was too bold for him to assert, that the Tests, which
are so lately made, were contrived to exclude the present King: when there was
not a thought of Exclusion many years after the first was made, and the Duke
was excepted out of the second by a special Proviso. But these Gentlemen will
do well never to mention the Exclusion; for every time that it is named, it
will make people call to mind, the service that the Church of England did in
that matter, and that will carry with it a Reproach of Ingratitude that needs
not be aggravated. He also confounds the two Tests, as if that for Public
Employments, contained in it a declaration of the King's being an Idolater, or
as he makes it, a Pagan: which is not at all in it; but in the other for the
Members of Parliament, in which there is indeed a Declaration, that the Church
of Rome is guilty of Idolatry; which is done in general terms, without applying
it to His Majesty, as our Author does: Upon this he would Infer, that his
Majesty is not safe till the Tests are taken away: but we have given such
Evidences of our loyalty, that we have plainly showed this to be false; since
we do openly declare, that our duty to the King is not founded on his being of
this or that Religion; so that His Majesty has a full Security from our
Principles, tho the Tests continue, since there is no reason that we, who did
run the hazard of being ruined by the Excluders, when the Tide was so strong
against us, would fail his Majesty now, when our Interest and Duty are joined
together: but if the Tests are taken away, it is certain that we can have no
Security any longer; for we shall be then laid open to the Violence of such
restless and ill-natured men, as the Author of this Paper and his Brethren are.

VI. The same reason that made our Savior refuse to throw himself down from
the roof of the Temple, when the Devil tempted him to it, in the vain
Confidence, that Angels must be assistant to him to preserve him, holds good in
our Case. Our savior said, Thou shall not Tempt the Lord thy God. And we dare
not trust our selves to the faith and to the Mercies of a Society, that is but
too well known to the World, to pretend, that we should pull down our Pales, to
let in such Wolves among us. God and the Laws have given us a legal Security,
and His Majesty has promised to maintain us in it: and we think it argues no
Distrust, either of God, or the Truth of our Religion, to say, that we cannot
by any Act of our own, lay our selves open, and throw away that defense. Nor
would we willingly expose His Majesty to the unwearied Solicitations of a sort
of men, who, if we may Judge of that which is to come, by that which is past,
would give him no rest, if once the restraints of Law were taken off, but would
drive matters to those Extremities, to which we see their Natures carry them
headlong.

VII. The last Paragraph is a strain worthy of that school that bred our
Author; he says, His Majesty may withdraw his Royal Protection from the Church
of England which was promised her, upon the account of her constant Fidelity;
and he brings no other proof to confirm so bold an Assertion but a false Axiom
of that despised Philosophy, in which he was bred: Cessante causa tollitur
effectus. This is indeed such an Indignity to His Majesty, that I presume to
say it with all humble reverence, these are the last persons whom he ought to
pardon, that have the boldness to touch so sacred a point as the faith of a
Prince, which is the chief security of Government, and the Foundation of all
the Confidence that a Prince can promise himself from his People, and which,
once blasted, can never be recovered: Equivocations may be both taught and
practiced with less danger by an Order that has little Credit to lose; but
nothing can shake Thrones so much, as such treacherous Maxims. I must also ask
our Author, in what point of Fidelity has our Church failed so far, as to make
her forfeit her Title to His Majesty's Promises? for as he himself has stated
this matter, it comes all to this. The King promised that he would maintain the
Church of England as established by Law. Upon which in Gratitude he says, that
the Church of England was bound to throw up the Chief Security that she had in
her Establishment by Law; which is, that all who are Entrusted either with the
Legislative or the Executive parts of our Government, must be of her Communion;
and if the Church of England is not so tame and so Submissive, as to part with
this, then the King is free from his Promise, and may withdraw his Royal
Protection; tho I must crave leave to tell him, that the Laws gave the Church
of England a Right to that Protection, whether His Majesty had promised it or
not.

Of all the Maxims in the World, there is none more hurtful to the Government,
in our present Circumstances, than the saying, that the Kings Promises and the
Peoples Fidelity ought to be Reciprocal; and that a Failure in the one, cuts
off the other: for by a very Natural Consequence the Subject may likewise say,
that their Oaths of Allegiance being founded on the Assurance of His Majesty's
Protection, the One binds no longer than the Other is observed: and the
Inferences that may be drawn from hence will be very terrible, if the Loyalty
of the so much decryed Church of England, does not put a stop to them.

FINIS.

