A LETTER WRIT BY The Lord Bishop of Salisbury, TO THE Lord Bishop of Cov. and
Litchfield, CONCERNING A Book lately Published, called, A Specimen of some
Errors and Defects in the History of the Reformation of the Church of England,
by Anthony Harmer.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. M DC XC III.

A LETTER Writ by the Ld. BISHOP of SALISBURY, To the Ld. Bishop of Cov. and
Litchfield, Concerning A Book lately Published, called, A Specimen of some
Errors and Defects, etc.
MY LORD,
A Book lately published, under the Title of a Specimen of the Errors and
Defects in my History of the Reformation, calls upon me to say somewhat in
Justification of that Work: Which I intend to do in the same Method in which I
composed that History; and address it first of all to you, and then to the
Public, after it has past under your Censure; in which I know you will use the
same friendly and plain Freedom that you did in perusing the other; and let
nothing pass, to which you find any just, or even plausible exception. And
indeed, if there are such Errors in that Work, as this Specimen pretends to
discover, and puts the world in expectation of more, this being offered but as
a sampler, that does not amount to above a Third part of what may come
afterward; your Lordship must submit to bear some part of the blame.

You know well, that you were the Person that pressed me most to undertake that
work; and to encourage me to it, you promised me two very valuable things; the
one was, The Copying-out of all your Collections relating to that time: The
Value of this can only be judged by those who have seen with what an amazing
Diligence, and to how vast an Extent, and in how exact a Method, all those many
Volumes, I had almost said, that Library of Collections, is digested. No part
of this pleased me more, than that Criticalness which is so peculiar to your
self, in marking all Dates so punctually; this being one of the most necessary,
but withal one of the most unacceptable (to me at least) of all the Labors of
a Historian. All this, as far as concerned my Design, I had the free use of,
and I found my Work much shortened by it. Your other Promise was no less exactly
performed by you, of revising my first Draughts with that Censorious Severity
that became your Zeal for Truth, and for that Great Work, and also that most
obliging Friendship with which you had honored my self. And you did acquit
your self in all Points as became an Honest Man, and a Faithful Friend. You
spared me in nothing; you made both Rasures, Additions, and Alterations, with
so much Reason, and so true a Judgment, that I all along felt what I can never
enough acknowledge, how happy I my self was, and how great Advantages that work
received from the share that you were pleased to take in it. So that I hope you
will suffer me to say, that you ought to take some share likewise in the Fault
that is found with the History, and the Reproaches that are cast both on it and
on my self. Your Friends have hitherto often blamed you, for being so minutely
Critical in all you do, which as they do rightly judge, has deprived the world
of a great deal that might have been otherwise expected from you; and no man
has taken the liberty to complain more of this than my self, who have seen the
almost incredible Compass and Fullness of your Collections, which indeed seems
to be beyond what the longest life of any one man could lay together; and has
made me often say, That if you could be but at half the pains to bring out your
Learning, that you have been at to lay it up, never man should merit so much of
the Learned World, as you might do. This I confess made me the more secure in
Publishing my Work, when it was so strictly sifted by you; for I do still
preserve the Copy that was so carefully perused by you. The greatest part of it
was examined by you when you were in the Country, out of the Town, and out of
that vast Application in which you laid your self so entirely out upon the
greatest Parochial Cure of England, that it took up the whole Day constantly;
and tho you gave the best part of the Night to your Study, yet I could not have
expected, that a Work, in which every thing was to have been weighed, could
have had such a share in those hours as it required: But you reserved it for
your Retreats into the Country, and there you answered, and even exceeded my
Expectation.

You saw there was need of more than ordinary care, since we could not but
expect, that every thing of a work of this nature would be enquired into. I
confess we expected it from other hands. We thought they of that Church which
was most concerned to blemish the Honor of the Reformation, would have taken
some pains to have discredited its History, especially when they saw it had the
Reception which this Author confesses the World gave it; he is pleased to add,
justly; but it seems this was meant only to gild the Pill, for he has been at a
great deal of pains to lessen the Credit of it; with what Success, let the
world judge. I do not believe that he did this to ingratiate himself with them
whom he chiefly gratifies in this: But I do acknowledge, I looked for nothing
of this strain, from one of our own Communion.

It was no small addition to the Credit of the Work, that in the late Reign, in
which the Book and the Author both were in such Public Disgrace, yet nothing
was then Published to lessen its Esteem, and that it was appealed to by our
best Writers, as often as Matters of Fact were under Debate. But

Quod non fecerunt Barbari, fecerunt Barberini. I may be pardoned to quote from
Pasquin, since he that deals thus with me vouches Athenae Oxoniensis. I do not
trouble my self to find out the Author. I am assured that the Name in the Title
page of Anthony Harmer is a feigned one; nor, as I hear, does the Stationer for
whom it is printed, know any thing concerning him.

But this is a matter of no Consequence. I am only concerned to consider what
is said, and not who says it. And what Reason soever I may have to lay my
conjectures on the true Author, yet that is not to enter into the present
discourse: only I must crave leave to say, That a Man who pretends to have many
Papers in his Hands, and to affirm a great many things upon his Single Word,
without saying upon what authority he grounds most of his Corrections, ought to
have named himself True, and to have told how he came by his Informations: that
if we must take his word for every thing that he says, without searching into
the truth of it, yet at least we might have been able to quote our Author, in
those things for which he is pleased to give us no other Author but himself. He
treats me always with so much slighting and contempt, that if things of that
kind could provoke me much, I should be obliged to watch over both my Thoughts
and Pen for fear they should run too quick. He owns those low Thoughts of me,
that do indeed very well become me to entertain of my self, but look not so
decent in another, whom to my knowledge I never injured; and whom, if I guess
right, I have endeavored to serve. But it is of no great consequence how
meanly soever, he or any others may think of my Judgment or Learning, so long
as that work is like, for ought I see or can learn, to remain still as entire
in its reputation as ever, after such a keen attempt as he has made upon it.

The Scorn he lays upon me, and the injuries he does me, in charging me with
falsehood so often, give me very little disturbance: And the prejudices that
arise from such a way of Writing, are likelier to turn upon himself, than to do
me much hurt. Those things do very ill become Scholars and Christians, but
worst of all Men of our Profession, who ought never to be overcome of Evil, but
to overcome Evil with Good. And therefore though the station I am in, did not
reach him the regards that he owed it, how little soever I may deserve them,
yet it obliges me to write in a Style that becomes it, rather than in that
which he has deserved from me. Only in one particular I desire not to be
mistaken, as if the softness with which I treat him, was intended to Manage and
Cajole him, and so to prevent his going on with those farther Discoveries with
which he threatens me: For he says this was but a Months work at a destance
from Page 161.
his other helps, and that he has only Noted what his Memory and present
Collections suggested to him: Though by the way, ones Memory is no very good
Voucher, in things of this kind: I published that Work on design to undeceive
the World, and to give true relations of things; therefore I am very well
pleased to be informed my self, and to have the World told, though at my cost, if
I have been mistaken in any thing. Truth is great and must prevail: Therefore I
do so earnestly desire to see all that he can say of this kind, that if he
brings out no more, I shall be much disappointed of my hope, and shall complain
more of that, than of all the ill usage he has given me.

As to the charge of Falsehood that comes over so often, that it is plain by his
frequent repeating of it, that he intended it should stick. I can and do affirm
it, that to my knowledge, I did not willingly mistake, or misrepresent, nor so
much as suppress any one particular relating to that great Transpaction: If I
were called on to say this, with the highest solemnities of Religion, upon
Oath, or at the Sacrament; I am sure I can do it with a good Conscience. I have
also sent for Mr. Angus of St. Dunstans, who was then my Amanuensis, not having
leisure or other opportunities at present to enter into the retail of smaller
Matters; and have asked him if he can imagine, how there should be so many
mistakes about Dates in the transcribing of the Records; for this Author scarce
allows one of them to be true. And therefore he thinks little Credit is due to
the History, and that the Records Pa^. 26.
will be of little value if once there appears just reason to suspect the Care,
or the Fidelity of the Transcriber. And assures he the Reader, That of those
Dates which he has examined, he has found near as many to be false as true.

Mr. Angus was amazed at this, and said he was ready to take his Oath upon it,
that though he himself used his utmost diligence, to examine every Paper that he
copied out; yet I was never satisfied with that, but examined all over again my
self: So that I may sincerely say, what I once writ on a very solemn occasion,
at the making of my Will when I went out of England, that I writ that Work,
with the same fidelity that I should have given an Evidence upon Oath in a
Court of Judicature.

All this I think necessary to be said upon this occasion; for I do hereafter
expect to see this Specimen often brought out by those of the Roman Communion
to overthrow the credit of that History, which no doubt they will urge with a
sort of Triumph, since one who seems zealous for our Church, does charge it
with so much falsehood. For all this, I do not suspect this Writer of any
leaning to Popery, his zeal for justifying the Marriage of the Clergy, upon
which subject he seems to have taken some pains, is enough to cover him from
all such suspicions. But yet he seems so sharpened against me, that rather than
not vent his spleen, he would furnish them with a Weapon that they will not
fail to make use of on many occasions. He seems indeed to have some zeal for
one of the worst Bodies of the Roman Communion, the Monks of the later Ages:
and is concerned for the Reputation both of their Morals and of their Learning;
though for their Morals, where he censures me most severely for charging them
with Incontinence, he is pleased in the very next Leaf to brand them with such
Crimes as are not to be named among Christians. For their Learning, though he is
pleased to enter the Lists against me, yet I have reason to believe that he is
no admirer of it. His studies have been much that way, and it is natural for
Men to value that much on which they have bestowed much of their time: and
perhaps he has been Infected by the Rudeness and Maledicence that runs through
their Writings, to imitate so bad a Pattern.

He prevents one Objection to which he saw how open he was, that he was
sensible somewhat was to be said to it. I had invited all that could give me a
further light into those Matters, to communicate their Remarks or Discoveries
to me, and promised both to Retract my Mistakes, and acknowledge from whose
hands I had received better Imformation. But in answer to this, he sends me to
a passage in the Second Part of the Athenae Oxonienses. I confess I did not
expect to see a Writer of his Rank, descend so low as to cite such a Scribler,
especially upon such an occasion. That poor Writer has thrown together such a
tumultuary mixture of Stuff and Tattle, and has been so visibly a Tool of some
of the Church of Rome, to Reproach all the greatest Men of our Church, that no
Man who takes care of his own Reputation, will take any thing upon trust that
is said by one that has no Reputation to lose: He who has laid together all
that the malice of Missionaries could furnish him with, to blemish the Work of
one of the greatest Men of our Church, who was the lasting Honor of that See
which I do now so unworthily possess, I mean Bishop Jewel, does but follow his
stroke when he Calumniates my History: and he who has so barbarously attackt
the Memory of my immediate Predecessor Bishop Ward, who was in so many respects
one of the greatest Men of his Age, but that had appeared with too much zeal
against Popery, to be spared by one of their Faction: he, I say, does but like
himself, when he endeavors to blacken me with his Calumnies. But what is it
that this angry Correcter is pleased to take upon the word of such an Author?

He says Mr. Fulman complained much that I had not dealt faithfully with him in
Publishing his Correction of my first Volume. I have not that despicable Book
now by me, so I cannot quote the words, but this is the sense of them: and upon
this the Author of the Specimen depends so entirely, that he thinks he is by it
excused from using me in that friendly way that I had proposed, or in that
Charitable method which the Gospel directs. It happens that I have in this
Instance a great variety of proo^ to show the falsehood of this Calumny. You
know, My Lord, in particular, that it was Bishop ^ell of pious and blessed
Memory, that engaged Mr. Fulman to send up his Corrections to me. You your
self, and indeed every body else, thought they were not of that moment, that
they deserved so public a notice as I took of them: I confess I was of that
mind my self, but I thought it was fit for me upon that occasion, to behave my
self so as to encourage all others to set me right, if they found I was
mistaken in any particular; and that I might make as much advantage from Mr.
Fulman as was possible, I bore with an odd strain of sourness that run through
all his Letters. Bishop ^ell had prepared me for that; and I took every thing
well at his hands. I in conclusion drew a short Abstract of all his
Corrections, and sent it down to him to have his approbation of it, before it
should be Printed: for it would have been too tedious to have published them so
largely as he had sent them to me. I staid long for his Answer, till the
Carrier that brought his Letters to me, had come up a second time, from those
parts where he lived. It happened to be in the Month of February, before the
Sitting of the Oxford Parliament: and Mr. Chiswell thought it might be of some
Consequence in the Sale of the Work, to have it ready to appear at that time:
so he pressed a dispatch: for all stuck at the return which I expected from Mr.
Fulman. But the second Carrier bringing me no Answer, I took it for granted,
that he was satisfied with the Abstract that I had sent him; so I put it in the
Press. But before it was Printed off, the third Carrier came, and brought me
his Answer. He was satisfied with the main of what I had prepared, only he
desired that some Alteration might be made in four or five Articles: and so
careful was I to gratify him in every thing, that though these things were of no
Consequence, yet I would needs have all to be reprinted: his Corrections
happened to be all in one Leaf, so that Leaf was only reprinted, and pasted to
the other half of the Sheet: and this will be found in the greatest part of the
Copies of the First Edition of my Work, not in them all, for I stopped the Press
which was working, and reprinted a Leaf for all that were wrought off; and the
rest were Printed with those Amendations. So that both from Mr. Fulman's own
Letters, which I still do keep, and from this real Evidence, it appears how
unjustly this is laid upon me; and how weak an excuse this will prove for the
method in which this Author has thought fit to deal with me. Since I had in
that very Instance which he gives, used that Person with a Candor, that gave
me a right to expect fair dealing from all others.

Yet after all this and a great deal more that I might well urge, if I intended
to aggravate matters, I must say that I have not seen any one thing, relating
to my History, that has pleased me so much as this Specimen does. It is plain
that here is a Wrirer who has considered those times and that matter with much
application: And that he is a Master of this Subject; he has the Art of writing
skilfully, and how much soever he may be wanting in a Christian Temper, and in
the decency that one who owns himself of our Communion, owed to the Station I
hold in it; yet in other respects he seems to be a very valuable Man, so
valuable, that I cannot without a very sensible regret, see such Parts, and
such Industry, like to be soured and spoiled with so ill a Temper: All the
Heresies and Schisms in the Church have been either started or carried on by
Men who have been pussed up with their Knowledge, and have not tempered it with
that Charity which edifieth. As he is a Man capable of making the severest
Observations that the subject will bear: so he shows that he is so much set on
it, and so inclined to disparage both me and my work, that no body who reads
his Specimen, will believe that he is tender of me, or that he has spared me in
any one thing. So many Remarks that are so very trifling, force a Reader to
believe, that he had a mind to make a great Muster, and that it was merely want
of Matter that led him t^ make so much of things, on which no body, as far as I
can hear, besides himself, sets any value. I confess I my self value his Book
much more than I find any of the more judicious Readers tell me they do. I
value it so much, that I do earnestly desire that all those who have my Book,
will likewise procure this, as the best Apology that I know can be made for it.
Since in all this Collection, there is not any one material fault, relating to
any of the Transactions of the Reformation; and among those that he pretends to
find, there is not any one in which, even he himself* who is liberal in
accusing me of Falsehood, yet can charge me with any Fraud or ill Design: So
that how much soever* the reputation of my own Learning or Exactness may be
lessened by this Specimen, there is nothing brought to overthrow the Truth of
the History, in any important Matter: and if in things of no moment there was
not all that exactness used that was possible, the fault is the more
pardonable. And after all, so the Credit of that Work stands unshaken, let the
Credit of the Historian take its venture, and stand or fall as men may be
disposed to be kind to him, or severe upon him.

But after all that has been said in general, it is time now, that I should
come to speak more particularly to the things contained in his Book: I once
intended to have examined every one of all his Remarks; but your Lordship, as
well as the rest of my Reverend Brethren with whom I spoke upon this Subject,
were of opinion that his Reflections on my History, were not such as could
deserve, that either I my self should spend that time upon them which they will
require, and that may be certainly much better improved; or that I should
publish any thing of that kind, the reading of which must needs be both flat
and tedious: Since in that great variety which he has affected to bring
together, there is not any one Instance that seems to be of any Consequence.
Thirteen Years are now past since I finished that Work, so that now many of the
things that I writ are quite out of my Head: Yet I have taken care to preserve
all the Notes I then made, so carefully, that without seeking for it elsewhere,
I am confident, I could say enough in my own Defense, if I should again open my
Papers. But the things excepted to here are such trifles, that I had much
rather that the world should believe all that he says is true, than engage into
so fruitless a Controversy. Therefore in Compliance with your Advice, and
which my own Inclinations too, I shall decline this ungrateful Work, and shall
only offer somewhat on the several Heads on which he exercises his Censure.
Which may be reduced to these four.

The First are the Recapitulations that I make of the State in which things
were before the Reformation; in which he triumphs often over me, as Ignorant of
the Ancient English History: P. 9. 10, 1^, 2^.
and not having so much as a competent knowledge of it, nor being conversant
enough among the writings of the Monks and other Authors that lived in the dark
Ages, which preceded the Light. Indeed I am not at all out of Countenance to
own that I have not much studied those Authors: The little that I have studied,
did not encourage me to go further, than to carry in my mind a true view of the
state of the Church in those times, from which I might be able to judge of the
Necessity of a Reformation. The barbarous Style, the mixture of so much Fable,
the great want of Judgment, and the gross partiality that runs through the
Writings of the Monks, has so disgusted me at their Works, that I confess I
could never bring my self to read them with Pleasure. If any one that has more
Patience than I, can think it worth the while to search into that Rubbish, let
him write Volumes of Anglia Sacra, and have the Glory of it for his Pains: And
even these two Pompous Volumes have not at all changed my Taste. To dig in Mines
were not to me a more ungrateful employment. I am contented to take these
things from second hand, and am no more out of ^ountenance to own this, than to
own that I have no Arabic, or that I have not read the Talmud: A study after
all that I should vastly prefer to the other, i^ my Genius and Leisure should
favor it. After all this, he that Recapitulates, as I do in the places for
which I am censured, gives only general views of things, to furnish ordinary
Readers with some general Notions; so that no man expects an accuracy in this.
Nor does the Historian here, deliver any thing upon the credit of special
Vouchers, but only draws from other Books a short state of past times, to give
an Introduction to what he himself is to open: He neither pretends to be exact
nor particular: and so the view he gives is upon the main true; this is never
to be ^urther canvassed. This Author has very probably examined the M^nastick
Writers, and especially in the point of the Celibacy of the Clergy, more
minutely than I have done: and so he is very full of disdain, and comes over
with it very often, that I am ignorant of the Ancient English History: I own
it, as to that part in which he charges me, and if I had not been engaged in
that Work, I should have continued still much more ignorant than I am; without
either remorse or shame. I confess that made me go further than otherwise I
should ever have done, and much further than ever I shall do again: but he is
not satisfied with my proficiency, and I must bear his displeasure. But, after
all this, I must now say somewhat to your Lordship, and by the good leave of my
Most Learned brother, My Lord Bishop of Worcester, to him likewise, whom I take
the liberty to call in here for my excuse, without asking his leave; he being
now at such a distance. It was on you both, that I chiefly depended as to the
Correction of my Work: and all the World knows how exact you both are in those
matters. I remember well I desired you to look particularly into those
Recapitulations, that went into the dark Ages. I thought I had good Authority
for all I said, but I left it to you to judge whether I had or not: I am sure I
never pretended to justify any thing after either of you found fault with it.
I had all reason to believe that you had all possible zeal for having our
Reformation so opened, that its History should appear with credit, and be
liable to few exceptions: you both had also given me good reason to believe
that you had some care of my part in it, so that I conclude that either this
Critic is mistaken in some of his Remarks; or, that you did not think such a
minuteness was necessary, when a short Abstract was only proposed. It seems by
this Author, that your Lordship, whom I have often thought too exact, and by
Consequence too slow in all that passes through your hands, has been in this
too hasty, and too superficial: and perhaps you will receive this as a sort of
Reprimand, which may oblige you hereafter to be yet more exact and more slow
than you have hitherto been. But there is no need of all this Caution, since I
hope all the World will impute the looseness and omissions which are blamed by
the Specimen, and that were let pass by you., rather to your true Judgment,
that led you to conclude that too full an exactness in such a part of History,
is as vicious an Abundance, as the fullness of the account in what is to be
related, is ncessary and indispensable. Yet it is no small comfort to my self,
and no little honor to the Work, that in so vast a variety of Recapitulations,
as are made in both Volumes, he could find so little, and that too so
inconsiderable, for an entertainment to his Ill Humor: but I must not build
too much on this, till I see what the rest of his performances may produce,
which I must again tell him, I expect from him; otherwise I shall not take him
for a a man of his word.

A second Head of Censures is the many Dates that he finds to be amiss, upon
which he gives other dates, without descending so low as to tell from whence he
had them: which is a way of writing that no man ought to assume, when he is
censuring another, especially when he appears under a disguised name. As for
the dates he questions, I confess I cannot tell what to say to them, unless I
should enter a new upon that whole matter: Many of them I had from your
Lordship, and I am sure yours are right, if the Authors from whom you took
them, are not in the wrong. Others I took out of the several Offices, from
which I gathered my Materials: I might have writ them wrong, or Collationed
them too negligently; or perhaps he is in the wrong when he pretends to set me
right. He says he has made his Observations upon the Second Edition, which in
the Title page is said to be Corrected: Yet he who will teach us all exactness,
should have held to the first, for it was that only that I took care of, and
left all Editions since to the Booksellers care: So I am only answerable for
the first. Probably the Errata I drew out in the first, were Corrected in the
Second Edition, and upon that account it might be said to be Corrected: but
more new ones might have crept into it, especially in Figures.

When any thing of moment seems to depend upon a Date, it is in that case
necessary to use great Caution for fixing it right: but in the Course of a
History, where ordinary Transactions occurr, about which there has been no
Controversy, one may safely take Dates from the common Writers. If then I have
often followed either Fox or Goodwin, I do not think my self liable to a just
Censure, though the Date should be found to be wrong. But there is one thing,
that does very much offend this Author, that I have questioned the Exactness of
the Clerks in the enrolling of Dates: for he thinks that the Honor of the
whole Nation is much concerned in the Truth of Records. I confess, I thought
the Honor Page 3.
of Nations was not struck at as often, as the Diligence of any Clerk was
questioned. We know that notwithstanding the Religious Care of the Copiers of
Bibles, many of whom have been Monks, and so they are more particularly under
this Author's Protection; yet the different Readings make a competent Volume;
and though the Dates of the Roman Laws have been, and that justly too, esteemed
one of the surest Helps of Chronology; yet the Learned Gothofred, and Baluze
have undertaken to prove that very many of them are wrong, even in the
correctest Copies. When these Matters were fresher with me,* than they are now,
I could have given him many Proofs of, that Assertion, which yet is no
Asseveration, as he is pleased to call it: nor do I assert any thing of the
Record there in question, but say only in general, that the Enrolments are not
always exact as to Dates; and he must love Contradiction for Contradiction's
sake, that will quarrel with this. If one dictates to another, it is easy to
mistake thirty for thirteen, or to write eighteen for twenty eight, or thirteen
P. 28, 121, 153.
for twenty three; or sometimes to omit the Decimal Figure. After all, no
designed Mistake appears to be among all these that P. 127.
he reckons up: so there is neither Fraud in all this, nor Falsity, a word that
some of his Friends think it would have become him to use more sparingly.

But to conclude this Head, I promise you, that as soon as he has gone through
with his whole Undertaking, and that he gives me reason to believe that his
Correction of Dates is well-grounded, I will take care that none of them shall
be forgotten, but will correct all by them, if my History comes to be printed
again; for I desire nothing so much as to find out the Truth, even in the
smallest and the least important Matters: And I shall not decline to own my
Mistakes, whenever a full Conviction is offered me, though it be accompanied
with all the Rudeness, of which this Specimen has given so many blunt, but
designed Strokes.

The third Head to which these Censures do belong, is the Conjectures that I
was put to make in some places, where my Materials were defective: Upon some of
these he falls, and thinks that he has evinced that they are groundless. If he
had overthrown what I had affirmed as certain, there had been some cause of
Triumph: But I cannot imagine what harm it can do, either to a Man or to his
Work, that when he is put to guess, it is found that he guessed wrong in some
few Particulars: Yet after all, if I had a mind to value my self upon my
Conjectures, it is plain, that many of those I made in the first Volume, are
justified in the Second; and many of the Defects that he supplies by the Papers
which he has found, and that I never saw, justify others of my Conjectures: So
that if it appears from his Specimen, that I guessed sometimes wrong, it is no
less evident that I was much oftener right in my Conjectures. Nor is it a fair
way, when one studies to expose another, for guessing wrong, only to attack the
Conjecture it self, without examining the Grounds on which it was made: for if
the Grounds were but specious and plausible, they may serve to justify the
Conjecture, even where there appears better reason to lay it aside. He is
offended, because Judgments that I gathered Page 51.
in the first Part, happen to be contradicted by what is related in the Second.
Now a more candid Censurer would rather have made an Inference from that in
favor of my Sincerity; and have gathered from it, that I was not biassed by
any partiality to my own prejudging, but that I tell Truth, even though it
happens to disparage or detract from what I had formerly writ. In fine, he
thinks I say many things as Embellishments to my History, that are not
well-grounded. These are indeed small Matters, and they prove to be yet much
smaller, when they are doubtfully proposed: and whatever the strict importance
of the words no doubt may be, which has drawn such an angry Remark from him,
yet in P. 140. 141.
common use, it signifies no more than a Conjecture, of which one believes
himself pretty well assured.

But one Prejudice still remains against all Conjectures in History, since it
ought to be a severe recital of Matters of Fact, without the intermixture of
Conjectures and Inferences: Which not being certain, as they ought not to be
received, so they ought not to be proposed neither, since they prepossess and
often mislead the Reader. It were enough, in answer to this, to cite the
Authority of the most esteemed Writers of History that have frequently
practiced it; in particular of Padre Paulo, whose History of the Council of
Trent I acknowledge I made my Pattern: And that I might copy after it with some
Resemblance and Success, I read it over five or six times before I set about
that Work. If a Man is to write Memoirs, he must keep close to his Vouchers;
but when he writes a History, on a Subject of much Consequence, and that was
transacted long before his own Time, and that it is visible that many of the
most valuable Papers relating to it, are lost, but that enough remains to give
him a right view of the whole, and a Thread to guide him in it, he may
certainly find many Hints of Things, which since he cannot lay before his
Reader as Historical Facts, he may and ought to suggest them as Probabilities.
And he who forms a true Character of a Man, from some of his secretest Papers,
can frame Judgments, and see Likelyhoods that could never come in the way of
one who only reads his Work; but does not dwell so long upon it, nor turn it so
much in his Thoughts as he himself has done: And yet the offering of these may
be necessary, since they may be of use to let his Reader see further than he
would do without them. For instance, he is angry for my taking notice Page 87.
of Bonner's writing to his Friends for Puddings and Pears. I must desire you
to observe his Ingenuity in this, since my Reflection did not fall upon these
words of Bonner, but on his adding, that if his Friends did not furnish him
with them, he would give them to the Devil, to the Devil, and to all the
Devils. Now this from a Bishop in Affliction, writing to his private Friends,
showed a strange kind of Brutish levity; and the observing of that was not
below the Majesty of History, since Bonner acted so great a Part, during the
whole time that I write upon; so that such a Stroke as this, in my poor
Opinion, ought not to have been suppressed.

I come now to the fourth and last Head of the Specimen which relates to those
additional Discoveries that he has made. He calls them the Defects of my
History; how justly I leave to you, who are a true Critic in the use of Words.
According to my sense, a Defect is a vicious want of that with which one might
have supplied himself, if he had not been too careless. I cannot see what I
could have done more than I did, to be well Informed. I put Advertisements in
Gazettes, desiring the assistance of all that could furnish me with Materials.
I let two Years and a half pass between the publishing my first, and second
Volume. I did in the first desire the assistance of all the Learned and Curious
Men of the Nation: I went through all the Offices and Records that were about
London or Westminster: I went to Cambridge, when I understood that Archbishop
Parker's Manuscripts were there. I was upon going to Oxford, had not Bishop
Fell let me know that he was informed, they had nothing worth my Journey, that
was not already printed. I met with great Assistances from many Learned Men,
all which I gratefully and publicly acknowledged, and made the best use of
them that I could. I do not see what more I could do.

Your Lordship and several others of my worthy Friends, set all Persons that
you thought capable of assisting me, on work for Materials. That Great and good
Man who was then Lord Chancellor, the late Earl of Nottingham, did on many
Occasions recommend the procuring Materials for me in the most effectual
manner. Their Majesty's most deserving Attorney General that now is, was
pleased without my presuming to give him the trouble, to visit and examine some
Offices for me in the Country. If our Author has been an Inquisitive Man of so
long a standing, (he pretends to be longer, for he tells us of what he observed
20 Years ago) he could not but hear of all this, so there was occasion offered,
and Time given for him to have contributed out of his store. If I had refused
any help that had been offered me, or had not looked out and got together all
that could be had; If I had either called for no Assistance, presuming on my
own Industry; or if I had made so much haste, that I had prevented even the
diligence of Learned Men, here had been great occasion for Censare. But he has
got a Council-Book of the last four Years of King Edward the sixth's Reign, and
this must be brought out with great Pomp to reproach the Defects of my Work. I
had the Book of the first two Years of that Reign. But though it was freely
given me, I thought it did of right belong to the Crown, and delivered it in to
be kept among the Council-Books: if this Author does the same with his, then
his Quotations out of it may be examined. They make indeed the Valuablest part
of his Book. But neither these, nor any thing else he says, can be of any
value, till he gives himself his true Name, that (...) one may know how to look
into, or examine those things that he pretends to have in his Hands.

I have now gone as far as I can in so general a way; when your Lordship or any
other Person whose Judgment is of weight with me, advises me to descend into
further Specialties, I shall not decline it. Yet if I had any Inclination to
it, I think still it is best to make one Work for all, and to stay till he
brings forth that which he has in Reserve; for I will still hold him to it: he
must either give the World a great deal more, or he must expect to be thought
to have insinuated that which he cannot perform. Only when he writes next, I
wish he may do it with a better Spirit, and in a decenter Style. He who knows
so much, cannot judge so ill, as not to see that the attacking a Man's
Reputation, but especially a Bishop's, in so great a Point, as is that of his
Truth and Fidelity, upon which the Success of all his Labors, and the Credit
of his whole Life and Ministry does depend, is not a slight thing, and is not
to be attempted, unless one is very well assured, that what he objects, is not
only just in it self, but that it is incumbent on him to do it. The Fame of a
Man is a most valuable thing; and the Rules of Charity, and against Detraction
and Slander, are delivered in such weighty Strains in the New Testament, that
it is no small matter to make so bold with them.

The Years I have spent in the Service of the Church, the Labors I have
undergone, and the Station I am in, deserve at least a modest and decent
treatment: and my Diligence in that History, the Designs I pursue through it
all, and that Sincerity and Candor that even Enemies do acknowledge, appears in
its Contexture; the great Additions I had made to what was formerly known, and
the general Acceptance with which it has been entertained, both at Home and
Abroad, ought to have made a Man to have thought well of what he did, before he
had attacked it at all: but if he was so full of his Matter, that he was not to
be restrained, at least he ought to have writ it in another manner, with
another Air, and in a Strain of Civility (I had almost said Respect) suitable to
the Subject, and such as my way of Writing had deserved.

If this Author is so made, that nothing of all this touches him; I am sorry
for it, I will not treat him more roughly; but must despair of working on him
so as to do him good: I should think it a very particular Happiness, to be able
to turn such a Man to a better Mind, from that Sourness which prevails over him
at present. He seems capable of better and greater things; but till his
Capacity and his Industry are sanctified to him, at another rate than this
Specimen shows, he is a much worse Man for them, and will have a much greater
Account to make at the last Day.

I ask your Pardon for having given you so long a Trouble. I am, with all
possible Esteem and Respect,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most Affectionate Brother, and most humble Servant,
Gi. Sarum.
Windsor, Feb. 23. 1692/3.
FINIS.
Books Sold by Richard Chiswell.
BOOKS written by GILBERT BURNET, D. D. now Lord Bishop of Sarum.
THE History of the Reformation of the Church of England, in 2 Volumes. Folio.
-- Abridgment of the said History. Octavo. -- Vindication of the Ordinations of
Church of England. Quarto. -- History of the Rights of Princes in disposing of
Ecclesiastical Benefices and Church Lands. Octavo. -- Life of William Bedel, D.
D. Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland; togewith the Copies of certain Letters which
passed between Spain and England in matter of Religion, concerning the general
Motives to the Roman Obedience: Between Mr. James Wadsworth a late Pensioner of
the Holy Inquisition in Sevil, and the said William Bedel then Minister of the
Gospel in Suffolk. Octavo. -- Some Passages of the Life and Death of John late
Earl of Rochester. Octavo. -- Examination of the Letter writ by the late
Assembly-General of of the Clergy of France to the Protestants, inviting them
to return to their Communion; together with the Methods proposed by them for
their Conviction. Octavo. -- A Collection of seventeen Tracts and Discourses
written in the Years 1687 to 1685, inclusive. Quarto. -- A Second Volume, or a
Collection of eighteen Papers relating to the Affairs of Church and State
during the Reign of King James the Second. With twelve others published a
little before and since the late Revolution, to Christmas, 1689. -- Fast Sermon
at Bow-Church; March 12, 1689. Luke 19. 41, 42. -- Fast Sermon before the
Queen; July 16, 1690. On Psalm. 85. 8. -- Thanksgiving-Sermon before the King
and Queen; October. 19. 1690. On Psalm. 144. 10. 11. -- Fast-Sermon before the
King and Queen; April 19, 1691. On Psalm. 82. 1. -- Thanksgiving-Sermon before
the King and Queen; Nov. 26. 1691. On Prove. 20. 28. -- Sermon at the Funeral of
Robert Boil, Esquire Jan. 7. 1691. On Eccles. 11. 26. -- A Discourse of the
Pastoral Care. Octavo. 1692.

