THE Poor Man's Help, AND Young Man's Guide: CONTAINING I. Doctrinal
Instructions for the right Informing of his Judgment. II Practical Directions
for the General Course of his Life. III. Particular Advices for the
Well-managing of every Day:
With Reference To His 1. Natural Actions, 2. Civil Employments, 3. Necessary
Recreations, 4. Religious Duties:
PARTICULARLY, I. Prayer. Public in the Congregation. Private in the Family.
Secret in the Closet.
II. Reading the Holy Scriptures. III. Hearing of the Word Preached. IV.
Receiving of the Lord's Supper.


Unto which is Added An Earnest Exhortation unto all Christians to the Love and
Practice of Universal Holiness.

By William Burkitt, M. A. of Pembrook Hall in Cambridge, now Vicar of Dedham
in Essex.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower
End of Cheap Side, near Mercers-Chappel. 1694.

Imprimatur,

July 9. 1693. Ra. Barker.

TO The PEOPLE of my Charge.
IT is none of the least or most inconsiderable Arguments to evince and prove
the Dignity and Preciousness of the Soul of Man; that Almighty God has been
pleased to Institute a Sacred and Divine Office in his Church, on purpose for
the Benefit and Advantage of it, and to appoint a Distinct Order of Men (his
Ministers I mean) whose whole Employ and Concern it is peculiarly to Watch over
the Souls of his People, and to be accountable to him for the same. In this
Delightful Service of God and of your Souls I have now worn out more than three
Apprenticeships amongst some of you, Endeavoring with my utmost Care and
Diligence to excite the Careless and Unconcerned Sinners on the one hand, and
to direct the Weak and Doubting Christian on the other hand to the Practice of
their respective Duties: For it is hard to say, from which Religion suffers
most, whether from the Want of Zeal in some, or from the Mistakes of Zeal in
others. Besides my Public Advices to you in God's House, your Consciences can
Witness for me; that I have taken some Pains (and if God continues my Health, I
resolve to take much more) in the Duty of Private Inspection and Ministerial
Conference with you, in your own Houses, in order to your Preparation for that
Venerable Ordinance of the Lords Supper, which to the great Scandal of our most
Holy Religion, is so shamefully neglected by multitudes of Persons professing
Christianity, of all persuasions amongst us: Exhorting you also to set up
Religion and the Worship of God in your private Families, that God may dwell
where you dwell. But the Answer of many of you has been this, We want
Abilities; we are willing, but not able to perform those Duties without some
Assistance: In great Charity therefore to those of you who want such a Help as
this, and are willing to make use of it, I put this small Paper into your Hand,
which I entreat you to accept both as an Instance of my Duty, and as a Monitor
of your Own.

Know assuredly, Sirs, it will be the Portion of many of God's Ministers at the
Great Day (I pray God it may never be mine) to be called forth as Witnesses
against their own People, when Almighty God will thus interrogate us in the
presence of Men and Angels; Did you not Admonish this People of the sin and
danger of a resolute Impiety? did you not warn them of their Neglect of
Sacraments and Holy Duties, publicly, privaeely, personally? Must we not
plainly and faithfully declare that all our melting Entreaties and passionate
Importunities could ^^er prevail with you to part with your Sins; but you would
choose rather to gratify your Lusts than to obey your Reason? Then will our
Lord say unto us, I pronounce you pure and Innocent from the Blood o^ these
Men; Oh joyful Word to us! But to Sinners will he say, Your Destruction be upon
your own Heads; what could I or my Ministers have done more for you that has
not been done? therefore Depart ye Cursed into Everlasting Misery: Oh doleful
Word to them! God grant tha^ your and my Ears may never hear it.

Beloved, it is your Commendation and my Comfort, that when in this wanton Age,
a Spirit of Giddiness has possessed the Minds of many that they are tossed too
and fro with every Wind of Doctrine, trying all things in deed, but holding
fast nothing; you have been unanimous in this part of your Duty, keeping close
to the Public Assemblies, and continuing steadfast in the Apostle's Doctrine
and Christian Fellowship and in Breaking of Bread and in Prayers.

But know, that the best Communion and best Religion in the World* the holiest
Doctrine and the purest Worship; will be of no avail to impure Worshippers and
impure Livers: God grant therefore that you and I may Oblige our selves to such
an Eminent and Exemplary Piety of Conversation, in all the several Instances of
our Duty, as may render the Unspotted Religion of the Holy Jesus venerable to
the World: And may Almighty God, who sometimes delights to do great things by
weak means, be pleased to succeed these well-design'd Endeavors of mine, in
order to your Advantage, that so in God's House and in your own also the most
solemn Acts and Exercises of Religious Worship, may be performed by you with
such a becoming gravity and sincerity of Devotion, that the Name of our Holy
Lord may be glorified, your Souls comforted with the sense of Pardon and Peace
here, and everlastingly refreshed with Joys unspeakable and full of Glory,
hereafter; so prays

Dedham, 1693. Your Affectionate Minister WILLIAM BVRKITT.

THE POOR MAN's HELP, AND YOUNG MAN's GUIDE.
CHAP. I. Containing Doctrinal Instructions for the right informing of the
Judgment.
NOthing concerns Mankind in general so much as the Salvation of their Souls:
This is the one thing Needful, and that which they are obliged above all things
to mind and regard: But it concerns Poor Men especially to secure the Salvation
of their never-dying Souls, lest they be miserable in both Worlds; for they
tasting but little of the Comforts and Sweetness of this Life, had need take
Care above others, that they miss not the Consolations and Happiness of the
next.

Now in Order to every Man's Salvation hereafter, three things are
indispensibly necessary here; namely, a right Knowledge, a right Faith, and a
Righteous Life. Knowledge is the Foundation of our Faith, and Faith the
Foundation of our Obedience, and Obedience the Condition of our Happiness; for
although a Man may know the Will of God and not do it, yet he can never do it
acceptably and not know it. A wilfully Ignorant Man can neither Serve God nor
be saved by him.

Toward the Attaining of this Knowledge and Belief, which is so absolutely
Necessary to Salvation, the great things required are, an Humble Sense of our
own Ignorance, a Teachable Disposition and Readiness of Mind to receive
Instruction, accompanied with an Earnest Invocation and fervent Calling upon
God for the Promised Illuminations of his Holy Spirit. More particularly the
Chief and Fundamental Principles of our Religion, necessary to be known and
Believed by all Persons in Order to their Everlasting Salvation, are these
four. I. Concerning God. II. Concerning Man. III. Concerning Jesus Christ, the
Mediator between God and Man. IV. Concerning the way and means to obtain
Salvation by Christ, the only Mediator.

I. Concerning GOD.
It is necessary to Know and Believe the following Severals; Namely,

That God is an Infinite, Invisible and Immortal Spirit, without Bodily Parts
or Passions, Almighty, All-knowing, every where present, most Wise and Holy,
most Just and Righteous, most Good and Gracious: The following Scriptures will
Confirm your Belief of the Truth of this, viz. St. John 4.24. God is a Spirit,
St. Luke 24 39. A Spirit has not flesh and bones: Exodus 34. v. 6, 7. The Lord
passed by and proclaimed his Name, the Lord God gracious and merciful,
long-suffering, abundant in Goodness and Truth.

2. That there is but one true and ever-living God, who being Oone in Nature,
is yet Three in Person, namely the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, each
Person having his proper Part and Office in the Salvation of lost Sinners,
namely the Father as the Original and Fountain, the Son as the Manager and
Transacter of it, and the Holy Ghost as the Applier and Sealer of it: See the
following Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 6.4. The Lord thy God is one Lord: 1 John 5.7.
There are three that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy
Ghost, and these Three are One: St. John 15.26. But when the Comforter is come,
whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which
preceedeth from the Father, he shall Testify of me: Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the
Holy Spirit of God, whereby you are sealed unto the Day of Redemption.

3. That this ever-living and only living Lord God, by his Almighty Power and
Infinite Wisdom, Created the World and all things therein out of nothing, and
by his effectual Providence does sustain and preserve them in being; and does
likewise govern and dispose of all things to his own glory: Nehem. 9. v. 6.
Thou art Lord alone who have made the Heavens and the Heaven of Heavens, with
all their host, the Earth and all things that are therein, and thou preservest
them all.

II. Concerning Man. We are to Know and Believe
1. That Almighty God Created Man (Adam) after his own Image, which consisted
in Knowledge, Righteousness and true Holiness, giving him an holy Law for the
Rule of his Obedience, with Power to keep it, and a Promise of Life upon
Condition of keeping it; see Genesis 1.27. So God created Man in his own Image, in
the Image of God created he him: Eccles. 7.29. This only have I found, that God
made man Upright.

2. That Man (Adam) being Created in an Holy State, yet in a mutable Condition,
and under a possibility of falling, being tempted by Satan, and left to the
freedom of his own Will, did actual fall from his Estate of Innocence and
Integrity into a State of Sin and Misery: Genesis 3.6. And when the Woman saw that
the Tree was good for Food, and pleasant to the Eye, she took thereof and did
Eat, and gave also unto her Husband, and he did eat: Eccles. 7.29. God has
made Man upright, but he has found out many Inventions.

3. That by reason of Man's Fall, his Nature is wholly Corrupted with Original
Sin, which is the Seed and Root of all other Sins, derived upon us by Natural
Generation, whereby we are disabled to that which is spiritually Good, and
inclined to that which is Evil and sinful; Genesis 5.3. And Adam begat a Son in
his own likeness, after his Image: Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in-iniquity,
and in sin did my Mother conceive me: Romans 8. v. 8. So then they that are in
the flesh cannot please God.

4. That every Man does further fall into manifold Actual Sins in the daily
Course of his Life, transgressing every one of God's holy Commandments, either
in Thought, Word or Deed; see Eccles. 7. v. 20. There is not a just Man upon
Earth, that does good and sins not: Romans 3. v. 10, and 23. There is not one
righteous man, no not one, for all have sinned and come short of the glory of
God.

5. That the Punishment due to every sin is Death and Hell; all Miseries
Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal: Romans 6.23. The Wages of Sin is Death: 2 These.
1.9. They shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of
the Lord, and from the glory of his Power.

6. That Almighty God pitying the deplorable Misery of our fallen Estate, has
found out a Way and appointed a Means for our Deliverance from the Power and
Punishment of Sin by a Mediator and Redeemer: Titus 3. v. 4, 5, 6. After that
the Kindness and Love of God our Savior toward Man appeared, according to his
Mercy he saved us, by the washing of Regeneration and Renewing of the Holy
Ghost.

III. Concerning Christ the Mediator between God and Man. We ought to Know and
Believe
1. That Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of God, the second Person in the Trinity,
is the only Redeemer of lost Man, and the only Mediator betwixt God and Man,
from whom alone we are to expect Life and Salvation: 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one
God and one Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus: Acts 4.12.
Neither is there Salvation in any other, for there is no other Name given under
Heaven by whom we must be saved.

2. That Jesus Christ our Redeemer was both God and Man, having two Natures in
one Person, a Divine Nature as he was God, and an Humane Nature as Man; in
which Humane Nature he suffered for Sinners, and in his Divine Nature satisfied
the Justice of God for sin: Acts 20.28. Feed the Church of God which he has
purchased with his own Blood: Heb. 10. v. 10. By the which Will we are
sanctified through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all.

3. That Christ our Redeemer having taken upon him our Nature, lived here upon
Earth about three and thirty Years, and did in our stead and for our sin give
full Satisfaction to the Justice of his Father, by enduring most grievous
Torments in his Soul, and by undergoing most painful Sufferings in Body, was
Crucified, Dyed and was Buried, and by his Death did Conquer Sin and Satan,
Death and Hell: Read the 26th. and 27th. Chapters of St Matthew, which give a
large Account of our Savior's Sufferings.

4. That Jesus Christ on the third Day Arose again from the Dead, with the same
Body in which he suffered, with which Body also he Ascended into Heaven, and
sits there at the right hand of his Father to intercede for us, and by his
Intercession in Heaven, making Application of that Redemption which he wrought
on Earth, from whence at the End of the World he shall come again to Judge both
Men and Devils, and to determine their Final and Eternal State; see Romans 8. v.
34. Who is he that Condemns, it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes Intercession for
us: St. Matthew. 13. v. 41, 42. The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and
they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things which offend, and them that do
Iniquity, and shall cast them into a Furnace of Fire, where shall be wailing
and weeping, etc.

IV. Concerning the Way and Means to obtain Salvation by Christ
1. That the way and means appointed by God for the Sinners Salvation through
Jesus Christ the Redeemer, is by Faith, Repentence, and sincere Obedience: So
says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace ye are saved through Faith. Acts 11. r8.
Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life; Heb. 5. v. 9.
Christ became the Author of Eternal Salvation to them that obey him.

2. That saving Faith is a Grace of the Holy Spirit, wrought in us by the
Ministry of the Word: Whereby we do in our Understandings Assent to the
Doctrine of the Gospel as true and with our Wills embrace it as good: And
according to that Revelation, do depend upon the merits of Christ alone for
pardon of Sin, and eternal life, on such conditions as the Gospe^ has assured
them upon, Romans 10. v. 10. With the heart man beliveth unto Righteousness: St.
John 6. v. 68, 69. We believe and are sure that thou art Christ the Son of the
living God; to whom shall we go? thou have the words of Eternal Life.

3. That true Repentance consists in an hearty Trouble and Sorrow for sin past:
In an humble acknowledgment and Penitential Confession of sin both past and
present, but chiefly in such steadfast Purposes and Resolutions against sin for
the time to come, as do produce Actual Reformation and Amendment of Life. 2
Cor. 7.11. Ye sorrowed after a Godly sort, what carefulness did it work in you,
yea what indignation, yea what fear, yea what vehement desire, yea what
revenge! Isa. 55.7. Let the Wicked forsake his way, and turn, etc.

4. That Repentance being a real Change and Reformation of our Lives, to defer
it to a sick bed and a dying hour, puts the Soul upon a mighty hazard, it being
then impossible to know the truth of our Repentance, when we want time and
opportunity to make trial of the sincerity of it. St. Mat. 3.8. Bring forth
therefore fruits meet for Repentance. Isa. 55.6. Seek ye now the Lord whilst he
may be found, and call upon him whilst he is near. 2 Cor. 6.2. Behold now is
the accepted time.

5. That Sincere obedience consists in a conformity of Heart and Life to the
Word and Will of God, from an unfeigned Love to God, and a sincere delight in
keeping his Commandments. Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will oh my God, yea
thy Law is within my heart. Acts 24.16. Herein do I exercise my self, to keep
always a Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward all men:

6. That the Obedience of the best of Christians in this Life, when at the
best, is but imperfect, attended with much weakness, and accompanied with
manifold imperfections: which yet upon our humble acknowledgment, God will
graciously pardon, and for Christ's sake mercifully accept. Job 9. v. 20. If I
justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me, If I say I am perfect, it
shall also prove me perverse. 2 Chr. 30.18, 19, 20. The good Lord pardon every
one that prepares his heart to seek God; though he be not cleansed according to
the purification of the Sanctuary: And the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and
healed the People.

7. That no Obedience is sincere but that which is Universal, and causes us to
have an abiding respect unto all Gods Commandments to obey them, and to all
Christ's institutions to observe and follow them: Psalm 119.9. Then shall I not
be ashamed when I have respect unto all thy Commandments. St. Mat. 28.20
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you.

8. That the great Commands of God, are to Love him with all our Hearts, with
all our Souls, with all our Strength, and to love our Neighbor as our selves.
Matthew. 22.37, 38. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, etc.
This is the first and great Commandment, and the second is like unto it: Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.

9. That the great Institutions of Jesus Christ under the Gospel, are his Word
and Sacraments, to wit, Baptism and the Lords Supper, which he Commands all his
Disciples and Followers most Religiously to Celebrate until his coming again
unto Judgment. St. Math. 28. ult. Go teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc.
And lo I am with you always even unto the end of the world. 1 Cor. 11.26. As
often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death till
he come.

10. That Baptism is a holy Institution of our Saviors, for the benefit of
Believers and their Seed: Wherein by the outward washing with Water in the Name
of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, it signifies the Spiritual washing of the
Soul by the Blood and Spirit of Christ, from the guilt and filth of sin. Ephesians.
5.25, 26. Christ loved his Church, and gave himself for it, that he might
sanctify and cleatnse it, by the washing of Water and the Word.

11. That the Lords Supper is an holy Ordinance, wherein by Bread broken and
Wine poured out, the death of Christ is showed forth, and all the Benefits of
his death are Represented Applied, and Sealed unto Worthy Receivers. 1 Cor.
10.16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless is it not the Commmunion of the Blood
of Christ, etc.

12. That the end of this Ordinance is to be a Memorial of Christ's Death: To
strengthen our Faith in him: To increase our Communion with him: To be a
Spiritual Banquet, wherein we feed upon him in order to our Spiritual
nourishment and Growth in Grace. 1 Cor. 11.26. As often as ye eat this Bread and
drink this Cup, ye show forth the Lords death till he come.

13. That all such as are truly penitent for sin past, and holily resolved
against sin, and for a new life for the time to come, though their Grace be weak,
their doubts many, and their fears great, yet ought they often to come to this
Heavenly Banquet for Spiritual strength and inward comfort. St. John 6.51. I am
the living Bread which came down from Heaven, if any man eat of this Bread he
shall live for ever.

14. That it is the duty of every one who would be a Worthy Receiver, of the
Lords Supper, to prepare himself thereunto by previous Examination, and to make
proof of his Knowledge, Faith and Charity, and so to eat of this Bread and
drink of this Cup. See 1 Cor 11.28. But let a Man examine himself, and so let
him eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup.

15. That the danger of Unworthy Refusing, is certainly as great as the danger
of Unworthy Receiving: The neglects of duty are as dangerous and damnable as
the Acts of sin, and sins of omission are certainly damning as well as sins of
commission. St. Mat. 3.10. Every Tree that brings not forth good fruit is cut
down and cast into the fire.

16. That God has appointed a time in which he will Judge all Persons as well
for their omissions of good, as for their commissions of evil, and every one
shall receive an unalterable Sentence according to his Works. Rev. 20.12. I saw
the Dead standing before God, and the Dead were Judged according to their Works.

17. That those who have done good, shall be absolved, and accepted, and shall
inherit a Kingdom of Glory prepared for them where they shall both see and
resemble their Blessed Savior, in perfect holiness and endless happiness.

18. That such as have here done evil and dyed in their Impenitency, shall
suffer an everlasting Imprisonment with Devils and damned Spirits, in Blackness
of Darkness for ever: Undergoing the perpetual gnawings of the Worm that dies
not, and the extreme torments of the fire which never shall be quenched. St.
John 5.28. Marvel not at this, for the hour is ^^ming in which all that are in
the Graves shall hear his voice, and they shall come forth they that have done
good unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil unto the
Resurrection of Damnation.

CHAP. II. Containing Practical Directions for the General Course of Life.
I. Direction. For the Right Ordering of Our Thoughts.
COgito Ergo sum; I Think, therefore I am; is a prime Conclusion with the
Modern and Ingenuous Philosopher. Thinking is the surest Proof and Evidence of
Being: I cannot so certainly conclude I am, because I walk, I drink, I see and
hear, because the Senses are oft-times deceived, but If I be sure I Think, I am
sure I Am, because Thinking is an Operation that flows from Being. Now as bare
Thinking is an Argument of mere Being, so Well-Thinking is an Evidence of
Well-Being; for says the Wiseman, Prove. 23. v. 7. As a Man Thinks in his
Heart, so is he.

Therefore in Order to the right Governing of thy daily Thoughts, Observe the
following Rules.

1. Think frequently with thy self, that as thy Pulse will be continually
beating, so thy Thoughts will be always working to thy Dying Hour, and
therefore had need be well employed.

2. Think often what a World of Sin a Man may be guilty of in his Thoughts,
Atheism, Blasphemy, Idolatry, Adultery, Murder, and what not? and Believe thy
self to be no less Accountable to God for the Sin of thy Thoughts, than of thy
Words and Actions, Eccles. 12.14. God shall bring every secret thing into
Judgment, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.

3. Think often what a glorious Theme and Subject for thy Thoughts God has
provided and laid before thee; as himself in his Attributes, his Son in his
Natures, Life and Actions, his holy Spirit in all its gracious Operations, his
Word and Promises, his Works of Creation, Preservation and Redemption, etc.
Astronomy does but Surveigh a Dunghill in comparison of what Christianity
Comtemplates: Stars are but dirty Clods compared with that Glory which lies
within the reach of the Christian's Thoughts.

4. Think every Morning what good Offices thou have to do that day, and so
Think all the Day as if all thy Thoughts were written on thy Forehead for the
whole World to read them, and so Act every Day as if thou had a thousand Eyes
upon thee.

5. Think thy own Condition to be certainly the best, because the Wisdom of God
sees it best for thee; if thou have not as much as others, yet thou have that
which is Appointed for thee: In Heaven our Reward shall be, not according to
the good things we have received here, but according to the good Works which we
have done here. At the Reckoning Day he will be accounted the wisest Man that
has laid out his time in good Duties, and his Treasure in good Works.

6. Think Contentment to be the truest Riches, and Covetousness the greatest
Poverty. He is not Rich that has much, but he that has enough; that Man is Poor
who Covets more, and yet wants a Heart to enjoy what he has already.

7. Think it no part of thy Business curiously to Search into other Men's
Lives, but narrowly to inspect the Errors of thine own: It is much better to
amend one Fault in our selves than to find out an hundred Faults in another.

8. Think it a greater Virtue to forgive one Injury than to do many Kindnesses,
because it is harder and more against Nature.

9. Think him no True Friend whom one Injury can make thine Enemy. He must have
no Friends that will have a Friend with no Faults.

10. Take a View of thy Thoughts every Night, as the Master does of his
Servants Work every Day, and so Think (if possible) of all things now, as thou will think of them when passing into Eternity.

II. Direction. For the right Ordering of our Words.
Speech is a very Noble and Advantageous Benefit to Man, by which he excels the
whole Creation: Our Tongue is our glory, the Index and Expresser of our Mind
and Thoughts, the Instrument of our Creator's Praise; and there is no Subject
so sublime and honorable for the Tongue of Man to be employed about, as the
Word and Works of God: There is a great Difficulty in governing of the Tongue,
it being a proud and active Member, and therefore the Scripture places much of
Religion in Bridling of the Tongue, St. James 1.26.

It is the great Wisdom of a Man to know both when and what to speak, and also
how and when to be silent; for a Man may sin both ways, by over-silence as well
as by overmuch speaking. Woe unto us, if we want a Tongue to publish God's
Truth, to plead God's Cause, to Vindicate God's Honor, and to sound forth
God's Praise.

To avoid all Extremes, Remember these Rules:

1. Accustom not thy self to speaking overmuch, and before thou speak,
Consider; let not thy Tongue run, before Reason and Judgment bid it go; if the
Heart does not pre-meditate, the Tongue must necessarily precipitate.

2. Let the Matter of your Speech be both true and profitable: True (logically)
by an Agreement betwixt the Thing and your Words, without falsehood; and True
(morally) by an Agreement betwixt your Tongue and your Heart, without
Dissimulation.

3. Speak always to God with extraordinary Dread and Caution, and always of
him, with a profound Veneration and Awfulness of Regard.

4. Speak of Holy Things frequently, but always seriously, yet place not
Religion in Talk only, nor measure Goodness by good Words; it is much easier to
Talk like a Saint than to be one.

5. Speak well of all Men 'till thou know otherwise, and when thou can not
speak well, be Silent.

6. Speak not well of any undeservedly, that is sordid Flattery: Speak not well
of thy self, though never so deserving, that is Vainglory, but Value more a good
Conscience than a good Commendation.

7. Speak not in high Commendation of any Man to his Face, nor Censure any Man
behind his back; but if thou know any thing good of him, tell it unto
others, if any thing ill, tell it privately and prudently to himself.

8. Speak not well of thy self, though others do so, and yet give no Occasion to
others to speak otherwise than well of thee: Neither speak thine own Praises,
nor greedily hear them, but when any thing relates to thy own Commendation,
Watch against the Vanity of Self-Applauding.

9. Speak not Censoriously of thy Betters, nor Scornfully of thy Inferiors, nor
Boastingly of thy Self.

10. Speak always Truth, especially when called forth to speak it, and abhor
Lying as you abhor the Devil, who is the Father of Lies, and the Tormenter of
Liars.

11. Swear not falsely before a Magistrate, for this is an Appeal to God as
your Judge, and an Engagement of God to be your Avenger: Therefore whenever you
take an Oath, look that the Cause of it be necessary and weighty, the Manner of
it grave and solemn, and the End of it honest and sincere.

12. Swear not rashly in your ordinary Discourse, for this will render the
Truth of all you say suspected by wise men: He that swears vainly ought not to
be much credited when he speaks truly; because he that Dreads not an Oath, will
not Tremble at a Lie.

III. Direction. For the Right Ordering of our Actions.
Our Actions having a far greater Aptitude than our Words, to make an
Impression upon the Minds and Manners of men whom we converse with, it highly
concerns us to exercise great Watchfulness over our selves in all Actions of
humane Life, and to be exactly circumspect in our daily walking, performing our
Duty to God, our Neighbor, and our selves, in such a manner that God may be
glorified, Religion adorned, our Neighbor edified, and our own Souls saved. In
order to that end the following Rules may be helpful.

1. Look carefully, that Love to God and Obedience to his Commands, be the
Principle and Spring from whence the Actions flow, and that the glory of God
and the Salvation of thy Soul be the End to which all thy Actions tend; and
that the Word of God be thy Rule and Guide in every Enterprise and Undertaking,
Gal. 6.16. As many as walk by this Rule, peace be on them, and mercy.

2. Enterprise and undertake no Action without Advice from Heaven, asking
Counsel of God by Prayer. He blesses or blasteth our Endeavors, according as
we own our dependency upon him, and Engagements to him.

3. Then serve the Providence of God in the Use of all lawful and fit Means for
attaining thy ends in all honest undertakings, having first recommended them to
the Divine Blessing. For know, that the Providence of God ordinarily works in a
way of Concurrence with our Endeavors: Follow therefore Providence, but not
run before it.

4. Do no Action upon which thou may not warrantably pray for Gods Blessing:
Do nothing for which thou shall need to ask Gods Pardon: Let thy first care be,
not to Do an ill Action, thy next care to Repent of it.

5. Offend not either God or thy Neighbor knowingly and deliberately; but if
thou fallest by Surprise, confess it, for Confession is some part of
satisfaction: By denying a little sin, thou make it great; but by confessing
a great sin to God, thou make it as none at all.

6. Be strictly just in all thy Dealings with Man, and think not thy self
discharged from the Duty of Righteousness toward thy Neighbor, by any
extraordinary measures of pretended Zeal and Piety toward God: For all such
Pretenses to Piety are but Hypocrisy, if men be not really honest as well as
seemingly devout. And dishonesty and unrighteousness will as certainly shut men
out of Heaven, as Impiety and Profaneness, 1 Cor. 6.9.

7. Think it not sufficient that you do not do an ill thing, but you must not
do an hard thing to any, but be kind and charitable as well as just and honest;
always endeavoring to do the utmost good you can, by a Life of universal
Usefulness.

8. Deride not any man's Deformities, but Bless God that they are not thine.
Men shall answer at Gods Bar for their Vicious habits, but not for their
natural Imperfections

9. Never forget the Kindnesses which others do for you: Never upbraid others
with the Courtesies which you do for them.

10. Be covetous of nothing but of doing good, and Prodigal of nothing but of
Good Counsel.

11. Promise nothing which may prejudice thee in the performance, but perform
what thou have promised, tho it be to thy real prejudice. A wise man measures
his Promises by his Abilities, but he measures his Performances by his Promises.

12. Always judge of men by their Conversation toward God, Never, by Gods
Dispensations toward them.

13. Let not what is falsely talked of thee, ever trouble thee, for an ill Report
makes no Body an ill man: be careful to do nothing that deserves to be ill
spoken of; and then let it never Trouble thee to be ill spoken of undeservedly.

14. Revenge not an injury tho thou could, yet show that thou art able to
revenge it if thou would. To Revenge a Wrong done unto thee, is a greater
wrong to thy self than the Injury received by thee. Beware when others hurt
thee, that thou hurt not thy self.

15. Unwillingly undertake a suit of Law, and most willingly make an end of it.
Choose rather to buy Quietness with some Loss, than to gain much by Strife and
Contention: for going to Law, is one of those lawful things which is very
difficultly managed without Sin: It Is rare, if a man wrongs not his Soul by
Righting his Estate.

16. Look upon Obedience to the Authority which God has set over you, in all
lawful and unforbidden things, to be a necessary and indispensable Duty. In all
such Cases it is not for men of a private Capacity to Dispute but to Obey.

CHAP. III. Containing particular Advices for the well-managing of every Day.
1. BEgin and End every Day with God: In the Morning when you awake, accustom
your self to Think first upon God, and let him have your first Awaking
Thoughts, lift up your Hearts to God reverently and thankfully for the Rest of
the Night past, and let your first Discourse be agreeable to your Thoughts,
Psalm. 139.18. When I awake I am still with thee.

2. Spend that Time which must necessarily be allowed for the Dressing your
selves, in fruitful Meditation, of the great Mercy of a Nights Rest, and of
your renewed Time. Think how many spent that Night in Hell, how many in a
Prison, how many Worried out that Night in tormenting Pains and languishing
Distempers, weary of their Beds and their Lives together. Think also how many
Souls were the last Night summoned from their Bodies to Appear before the
Dreadful God, and how soon your last Night may come.

3. Let Secret Prayer by your self alone be constantly performed before the
Work of the Day be Undertaken: It is much better to go from Prayer to Business,
than from Business to Prayer, in regard of the Minds freedom from Distracting
Thoughts: Because also, if the World gets the Start of Religion in the Morning,
it is hard for Religion to Overtake the World all the Day after.

4. Let Family Worship be performed constantly and seasonably, at that Hour
which is freest in regard of Interruption, and look that it be Reverently and
Spiritually performed. Call not then for the Cushion when there is more need of
the Pillow.

5. Then set about and follow the Labors of your Calling with Diligence and
Industry: He that says, Be servent in Prayer, says also, Be not slothful in
Business, Romans 12. and let the Day be spent in your Calling watchfully,
watching your Company you converse with, and the Corruption which you find
stirring in you; but especially Watch against those Temptations, which the
Company you are with, the Place you are in, or the Work and Calling you are
about, may expose you to, or lay you under.

6. When about your Calling; if alone, improve the Time in fruitful Meditation,
and holy Ejaculations, or short Prayers, which are no Hindrance at all to your
Worldly Business; if in Company, in such profitable Discourse as may tend to
make thy self and others both Wiser and Better.

7. In doing your Duty in the Labors of your Calling, humbly depend upon God's
Fatherly Care for a Comfortable Subsistence for thy self and Family, and
Compose thy Mind in all Conditions of Life to a quiet and steady Dependence on
the Divine Providence, being anxiously Careful for nothing, but casting all
your Care upon him that Cares for you.

8. Heedfully Observe all the Passages of Divine Providence daily, both toward
thy self and others; and those Providential Dispensations which thou can not
thoroughly understand, awfully Admire.

9. In all Places and in all Companies remember the Presence of God, and walk
continually as under the View of his All-seeing and Observing Eye. Often
consider that God is every where Present, and then you will study to be every
where Holy.

10. Walk every day with an high Esteem of the preciousness, swiftness and
irrecoverableness of your Time, and resolve to spend it in Nothing which you
dare not Pray for a Blessing upon, in nothing which you know must be Repented
of before you Dye, in Nothing which you would not be found doing if Death
should surprise you in the doing of it.

11. Look every Day to the faithful Discharge of the respective Duties of your
several Relations, as Husbands and Wives, Parents and Children, Masters and
Servants, and remember that much of the Life and Power of Religion consists in
the Conscientious Practice of Relative Duties.

12. In the Evening retire, and take a View of your Actions the Day past;
Examine what good you have either done or received, and bewail it as a Day
lost, in which you have not either Profited others or Advantaged your self.

CHAP. IV. Of Glorifying God in our Natural Actions, viz. in our Eating,
Drinking and Sleeping.
IT is the Advice of the Holy Apostle, 1. Cor. 10.31. That whether we Eat or
Drink, or whatever we do, to do all to the Glory of God; plainly implying that
a Christian ought to perform his Natural Actions to spiritual Purposes, and
whilst he is feeding his Body, must have an Eye at his Serving of God; Eating
and and Drinking to the satisfying of our Natures, and not to the gratifying of
our Lusts. Our lawful Comforts without Watchfulness become our greatest Snares:
The first Sin that ever was committed, entered the World by Eating. Our first
Parents pleased their Appetites to their Ruin, which ought to make their
Posterity afraid of all sinful Excesses; to prevent which, let the following
Rules be remembered and observed:

1. Raise not any perplexing Scruples about what you are to Eat and Drink, to
no purpose, but only to your own Vexation. Remember, Christ has taken away that
Distinction of Meats, (Clean and Unclean) which was of old amongst the Jews,
and has given us a liberty of feeding upon all the good Creatures of God with
Temperance and Sobriety, 1 Timothy 4.4. Every Creature of God is good, and nothing
to be refused, if it be received with Thanksgiving: Which hints a second Rule.

2. Look that your Meat and Drink be blessed and sanctified to you by Prayer and
Tanksgiving: Sit not down to your Food as a Beast to his Fodder, without taking
any Notice of the Hand that provides it for you. Our Meat does not Nourish us
by its own Power, but by Divine Appointment, and therefore our Blessed Savior,
though he was Lord of the Creatures, yet did not sit down to feed on them before
he looked up to Heaven for a Blessing upon them, St. Mark. 6.41. Remember that
the Creatures on your Table are God's Creatures, and if you Convert them to
your own Use without asking God's Leave, you are bold Usurpers.

3. Eat and Drink as in the Presence and View of God: We are most apt to forget
God at our Meals, feeding our selves without fear. Now the Remembrance of God's
Eye upon us will Remedy this: It is a memorable Expression which you have in
Exodus 18. v. 12. And Aron and all the Elders of Israel came to eat Bread with
Moses Father-in-law before God: Where Observe (1.) The Greatness of their
Courtesy. (2.) The Graciousness of their Carriage. Their Courtesy was great,
though Jethro was a Stranger, and no Isralite, yet the Elders of Israel honored
him with their Company, and their Carriage was gracious, they came to eat Bread
with him before God; that is, in gloriam and honorem Dei, says one, to the
Honor and Glory of God: They received their Sustenance as in God's sight, and
caused their Provision to tend to God's Praise.

4. Remember that Reason and not Appetite is to be our Guide and Rule both for
the Quantity and Quality of our Meat and Drink: Not what Appetite likes best,
but what Reason and Judgment tells you is best, ought to be received by you.
Meat and Drink have destroyed more thousands than ever Poison did; because
persons are not so fearful of these as they are of that. If the Brute
Creatures at any time eat or drink to any Degree of Excess, it is to satisfy
their Nature, not to gratify their Lusts. But what an Abominable shame is it
for Man instead of being governed by Reason to be inslaved by his Lust; and to
have his sensitive Appetite command his Rational Faculty.

5. Take heed of making thy Table a Snare, either to thy self or others. This
is done two ways: (1.) When our Meals are Incentives to Sin, and our Food is
made Fuel for our Lusts; the Flesh is an Enemy too strong for us when we take
away its Armor, and fight against it; but much more so, when we our selves put
weapons into its hand, and provide it Ammunition to fight against us, Romans 13.
ult. Make no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. (2.) We make
our Table a Snare when by our Importunities we urge others to eat and drink
more than they desire, or their Natures will well bear. It is unquestionably
lawful for a man sometimes to exceed in his Provision for his Friends, but
lawful at no time to exceed the bounds of Sobriety and Moderation himself, or
to solicit others so to do. The Royal Example of Ahasuerus an Heathen King, the
Spirit of God has Recorded to the shame of many that call themselves
Christians, Esth. 1. v. 7, 8. When he made a magnificent Feast for his Princes
and Nobles, he commands that every man eat and drink according to his own
pleasure, and that none be compelled.

6. Let every one labor to understand, what is most conducible to his own
Health, and let that be the ordinary measure of his Diet, both for Quantity,
Quality and Time. It is every Man's Duty to observe the Temper of his own Body;
and to understand his particular Constitution in order to the preservation of
Life and Health; that a healthful Body may be Assistant to a holy Soul in the
Service of God.

7. Often consider with thy self, what a sinning Sin, what a Beastly sin, and
what a Destroying sin, the sin of Intemperance is. It Is an Inlet to all Sin,
and for that Reason perhaps is not particularly forbidden in any one of the
Commandments, because it is contrary to them All: Drunkenness may be called a
breach of every one of the Commandments, because it disposes men to break them
All: What sin is it, that a Drunken man stands not ready to commit?
Fornication, Murder Adultery, In^est, what not? and how does this Sin
transform a man into a Beast, and make him the shame and Reproach of Humane
Nature? Of the two, it is much worse to be like a Beast than to be a Beast: The
Beast is what God has made it, but the Drunkard is what Sin and the Devil has
made him: Add to this, that the Intemperate man is his own Tormentor, yea his
own Destroyer; as appears, by the many Diseases and untimely Deaths which
Surfeiting and Drunkenness daily bring upon men. For as Temperance and Sobriety
is the Nurse and Preserver of Life and Health, so excess in either is the
occasion of Self-murder; it is like a lingering Poison, which though it works
slowly, yet it destroys surely. Consider lastly, That Intemperance is a sin
which a man cannot presently Repent of, as soon as he has committed it: A
Drunken man is no more fit to repent than a dead man; and what Assurance has
any man that when Drunkenness closes his Eyes over night, that he shall not
open them in Hell-flames next Morning? How many thousands have closed their
Eyes in a Drunken fit, and opened them in another World?

8. Think it neither unlawful nor indecent to intermingle innocent and harmless
mirth with your Eating and Drinking; but always remember to keep within the
Bounds of Modesty, Decency and Sobriety. It is certainly a melancholy
Reflection, that the thing we call Society and Conversation, the Gentleman and
the Christian, Mirth and Religion, should be thought inconsistent; that men to
fly Preciseness must run into Debauchery and Profaneness. Cannot sourness and
moroseness be banished Conver^ation, but must Modesty and Sobriety be banished
too? Must our Entertainments of one another at our Tables administer either to
Sin or to Sullenness? Surely it is possible to observe the Rules of
Conversation better without running into either Extreme. A virtuous and wise
man at his Table may let his Tongue loose in a harmless Urbanity, but at the
same time he scorns to come within the Verge of a base Scrurility. Ephesians. 4.29.
Let no filthy Communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good
to the use of Edifying.

As touching Intemperance and Excess in Sleep, Necessity Cures most of you that
are Poor of this Evil, and it may be happy for you that it does so, for how
many thousand Hours have some that are Rich to account for, which were spent in
a sinful Excess of Sleep? and Oh, how earnestly will such Persons shortly wish
for those Hours to spend over again which were thus Consumed!

1. Let Prudence direct you about the Measure of your Sleep, and Piety instruct
you to mind the Ends of it, which are the repairing of Nature, the refreshing
of the Spirits, the supporting of our frail Bodies, which continual Labor and
Toil would soon weary and wear out; but now a moderate Degree of Sleep best
serves these Ends, namely, to fit us for Business, and enable us to Serve God
by an Active Obedience.

2. Often Consider what a great Time-waster Sleep is, and that there is no part
of your Time so totally lost as that which is Consumed in Sleep, for all that
Time a Man's Reason lies idle and buried, all his Wisdom and Knowledge is of no
Use or Advantage to himself or his Neighbor.

3. Remember how very injurious Immoderate Sleep is, both to thy Body and Soul:
To thy Body, in filling that full of Diseases, and making it a very Sink of
Pernicious Humors: To thy Soul, by bringing a Stupifying Dullness on its
Faculties, and thereby rendering it unfit for Holy Services.

4. Remember also the grand Importance of the Business of your Souls, which
lies continually upon your Hands; and let the Consideration of the greatness of
your Work, rouse and raise you from a Bed of Sloth. If you have a Journey to
go, or some extraordinary business to do, you can rise Early at a particular
time, why not then every Day, when you have much greater Business to do for God
and your Souls.

5. Remember that your Morning-hours are the Flower of your Time, and that
early rising makes at once both the Body healthful and the Soul holy. The
Morning is the best time for enjoying God and our seves, then are our Spirits
fresh, and our Hearts free from Worldly Cares.

6. Believe your self certainly Accountable to God for the Time you spend in
Sleep; this will make you with Holy Hooper, sparing of your Sleep, more sparing
of your Diet, and most sparing of your Time.

CHAP. V. Of Glorifying God in our Civil Employments, and Labors of our
particular Callings.
ALmighty God has sent no Man into the World to be idle, but to serve him in
the way of an honest and industrious Diligence: He that says, Remember the
Sabbath Day to keep it holy, says also, Six days shall thou labor, either with
the Labor of the Mind, or of the Body, or with both. Riches and a great Estate
will excuse none from laboring in some kind or other, in the Service of our
Maker; for he that receives most Wages, surely ought to do some Work.

1. Labor to Understand and be thoroughly sensible how much you are beholden
to God for the Benefit of a Calling: Thousands are now Blessing God in Heaven
for the Blessing of a Calling here on Earth, by which multitudes of Temptations
were prevented; how many sins does a Life of Idleness expose unto?

2. Be Diligent and Industrious in the way of thy Calling, and that from a
Principle of Obedience to the Divine Command: He that says, Be fervent in
Prayer, says also, Be not slothful in Business. An Idle Man has no Pattern or
President either in Hell or Heaven: Not in Hell, for the Devils are diligent
about their Deeds of darkness: Not in Heaven, for the Angels are continually
employed, either in Beholding God's Beauty, or in Executing God's Commands.

3. If thou art called to the meanest and most laborious Calling, that of an
Husbandman, murmur not at it, because it is Wearisom to the Flesh; but eye the
Command of God, and in Obedience thereunto be diligent in thy place, and then
thou glorifiest God as truly when digging in thy Field, as the Minister in his
Pulpit, or the Prince upon his Throne.

4. Be strictly Just and exactly Righteous in the way of thy Calling, and with
a generous Disdain and resolute Contempt abhor the getting of Riches by
Unrighteousness: Cursed Gain is no Gain. How sad is it to be Rich on Earth, and
to roar in Hell for unrighteous Riches. He that cheats and over-reaches, he
that tricks and defrauds his Neighbors, is as sure to go to Hell without
Repentance and Restitution, as the prophanest Swearer or Drunkard in a Town. 1
Cor. 6.9. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God?

5. Be very careful that thy partiular Calling as a private Person, do not
incroach upon thy General Calling as a Christian: The World is a great devourer
of precious Time, it robs the Soul of many an hour which should be spent in
Communion with God, and in communing with our own Hearts. How many are so taken
up with their Trade on Earth, that they forget to converse with Heaven: Verily
there is a holy part in every man's Time, which the daily Exercises of Religion
call for, and which it is our daily Duty to keep inviolable from the
Sacrilegious hands of an encroaching World.

6. Labor after an heavenly frame of Spirit in the Management of thy Earthly
Business; and take heed that thy Worldly Employments do not blunt the edge of
thy spiritual Affections, but endeavor to keep thy Heart close with God when
thy hand is employed in the Labors of thy Calling. A faithful and Loving
Husband, when he has been abroad all day in Varieties of Company, yet when he
comes home at Night he brings his Affections with him as entire to his Wife, as
when he went forth in the Morning from her; yea he is inwardly pleased, that he
is got from all other Company, to enjoy hers: Thus does a heavenly-minded
Christian, after he has spent some time amidst his wordly Business in the
Labors of his Calling; he desires and endeavors to bring his whole heart to
God with him, when at Night he returns into his presence to wait upon him; yea
he strives to keep his Heart with God all the day long, by often lifting it up
to God, in holy Thoughts and pious Ejaculations, which are an Help rather than
an Hindrance to Wordly business.

7. Eye God in every Providence thou meetest with in thy Calling. Do thou
meet with any dispointment, see and be sensible of Gods hand in it. All that
are diligent are not thriving in this World: There are Mysteries of Providence
as well as Mysteries of Faith, which we can never fathom. Do thou meet with a
Blessing? Own God in all that good success thou find in thy Employment; with
holy Jacob, Genesis 33.11. The Lord has dealt graciously with me, and I have
enough. When God at any time sends thee in Profit, let it be thy care to send
him back praise: For nothing is so Acceptable to God as a Grateful Mind.

8. Watch daily against the Sin of thy Calling, as also against the Sin of thy
Constitution; and whatever Temptations thou meetest with from either, cry
mightily to Heaven for Power to resist them; knowing that thou never yieldest
to a Temptation, but the Spirit withdraws in Tears, and the Devil goes away in
Triumph.

9. Having used faithful Diligence in thy lawful Calling, perplex not thy
Thoughts about the Issue and success of thy Endeavors; but labor to compose
thy Mind in all Conditions of Life to a quiet and steady dependence on Gods
Providence, being anxiously careful for nothing. There is a threefold Care
which the Scripture takes notice of: Namely, A Care of the Head, A Care of the
Hand, and a Care of the Heart. A Care of the Head, and that is a Care of
Providence and prudential Forecast, this is commendable. A Care of the Hand,
that is a care of Diligence and Industry, this is profitable. But then there is
the Care of the Heart, which is a Care of diffidence and distrust, a care of
Anxiety and perturbation of Mind, this is culpable, and exceeding sinful. See
St. Matthew. 6.31, 32, 33, 34.

10. Resolve it in thy mind to be cheerful and contented with thy Portion
(little or much) which God as a Blessing upon thy Endeavors, allots unto thee:
Not content because thou can not have it otherwise, but from an Approbation
of Divine Appointment. Necessity was the Heathen Schoolmaster to teach
Contentment, but Faith must be the Christians. Phil. 4.11.14. I have learnt,
says the holy Apostle, (not at the feet of Gamaleel, but in the School of
Christ,) both how to be abased and how to abound; how to be full, and how to be
empty; yea I know in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. How are
some Christians Minds like Musical Instruments, quite out of tune, with every
Change of Wheather. But it is an even Composedness of Mind in all Conditions of
Life, that glorifies God; and is advantageous to our selves. 1 Timothy 6.16.
Godliness with Contentment is great gain. Not Godliness with an Estate, but
Godliness with Contentment.

CHAP. VI. Of Glorifying God in our lawful Recreations.
IT being impossible for the Mind of Man to be always intent upon Business, and
for the Body to be exercised in continual Labors, the Wisdom of God has
therefore adjudged some Diversion and Recreation, (the better to fit both Body
and Mind for the Service of their Maker) to be both needful and expedient, such
is the Constitution of our Bodies and the Complexion of our Minds, that neither
of them can endure a constant Toil without some Relaxation and delightful
Diversion. As a Bow if always bent, will prove sluggish and unserviceable, in
like manner will a Christian's Mind if always intent upon the best things, the
Arrow of Devotion will soon flag, and fly but slowly toward Heaven. A wise and
good Man perhaps could wish that his Body needed no such Diversion, but finding
his Body jade and tire, he is forced to give way to Reason, and let Religion
choose such Recreation as are healthful, short, recreative and proper, to
refresh both Mind and Body; to which purpose the following Cautions may be
Necessary:

1. Look that your Recreations be lawful, and such as have nothing of Sin in
them: We must not to Recreate our selves, do any thing which is dishonorable
to God or injurious to our Neighbor, as they do who droll upon things that are
Sacred, and who make Back biting Discourse their Recreation.

2. Look that your Recreations answer the End and Design of their first
Institution; not to pass Time away, which we ought above all things to Study to
redeem and improve. Surely no Man needs to contrive how to drive away his Time,
which flies so fast of it self, and is so impossible to recover: But the true
End of Recreation is the refreshing of the Mind, and recreating of the Body, to
make them both the fitter for the Service of God in the Duties of our general
and particular Callings. Therefore

3. Be careful that your Recreations be short and diverting, such as may fit
you for Business, rather than rob you of your Time. He that makes Recreation
his business, will think Business a Toil. The End of Recreation is to fit us
for Business, not to be it self a Business to us.

4. Take Care that Covetousness have nothing to do in your Recreations: Let
your End be merely to Recreate your self, not to Win Money, for that will
certainly bring you into a double Danger, the one of Covetousness, and a greedy
desire of Winning, the other of Rage and Anger at thy bad Fortune, if thou
happen to lose. Covetousness will occasion thy Cheating and Cozuening, and
Anger occasion thy Swearing and Cursing; and thus thou make that which is
lawful in it self, unlawful to thee, by making it an Occasion of sin to thee.

5. Let not your Recreations be Costly and Expensive: Some Persons have spent
more in Gaming vainly than would Build and Endow an Hospital, and maintain many
Families comfortably; little considering that they are only God's Stewards, and
must be severely Accountable to him for every Inch of their Time, and every
Penny in their Purse, which is consumed in Sin and Vanity.

6. Take heed that your Sports and Recreations be not Cruel: We ought not to
refresh our selves with Spectacles of Cruelty, in seeing either Men or Beasts
needlessly Tormenting each other: That Enmity which is among the Creatures is
certainly the Effect of our Sin. What a Heart then has that Man that can take
Delight in seeing the dumb Creatures Torment one another? Is it not enough for
thee to behold the Antipathies which thy Sin has put into the Natures of the
Creatures, but thou must barbarously make thy self Merry with their Miseries,
who (in their kind) are far more serviceable to the Creator than thy self?

7. Remember (young Men) that God's Eye is in the midst of you, when in the
midst of your Sports and Recreations, therefore be wise and moderate in the
pursuit of them: Do all things as in God's sight, and you will do every thing
to God's glory. Respect ought to be had to God in all we do, not in our
Vocations only, but in our Recreations also; and the Remembrance of God's
all-seeing Eye upon us will have an Universal Influence upon all our Actions.

8. Take an extraordinary Care that your Recreations do not engross too much of
your Precious Time, which was given for Nobler Purposes. Oh how sadly do some
Young Men addict themselves to a Life of Pleasure, Ease and Voluptuousness,
unworthily wasting the Flower of their Youth, the Srength of their Body, the
Vigor of their Minds, drowning in a brutish sensuality the Fair and goodly
Hopes of a Virtuous Education, together with the Honor of their Families, the
Expectation of their Country, and the improvement of their Parts; as if
Almighty God had placed them on the Earth as Leviathan in the Sea, only to take
their Sport and Past-time therein; such Persons being Lovers of Pleasure more
than Lovers of God, are certainly in a most deplorable State.

9. But above all, take heed of making the Lord's Day your Day of Sports and
Recreation: This is a Crime of a tremendous Guilt. Woe be to that Man which
disturbs God's Holy Rest with his unholy Sports. God's Holy Day calls for Holy
Delights, Isa. 58.13. Not doing thy pleasure on my holy day. Thou that art a
poor Man, and stealest Time from thy Family for Unnecessary Recreations on the
Weekday, this is Theft: But to steal Time from thy Maker and Redeemer on his
Day, is Sacrilege; of the two, it is better to Plough than to Play, to Digg
than to Dance, upon the Lord's Day.

CHAP. VII. Of Glorifying God in our Religious Duties.
ALmighty God being more Honored or Dishonored by us in our Religious Duties,
than in all the Actions of our Lives besides, it concerns us to be exactly
Careful how we manage our Deportment in his Presence, when we Worship at his
Footstool, and bow before his Mercy-seat. If it be a Sin not to Aim at the
Glory of God when Eating and Drinking at our own Table, much more so when
Eating and Drinking at his Table, when we are performing the most tremendous
Acts and Exercises of Religion. How superstituously Devout were the Old
Heathens, in the Service of their Dumb Idols! they thought nothing too good for
their false Gods, for whom the worst was not bad enough, the Worshipper being
better than the God he worshipped: When they were going to offer their
Sacrifices, their Priests cried out in the Audience of the People, Procul! Oh
procul este prophani; Depart all you that are Impure and Profane from the Holy
Sacrifices of the Gods. Oh where they so choice and chary in the Service of
their dunghill Deities, and shall not we exercise a more extraordinary Dread
and Caution in the Religious Service of the living and true God: Therefore to
prevent sinful Miscarriages in Holy Duties, the following Advices may be
necessary:

1. Labor to entertain in thy Mind awful Apprehensions, and suitable
Conceptions of the Majesty of that God whom thou art Addressing thy self unto:
Conceive of him in thy Mind as a God of such incomprehensible greatness and
majesty, of such transcendent Holiness and Purity, of such Sanctity and
Severity, that he cannot behold Iniquity in any of his Worshippers, without the
greatest Abhorrency and Detestation; and for that reason approach thou to him
with a holy Fear, with an humble Reverence, and not without a trembling
Veneration.

2. Set not about Religious Duties without previous Preparaton: In every Work,
whether Natural or Artificial, some Preparation is necessary to bring it to
Perfection. In Works of Nature the Ground must be dug and dressed, plough'd
and prepared, before the Seed be cast into it. In Works of Art, the Musician
must string and tune his Instrument, before he can play his Lesson melodiously:
Surely then in Holy and Religious Duties (toward which our Hearts are
naturally so backward and averse) it concerns us to exercise a Preparatory
Care, to bring our Hearts into, and keep them in such a holy, humble, joyful,
thankful Frame and Posture, that God may have the Glory, and We the Comfort of
all our Religious Addresses to him, and attendences upon him, in the way of his
Ordinances.

3. Keep a Watchful Eye upon thy Heart, when thou art engaged in any Religious
Duty: Never are our Hearts so apt to wander as at such a time, and therefore
they require a strong Guard. How very backward is the Heart to Duty! how
naturally dead and dull in Duty! how soon weary of Duty! how many Pretenses
will our Hearts make, to cause us to Omit Holy Performances, or to render us
heedless and lifeless in them; therefore, as good Nehemiah when building, did
Work and Watch, Watch and Work, so must we in Duty, Pray and Watch, Watch and
Pray.

4. Make Conscience of Glorifying God in all Religious Duties, one as well as
another: Partiality is hateful to God in the Duties of Religion, which have all
a Divine Stamp upon them. Many Complain of their deadness in Prayer, and
dullness unto the Word, who never came to the Sacrament; Wonder not at it; God
will not meet thee in one Ordinance if thou neglectest him in another. We must
not limit and bind the Holy Spirit to this or that Duty, but wait upon him in
all. Almighty God is pleased to Communicate himself with great Variety to his
Children, at one time in this Ordinance, at another time in that, on purpose to
keep up the Esteem of all in our Hearts, and to engage us to Attend, upon all
Conscientiously in the whole Course of our Lives.

5. Look that in all thy Religious Duties thou servest God with an holy
Alacrity, with a Spiritual Delight and Joy. Joy suits no Person so well as a
Christian, and at no Season so well as when Waiting upon God in Religious
Duties: We have a Promise of it, Isa. 12. v. 3. With Joy shall ye draw Water
out of the Wells of Salvation: And we have also a Promise made unto it, Isa.
64.5. Thou meetest him that rejoiceth, and works righteuousness; that is,
Thou Acceptest him.

6. Look that thy End in Attending upon Religious Duties be the same with God's
End in Appointing of them: Namely, First, that by them we should pay our Homage
to him as our Sovereign Lord: And, Secondly, That through them he may
Communicate his Spiritual Blessings into his People's Bosoms.

7. Above all take Care that thou do not blot thy Holy and Religious Duties
by a wicked and Unholy Life: If thou intendest to foul thy Hands with Sins
black work on the Weekday, it is in vain for thee to wash them with Prayer on
the Lord's Day. A little seeming Zeal at thy Devotion in the Church will not
guild over the Weeks Miscarriages in thy Shop, nor atone for thy Pride and
Passion, for thy Deceit and Fraud, for thy Riot and Excess.

CHAP. VIII. Of Glorifying God in Public Worship.
IT is Confessed by all Persons who have any Sense of God and Religion upon
their Minds, that they were made to serve and glorify their great Creator, by
a constant Acknowledgment of his Sovereignty over them, and their continual
Dependency upon him: Now much of the Honor of God and the Credit of Religion
depends upon the due Performance of his Public Worship; this Glorifies God
much more than any Private Addresses from the Family or the Closet, both as it
creates a greater Veneration and Esteem of God in the Minds of Men, and also
because Public and Solemn Adorations are the most Illustrious Testimonies we
can render to God of our Homage to him: Besides, how reasonable is it, that we
should own the God whom we serve in the Face of the World.

Not but that a Christian honors God highly, and serves him Acceptably by his
Family Duties and Closet-Devotions: But we do much more Glorify him by our
Public Addresses. Then we Honor God Eminently, when we let others see
conspicuously the high Esteem we have of his Excellencies, and cause the Voice
of his Praise to be heard amonst Men. The Honor that is done to Persons
amongst Men is not done in secret, but is always a Public thing. Honor me
before the Elders of my People, said Saul to Samuel; in like manner we give
unto the Lord the Honor due unto his Name, when others are Witnesses of the
Esteem which we have of his Divine Perfections, by our Reverend Acknowledgment
of him in his Public Worship. To excite you therefore to a diligent and daily
A^tendance upon God in his Public Worship, as you have Opportunity, Consider,
(1.) That Public Worship glorifies God most. (2.) He Accepts it best.

1. Public Worship glorifies God most, because hereby a Sense of God and
Religion is best kept up and preserved in the World, which otherwise would be
in danger of being lost. If the Public Assemblies fall, Religion cannot long
stand; the Worship of God in our Closets will not do this, because it is
unseen. What we do alone, no Body sees, (nor is it intended that they should)
and therefore that cannot induce others to the same way of Glorifying God: But
when Men see a Body of Christians assembled together in an humble manner, with
Pious Devotion and submissive Reverence, with bended Knees, and Eyes lifted to
Heaven, paying their Solemn Acknowledgments to the Author of their being, this
strikes Men with a certain Awe, and supports the Belief both of God's Existence
and Pen^ficence also in the Minds of Men: As for instance, when we see a great
multitude of poor People constantly waiting at the Gates of an House, we
presently conclude that some great and good Man dwells there, whom the Poor
wait upon: Thus does the Public Worship of Pious Christians spread the Fame of
God's extraordinary Goodness, far and near, whereas when few or none tread in
the Courts of his House, (which were built to contain a multitude of
Worshippers, and to represent the inconceivable Greatness of that God who is
therein worshipped) this very much damps the Sense of God and Religion in the
World, and represents him after a poor and contemptible fashion. Oh how
unsuitable then is it, that the Worship of such a superexcellent and
transcendent Being, as God is, should be confined to our Closets and Private
Houses, when it is much more suitable and agreeable to his Nature that we
Magnify and Praise him as openly and as Publicly as possible we can, that so
we may not seem to Worship some little petty Deity, but the Almighty and
Universal Lord of Heaven and Earth.

2. As Public Worship glorifies God most, so he accepts it best, for there is
nothing that Almighty God more delights in, than in the joint Prayers and
Praises of his People, Psalm. 87.2. The Lord loves the Gates of Sion more than
all the dwellings of Jacob: No doubt the Prayers which good Men put up to
Almighty God from under their Private Roofs, are very acceptable to him; but if
a Christian's single Voice in Prayer be so sweet, what is the Churches Quire,
the joint Prayers of a multitude of good Men in Consort together. A Father is
glad to see any one of his Children at his House, and makes him Welcome when he
Visits him, but when they meet all together there, then is the Feast and
splendid Entertainment. Verily the Public Prayers and Praises of God's
Children are the Emblems of Heaven, and a Devout Soul when joining in the
Public Assemblies, looks upon himself as in the very Suburbs of Heaven, it
being the nearest Approach that he can make to that glorified Society on this
side Glory.

In Order to your Profitable Attendance upon God in his Public Worship, let
the following Directions be Observed by you:

1. Come always at the Beginning of Public Worship, and tarry constantly 'till
all is ended, neither coming late nor running away early, before the Blessing
be giving, which many careless People rudely do, as if they were as glad to get
out of God's House as out of a Prison. Those two Pious and Useful Men, whose
Memories you of this place have such a deserved Veneration for, Mr. Rogers,
sometimes your Minister, and Mr. Hildersham, the one in his Exposition of St.
Peter, and the other in his Lectures on St. John, do give frequent Advice to
their People, not only to come at the Beginning, but before the Beginning of
Public Worship: It becoming the People, say they, to wait for the Minister,
rather than the Minister to stay for the People. Think not then that you are
time enough at Church if you get to the Sermon, though you miss the Prayers, for
they Prepare you for the Word, and Sanctify the Word unto you. It is not the
way to profit by one Ordinance, to Neglect another.

2. Enter the public Assemblies awfully and Reverently; presume not to come
into the House of God, as you do into a Playhouse or Dancing-School, laughing
and toying, nor to go out of it as such; but labor for a lively and vigorous
sense of God impressed upon your Minds, and to get your Hearts possessed with the
Consideration of the infinite Majesty and glorious Excellency of that God whom
you are Addressing your selves unto.

3. When present in the public Assemblies, join uniformly with the
Congregation in all the parts of Gods Worship. It makes much for the Comeliness
and Reverence of Gods Worship, that all things be done in order; when the
Congregation prays, hears, kneels and sings together, as if the whole
Congregation were but one man.

4. Look that the Intention of your mind, and the Reverence of your Body, do
always accompany each other in the Public Worship of God, particularly in
Prayer; look that your Soul ascend with every Petition that is put up at the
Throne of Grace, and let the Posture of thy Body declare the Veneration of thy
Soul. To that end, Always kneel at Prayer, if with any convenience you can.
This posture of Kneeling, and sometimes of lying prostrate upon the Face in
Prayer, was constantly used in the Jewish Church, and the Christian Church was
never acquainted with any other posture, except only betwixt Easter and
Whitsontide, when in Memory of Christ's Resurection they were wont to stand. As
for such amongst us who Rudely sit at Prayer, it shows, that their Minds are
not possessed with an awful sense of that vast and infinite distance and
disproportion that is betwixt God and them. Sitting no where appears in
Scripture to have been used as a Praying posture: As for that one Text, 2 Samuel
7. v. 18. that David sat before the Lord and said, etc. it may as well be read,
David abode, or stayed before the Lord, and so is rendered 1 Samuel 1.22. Nor is
it with me supposeable, that David would present his Supplications to Almighty
God in such a saucy manner as he would not suffer one of his own Subjects to
present a Petition to himself. A Prince would not like an irreverent Behavior
from his Servant in his Bedchamber, where none besides himself is Witness to
it; much less would he bear it in his Presence Chamber, where he sits upon his
Throne before a multitude of his Subjects.

5. Therefore to compose the Frame of your Mind, and to regulate the Behavior
of your Body, whilst you are attending upon Almighty God in his public
Ordinaces, often remember the several Eyes that are upon you, and taking notice
of you: Namely, the All-seeing Eye of God, the Observing Eye of Conscience, the
Vigilant Eye of the World, and the Malignant Eye of Satan.

6. Never Attend upon Almighty God in public Duties, before you have waited
upon him in your private Devotions. Enter your Closet before you enter into
Gods House, and there, first, consider, and then pray. Consider with thy self
the weight and importance of those Duties which thou art about to engage in:
Consider the worth and value of an Opportunity for thy Soul which thou art that
day entrusted with; but especially reflect often upon the strictness of that
Account which is to be given, for the long enjoyment of the plentiful means of
Grace afforded to thee. Next bow thy Knees to Almighty God in Prayer, humbly
implore his gracious Presence with thee, and Assistance of thee, in thy private
Preparations, and in thy public Administrations also. Remember, that as thou
can do nothing of thy self at the Ordinance without Gods Assistance, so God
will do nothing for thee by the Ordinance without thy Endeavors: The
remembrance of the former will stir thee up to a more fervent Supplication for,
and a more importunate Expectation of Help from Heaven: And the consideration
of the latter will excite our diligence and care both in our Preparation for,
and Attendance upon, all the Sacred and solemn Institution of Almighty God.

Take therefore the Throne of Grace in thy way to hear the Word of Grace, and
never go forth out of thine own House without Preparation and Prayer, to the
House of God. And let such of you as plead to me want of Ability to express
your desires to God, make use of the following Prayer, or some other composed
to your hand, both in your Closet alone, and also in your Family, changing only
the Person, according as you pray by your self alone, or together with your
Household.

A Prayer to be used on the Lord's Day Morning, or at any other time before we
go forth to Public Worship.
OH Almighty and most Glorious Lord God! who are greatly to be feared in the
Assemblies of thy Saints, and to be had in Reverence of all them that are round
about Thee. Although thou art infinitely exalted above all the Prayers and
Praises, above all the Adorations and Acknowledgments of thy Creatures, yet
such is thy astonishing Kindness and Condescension, as not only to indulge us a
liberty of Access unto Thee, but also to account thy self highly honored by
us, when we come into thy presence, to celebrate thy Praises, and to renew our
Acquaintance and Communion with Thee in the public Duties and Exercises of thy
Worship and Service. In a humble sense of our unworthiness, in a cheerful
compliance with our Duty, and in a thankful Acknowledgment of our Privilege,
we desire to go forth this day, to worship at they Footstool, and to pay our
Vows in the great Congregation. God Almighty pardon to us all the Errors of
our Life past, and suffer them not to stand this day as a partition wall
betwixt thy Majesty and our Souls, to hinder either the Ascent of our Prayers
up to God, or the descent of thy Grace and Mercy upon Us. Help us seriously to
consider, now our faces are toward thy House, whose Word it is we are going
forth to hear, whose work it is we are about, and unto whom we must all render
a strict, and for ought we know a very sudden Account, for all Opportunities
and seasons of Grace we are entrusted with.

Let us hear that Word of thine which shall be either read or preached this
(...) deemer not worth rememembring by us: Or if we have not wholly neglected
that Sacred Ordinance, we have not so grown in the Graces and Comforts of thy
Holy Spirit by it, as we might have done.

Forgive unto us the Sins of this Day; more especially Pardon to us the
Iniquities of our Holy Things, our unpreparedness for, our backwardness to, our
deadness and dullness in the Performance of those high and Holy Duties we have
this Day been Engaging in; let our Persons and Performances find a gracious
Acceptance with thee, in and through our worthy Mediator; for his sake receive
us and ours into thy Protection this Night, may we lie down in thy fear, arise
in thy favor, and our Rest be made refreshing to us, and we thereby the better
enabled to serve thee in our several Vocations and Callings the Day that is
approaching. Extend thy Compassions to the whole World, pity the deplorable
Ruins of Mankind, send forth the Light of thy Gospel into the dark Corners of
the Earth that perish for want of Vision: Especially remember thy Church,
wheresoever dispersed or however distressed; be a perpetual Protection and
Defense to that part of thy Church which thine own right hand has planted and
hitherto so miraculously preserved in these Nations to which we belong. We
thank Thee for all the wonderful Appearances of thy Power and Goodness toward
us; and we beg of God to establish us upon such Foundations of Righteousness
and Peace, that it may never more be in the Power of our restless Adversaries
to disturb us.

God Almighty guide and guard, Bless and Protect thine Anointed Servants, our
Sovereign Lord and Lady, King William and Queen Mary, let their Days on Earth
be like the Days of Heaven, many and happy; and after a long and a religious
Reign, upon a peaceable and unmolested Throne, may God Crown them with the
Rewards of a Glorious and Blessed Immortality.

Bless them and us in all their Royal Relations, with all the Nobility, the
Judges, Magistrates, Gentry and Commonalty of this Land; and Grant them all
Wisdom and Grace to Fear God, to Honor the King, and Love one another.

But for the sake of all, Bless all those that Administer unto thee in Holy
Things, and let all the Governors and Pastors of thy Church, further the
Edification of it by Soundness of Doctrine and Holiness of Life; but especially
Bless the Ministry of thy Servant in this Town, and make it successful for the
Conversion, Edification and Salvation of all that sit under it.

Remember all the Sons and Daughters of Sorrow and Affliction, and dispense thy
Mercies suitably to their various Necessities: Do good to all our friends,
Relations and Acquaintance, Pardon and Forgive our Enemies; and do more
abundantly for us, ours, and all thine, above what we are able to ask or worthy
to receive, for Christ's sake, in whose Name and Words we farther call upon thee:

Our Father, etc.

An HYMN or Psalm of Praise for the Lord's Day.
THis is the Day, the Lords own Day,
A Day of Holy Rest.
Oh Teach our Souls to Rest from Sin,
That Rest will please thee best.
This is the Day, thy Day, Oh Lord!
On which thou did Arise,
For Sinners, having made thy self
A Sinless Sacrifice.
Thou, Thou alone Redeemed have
Our Souls from deadly Thrall,
With no less Price than precious Blood,
The Purchase of us all.
Had thou not died, we had not lived,
But died Eternally;
We'll live to him that died for us,
And Paise his Name on high.
Thou Dy'dst indeed, but Rose again,
And did Ascend on high,
That we poor Sinners, lost and dead,
Might live Eternally.
Thy Blood was shed instead of ours,
Thy Soul our Guilt did bear,
Thou took'st our sins, gave us thy self,
Thy Love's beyond compare.
Welcome and Dear unto my Soul
Is thy most Holy Day,
But what a Sabbath shall I keep
With thee my God, for aye!
I Come, I Wait, I Hear, I Pray,
Thy Footsteps, Lord, I trace;
I joy to think this is the way
To see my Savior's Face.
These are my Preparation-Days,
And when my Soul is Dressed,
These Sabbaths shall deliver me
To mine Eternal Rest.
CHAP. IX. Of Glorifying God in Family Worship.
MAn's chief Prerogative and Dignity, which he has to Glory of, is this, that
he is the only Creature in the Visible World, made to Worship and Enjoy his
great Creator. All the Creatures are Servants, but Man is only a Priest to God,
they obey their Maker, he only Worships him: This Worship under the Law was
Limited to a particular place, to wit, The Tabernacle and the Temple, the
Tabernacle was an Ambulatory Temple, and the Temple was a standing Tabernacle:
Into which they were of old required to repair; and where Almighty God Promised
to accept them. But under the Gospel, Almighty God has declared that it is his
Will, that Men pray every where, lifting up pure hands, without Wrath and
Doubting. So then, a Christians private House is his Chapel of Ease, in which
Almighty God allows him the liberty and enjoins him the Duty of Worshipping
with his Household: And accordingly we find that Religious Householders have in
all Ages Constantly and Conscientiously performed this Duty. Devout Cornelius,
his Family Religion stands upon Record; Acts 10.2. He feared God with all his
House; that is, he Revere'd and Worshipped him: It is added, that he gave much
Alms to the People, and prayed to God always. Surely he that was so Charitable
at his door, to refresh the pinched Bowels of his poor Neighbors, could not be
so cruel to his Relations Souls within his House, as to Lock up his Religion in
a Closet from them.

To Convince you of the Equity and Reasonableness of this Duty of Worshipping
God daily, in and with your Families, Consider,

1. The Right which Almighty God has to your Family Worship, by virtue of that
Relation which he stands in to your Families. He is the Founder of your
Families, the continual Preserver of them, and a daily Benefactor to them; the
very Being of your Families, as such, is from the Lord: He builds the House, he
sets the Solitary in Families. He has founded this Domestical Society,
ultimately for his own Glory, and Subordinately for our good and Comfort. Your
Families then are Gods by a Right of Creation, and by a right of Conversation
also. He made them, and he sustains them: We and ours live upon his Bounty, and
are maintained at his Cost; it is his Flax and his Wool which we daily wear,
and he gives us richly all things to enjoy. Now if the Ox knows his Owner,
and the Ass his Masters Cribb, shall a Family which Almighty God does hourly
sustain and nourish, neglect to pay their Homage to Him, and own their
Dependence on him? Consider,

2. The superadded Obligation you lie under to the performance of this Duty,
both in point of Duty and in point of Interest.

In point of Duty: (1.) As you are entrusted by Almighty God with the Care and
Charge of your Children and Servants also; for which reason every Parent and
Master is constituted a Prophet, Priest and King, in and unto his Household. As
a Prophet he is to teach them by Instruction and Example. As a Priest he is to
offer up the daily Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise for them. And as a King he is
to command his Children and Household after him to keep the way of the Lord.

In point of Interest also: (2.) Have you not many Family-Sins to confess, and
many Family wants to supply? Now is there any that can pardon the one, or
supply the other, besides God? If thy Children want bread, can thou put it
into their Mouths before God puts it into thy hand? If they want Grace, can any
work it in their hearts but the God of all Grace? In a word: Do you not daily
receive many Family-Mercies from the hand of Divine Bounty? and is it not
reasonable that they which eat of the same Feast, should join in the same Song
of Praise to the Founder of it? When you awake in the Morning, and find none of
your Families dead in their Beds, or Buried in the Ruins of their Habitation,
but all of you preserved from death and danger, and delivered from the power
and malice of Evil Spirits, and out of the hands of unreasonable and wicked
Men, is not this a mercy that deserves thy calling thy Family together jointly
to offer up your thankful acknowledgements to the God of your Mercies?

3. Consider, That the very Heathens at the great day will arise up in
judgment, and condemn all such persons as live in the neglect of worshipping
God in their Families. For even they had their (...), their Dii Domestici,
their Lares and Penates, their Household Gods as they called them, whom they
sacrificed Morning and Evening unto, that they might conciliate their Favor,
and be successful in their Enterprises. The Old Heathens were wont to say, Now
we have Sacrificed, let us go to bed. How many that call themselves Christians
say, Now we have Supped let us go to bed! Oh what shall we think of such
persons? are they Men, or are they Swine? they are sunk not only below
Heathens, but even as low as Brutes, who never look up to the hand that feeds
them.

Now that your Family Worship be performed in an Acceptable and Advantageous
manner: Let the following advices be observed by you.

1. Take care that Family Worship be performed constantly, and seasonably; by
Family Worship, I mean especially Family Prayer, Reading the Holy Scriptures,
etc. Catechizing and Instructing Children and Servants in the Fundamental
Principles of Christianity, and praising of God in Singing. All which duties
the Family-Governour is to take care, not only that they be performed
constantly, but seasonably; at such times as are freest in reguard of
interruption; particularly, the Morning is the fittest season, when our Spirits
are fresh and lively, and before a Throng of Worldly business crowds in upon
us: You will find it much better to go from Prayer to Business, than from
business to prayer, in regard of the freedom of your Minds from distracting
thoughts. So when the Evening comes on, delay not the performance of your duty
to an unseasonable hour. Some Masters call for the Cushion to go to Prayer,
when they are more fit for the Plilow and to go to sleep. But supposing that
this should not be thine own case, thou art wakeful thy self, yet thou ought
to consider the condition of thy poor Servants, who work hard in the day, and
to take heed that thou do not expose them to the sin and temptation of
drousie praying.

2. Look upon it as thy oblidged duty, to pray Morning and Evening in thy
Family; many Masters pray neither Morning nor Night with their Household, some
pray at Night only, and then so late that a Child is asleep in one corner, and
a Servant in another, and the Master himself between sleeping and waking; can
such hanging down our heads, instead of listing up our hands, be Accepted as an
Evening Sacrifice? Surely we cannot expect it. To convince you how reasonaby
Almighty God may expect from you a Morning as well as an Evening Sacrifice of
Prayer and praise: Consider, (1.) That under the Law Almighty God required thus
much, namely, both a Morning and Evening Sacrifice, which was called the
continual Burnt-offering. (2.) That we have no reason to think or suppose that
Almighty God expects less, but rather more homage and spiritual worship from us
now, having freed us from the burden of such Ceremonial observances as they
were obliged to. (3.) That the often repeated commands of the Gospel, which
require us to pray always, and to pray without ceasing, cannot reasonably be
thought to signify less than praying as often as the Jews offered Sacrifice,
which was Morning and Evening. And this may as properly be called a praying
continually, as the Morning and Evening Sacrifices under the Law, were called a
continual Burnt-Offering: So that if you do not pray Morning and Evening, you
must suppose that Almighty God will accept of less service under the Gospel,
than he did under the Law.

3. Advice is this, Spend so much time in Family Worship, and particularly in
Prayer, that those that join with you may be affected, but not so much time as
to be wearied with the Duty. My meaning plainly is, be neither too short, nor
yet too tedious: To arise up from our Kees, before our Hearts are affected
either with our own Sin, or with Gods Mercies, is to come away from a duty no
better than we went to it: And such an over hasty Brevity argues very little
delight that we take in the duty; but shows that we are very glad to get out of
Gods presence as soon as we can. And on the other hand, too much prolixity and
length in duty has its inconveniences, and makes the Duty burthensom, and
Persons the more backward to the performance of it. Let thy prudence then so
guide thee in the management of thy duty, that God may have the Glory, thy self
and others the Benefit of thy attendance on him in holy Duties.

4. Labor to preserve Family-peace; if you would acceptably perform
Family-Prayers, agree together in Love, that your Prayers be not hindered. This
is certain, that Religion, and the power of Holiness can never thrive or
prosper in that Family, where discord and contention dwells; you may as well
hope to Live together comfortably in an house on fire, as pray together
acceptably when your Spirits are inflamed with passion, or embittered with
prejudice one against another; nay verily, the Body may as well thrive in a
Fever as such a Family grow in Grace. As the fire in the Bones must be
quenched, and the Body brought to its natural temper and disposition before it
can thrive and grow healthy, so these unkindly heats must be quenched in a
Family, before Religion can thrive or prosper: That Family will be unsuccessful
in praying, that is much squabling and brawling, often contending with and
clashing against one another.

5. Take heed of setting up Family Worship in opposition to Public Worship, or
to suffer the one to interfere with the other: We can say our Prayers (say
some) in the Chimny-corner, what need we go to Church to do it? But at this
rate, all sense of God and Religion will be utterly lost in the World; and is
not this the Communion of Saints and the Fellowship of Holy Christians, a
privilege worth thy prizing? How does the presence of Devout Souls sometimes
fire and inflame our cold Spirits, and cause them to grow into greater Ardours
and Transports of Zeal! Thus the Divine Herbert sweetly expresses it, Though
Private Prayer be a brave Design,
Yet Public has more Promises, more Love, etc.
Leave there thy Six and Seven
To pray with most, for where most pray is Heaven.


God allows you time both for Publick-Worship and Family Duties, he expects the
joint performance of both from you. Let Piety and Prudence so Guide and Direct
you in the management of both, that God may be Glorified, and your Souls
improved by both:

6. Let not the sense of thine own weakness, or want of Gifts and Parts, etc.
discourage thee from the daily performance of this Duty of Praying in and with
thy Family; but in Obedience to God set about it in the best manner thou art
able, and he will pardon thy weakness, and accept thy sincerity. It is not
enlarged Parts and Gifts, and Florid Expressions, that Almighty God looks at,
but an Humble, Penitent, Broken and Believing Heart: In Prayer it is not the
quaint Note of the Nightingal, but the Mournful Tone of the Dove, that finds
the best acceptance. Study your Sins, your Wants and Mercies, and get a sense
of all these upon your Hearts, and you will be able in some measure to express
your desires to Almighty God. But if after all, the want of suitable
Expressions do discourage thee from Praying before others in thy Family, make
use of some of those many good Books of Devotion which are amongst us: Or if
you have none of them, and are so poor that you cannot purchase them, make use
of the following Words to express your Family-wants in to Almighty God, Morning
and Evening.

A Family Prayer for the Moning.
OH Eternal, Ever-Glorious, Ever-Gracious and Merciful Lord our God! Thou
fillest the Heavens with thy Glory, the Earth with thy Goodness, and all places
with the immensity of thy Presence. We pray Thee fill our Hearts with awful
Apprehensions of thy Great and Glorious Majesty, that whenever we come before
Thee, we may Sanctify thy Name in all our Religious Addresses to Thee.

We Holily Admire, and Humbly Adore thy Divine Goodness toward us, in this
Invaluable Priveledge of our Admission to the Throne of Grace, (which our dear
Redeemer has purchased for us,) by Faith, in whose Mediation it is that we
offer up our Prayers and Suplications now unto Thee, beseeching thee for his
satisfaction sake to pardon our Iniquities, and for his Intercession sake to
hear our Prayers.

It is oh Lord! the sincere desire of our Souls this Morning, to give Glory to
thy Name by a free Penitent Acknowledgment and Confession of our Sin and Guilt,
which has rendered us All justy liable and Obnoxious to thy Wrath and Curse.

Particularly, We lament before God, the want of the Original Purity and
Perfection of our Natures, the loss of thy Divine Image which was Instampt upon
our Souls in their first Creation: Oh how have we by our Apostasy from God,
forefeited his favor, and lost his likeness, being by Nature Children of
Wrath, because Children of Disobedience!

Help us also to lie low at thy foot in a Sorrowful fight and sense of the
manifold Actual Transgressions and Provocations of our Lives.

Humble us greatly for all the Follies and Indecencies of our Childhood, for
the Vanities of our Youth, and the sinfulness of our Riper Years; for our Sins
of Ignorance and of Knowledge, of Weakness and of Wilfulness, of Omission and
of Commission, against thy Law and against thy Gospel, against the motions of
thy Holy Spirit, and the checks of our own Consciences. We lament and bewail
them all in thy presence, they are our grief and our shame, and the burden of
our Souls: God Almighty pardon them unto us; blot them out of thy Book, bury
them in our Saviors Grave, that they may never arise more either in this World
to shame us, or in the World to come to condemn us.

And as we humbly implore thy Pardoning Mercy for the Errors of our Life past,
so we do Importunately beg the Aids of thy Divine Grace to empower us against
the Dominion of Sin for the time to come; let the Grace of God which has
appeared to us in thy Gospel, Teach every one of us practically to deny all
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts and to Live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in
this present World. And God Almighty keep it in the purpose of our hearts for
ever to continue faithful to him, that with full purpose of heart we may cleave
unto the Lord, that continuing faithful to the Death, we may lay hold of the
Crown of Life.

Prepare and sit us for thy whole providential Will and Pleasure. We pray thee
Compose our Minds in all Conditions of Life, to a quiet and steady dependence
on thy Good Providence, that we may be Solicitously careful (or nothing, but
in every condition by Prayer and Supplication let us make our Requests known to
God: Mind us of our Mortality, and let us never be forgetful of our latter end;
help us practically to understand how frail we are, and let us wisely prepare
for that great change of ours which will Translate every Soul of us into an
Unchangeable and Everlasting State.

Extend thy Goodness and Compassions to the whole World: Pity the deplorable
Ruins of Mankind; think upon the dark Corners of the Earth, that perish for
want of Vision; and where ever thou have a Church planted, perpetually watch
over it, and be a protection to it: Continue thy Loving kindness to this Church
and Nation to which we belong, pardon our sins, avert our Judgments, heal our
Breaches, compose our Unreasonable Divisions: Bless our Governors, especially,
thy Servants on the Throne, let their Reign over us be long and prosperous.
Bless all the Governors and Teachers of thy Church, particularly him and his
Labors who Administers to Thee and us in holy things in this Congregation. Let
all in an afflicted condition be had in Remembrance of God: Give them patience
under their sufferings, advantage by them, and in thy good time a happy Issue
and Deliverance out of them. Bless all our Relations, Friends and Acquaintance,
Pardon and Forgive our Enemies, and enable us to forgive them also.

And now oh Father! Accept we pray thee our thankful Returns for all the
instances of thy Goodness toward us, particularly for our Creation,
Preservation and all the Blessings of this Life: But especially and above all
for thy wonderful Love in the Redemption of Mankind by the Son of thy Love, the
Holy Jesus: We bless thee for the means of Grace and for the hope of Glory. We
thank thee for all the Comforts and Conveniences of Life afforded to us, for
thy Good Hand of Providence over us this last Night, and for raising us up this
Morning to see the light of another day. Stand charged with the particular care
of every one of us, prosper the labor of our hands, and bless us in all our
lawful Undertakings, preserve us from the Evil of Sin, and keep us in perpetual
peace and safety, through Jesus Christ our Lord! In whose Name and Words we
call on thee:

Our Father, etc.

A Family Prayer for the Evening.
ETernally Glorious, and Incomprehensibly great and Gracious Lord God: who art
infinitely exalted above all the Prayers and Praise of Glorious Angels and
Glorified Saints, yet such is the condescension of thy Grace and Goodness, as
not only to invite us into thy presence, but also to Account thy self honored
by us when we come before Thee, and renew our Acquaintance and Communion with
thee in the Duties and Exercises of thy Worship and Service.

We humbly pray, that none of our iniquities may divide or separate betwixt God
and us, but whereinsoever we have offended, be Gracious to us in the pardon and
forgiveness of it.

Pardon, Oh Lord, unto us, Original Guilt, the Hereditary Pollution, and
Universal depravation of our Natures. Remember not against us the Follies of
our Childhood, the Sins of our Youth, or the provocations of our Riper years,
but according to the multitude of thy tender Mercies in Christ Jesus, blot our
Transgressions. Wash us thoroughly from our Wickedness, and cleanse us from all
our Sins; Create in us a clean heart, oh God! and renew a Right Spirit within
us; purge us with Hyssop and so shall we be clean, oh wash us in the Blood of
the Immaculate Lamb, the Crucified Jesus, and so shall we be whiter than the
Snow.

And God Almighty grant that we may never more return to the Love and Practice
of our former Sins, but proclaim and prosecute an open and Irreconcilable War
against them, yea enable us by thy Grace to dye daily to them, and to live unto
Righteousness and True Holiness, continually mortifying all our Evil and
Corrupt Affections, and daily proceeding in all Virtues and Godliness of Living.

Guide us we pray thee, through all the difficult passages of our Lives by the
Conduct of thine Unerring Providence, and in all conditions of Life, let thy
Grace be abundantly sufficient for us: Leave us not one Moment to our selves,
least we become a prey to every Temptation: But carry us joyfully through all
the Difficulties of Life, and Support us powerfully in and under the Agonies of
Death.

Keep us ever mindful of our latter End, and from flattering our selves with
the hope and expectation of a long continuance of time here in the World: But
let it be our great Ambition and desire not so much to live long, as to live
well, to be useful and serviceable to Almighty God in our place and generation,
knowing it is nothing but a useful and well spent life, that can render our
Death happy and our Resurrection Glorious: And let Almighty God Mercifully
Assist and succor us in our last moments; in the hour of Death, and in the day
of Judgment, good Lord, deliver us: Remember all thine all the World over, do
good in thy Good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the Walls of Jerusalem, ruin
the Kingdom of Sin, Satan, and Antichrist, enlarge the borders of thy Sons
Kingdom, and give him the Heathen for his Inheritance, the utmost parts of the
Earth for his Possession. Be favorable and Gracious to these Nations of
England, Scotland and Ireland: Humble us for all our provoking sins, avert our
impending Judgments, prevent what we fear, remove what we feel, and in thy own
time establish us upon such foundations of Righteousness and Peace, that it may
never more be in the power of our restless Adversaries to disturb us.

Bless our Governors and all that are in Authority over us, both in Church and
State, Especially thine Anointed Servants on the Throne, K. William and Q.
Mary, and grant that under the shadow of their Governmeot we may lead quiet
and peaceable Lives in all Godliness and honesty; remember all the Sons and
Daughters of Sorrow and Affliction, especially any that are near unto us, lying
under thy hand in bodily Sickness; sanctify, we pray thee, all thy Fatherly
Corections to them, and grant that the sense of their weakness may add Strength
to their Faith, and seriousness to their Repentance; raise them up if it be thy
Will, and give them Wisdom and Grace to lead the Residue of their lives in thy
fear, and to thy Glory; and prepare us for the like adversities.

Finally we bless and praise thy Holy Name, for all thy Mercies vouchsafed to
us, for the source and fountain of them all, the Holy Jesus: For all the
invaluable Fruits and Benefits of his Incarnation, Death, Resurrection and
Ascension; for the present means of Grace, and the hopes of future Glory. We
Praise Thee also for all Temporal Blessings, for the use of our Reason, for the
preservation of our Health and Strength, for thy Watchful Care and Good
Providence over us this day.

Pardon to us the Sins of this day, whether in thought, word, or deed, committed
against thy Divine Majesty: And take us this Night into thy Care and
Protection, give us Comfortable Rest and Repose, defend this Habitation and all
about it, from Fire, from Storm and Tempest, and every sad Accident: Deliver us
from the Power and Malice of Evil Spirits, and keep us out of the Hands of Evil
Men. And when we awake in the Morning, let us be still with Thee, and let every
one of us in our several vocations serve Thee Faithfully and Painfully to our
dying hour. All which we humbly Beg in the Name and Mediation of the
Infinitely Worthy Jesus, who in Compassion to our Infirmities has commanded us
to say,

Our Father etc.

An HYMN, Or Song of Praise for the Morning.
LORD, for the Mercies of this Night,
My humble Thanks I Pay:
And unto Thee, I Dedicate
The First Fruits of the Day.
My God was with me all this Night,
And gave me sweet Repose;
My God did Watch, even, whilst I Slept,
Or I had never Rose.
How many groaned and wished for Sleep,
Until they wished for Day:
Weary both of their Bed and Life,
whilst I securly lay.
Whilst I did Sleep, all Dangers Slept,
No Thieves did Me affright,
Those Evening Wolves, those Beasts of Prey,
Disturbers of the Night.
No Raging Flames, Nor Storms did Rend
The house that I was in:
I heard no Dreadful Cries without,
Nor Doleful Groans within.
What Terrors have I 'scap'd this Night,
Which have on others fell,
My Body might have Slept its last,
My Soul have waked in Hell!
Let this Day Praise Thee, oh my God,
And so let all my Days,
And oh let my Eternal Day
Be thy Eternal Praise.
An HYMN or Song of Praise for the Evening.
MY God, my only Help and Hope,
My strong and sure Defense,
For all the Mercies of this Day
I Bless thy Providence.
Lord in the day thou were about
The Paths wherein I tread,
Now in the Night when I lie down,
Be thou about my Bed!
This Day God was my Son and shield,
My keeper and my Guide,
His Care was on my Frailty shown,
His Mercies multiplied.
Minutes and Mercies multiplied
Have made up all this Day,
Minutes came quick, but Mercies were
More swift and free than they,
New Time, new Favors, and new Joys,
Do a New Song require,
'Till I shall Praise the as I would,
Accept my Hearts Desire.
Now for a Close of this Advice to Family-Governours, concerning their
Performance of Family Worship, I shall only subjoin this one Cautionary
Direction: Take heed of resting in thy Family Duties, and by no means think it
sufficient to prove thee a Saint, and evidence thee a sincere Christian,
because thou art frequent in Family Duties. Alas! a Man may set up the Worship
of God in his House, and yet not Enthrone God in his Heart. The Duty it self is
good, but the bare Performance of it will not demonstrate thee to be so; look
therefore how thou daily Walk as well as how thou Prayest. If thou meanest
to foul thy Hands with Sins black work in the Day, it is gross Hypocrisy to
pretend to wash them by Prayer in the Morning: It Is sad to pretend to Religion
in the House, and to practice Deceit and Fraud in the Shop. Oh how many begin
with God by Prayer in the Morning, and keep the Devil Compain Sin all the Day
after.

The Neglect of Family Duties will certainly bespeak thee a Bad Man: But the
most constant performance of them without a Life suitable to them, will never
prove thee a good Man.

CHAP. X. Of Glorifying God in Secret Duties.
GReat is the Condescension of Almighty God in holding Communion with his
Church in their Public Assemblies, when with United Prayers and Supplications
they make their Solemnest Adresses to him: But Oh, how Adorable is his
Condescending Love, in stooping so low as to maintain a holy Fellowship and
sweet Communion with a single Christian in his Closet-Devotions. It is not
enough that in Heaven when we shall put on our Robes of Glory, that he will
take us into his Royal Presence, and Admit us there to the sight and enjoyment
of his Face and Favor, but will he now whilst we are clad with Rags of
Mortality, and before our Grave Clothes are thrown off, entertain us also as
his Friends, and indulge us the liberty of giving him a Visit in the remotest
Corner of our House? Verily such astonishing Love and stupendous
Condescension, is rather to be admired than expressed by us. Now there are
several Secret Duties incumbent upon Christians, which Almighty God upon our
humble Application to him, will afford us the sweet Influences, the secret Aids
and Assistances of his Holy Spirit in the performance of: As namely,

1. Holy and Devout Meditation, when the Soul retires from the World, and in a
serious and solemn Manner sets it self to think upon God, to contemplate his
glorious Attributes, to ruminate upon his gracious Promises, to admire his
wonderful Word and Works.

2. Serious Self-examination, by which we make a daily enquiry into the State
of our Souls, and thereby arrive at a well-grounded Kowledge of the safety of
our State and Condition, by comparing the Frame of our Hearts and the Course of
our Lives with the Holy Rule of God's Commandments, and observing their
sincere Conformity thereunto.

3. Secret Prayer and Supplication, which ought to be performed constantly and
seasonably twice a Day. As soon as thou arisest out of thy Bed in the Morning,
begin the Day with God, and make a most hearty tender of your self to his
Service and Glory, before you set about any Worldly-Business, and never think
of putting off your Clothes to lie down at Night, before you have commended
your selves and all yours unto his merciful Protection. For your Encouragment
hereunto, you have the Practice and Example of our Blessed Savior, whom you
find early in the Morning Praying alone, St. Mark 1.35. and late in the
Evening, St. Matthew. 14.23. and that this was our Savior's usual Practice, may
be gathered from St. Luke 22.39. compared with St. Luke 21.27. Thus Christ
Sanctified this Duty by his own Example, and has by his Promise annexed a
Gracious Reward to the faithful doing of it, St. Matthew. 6.6.

All this our Blessed Savior did when he was here on Earth, and now that he is
Ascended up into Heaven, to what Purpose is he appointed our Intercessor there
if we send up no Prayers to him to be presented by him to the Father.

Besides this, the Sense of our daily wants, one would think should
sufficiently excite us to this Duty, we standing in continual need of God; or
if we could be supposed to want nothing, yet the Sense we have, that we hold
All we call Ours by the mere Mercy of God, should move us to acknowledge him,
and to pay our Homage and Adorations to him. Add to this, that there is no such
way to make Almighty God entirely our Friend, as by commending our selves in
the Duty of Prayer to him, with a Pious Trust in his Mercy, and an entire
Devoting of our selves to his Service and Glory. But oh how inexpressible will
be the Comfort of going to God as an Acquaintance, when we are going out of
this World, if we can truly say, as that Devout Man, Dr. Preston did, a little
before his Death, I shall change my Place, but not my Company; how joyfully may
we hope and comfortably expect, to go to God when we dye, with whom we held a
constant good correspondence, and maintained a sweet familiarity whilst we
lived.

Let these Considerations briefly hinted to thy Thoughts, work in thee a Pious
Resolution to begin and end the day with God, this will Antidote and fortify
thy Soul against the Contagion of Sin, and the Temptations of Sinners.
Ecclesiastical History tells us, that when St. Origin fell into that great Sin
of Offering Incense to an Idol-god, that Morning he went forth before he had
performed his Private Devotions. We are never safe either from Sin or Danger,
but when under the over-shadowing Care and Providential Wing of God, and Prayer
is the way and means to engage God Almighty's care over us and concern for us;
by Prayer we fix our Minds upon him, we lay open our Souls before him, we
recomend our selves unto him, which gives our Minds the sweetest and most solid
satisfaction, that whatever Providence befall us, are certainly intended by an
unerring Wisdom for our good, and in Order to our Happiness.

Now in Order to your Glorifying Almighty God in Secret Duties, let the
following Directions be observed.

1. Be sure that thou art Private in thy Private Duties, let it be true Secret
Prayer, and not have its Name for naught: Remember our Savior's Advice, St.
Matthew. 6.6. Enter into thy Closet when thou prayest, and shut thy door; and be
sure to shut it so close, that no Wind of Vain Glory may either get out or come
in. Some Hypocrites pray in Secret, but as they handle the matter they are not
Secret in their Closets, like the Hen that goes into a Private place to lay her
Egg, but by her Cackling tells all the House both where she is, and what she is
about; rather than be guilty of this Vanity, shut the door of thy Lips, as well
as of thy Closet; not but that it is lawful to use the Voice in Private Prayer,
provided it be not for Ostentation, to be overheard by others: Yea, and useful
also, as it helps the Attention of the Mind, and prevents wandering thoughts;
and likewise quickens the Affections, by raising them up to an higher degree
and pitch of Fervency. Christian Prudence therefore must direct Thee, what is
best in this Case.

2. Look that thou art free and open with Almighty God in Private Duties, come
not to God in Secret, and then conceal thy Secret from him, lay open thy very
Heart, and spread all thy Secret Sins before him, and be sure to hide nothing
from him; if thou art not free to Confess, never expect that God will be
faithful to forgive. Prayer is called in Scripture a pouring forth of the Soul
to God, because a Gracious Person makes known all its wants and griefs to God,
and does this with much Freedom of Spirit: Verily there is nothing that
Almighty God resents more unkindly at his Peoples hands, than their Attempts to
conceal either their their Secrets Sins, or their Secret wants from him; when
he stands ready so graciously to pardon the one, and so mercifully to supply
the other.

3. Make use of the most proper and fitting Season for Secret-prayer, and take
heed that one Duty does not interfere with another, either with Family Prayer
or with Publick-worship; the Beauty of Christianity consists in the Harmony of
a Christian Obedience, but the Devil takes a mighty pleasure in putting Persons
upon setting the Ordinances of God at variance one against another; look also
that thy Closet-Devotions do not interfere with the Duties of thy particular
Calling. God allows time for the Shop, as well as for the Closet, as thou art
to shut thy Closet-doors to pray, so to open thy Shop Windows for work; and if
we be not faithful in the one, we cannot expect his Presence in the other: Go
then, Oh Christian, into thy Closet before thou go into thy Shop, or else
thou art an Atheist, but when thou have been with God there, attend with
faithfulness the Business of thy Calling, or else thou art an Hyyocrite; he
that says Be fervent in Prayer, also says, Be not sloathful in Business.

4. Take heed that your frequent performance of Secret Duties do not degenerate
into a lifeless formality; what we do very frequently, we are prone to do very
carelessly; it is exceeding hard not to grow formal in those Duties which we are
daily Conversant in. Endeavor therefore with your utmost Care and Diligence to
keep up the fervor of your Affections in your daily approaches to God; and in
order thereunto, I would advise you to pray often, rather than very long; for
it is difficult to be long in our Prayers, and not to slacken our Affections.
Our Blessed Savior himself we find praying often, yea and using the same Words
in Prayer, St. Matthew. 26.44.

5. Rest not upon it, as an Infallible Evidence of thy Sincerity, thou art
found in the practice of Secret Duties. It Is as possible for Hypocrisy to
creep into the Closet, as for the Frogs to get into Pharaohs Bedchamber; a man
may perform Secret-Duties, and yet indulge himself in many Secret Sins: But if
thou delightest in searching Duties as well as Secret, in the close Examination
of thy Heart, in the impartial Trying of thy Ways, in serious Meditation of the
Threatenings of the Word, so as to deterr thee from the Practice of all known
Sin; this will afford thee a good ground of Hope, that thy Heart is upright in
Gods sight.

6. Let not Business divert thee, let not the sense of thy own weakness and
want of Abilities discourage thee from the practice of Secret Duties,
especially from praying daily by thy self alone; confess all thy Sins, and lay
open all thy wants before Almighty God in the best manner thou art able, and
question not the acceptance of thy worthless Services for the sake of a worthy
Mediator; and rather than the sense of thine own weakness and want of
Expression should tempt thee to neglect this Duty, make use of the following
Words.

A Morning Prayer for a Private Person.
OH Eternal and ever Blessed God! Thou art in thy self Infinitely Glorious, in
the Son of thy Love transcendently Gracious: In all Humility I bow at thy Foot,
adoring thy Divine Majesty, by whose Power I was brought into the World, and by
whose Providence I have been preserved to this Moment. I acknowledge my self to
have been estranged from Thee, even from the Womb; for I brought a sinful
Nature into the World with me, from whence all actual Transgressions have flown
and proceeded, as impure Streams from a polluted Fountain. Oh Lord! humble me,
and that greatly, for my Original Guilt, for the Follies of my Childhood, for
the vanities and impieties of my Youth, for the Transgressions and Provocations
of my Riper Years, give me a particular sight of them; work in my Soul an
Ingenious and Godly Sorrow for them; an impartial hatred and enmity against
them: Accept of the Death and Sufferings of thy Son, as a full satisfaction to
thy Justice, for all that wrong I have done to the Holiness of thy Law, and
enable me by Faith to repose the entire Trust and Confidence of my Soul on the
sufficiency of his Merits; and Oh let thy Holy Spirit for the time to come, so
direct, sanctify and govern both my Heart and Life in the Ways of thy Laws,
and in the Works of thy Commandments, that in all my Thoughts, Words and Works,
I may ever seek thy Honor and Glory; and may so Order my Conversation aright,
that at Death I may see the Salvation of God. Prepare me for a sickbed, and
fit me for a dying hour, let not God be a Stranger, nor my Conscience a Terror
to me when I come to die, but do thou mercifully assist and succor me in my
last Moments: In the hour of Death, and in the Day of Judement, Good Lord
deliver me, and conduct me safely to thine Everlasting Kingdom. I Bless thy
Name, Oh Lord, for that good Providence of thine, which has brought me to the
Light of another day, do thou so prevent me with thy Grace, so direct and
assist me by thy Holy and Good Spirit, that I may not run this day into any Sin
or Temptation; that I may not follow nor be led by any Worldly and Carnal
Lusts, but be enabled in my place and station to perform my Duty to thy Self
and my Neibour with such Care, Fidelity and Cheerfulness, as may be acceptable
both to God and Man. I humbly commend this Church and Nation to thy merciful
Care and Protection. Let our Gracious King and Queen live in thy sight, and
rule in thy fear, and let all their Subjects fear God Honor their Majesty's,
and Love one another. Assist all thy Ministers in their hard and difficult
work, and follow their endeavors with thy Blessing, particularly his who
labors amongst us in the Word and Doctrine. Pity all in an afflicted
Condition, Pardon their Sins, and supply their wants. Remember all my Relations
for good, requite the kindness of my Friends, pardon and forgive my Enemies,
and Enable me to forgive them also. These Mercies with whatever else thou
know to be needful for me and all Mankind, I humbly beg in the Name and
Words of my Blessed Redeemer, saying as he has Taught me. Our Father, etc.

An Evening Prayer for a Private Person.
MOst Holy and ever Blessed Lord God! the Father of Mercies, the Fountain of
Goodness, and the Author of all Grace. I desire again this Evening to bow
before thy Mercy-Seat, to adore and praise thy Glorious Majesty, for thy
Gracious Care and Providence over me the day past. Pardon unto me (most
Merciful Father) I most humby Beseech, whatever I have committed or omitted
this day contrary to my Resolutions and Obligations. Pity my weaknesses, and
accept my sincere endeavors to serve and glorify Thee. Wherein I have been
wont to slip, Lord help me to be more Watchful, where I have been careless and
negligent, let me use greater Diligence and Circumspection; help me more
sensibly to groan under this Body of Sin which I carry about with me, and which
so interrupts me in thy Service, that when I would do Good, evil is present
with me. And oh that the Sense of that Corruption which I find stirring in my
Soul, may cause me more earnestly to implore the help of thy Blessed Spirit,
which alone can enable me to Mortify all Evil and Corrupt Affections, to deny
all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly
in this present World. Raise up my Heart and my Affections above this World and
the things below, and place them upon thy Self and the things that are above;
oh help me to Realize the Things of Eternity and another World to my Mind, and
to believe them as certainly as if I saw them with my Bodily Eyes. Hear, Oh
Lord, and Answer the Supplications and Prayers which have been put up unto Thee
by any of thine this day, on the behalf of this Church and Nation. Oh that
Peace and Happiness, Truth and Justice, Religion and Piety, may be established
amongst us, for all Generations: Secure the Persons of thy Servants, King
William and Queen Mary, from all attempts of Violence, and let that hand be for
ever withered which shall be once stretched forth to hurt the Lords anointed;
and let all that are in Authority under them execute Judgment and Justice
impartially to the Punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and to the maintenance
of thy True Religion and Godliness. Let all that Minister unto Thee in Holy
things, endeavor both by the Purity of their Doctrine and the Piety of their
Lives, to win many to a Love of Holiness and Religion, that they may shine as
Stars for ever and ever. Pity all those that are in a worse Condition than my
self, supply their wants out of thy abundance, and work in me a readiness of
Disposition to administer to their necessities according to my Ability. Accept
my Thankful returns to thy Majesty for all thy Mercies, for the Fountain of
them all, the Holy Jesus, for all the invaluable Benefits of his Incarnation,
Death and Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and Intercession; for the Gift of
thy Holy Spirit, for the Light of thy Glorious Gospel, for all the Comforts and
Conveniences of Life afforded to me, which many Better than my self are
deprived of, for thy watchful care and good Hand of Providence over me this
day. Receive me into thy Protection this Night, sanctify my Rest, and keep me
from sinning against Thee upon my Bed; and let the natural repose of my Body
put me in Mind, that e're long I must sleep in the Bosom of the Grave, and
awake no more 'till the Morning of the Resurrection, for which solemn hour good
Lord prepare and sit me and all Mankind, by a renewed frame of Heart, and a
Religious course of Life, for thy Mercies sake in Christ Jesus, who has both
directed and commanded me when I pray to say, Our Father, etc.

A short Hymn for the Evening.
NOw from the Altar of my Heart,
Let Incense Flames arise;
Assist me Lord, to offer up
My Evening Sacrifice.
Lord Watch and Ward, when I shall sleep,
I humbly Thee implore;
Thine Angels let my Guardians be,
Both now and evermore.
Into thy hands do I commit
My Spirit, which is thy due;
For why Thou have created it,
Yea did Redeem it too.
Lord, if I live, let me be thine,
Thine also if I die;
Come Life, come Death, let Heaven be mine,
Amen, Amen, say I.
CHAP. XI. Of Reading the Holy Scriptures.
THE Holy Bible being a Letter wrote unto us by the Finger of God himself, what
is our Reading of it, and daily Conversing with it, but a Communing with the
Almighty, and making an inquiry after that Revelation of his Will, which his
Wisdom has been pleased to make unto us? How stupendous then is the Folly and
Impiety of those, who either lay the Bible aside as a neglected Book, or else
read it carelessly, irreverently, unattentively, without an honest simplicity of
Mind, to be guided, instructed, and directed by it! To prevent the Sin and
danger of both which neglects, it will be our Wisdom to resolve with our
selves, to redeem some time every day, either Morning or Evening, or both, to
read in our Closets, as well as in our Families, some part of Gods Holy World.
And that we may read it with the greater Profit, resolve we to read the Bible
through and in Order; which may be done once a year by reading about three
Chapters every day, two out of the Old Testament, and one out of the New. In
the Discharge of which Duty the following Directions may be of Use and
Advantage to us.

1. The first Preparative to our reading the Holy Scripture should be Prayer;
as the Scriptures were dictated at first by the Holy Spirit, so do they still
owe their Effects and Influences to the Spirits Cooperation, he teaches his
People to profit; the Things of the Spirit, the Apostle tells us, are
Spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. And although the natural Man may well enough
apprehend the Letter and Grammatical sense of the Scriptures, yet its Power and
Energy, that persuasive force whereby it works upon men's Hearts, this is
peculiar to the Spirit, and therefore without his Aids, the Bible whilst it
lies open before us, may be as a Book that is Sealed to us. Whenever therefore
thou take the Bible into thy Hands, dart up such Ejaculations as these
toward Heaven, and say: Lord open thou mine Eyes, that I may see the wondrous
things of thy Law. Blessed art thou, oh Lord, Teach me thy Statutes. Let thy
good Word be a Light unto my Feet, and a Lamp unto my Paths. Order my Steps in
thy Word, and let no Iniquity have Dominion over me. Give me understanding that
I may walk all my days by the Council of thy Word, and in the end of my days
die in the Comfort of it. If you read the Word of God without Prayer, you must
expect to read it without Profit.

2. A second Qualification preparatory to the reading of the Holy Scriptures,
is Reverence. When we take the Bible into our Hands, we should do it with other
Sentiments and Apprehensions than when we take a common Book, considering that
to all that converse with it, it is either the Savor of Life unto Life, or of
Death unto Death, that is, in the regular and right use of it. It Is the
Instrument of our Salvation, but upon our abuse of it, it is the Promoter of our
Destruction. And accordingly we find good men in all Ages have been wonderfully
affected with the Holy Scriptures, and to the inward Reverence of their Minds
have joined the outward Prostration of their Bodies; never reading the Bible
but upon their Knees, to the great reproach and shame of our Profaneness, who
snatch up the Bible as we do a Play-Book, and read it with as little Reverence
and Regard: Yet with this difference, that we dismiss the one much sooner, and
retain the Impressions of the other much longer. Now this proceeds in some from
the want of that habitual Reverence which we should always have to the Word of
God; and in others, from the want of Actual exciting of that inward Reverence
when they go to read: This is certain, that where there is no Reverence, there
can be no Prospect of any genuine and lasting Obedience.

3. A third Requisite to the reading of the Holy Scriptures with Profit, is
Sincerity; this is twofold, Namely, a Sincerity of the Understanding in order
to Belief, and a Sincerity of the Will in order unto Practice. We must come to
the Word of God with a Preparation of Mind, to embrace indifferently whatever
God reveals as an Object of our Faith, and we must also direct our Reading to
the proper end for which the Holy Scriptures were designed, namely, the knowing
Gods Will in Order to the doing of it, Psalm. 111.10. A good Understanding have
all they that do his Commandments.

4. Read the Scriptues with special Attention. It Is Folly and Lightness not to
do so in the reading of humane Authors, but it is sinful and dangerous not to do
so in perusing of this Divine Book: What greater contempt can be shown of a Man
whom we hear speak, if we mind not at all what is spoken by him? This vile
affront do all those put upon Almighty God, who hear or read his Word, but give
it no Attention; the Virtue which God has put into his Word consists not in the
Letters and Syllables of it, which are no more Sacred than those of another
Book, but it is the sense and meaning which is divinely inspired, and which can
never be understood by Drowsy and Unattentive Readers.

5. Read the Word of God with particular Application; this is the proper end of
our Attention, let us therefore when we Read look upon our selves as spoken to
in what we Read; when we read our Saviors Denunciation to the Jews, Except ye
repent, ye shall all perish, Luke 13.5. We are to look upon it as spoken to our
selves, and to conclude the indispensable Necessity of our own Repentance. When
we Read that Black Catalogue of Crimes in 1 Cor. 6.10. which exclude Persons
from the Kingdom of Heaven, we are to Believe that the same Crimes will as
certainly shut Heaven Gates against us, as against those to whom that Epistle
was immediately directed. So in all the Precepts of Good Life, we are to think
our selves as nearly and particularly concerned as if we had been Christ's
Auditors on the Mount. In like manner when we Read the Threatenings and
Promises, we are either to Tremble, or Hope, according as we adhere to those
sins against which the Tereatnings are Denounced, or practice those Duties to
which the Promises are annexed.

6. Read the Word of God with a Resolution to practice what thou Read,
otherwise all your Reading serves but to increase your Guilt, and will
Aggravate your Condemnation. As Christianity is not a Speculative Science, but
a practical Art of Holy Living, so the Bible was not given us merely for a
Theeme of Speculation, but for a Rule of Life. Alas! what will it avail us that
our Knowledge is right, if our Manners be crooked, and our Practice be bad? We
shall wish another day we had studied the Alcoran, rather than the Book of
Life. Read then the Holy Lives and Actions of Gods Children, not as matters of
History only, but as Patterns of Imitation. When thou read of Noah's
uprightness, of Abraham's faithfulness, of Moses meekness, of David's devotion,
of Jobs patience, of Josiahs zeal; labor to be inwardly endued with the like
Virtues, and to be outwardly Adorned with the same Graces. Woe unto us if we
read the Bible as Historians only, to furnish our selves with matter of
Discourse, and not as Christians, to Regulate our Lives according to the
Precepts and Examples contained in it; it will undoubtedly prove the saddest
History that ever we read in all our Lives.

7. Let the Word thou Read in the Morning be much upon thy Thoughts all the
Day after; as thou have opportunity, if alone, either walking or working,
meditate upon what thou have read; thy Thoughts may be busy, and yet thy Hands
not be idle, thy Heart may be in Heaven, whilst thy Hand is at the Plough; how
is it possible to profit by the Word we read, if we never think of it after we
have read it? David tells us that he had more understanding than his Teachers,
because the Law of God was his Study and Meditation all the day long, Psalm.
119.99. If thou art in Company either with thy Children or Servants, Almighty
God both directs thee and commands thee also to make his Word the Subject
matter of thy Discourse unto them: Deuteronomy. 6.6. These Words which I command thee
this day shall be in thy Heart, and thou shall Teach them diligently unto thy
Children; and shall talk of them, when thou sit in thy house, and when thou
walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

8. In Reading Gods Word compare Scripture with Scripture: And use plain
Scriptures as a Key to unlock obscure ones, for the Bible sweetly Harmonizeth
and agrees with it self; there are indeed some things hard to be understood,
some knotty Passages in Scripture, to tame our pride, and to preserve the
Sacred Writings from Contempt; but the Truths necessary to Salvation are plain,
and of easy Access to the weakest understanding. In the Scriptures, those
Waters of Life, (says pious Bishop Hall) there are Shallows, and there are
Depths: Shallows where the Lambs may wade, and Depths where the Elephants may
swim: Let not the plainness of the Scriptures offend some, nor the obscurity of
the Scriptures discourage others. But,

9. If you meet with any difficulties in Scripture which overmatch you, note
them down, Propound them to your Ministers, and crave their help, in order to
the right Understanding of them; you need not doubt of an easy Access, and an
hearty Welcome upon this Errand to your spiritual Guides; only be sure that you
come to Learn, and not to Cavil; to have your Judgments informed, and your
Consciences satisfied; not to have any itch of Vain Curiosity gratified. Our
Blessed Savior though willing to satisfy his Disciples concerning his Doctrine,
yet when they came to him with Nice and Curious Questions, he chose rather to
chastise that Humor by a Reproof, than to Cherish it by a satisfying Answer:
See Acts 1.6. Lord will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? he
said, It is not for you to know the Times and the Seasons, etc.

10. If by frequent converse with the Blessed Bible you have got the Scriptures
at your Tongues-end, take heed that you never furnish out a Jest in Scripture
Attire, nor in a jocular humor make any light and irreverent Applications of
Scripture Phrases and Sentences. Oh what an impious Liberty have some men in
this Age taken, to lay their Scenes of Ridiculous Mirth in the Bible, to Rally
in the Sacred Dialect, and to play the Buffoons with the most Serious Thing in
the World! they bring forth Scripture indeed in Discourse, but it is as the
Philistines brought forth Samson, only to make them sport. These Men e're long
will find Almighty God in Earnest, though they be in Jest, and that he that he
that has Magnified his WORD above all things, will not brook it, that any man
should make it Vile and Contemptible, by rendering it the Theme of his giddy
Mirth and Profane Drollery. It is Reported of our Josiah, K. Edward 6th. That
when in his Council Chamger, a Paper that was called for happened to lie out of
reach, the Person concerned to produce it, took a Bible that lay by, and
standing upon it, he reached down the Paper; the King observing what was done,
frowned upon him, took the Bible into his hands and Kissed it, laying it up
again: Of this Action of the Kings let me make this Application, how much it
concerns all Men not only to abstain themselves from every Action that looks
like a contempt of the Holy Scriptures, but also when they observe it in
others, to discountenance the insolence, and both by Word and Action give
Testimony of the Veneration they have for that holy Book which they see others
despise.

CHAP. XII. Of Hearing the Word Preached.
OUR Blessed Savior being Constituted and Appointed by his Father to be the
Supreme Prophet and Teacher of his Church, when here on Earth, he discharged
this Office Personally, going himself into all the Cities and Villages,
Teaching and Preaching the Kingdom of God, St. Mark 6. Now he is Ascended into
Heaven, he Teaches his Church Ministerially, by his Ministers and Ambassadors,
whom he has enjoined in his Name, and by Authority derived from him, to Teach
his People to observe all things whatsover he has commanded them, St. Math. 28.
v. 20. At the same time laying his People under a strict Injunction and
Obligation also, to take heed that they hear, Math. 11.15. To take heed (Mark
4.24.) what they hear, and to take heed how they hear, Luke 8.18. Where
observe, that as there is a Law injoyning Hearing, so there is also a Rule to
Modify the Act of hearing. And indeed if we consider the Majesty and Authority
of the Person speaking to us in the Word, how deeply we are concerned in what
we hear, the contrary Effects that the Word has upon its hearers, the Paucity
and fewness of those whom the Word works Savingly upon, and the Shortness and
uncertainty of the time which we have to hear the Word in, such Considerations
cannot but excite our Care, and cause us to take heed how we hear.

Now that you may hear the Word Preached with the greatest Profit, the
following Directions may be of use and Advantage to you.

1. Hear the Word of God preparedly: Consider seriously with thy self whose
Word it is that thou art going forth to hear; the Word of the Great and Holy
God, by which thou must be Judged, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. Fix your End and Aim right in
going forth to hear the Word, and that will have a special Influence upon your
hearing; come not to the good Word of God with an evil frame of heart: Either
with Pride, Prejudice, or Passion: But lay aside all Filthiness, and
Superfluity of Naughtiness, that you may receive with meekness the ingrafted
Word which is able to save your Souls. But especially take the Throne of Grace
in your way to hear the Word of Grace. The Word works not as a Natural Agent by
any Inherent Quality of it is own, but as a Moral Instrument in God's Hand: Now
as it is God that sets the Word on work, so it is Prayer that sets God on work.
Say therefore with David, Lord, open thou mine Eyes, that I may see the
wondrous things of thy Law; make me to understand the way of thy Precepts. And
if thou want words to express thy desires upon this occasion, make use of
the foregoing Prayer mentioned Page 27, 28, etc.

2. Hear the Word Attentively; fix thy Mind upon, and apply thy Thoughts unto,
what is spoken; suffer not vain Thoughts, or drowsy Negligence, to hinder your
Attention: For it shows a vile esteem that we have of the Word of God, when we
give place ordinarily to wandering Thoughts, and a drowsy Eye in the hearing of
it. It Is said of Lydia, Acts 16.14. That the Lord opened her heart, that she
amended to the Word which was spoken of Paul: Observe, First her heart was
opened, then her Ear; from whence I gather, that the great reason of Persons
not attending to the Ministry of the Word, is a defect in their Hearts; where
the heart is open, the Ear will not be shut. Oh what great Vanity of Mind and
Levity of Spirit does it argue in Men, to yield a far greater attention at the
hearing of a News-Book, than when a Message from God is delivered to them, even
a Message of Life or Death.

3. Hear the Word of God Retentively: Labor to remember and hold fast what
thou hear. To this the Apostle advises, Heb. 2.1. Let us give the more
earnest heed unto the things which are spoken, lest at any time we should let
them slip. Many complain of the weakness of their Memory, they cannot remember
the Word as they desire; let such take the following advice, viz. Labor for a
full and clear Understanding of the matter delivered: The clearer Apprehension
we have of Truths in our Understanding, the firmer Impression will they make
upon our Memories: Ignorance is one of the greatest hindrances to Memory.
Again, Labor to excite and quicken, and stir up and awaken your affections of
Desire and Delight, in and toward the Word of God: David says, Psalm. 119. I
delight in thy Precepts, I will not forget thy Word. We also find it true by
common observation, that passage in a Sermon is best Remembered by us which did
most Affect us: But especially if you would Remember what you hear, be much in
the present Meditation of the Word you have heard: The Word Preached is
compared to Seed sown; now the Meditation is the Harrow that covers this Seed:
This must be used as speedily as we can after we have been under the Ordinance,
otherwise Satan the Bird of Prey which follows God's Plough, will steal away
the precious Seed out of our Hearts.

4. Hear the good Word of God Applyingly: Make a particular and close
Application of the Truths thou hear to thy own Soul. It is observable, that
the Word of God is compared in Scripture to such things as do require a close
and immediate Application; as to Seed, which brings forth no Increase as it
lies in the Chamber, but when cast into the Furrows of the Field; to Bread,
which nourishes not when standing upon the Table, but when applied to the
Stomach; to Rain, which fructifies not when bringing in the Clouds, but when
drunk in by the thirsty Earth. This was the reason why St. Peter's Sermon met
with such Success; why so many Thousand Souls were Converted by it. Every
Hearer applied what was spoken to himself: They said, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do? Acts 2. v. 37. Application is not only the Life of Preaching, but
of Hearing also.

5. Hear the Word of God Believingly: All the want of Success which the
Preaching of the Word meets with, proceeds from Unbelief: Heb. 4.2. The word
Preached did not profit, not being mixed with Faith in them that heard it.
There is a mutual Relation betwixt Faith and the Word. No Faith without the
Word, it comes by Hearing; and no profiting by the Word without Faith: The Word
fights boldly, and works miraculously under Faith's Banner; it is the power
of God unto Salvation, but only to them that believe. Faith in the Precept
causes Subjection: Faith in the Threatenings causes Humiliation: Faith in the
Promises works Consolation. Were the Threatenings and Promises which are daily
Preached, duly Believed, what a mighty Influence would they have upon the Lives
of Men! The Threatenings would affright us from Sin, and the Promises allure us
to Duty.

6. Hear the Word of God Meekly: Take heed of Anger and Passion either against
the Message or Messengers of God: Many Sinners are Angry when the Word reproves
them for their Sins, and threatens them for their Abominations, 2 Chronicles. 16.10.
Asa was wroth with the Prophet, put him in Prison, and was in a rage with him.
If such Rage was found in a Good and Holy Man, whose Heart was perfect with the
Lord his God, what Fury and Indignation may we conceive oft-times to boil in a
wicked Man's Breast, when his Sins are Discovered, Reproved, Condemned and
Threatened by the Ministry of the Word? And therefore St. James gives Advice, to
receive with meekness the ingrafted Word; Chapter 1.21. Consider, Oh Sinners! how
unreasonable and unjust thy Anger and Displeasure is, when thy Sins are
Reproved by the Ministry of the Word; either thou must be angry with the
Messenger, or with him that sends the Message; to be angry with the Messenger
is unreasonable; for God will Reprove him, if he neglect to Reprove thee; thy
Blood shall be required at his hands; and to be displeased with the Message is
unjust: For will thou impudently break and violate the Law of God, and not
endure to be told of thy Faults? If you say, that this Preaching of the
Terrors and Threatenings of the Law, is the ready way to drive Men to Despair:
I reply, That it is not the Hearing, but the Rejecting of Reproof, that lays Men
open to Despair. Peter received our Savior's Reproof, and Repented; Judas
Rejected Christ's Reproof, and that drives him to Despair, and next to the
Halter; he went and hanged himself, St. Matthew. 27.5.

7. Above all, Hear the Word of God Practically. When the Minister's Duty is
done, the Hearer's Work begins: He hears a Sermon best, who practices it
most. This practical Hearing of the Word will Evidence thee to be an
Understanding Hearer, Psalm. 111. ult. A good Understanding have all they that
do thy Commandments. It will Evidence thee to be a Retentive Hearer, because
this practicing is the end of our Remembering; it will Evidence thee a Believing
Hearer; who Believed Moses his Word concerning the Plague of Hail, but they
that made their Cattle flee out of the Field into their Houses? Who are they
that Believe the Threatenings of the Word, but such as upon the Denunciation of
the Threatenings do fly from the Wrath to come? Oh Christian! do not only hear
and admire, but hear and amend; obey from the heart the Form of Doctrine
delivered to thee, and then thou art blessed in thy Deed. To excite thee
hereunto, consider, First, That this Practical hearing of the Word glorifies
the Word, and God in the Word above all: to come to the Word without any desire
or design to Glorify God by it, is the height of Profaneness; to pretend, and
not to do it, is the depth of Hypocrisy. The Apostle begs Prayer, 2 Thessalonians.
3.1. That the Word of the Lord may have a free course, and be Glorified. When
is God glorified, but when his Word is Believed, Entertained, Practiced and
Obeyed? Consider also, That if thou art a Doer of God's Will, he will be a Doer
of thine; he will make as much of thy Prayers, as thou do of his Commands;
John 9.31. If any Man be a Worshipper of God, and does his Will, him be
hears. What a Privilege is this, to have God's Fiat set to all we ask!

8. Be careful to take an Account of thy self after thou have heard the Word
Preached. God has endued man with a noble Faculty of Self-reflection, he has a
power of calling himself to an account for the several Actions performed by
him. Now when a Christian, after hearing of the Word Preached, is found in the
Exercise of this Duty, frequently and faithfully interrogating his own Heart,
what he has heard, and how he has heard, it is a good Evidence of his
Sincerity; both because, First, It is a secret Duty: And, Secondly, A searching
Duty. This is not the Hypocrite's Walk, who desires not to search himself, nor
that the Word should search him; he is for taking all upon Trust, and nothing
upon Trial. And having called thy self to an account in Secret, how thou have
heard the Word in Public, what Benefit thou receivedst, and what Assistance
thou enjoyedst; call likewise thy Family (if thou have any under thy Charge) to
give thee an Account what they have heard, and how they understand,
endeavoring to inform their Judgments aright as to the Nature of those Divine
Truths they have heard, and praying with them and for them, according to the
Directions given before, Chap. 8. Page 29.

CHAP. XIII. Concerning the Lord's Supper.
THE Sacrament of the Lord's Supper being one of the most Tremendous Mysteries
of the Christian Religion, and the highest Act and Exercise of Religious
Worship; he must be unthankful to Christ, and unjust to himself, that does not
warily attend his Soul in so sacred an Homage. Therefore, that I may Assist you
in a faithful Preparation for this Ordinance, and excite you to the frequent
Participation of it, I shall briefly dispatch the following Severals.

1. I shall acquaint you with the Nature of this Ordinance.

2. Inform you of the Ends of its Institution.

3. Lay before you the Obligations which are upon you to frequent it.

4. Answer the several Pleas made by many for the Neglect of it.

5. What Preparation is necessary to fit you for it.

6. What Directions may be useful to assist you in it.

7. How we ought to manage our Deportment and Behavior after it.

1. Concerning the Nature of this Ordinance. Know, that the Lord's Supper it is
a Spiritual Feast, appointed for a Solemn remembrance of Christ's Death, and to
be a Seal of that Covenant which God has made with us in Christ: The Use then
of this Ordinance is twofold. (1.) To be a solemn Remembrance of the Person
and Passion of our Holy Lord, to excite us thankfully to call to mind all that
Christ has done and suffered for our good and in our stead; in order to the
inflaming of our Affections with Love unto his Person, and our Wills with
Resolution to obey his Precepts. (2.) It Is a Seal of the New Covenant, or
Covenant of Grace, which God has made with us in Christ; in which Covenant he
has assured us of Pardon of Sin, and Eternal Life, upon the Conditions of Faith
and Repentance. Almighty God Seals to us in the Sacraments, and assures us that
he for his part will make good his Promises; and we Seal on our part to him,
that we will endeavor (by his Grace enabling) to perform the Conditions. This
is the Genuine Nature of the Lord's Supper.

2. Now as touching the Ends of this Institution, and the special Reasons and
Purposes for which it was ordained by our Savior, they are such as these: (1.)
The renewing of that Solemn Covenant with God which we entered into at our
Baptism; when by the Piety of our Parents, we were Dedicated to the Lord, and
took an Oath of Fidelity unto Christ the Captain of our Salvation, to become
his faithful Soldiers and Servants unto our Lives end. Now because our
Infirmities are many, and our Covenant-Breaches too frequent, that we may not
want a merciful opportunity to bewail our Backslidings, and to renew our
Covenant, this Ordinance was appointed. (2.) Another end is to Remember the
Love of our dying Redeemer, in laying down his Life for us: St. Luke 22.19.
This do in Remembrance of me. In Remembrance of my Bloody Sufferings, in
Remembrance of my Bitter Death and Passion. (3) To Seal up unto us the Pardon
of our Sins, and the Assurance of Everlasting Life. St. Matthew. 26.28. This is
my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many for the Remission of
Sins. Christ assures us of Pardon on his part, if we perform the Conditions of
Faith and Repentance on our part. (4.) Another end of this Ordinance is to
fortify the Soul with power to resist Sin, and to get the Victory over it,
yea, to mortify and subdue it: That our Souls being as Giants refresht with
this Spiritual Wine, all the Enemies of our Salvation may fall before us, and
we may be more than Conquerors over them. (5.) The last, but not the least end
of Christ in Appointing this Ordinance, was for the Uniting all the Professors
of his Holy Religion together in the strictest Bond of Love and Charity, 1 Cor.
10.17. We being many, are one Bread, and one Body; for we are all partakers of
that one Bread. That is, as many grains of Wheat united together, as one Mass
or Lump do make one Loaf of Bread; so Christians, though many, by the Death of
their Savior, and by partaking of his Supper, are Spiritually incorporated
into one Mystical Body, and should labor to be of one heart and of one mind.

3. Next let us consider the Obligations which lie upon Christians to Attend
upon Christ in this Ordinance; now these are especially two, namely, an
Obligation of Duty, and of Interest.

First, We lie under an Obligation to frequent this Ordinance, in Point of Duty
and Obedience to our Savior's Command, especially if we consider what kind of
Command it is, namely, the Command of a Sovereign, the Command of a Savior,
the Command of a dying Savior: It Is a Command of Love, a gracious Command, Eat
and Live. It Is a pleasant, easy and honorable Command: What more pleasant
than a Feast? What more easy than to come to a Feast? What more honorable
than to Feast with a King, yea, with the King of Kings? In a word, it is such a
Command, the due Observation whereof will help us to keep the rest of God's
Commandments better; it will be an efficacious means to make you do well.
Finally, it is a plain, positive, express Command, from which nothing can
discharge us but a Countermand from Heaven, which we must never expect, or an
impossibility of doing it for want of Opportunity, which we cannot plead.

Secondly, We lie under a super-added Obligation to the practice of this Duty
from a tie of Interest. For by a due Approach to our Lord's Table, our
Baptismal Vow is renewed, our weak Faith strengthened, our languishing Love
inflamed, our Desires after Christ enlarged; our Sorrow for Sin heightened,
fresh Power against and Victory over Sin obtained, our present Joy and Comforts
multiplied, and our future hopes of Heaven advanced. Oh how unkind then are
they to their Savior, and also cruel to their own Souls, who live all their
days in the neglect of this engaging, uniting, quickening, confirming Ordinance
of the Lord's Supper! whom all the melting Entreaties and passionate
Importunities of the Ministers of Christ could never prevail upon, to the
practice of this most Reasonable and most Advantageous Duty.

3. But let us hear the several Pleas and Pretenses which so many Thousands of
Persons, though professing Christianity, do make for this notorious neglect of
their dying Lord's Command.

1. Plea, or Excuse made by some, is the extraordinary Dread and Solemnity of
the Ordinance; these put their Savior off with a Complement, telling him, that
the Privilege is too great, the dignity too high, and the Ordinance too solemn
for them to approach unto.

Answer. This is a good Reason why you should approach the Ordinance with
Preparation and Care, but no Argument at all why you should turn your back upon
it: As if a King should invite and command you to pay Attendance at Court upon
his Person, and you very gravely tell him, That is too high an Honor for
Persons of your Rank, you will therefore out of Reverence to his Person violate
his Precept, and at once Affront his Authority and Contemn his Kindness. Know
then, that the Reverence which our Savior expects to his Holy Institution, is
a Reverence of Obedience: That man has a due sense upon his Mind of the
Solemnity of the Sacrament, who is careful to approach it with all the Humility
and sense of Unworthiness which becomes polluted Dust and Ashes; but such a
superstitious sort of Reverence as makes men afraid of doing their Duty, is
dishonouring to God, and detrimental to themselves.

2. Plea, Is that of Unworthiness: We are unworthy to come, and therefore
afraid to come: For he that eats unworthily, eats his own Damnation;
therefore we will be of the safest side, and prevent coming Unworthily by
keeping away, and not coming at all.

Answer (1.) There is a twofold Worthiness in reference to the Sacrament: A
Worthiness of Merit, and a Worthiness of Meetness; if by being worthy you mean
the former, a worthiness of Merit, by which you deserve to be Entertained at
Christ's Table; in that sense, not only the Holiest Saint on Earth, but the
highest Angel in Heaven, is unworthy of this Privilege: But then there is a
worthiness of Meetness, which imports such a fitness and preparation of Soul as
the Gospel requires and Christ will accept. A Beggar is not worthy of your
Alms, yet you would not account it Humility but Pride in him to refuse your
Alms (when entreated to accept them) upon pretense of being unworthy of them.
The Truth is, an humble sense of our unworthiness is in God's Account our
greatest worthiness.

(2.) Whereas thou please thy self that thou art on the safest side, by
keeping away from the Ordinance, this is a manifest mistake; because the guilt
and danger of unworthy Refusing, is certainly as great, or greater, than the
danger of unworthy Receiving: For not to come at all, is a bold Affront to the
Authority of Christ, a mighty contempt of the love of Christ; it is the casting
off the Profession of Christianity; it is a Renouncing of the Communion of
Saints, and a quitting all claim and interest in the Covenant of Grace. Did
they in the Gospel, who made light of Christ's Invitation to the
Marriage-Supper, escape any better than he that came without the
Wedding Garment? Were they not both destroyed, they for their Disobedience, and
he for his Disrespect?

3. Plea, Is that of Unfitness and Unpreparedness: My Conscience tells me, says
the Sinner, that I am unfit to come to this Ordinance, and therefore I had
better stay away.

Answer (1.) Whose fault is it that thou art unfit? It must be either God's
fault or thy own: Can thou, dare'st thou say it is God's fault, when he is
willing both to Assist and Accept thee; when he offers thee his Assisting
Grace, but thou art not willing to accept it? But what is it that makes thee
unfit? Is it not some Sin that you are not willing to part with? Does not
Conscience tell you that you live a bad Life, that there are some sensual Lusts
which you indulge, and are not willing to part with? This is that which makes
you unfit to come, and afraid to come.

(2.) If you are unfit for this Ordinance, you are not fit to die; you pretend
you must stay all the days of your Life, till you are prepared for the
Sacrament; but will Death stay for you till you are prepared for that? When
Death calls, appear you must at God's Tribunal, whether fit or not fit: Now
what is it that prepares you for Death? Is it not the exercise of Repentance
and a Holy Life? This will fit you for the Sacrament, and without this you can
never be fit for Heaven, nor hope to come there.

(3.) Speak sincerely, Did you ever go about to make your self fit? Did thou
ever spend a day in thy Closet, in searching for, and finding out thy Sins, in
Confessing and Bewailing of them, in Resolving against them, in praying
earnestly to God for the Aid of his Grace to enable you to mortify and subdue
them? Did ever you repair to your Minister, and desire his Assistance in
fitting you for the Ordinance? If not (which is certainly the very case of
many) Good Good! what horrid Hypocrisy is this, to offer it as a reasonable
excuse, that thou art unfit, when thou did never in thy whole life once
attempt or endeavor to make thy self fit! Unfit thou art not only for the
Sacrament, but for every holy Duty also; unfit to Pray, unfit to Hear, and
unfit thou will be for ever, without thy own Endeavors to make thy self fit:
For Almighty God never wrought a Miracle to maintain Sloth. If thou say,
thou can do nothing without God: I Reply, That God will do nothing without
thee; use a Faithful Endeavor to prepare thy self, and thy God will both
assist thee and accept thee also; but it is great folly to think of excusing
one fault with another.

4. Plea. Alas! say some, we are poor ignorant Creatures, we were never
Book-learnt, and therefore want the Knowledge which is requisite in a Worthy
Communicant.

Answer (1.) If thou art wholly and grossly ignorant in the Fundamentals of
Religion, thy Ignorance is dangerous and damnable, such as will shut thee out
of Heaven, as well as debar thee from the Sacrament: But why do thou rest
contented with thy Ignorance? Why do you not repair to your Spiritual Guides
for private Instruction; who would thank you for such an Opportunity of being
Serviceable to you? Will you choose rather to carry your Ignorance to Hell with
you, than make it known to such as are willing to Relieve you against it?

But (2ly.) It may be thou art not so ignorant as thou think thy self;
peradventure thou art mistaken in the Measures and Degrees of Knowledge which
are requsiite in a Worthy Communicant: if thou have a Competent Knowledge of
the Author, the Use and End of this Ordinance, it is sufficient, though thou art
not able to dispute Controversial Points relating to it: If thou understandest
the Author of the Ordinance to be Jesus Christ; the End of the Ordinance, to be
a Representation and Commemoration of his Death; that the breaking of the Bread
represents the breaking of his Body upon the Cross; and the pouring out of the
Wine, the Shedding of his Blood for thy Redemption: If thou understandest the
Use of this Ordinance to be, for the Renewing of thy Covenant with God which
thou enteredst into at thy Baptism, to remember the Love of thy Dying Savior,
to Seal up unto thy Soul Pardon of Sin, and to Engage thee daily to die more
and more unto sin: To Unite Christians together in the strictest Bonds of Love
and Charity: If thou know all this, and endeavourest to Act suitably
thereunto, I dare assure thee, thou have the Knowledge of a Worthy Communicant.
And if thou come to the Sacrament with a desire to grow more and more in thy
Knowledge and Obedience, Almighty God will mercifully Accept thee.

5. Plea. But I fear I am under the Power of an hard Heart, I cannot mourn for
Sin so much as I would, and weep over it so often as I ought; and what should a
person under the power of an hard heart do at this Ordinance?

Answer. If thou have such a degree of sorrow, as puts thee upon loathing and
leaving off thy Sins; though thou can not mourn for sin so much as others do,
and as thou would do, yet thou may be a true Penitent. Know, that
another's degree of Sorrow is not the Standard to measure thine by; all are not
Sinners alike, and for that Reason the Sorrow of all persons will not be alike;
some men's Sins have been Infamous and Notorious, their Lives tainted with
heinous Crimes; now their Sins looking ghastly upon their Consciences, no
wonder if they labor under such Agonies of Mind, such Horrors and Terrors of
Conscience, and meet with such melting Sorrows as others are Strangers to, and
unacquainted with. But perhaps God has blessed thee with a pious Education, and
his Restraining Grace has kept thee from those presumptuous Acts of Sin which
others have been guilty of, and consequently thou art a Stranger to their
violent Expressions of Grief and Sorrow; yet at the same time thou have such a
convincing sight of Sin, as causes thee to hate it, to forsake it, and to loath
thy self by reason of it: And though thou do not mourn so much as thou would,
yet thou mournest that thou can mourn no more. Now for thy comfort, that thou
art not under the power of an hard heart: thou do not wholly want the Grace
of Repentance, but ought to come to this Ordinance for the increasing of thy
Godly Sorrow for Sin, believing and expecting that the sight of a Broken
Bleeding Savior will tend to the further breaking of thy Heart, and increasing
thy Godly Sorrow for Sin.

6. Pretended Excuse for not coming to the Sacrament, is the danger of
Relapsing: I fear, say some, if I come, and afterward fall into any known sin,
that Almighty God will never pardon it, but my sin will be like the Sin against
the Holy Ghost, which shall never be forgiven, therefore we judge it safest to
stay away.

Answer. It must be acknowledged, that to Sin wilfully and deliberately, after
we have been at this engaging Ordinance, is a great Aggravation of Sin, but not
such as to render it unpardonable, but after our Fall we may be recovered by
Repentance; Because we have an Advocate with the Father; 1 John 2.2. Doubtless
the Primitive Christians, who probably received the Lord's Supper every day,
certainly every Lord's Day, did occasionally fall into many voluntary and
deliberate Acts of Sin, but far be it from us to think that their sins were
unpardonable.

(2ly.) Know, that Almighty God, though he requires (after you have been at his
holy Table) your utmost care to avoid Sin, and to shun Temptations, yet he does
not expect that you should live wholly free from Sin whilst you continue in
this mortal state: He expects a Holy Life after the Sacrament, but not an
Angelical Life; the Life of a Saint, but not the Life of an Angel; a Life of
Purity, not a Life of Perfection; he expects we should be sincere, not that we
should be sinless: Could men live wholly free from sin after they have been at
the Sacrament, then they need not Receive it more than once in their whole
Lives; but the Sacrament, being an appointed means to enable us more and more
against Sin, and to get Victory over it, our Duty is, to have frequent recourse
to it, notwithstanding our Relapses into Sin, after we have humbly implored
pardon for them.

7. Plea, is this: I dare not come, because I labor under so many Fears and
Doubts as to my own sincerity; had I an assurance of my state of Grace, I might
venture to come; but I have heard, no man ought to come to this Ordinance that
wants Assurance.

Answer. There are two sorts of Doubtings; some that proceed from want of
Faith, others which proceed from weakness of Faith. As to the former, some men
there are whose Consciences tell them, that they are either open Sinners, or
close Hypocrites; these Men have great reason to doubt of their condition, for
it is certainly very bad and very dangerous, not one moment longer to be rested
in. But then there are Doubtings which arise from weakness of Faith, St. Matthew.
14.31. Oh thou of little Faith, wherefore did thou doubt? Now the Ordinance
of the Lord's Supper is the proper Remedy for the Relief and Cure of these
doubtings; and the longer we keep from this Ordinance, the stronger will our
fears grow, and the more will our doubts increase: And whereas thou have heard,
that none should approach that want a full Assurance of their Grace; this is a
great mistake; for the Sacrament being a Sealing Ordinance, is the great means
of procuring a full Assurance of Faith; which if a man has already, there is no
need of going to the Sacrament for it. No Man will go to the Insuring Office to
secure an Estate which he has in his own Possession, and Apprehends to be out
of the reach of danger.

8. Excuse is this: I see not (say some) much good gotten by this Ordinance;
many that come to the Sacrament, lead as bad Lives as those that never come;
and if it does them no good, we are sure it does them hurt, and they had better
never come there.

Answer (1.) Allowing what thou say to be a sad Truth, why should thou
draw such a wicked Conclusion from it? Because some Men are choakt with their
Meat through their own Negligence, will thou therefore resolve never to eat more?
Some Men eat and drink unworthily, and dishonor their Savior; is this a
sufficient Reason why thou should disobey him? Surely thou art to walk by
Rule, not by Example; and ought rather to eye thy Savior's Command, than
thy Neighbors miscarriage.

But (2ly.) How know thou, that such whom thou have seen fall after the
Sacrament, have not risen again by Repentance? I am sure we have great reason
to Believe, that Conscience is more quick in Reproving such Persons, than those
that never Receive; for the Remembrance of the Ordinance cannot but strike a
man's mind at one time or other: There is more hope of a man that comes to this
Ordinance, and does not live so well after it as he should, than of such a man
who profanely keeps from it, and casts off all regard to God and Religion; for
he certainly damns himself, to avoid the danger of Damnation: He that eats and
drinks unworthily, endangers his own Soul; but he that to avoid this danger
will not eat nor drink at all, does he not run into a greater danger?

9. Plea, or Pretense is this: I would not have neglected this Ordinance so
long, (say some) but that I was not in Charity with my Neighbor, as I confess
I ought to be; he wronged and abused me, and I being at odds with him, I durst
not come.

Answer. If thy Neighbor has wronged thee, will thou wrong thy own Soul?
Because he has hurt thee, will thou hurt thy self? The injury done to thee is
his Sin; but thy being in malice is thine own Sin, and thou must account for it.

But (2ly.) Inquire whether thine Anger against thy Neighbor be just or
unjust; if thy Neighbor has done thee wrong, and persists in it without
Repentance, thy Anger is just, if kept within due bounds, that it does not
Transport you to desires of Revenge; and displeased you may be with your
Neighbor for a real Injury, and yet not be indisposed for the Sacrament. But
if upon Examination you find your Anger was unjust, then you ought without
delay to repent of it, and upon your Repentance to hasten to the Lord's Supper,
where you will meet with sufficient Arguments for the cooling of the heats of
your Passion, and for Allaying the Boilings of your Rage, beholding there such
an illustrious Instance of Loving Enemies and Forgiving Injuries, as the World
was never acquainted with: So then, if thou hate thy Brother in thy heart,
and resolvedst to persist in that hatred, thou may tremble to come to the
Sacrament, and thou ought to tremble every time thou layest the Lord's
Prayer; for therein thou do directly pray against thy self. Labor then for a
readiness of mind to forgive thy Neighbor, and a willing desire to live
quietly and peaceably with him, and thou may as safely come to the Sacrament
as thou may say thy Prayers.

10. The next Excuse which some make, is a multitude and multiplicity of
worldly Business: We are so encumbered with the World (say they) that we cannot
find time to fit our selves as we ought for such a Solemnity.

Answer, (1.) Can you find no time to serve and glorify that God who gives you
all your time? Or can you find time for every thing but your Soul?

(2.) Your Business is either necessary Business, or needless Business: If
needless, why do you not throw it off? for such Business is your Sin: If it be
necessary Business, that of your Place and Calling, this ought not to hinder
you, for such Business is God's Service. Thou art serving thy God when
industriously following thy Vocation.

(3.) The more necessary worldly Business thou have upon thy hand, the greater
reason thou have to frequent this Ordinance: No man has more need of the
Sacrament, than the man of Business; because no man's Soul is more in danger of
being lost in a crowd of Worldly Business; for having so much of the World upon
thy hand, there is just cause to fear lest the World get into the Throne of thy
Heart, and that thy Riches become thy Ruin. In short, that Man that pleads
Business for neglecting the Sacrament, does plainly tell Almighty God, that he
is not to be served but when the World will give leave.

11. The next Scruple made by some for not coming to the Lord's Table, is the
Unworthiness of others: they are afraid some wicked men thrust themselves
forward, and therefore they keep back.

Answer. (1.) True Humility will Teach a man to suspect the worst of himself,
and to hope the best of others. But suppose it be as thou suspectest, can
another man's Sin deprive thee of the Benefit and Comfort of the Benefit and
Comfort of the Ordinance? That when by the Grace of God and thy own Endeavors
thou art fit, it should be in the power of a wicked man to make thee unfit?

Obj. But say some. The Presence of a wicked man pollutes the Ordinance.

Answer. If so, he pollutes it to himself only, he cannot pollute it to thee
who art no ways Accessory to his Sin.

But (2ly.) How art thou sure that the Person thou suspectest for wicked, is
really such? has he been bad formerly? yet what Assurance have thou, that he
has not sincerely repented, and is now come to the Sacrament with an honest
desire to get power against his sins, which formerly got power over him? By his
coming he makes a profession to do so; and how know thou that he is not
sincere in what he professes. Oh but, say you, the Man will certainly return
again to his former wickedness; next Week he will be drunk again, and swear
again. This is more than thou, or any man can tell; for though heretofore the
Temptations were too many, and his Lusts too strong for him, and carried him
away against his Endeavors and Resolutions; but how know thou what strength
of Grace the Lord may Communicate to him by this Ordinance? Charity should
teach you to hope the best, and instead of Censuring your Neighbor, put you
upon pitying their Weakness, and upon praying for them also, that the Lord will
keep them from future Backslidings.

12. And last Plea against Communicating is this: Say some, We do not like your
way of Administering the Ordinance: We are for Christ's Ordinances in Christ's
Order; but we neither like the Garment which you wear, nor the Form of Prayer
which you use, nor the Gesture of Kneeling you prescribe, and therefore we
cannot join with you.

Answer, (1.) As to your having Christ's Ordinances in Christ's Order, you have
the Sacrament so with us, as to the Substance of the Ordinance, and all the
Essential Requisites of it: But our Savior never intended that you should
observe all the Circumstances relating to that Ordinance which he observed: As
for instance, he Celebrated the Supper in a borrowed Chamber, in an upper Room,
in the Evening, only to Twelve Persons, and those Twelve Men, yea, Twelve
Ministers, and in a Coat without a Seam: To keep thus strictly to Christ's
Order, in the use of this Ordinance, I assure you is so far from being a Duty,
that it will be your sin.

But (2ly.) As to the Garment worn by us in the Administration, why should a
matter of such indifferency discompose thy Thoughts at such a solemn time? Look
you to your self, that you come clothed with the Wedding Garment of
Repentance, Faith, Love, and Joy; and if there be any Evil in Colors, in a
White Garment more than a Black one, he that wears it, or the Authority that
enjoins it, shall Answer for that and not you.

3ly. As to our using a Form of Prayer in the Administration, know, that all
the Reformed Churches throughout the World have done the like; the Church of
Geneva not excepted; for the Spirituality of Prayer does not consist in an
extemporary fluency of Words, but in the Intention of the Mind, and Devotion of
the Soul; if we pray in Faith, with Humility, with Holy Fervency, with Humble
Resignation, we certainly pray by the Spirit, though with a Form of Words before
us; and on the other hand, if we pray without the forementioned Dispositions,
our Prayers are formal and unacceptable, though we pray without a Form. Lastly,
As to what is scrupled about Kneeling. (1.) It does not clearly appear what
Gesture our Savior used, when he celebrated this Ordinance; the Scripture is
very silent about it: from whence I infer, that had it been our Savior's mind
we should follow his Example in this Circumstance, we should not have been left
in the dark concerning it. (2.) Suppose it were Sitting; this being but a
Circumstance of the Action, we are no more obliged to follow it, than the other
Circumstances of Time, Place, Habit, etc. (3.) Let it be considered, how far
the Church of England has protested against all Adoration of the Elements; so
that they who suspect us Kneeling to the Bread and Wine, do show themselves to
be either grossly ignorant, or greatly malicious: But because this is the
highest Ordinance, we attend upon Christ in, and we receive the greatest
Benefits by the Ordinance we are capable of on this side Glory, even a Pardon
Sealed from the King of Heaven, (which we would not receive in any other
posture than upon our Knees from an Earthly Prince) and forasmuch as the
Sacrament is delivered to us with Prayer, we judge it the most suitable Gesture
for such a solemn Ordinance; and both in Obedience to Authority, and also from
an Act of choice, we use this Gesture, as a Token of profound Reverence to our
most endearing Redeemer.

These are all the most considerable Pleas and Pretenses which I have met with
from Persons for the neglect of this Duty: If what has been here said tend to
the satisfaction of any, and they are willing to address themselves to the
practice of this long neglected Duty, I shall next inform them what Preparation
is necessary to fit them for it.

5. And here know in General, that the best Preparation for the Sacrament, is a
Holy Life, a daily walking before God in the Holy Path of his Commandments, in
an uniform Compliance with the Duties both of our General and Particular
Callings, exercising your selves daily in keeping a Conscience void of Offense
both toward God and toward all Men. In short, the habitual devotedness of the
Soul to God, accompanied with a steady resolution to continue steadfast in our
Obedience to him all our days, is such a Divine Temper, as gives us an
undoubted right to the Ordinance, and is the best Qualification for it. But
more particularly you are to understand, that besides our habitual Preparation
by Repentance, and the constant Endeavors of a Holy Life, we ought to set some
time apart for Actual Preparation, though how much every Person ought to allot of
his Time for that Work, cannot precisely be determined; some have more cause
for it than others, having long neglected themselves and their Duty: Others
have more Leisure and Freedom for it. No man ought to come to the Sacrament
without due Care and Preparation; but God does not expect so much time should
be set apart for Solemn Preparation by a poor Servant, as he does from a Rich
Master.

Now a Christian's actual Preparation for this Ordinance, I take to consist in
the practice of these five following Duties: Examination, Humilation,
Resolution, Meditation, Prayer and Supplication.

1. Examine thy self according to St. Paul's Advice, 1 Cor. 11.28. For we stand
too near our selves to see our Failings without great Observation: Take
therefore the Candle of the Word into thy hand to search thy Heart, and examine
thy Life by: Particularly examine, (1.) What good there is in thee, what
Knowledge to discern the Lord's Body, and to understand the Nature, Use and End
of the Lord's Supper. What Faith to apply the Merits of his Death to thy own
Soul? What Love to thy Savior's Person, Precepts, Promises, People; to every
one that has the Image of Christ upon him? What Repentance and Godly Sorrow
do thou find in thy Soul for Sin? What Care every day to mortify it, and to
die daily more and more unto it? (2.) Examine what Evil is in Thee, and has
been done by Thee? See, and be sensible of the sinfulness of thy Nature, of the
Sins of thy Heart and Life; of thy Omissions of Good, and Commissions of Evil;
of thy Sins against God and thy Neighbor in Heart, Word, or Deed: And though it
be impossible upon thy utmost search to find out all, it will be a good
Evidence of thy Sincerity, that thou art not willing to hide any.

2. Having by Examination found out thy Sins, fall down upon thy Knees in
Confession and Humiliation before God; bewailing manifold Sins and Wickedness,
which thou from time to time have most grievously committed, by Thought, Word,
and Deed, against his Divine Majesty, Labor earnestly to repent, and to be
unfeignedly sorry for these thy misdoings; beg of God that the remembrance of
Sin may be bitter to thy Soul, and the burden of it be intolerable; plead with
him to forgive Thee all that is past, and to give thee his Grace, that thou
may ever hereafter serve and please Him in newness of Life, to the Honor and
Glory of his Holy Name. This done, before thou arisest from thy Knees,

3. Renew thy Resolutions for a Holy Life: Vow to be more watchful, more
careful and circumspect for the time to come; say with holy David, Psalm.
119.106. I have sworn and will perfarm, that I will keep thy righteous
Judgments. And be sure when you resolve against your Sins, that you resolve
against all Temptations which lead to Sin; he that resolves against Drunkenness
and Swearing, must resolve to avoid wicked Company, which draw him to that
excess, and to pass by the Door where he is wont to be drawn in: And take heed
of making any Resolutions in your own strength, but earnestly implore the Grace
and Assistance of Almighty God: Oh be sensible that your own strength is small,
your Enemy strong, your Temptations many, your Danger great; if ever you desire
to bring your Resolutions for a better Life to perfection, look up to Heaven
for Auxiliary Aid from thence, engage God's Strength, which will enable Thee to
do all things; so says the Apostle, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things, etc.

4. Apply thy self next to the Duty of Meditation, particularly Meditate on the
Sufferings of thy Savior: And to help and quicken thy Meditations upon them,
let me advise Thee constantly to read over the History of them before a
Sacrament, as you find them Recorded in the two last Chapters (but one) of all
the Evangelists. Meditate on his wonderful Abasement in his Incarnation, that
the Creator of the World should become a Creature. Meditate on the Meanness and
Poverty of his Life, and that will work in thee true Contentment of Mind in thy
poor and low Condition: But above all, meditate on his unparalled Sufferings
at his Death, his Patience under them, and his readiness to pardon, and pray
for his Enemies and Murderers that were the occasion of them. This will at
once inkindle thy hatred against Sin, inflame thy Love to Christ, and inspire
thee with a Spirit of Meekness toward thy greatest Enemies, in imitattion of
thy dear Savior, who offered up his Blood to God on the behalf of them that
shed it.

5. Set more than ordinary time apart before the Sacrament for Sccret Prayer,
earnestly pleading with God to make the Sacrament effectual, for the mortifying
of thy Sins, for the streng^hning of thy Grace, for the quickening of thy
Desires, for the confirming of thy Resolutions; to make a Soul-nourishing Meal
unto Thee, and that thou may experience the strengthening, comforting,
quickening, assisting, and accepting Presence of Christ in and at the Ordinance;
and that so thou may be able to sanctify the Name of Christ, in the highest
Act of Homage and Adoration to him, suitable Petitions for such an occasion you
have many in that excellent Cook called, The Whole Duty of Man; and in Bishop
Patrick's Christian Sacrifice, with many more; in want of which, if thou can
not of thy self express thy own Desires, make use of the following Form of
Words.

A Prayer before the Sacrament.
O Eternal and Ever Glorious God! Who dwell in the highest Heavens, yet in
the humblest and lowest Hearts: In a great sight of thy Infinite Majesty, and
Adorable Excellencies, as also in a deep sense of my own vileness and
unworthiness, I come unto Thee, Beseeching Thee, for the Passion of thy dear
Son, to Accept of me a poor Prodigal, now returning to Thee, and Prostrating my
self at thy Door, who am by Nature a Child of Wrath, by Practice a Child of
Disobedience, and therefore liable and obnoxious to thine Everlasting Wrath: But
thou of thine Infinite Goodness have promised me thy Favor and Friendship in
Christ, if at the call and invitation of thy Gospel, I will accept the Merit of
his Death, and submit to the Authority of hie Laws, and Proclaim and Prosecute
an open and irreconcible War against all known Sins, the Enemies of thy Glory
and the disturbers of my Peace. Oh Lord, I heartily lament them, and from the
bottom of my Soul, I Renounce them all, whether in thought, word or deed
committed against thy Divine Majesty, faithfully Covenanting with thee for the
time to come, not to allow my self in any known sin; but to use all those means
which I find prescribed by thee in thy Word, for my Spiritual Advantage, and
for the Death and Destruction of all my Corruptions. Oh thou God and Father of
Hcaven, whose Thoughts of Mercy toward me have been from Everlasting, I
Dedicate my self, Soul, Body and Spirit, to thy Service and Glory, as a small
Return of Duty and Thankfulness for thy matchless Love, promising to serve Thee
in Righteousness and true Holiness all the days of my Life. Oh thou Blessed
Jesus! the Precious Lamb of God, whose Soul was made an Offering for Sin, and
who have declared thy readiness to receive and embrace Repenting and Returning
Sinners: Receive me Graciously who am weary and heavy laden with the Burden of
my Sins, and humbly desire by Faith to Approach unto thee: I own my self
unworthy to gather up the Crumbs that fall from thy well-spread Table, much
more unworthy to be entertained at it; but seeing such is thy condescending
Grace and Love, to invite me to the participiation of thy self, I do here with
all humility Accept thee for my Lord and Savior, for my King, Priest and
Prophet: Oh permit me to come to thy Holy Table to Ratify this Engagment! And
oh thou Holy and Good Spirit, the Sanctifier and Comforter of thy Church and
Children, enable me to resign up my self entirely to the Guidance and Dominion
of thy Grace, that I may evermore hereafter walk in the Spirit, and not fulfill
the Lusts of the Flesh. And now that I am going to the Holy Table in obedience
to my Lords Command, to Commemorate his Dying Love, vouchsafe thy Gracious
Presence with me, and render thy self powerfully present to my Mind and
Thoughts: Oh help me that I may attend my Lord without Distraction! Enable me
to give up my self an holy and acceptable Sacrifice to my Redeemer, who has
given himself a Meritorious Sacrifice for my Redemption. Oh help me to follow
my Holy Lords Example, in all the steps of an Imitable Virtue: Let me Admire
and Imitate his Condescending Humility, his Fervent Charity, his Patience under
Sufferings, his readiness to forgive Injuries; and let the same mind ever be in
me which was also in Christ Jesus; that having been a Welcome Guest at thy
Table here on Earth, I may hereafter be Adjudged worthy to be called to the
Supper of the Lamb, and may Feast with my Blessed Redeemer in his Everlasting
Kingdom. All which I ask in the Mediation of Jesus Christ, saying,

Our Father, etc.

An Hymn before the Sacrament.
THis day the Lord of Hosts Invites
Unto a Costly Feast,
I will take care and will prepare
To be a Welcome Guest.
But who and what am I, oh Lord,
Unholy and Unfit
To come within thy doors, or at
Thy Table for to sit.
Awake Repentance, Faith and Love,
Awake O every Grace,
To meet your Lord with one Accord
In his most Holy Place.
Worldly Distractions stay behind,
Below the Mount abide,
Cause no Disturbance in my mind,
To make my Savior chide.
O come my Lord, the time draws nigh
That I am to Receive.
Stand with thy Pardon Sealed by,
Persuade me to Believe.
Let not my Jesus now be Strange
Nor hide himself from me,
But cause thy Face to shine upon
The Soul that longs for thee.
Come Blessed Spirit from above,
My Soul do thou Inspire,
To come again to My Lords Board
With fullness of Desire.
Oh let my Entertainment now
Be so Exceeding Sweet,
That I may long to come again,
And at thy Table meet
6. Having directed you in your Preparation for this Ordinance, next understand
how you are to behave your selves at and under it. First then, Come to the
Ordinance with high and raised Expectations to receive great Benefit and
Advantage by it, both as to the Mortifying of thy Sin, and Quickening of thy
Grace: And whatever Lust it is that thou art most Captivated by, and enslaved
to, be it Pride, Passion, Earthly Mindedness, etc. let us set our selves
against that Lust with all our might, and plead with God at his Table thus,
Lord I come to this Ordinance with a sincere desire and design to get Victory
over every Lust, but particularly against -- which does so often solicit and
importune me, oh let it receive its Death wound in the Death of my Savior, and
never molest or inslave me more. Secondly, When come to thy Lords Table, labor
to cast all thy Worldly Thoughts and Concerns out of thy Head and Heart: And
strive to lift up thy Heart unto the Lord, as thou art exhorted by the
Minister; say unto all unsuitable Thoughts, as Abraham did unto his Servants;
Genesis 22.5. Abide you here below, whilst I go and worship the Lord yonder.
(3ly.) The better to keep all Impertinent and Improper Thoughts out of thy
mind, Entertain thy self with a frequent Remembrance of the Death of Christ; at
the sight of the Bread broken and Wine poured out, call to mind at once the
Passion of the Son of God, and thy Sins which exposed him to such a Painful,
Shameful, and Accursed Death: Represent to the Eye of your minds your Dear
Redeemer as hanging upon the Cross, Bleeding, Sighing, Groaning, Dying under
the insupportable burden of thy sins, and his Fathers Wrath. (4ly.) When thou
perceivest the Minister approaching with the Elements toward thee, put thy
self in the lowliest posture of Reverence, and say thus betwixt God and thy
Soul, How Beautiful are the feet of him that publishes Salvation, and brings
the proffer of a Savior to me! I am unworthy of Christ, but he is worthy of me
and of my Faith: I do therefore, Oh Lord! with all Humility accept Thee for my
King, Priest and Prophet, for my Sanctifier and Savior. (5ly.) When thou have
received the Bread, say to this or the like effect. Lord I receive this broken
Bread in remembrance of thy broken Body, Oh strengthen me with thy Heavenly
Grace, that I may continue thine for ever, and daily increase in thy Holy
Spirit more and more, until I come to thine Everlasting Kingdom. Amen. In like
manner after thou have received the Cup, pray to this purpose: Oh my God: Let
my Soul go forth as a Giant refreshed with this Spiritual Wine, and let all the
Enemies of my Salvation fall before me; may I walk in the Strength of this
Spiritual Meal all my days, and in the end of my days enjoy the full
Manifestation of thy Love (which is better than Wine) in thine Everlasting
Kingdom. Amen. (6ly.) Employ your time whilst others are Receiving, in
Meditation and Prayer; in meditating upon the Love of the Father in sending,
and upon the Love of the Son in coming upon this great Errand, to accomplish
the Work of Redemption of us. Also in Praying unto God for all Mankind in
General, for the whole Church of God in special, for that part of it planted in
these Nations in particular; for all Christian Kings, Princes, and Governors,
especially our own; for all our Friends and Benefactors, that God would requite
the kindnesses they have shown us; for all our Enemies, that God would Pardon
the wrongs and injuries done to him, to us, and to their own Souls. This being
a Feast of Love, in which we commemorate the highest instance of Love that ever
the World was acquainted with; a greater Expression of our Love we cannot show
to our offending Brother, than in a readiness to forgive him, and interceeding
earnestly for his Soul. Lastly, As an Expression of thy Thankfulness to Christ
for his Mercy and Compassion toward Thee, lay hold upon this occasion to show
thy Charity to his Members, that thy Prayers and thine Alms may be had in
Remembrance of God; and as thou refreshest the Bowels of the Poor, so may
thou find Mercy of the Lod in the needful day.

7. It only now Remains to show, how we ought to behave our selves after we
have waited upon Christ at his Holy Table. (1.) Decline if possible all Company
immediately after the Action; and retire instanly into some Secret Places, and
there upon your Knees offer up your Thanksgivings to Almighty God, for his Rich
Mercy and Invaluable goodness vouchsafed to you in that Ordinance; entreating
him to Pardon all the defects of the whole Service, and imploring the Gracious
Assistances of his Holy and Good Spirit, whereby you may be enabled to walk in
the Strength of that Grace, as becomes those who have recived such great
Pledges of Salvation. (2.) When you are returned into Company, take heed that
the spiritual heat which was inkindled in your Souls by and under the
Ordinance, be not quenched by a sudden falling into worldly Conferences and
fruitless Discourses; but labor to cherish and keep alive that Holy Fire upon
the Altar of your Hearts, and endeavor by Prayer, Meditation, and Holy
Conference, to improve it into a Holy Flame. (3.) Spend the Sacrament-day in
Public, Private and Secret Duties of Religious Worship; particularly in Prayer
and Praises, in After-Examination of your selves, What Faith, what Love, what
Humility, what Sincerity was found with us when waiting upon your Savior at
his Holy Table? Take notice also of any deadness of Heart and disposition of
Spirit which thou labouredst under, bewail it, and beg pardon of it for Christ's
sake, who bears the Iniquities of our Holy Things. (4.) Conclude the
Sacrament-day with Prayer and an Hymn of Praise. Thus did our Savior after he
had kept this Supper with his Disciples, He sung an Hymn, St Matthew. 26.30. and
betakes himself to God in Prayer; and the Jews at their Passover did Sing the
113th. Psalm, with the five following Psalms; which they called the great
Hallelujah. A Christian should every day of his Life give Thanks and Pray, but
especially on a Sacrament-day, then should we Bless the Lord with our whole
Souls, and call upon all that is within us to Bliss his Holy Name; such
Christians as desire to do this, but want suitable Words to express their
desires in, may make use of what here follows.

A Prayer after the Sacrament.
FOr ever Blessed be thy Great, thy Glorius, and thy Holy Name, Oh Lord, For
all thy unspeakable Favors and Benefits vouchsafed to me and to all Mankind;
particularly for thy invaluable Love in giving thy Dear Son to die for me in
the Sacrifice, and to be my Spiritual Food and sustenance in the Holy
Sacrament. Lord who am I, and what am I, that thou have been pleased to admit
me this day into thy Presence, to renew my Covenant with Thee, which I have so
often and so perversely broken before Thee! I have once more lifted up my hand
to the most High God, and sworn Allegiance to my Sovereign and my Savior; Oh
keep it in the purpose of my Heart for ever to continue steadfast in his
Covenant, and let neither the smiles of a flattering World allure me, nor the
Frowns, Threats, and Terrors of an Angry World, be ever able to drive me from
my Duty, or hinder me in the way of well-doing. Holy Father! accept I Beseech
Thee, of that renewed Dedication which I have made of my self this day unto
Thee, even of my whole Man, Soul, Body, and Spirit, to thy Service and Honor.
And now, Glory be to Thee, Oh God the Father! whom I shall from this day
forward with an humble Expectation, look up unto, as my Father and God in
Covenant: Glory be to Thee, Oh God the Son! who have loved me, and washed me
from my Sins in thine own Blood, and art now become my Savior, my Justifier
and Redemer: Glory be to Thee, Oh God the Holy Ghost! who have by the Power of
thy Victorious Grace, overcome the obstinacy of my Heart, and turned it from
Sin to God. Oh Lord God! Omnipotent Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, Thou art
become my Covenant Friend, and I through thy Grace am become thy Covenant
Servant. Truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, heartily devoted to thy fear.

Thy Vows are upon me, Oh God! Thy Vows are upon me, I will render Praises unto
Thee. Oh let me never more start aside from my Vows like a broken Bow, but give
me such a stedfastness and stability of Mind, such a firmness and fixedness of
Resolution, that my after-Conversation may be suitable both to my present
Profession and future Expectation; that so I may in all Companies, in all
Conditions, walk worthy of him that has called me to his Kingdom and Glory.
And let the sense of my Redeemers Love this day to me, inflame my Heart with a
never failing Charity unto all Mankind, whom I pray God to do good unto,
especially to thy Church, particularly to these Nations under their Majesty's
Care and Inspection, whom may Almighty God long and mutually Bless in the Happy
Enjoyment of each other; and work in the Minds of all Christians a dread of thy
Name, an Honor of their Superiors, and un unfeigned Charity one toward
another. All which Mercies I humbly Beg in the Name of the Holy Jesus, saying,
Our Father, etc.

An Hymn after the Sacrament.
LOrd! any Mercy short of Hell,
For Me it is too good;
But have I Eat the Flesh of Christ,
And also Drunk his Blood?
Mysterious Depths of Endless Love
My Admirations Raise,
Oh God thy Name exalted is
Above the highest Praise.
My Saviors Flesh is Meat indeed,
His Blood is Drink Divine;
His Graces Dropped like Honey-Combs,
His Comforts Taste like Wine.
This day Christ has refresht my Soul
With his abundant Grace,
For which I magnify his Name,
Longing to see his Face.
Oh when shall I ascend on high,
Most Holy Just and True,
To eat that Bread, and Drink that Wine
Which is for ever New!
To Him that sits upon the Throne,
And Christ the Lamb therefore,
Be Glory, Blessing, Strength, Renown,
And Honor evermore.
CHAP. XIV. Containing an Earnest Exhortation to the Love and Practice of
Universal Holiness.
THE Consideration of our Baptismal Vow, renewed and ratified by many
Sacramental Engagements at the Holy Table, is certainly one of the strongest
ties that Christianity lays upon us, to oblidge us to the Love and practice of
universal Holiness; for most certain it is, if we relapse and fall back into an
evil course of Life, if we wilfully return again to Folly, we kindle Gods Wrath
against us; we provoke him to plague us with diverse Diseases and sundry kinds
of Death: But if we escape these, there are more dismal Plagues than these that
will overtake us, such are hardness of Heart, blindness of Mind, and a Seared
Conscience. These are indeed invisible strokes, which make not a noise, and
strike not our Senses, but verily if we consider the Effects and consequences
of them, they are more formidable and dismal than the raging Pestilence and the
loudest Claps of Thunder. Let us then Piously Resolve, as we Fear the Wrath of
God, and Love our own Souls, after we have renewed our Covenant with God at his
Holy Table, to oblige our selves to an Eminent and Exemplary Piety of
Conversation: Let us live as those that are Redeemed by the Blood of Jesus, as
those that are Sanctified and Sealed by the Spirit of Jesus, as those that do
expect an Eternal Fellowship and Communion with Jesus in his Heavenly Kingdom.

To this end it may be very advisable,

1. The next Morning after thou have been at the Sacrament, as soon as thou art
up, enter into thy Closet: And before the Lord, piously and positively Resolve
and Vow to maintain a strict Watchfulness and Care over thy Heart, Words and
Ways, for the time to come. Such a Resolution as this made in the Strength of
God, will work wonders, because God will Assist and Bless it. 'Twill fortify
thee against Temptations and the strongest Solicitations to return to the Love
and Practice of Sin and Wickedness: Suppose thy dearest Friends and Familiars,
suppose thy Indulgent Mother that bare thee, nay, suppose the Wife of thy
Bosom, the Delight of thine Eyes, should all set upon thee, yea Entreat and
Importune thee, to Omit some known Duty, or to Commit some wicked Act, such a
Resolution as thou have now made for a Holy Life, will Antidote thy Soul
against the Poison of such a Temptation, and put the same Reply into thy Mouth
as was found in Holy Joseph's, Genesis 39.9. How can I do this great Wickedness,
and sin against God?

2. Having made this Solemn Vow betwixt God and thy own Soul for a Holy Life,
for a Life suitable to a Sacramental Engagement, you will find it very
advantageous to write it down and keep it by you, thus, At such a Time, and on
such a Day, having renewed my Covenant with God at his Holy Table, I did with
all the Devotion of my Heart and Soul, entirely surrender up my self and all
that is mine to the Service and Glory of Almighty God, Vowing all Fidelity and
Obedience to him, and Resolving that he shall have the full Guiding, Governing
and Disposing of me and mine: And after every Sacrament look upon it, and
consider seriously of it, saying thus to thy self, Behold, Oh my Soul, the
Bonds that are upon thee, this is thine own Act and Deed, it is as certainly
Recorded in Heaven as it is here Written on Earth, and shall one Day be brought
forth against thee to thy Everlasting Condemnation, if thou do not walk
answerably to the Obligation of it. Keep it by thee as a Memorial of the Solemn
Transactions betwixt God and thy Soul; and besides the Influence it will have
upon thy Obedience in the time of thy Life, it will afford thee no small
Comfort and Assurance at the Hour of Death, and in the time of Temptation.

3. Make choice of some wise and faithful Friend, and Engage him by all the
Endearments and Obligations of Friendship, to be your Monitor and Remembrancer;
this the Apostle advises to, Heb. 10.23. Consider one another, to provoke unto
Love and to good Works. There are two sorts of Persons that will tell us of our
Faults, our best Friends, and our bitterest Enemies: Have thou such an Enemy?
make use of those Rebukes with Christian Prudence, which he gives in sinful
Anger: Art thou blessed with such a Friend? Bless God for him, let thy Heart
cleave unto him, and perform a Reciprocal Duty of Love and Faithfulness toward
him, be often Admonishing, Reproving, Restoring, Quickening and Confirming one
another; the Advantage of such a Friendship is inexpressible.

4. Labor every Day to Live as in God's sight, and to walk continually as
under the View and Observation of his All-seeing Eye, Psalm. 16.8. In all
Places, and in all Companies endeavor to remember the Presence of God, that he
is about thy Path by Day, and about thy Bed by Night, and espies out all thy
ways: Remember that thy God sees in secret, and that no Darkness is an
Obstacle to his piercing Eye. Remember that God is every where present, and
then thou will Study to be every where Holy: It is not sufficient that God's
Eye sees thee, but thou must see thy self Seen of God. The Master's Eye upon
the Scholar will not Command him to his Book, but the Scholar's seeing that his
Master sees him will do it. Oh my God! (says pious Bishop Hall) let me see my
self Seen of Thee, and I shall never dare to Offend thee.

5. Have frequent recourse to your Minister, your spiritual Guide, desire his
Advice and follow his Instructions, in order to your Improvement in Knowledge,
and Advancement in Piety: Acquaint him with thy Resolutions for Heaven and a
Holy Life, and desire him to give thee the needful Directions in order to it:
Lay open thy very Soul unto him, and be not shie of acquainting thy spiritual
Physician with all thy Soul-Complaints; hear him as thou would hear Christ
himself, whose Minister he is; Mark what he says with the greatest Care, and
follow his Instructions with the greatest faithfulness: Acquaint him from time
to time with the State and Condition of thy Soul, with thy Temptations and
Discouragements, with thy Doubts and Fears, with thy Failings and
Imperfections, with thy Joys and Sorrows; his Counsels, by the Blessing of God,
will preserve thee in an uniform, even and steady Course of Well-doing. Thy
Minister is concerned to give thee the best Advice he can, and God is concerned
to make it Effectual for thy Good, having in his Infinite Wisdom ordained it
for that end.

6. And above all, look up to Almighty God in Prayer, that he would make you
perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. Give him the entire Praise of all
that good that is wrought in you or performed by you: Be Thankful to him for
any measure of Knowledge received in thy Understanding, for any good
Inclinations found in thy Will, for any devout Affections stirring in thy Soul,
and intercede with him, that in mindfulness of his Promise, as he has begun a
good Work in thee, he would perfect it unto the Day of Jesus Christ, that he
would Order thy Steps in his Word, and let no Iniquity have dominion over thee;
that he would hold up thy goings in his ways, 'till thy Feet take hold of
Eternal Life, that thou may be faithful to the Death, not beginning in the
Spirit, making a sad End in the Flesh; not being of the Number of those who
draw back unto Perdition, but of those who persevere in Well-doing to the
saving of their Souls. Amen.

FINIS.

