AN ESSAY UPON THE Excising of Malt: AS ALSO, The Present CASE of TALLIES
considered.

By A. BURNABY, of the Middle Temple.

LONDON, Printed for the AUTHOR, 1696.

AN ESSAY UPON THE Excising of Malt, etc.
THE Gentleman that Wrote an Essay in the year 1695, upon Ways and Means of
Supplying the War, made the following just Observation, That in the Course of
this War we are Engaged in with France, nothing seems more to hurt our Affairs
than an Opinion, which from year to year has been entertained among some People
of Authority, That the War could not last; which they were brought into by a
Vanity, natural to our Nation, of over-rating our own Strength, and
undervaluing that of our Enemies.

I think it is now too evident, that this Opinion has prevailed to our
prejudice; otherwise those Expedients of raising of Money by Fonds of Interest,
had surely, not been so often repeated as they have been, (had we had but the
least Apprehension of the Continuance of the War) and had not taken up a firm
Belief, that every year would put an end to it. And though, these former
Expedients (as the same Author well observes) may be proper to answer a short
and single Necessity, yet, perhaps, they will hardly appear to be the proper
Ways and Means to carry on a Great, and Long War.

Let us therefore, but consider our present Circumstances, and the many
Inconveniences we have run our selves into by some of the former Ways of
Raising Money, and we shall soon find them, to be the chief Occasion of all our
present Wants: But, perhaps, it is prudence at this time to conceal our Weakness
as much as we can, and the best way to do it, is the application of a speedy
Remedy. Give me leave to ask a Question; What Fond can now be found out, that
His Majesty can afford to pay 40 l. per Cent. for the advance of Moneys? (for
such is our present Case) And it is much to be suspected, if such an Overture
were made, whether it would be accepted of at this time. At first sight it may
seem very monstrous, That that Government, that was supplied the last year, and
several others before, with what Money they pleased, at 7, 8, and 9 l. per
Cent. cannot in all probability be now able to have present Money advanced,
under 40 l. per Cent. Nay, it is much to be feared, not on any Terms
whatsoever: But when we reflect on the Case of those that have already advanced
their Moneys on Fonds, and have received Tallies for the same, then, perhaps,
neither the Question, nor Suggestion, will appear wholly destitute of Reason,
if we consider that there has not been one of these Fonds, but there has been
Tallies from each of them, daily chaffer'd away at no less than 30, 35, and 40
l. per Cent. nay, some have been parted withal at a greater loss. I say, how
then can it be hoped that Money can be advanced on any Fond whatsoever, (when
all Fonds are supposed to be equally secure, the only difference, being the
length of time, when the Lenders are to be repaid again) unless on the like, or
greater Advantages. And again should the Government make such an Offer, (which
cannot be posed it will) it might give the People cause to suspect some mighty
deficiency, insomuch that there would, in all probability, be very little
advanced, if any. All this, and a great deal more, is now too visible, the
advancing Moneys on Fonds at Interest, has brought this Nation to: But,
perhaps, I have said too much on this Head already.

The Cause is also plain, we have run the Nation into a great Debt, by
advancing our Money on Interest, (merely upon an Opinion that the War would not
last) and the public Faith is now almost exhausted; for it is evident, the
Expense of a great, and long War, thus supplied with Money, must in process of
time, be greatly impoverished; and like a Ship in a Storm, where there is
manifest danger, though all that are in her, are Friends, and in one common
Interest, yet every particular Person, scruples not to run the hazard of the
whole, to save himself; The Application is plain, when the People once
apprehend such a Storm in a Government, every Man that before was bound in the
Common Interest, will leave it, and look to himself and Family; and most
certainly, the want of Money, (which now is become almost to bare proportion
with every thing, nay, is almost every thing) will bring a People to it, if
speedy Course be not taken to prevent it.

As nothing is a greater sign of a Nations poverty, than where Usury is
predominant; so nothing is a surer sign of Destruction, if a timely stop be not
put to it; which is too plain, is too much in use in this Nation at this time;
for as anciently, Governments have Consulted their Oracles, it is come to that
pass now, that scarce the Public, or Private, can do any thing, without first
consulting, and having recourse to the Usurer, and his Coffers; an idle and
detestable way of employing Money, to the great prejudice of all Trade, and
Industry; and if this buying and selling of Tallies (which is our Usurers
present Employment) be not prevented; it is to be feared, there will be but very
little Money found, to Lend the Government, and, perhaps, may do much greater
damage, then can be at present easily discerned.

Before I proceed any further, I humbly propose, that the buying and selling of
Tallies, be made Usury by Act of Parliament, unless it be on the very same
Terms the Parties had them from the Government; that is, that the Sellers shall
not dispose of their Tallies for less than they paid the Government for them;
for it is not reasonable either, to debar the Subjects from disposing of their
Rights at pleasure, because, necessity may oblige them to part with them, and
entirely to hinder the disposing of them, to one another, were yet to make them
less valuable, for that the Property cannot be assigned to answer any Emergency
that may possibly happen. And unless the Government do raise the Credit of
Tallies, by preventing them from being subject to such Usurious practice,
(either by this, or some other way, as in the Wisdom of the Parliament shall
seem most meet) it is to be feared, the Government, will not very easily be
supplied with present Money.

Of Assessments, or Taxes.
Surely, before any Tax be Levied, some Things are to be considered; as, First,
Whether it be Universal; Secondly, Whether Equal; Thirdly, The Charge of
Collecting; Fourthly, That the Collection be not attended with too much Trouble
to those that are the Contributors; Fifthly, A near Estimate how much 'twill
raise ought to be known; and, Sixthly, The Time known when the whole Tax shall
be brought into the Exchequer.

I say, surely these Things are of absolute necessity to be Considered, before
any Tax be Levied, which seems to me, not only to be the true Properties of an
Equal and Just Tax, but that no Tax can be Equal or Just, without being
possessed of a great part of the Properties beforenam'd (I mean such a Tax, as
can be hoped will raise any Thing considerable; it is not impossible, Taxes of
small Produce, may not have all these Properties, yet be Equal too,) as is
hoped, will appear from these following Reasons.

First, Whether it be Universal.
For unless it be, 'twill hardly raise sufficient to answer a great Expense,
and a long War, without a great Oppression; for a great Sum from a great Number
of Persons, will naturally be supposed to come more easy from them, and the
Burden be less felt, than from a few.

Secondly, Whether it be Equal.
Every Man charged with the like Sum surely, is not sufficient alone to make a
Tax equal, for Respect must be had to the Conditions of every Person, and
according to their several Substances, that they be charged; that every Person
may bear the common Burden (which, let it be never so equally disposed, will
be yet thought burdensome) with Cheerfulness, and with one Mind, to Vindicate
our Common Safety. And Encouragement ought to be given, by the equal Levying of
our Taxes, that every Man may, to the utmost drop of his Blood, and Substance,
defend his Liberty and Property; And indeed, who would not? rather than be
under the Tyranny of a French Government. The present miserable Case of our
Fellow Creatures under that Government, is sufficient, to move us to all that
is said before: But no doubt, regard must be had, that the Unequalness of our
Taxes, do not amount to the unjust Demands and Exactions of our Enemies: For if
they should, the Difference would be thought but little, whether a Man be
Oppressed by one Government, or another; that is, that we give not any just
cause of Complaint to the disaffected People in England, who would gladly
embrace an opportunity to improve the least Inequality in our Taxes, to answer
the mighty unjust Ones of the French. And in a mixed Government, unless every
Man be left destitute of cause of Complaint, it can never be hoped, the People
should be all of one Mind; which is absolutely necessary that they should, to
make a People in love (at least to be cheerful and content) with a long, and
expensive War: And surely, no Man can have cause of Complaint, if he stands
upon an equal foot with his Neighbor. There is also, another sort of Equality
necessary in a Tax: Which is, That the Law ought to take due care and regard,
that none by their Craft or Cunning, shall be able to escape, or defraud His
Majesty, of the least part thereof; otherwise, the People will not be of equal
footing, although, the Tax in it self be never so equally disposed, as too
plainly appears in the Revenues of Excise, not to mention the other Taxes that
are attended with the like Misfortune: And upon a strict Examination, perhaps,
it may appear, that not any Tax that has yet been proposed, has been entirely
free from that Inconvenience: Where the Advantages some Brewers have of others,
(in escaping the Payment of the Duty) almost destroys a great number of the
Trade; the which Causes no little Trouble to the Commissioners of that Revenue,
and is no small Oppression to the Subjects in general, and more particularly to
the Trade it self; besides, the great Loss and Disappointments to His Majesty.

Thirdly, That the Collection of it ought to be considered.
For if the Charge be very great in the Collection, His Majesty might almost as
well pay Interest for Money; the Difference would not be very great.

Fourthly, That the Collection be not attended with much Trouble to those that
are to pay the Tax.
Perhaps, this was the chiefest Complaint made of the Hearth-Money, and the
chiefest Cause likewise, that that Tax was laid aside: For perhaps, if a small
Regulation in the Assessing and Collecting of that Duty, had been made, upon a
narrower Inspection, that Tax will not be found to be so very unreasonable, as
some have rashly concluded; for whatever Tax is attended with this sort of
Trouble, will always cause great Murmurings, especially in the poorer sort of
People; Who were those that chiefly complained against the Hearth-Money. For
when People part with their Moneys, especially the poorer sort, they are ready
to find fault, and murmur, on the least Occasion; therefore, regard ought to be
had, to avoid as much of that sort of Trouble, as possible may be; though to give
no Trouble at all of this kind, is not, perhaps, possible.

Fifthly, A near Estimate how much 'twill raise, ought to be known.
The Parliament has found by Experience, the Trouble they have had in Levying a
Fresh or New Tax, to make good the Deficiency of an Old one: The King has found
the Disappointments, and the Effects of it. The Collectors of those Taxes, the
Trouble of them, and the People are always sure to pay them with more Regret,
than the Old one, tho, perhaps, they did not amount to above a Fifth part so
much. And, in my humble Opinion, it is an Error on the right side, If the Tax
surmount the Sum it is given for.

Sixthly, The Time known, when the whole shall be brought into the Exchequer,
Is of absolute necessity; if it were for no other Reason, than that the Lords
Commissioners of His Majesty's Treasury, might dispose Matters according to the
Income of His Majesty's Revenues and Taxes; for neither they, nor those that
are to receive Moneys thereout, do find it no little Inconvenience, by the
Revenues and Taxes not coming in at the time expected: And most certain it is,
so much one Tax can be brought into the Exchequer sooner than another, so much
the more preferable that Tax is; provided, it stands in Equality as to all
other Considerations that ought to be had in laying on of Taxes.

Now, the Tax that I am going to plead for, I humbly hope shall appear, to have
all the Properties of a Tax as beforementioned, and withal, the Advantage of
producing two Millions of present Moneys, without paying the least Interest for
it, and of coming into the Exchequer, much quicker than any hitherto: Besides,
several other considerable Advantages, that shall appear in their proper places.

I am not unsensible, that the very Tax I am here to plead for, has been before
the Parliament already, and brought there by my self; but I have some Reason to
believe, that notwithstanding it was not Agreed to the last Sessions, it may
not be an Unwelcome Guest in this. Therefore,

It is humbly proposed, That Sevenpence Halfpeny per Bushel be laid upon all
Malt made, and to be made, to be paid by the Maker thereof Monthly, and the
Duty, to be received by the Maltsters from their Customers before they deliver
their Malt; so that the Credit they give may be the same, and not other, than
now it is: Besides, the Brewer, Retailer, or private Person, that cannot pay
the Duty down, is not a fit Person to be trusted with the Commodity; and
thereby, in some measure, the Maltster will be the better able to judge, who
is, or who is not fit to be trusted with his Commodity. And thereby may
likewise, possibly, be avoided, the contracting of a great many bad Debts,
which has been the chiefest Destruction of most Dealers that have failed in the
World.

First then, That this Tax is Universal.
The very Name is sufficient, to prove it to be of Universal Use in England,
for every Person knows what use is made of that Grain; which is a sufficient
Argument for my Purpose: therefore I need not trouble my self more on this
Head; being what proves it self, without calling to its Aid, the help of either
Logic, or Rhetoric; under one of which, most Fallacies are couched. I will
only add, That not an Instance can be given of one single Family in England,
that subsists without the use of that Grain; and Custom has so long prevailed,
that it is even Monstrous now to suppose, that the Use of this Grain could be
laid aside in England, on almost any Terms whatsoever.

Secondly, That this Tax is Equal.
As I said before, every Person being charged with the like Sum, surely, is not
sufficient alone to make a Tax equal. Therefore this Tax, which will effect
every Person, tho not with the like Sum, but proportioned to every Person's
Circumstances, is equal. As thus: (viz.) Men of great Estates and Figure, are
for the most part attended with a Family and a numerous Train of all kind of
Servants proportionable; Men of less Figure, with less, and so of the meanest
Person. And this Grain being of Universal Use in this Nation, and of absolute
Necessity, proves plainly, that none can escape contributing toward this Tax;
therefore, every Man will stand on an equal foot with his Neighbor; and none
will have the least cause to Complain or Grumble. He that consumes little, will
have but little to pay. And as it is in every Person's Power to charge himself
with this Tax; as it pleases himself, so it is undeniably Equal: But there is a
more than common Equality, that attends this Tax: For every Man is his own
Carver, consequently, every Man taxes himself, or rather, is a Liberal
Contributor (without the least Compulsion) toward the Defending his Country,
Liberty, and Property, from the Ravenous Insults of a Foreign Power. Surely, I
need say no more (tho much more might be said) to convince all Mankind, that
nothing can be more equal, and am fully satisfied, in my own Thoughts at least,
if the rest of the Common Burden were so equally disposed, as it will be by
this Tax, there would soon appear in the People of England, an Unusual
Cheerfulness! And that mighty Monarch of France, seeing such New Veins of vast
and durable Treasures opened at the beginning of the next Session of
Parliament, it is more than probable, in stead of Taking, we might Give, a
Peace, and would soon give him just cause to suspect his imagined Greatness.
But whilst he sees us Irregular in disposing the common Burden, he will be
vain enough, to think of himself, as he has these Eight Years past: For he
knows too well, that War, and every Thing else, at this time, is brought to
bear proportion with Money.

Thirdly, The Charge of Collecting it.
If I should say, The Collecting of it would cost nothing, I do'nt doubt but I
should be thought a Madman: But since it is out, (tho for particular Reasons to
my self, and with designed Advantages to His Majesty, I had once Thoughts to
withhold it) I do boldly affirm, it shall cost neither His Majesty nor the
Subject any thing; but shall be an Advantage to both; for which purpose, I must
prove to this Honorable House, That the Frauds of Brewers amount to, at least,
320000 l. per Annum, and that this Excising of Malt will prevent those Frauds;
and I do'nt doubt, 320000 l. per Annum, will be thought much too great for the
Charge of Collecting such a Tax; but, perhaps, 50000 l. per Annum, may serve
turn, considering the Excise-Officers, with little Additions, may serve both
Purposes: And also, that it is absolutely necessary, that both Duties, should
come under the Consideration of one sort of Managers; the which, in its proper
place, I shall endeavor to make more plainly appear: But that this Proof
(which will be long) may not too much divert the Reader from the Assertion
beforementioned, I shall therefore, first, come to a Conclusion, and
afterward Prove it. Tho it be not a proper way of Arguing, to come to a
Conclusion before Proof, yet in regard the Reader may carry all with him, it
may the better be Excused.

Admit then, that the present Frauds of Brewers do amount to 320000 l. per
Annum; Admit likewise, the Excising of all Malt will prevent those Frauds, and
also admit, that 50000 l. per Annum, considering that it will fall under the
Consideration of the Excise Officers, will answer the Charge of Collecting it:
Admit likewise, that it is of absolute necessity that this and the present Duty
of Excise be under the Consideration of one sort of People; I say, admit all
this, and then it will appear, that this Tax will be Collected not only without
Charge, but there will also accrue the advantage of 270000 l. per Annum, to the
King, and I say, to the Subject too; the which, when I make it appear, that
these Frauds are a greater prejudice to the Subject, than to the King, will be
admitted as a sufficient proof also. These Frauds of Brewers have been a
growing Evil ever since the first Institution of that Tax, as appears plainly,
by the Charging of that Revenue from time to time with Additional Duties, which
never answered the End, as the Commissioners of that Revenue can well tell;
nay, so far it has been from answering, that when it came to be heavy loaded,
that is, when it came to be almost Charged double, the Additional half; did not
produce a third part, which is a plain Demonstration, the Evil grew
proportionable as the Advantages rose, and as it increased, gave still greater
Encouragements to Frauds; which will more evidently appear by the rising and
falling of that Revenue, according to the several Additional Duties laid on it,
which will be too tedious to insert here.

All which was occasioned by means of these Frauds, for the Brewers having a
double advantage, especially at this time, (the Duty being almost double to
what it has been) puts them upon all the Contrivances of Frauds imaginable; To
prove which Assertion, it is but looking back to former years, and comparing
them with the latter: As when the Excise was at 2 s. 6 d. per Barrel Strong,
and 6 d. per Barrel Small, it did amount to about 680334 l. per Annum; Now at 4
s. 9 d. per Barrel Strong, and 1 s. 3 d. per Barrel Small, does amount to about
900000 l. per An. according to the Additional Duty, (which appears to be almost
double) the Excise ought to come to at least 1330000; according to this
Computation it comes short 430000 l. To go on with the Proof effectually,
suppose an Allowance of 30000 l. per Annum be made, for the Humor of the Town
as well as the Country, running more of late upon very strong or double Ales,
than formerly: Suppose likewise, an Allowance of 20000 l. per Annum, be made
for the Declension of the Brewing Trade of late years, though I should think it
no very great task to prove, were it necessary, that that Trade of late years
is not in the least declined, but on the contrary, much advanced. But I shall
have room to make large Allowances; therefore, lest that Objection should
arise, that also is made hereout; Suppose likewise, an Allowance of 10000 l.
per Annum, be made, in the stead of the Excise on the Retailers of Coffee,
which is more than ever was received by that Duty; When the Excise did amount
to 680334 l. per Annum, that Duty helped to make up the aforesaid Sum, which at
this time is on the Berry, and the Duty received at the Custom-House. Suppose
likewise, the Distillery be the same now as then, according to the Additional
Duty on it, though in fact it is considerably advanced even according to the
Additional Duty. Suppose, an Allowance also of 100000 l. per Annum, be made,
for the Importation of Brandy, which also helped to make the aforesaid Sum of
680334 l. obstructed at this time, by means of the present War: All these
Deductions amount to but 160000 l. per An. which deducted from 430000 l. there
will still remain 270000 l. It Is to be supposed, that (even when the Excise was
but 2 s. 6 d. per Barrel Strong, and 6 d. per Barrel Small) the practice of
Frauds were not wholly laid aside; but suppose, an Allowance be made, for the
then supposed Frauds, of 50000 l. per Annum, (though upon a nicer Examination,
there would be good reason to suspect, twice that Sum did not serve their
turns) then the Brewers Frauds will amount to 320000 l. per Annum, which is
considerably above one third part of that present Revenue. There might be much
more said to swell the aforesaid 320000 l. per Annum to a much greater Sum, but
it is to be feared that even that is much too great to be well spared at this
time; and, perhaps, it will be morally impossible to Rectify that great Abuse,
unless by Levying such a Tax as I am now Pleading for.

To make the Argument yet stronger, and to Answer every particular, I must
show, wherein, in my humble Opinion, the Frauds of Brewers are prejudicial to
the King, to the Subjects in general, and, more particularly, to the Trade it
self.

First, These Frauds are a Disappointment to the King, by reason that thereby
the Excise does not answer the Sum it was given for; consequently, the Fond to
the Lenders of Money is not so good or large, as if it did fully answer.

Secondly, They are prejudicial to the Public in general, by reason that if
the Brewers paid for all they Brewed, (as in Reason they ought) the less Taxes
would serve turn, consequently, are prejudicial to the Subject.

Thirdly, These Frauds, are more particularly prejudicial to the Brewing Trade;
Every Person that knows the Brewing Trade, knows the greater the Trade, the
greater opportunity they have to Defraud, insomuch, that the very small Brewers
can scarce defraud any, the great Brewers having such advantage, do sell
Stronger or Better Drink, more Measure and Cheaper, than the lesser ones can,
who by reason of the want of such great Trades, have not such great advantages
by Frauds; The lesser Brewers by this means, cannot be supposed to have any
Customers that can make good Payments for what they buy of them, for if they
could, no doubt they would apply themselves to the great Brewers, where they
will receive such visible advantages, different from what the l^sser Brewers
can afford them, so that what few good Customers the lesser Brewers can be
supposed to have, they get nothing by, perhaps loose. Since then, the only
Customers the Lesser Brewers have, that they can hope to get by, are bad, it
may be concluded such an Employment must end in destruction, unless timely
relieved from those Inconveniences. It will not be denied, I presume, that
what has been said before, has sufficiently made appear, that the preventing of
these Frauds will prove equally advantageous to the King and Subject, and more
particularly to the Trade it self. And there will also this Consequence
necessarily follow, the Public will be yet further prejudiced, if these Frauds
are not prevented, which will be obliged to bear some Tax levied on them, to
make good such deficiency, as may accrue therefrom.

Now, I hope, I have fully proved, that this Tax shall not only be Collected
without Expense, but on the contrary, the Collection of it will be happily
attended with a considerable Advantage (nothing less than 270,000 l. per Annum)
both to the King and Subject, which I presume, is not an unwelcome Guest at
this time, when our Occasions too visibly call upon us to be good Husbands.
There indeed wants one thing to complete the proof (viz.) that the Excising of
Malt, will prevent the Frauds of Brewers. The proof of which, will likewise be
plain, if we consider, whoever knows the least of the Brewing Trade, cannot be
ignorant what quantities of Drink the Brewer must make from his Malt, to be a
Gainer by it, (and it is to be supposed they will hardly Brew without Gain) and
by the Levying of such a Tax as this, all the Malt the Brewers use must
necessarily be known, (according to a Scheme of Practice that shall be produced
when required) consequently, the Brewers cannot defraud any, but it will be
known likewise; that is, they cannot defraud any thing considerable, but that
it will be known, little Matters are not worth looking after; however, there
may be Remedies found out for them also, if this take effect.

Fourthly, That the Collection be not attended with too much trouble to those
that are the Contributors.
Let us consider, What sort of People they are that make Malt? And shall we not
find them to bear much about the same Reputation or Character in the World, as
the Brewers do? And both are inferior to the Merchant. Then let us but consider
also, what trouble both the Merchants and Brewers have? The one in the Customs,
and the other in the Excise? and we shall find that either of them, especially
the Merchant, to have treble the trouble that the Maltster will have by this
Tax; for as by Comparison the difference in the value of things are made known
to us, so by the like Parity, the difference in the trouble of things will be
made known to us likewise: The Maltsters Kilnes, in which they make their Malt,
are in their Outhouses, and are no ways adjoining to their Dwelling-Houses, are
very tedious in the Working of a Kilne, and they work only in the Winter
Season; So that the Inspection of Officers, need not be so often repeated, or
so troublesome to them by much, as they are to the Brewers, who are much more
nimble; as also, their Brew-houses, are for the most part joined to their
Dwelling-houses, through which Officers do pass and repass daily, and also do
make Searches both day and night throughout their their Houses, otherwise,
there would be but little of that Revenue come to the King's Share; and the
Entries of Maltsters would not be attended with half so much trouble, as those
of the Brewers are, for that they will not have occasion to make their Entries
so often, and that but in the Winter Season either. Let us see, what trouble
our best Merchants have in their Businesses? and we shall find them to have
twice the trouble of either of them; As thus, all Merchants make their Entries
upon the Exporting of their Goods, then again other Entries at their Importing
of their Returns, and if their Goods be such as pay an Additional Duty, they
must besides their Entry, be at the trouble of Entering into Bond for their
other Payment, and for getting Security also; Then after this, another trouble
in the payment of that Money, and obtaining an Order for the getting up of
their Bonds: And if any of these Goods be sent abroad, then a Transire must be
taken out: All which are ten times more trouble than what our Maltsters will be
put to: And, I hope, our Maltsters themselves will acknowledge Merchants to be
their Superiors in Quality. I suppose, I need say no more, especially in this
place, of the smallness of the trouble those People are like to incur on whom
this Tax should be levied. Besides, none of this will fall on the poorer sort
of People, who are for the most part, those that make the greatest noise, for
the smallest Payments, the Maltsters being most, if not all of them, Rich Men.

Fifthly, A near Estimate how much it will raise, ought to be known; As for
Example, from the Excise of London a Computation may be made, what a Duty of 3
d. per Bushel upon all the Malt of England would produce, in this manner.
There was Brewed in London, the year ending the 24th of June, 1689.1, 212, 550
Barrels of Strong Beer and Ale, and 827, 544 Barrels of Small Beer, so, of both
sorts of Drink there was Brewed 2,040,094 Barrels. To the Strong Beer and Ale,
there is allowed 3 Bushels to the Barrel, and to the Small, one Bushel; but
much Small being Brewed from the Strong, it may be a reasonable medium to allow
to both Drinks, one with another, two Bushels to the Barrel; at which rate to
reckon by round numbers, there is used in London 4,000,000 of Bushels of Malt.

The People of England, by the nearest Computations that can be made, are
reckoned Seven Millions, of which London is accounted a Tenth; so that there
may be in London 700,000 People; Divide the 4,000,000 Millions by 700,000, and
there will be found to each Man 5 Bushels 7 tenths of a Bushel. But the
Allowance of two Bushels to the Barrel being rather of the least, we may
reasonably allow to each Man's Consumption six Bushels of Malt in a year, which
would be 4,200,000 Bushels, which is about 3 Barrels a year, which to the Mas
of the People blended together, will be about a quart a day.

So that if London, which is a Tenth of the People, consume 4,200,000 Bushels
of Malt, the whole Kingdom, which are Seven Millions, may consume 42,000,000
Bushels, which at 3 d. per Bushel would produce 525,000 l. per Annum. If then,
3 d. per Bushel will produce 525,000 l. per Annum, 7 d. will produce 1,312,100
l. per Annum.

If we reflect on the Frauds of Brewers, which I have before made plainly
appear to be very great, which cannot be supposed to have appeared in the
Excise Office; and the great quantities of Stout and Double Ales, and Stout and
Double Beer, that are Brewed in almost all the Counties of England, London and
Middlesex not exempted, which consume, 5 times the Malt in proportion to every
Barrel of Common Ale and Beer, which the Common Brewers Brew, from whose
Brewing only the aforesaid Computation is made; And also, if we reflect on the
great quantities of Malt Exported beyond the Seas, and likewise the great
quantities that are daily used in the Distillery, neither of which being within
the aforesaid Computation either: I say, when we reflect on all these several
Ways of the Consumption of that sort of Grain, it cannot be imagined, but the
aforesaid Sum of 1312,100 l. will by means thereof, be advanced too
considerably above And Million and an half per Annum.

Sixthly, The time known when the whole Tax shall be brought into the Exchequer.
Every one that knows the Making of Malt, knows it cannot be made but in the
Winter Season, nor is it fit for use, in less than three months after it is
made, which is a plain Demonstration, that there must be a year and three
months Stock of present Malt in the Maltsters and Brewers hands; and it cannot
be supposed, that they can exactly foretell what shall be consumed the ensuing
year; besides, the Brewers can inform you, they very often use Malt of two
years old; so that from this, it may reasonably be presumed, that the present
Malt in the Maltsters and Brewer's hands, will amount at 7 d. per Bushel, to
Two Millions of Money, at least; and the next years make (which must be all
made before the end of May next) will produce One Million and an half more; and
so consequenty, in little more than seven months, will produce Three Millions
and an half.

It will hardly be denied, I presume, that what has been said before, has made
this Tax appear, to have all the Properties of a Tax as beforementioned, with
these different Advantages from other Taxes; (viz.) Of producing Two Millions
of present Money, without paying the least Interest for it; Secondly, Of coming
into the Exchequer much quicker than any Tax that has yet been proposed, by
which this Tax is more preferrable, than any other by 5 l. per Cent. according
to the Rate His Majesty has paid for Moneys hitherto, which is to be feared His
Majesty cannot reasonably expect to have on easier Terms this year; and it is
to be feared likewise, that this year seems to want as great Supplies as any
since the Revolution; Thirdly, The Levying of this Tax will prevent that mighty
Abuse that at present attends the Brewing Trade, even to the preservation of a
great number of Lesser Brewers, that have for these many years past strugled
under that difficulty, and a Trade that the Government has received very large
Supplies from; Fourthly, His Majesty will save 320,000 l. per Annum (by the
preventing of those Frauds beforementioned) from this proposed Tax. All which,
I hope, are sufficient Inducements to have it complied withal.

But, because, there scarce yet ever was any thing of this kind that had not
its Enemies, tho it were but for mere Argumentsake, therefore, I cannot hope
this should escape Censure, were it even better than what I affirm it to be.
Therefore, I take the Liberty of laying down, what I humbly conceive, are the
most material, or probable Objections, that can be made to it.

The Enemies to this Proposal, will be apt to make these four following
Objections, which, according to my Apprehension, are all, that can probably be
raised against it.

OBJECTION I.
It is not so equal as I would insinuate, by reason, the Tax will fall entirely
on one sort of Grain, and consequently, on one sort of Land that bears such
Grain.

ANSWERED.
The difference of affecting the Land or Grain, more by this Duty, than it is
affected by that of the Excise on Beer and Ale, is only, It pays the Duty in
one, when Malt, in the other, when that very Malt is made into Drink; and Malt
is of little other Use, or, at least, it is not put to any other Use, than the
making of Drink, in this Nation, (save what is used in the Distillery*) Besides,
there is this General Argument to back it, That the Seller always commands the
Buyer, consequently, the Farmer and Maltster will get more than now they do;
and so far it is from an Objection, (tho, generally, it is thought of some
moment) in my humble Opinion, that it is to be hoped (and, not without good
Reason too) from that Consideration alone. That Malt will be one of the
chiefest, and most advantageous Grain, the Farmers will employ themselves in;
consequently, that Land will bear to the Landlord a greater Price.

OBJECTION II.
That at this time, what with the Alteration of the Coin, the great Expense of
a great, and long War, Money is become so scarce, that few People can pay even
the present Taxes, that are already on them; how then can it reasonably be
supposed, so large a Sum, and so soon to be advanced, can be produced from so
small a Number of People, that are (by this Tax) proposed to pay it?

ANSWERED.
All Men that are acquainted with the vast Credit the Maltsters and Brewers
give, and have but made the least Observation of these two Employments, will
easily agree with me, That there is not any one Trade in the Kingdom, has throve
comparable to theirs; and the Maltster's not the least. It Is obvious to all
Mankind, that the Maltsters make vast Profit, who, for the most part, are, in
the beginning, but a poorer sort of Husbandmen, and begin the Malt-Employment
with, perhaps, not above 40 or 50 l. and many Instances could be given, that,
in less than 20 Years, they have improved it to as many Thousands. If we
reflect what vast Sums those Persons of both Employments have left behind them
at their Deaths, (which is the surest way to know Trading People's
Circumstances) and also, with how little a great many of them have begun the
World with, we shall easily believe, that all the Merchants in London, were not
able to supply the Government with what these two Employments could. Indeed,
there are some few of the Brewers, that are not, perhaps, very rich; but the
Maltsters are most, if not all, of them, exceeding well to pass; and very many
of the Brewers also. I Will only instance one Thing of the Brewers, which will be
sufficient to prove, that they have the Command of present Money. About the
latter end of King James's Reign, when Money was as plentiful, perhaps, as ever
it was known to be, if the Excise-Books were examined, it will be found, that
very few Brewers were then less indebted to the Excise, than Seven Weeks, some
(and a great many too) Ten, and a Dozen: ( Note; By the way, a Brewer of but a
moderate Trade, his Excise will come to, at least, 40 l. per Week; some there
are, that comes to 200 l. per Week, and upwards.) And when the Government had
the last Year pressing Occasions for Money, and the Excise also was double
almost to what it was in the late King's Reign, truly, they could (when they
came to be put to it) clear off in less than a Month all that they were in
Arrears; that is, when the Government told them, they could nor would not give,
for the future, such Credit; and at this time, not any of them, owe above One
Week's Excise, as I am very credibly informed, and believe to be true; besides,
they give their Customers nothing less Credit (for all this) than what they had
used to do. As to the Country Farmers, the Country Gentlemen can well tell, by
the paying of their Rents, that they are not over-stock'd with Moneys: And if
we consider, that a great many Maltsters trade for 12 or 15000 l. a Year; and
must pay ready Money for their Barley, since the Farmers are not able to give
them Credit for it, and, for the most part, have a considerable Stock of Malt
by them, and give likewise very great Credit to some Brewers; I say, if we
consider, and weigh, all these Things, in my humble Opinion, it is sufficient to
prove, that (in all probability) the Maltsters and the Brewers have present
Money enough to answer this proposed Tax. Not that I think, either the Maltster
or Brewer, will pay one Farthing of it, other than what Beer they consume in
their own Families; but, on the contrary, will be Gainers thereby, and make the
like Profit by the Moneys they lay out on the account of the Tax, as they do
(in proportion) of the Money they lay out, on the account of the several other
Materials they use in their Employments, for this to them is a fort of
Material: Let the Parliament reckon how they please, they make no other
Reckoning, than this, -- So much Money laid out, (no matter on what, whether
for the Tax, or for buying Malt, Coals, Hops, etc.) so much must come in,
according to their accustomed Profits: One how or other, they will be sure to
make their Profits or Gain, to come safe home, and answer its usual Return,
with an Overplus: Always alleging to those to whom they sell their Goods, how
heavy the Tax lies on them, therefore, they cannot afford them under such a
Price: It Is a Plea likewise for the poorer sort, to those they owe Money to: So
that it serves them on all Occasions; as the Scarcity of the Coin, at present,
does, a great many that would not have one Farthing the more, tho it were never
so plenty: For it is a Jest, to imagine any contributes toward a Tax, but he
that consumes the Commodity on which the Tax is laid, as is visibly seen by all
those, on whom any Tax whatsoever has been hitherto laid. Let us go no farther
than the Duty laid on Pipes; (but, by the way, be pleased to call to mind, how
those very People daily came in whole Sholes, humbly Petitioning, That their
Miserable Condition might be taken into Consideration:) Every body, that buys
of that Commodity, knows, that, besides the Duty added, they pay dearer by 6 d.
per Gross than they did before; the Pipes shorter also, and the Credit they
give is the same, and not other than before, (which is very little;)
Workmanship and Clay the same, nay, perhaps, cheaper, under the old Plea, The
Taxes lie so heavy upon them, they cannot afford to give more: And yet they make
the People pay 6 d. per Gross more. What other Reason can they give? but that
they must make a Profit of the very Money that they lay out on the account of
the Tax. By which, it appears plainly, they are Gainers by it: As also, it will
appear, in the Answer to the next Objection, that our Brewers have been
likewise considerable Gainers by all the Additional Duties that ever yet has
been laid upon the Excise; and yet, perhaps, if the Parliament but once set
about such a Matter, they are sure daily to be plagued with Petitions, and
Reasons, and always they set forth their Poverty, and complain, how unable they
are to undergo the Burden: But for what Reason, God knows, I am sure I cannot
guess at it, unless, as People by Sleep receive Nourishment, and don't know of
it, till they awake, and find themselves increased in Strength, and refreshed
thereby. If it be out of Cunning, they make such a Sputter, it is on the same
account Women quarrel with those they have a mind to be better acquainted with,
that they may make sure of them.

OBJECTION III.
It will be a Hardship on the Brewers to pay this Malt-Duty of Sevenpence
Halfpeny per Bushel, and the Excise-Duty too; especially, since the Excise is
so high as it is at this present time.

ANSWERED.
The first Thing that seems necessary to make a full Answer to this Objection,
is, To enquire, whether those Gentlemen have not paid as great a Duty to the
Excise, as they will when this Duty is added. If so be it appears that they
have, I suppose it will easily be agreed by every Body, that our present
Occasions seem to want as great Supplies this Year, (if not greater) than any
since the Revolution: Therefore, they have no Reason to complain, especially
when it shall appear likewise, that they have always been Gainers by the
Additional Duties, and, consequently, by this.

For which purpose, let us see, what two Barrels and three Fourths of Strong
Beer, or Ale, will amount to, at 6 s. 6 d. per Barrel; (two Barrels and three
Fourths being the common Produce of a Quarter of Malt.) Let Us see likewise,
what two Barrels and three Fourths will amount to, at 4 s. 9 d. per Barrel,
which is the present Duty; the first will appear to be 17 s. 10 d. 2 q. the
latter, 13 s. 00 d. 3 q. Now let us add to the latter, the present proposed
Tax, of 7 d. 2 q. per Bushel, which is 5 s. per Quarter, makes 18 s. 00 d. 3 q.
Deduct 17 s. 10 d. 2 q. then there will remain 2 d. 1 q. and this divided into
two Barrels and three Fourths, will be very little above 3 q. per Barrel.

I presume, they will have no cause to complain of this small difference,
especially, when they consider, what a mighty Equality such a Tax will put upon
their Trade, as appears, plain enough, by what is said before. Let us examine
what Advantages these Gentlemen made, when the Additional Duties were laid on
them; and then, I presume, it will appear, they will have less cause to
complain.

When the Duty was doubled, they paid 3 s. 3 d. more than before, for this 3 s.
3 d. they made most of their Customers advance in their Prices, from 16 s. and
16 s. 6 d. per Barrel, which were the usual Prices before, to 19 s. there is 2
s. 6 d. toward the Duty; then they made their Drink smaller by 3 s. per
Barrel, which added, makes 5 s. 6 d. they all cut their Measures thereupon, for
which, may reasonably be allowed 1 s. more, which added also, makes 6 s. 6 d.
for the 3 s. 3 d.

This was not all the Gain they made thereby, for when the Duty was taken off,
not One, to Twenty, of their Customers, lowered their Prices. Much more might
be said, that not only this, but all Trades, are sure to be Gainers, if any
Duty be laid on the Commodity they sell; and the greater the Duty is laid, the
greater their Profits. But what is said before, I presume, is sufficient to
fully answer the Objection.

Note: That Malt, Coals, etc. are at this present Time considerably cheaper,
than when the Duty of Excise was doubled; and unless some Duty be laid on that
Grain, (in all probability) 'twill fall so cheap, that the Farmers, Maltsters,
and Brewers, will all of them be Losers, but more especially, the two first.

OBJECTION IV.
If neither the Maltsters, nor the Brewers, will bear this Tax, yet the
Consumptioners will be unequally Charged; for those that brew their own Drink,
will not be equally Charged, with those that buy their Drink of the Common
Brewers.

ANSWERED.
Indeed, this Objection, at the first sight, seems to have some Reason in it,
but that Reason is not Essential: For tho there will be a Difference in the
Contributions of the Consumptioners, yet the Difference is not made so by this
Tax; for, by this Tax, they will not one pay more than another, because, it is
an Universal, Equal, and Just Tax; (of which, enough is said before:) So that
this Objection, in reality, relates nothing to the present proposed Tax, what
e're it may, to that of the Excise, on Beer, and Ale; But by the Acts of
Parliaments, relating to those Matters, none ought to pay that Duty, but such
as were supposed to make Profit by what they brewed; and the Duty was chiefly
intended to come out of the several Profits of the Trading People; therefore a
Difference is just, especially, if made so by an Authority too Great to be
questioned, (at least, by me, or any private Person,) An Act of Parliament.

All that can be said, to justify the Difference, in my humble Opinion, is
this: The Generality that buy their Drink of the Common Brewers, (some few
excepted,) are the Trading Part of the People, that live in great Towns, and
have not the Convenience of brewing their own Drink; and, as the Brewers get by
them, they get by the Brewers, in the Commodities they sell them; which,
perhaps, may make the Thing equal: However, they that will have the Convenience
of being supplied by the Common Brewers, must pay for it. The Nobility and
Gentry, having no Employments of Traffic, cannot make the Thing equal with the
others. Likewise, those who do brew their own Drink, are at the Expense of
buying Utensils, and other Conveniences. And considering also, all that is
necessary to make a Person capable of Brewing, cannot be supposed to be in
every Country Wench, so that what they get in the Shire, they may lose in the
Hundred. Upon the whole Matter, whether the want of Judgment in the Employment,
and Knowledge in the Materials, those Gentlemen that do brew their own Drink,
might not be as Cheap furnished by the Brewers? is a Question, that I shall not
consider at this time: But if it be true, then there will not be any
Difference, notwithstanding the present Excise-Duty.

But, that it is highly Just, and Reasonable, that a Malt-Duty be added, and
that all private Families, and Strangers, ought to pay a Proportion toward
such a Tax, will easily be Consented to, when we reflect on King Charles the
Second his Consent, for taking away the Court of Wards, Purveyance, Preemption,
etc. and then, we shall soon find how reasonable it is, that both Private
Families and Strangers should contribute toward such a Duty? and indeed,
unless they do, it cannot be said to be equal; for which purpose? let us see,
with what disadvantages to the Prerogative of the Crown that King granted the
Exchange? But, by the way, I shall first inform those that are most
dissatisfied with this Proposal, what King James the First said to the then
Prince of Wales, while in his time some Essays were made for the abolishing all
those Royal Advantages. Son (said he) the yearly Revenues as are now offered in
lieu of your Court of Wards, and other Tenures, may make you a Prince a little
Richer, but if ever you accept them, you will much lessen your Greatness. Why
did he say so? but because he well knew those things were notable Branches of
the Royal Prerogative, from which the Crown received much of its Honors,
Powers, and Dignities.

The truth is, most of our Gentlemen at this time are of a new Generation, and
feel not the Smart of those Grievances their Ancestors and their Tenants did,
from all these things; therefore, know no more of them than what they have in
the Histories of those times, and their own Speculation deduced from thence.
But that they may be the better acquainted with the Advantages that they had by
the Exchange, I will give some touches at a few of the Grievances, by which the
rest may be judged, namely; The Denial of Dying Parents the Disposal of their
own Children; The many Unhappy Marriages that too often attended young Heirs
and Heiresses upon their becoming Wards. How were such Persons oft-times drawn
into Marriage before they were capable of making it an Act of their own
Judgment and Affection? Yea, and what force was put upon others? Such as it
seems, at least to me, as made their Marriages differ but very little from a
Rape.

I cannot but believe this Court of Wards was at first well intended, or surely
so many Acts of Parliament could not have been made to confirm it, some whereof
were so late as in King Henry the Eighth his time, but such woeful Corruption
had crept into the Execution of them, as many of the Children of Noble and
Worthy Parents were so disposed of, as could they have foreseen it, nothing
could surely have been a more Melancholy Representation. Again, what great
Charges, Trouble and Hazard were the Lords Mesne put to by Assessments of
Escuage and otherwise? How often the Kings Tenants in Capite, and by Knights
Service, did the Escheators immediately Seize, not only the Lands of the
greatest Nobility, Gentry, and Meaner Men, but the Stock and Cattle also on the
Ground, with the Goods in their Houses, insomuch that their Executors, were
many times constrained to Petition and obtain the King's special Favor, by his
Writ, to have an Allowance for the Personal Estate to be delivered back again.

Let us likewise consider, what hasty and frequent Summons's were Issued out at
the King's Pleasure, even to the Chiefest Men of the Kingdom (over whom he had
this power) to attend him Cum equis and Armis. And how tedious and Chargeable
were those Attendances to them? What Work was made also amongst the Country
Farmers, Yeamondry, and Market People? What Exactions and Oppressions, did all
this Rank of People suffer from the King's Officers in Executing their
Preemption, Purveyances, and Carriages for the King's Household? Which the
Parliament in the Preamble of the Excise Act, Complained, were grown to that
height, that it was found, tho diverse strict Laws had been made in the time of
His Majesty's Progenitors, some extending so far as unto Life, that yet diverse
Oppressions were still committed and continued, and several Counties held to
sundry Rates, Taxes and Impositions, to redeem themselves from those Vexations.

A Man would think there needed not one Word more to be said to make this
Cogent Argument for settling the Excise on Malt, yet I have something more to
add, that will, or at least, should make it more forcible than all that is said
before, which is, to observe, who the Persons were that chiefly enjoyed the
benefit of those Exemptions from the Court of Wards, in lieu of which, the
Excise was Entailed upon the Crown; Secondly, Who are they that have gotten the
special Advantages, being delivered from those Grievances and Oppressions? And
who are the Persons that have, and still do pay the Purchase Money?

To the first of these Questions, I say, or, at least, modestly ask, Whether it
be not the Nobility, Gentry, and their Tenants, the Country Farmers and
Yeamondry, and all others who have Estates in Lands, or are by their Occupation
related to them: I say, are not they the only Persons? where, by the way, let
it be noted, that these Advantages mostly concern all those Families in Country
Towns, who Brew their own Beer, for in Cities and great Towns, where the
Inhabitants are of Trades, and their Estates lying in Wares and Debts, their
Orphants were not so much subjected to Wardship, or could the Grievances touch
them as they did the Country.

To the other part of the Question, (viz.) Who are the Persons, or what Rank of
People are they, who pay this Excise which brought off all those Grievances?
Are they any other, than those that make the Consumption of the Beer now under
Excise? And who are they but the Commonalty of the Kingdom, the Nobility and
Gentry judging it (as indeed it is) much below them, to drink in such Houses,
otherwise, than as they are by Traveling constrained to it. Surely, nothing
could have been more reasonable, than that that Act it self should have made
such provision, that they who shared deepest in the benefit of it, should have
shared deepest in the burdens of it also, however, to have born an equal share
at least, and not entirely to have freed themselves from their Burdens, by
laying a fresh Burden upon the Backs of the most Laborious and Industrious
part of the Common People, upon a Commodity of absolute necessity for the
support of Life. And, as it is the Commonalty that pay this Duty, so it is the
more inferior part of them that support the Victuallers Trade, as Tailors,
Weavers, Smiths, Bricklayers, Combers of Wool, Sawyers, Colliers, Seamen,
Soldiers, Watermen, Laborers in Husbandry and Buildings, Drovers of Cattle,
Carters, Coachmen, Porters, and Journeymen of all sorts, nay, the very
Alms-People, are not wanting to bear their share; and which is yet worse, they
are most of them by the short Measure (now again set up a new) forced to pay it
twice over.

What has been said in this Argument, must surely be unanswerable. Shall such
Excellent Privileges and Immunities be bought, and shall those, who, by reason
of their Meaness, are rendered incapable in sharing in them, pay for the whole
Purchase? While those, who fully enjoy them, pay nothing at all?

There Is another Reason also for the laying an Excise on Malt, drawn from the
late Gracious Act of our present King William, and our late Queen Mary, in
Remitting a like Imposition, The Hearth-Money. As King Charles the Second, in
lieu of half the Excise Dissolved the Court of Wards, Purveyances, etc. so King
William and Queen Mary, have freely and without any Consideration at all
Remitted all their Right and Title to the Hearth-Money, worth 200000 l. per
Annum, which had been settled, upon the Crown and its Heirs for ever.

Certainly, this must be a Reason of some Weight, since no Man can gainsay,
but that such a Piece of Royal Bounty in Princes, ought to meet with some
proportionable Retribution from the Subject: And what can be better thought of,
than the settling such a Duty, as seems, in the Nature of it, to be adapted as
something of a proper Return to His Majesty for the Remission of that Tax, as
being of like Universal Extent, as the Hearth-Money was.

To go on with the Argument more effectually, let me ask, What was the Reason
which that Parliament proceeded upon, which brought the Kingdom under such a
Payment, as that of the Hearth-Money? Can it be thought any other, than that
every Family should pay toward the Charge of the Government, such a
Proportion, as the Station, in which it stood, would bear, which was judged, in
some measure, by the Quality of their Dwellings.

Against this, no Exception could be made, because there is no Man who receives
the Benefit of a good Government, but, as far as he is able, ought to bear his
Share in the Charge required to support it: But, Whether this was laid with a
just Equality, in respect of the Abilities of all Families? or, Whether it be
so Unequal, as to be Oppressive? is another Question, too large here to
determine. Perhaps, there is not any Tax that can be so laid, but will come
with some Inequality to some particular Person. And yet I am persuaded, the
Excising of all Malt, universally, will be so, less than any other that can be
imagined; at least, that has yet been proposed, notwithstanding the many Taxes
of different kinds, that has been levied within the Memory of Man. Not to
mention others more remote.

Such an Excise as I plead for, will be better proportioned to the different
Estates and Degrees of People, than the Hearth-Money, will soon be
acknowledged, if we consider, how diverse Persons but of small Estates have,
either from the Nature of their Employments, or Largeness of their Families,
been forced to take such large Houses, as paid as much Chimney-Money, as many
Gentlemen of Forty times their Estates: For Example; Innkeepers, who, having
nothing but their Employments to live on, have yet paid Annually more Money in
that Tax, than some Noblemen; but this Inequality cannot be in the Excising of
Malt, for every Man there may pay as he pleases, according to the Smallness of
his Family, and the Quality of his Beer, as he pleases to make it: Gentlemen,
who live plentifully, and make a greater Expense, will indeed pay more; but yet
they shall pay no more than their just Proportion, according to the Quantity,
and the Quality of the Beer they spend, which, I hope, will prevent all Cause
of Complaint.

The Intention of that Parliament, which settled that Duty of Hearth-Money, was
to bring every Family, according to its Proportion, to pay something toward
the Support of the Government, which I have hinted at already: This, they
thought, could not be better done, than by placing some Payment on something of
Universal Use, as Chimneys in all Houses are, which gave Occasion for that
Imposition: But for several Inconveniences Their Majesty's found to be in it,
it is now taken off. However, the Reason, on which the Maxim is grounded, is
unchangeable; therefore, if any other Thing can be found out of less Trouble,
and more Equal, and of the like Universal Extent, to supply the other Vacancy,
I hope, there will not be any Reason found, why that should not be brought on:
And, what can be better thought on? than Excising the Beer of every Family in
the Kingdom.

I deny not, but by this Transition of the Hearth-Money to Beer, some
Gentlemen's Payments will exceed what they paid before: But, is there any
Injustice or Hardness in that, if they pay but their just Proportions, as all
other of their Fellow Subjects do; and yet let them give me leave, truly to
inform them, That when they shall have paid as much as their true Proportion of
such a Tax, there are some ordinary Artificers, as Hatters, Brasiers, Tailors,
or Shoemakers, who have a great many Workmen, for whom they provide Strong Beer
once or twice a Day bought by the Penny, shall contribute much more to the
Advance of the Revenue of Excise in a Year, than most Gentlemen shall, by all
the Beer, both Strong and Small, they spend in the like Time in their Houses;
which, I think, should stop any Gentleman's Mouth, from making the least
Exception against it.

To Conclude: Give me leave to ask one Question more, Whether, or not, if King
Charles the Second, when he was entreated to part with the Court of Wards, and
other Tenures, had insisted, That those that shared deepest in the Benefit
desired, should Contribute Equally to the Tax given in lieu of it? and, Whether
or not, if such a Tax as is now Proposed had been then thought on, the
Parliament would not have Agreed to it? and, if it was Reasonable then,
methinks, much more now.

FINIS.

