AN ENQUIRY Into the Measures of SUBMISSION To the SUPREME AUTHORITY. And of
the Grounds upon which it may be Lawful, or Necessary for SUBJECTS to Defend
their RELIGION LIVES And LIBERTIES.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1688.

An Enquiry into the Measures of SUBMISSION, to the Supreme Authority: And of
the Grounds upon which it may be Lawful or Necess^ry for Subjects, to Defend
their RELIGION, LIVES and LIBERTIES.
THis Inquiry cannot be Regularly made, but by taking, in the first place, a
true and full view of the Nature of Civil Society, and more particularly of the
Nature of Supreme Power, Whether it is lodged in one or more Persons.

1. It is certain that the Law of Nature has put no difference nor
subordina^ion among Men, except it be that of Children to Parents, or of Wives
to their Husbands; So that with Relation to the Law of Nature, all Men a^e born
free; And this Libert^ must still be supposed Entire, unless so far as it is
limited by Contracts, Provisions and Laws; For a Man can either bind himself to
be a Servant, or sell himself to be a Slave, by which he becomes in the power
of another, only so far as it was provided by the Contract: Since all that
Liberty which was not expressly given away, remains still entire; so that the
Plea for Liberty always proves it self, unless it appears that it is given up,
or limited by any special Agreement.

2. It is no less certain, that as the light of Nature has plan^ed in all Men a
Natural principle of the Love of Life, and of a desire to pr^s^rve it; so the
comm^n principles of all Religion agree in this, that GOD having set Us in this
World, we are bound to preserve that Being, which he has given Us, by all Just
and Lawful ways. Now this Duty of Self-Pr^serv^tion, is exerted in instances
of two sorts; The one are in the resisting of violent Aggressors; The other are
the taking of J^st Revenges of those who have invaded Us so secretly, that We
could not prevent them* and so violently that We could nor resist them. In
which cases the principle of Self preservation warrants us, both to recover
what is our own, with just Damages; And also to put such unjust persons out of
a capacity of doing the like injuries any more, either to our selves or to any
others. Now in these instances of Self-preservation, this difference is to be
observed, that the first cannot be limited, b^ any slow Forms, since a ^ressing
Danger requires a vigorous Repulse, and cannot admit of delay; whereas the
second, of taking Reverges or Reparations, is not of such haste, but that it
may be brought under Rules and Forms.

3. The true and original Notion of Civil Society and Government is, that it is
a com-promise made by such a body of Men, by which they resign up the right of
demanding Reparations, either in the way of Justice, against one another, or in
the way of War against their Neighbors; to suc^ a single person, or to such a
body of Men as they think fit to trust with this. And in the management of this
Civil Society, great distinction is to be made between the power of making Laws
for the regulating the conduct of it, and the power of executing these Laws:
the Supreme Authority must still be supposed to be lodged with those who have
the Legisl^tive Power reserved to them; but not with those who have only the
Executive, which is plainly a Trust, when it is separated from the Legislative
power; and all Tru^ts by their nature Imp^rt, that those to whom they are
given, are accountable, even tho that it should not be expressly specified in
the words of the ^rust it self.

4. It cannot be supposed by the principles of Natural Religion, that GOD has
authorized any one Form of Government, any other way than as the general Rules
of Order and of Justice oblige all Men not to subvert Constitutions, nor
disturb the peace of Mankind, nor invade those Rights with which the Law may
have vested some Persons; For it is certain that as private Contracts lodge or
translate private Rights; so the public Laws can likewise lodge such Rights,
^rerogatives and Revenues, in those under whose protection they put themselves;
and in such a manner that they may come to have as good a title to these, as
any private person can have to his property; so that it becomes an Act of high
injustice and violence to invade these, which is so far a greater sin than any
such Actions would be against a private person; As the public Peace and Order
is preferable to all private considerations whatsoever. So that in truth, ^the
principles of Natural Religion, give those that are in Authority no power at
all^, but they do only secure them in the possession of that which is theirs by
Law* And as no considerations of Religion can bind me to pay another more than
I indeed owe him, but do only bind me more strictly to pay what I owe; So the
considerations of Religion do indeed bring Subjects under stricter Obligations,
to pay all due all^giance and Submission to their Princes; but they do not at
all extend that Allegia^ce further than the Law carries it. And though a Man
has no Divine Right to his Property, but has acquired it by Humane Means, such
as Succession or Industry, yet he has a security for the enjoyment of it, from
a Divine Right, so tho Princes have no immediate warrants from Heaven, either
for their Original Titles, or for the extent of them, yet they are secured in
the possession of them by the Principles and Rules of Natural Religion.

5. It is to be considered that as a private Person, can bind himself to
anoth^r Man's service by different degrees, either as an ordinary Se^vant for
wages, or as an appropriat for a longer time as an Apprentice, or by a total
giving himself up to another, as in the case of Slavery: In all which cases the
General name of Master may be equally used, yet the degrees of his power are to
be judged by the nature of the Contract; so likewise Bodies of Men can give
themselves up in different degrees, to the conduct of others. And therefore
though all those may carry the same name of King, yet every ones power is to be
taken from the Measures of the Authority which is lodged in him, and not from
any general Speculations founded on some Equivocal terms, such as King,
Sovereign or Supreme.

6. I^'s certain, that GOD, as the Creator and Governor of the World, may set
up whom he will, to rule over other Men: But this Declaration of His will, must
be made evident by Prophe^s, or other extraordinary Men sen^ of Him, who have
some manifest proo^s of the Divine Authority, that is committed to them, on
such occasions, and upon such Persons declaring the will of GOD, in favor of
any others, that Declaration is to be submitted to and obeyed. But this
pretense of a Divine Delegation, can be carried no farther than to those who
are thus expresl^ marked out, and is unjustly claimed by those who can prove no
such Declaration to have been ever made in Favor of them, or their Families.
Nor does it appear Reasonable to conclude from their being in possession, that
it is the will of GOD that it should be so, this justifies all Usurpers, when
they ^re successful.

7. The Measures of Power, and by consequence of Ob^dience, must be taken from
the express Laws of any S^ate, or Body of Men, from the Oaths that they swear,
or from Immemorial prescription, and a long possession, which both give a
Title, and in a long tract of time make a bad one become good, since
prescription when it passes the memory of man, and is not dispured by any other
pretender, gives by the common sense of all men, a just and good title: So upon
the whole matter, the degrees of all Civil Authority, are to be taken either
from express Laws, Immemorial Customs, or from particular Oaths, which the
Subjects swear to their Princes: This being still to be laid down for a
principle, that in all the disputes between Power and Liberty* Power must
always be proved, but Liberty proves it self; the one being founded only upon
positive Law, and the other upon the Law of Nature.

8. If from the General Principles of humane Society, and natural Religion, we
carry this matter to be examined by the Scriptures, it is clear that all the
passages that are in the Old Testament, are not to be made use of in this
matter, of neither side. For as the land of Canaan, was given to the Jews by an
immediate grant from Heaven, so GOD re^erved still this to himself, and to the
Declarations that he should m^ke from time to time, either by his Prophets, or
by the answers that came from the Cloud of Glory that was between the
Cherubims, to set up Judges or Kings over them, and to pull them down again as
he thought fit, here was an express Delegation made by God, and theref^re all
that was ^one in that Dispensation, either for or against Princes, Is not to be
made use of in any other State, that is founded on another bottom and
constitution, and all the expressions in the old Testament relating to Kings,
since they belong to persons that were immediately designed by God, are without
any sort of reason ap^lyed to those, who can pretend to no such Designation,
neither o^ themselves nor for their Ancestors.

9. As for the New Testament, it is plain* that there are no rules given in it,
neither for the Forms o^ Government in general, nor for ^he degrees of any one
Form in particular* but the general rules of Justice, order, and peace, being
established in it upon higher Motives, and more binding considerations, then
ever they were ^n any other Religion whatsoever, we are most strictly bound by
it, to observe the constitution in which we are? And it is plain, that the
rules set us in the Gospel, can be carried no further. It is indeed clear from
the New Testament, that the Christian Religion as such, gives us no grounds to
defend or propagat it by force. It is a Doctrine of the Cross, and of Faith,
and Patience under it: And i^ by the order of Divine providence, and of any
constitution of Governmen^, under which we are born, we are brought under
suf^erings, for our professing of it, we may indeed retire and fly out of any
such Country, if we can; but if that is denied us, we must then according to
this Religion, ^ubmit to those suffe^ings under which we may be brought,
considering that God will be Glorified by us in so doing, and that he will both
support us under our sufferings, and gloriously reward us for them.

This was the State of the Christian Religion, during the three first
Centuries, under Heathen Emperors, and a Constitution in which Paganism was
established by Law; But i^ by the Laws of any Government, the Christian
Religion, or any form of it, is become a part of the Subjects Property, it then
falls under another consider^tion, not as it is a Religion, but as it is become
one of the Principal Rights of the Subjects, to believe and profess it: And
then we must ju^ge of the Invasions made on that, as we do of any other
Invasion that is made on Our Rights.

10. All the pas^ages in the New Testament that relate to Civil Government are
to be expounded as they were truly meaned, in opposition to that false notion
of the Jews, who believed themselves to be so immediately under the Divine
Authority, that they would not become the Subjects of any other Power;
particularly of one that was not of their Nation, or of their Religion:
therefore they thought, they could not be under the Roman yoke, nor bound to
pay Tribute to Caesar* but judged that they were only subject out of Fear, by
reason of the Force that lay on them, but not for Conscience sake: And so in
all their Dispersion, both at Rome and elsewhere, they thought they were GODS
Freemen; and made use of this pretended Liberty as a cloak of maliciousness.
In Opposition to all which, since in a cour^e of many years, they had asked the
protection of the Roman yoke, and were come under their Authority, our Savior
ordered them to continue in that by his ^aying, Render to Caesar that which is
Caesar's; and both St. P^ul in his Epistle to the Romans, and St. Peter in his
General Epistle, have very positively condemned that pernicious Maxim, but
without any formal Declarations made of the Rules or Measures of Government.
And since both the People and Senate of Rome had acknowledged the power that
Augustus had indeed violently usurped, it became legal when it was thus
submitted to, and confirmed both by the Senate and People: And it was
established in his Family by a long prescription when these Epistle^ were writ:
So that upon the whole matter, all that is in the New Testament upon this
Subject. imports no more but that all Christians are bound to acquiesce in the
Government, and submit to it, according to the cons^i^ution that is settled by
Law.

11 We are then at last brought to the Constitution of our English Government;
So that no General Considerations from Speculations about Sovereign Power, nor
from any passages either of the Old and New T^stament, ought to determine us in
this matter; which must be fixed from the Laws and Regulations that have been
made among Us. It is then certain, that with Relation to the Executive part of
the Government, the Law has lodged that singly in the King; So that the whole
administration of it is in him: but the Legislative Power is Lodged between the
King and the two Houses of Parliament; So that the Power of making and
Repealing Laws, is not singly in the King, but only so far as the two Houses
concur with him. It is also clear, that the King has such a determined extent
of Prerogative, beyond which he has no Authority: As for instance, if he Levies
Money of his People, without a Law impowering him to it, he goes beyond the
limits of his Power, and asks that to which he has no Right* So that there lies
no obligation on the Subject to grant it: And if any in his Name use Violence
for the obtaining it, they are to be looked on as so many Robbers, that invade
our Property and they being violent Aggressors, the Principle of Self
preservation seems here to take place, and to warrant as violent a resistance.

12 There is nothing more evident, than that England is a free Nation, that has
its Liberties and Properti^s reserved to it b^ many positive and express Laws:
If then we have a right to our Property, we must likewise be supposed to have a
right to preserve it; for these Rights are by the Law secured against the
Invasions of the Prerogative, and by consequence we must have a right to
preserve them against those Invasions. It is also evidently declared by our
Law, that all Orders and Warrants, that are issued out in opposition to them,
are null of themselves; And by consequence, any that pretend to have
commissions from the King for those ends, are to be considered as if they had
none at all: Since these commissions being void of themselves, are inde^d no
commissions in the construction of the Law; And therefore those who act in
virtue of them, are still to be considered, as private persons who come to
Invade and disturb u^. It is also to be observed, that the^e are some points
that are justly disputable and doubtful, and others that are so manifest, that
it is plain that any Objections that can be made to them, are rather for^ed
preten^es, than so much as plausible colors. It is true, if the case is
doubtful, the interest of the public Peace and Order ought to ca^ry it; ^ut
the case is quite different when the Invasions that are made upon Liberty and
Property, are plain and visible to all that consider them.

13. The main and great difficulty here, is, that tho our Government does
indeed as^ert the Li^erty of the Subject, yet there are many express Laws made,
that lodge the Militia singly in the King, that make it plainly unlawful upon
any pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the King, or any c^mmissioned by
him; And these Laws have been put in the form of an Oath, which all that have
born any Employment either in Church or State ^ave sworn; And therefore ^h^se
Laws, ^or the assu^eing ^ur Liberties, do indeed bind the Kings conscience, and
may af^^ct his Ministers; yet since it is a M^x^m of our Law, that the King can
do no wrong, these cannot be carried so far as to justify our taking Arms
against him, be the trans^r^ssions of Law ever so many and so manifest: And
since this has be^n the constant Doctrine of the Church of England, it will be
a very h^avy Imputation on us, if it appears, that tho we held these opinions,
as long as the Court and the Crown have favored us, ^et as soon as the Court
turns against us, we change o^r Principles.

14. Here is the true difficulty of this whole matter, and therefore it ought to
be exactly considered. First, all general words, ^ow large so^ver, are still
supposed to have a tacit Exception, and reserves in them, if the matter seems
to require it. Children are commanded to Obe^ their Parents in all things:
Wives are declared be the Scripture, to be subject to their Husbands in a^l
things; as the Church is unto Christ: And yet how comprehensive so^ver these
words may seem to be, there is still a reserve to be understood in them; And
tho by our Form of Marriage the P^rties swear to one another till death them do
part, yet few doubt (...) this bond is dissolved by Adultery, tho it is not
named; for odious things ought not to be suspected, and therefore not named
upon such occasions: But when they fall out, they carry still their own force
with them. 2. When there seems to be a Contradiction between two Articles in
the constitution, we ought to examine which of the two is the most evident, and
the most Important and so we ought to fix upon it, and then we must give such
an accomodating sense to that which seems to contradict it, that so we may
reconcile those together. Here then are two seeming contradictions in our
constitution: The oneis the Public Libert^ of the Nation; the other is the
renouncing of all resi^tance, in case that were Invaded. It is plain, that our
Liberty is only a thing that we enjoy at the Kings discretion, and during his
pleasure; if the other against all Resistance is to be understood according to
the outmost Extent of the words. Therefore since the chief Design of Our whole
Law, and all the several Rules of our Constitution, is to secure and mantain
Our Liberty, we ought to lay that down for a conclusion, that it is both the
most plain and the most important of the two: And therefore the other Article
against Resistance ought to be so softened* as that it do not destroy this. 3.
Since it is by a Law that Resistance is condemned, we ought to understand it in
such a sense, as that it does not destroy all other Laws: And therefore the
intent of this Law must only relate to the Executive Power, which is in the
King, and not to the Legislative, in which we cannot suppose that our
Legislators, who made that Law, intended to give up that, which we plainly see
they resolved still to preserve entire, according to the Ancient Constitution.
So then the not resi^ting the King, can only be applied to the Executive Power,
that so upon no pretense of ill Administrations in the Execution of the Law, it
should be lawful to resist him; but this cannot with any r^ason be extended to
an Invasion of the Legislative Power, or to a total subversion of the
Government. For it being plain, that the Law did not Design to lodge that power
in the King; it is also plain, that it did not intend to secure him in it, in
case he should ^et about it. 4. The Law mentioning the King, or those
Commissionate by him, shows plainly, that it only Designed to secure the King
in the Executive Power: For the word Commission necessarly imports this, since
if it is not according to Law, it is no Commission; And by con^equence, ^^ose
who Act in Virtue of it, are not commissionate by the King in the sense of the
Law. The King likewise imports a Prince clothed by Law with the Regal
Prerogative, but if he goes to Subvert the whole Foundation of the Governmen^,
he subverts that by which he himself has his power, and by consequence he
annulls his own power; and then he ceases to be King, having endeavored to
destroy that, upon which his own Authority is founded.

It is acknowledged by the greatest asserters of Monarchical power, that in
some cases a King may fall from his power, and in other cases that he may fall
from the exercise of it. His deserting his people, his going about to enslave
or sell them to any other, or a furious going about to destroy them, are in the
opinion of the most Monarchical Lawyers, such abuses, that they naturally
divest those that are guilty of them, of their whole Authority. Infamy or
Phrenzie do also put them under the Guardian-ship of others. All the crowned
heads of Europe have, at least secretly, approved of the putting the late King
of Portugal under a Guardian-ship, and the keeping him still Prisoner for a few
Acts of Rage, that had been fatal to a very few persons: And even our Court
gave the first countenance to it, tho of all ot^ers the late King hade the most
reason to have done it at least last of all, since it justified a Younger
brother's supplanting the Elder; yet the evidence of the thing carried it even
against Interest. Therefore if a King goes about to subvert the Government, and
to overturn the whole Constitution, he by this must be supposed either to fall
from his power, or at least from the exercise of it, so far as that he ought to
be put under Guardians; and according to the case of Portugal, the next Heir
falls naturally to be the Guardian.

The next thing to be considered, is, to see in Fact whether the Foundations of
this Government have been struck at, and whether those E^rors, that have been
perhaps committed, are only such Malversations, as ought to be Imputed only to
humane Frailty, and to the Ignorance, Inadvertencies, or passions to which all
Princes may be Subject, as well as other men, but this will best appear if we
consider, what are the Fundamental points of our Government, and the chief
securities that we have for our Liberties.

The Authorit^ of the Law is indeed all in one word, so that if the King
pretends to a power to Dispense with Laws, there is nothing left, upon which
the Subject can depend; And yet as if Dispensing power were not enough, if Laws
are wholly suspended for all time coming, this is plainly a repealing of them,
when likewise the Men, in whose han^s the Administra^ion of Justice is put by
Law, such as Judges and Sheriffs are allowed to tread all Laws un^er foot, even
th^se that infer an incapacity on themselves if they violate them; this is such
a breaking of the whole Constitution, that we can no m^re have the
Administration of Justice, so that it is really a dissolution of the
Government; since all Trials, Sentences, and the Executions of them are become
so many unlawful Acts, that are null and void of themselves.

The next thing in our Constitution, which secures to us our Laws and
Liberties, is a Free and Lawful Parl^ament. Now not to mention the breach of
the Law of Triennial Parliaments, it being above three years since we had a
Session, that enacted any Law; Methods have been taken, and are daily a taking,
that render this impossible. Parliaments ought to be chosen with an in^ire
Liberty, and without either Force or Pre-engagements: Whereas if all Men are
required before hand to enter into Engagements, how they will Vote, if they
were chosen themselves; Or how they will give their Votes in the Electing of
others; This is plain^y such a preparation to a Parliament, as would indeed
make it no Parliament, but a Cabal, if one were chosen after all that
Cor^uption of Persons, who had pre-engaged themselves; and after the Threatening
and Turning out of all Persons out of Employmen^s who had Refused to do it; And
if there are such daily Regulations made in the Towns, that it is plain those
who manage them, intend at last to put such a number of Men in the Cor^orations
as will certainly choose the persons who are recommended to them. But above all,
if there are such a number of Sheriffs and Majors made over England, by whom
the Elections must be conducted and returned, who are now under an Incapacity
by Law, and so are no Legal Officers, and by consequence these Elections that
pass under their Authorit^ are null and void* If, I say, it is clear that
things are brought to this, then the Government is dis^olved, because it is
impossible to have a Free and Legal, Parliament in this State of things. If
then both the Authority of the Law, and the constitution of the Parliament are
struck at and dis^olved, here is a plain subversion of ^he whole Government.
Bu^ if we enter n^xt into the particular b^anches of the Government, we will
find the like diso^der among them all.

The Prote^tant Religion, and the church of England, make a great Article of
our Government, the Latter ^eing secured not only of old by Magna Charta, but
by many special Laws made of late; And there are par^icular Laws made in K.
Cha^l^s the First, and the late King's time, securing them from all Commissions
that the King can raise for Judging or Cen^ureing them: If then in oppofition
to this, a Court so condemned is E^^cted, which proceeds to Judge and C^nsure
the Clergy* and even to d^ssei^e them of their Free holds, without so much as
the Form of a T^yal, tho this is the most indispensable Law, of all these that
secures the Property of England: And if the King pretends that he can ^equire
the Clerg^ to publish all his Arbitrary Declarations* And in par^icular one
that stricks at their whole Setlement, and has Ord^red P^ocess to be begun
against all that disobeyed this ill^gal Warrant, and has treated so great a
number of the Bishops as ^r^minals, only for representing to him the reasons of
their not obe^ing him; If likewise the King is not satisfied to pro^ess his own
Religi^n openly, tho even that is contra^y to Law, but has sent Ambassadors to
Rome, and received Nunci^'s from thence, which is plainly Treason by Law, if
likewise many Popish Churches and Chapels have been publicly opened; if
several Colledg^s of Jesuits have ^e^n set up in ^ivers parts of the Nation,
and One of the Ord^r has been made a Privy Counselor, and a Principal
Minister of State; and if Papists and even those who tu^n to that Religion, tho
de^la^ed Traitors by Law, are brought into all the chief Employm^nts, both
Mili^ary and Civil; then it is plain* that all the rights of the Church of
England, and the whole establishment of the Protestant Reli^ion are struck at,
and designed to be overturned; since all these things, as they are notoriously
illegal, so they evidently de^onstrate, that the great design of them all, is
the rooting out this Pestilent Heresy, in their style, I mean the Protestant
Religion.

In the next place, if in the whole course of Justice, it is visible, that
there is a constant p^actis^ing upon the Judges, that the^ are turned out upon
their varying from the Intentions of the Court, and if Men of no Reputation or
Abilities are put in their places; If an Army is kept up in time of Peace, and
Men who withdraw from that illegal service are hanged up as Criminals, without
any color of Law, which by consequence are so many Murders; And if the
Souldierie are connived at and encouraged in the most enormous Crimes, that so
the^ may be thereby prepared to commit great ones, And from singl^ Rapes and
Murders, proceed to a rape upon all our Liberties* and a Destruction of the
Nation: If I say, all these things are true in Fact, then it is plain, that
there is such a Dissolution of the Government made, that there is not any one
part of it left Sound and Entire: And if all these things are done now, it is
easy to imagine what may be expected, when Arbitrary Power that spares no Man,
And Popery that spares no Heretic, are finally established: then we may look
for nothing but Gabelles, Tailles, Impositions, Benevolences, and all sorts of
illegal Taxes; As from the other we may expect Burnings, Massacres, and
Inquisitions. In what is doing in Scotland we may gather what is to be expected
in England; where, if the King has over and over again declared, That he is
vested with an Absolute Power, to which all are bound to Obey without Reserve.
And has upon that annulled almost all the Acts of Parliament that passed in K.
James I. Minority, tho they were ratified by himself when he came to be of Age;
And were confirmed by all the subsequent Kings, not excepting the present. We
must then conclude from thence, what is resolved on here in England, and what
will be put in Execution as soon as it is thought that the times can bear it.
When likewayes the whole setlement of Ireland is shaken, and the Army that was
raised, and is maintained by Taxes, that were given for an Army of English
Protestants, to secure them from a new Massacre by the Irish Papists, is now
all filled with Irish Papists, as well as almost all the other Employments; It
is plain, that not only all the British Protestants Inhabiting that Island, are
in daily danger of being butchered a second time, but that the Crown of
England, is in danger of loseing that Island, it being now put wholly into the
hands and power of the Native Irish, who as they formerly offered themselves up
sometimes to the Crown of Spain, sometimes to the Pope, and once to the Duke of
Lorrain, so are they perhaps at this present treating with another Court for
the sale and surrender of the Island, and for the Massacre of the English in it.

If thus all the several branches of our Constitution are dissolved, it might
be at least expected, that one part should be left entire, and that is the
Regal Dignity; and yet that is prosti^u^ed, when we see a Young Child put in
the reversion of it, and pretended to be the Prince of Wales; concerning whose
being born of the Queen, there appears to be not only no certain proofs, but
there are all the presumptiones that can possibly be imagined to the contrary.
No proofs were ever given either to the Princess of D^nmark, or to any other
Protestant Ladies, in whom we ought to repose any confidence that the Queen was
ever with Child; that whole matter being managed with so much mysteriousness,
that there were violent and public suspicions of it before the Birth. But the
whole contrivance of the Birth, the sending away the Princess of Denmark, the
sudden shortning of the Reckoning, the Queens sudden going to St. James's, her
no less sudden delivery, the hurrying the Child into another Room, without
showing it to these present, and without their hearing it cr^; And the
Mysterious Conduct of all since that time; No satisfaction being given to the
Prin^ess of Denmark upon her return from the Bath, nor to any other Protestant
Ladies, of the Queens having been really brought to Bed; These are all such
evident Indications of a base Imposture, in this matter, that as the Nation has
the justest reason in the World to doubt of it, so they have all possible
reason to be at no quiet, till they see a Legal and Free Parliament assembled,
which may Impartially, and without either fear or corruption, examine that
whole matter.

If all these matters are true in Fact, then I suppose no Man will doubt, that
the whole Foundations of this Government, and all the most sacred parts of it
are overturned; And as to the truth os all these Suppositions, that is left to
every English-Mans Judgment and Sense.

FINIS.

