EXPOSITORY NOTES, WITH PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS ON The Four Holy Evangelists:
VIZ. ST. Matthew, ST. Mark, ST. Luke, ST. John.


WHEREIN The Sacred TEXT is at large Recited, the Sense Explained, Doubts
Resolved, Controversies Declined, References Avoided, Seeming Contradictions
Reconciled;

And the Instructive Example of the Holy JESUS to our Imitation Recommended.

Designed for the Instruction of Private Families; and particularly, put into
the Hands of Family-Governours in Dedham; for the Improvement of Themselves and
their Household, in Knowledge, Faith, and Holiness.

BY WILLIAM BURKITT, M. A. Vicar and Lecturer of Dedham in Essex.

LONDON: Printed by R.J. for T. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside; J. Robinson at the Golden Lion, and J. Wyat at the Rose, in S.
Paul's Churchyard. M.DCC.

To the Right Honorable, CHARLES Lord Fitzwalter.
My Lord!
THE Sacred Pages inform us of a Son that was Nourished up in the Words of
Faith, by his Grandmother Lois, and his Mother Eunice.

The like Pious Care has been taken for Your Lordship's Religious Education, by
one of the Wisest of Women, and the Best of Mothers that the Age has afforded:
And that Your Lordship's Improvement in Knowledge and Sincere Piety, may Answer
the Prayers, the Tears, the Endeavors of such an Endearing Parent, who
preferrs Your Lordship's Happiness abundantly before her Own; I take Leave to
put a Part of the Inspired Writings into Your Lordship's Hand, with an
Endeavor of Mine, to Render the Reading of them both Profitable and Delightful
to Your Lordship.

Whilst Others consume their Precious Hours in Plays and Romances, and
suchlike Corrupting and Effeminating Trash, which the Superfoetation of the
Stage furnishes the Nation with, to the Scandal of Our Holy Religion, and the
Grief of all Good Men; Debasing the Minds, and Debauching the Manners of so
many amongst us: That Your Lordship (and Others of Your Noble Order with you)
may Taste such Incomparable Delight and Sweetness in, and Experience such
Invaluable Benefit and Advantage by, Reading the History of Your Blessed
Redeemer's Life and Actions; and may thereby be Transformed into His Holy
Likeness here on Earth, and spend an Eternity in the Rapturous Contemplation,
and Ravishing Fruition of Him in Heaven, is the Fervent Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Honor's Faithfully Devoted Servant and Chaplain, W. Burkitt.

To Family-Governours; particularly those of my Charge.
AS Religion did always consist in an Imitation of God, and in a Resemblance of
those Excellencies which shine forth in the Best and most Perfect Being, so we
may Imitate Him now with much more Ease, and greater Advantage, since His Son
was manifest in our Flesh, and dwelt among us: For He was pleased to become
Man, on purpose to show us how we might become like to God, by a Daily
Imitation of His Holiness. And it is most certain that God Our Father will
never own any of us for His Children, unless He sees upon us the Air and
Features, the Impresses and Resemblance of Christ Our Elder Brother.

This Consideration has induced me to set the Example of the Holy Jesus before
my self and you, in these Plain, Practical Notes upon the Holy Evangelists,
which contain Remarks upon the History of our Savior's Life, Doctrine, and
Miracles, and of His Death, Resurrection, and Ascension. To the Intent that the
Temper of our Minds; and the Actions of our Lives, may be a lively Transcript
of the Mind and Life of our Blessed Redeemer. That we may Admire and Imitate
His unspotted Purity, His Condescending Humility, His Fervent Charity, His
Patience under Sufferings and Reproaches, His Readiness to Forgive Injuries,
and His entire Resignation to the Divine Will in all Conditions of Life
whatsoever. That so following our Lord and Master in all the Steps of an
Imitable Virtue, and setting His Example continually before us, we may be Daily
Correcting and Reforming of our Lives by that Glorious Pattern; for without
present Likeness to Him, we have no Grounds to hope that we shall hereafter
Live with Him.

A true Compassion to your Souls, and a fervent Desire to farther their
Salvation from the Press, as well as from the Pulpit, has put me upon Redeeming
Time for this Work.

I must acknowledge my constant Preaching thrice a Week unto you, (besides
Occasionals) and Visiting as often a populous and scattering Parish from House
to House amongst you, (which I have always accounted a most Important Part of
my Duty) would allow me but little, too little Time, for such a Work as This,
which I heartily wish had fallen upon the Shoulder of one that had more
Leisure, and Greater Abilities for it. But thus much I can truly say, that
earnestly Imploring Divine Assistance, I have done what I could; my Work has
been my Recreation, and the Lord accept it, and succeed it.

And I have this Observation to Ground my Hope of Acceptance and Success upon,
that Almighty God has in all Ages rendered those Labors of his Servants, (how
mean soever in themselves) most Acceptable and Useful, which have been employed
in the profitable Explication of any part of the Holy Scriptures. As if He who
Imprinted such a Majesty upon the Text, delighted also to Reflect an Honor
upon the Interpreters thereof.

My Design in preparing and giving these Notes into your Hands, is to Oblige
you to Read a part of the Holy Scriptures in your Families every Day; and to
invite you thereunto, the Sacred Text is here at large Recited, Controversies
Declined, and References Avoided. I have chosen to Transcribe and Write over
again upon another Evangelist what was observed in a Former, rather than give
you the Trouble of looking back upon what is written elsewhere.

And I do most Affectionately Request you not to suffer the Holy Word of God,
which is in all your Hands, to lie by you as a Neglected Book, but daily to
Read it in and to your Families, with a Simplicity of Mind to be Directed and
Instructed by it.

All the Return I desire from you for this my Labor of Love, is your living in
a daily Imitation of that Grand Pattern of Holiness and Obedience, which is
here set before you, and in every Page Recommended to you; and that we may
continue to strive together in our Prayers one with, and one for another, for
that Grace, which may enable us to the Faithful Discharge of our Respective
Duties toward God, toward each other, and all Mankind. And that the Happy
Unity and Unanimity which has hitherto been amongst us, may continue and
increase still with us, to the Glory of God, the Honor of our Holy Religion,
the present Benefit and Comfort, and the Eternal Joy and Rejoicing both of
Minister and People in the Day of the Lord Jesus. Which, as it is the fervent
Prayer, so it shall be the constant Endeavor of your Unworthy Minister, whose
Highest Ambition it is to serve you in the Faith and Fellowship of the Gospel,
whilst I am,

Dedham, 1700. W. Burkitt.

EXPOSITORY NOTES, WITH PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS UPON The Holy Gospel ACCORDING
TO ST. MATTHEW.

ACTS xvii. Ver. 11. These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that
they received the Word with all Readiness of Mind, and searched the Scriptures
daily whether those things were so.

A PRAYER Before the Reading of the Holy Scriptures.
ALmighty God and Merciful Father, who have appointed thy Word to be a Light to
our Feet, and a Lamp unto our Paths, and caused all Holy Scriptures to be
written for our Learning; Grant us the Assistance of thy Holy Spirit, that we
may in such wise Read, Mark, Learn, and inwardly Digest them, that by Patience
and Comfor^ of thy Holy Word, we may embrace, and ever hold fast the Blessed
Hope of Everlasting Life, which thou have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ.

And seeing of thy tender Love to Mankind thou have given thy Dear and Only Son
to be unto us both a Sacrifice for Sin, and also an Example of Godly Life, give
us Grace, that we may always most Thankfully receive this His Inestimable
Benefit, and also daily endeavor our selves to follow the Blessed Steps of His
most Holy Life; who Lives and Reigns with Thee and the Holy Ghost, ever One
God, World without end. Amen.

EXPOSITORY NOTES, WITH PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS UPON The Holy Gospel ACCORDING
TO ST. MATTHEW.
The HOLY BIBLE contains the whole Revelation of the Will of GOD to the
Children of Men: This Sacred Book is usually divided into the Old and New
Testament. The Old Testament contains the Law and the Prophets: The Writings of
the New Testament are either Histories or Epistles; the Histories are the Four
Gospels and the Acts of the Apostles. The Four Gospels were written by the Four
Evangelists whose Names they bear; of whom St. Matthew and St. John were
Eyewitnesses of what they wrote, but St. Mark and St. Luke had what they wrote
from the Relation of others.

This Gospel before us of St. Matthew, contains an History of the Birth, Life,
Miracles, Death and Resurrection of the Holy JESUS: All which are the most
Stupendous and Amazing Matters, as well as the most Necessary Truths to be
Known and Believed in the World: And,

This Chapter before us contains the Genealogy or Pedigree of our Savior JESUS
CHRIST, as he was Man, unto Verse. 17. and then relates the Fact of his
Wonderful Incarnation, to the End of the Chapter.

CHAP. I.
1 THE book of the generation of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of
Abraham.

Our Evangelist designing to write a Narrative of our Savior's Life, begins
with his Pedigree and Genealogy, and shows whom he descended from, namely, from
David and Abraham. Where Observe, 1. That David is named before Abraham,
because he being a King, and an Illustrious Type of the Messiah, the Jews
expected, and do to this day expect, that the Son of David should reign over
them; and that they should enjoy a Temporal Kingdom by him. Observe, 2. The
Names given to our Blessed Savior, Jesus and Christ; Jesus is his Hebrew Name,
and signifies a Savior; Christ is his Greek Name, and signifies Anointed: From
whence some do infer an Intimation and Encouragement, that both Hebrews and
Greeks, both Jews and Gentiles, may alike come unto Christ for Life and
Salvation; he being the common Savior of both; according to that of St. John,
Epist. 1. chapter 2. ver. 2. He is the Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours
only, but also for the Sins of the whole World.

2 Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac begat Jacob, and Jacob begat Judas and his
brethren. 3 And Judas begat Pharez, and Zara of Thamar, and Pharez begat Esrom,
and Esrom begat Aram. 4 And Aram begat Aminadab, and Aminadab begat Naasson,
and Naasson begat Salmon.

Both the Evangelists, St. Matthew and St. Luke, make mention of our Savior's
Pedigree; the former by his reputed Father's Side, the latter by his Mother's
Side: the design of both, was to present us with a general Draught of our
Lord's Pedigree and Descent, and not to be strict and accurate in enumerating
every individual Person. This should teach us, not to be overcurious in
scanning the Parts of this Genealogy, much less captiously to object against
it: For if the Evangelists were not critical and exact in composing this
Genealogy, why should we show our selves so, in examining of it? Rather let us
attend to the Design of the Holy Ghost in Writing of it, which was twofold:
First, For the Honor of our Savior, as Man; showing who were his Noble and
Royal Progenitors according to the Flesh. Secondly, For the Confirmation of our
Faith, touching the Reality of our Redeemer's Incarnation. The Scripture making
mention of all his Progenitors, from the first Man Adam to his reputed Father
Joseph, will not suffer us to doubt, either of the Truth of his Human Nature,
or of the Certainty of his being the promised Messiah. Learn hence, That the
Wisdom of God has taken all necessary Care, and used all needful Means for the
satisfying the Minds of all unprejudiced Persons touching the Reality of
Christ's Human Nature, and the Certainty of his being the promised Messiah: For
both these Ends is our Savior's Genealogy and Descent recorded in the Holy
Scriptures.

5 And Salmon begat Booz of Rachab, and Booz begat Obed of Ruth, and Obed begat
Jesse. 6 And Jesse begat David the king, and David the king begat Solomon of
her that had bee^ the wife of Urias. 7. And Solomon begat Roboam, and Roboam
begat Abia, and Abia begat Asa. 8 And Asa begat Josaphat, and Josaphat begat
Joram, and Joram begat Ozias. 9 And Ozias begat Joatham, and Joatham begat
Achaz, and Achaz begat Ezekias. 10 And Ezekias begat Manasses, and Manasses
begat Amon, and Amon begat Josias. 11 And Josias begat Jechonias and his
brethren, about the time that they were carried away to Babylon. 12 And after
they were brought to Babylon, Jechonias begat Salathiel, and Salathiel begat
Zorobabel. 13 And Zorobabel begat Abiud, and Abiud begat Eliakim, and Eliakim
begat Azor. 14. And Azor begat Sadoc, and Sadoc begat Achim, and Achim begat
Eliud. 15 And Eliud begat Eleazer, and Eleazer begat Matthan, and Matthan begat
Jacob. 16 And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus,
who is called Christ. 17 So all the generations from Abraham to David are
fourteen generations: and from David, until the carrying away into Babylon, are
fourteen generations: and from the carrying away into Babylon unto Christ, are
fourteen generations.

Observe, Here are several Women mentioned in our Savior's Genealogy, and all,
or most of them, have a Brand of Infamy upon them. Thamar was one, with whom
her Father-in-Law Judah committed Incest; Rachab is called an Harlot; Ruth came
of Moab, whom Lot begat of his own Daughter; and Bathsheba the Wife of Vriah,
was one with whom David had committed Adultery. Now the Wisdom of God has
thought fit to leave all this upon Record for several Ends and Purposes. 1. To
denote the Freeness of God's Grace, which extends it self in the Saving Effects
and Benefits of it to them that are most unworthy, and ill-deserving. 2. To
encourage the greatest Sinners to go unto Christ by Faith, and seek to be
ingrafted into him: For as Christ by the Power of his Godhead did purify our
Nature from all the Pollution of his Ancestors, so he can by the Power of his
Grace and Spirit, Sanctify our Persons and Natures, how foul and impure soever
they either are, or have been. 3. Hereby our Lord gives us to understand, That
he came to Save the most Notorious Sinners, as well as those, whose Lives have
been less Scandalous. 4. This is recorded for the Support of such as are
Illegitimate and Base-born, how vile soever their Parent's Sin has rendered
them in the Eyes of Men, it is their own Sin only which exposes them to Contempt
in the sight of God. It Is not Illegitimacy, but Unregeneracy, that makes us
Objects of God's Wrath.

18 Now the birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise: When as his mother Mary was
espoused to Joseph, (before they came together) she was found with child of the
holy Ghost.

This Espousal of Mary to Joseph, was for the Safety of Christ, and for the
Credit and Reputation of the Virgin: It was for our Savior's Safety, because
being to fly into Egypt, he has Joseph his reputed Father to take care of him;
and it was for the Virgin's Reputation, lest she should have been accounted
unclean. Learn hence, What a special Regard Almighty God has to the Fame and
Reputation of his Children; he would have them free from the least Suspicion of
Evil and Dishonesty. Mary being espoused to an Husband, frees her self from the
Suspicion of Naughtiness, and her Son from the Imputation of an Illegitimate
Birth. Observe farther, The Miraculous Conception of the Holy Jesus; the Holy
Ghost overshadowed the Virgin, and did miraculously cause her Conception
without the help of an Human Father. Thus Christ was the Son of God as well in
his Human, as in his Divine Nature: He must needs be a perfectly Holy Person,
who was conceived purely by the Holy Spirit's Operation.

19 Then Joseph her husband, being a just man, and not willing to make her a
public example, was minded to put her away privily.

That is, being an holy Person, he was unwilling to accompany with a defiled
Woman, and therefore minded to put her away; but being kind and gentle, he
intended to put her away privily, lest she should have been exposed and stoned
to death. Observe here, How early our Dear Lord's Sufferings began; he and his
Mother are designed to be put away, even when he was but an Embryo in the Womb.
Observe farther, From the great Clemency of Joseph toward the suspected Virgin,
That kind and merciful Men always presume the best, and prosecute with
gentleness, especially where Life is concerned. Meek Joseph does resolve upon
the milder course, and chooses rather to put her away privily, than publicly
to expose her.

20 But while he thought on these things, behold, the angel of the Lord
appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph thou son of David, fear not to
take unto thee Mary thy wife: for that which is conceived in her is of the holy
Ghost.

Two things are here observable; namely, the Care that Almighty God takes, 1.
For Joseph's Satisfaction. 2. For Vindicating the Virgin's Reputation. For
Joseph's Satisfaction, an Angel is dispatched to give him assurance, that the
Virgin was not defiled by Man, but overshadowed by the Holy Ghost. Whence Note,
That Almighty God will certainly find out Ways and Means for his People's
Satisfaction, when they are willing, and desirous above all things, to come to
the Knowledge and right Understanding of their Duty. Observe, 2. How the Angel
clears the Virgin's Innocence, as well as satisfies Joseph's Doubtings, by
assuring, that what was conceived in her was by the Holy Ghost. Learn hence,
That God will in his own time clear the Innocence of such as suffer in their
Name and Reputation, for the sake of Christ, though for the present, they may ly
under the Burden of Disgrace and Shame.

21 And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his Name Jesus: for he
shall save his people from their sins.

Observe here, 1. A Prediction of our Savior's Birth; the Virgin shall bring
forth a Son. 2. A Precept for the Imposition of his Name; Thou shall call his
Name Jesus, that is, a Savior. 3. The Reason why that Name was given him;
because he should save a People, not temporally, as Joshuah did the Israelites
from their Enemies; but spiritually and eternally, from their Sins; not in
their Sins, but from them; that is, from the Guilt and Punishment, from the
Power and Dominion of them. Obs. 4. The peculiar Subjects of this Privilege;
His People: He shall save his People from their Sins. Learn, 1. That Sin is the
Evil of Evils; or, that Sin considered in it self, is incomparably the greatest
and the worst of Evils. 2. That the great End of Christ's coming into the
World, was to be a Savior from this Evil. 3. That Christ's own People do want,
and stand in need of a Savior, as well as others; if he does not save them
from their Sins, they must Die in, and for their Sins, as well as others.

22 (Now all this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the
Lord by the prophet, saying, 23 Behold a virgin shall be with child, and shall
bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being
interpreted, is, God with us.

Of all the Prophets of the Old Testament, the Prophet Esaias has the Honor to
be first recited in the New. Here the Evangelist quotes his Prophecy of
Christ's Incarnation. Behold a Virgin shall be with Child. Learn thence, That
the great Mystery of our Savior's wonderful Incarnation, was (though darkly)
revealed to the Church of God under the Old Testament. Observe farther, The
Name given to our Savior under the Old Testament, Immanuel, that is, God with
us: God manifested in our Flesh; God appearing in our Nature; God reconciling
Man to himself. Oh Happy and Blessed Union of Two Natures in One Person! Christ
is God and Man united, that God and Men may be reconciled.

24 Then Joseph being raised from sleep, did as the angel of the Lord had
bidden him, and took unto him his wife:

Joseph is no sooner assured that Mary is with Child by the Overshadowing Power
of the Holy Ghost, but he instantly obeys the Lord's Command, and takes Mary to
him, without farther disputing or delaying. Learn thence, That a Gracious
Person, when once satisfied in God's Word of Command, disputes no farther, but
instantly complies with the Will of God, even in the most hazardous and
difficult Duties.

25 And knew her not, till she had brought forth her firstborn son, and he
called his Name Jesus.

It is ^^^usly Believed, though not positively in Scripture Asserted* that the
Virgin had no other Child but our Savior; it is a very probable Opinion, though
not an infallible Article of Faith, as the Church of Rome would make it: For
the word Until signifies in Scripture, as much as Never. So Genesis 28.15. I will
not leave thee, until I have done that which I have promised; that is, I will
never leave thee. So the Words following, Her firstborn Son, do not imply that
she had any Child after; but that she had none before. That Child which first
opens the Womb, is usually in Scripture called the Firstborn, though there was
no other born after. Thus Josh. 17.1. Machir is called the Firstborn of
Manasseth, though he had no more Children. So that Christ, not only as God, but
also as he was Man, was the Firstborn, and Only Son. St. Austin expounds and
applies Ezekiel. 44. v. 2. to the Virgin Mary; This Gate shall be shut, it shall
not be opened, and no Man shall enter in by it; because the Lord God of Israel
has entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut. And others of the Ancients
say, That as Christ lay in the Tomb, in which none lay before himself, so he
lodged in a Womb, in which none ever lay, either before or after himself.

CHAP. II.
Our Savior's Miraculous Conception by the Power of the Holy Ghost, being
recorded in the First Chapter; several remarkable Circumstances relating to his
Birth, are set down in this: As namely, the Place of his Birth, Bethlehem; and
the Time, In the days of Herod the King.

1 NOW when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea, in the days of Herod the
king: behold there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem.

Observe here, 1. The Place of our Lord's Birth, Bethlehem; he was Born, not at
Athens, not at Rome, not at Jerusalem, not in any Opulent or Magnificent City,
but in the meanest of the Cities of Judah: Thereby showing us, that his Kingdom
was not of this World, and that he little regarded Pomp and outward Greatness.
Oh how can we be Abased enough for Christ, that thus Neglected himself for us?
Obs. 2. The Time of our Lord's Birth, In the Days of Herod the King. This Herod
being a Foreigner, and King of the Romans, which now reigned over the Jews; in
him was fulfilled Jacob's Prophecy, Genesis 49.10. That the Scepter should not
depart from Judah; that is, the Jews should have Governors of their own Nation
until Shiloh come: That is, until Christ the promised Messiah come in the
Flesh. So that considering the Circumstance of Time and Place, where and when
Christ was Born, it was, and is wilful Obstinacy in the Jews, to deny that the
Messiah is come in the Flesh. Obs. 3. That Tribute of Honor which was paid
unto our Savior at his Birth; the Wise Men of the East came and Worshipped
him: That is, the Chaldean, Arabian, or Persian Astronomers, who as the
First Fruits of the Gentiles, seek after Christ; whilst the Jews his own People
rejected him. Oh how will their coming so far as the East to seek Christ, rise
up another Day in Judgment against us, if we refuse to be found by Christ, who
came from Heaven to seek us!

2 Saying, where is he that is born king of the Jews? for we have seen his star
in the east, and are come to worship him.

Observe here, 1. The Inquiry that they make after Christ; they do not ask
whether he was Born, but where he was Born; not doubting of the Fact, but
ignorant of the Place. Obs. 2. The Ground of their Inquiry; For we have seen
his Star: They had seen a Star, but how did they know it was his Star?
Doubtless, by Divine Revelation, they had a Light within, as well as a Star
without, or they had never found Christ: No doubt, the Holy Spirit's
Illumination accompanied the Star's Apparition. As God made known the Birth of
Christ to the Jews by an Angel, so he manifested the same to the Gentiles by a
new-created Star. Obs. 3. The End of their Journey; We are come to Worship him;
that is, to Pay all that Honor and Homage which is due to a Great and Mighty
Prince: All that Adoration and Worship, which belongs to the promised Messiah
the Redeemer of the World. Learn hence, That all Honor and Homage, all Glory
and Worship is due to Christ from the Sons of Men, and will be given him by
those that know him.

3 When Herod the king heard these things, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem
with him.

Observe here, That when Christ came into the World to Save Men, it cast the
World into Consternation, and caused wonderful Disturbance. Herod is first
concerned, and next, all Jerusalem with him; Herod for fear of losing his
Kingdom, Jerusalem for fear of losing their Prince. Thus Christ, who was the
Angel's Song, the Wise Men's Joy, Israel's Consolation, becomes Herod's Fear,
and Jerusalem's Terror. But why was Herod thus disturbed? It Is true, a King is
Born, but one whose Kingdom is not of this World; 'twas Herod's false
Apprehension, that was the Cause of this Perturbation. Hence we see, that the
greatest Enmities, and bitterest Animosities, have arisen from causless Fears,
and groundless Jealousies.

4 And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people
together, he demanded of them where Christ should be born. 5 And they said unto
him, In Bethlehem of Judea: for thus it is written by the prophet; 6 And thou
Bethlehem in the land of Juda, art not the least among the princes of Juda: for
out of thee shall come a Governor, that shall rule my people Israel.

Herod being in great Perplexity, convened a Council of the Chief Priests and
Scribes, and demands of them the Place where Christ the promised Messiah was to
be Born; they readily reply out of the Prophet Micah, chapter 5.2. that Bethlehem
is the Place; this was the City of David's Birth, and of Christ's the Son of
David. Bethlehem signifies the House of Bread, and was so called from its
Fertility and Fruitfulness, and as some think, with Reference to Christ the
True Bread of Life, Born there. Bethlehem was a mean and contemptible Place in
it self, but being Honored with Christ's Presence, how great is it? Learn
thence, That the Presence of Christ dignifies and exalts a Place, how mean
soever in it self. Bethlehem, though a little City in it self, yet is not the
least amongst the Cities of Judah, because Christ is Born there.

7 Then Herod, when he had privily called the wise men, inquired of them
diligently what time the star appeared: 8 And he sent them to Bethlehem, and
said, Go and search diligently for the young child, and when ye have found him,
bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also.

Observe here, 1. How Herod cloaks his intended Cruelty, with disguised
Hypocrisy; he had Murder in his Heart, when he pretended to Worship Christ
with his Mouth. There is no Villainy so great, but will mask it self under a
Pretense and Show of Piety. Herod veils his Intent to Kill Christ, with a
Pretense to Worship him. Obs. 2. Herod calls him the young Child, not the young
King; that Word was too big to come out of Herod's proud Mouth, he could
neither bear the Thing, nor brook the Title. Obs. 3. How craftily Herod lays
his Plot; he desires the Wise Men to inquire thoroughly, and to inform him
privately. To be Wise in doing Mischief, is the worst Wisdom in the World: It Is
not the Wisdom from above, but from Hell beneath.

9 When they had heard the king, they departed, and lo, the star which they saw
in the east, went before them, till it came, and stood over where the young
child was. 10 When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.
11 And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child with Mary
his mother, and fell down, and worshipped him: and when they had opened their
treasures, they presented unto him gifts, gold, and frankincense, and myrrh.

Observe here, 1. How the Star, which for some time disappeared, now appears
again, to their farther Direction in finding Christ: Teaching us, That God will
not be wanting to such as are on the Way to seek Christ, but will renew
Directions and Encouragements to them, according as they stand in need; none
ever sincerely sought Christ, but they certainly found him at the last. Obs. 2.
That the Joy which arises in such a Soul as has found Christ, is unutterable
and unspeakable; the Wise Men here Rejoiced with Joy, with great Joy, with
exceeding great Joy. Obs. 3. The Wise Men having found this young King, they
bring Presents to him, according to the manner of the Eastern Countries;
namely, Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh, which were the principal Commodities of
the East: But the best Present we can make to Christ, is our Selves; he seeks
not Ours, but Us; and rather desires what we are, than what we have. Yet the
Providence of God was wonderfully seen in these Presents, for hereby Provision
was made for the Sustenance of Joseph and Mary, and the Child Jesus, in their
Exile, or Flight into Egypt, which they were shortly to undergo.

12 And being warned of God in a dream, that they should not return to Herod,
they departed into their own country another way.

God having warned the Wise Men in a Dream, not to go back to Herod, they
return home another way. But did these Wise Men play the Parts of Honest Men,
in that they returned not again to Herod? Answ. It appears not that they
promised Herod to return, though he expected it; or if they did, it was, in
consideration that Herod should Come and Worship Christ, not Murder and
Destroy him: But if they promised him never so positively, God Almighty gave
them a Dispensation from that Promise, by commanding them to return home
another way. Herod kept his Design against Christ close from the Wise Men, but
he could not conceal his Intentions from the infinitely Wise God; he knew the
Purposes of his Heart, and by his Providence, kept Christ out of his Hand:
There is no Wisdom, nor Understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord.

13 And when they were departed, behold, the angel of the Lord appears to
Joseph in a dream, saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and
flee into Egypt, and be thou there until I bring thee word: for Herod will seek
the young child to destroy him. 14 When he arose, he took the young child and
his mother by night, and departed into Egypt 15 And was there until the death
of Herod: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the
prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my Son.

Obs. here, 1. How our Lord himself in a time of Persecution flies for Safety,
who was able a thousand ways to have preserved himself from Danger: Teaching
us, That in times of Difficulty and Danger, it is neither unwarrantable nor
unbecoming, to preserve our Lives by flight; surely it is no Shame for us to
fly, when our Captain does both practice it, and command it also. Christ by his
own Example has sanctified that State of Life unto us, and by his Command has
made it lawful for us. Obs. 2. The Place which Christ flies unto for Safety,
and that is Egypt; an unlikely Place, considered in it self: Who could expect
Liberty in that House of Bondage? But any Place is good, if God sends us
thither, and Christ be in our company, his Presence can make Egypt it self not
only safe, but delightful also. Obs. 3. How readily Joseph complies with the
Divine Command; instantly He arose, and took the young Child, and fled.
Teaching us, That when our Direction is clear, our Compliance should be speedy:
We cannot be too forward and expeditious, in the Execution of Divine Commands.
Obs. 4. Though Joseph at the Command of God, flies presently from Herod's Rage,
yet he flies privately, by Night, and prudentially begins his Journey when
least Notice should be taken of his Motion: Teaching us, That although we have
never so many Promises of Safety and Deliverance, yet we must not put God upon
Working Miracles for our Preservation, when it may be obtained in the Use of
Means.

16 Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the wise men, was exceeding
wroth, and sent forth, and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in
all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time
which he had diligently inquired of the wise men.

Obs. How Herod having played the Fox before, he acts the Lion now; his secret
Policy not succeeding, he breaks out into open and inhumane Cruelty. Learn,
That when Fraud and Subtilty fail the Enemies of the Church, they then fall to
open Rage and barbarous Inhumanity: Thus here, these Holy Innocents fall, as a
Sacrifice to Herod's Rage, and Die for Christ, who came to Die for them; and so
were Martyrs in Deed, though not in Will. Some affirm, that Herod did not spare
his own Child then at Nurse in the Coasts of Bethlehem; which made Augustus
say, He had rather be Herod's Hog, than Herod's Child; because the Jews did
kill and eat no Swine's Flesh.

17 Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying, 18
In Rama was there a voice heard, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning:
Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because they are
not.

Observe here, The loud and bitter Cry which the Mothers of Bethlehem make for
the Death of their innocent Children, which were barbarously slain by the Sword
of Herod: Here was Lamentation, Weeping, and great Mourning made by Rachel,
that is, by the Women inhabiting in and about Bethlehem, where Rachel's
Sepulcher was; for the Land about Bethlehem was called Rachel, from her
Sepulcher, so famous in those Parts. Rachel here is not the Name of a Person,
but of a Place. Obs. 2. The Cause and Reason of this Cry, and bitter
Lamentation; the Mothers weep, not because their Children are, but because they
are not; they did not with some wicked Parents, repine because they had
Children, but because they had lost them: Mothers have the sharpest Throws both
in their Childrens Births and Burials. As Children in their Births, are their
Mothers Benjamins; so in their Burial, they are their Mothers Benoni's, Sons of
Sorrow.

19 But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appears in a dream
to Joseph in Egypt, saying, 20 Arise, and take the young child and his mother,
and go into the land of Israel: for they are dead which sought the young
child's life.

Obs. 1. Herod's Death, like a Bloody Persecutor, he is sent unlamented to his
Grave; Historians say, that out of his Body issued forth such impure Streams of
Blood, that the Loathsomness and Pain made him attempt the killing of himself.
God seldom suffers Persecutors to pass in quiet to their Graves; they rarely
die the common Death of all Men, having no other Balm at their Funeral, than
their own Blood. Obs. 2. The happy Consequent of Herod's Death, Christ is now
called Home without Danger; Herod being sent to his Grave, the Coast is clear
for the Return of the Holy Family: The Death of Persecutors, is the Delivery of
the Persecuted.

21 And he arose, and took the young child and his mother, and came into the
land of Israel. 22 But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Judea, in the
room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither: notwithstanding, being
warned of God in a dream, he turned aside into the parts of Galilee.

Observe here, 1. The just Fear that Joseph has upon his Mind, that Herod's Son
would be as Bloody a Tyrant as his Flagitious Father. No wonder, that the
Children of Cruel Persecutors are suspected to tread in their Bloody Parents
Steps. Obs. 2. How God's Warrant and Direction does quiet Joseph's Mind,
resolve his Doubts, and remove his Fears, and makes him readily comply with the
Command of God; Being warned of God, he removes out of Egypt into Galilee. Oh
how safe and satisfactory is it, in all our Ways to follow the Call and Command
of God! Joseph and Mary durst not move their Feet, no not out of Egypt it self,
till God gives them a Warrant for their departure, and bids them go.

23 And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the prophet, He shall be called a Nazarene.

A threefold Interpretation is given of these Words, He shall be called a
Nazarene. Some read the Words, 1. He shall be called a Nazarite; the Nazarites
were a Religious and Separate Rank of Persons among the Jews, who abstained
from Wine, and came not near the Dead for fear of Pollution: Christ was a Holy
Person, but no Nazarite in a strict sense; for he drank Wine, and touched the
Dead. 2. Others read the Words, He shall be called Netzer, a Branch, in
Allusion to Isa. 11.1. where he is called a Branch of the Root of Jesse. Christ
was that True Branch, of which the Prophets had so often spoken. 3. Others will
have the Word Nazarene referr to the City Nazareth, where Christ was conceived,
and lived most of his time: He shall be called a Nazarene, because he dwelt at
Nazareth; hence his Disciples were called the Sect of the Nazarenes, that is,
the Followers of him that dwelt at Nazareth; and Christ himself is pleased to
own the Title, Act. 22.8. I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest. Learn
from hence, The great Humility of Mind that was found in our Savior: He was
Born at Bethlehem, a little City; he Lives at Nazareth, a poor contemptible
Place: He aspires not after the Grandeur of the World, but is meek and lowly in
Spirit; may the same humble Mind be in us, which was also in Christ Jesus.

CHAP. III.
This Evangelist having declared our Savior's Miraculous Conception, in the
First Chapter, and recorded several remarkable Circumstances relating to his
Birth, in the Second Chapter; in this Chapter before us, he passes over in
silence the whole Course of our Savior's Life in private; taking no notice how
he spent his Minority whilst he dwelt at Nazareth, which was till he was Thirty
Years old; at which time he entered upon his Public Ministry, having John the
Baptist for his Harbinger and Forerunner; at this Chapter fully informs us.

1 IN those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judea, 2
And saying, Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Observe here, 1. The Preacher sent by God, John the Baptist a Pattern of
Mortification, and a Preacher of Repentance. Obs. 2. The Place he is sent to
Preach in, The Wilderness of Judea; not in Populous Jerusalem, but in a Barren
Wilderness, where Inhabitants were sew, and probably very ignorant and rude.
Learn hence, That it is God's Prerogative to send forth the Preachers of the
Gospel, when and whither, and to what People he pleases; and none must Assume
the Office before they be Sent. Obs. 3. The Doctrine that he preaches, namely,
the Doctrine of Repentance, Repent ye: This was to prepare the People for the
Messiah, and the Grace of the Gospel. Learn thence, That the Preaching of the
Doctrine of Repentance is absolutely necessary, in order to the preparing of
the Hearts of Sinners for the receiving of Christ Jesus. Obs. 4. The Motive
which St. John uses to enforce the Exhortation to Repentance, The Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand; that is, now is the so much expected Time of the Appearing
of the Messiah come; the Old Testament Dispensation is now to be Abolished, and
the Mercy and Grace of the Gospel is now to be Revealed; therefore Repent, and
Amend your Lives. Note thence, That the free and full Tenders of Grace and
Mercy in the Gospel, are the most alluring Arguments to move a Sinner to
Repent, and to Convert to God.

3 For this is he that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias, saying, The voice
of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths
straight.

The Papists, from John Baptist's living in the Wilderness, would make him the
first Founder of the Order of the Hermits, but very groundlesly. For, 1. What
he did, was by God's Command; what they do, is by the Dictates of their their
own Fancy. 2. He busied himself in Preaching in the Wilderness; they bury
themselves alive, and do nothing. 3. He lived in the Wilderness but for a time,
afterward we find him at Court, Preaching a Sermon to Herod; but they bind
themselves with a Vow, to live and die Hermits.

4 And the same John had his raiment of camels hair, and a leathern girdle
about his loins, and his meat was locusts and wild honey.

The plainess of John's Habit and Diet, is here declared; he was habited in a
plain Suit of Camels Hair, much as Elijah was, before him; and as his Habit was
plain, so his Diet was ordinary, feeding upon Herbs, and such Things as the
Wilderness affords; hence it was that Nazianzen said he was all Voice; a Voice
in his Habit, a Voice in his Diet, and a Voice in his whole Conversation: His
Example Teaches us, That the Ministers of the Gospel are not to affect Bravery
in Apparel, or Delicacy in Diet; but having the necessary Comforts, and needful
Conveniences of Life, to be therewith content.

5 Then went out to him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round
about Jordan,

Obs. here, The great Encouragement, which John had in his Ministry, from the
People's Attendance upon it; he was now Fishing for Souls, and God brought the
People very thick about the Net of the Gospel, and multitudes were enclosed.
Learn thence, That it is matter of great Rejoicing to the Ministers of Christ,
when they find their People forward to encourage their Ministry by a diligent
Attendance.

6 And were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins.

This Place the Papists bring to support their Doctrine of Auricular
Confession, but very groundlesly: For, 1. The Consession of those Converts was
voluntary, and not constrained. 2. It was general, and not of every particular
Sin. 3. It was public and open, not in the Ear of a Priest. Note, That
Confession of Sin past, together with a Profession of Faith in, and Obedience
to Christ for the time to come, are necessary Requisites and Qualifications in
all Persons of riper years that are admitted to Baptism; John admitted these
Persons to Baptism, upon their Confession of Sin, and Promise of Amendment.

7 But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadduces come to his baptism, he
said unto them, O generation of vipers, who has warned you to flee from the
wrath to come. 8 Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance. 9 And think
not to say within your selves, We have Abraham to our father: for I say unto
you, that God is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.

Here we have the Entertainment which John gave to his unexpected Auditors, the
Pharisees and Sadduces, which came to Hear him, and to be Baptized by him: He
gives them, first a quick and cutting Compellation, Oh Generation of Vipers;
next, a sharp and severe Reprehension, Who has warned you to flee from the
Wrath to come? It was matter of Wonder and Admiration, to see such Men turn
Proselytes. Note thence; That the Condition of proud Pharisees, pretending and
false-hearted Hypocrites, though it be very dangerous, yet is not hopeless and
desperate; and their Salvation, though very improbable, yet must not be despaired
of as impossible: And accordingly, the Baptist having given them a smart
Reproof, subjoins a seasonable Exhortation, Bring forth Fruits meet for
Repentance; as if he had said, Do not satisfy your selves with a bare
Profession of Repentance, but let us see the Fruits of Repentance in your daily
Conversation. Learn thence, That sincere Repentance is not a barren thing, but
constantly brings forth the Fruits of Holiness answerable to its Nature: As the
Body without the Spirit, and as Faith without Works is dead, so Repentance
without Fruits is dead also. Observe farther, How he enforces his Exhortation,
with a necessary Caution; Think not to say within your selves, We have Abraham
to our Father, etc. As if he had said, Trust not to your outward Privileges,
and glory not in them; flatter not your selves, that because you are Abraham's
Seed, and the only Visible Church, that therefore the Judgments of God will not
reach you; for God can out of the obdurate Gentile World raise up a People to
himself, and take them into Covenant with himself, and cast you all out. Now
from St. John's plain-dealing with these Hypocritical Pharisees, we Learn, That
it is the Duty, and ought to be the Endeavor of the Ministers of Christ, to
drive Hypocrites from their vain Confidence, who do constantly bear up
themselves upon their External Privileges, in the Enjoyment of which, they
promise themselves a freedom from the Judgments of God. Think not to say within
your selves, We have, etc.

10 And now also the ax is laid unto the root of the trees: therefore every
tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire.

The Baptist had preached the Doctrine of Repentance in the former Verses, he
backs it with a powerful Motive in this Verse; drawn from the Certainty, the
Severity and Suddenness of that Vengeance which would come upon them, if they
continued impenitent: Now is the Ax laid to the Root of the Trees. Learn, 1.
That those whose Hearts are not pierced with the Sword of God's Word, shall
certainly be cut down and destroyed by the Ax of his Judgments. Learn, 2. That
it is not unsuitable for Gospel-Preachers to press Repentance and Holiness of
Life upon their Hearers, from Arguments of Terror; John does it here, and
Christ elsewhere. Observe farther, That forasmuch as the Sin here specified is
a Sin of Omission, which brings this sore and severe Judgment; Every Tree that
brings not forth Good Fruit, as well as that which brings forth Evil Fruit,
is hewn down and cast into the Fire; we may gather, That Sins of Omission are
certainly Damning, as well as Sins of Commission; the Neglects of Duty as are
dangerous and damnable, as the Acts of Sin: Such Trees as stand in God's
Orchard and bring forth no Good Fruit, are marked out as Fuel for the Devil's
Fire.

11 I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance; but he that comes after
me, is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear: he shall baptize
you with the holy Ghost, and with fire.

In these Words John declares the Excellency of Christ's Person and Ministry
above his own: As to his Person, he owns that he was not worthy to carry his
Shoes after him, or to perform the lowest Offices of Service for him: And as to
his Office, he declares that Christ should not Baptize as he did, with Water,
but with the Holy Ghost, and with Fire; that is, should plentifully pour down
of the Gifts and Graces of the Holy Spirit upon his Proselytes, which like Fire
in their Operation should purify their Hearts from Sin, consuming their Lusts
and Corruptions; but at the same time he has a Fiery Indignation and Flaming
Judgments, to destroy and burn up Impenitent Sinners, like combustible Stubble.
Where observe, How Christ is represented by one and the same Metaphor of Fire,
in a way of Comfort to his Children, and in a way of Terror to his Enemies; he
is a Fire unto both: He sits in his Church as a Refiner's Fire, he is amongst
his Enemies as a Consuming Fire; a Fire for his Church to take Comfort in, a
Fire for his Enemies to Perish by.

12 Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather
his wheat into the garner: but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.

In these Words, the Baptist compares Christ the promised Messiah to an
Husbandman, the Jewish Church to a Barn-Floor; the Office of the Husbandman is
to Thresh, Fan, and Winnow his Corn, separating it from the Chaff; preserving
the one, and consuming the other. Learn hence, 1. That the Church is Christ's
Floor. 2. That this Floor Christ will Purge, and that thoroughly. 3. That the
Word of Christ is the Fan in his Hands, by and with which, he will thoroughly
Purge his Floor: The Church is compared to a Floor, upon the Account of that
Mixture which is in the Church; in a Floor there is Straw as well as Grain,
Chaff as well as Corn; Tares as well as Wheat, Cockle and Darnel, as well as
Good Seed: Thus in the Church there is, and will be a Mixture of Good and Bad,
Saints and Sinners, Hypocrites and Sincere Christians. But this Floor Christ
will Purge; Purge it, but not Break it up; Purge out its Corruptions, but not
Destroy its Essence and Existence; and the Fan with which he will Purge his
Floor, is his Word, accompanied with the Wing of Discipline: The Fan detects
and discovers the Chaff, and the Wing dissipates and scatters it; and by the
help of both, the Floor is Purged. His Fan is in his Hand, etc.

13 Then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be baptized of him:

Here we have our Savior's Solemn Inauguration, and Public Entrance upon his
Prophetic Office by Baptism, or Washing with Water, according to the Manner of
the Priests under the Ceremonial Law, Exodus 29.4. Where we have Observable, 1.
The Circumstance of Time; Then comes Jesus; that is, after he had lain hid in
Nazareth Thirty Years, he comes abroad, and enters upon his Public Ministry.
Teaching us by his Example, That when we are ripe and fit for Public Service,
we should no less willingly leave our Obscurity, than we took the Benefit of
it, for our Preparation. Obs. 2. The Action it self. Christ is Baptized now, as
he was Circumcised before; not because there was any Impurity in him, either
Filth, or Foreskin, which wanted either the Circumcising-Knife, or the
Baptismal-Water; yet Purity it self condescends to be Washed, Christ to be
Baptized; for these Reasons: 1. That by this Symbol he might enter himself into
the Society of Christians, as by Circumcision he had done into the Society of
Jews; as a King condescends sometimes to be made a Freeman of a City or
Corporation. 2. That he might by his own Baptism Sanctify the Ordinance of
Baptism unto his Church. 3. That thereby he might fulfill the Righteousness of
the Ceremonial Law, which required the Washing of the Priests in Water, when
they entered upon their Office, as appears from Exodus 29.4. Obs. 3. The great
Dignation and Condescension of Christ, in seeking and submitting to the Baptism
of John. Christ comes to John, not John to Christ. Behold! the Lord seeking to
his Servant, Christ will be Baptized of his Messenger: Our Savior's Design
hereby no doubt was, to put Honor upon the Ministry of John. Oh how dare the
Greatest upon Earth despise the Ministry of Man, being appointed by God, which
Christ honored in his own Person, and graced with his own Presence!

14 But John forbad him, saying, I have need to be baptized of thee, and come
thou to me?

Note here, 1. The Modesty of John's Refusal; John forbad him, and refused to
admit him: But why? 1. In regard of Christ, because he knew he needed it not;
such was his Majesty and Greatness, that he was above it; and such was his
Purity and Holiness, that he could not want it. 2. In respect of himself, he
knew his own Uncleanness; I have need to be Baptized of thee, etc. He thought
it unsuitable, that a Sinner should Baptize and Wash him that was no Sinner. 3.
With respect to the People; lest they seeing Christ Baptized, should apprehend
him to be a Sinner, and one that wanted the Baptism of Repentance, as well as
themselves. Obs. 2. As the Modesty of John's Refusal, so the Reason he assigns
for it; I have need to be Baptized of thee: As if he had said, Thou art Purity,
I am Pollution; thou art Spirit, I am Flesh: Thou are the Son of God, I am the
Son of Adam: Such an humble Apprehension has this Holy Man of himself. Learn,
That the more Holy a Person is, the more sensible he is of his Unholiness;
where there is most Grace, there is the greatest sense of the want of Grace.

15 And Jesus answering said unto him, Suffer it to be so now: for thus it
becomes us to fulfill all righteousness: Then he suffered him.

These Words contain our Savior's Reason, why he submitted to John's Baptism,
because it became him to fulfill all Righteousness; that is, particularly the
Righteousness of the Ceremonial Law, which required the Washing of the Priests
in Water, when they entered upon their Office, Exodus 29.4. Learn hence, 1. That
whatever the Law required, in order to perfect Righteousness, that Christ
fulfilled in most absolute Perfection; both in his own Person, and also in the
Name of all Believers. 2. That as it became Christ to fulfill the Righteousness
of the Ceremonial Law for himself, so it is our Duty and Interest to fulfill the
Righteousness of the Moral Law for our selves, as an Evidence of our being
Righteous in God's Sight, 1 John 3.7. He that does Righteousness is righteous,
even as he is righteous.

16 And Jesus when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the water: and
lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending
like a dove, and lighting upon him. 17 And lo, a voice from heaven, saying,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

Here we have the solemn Investing of Christ into his Office, accompanied with
a threefold Miracle. 1. The Opening of the Heavens. 2. The Descent of the Holy
Ghost in the likeness of a Dove. 3. God the Father's Voice concerning his Son.
The Heavens were opened, to show, that Heaven which was closed and shut against
us for our Sins, is now opened to us, by Christ's Undertaking for us. As the
First Adam shuts us out of Heaven, the Second Adam lets us into it; he opened
Heaven to us by his Meritorious Passion, and he keeps it open by his Prevailing
Intercession. Next, the Holy Ghost descends like a Dove upon our Savior; here
we have an Evidence of the Blessed Trinity; the Father speaks from Heaven, the
Son comes out of the Water, and the Holy Ghost appears in the likeness of a
Dove. Hence we gather, That the Holy Ghost is not a Quality, or an Operation,
but a Person; and a Person really distinct from the Father and the Son. But why
did the Holy Spirit now descend upon Christ? First, For the Designation of his
Person, to show that Christ was the Person set apart for the Work and Office of
a Mediator. Secondly, For the Qualification of his Person, for the Performance
of the Office. This was Christ's Unction, Isa. 61.1. when he was Anointed above
his Fellows, to be the King, Priest, and Prophet of his Church. Last of all, We
have the audible Voice of God the Father, pronouncing, 1. The Nearness of
Christ's Relation to himself, This is my Son. 2. The Endearedness of his
Person, This is my Beloved Son. 3. The Fruit and Benefit of this near and dear
Relation unto us, In him I am well pleased. Note, 1. That there is no
possibility for any Person to please God out of Christ: both our Persons and
our Performances, find Acceptance only for His sake. 2. That in and through
Christ, God is well-pleased with all Believers: This is my beloved Son, in whom
I am well pleased, etc.

CHAP. IV.
The former part of this Chapter acquaints us with our Blessed Savior's Combat
with, and Conquest over Satan; and the first Verse informs us of the Time when,
and Place where the Combat was fought.

1 THEN was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be tempted of
the devil.

Observe here, 1. The Time when Christ entered the Lists with Satan, implied in
the word Then; that is, First, Immediately after his Baptism; he is no sooner
out of the Water of Baptism, but he is in the Fire of Temptation. Secondly,
Immediately after the Spirit descended upon him, and the Father had by a Voice
from Heaven manifested his Complacency and Satisfaction in him, This is my
Beloved Son, etc. Note thence, That great Manifestations of Love from God, are
usually followed with great Temptations from Satan. Observe, 2. The Place where
this Combat was fought, and that is, in the Wilderness. Learn thence, That no
Place can privilege us from Temptation, or be a Sanctuary from Satan's
Assaults; the solitary Wilderness has a Tempter in it, yea, Satan sometimes
makes use of Men's Solitariness, to farther his Temptations; a Cell, a Nunnery,
or a Cloister, are as open to Satan, as the open Fields; and the Persons that
live in them, have a Tempter without, and an Enticer within, as well as other
Men. Obs. 3. The Efficient Cause of Christ's going into the Wilderness to be
Tempted by Satan; He was led up of the Spirit, says St. Matthew; The Spirit
drove him, says St. Mark: That is, the Holy Spirit of God, not Satan the
Unclean Spirit; for the Devil is seldom, if ever called The Spirit, but usually
some Brand of Reproach is annexed, as the Evil Spirit, or the Unclean Spirit.
Christ was Led by the Spirit; that is, he was carried by a strong Impulse of
the Spirit of God into the Wilderness, to be Tempted by Satan. Learn hence, 1.
That none of the Children of God ought to expect a Freedom from Temptations;
seeing Christ himself, in the Days of his Flesh, was strongly solicited by
Satan unto Sin. 2. That all the Temptations wherewith the Children of God are
assaulted, are ordered by Divine and Special Dispensation. Satan could not
assault our Savior, till he was Led by the Spirit into the Wilderness for that
End; and he shall not assault any of his Members, but by Divine Permission and
special Dispensation.

2 And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an
hungered.

Obs. here, 1. How the Divine Power upheld the Human Nature of Christ without
Food. What Moses did at the Giving of the Law, Christ does at the Beginning of
the Gospel, namely, Fast Forty Days and Forty Nights. Christ hereby intended
our Admiration, not our Imitation; or if our Imitation, of the Action only, not
of the Time. Christ teaches us, by Fasting and Prayer to prepare our selves for
a Conflict with our Spiritual Enemies; as he prepared himself by Fasting to
grapple with the Tempter, so should we.

3 And when the tempter came to him, he said, If thou be the Son of God,
command that these stones be made bread.

Observe here, 1. The Occasion of the Temptation. 2. The Temptation it self.
The Occasion was our Savior's Hunger, and want of Bread. Learn thence, That
when God suffers any of his Dear Children to fall into Want, and to be
straightened for Outward Things, Satan takes a mighty Advantage thereupon, to
Tempt and Assault them. But what does he Tempt our Savior to? To the Sin of
Distrust, to question his Sonship; If thou be the Son of God: And next, to
distrust his Father's Providence and Care, Command that these Stones be made
Bread. Learn hence, 1. That Satan's grand Design is, first, to tempt the
Children of God to doubt of their Adoption; and next, to Distrust God's
Fatherly Care over them, and Provision for them; and last of all, to use
Unwarrantable Means to help themselves. Thus Satan dealt with Christ, and thus
he deals with Christians: For to work a Miracle at Satan's Direction; was not a
Lawful Means of providing Food for himself.

4 But he answered and said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Observe here, The Weapon which our Savior made use of to repel the
Temptation, and to vanquish the Tempter; and that is the Word of God, It is
written. Learn, That the Scriptures, or the Written Word of God, is the only
sure Weapon wherewith to vanquish Satan, and to beat back all his Fiery
Temptations.

5 Then the devil takes him up into the holy city, and sets him on a
pinnacle of the temple,

That is, Satan by God's permission took up his Body and carried it in the Air,
and set it upon one of the Battlements of the Temple. Learn hence, 1. What a
mighty Power Evil Spirits have over our Bodies, if God permits them to execute
and exercise their Power upon them. 2. That it is owing to the gracious Care,
and watchful Providence of God over us, that we are not hurried away bodily by
Satan. Thanks be to God, though the Devil's Malice be infinite, yet his Power is
limited and bounded; as he cannot do all the Mischief he would to the Bodies
and Souls of Men, so he shall not do all he can.

6 And says unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down: for it is
written, He shall give his angels charge concerning thee, and in their hands
they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone.

Here we have Observable, First, the Sin which Satan tempts Christ unto; and
next, the Argument, which he tempts him from: The Sin tempted to, is the Sin of
Self-murder, Cast thy self down. Whence we Learn, That Self-murder is a Sin
which Christ himself was, and the best of Saints may, by Satan be tempted to
the Commission of. But forasmuch as Satan tempted Christ to murder himself,
but had not power to do it himself; do thou cast thy self down: We Learn, That
though Satan may tempt, yet he cannot compel; he may entice, but cannot enforce
any to Sin, against their own Consent. Obs. 2. The Argument which Satan uses,
it is a Scripture-Argument; he quotes the Promise of God, He shall give his
Angels charge over thee. What a Marvel is here, to find Satan with a Bible
under his Arm, and a Text of Scripture in his Mouth? Christ had alleged
Scripture before to Satan, here Satan retorts Scripture back again to Christ:
It is written, says Christ; It is written, says Satan. Learn thence, That it is
no wonder, to hear Heretics and Hypocrites quote Scripture, when Satan himself
durst recite them: He that had profanely touched the Sacred Body of Christ with
his Hand, sticks not presumptuously to handle the Holy Scriptures of God with
his Tongue. Yet Observe, How wretchedly the Devil wrests, perverts, and
misapplies the Scriptures: When God promises his Angels shall keep us, it is in
Viis, non in Praecipitiis, it is in all God's Ways, not in any of our own
crooked Paths. Note here, That although the Children of God have the Promise of
the Guardianship of Holy Angels, yet then only may they expect their
Protection, when they are walking in the Way of their Duty.

7 Jesus said unto him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God.

Observe here, Though the Devil had wrested and abused Scripture, yet still
Christ alleges Scripture. The Abuse of the Holy Scriptures by Heretics and
Seducers, is no Argument against the Use of them: As Christ here compares
Scripture with Scripture, so should we, in order to the finding out the true
Sense and Meaning of it.

8 Again, the devil takes him up into an exceeding high mountain, and shows
him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them: 9 And says unto him,
All these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me.

The next Sin which Satan tempts our Savior to, is the Sin of Idolatry, even
to Worship the Devil himself. Oh thou Impudent and Foul Spirit! To desire thy
Creator to Adore thee an Apostate-Creature! Surely there can be no Sin so black
and foul, so gross and monstrous, but that the Christian may be tempted to it,
when Christ himself was tempted to Worship the Tempter. St. Matthew reads the
Words, If thou will fall down and Worship me; St. Luke, If thou will Worship
before me. Whence we may gather, That if to Worship before the Devil, be to
Worship the Devil; then to Worship before an Image, is to Worship the Image.
Obs. 2. The Bait which Satan makes use of to allure our Savior to the Sin of
Idolatry; and that was, in representing to his Eye and View all the Glories of
the World in the most inviting manner, and that in a Moment of Time; to the
intent it might affect him the more, and prevail the sooner. Learn thence, That
the Pomp and Greatness, the Glory and Grandeur of this World, is made use of by
Satan, as a dangerous Snare to draw Men to a Compliance with him, in his
Temptations unto Sin.

10 Then says Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan: for it is written, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

Observe here, 1. With what Zeal and Indignation of Spirit, our Blessed Savior
repells and beats back this Temptation of Satan, Get thee hence. Note thence,
That the greater the Sins are which the Devil tempts us to, the greater our
Zeal and Indignation ought to be in opposing and resisting of the Temptation to
them. A great Temptation must be withstood with great Resolution. Observe, 2.
The Weapon with which he repells and beats back the Fiery Dart of Satan's
Temptation, and that is with the Shield of Scripture: It is written, Thou shall
Worship the Lord thy God. Learn thence, That GOD is the Sole Object of all
Religious Worship; it is so peculiarly the Creator's Due, that to give it to
any Creature, is gross Idolatry, and repugnant to the Scriptures.

11 Then the devil leaves him, and behold, angels came and ministered unto him.

Observe here, 1. The Issue of this Combat, Satan is conquered, and quits the
Field; Then the Devil leaves him. Teaching us, That nothing like a vigorous
Resistance of Temptation, causes the Tempter to flee from us; Resist the Devil,
and be will flee from you. Observe, 2. Our Lord's Triumph over his Enemy;
Behold, Angels came and ministered unto him; Food to his hungry Body, and
Comfort to his tempted Soul. Learn thence, That those who in the Hour of
Temptation do hold out in resisting Satan, shall find the Power and
Faithfulness of God will not be wanting to them, to send in Succor and Relief
in the End.

12 Now when Jesus had heard that John was cast into prison, he departed into
Galilee. 13 And leaving Nazareth, he came, and dwelt in Capernaum, which is
upon the seacoast, in the borders of Zebulon and Nephthalim: 14 That it might
be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying, 15 The land of
Zabulon, and the land of Nephthalim, by the way of the sea beyond Jordan,
Galilee of the Gentiles: 16 The people which sat in darkness, saw great light:
and to them which sat in the region and shadow of death, light is sprung up.

Observe here, 1. Our Savior hearing of John's Imprisonment, provides for his
own Safety by departing into Galilee. As our Holy Lord avoided Persecution, so
may we. Observe, 2. The Place in Galilee he comes to, Capernaum: Christ had
three Cities, which he called his own; Nazareth, where he was Bred; Bethlehem,
where he was Born; and Capernaum, where he dwelt; this was a Seacoast Town in
the Borders of Zebulon and Nephthali. Observe, 3. The Special Providence of
God, in this Change of our Savior's Habitation; for by that means the
Prophecy, Isa. 9.1. was fulfilled; which declares, that in that dark part of
the Country the Messiah, the True Light should shine forth. Learn hence, 1.
That a People destitute of the Saving Knowledge of the Gospel, are in great
Darkness, how great soever the Light of their Outward Comforts may be. This
People had Natural Light enough, and Civil Light enough, they had an Abundance
of Wealth and Riches, Peace and Plenty, but they wanted the Light of Christ,
and his Gospel, and therefore are said to sit in Darkness. 2. That wherever
the Gospel is Preached amongst a People, it is as a Light springing up and
shining forth amongst them; quickening and enlivening, reviving and chearing the
Souls of those that entertain it, how great soever their outward Darkness and
Distress may be. The People that sat in Darkness saw great Light, and to them
which sat in the Region and Shadow of Death, Light is sprung up, etc.

17 From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent, for the kingdom
of heaven is at hand.

Here our Savior begins to enter upon his Prophetic Office, and by Preaching,
to make known the Will of God to Mankind; and Observe, The Doctrine which he
Preached is the same that John the Baptist did Preach, namely, the Doctrine of
Repentance, Repent ye; and the Argument is the same also, For the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand; that is, now is the so much expected Time of the Appearing
of the promised Messiah. Learn hence, That the Doctrine of Christ and his
Ambassadors is alike and the same in Substance: They both Teach the Doctrine of
Repentance to a Lost World, as most suitable to the Time and Dispensation of
the Gospel.

18 And Jesus walking by the sea of Galilee, saw two brethren, Simon called
Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, (for they were
fishers) 19 And he says unto them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers of
men. 20 And they straightway left their nets and followed him. 21 And going on
from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the son of Zebedee, and John his
brother, in a ship with Zebedee their father, mending their nets: and he called
them. 22 And they immediately left the ship, and their father, and followed him.

Our Blessed Savior, as he was the Great Prophet of his Church, had Power and
Authority to Appoint Teachers under him; and accordingly here he begins to call
his Apostles to that great Work; and in this Call, we have several Particulars
very Observable: As, 1. The Meaness of the Persons whom he calls, Illiterate
Fishermen; not a Paul, that had long Studied at the Feet of Gamaliel, is first
called, but Peter, who was a Stranger to Eloquence and Humane Learning. Hereby
our Savior took effectual Care, that his Gospel should be known to be the
Power of God, and not the Wisdom and Device of Man; and that the Instrument
should not carry away the Glory of the Work. Obs. 2. How our Savior calls his
Apostles by Couples, two and two, Peter and Andrew, James and John; to let us
understand, That the Work of the Ministry requires the Concurrence of all Hands
that are called to it: All the Ministers of God should put their Hands, join
their Hearts, and set their Shoulders as one Man, to this Great Work; and all
little enough, to carry it on with Advantage and Success. Obs. 3. The Work
which they are called to, from being Fishermen, to be Fishers of Men: They
caught Fish before with the Labor of their Hands, they shall catch Men now,
with the Labor of their Tongues. Obs. 4. Our Savior's Command, first, to
follow him, before they are sent out by him; Follow me, and I will make you
Fishers of Men. We must be Christ's Disciples, before we are his Ministers, his
Followers, before his Ambassadors. We must Learn Christ, before we Preach him;
otherwise, we may Fish for a Livelihood, for Honor and Applause, but not for
Souls: If we be not first enclosed our selves in the Net of the Gospel, we can
have but small Hopes of bringing in of others. Obs. 5. The Promise, which
Christ gives his Apostles for their Encouragement: 1. To Qualify them, I will
make you Fishers. 2. To Succeed them, I will make you Fishers of Men.
Faithfulness and Care, Diligence and Endeavor i^ our Part; but the Blessing
and Success is Christ's. Our Labor is only in the Cast, Christ's Power is
wholly in the Draught. Some Fish cleave to the Rocks, others play upon the
Sands and more wallow in the Mud; and we shall labor all our Days, and catch
nothing, if Christ does not bring our Fish to Net, and enclose them in it, as
well as assist us in the throwing of it. Obs. 6. The Apostles ready Compliance
with our Savior's Call, Straightway they followed him. Whom Christ calls, he
calls Perswasively and Effectually; whom he calls, he draws, and works them to
a willing Compliance with their Duty. Lastly Observe, Upon their Call to the
Ministry, they leave off their Trade, they forsake their Ship and their Nets,
and lie close to their Ministerial Employment. Teaching us, That the Ministers
of the Gospel should wholly give themselves to their Work, and not incumber
themselves with Secular Affairs; nothing but an indispensible necessity in
providing for a Family, can excuse a Minister's entangling himself with Worldly
Business.

23 And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and
preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing all manner of sickness; and
all manner of disease among the people.

Our Savior having called his Apostles to Preach the Gospel in the foregoing
Verses, this Verse acquaints us how he went himself along with them in the
Work, he did not send them forth as his Curates to Labor, and lie at Home
himself upon his Couch at ease. What shall we say to those lazy Fishermen, who
can set others to the Drag, and care only to feed themselves with the Fish, not
willing to wet their Hands with the Net? Our Blessed Savior, when he sent
forth his Apostles, went along with them, and labored himself as much as any
of them.

24 And his fame went throughout all Syria: and they brought unto him all sick
people that were taken with diverse diseases, and torments, and those which were
possessed with devils, and those which were lunatic, and those that had the
palsy, and he healed them.

Obs. here, 1. That although our Savior's Doctrine needed no Confirmation beyond
his own Authority, yet he was graciously pleased to exert the Power of his
Godhead, in working Miracles for the Establishment of our Faith. Obs. 2. That
the Miracles which Christ wrought were not Judicial, but Beneficial to Mankind:
Moses his Miracles were as great Judgments, as Wonders; but Christ's Miracles
were Salubrious and Healing, full of Goodness and Compassion, and very
Advantageous to the World: He Dispossessed Devils, Healed the Sick, Cleansed the
Lepers, was Eyes to the Blind, and Feet to the Lame. Oh Blessed Savior! thy
Life in all Instances was a Life of Universal Serviceableness.

25 And there followed him great multitudes of the people from Galilee, and
from Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from beyond Jordan.

Observe here, How Affecting our Savior's Ministry was at first; Multitudes
throng after him; they come from all Parts to attend upon his Ministry, when he
first began to Preach amongst them: His Ministers find it thus also; at their
first coming amongst a People, their Labors are most acceptable, and they do
most Good: Our Peoples Affections are then warmest, and our own Zeal perhaps is
th^n greatest. Happy is that Minister that improves all Oppo^^unities and
Advantages, for the Good of Souls: For he that wins Souls, is Wise.

CHAP. V.
This Chapter and the two next following, contain Christ's Famous Sermon upon
the Mount, which comprehends the Sum and Substance both of the Old and New
Testament. Our Savior begins this his Sermon with an Exhortation to Duty, and
^nnexes a Reward to the Performance of that Duty.

1 AND seeing the multitudes, he went up into a mountain: and when he was sat,
his disciples came unto him. 2 And he opened his mouth, and taught them, saying,

Observe here, 1. The Preacher; He, that is, Christ, the Great Prophet and
Teacher of his Church. 2. The Place where he Preached, Upon a Mountain;
probably for Convenience to Himself, and Advantage to his Auditors: Though some
will have a Mystery in it; that as the Law at first was given on a Mountain, so
Christ would now explain it upon a Mountain. 3. The Posture in which he
Preached, Sitting; When he was set, he Taught, according to the Custom of the
Jewish Doctors, who sat, to show their Authority. Observe, 4. The Sermon it
self, which begins with Beatitudes and Blessings, and is accompanied with
Promises of Reward: Not as the Law was delivered on Mount Sinai with
Threatenings and Thunder, with Fire and Earthquake, but in a still and soft
Voice: Our Lord's Lips are full of Grace, they drop as the Honeycomb.
Blessings and Promises are our Encouragements to Obedience.

3 Blessed are the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

Observe here, 1. It is not said, Blessed are the Poor in Estate, but, Blessed
are the Poor in Spirit; it is not a Poverty of Possession, but a Poverty of
Spirit, that Entitles us to the Blessing. 2. It Is not said, Blessed are the
Spiritually Poor, but, Blessed are the Poor in Spirit: He that is destitute of
the Grace and Spirit of Christ, that has no sense of his Spiritual Wants, he is
Spiritually Poor, but he is not Poor in Spirit. Farther, 3. It Is not said,
Blessed are the Poor-Spirited, but, the Poor in Spirit; such as Act below and
beneath themselves as Men, and as Christians, these are Poor-Spirited Men; but
these are not Poor in Spirit. 4. It Is not said, Blessed are they that make
themselves Poor, by leaving their Estates and Callings, and turning Beggars, as
some do among the Papists: But Blessed are they whom the Gospel makes Poor, by
giving them a sight of their Spiritual Wants and Necessities, and directing
them to Christ, that they may be made Rich. In Sum, not those that are Poor in
Estate, or those whom the World has made Poor in Possession, but those whom the
Gospel has made Poor in Spirit, have a Right and Title to the Kingdom of Heaven.

4 Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.

Obs. here, 1. That Mourning for Sin is a Gospel-Duty; the Law allows no place
for Repentance, though we seek it carefully with Tears. Obs. 2. The Time and
Season for this Duty. Blessed are they that Now Mourn. Sorrow for Sin is
Physic on Earth, but it is Food in Hell. Repentance is here a Grace, but there
a Punishment. 3. As Mourning goes before Comfort, so Comfort shall follow after
Mourning. Our Godly Sorrow for Sin, shall end in Everlasting Joy and Comfort.

5 Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.

Obs. here, 1. The Grace and Duty recommended, Meekness. 2. The Wages and
Reward belonging to that Grace and Duty, The Inheritance of the Earth; Meekness
either respects God, or our Neighbor. As it respects God, so it implies
Flexibleness ^o his Commanding Will, and Submissiveness to his Providential
Pleasure. As it respects our Neighbor, it consists in Forgiving Injuries,
Bearing Reproaches, and Recompencing Good for Evil. The Reward and Blessing
Insured to this Grace and Duty is, the Inheritance of the Earth where Heaven is
not excluded, but included; yet the Earth is mentioned, to show that Men shall
be no Losers by their Meekness, as to their Outward Estates; for Almighty God
will make good to them, whatever they lose for Peace-sake. Oh Happy Temper of
Mind, that at once Secures Heaven and Earth to boot! Blessed are the Meek, for
they shall inherit the Earth in this Life, and Heaven in the next.

6 Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after righteousness: for they
shall be filled.

Obs. 1. The Character of the Persons whom Christ pronounces Blessed; such as
Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness. 2. Wherein their Blessedness does
consist: They shall be filled. By Righteousness, we are to understand, 1. A
Righteousness of Justification; the Righteousness of the Mediator imputed to
us, by which we stand Righteous in God's sight, being freed from Condemnation.
2. A Righteousness of Sanctification, wrought in us by the Holy Spirit,
enabling us to Act Righteously. By the former, there is a Relative Change in
our Condition; by the latter, a Real Change in our Constitution. Learn, That
all, and only such as do Spiritually Hunger and Thirst after Christ and his
Righteousness, are in an Happy and Blessed Condition.

7 Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.

Here our Blessed Redeemer recommends to us a Compassionate Regard toward the
Miseries of Others, and that both in Soul and Body, Name and Estate; to be
forward to Pity and Pardon, to Relieve and Help, to Give and Forgive. And as an
Encouragement he adds, That as we deal with others, God will deal with us; our
Charity toward Men, shall be Crowned with Mercy from GOD, and that in
Abundance too; for our Rivulet of Charity, we shall partake of an Ocean of
Mercy. Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy. Learn, That the
Merciful Man is a Blessed Man, and therefore Blessed, because he shall obtain
Mercy, when he most wants it, and most desires it.

8 Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.

Note here, 1. The Duty required and called for, Purity of Heart and Life; the
first expressed, the other included; for a clean Heart will be accompanied with
a clean Life: Where there is a Principle of Grace within, there will be the
Actings of Grace without. Note, 2. The Incentive to this Duty; the Pure in
Heart and Holy in Life, shall See and Enjoy GOD; the infinitely Pure, and
perfectly Holy GOD: They shall see him Spiritually and Mediately in this Life,
Gloriously, and Immediately in the Life to come.

9 Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.

Obs. 1. The Connection between Peace and Purity; Purity of Heart and
Peaceableness of Life accompany one another; there is no Inward Purity, where
there is not an Endeavor after Outward Peace. 2. The Duty exhorted to, namely,
to Love Peace, and to Labor after Peace; to Love it our selves, and Promote it
amongst others; to be not only Peaceable, but Peacemakers. Note, 3. The Title
of Honor that is here put upon such as are of this Peaceable and Peacemaking
Temper; they shall be called the Children of God; that is, they shall be
reputed and esteemed God's Children, for their likeness to him who is the God
of Peace. And they shall be dignified and honored with the Privileges of
God's Children; namely, Grace here, and Glory herefafter.

10 Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is
the kingdom of heaven. 11 Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake.
12 Rejoice, and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in heaven: for so
persecuted they the prophets which were before you.

Note here, 1. That all the Disciples and Followers of Christ, live they never
so Holily and Inoffensively in the World, yet must they expect Suffering and
Persecution. 2. That the keenest and sharpest Edge of Persecution is usually
turned against the Ministers of Christ, and falls heaviest on the Prophets of
God. 3. That such Sufferings, and such Persecution as will Afford a Man Solid
Comfort, and Entitle him to Real Blessedness, must be endured and undergone for
Righteousness sake. 4. That it is the Will and Command of Christ, that those
which Suffer for Him and for Righteousness-sake, should not only be Meek and
Patient, but Joyous and Cheerful: Rejoice, and be exceeding glad. 5. That such
a patient and cheerful Suffering of Persecution for Christ in this Life, shall
certainly be Rewarded with the Glory and Blessedness of the Life that is to
come. Great is your Reward, etc.

13 Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt have lost his savor,
wherewith shall it be salted? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be
cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men.

Our Savior compares Christians in general, and his Ministers in particular,
unto Salt, for a double Reason. First, Because it is the nature of Salt to
preserve things from Corruption and Putrefaction, and to render them savoury
and pleasant. Thus are the Ministers of the Gospel to labor and endeavor by
the Purity of their Doctrine, to sweeten putrefying Sinners, that they may
become savoury to God and Man; and may be kept from being Fly-blown with
Errors and False Doctrine. Secondly, Because Salt has a piercing Power in it,
which subdues the whole Lump, and turns it into its own nature: Such a piercing
Power is there in the Ministry of the Word, that it subdues the whole Man to
the Obedience of it self.

14 Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill, cannot be
hid. 15 Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a bushel: but on a
candlestick, and it gives light unto all that are in the house. 16 Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven.

Obs. here, 1. Our Savior's Doctrine. 2. The Inference which he draws from it,
by way of Application. The Doctrine delivered is this, That Christians in
general, and the Ministers of the Gospel in particular, are the Light of the
World. But how? Not Originally, but Derivatively; not Efficiently, but
Instrumentally. Christ himself is the Light of the World by way of Original,
his Ministers are Lights by way of Derivation and Participation from him.
Farther, Christ teaches them the End why he communicated Light unto them,
namely, to inlighten, direct, and quicken others: Even as the Sun in the
Firmament, and a Candle in the House, diffuses and disperses its Light to all
that are within the reach of it; so should all Christians, and particularly
Christ's Ministers, by the Light of Life and Doctrine, direct People in their
Way toward Heaven. Obs. 2. The Inference which our Savior draws from the
foregoing Doctrine; Ye are the Light of the World, therefore, Let your Light
shine before Men. Where Note, 1. That our Good Works must shine, but not blaze;
all Vainglory and Ostentation must be avoided in the Good Works we do. 2.
Although we must abound in Good Works, that Men may see them, yet not to be seen
of Men. 3. That the Glorifying of God, and doing Good to Mankind, must be the
great End we propound in all the Good Works which we perform.

17 Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets: I am not come
to destroy, but to fulfill.

Our Savior here informs his Followers, That he had no Design to Abrogate any
part of the Moral Law, or to Loose Mankind from the least Measure of their
Duty, either toward God or Man; but that he came To Fulfill it. 1. By yielding
a Personal Obedience to it. 2. By giving a fuller and stricter Interpretation
of it, than the Pharisees were wont to give; for they taught that the Law did
only reach the outward Man, and restrain outward Actions. Learn, That the Law
of God is such a perfect Rule of Life, that Christ Added no new Precept or Duty
to it; much less intended to Abrogate or Abolish any Part or Precept of it.

18 For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one
tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled.

Another Reason is here given by our Savior, why he had no intention to
Abrogate or Abolish the Law; and that is drawn from the Duration and
Perpetuity, the Unchangeableness and Immutability of the Law: Sooner shall
Heaven and Earth be abolished, than the Authority and Obligation of the Moral
Law be dissolved. Learn, That the Law of God is an Eternal and Unchangeable
Rule of Life and Manners, and is to stand in Force as long as the World stands,
and the Frame of Heaven and Earth endures.

19 Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, and shall
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but
whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the
kingdom of heaven.

To evidence yet farther, that the Moral Law is a perfect Rule of Life, our
Savior tells his Disciples, That if any of them did either by their Doctrine
or Practice, make void any one of the least of God's Commands, either by
allowing themselves in the Omission of any known Duty, or in the Commission of
any known Sin, he should never enter into the Kingdom of God. Learn, That such
a Professor of Christianity as allows himself in the least Voluntary
Transgression, either of Omission or Commission, and encourages others by his
Example to do the like, is certainly in a State of Damnation.

20 For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

Observe here, 1. A Glorious Prize or Reward set before the Christian, as
Attainable; namely, The Kingdom of Heaven. 2. The Means required, in order to
our obtaining of this Prize, and laying hold of this Reward; we must be Holy
and Righteous Persons: Heaven is the Reward of Righteousness, a Reward
conferred only upon Righteous Persons. 3. Here is the Special Qualification of
that Righteousness expressed, which will Entitle us to Heaven and Salvation: It
must be a Righteousness which Exceeds the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and that these Three Ways: 1. In its Principle and Motive; Love to
God, and Obedience to his Command; not the Applause and Commendation of Men. 2.
In its Aim and End. The Pharisees made Themselves, their own Credit and Esteem,
their Wordly Gain and Interest, their Ultimate End, and not God's Glory, their
supreme Aim. 3. In the Manner of Performance; the Pharisees Duty wanted that
Purity and Spirituality which the Law of God required; they had respect only to
the Outward Action, without any regard to the Inward Intention, and to that
Purity of Heart which God required. Learn, That such a Holiness of Heart, and
Righteousness of Life, as the Spirituality of God's Law requires of us, is
absolutely and indispensibly necessary to Salvation.

21 Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not kill:
and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment. 22 But I say unto
you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in
danger of the judgment: and whosoever shall say unto his brother, Racha, shall
be in danger of the council: but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in
danger of hellfire.

Here our Blessed Savior begins to Expound the Spiritual Sense and Meaning of
the Law, and to Vindicate it from the corrupt Glosses of the Pharisees: Where
Observe, Christ does not deliver a New Law, but expounds the Old; and does not
Injoin New Duties, but Inforces the Old Ones. The Law of God was always
perfect, requiring the Sons of Men to Love God with all their Hearts, and their
Neighbor as themselves. In this Exposition of the Law, Christ begins with the
Sixth Commandment, Thou shall not Kill: Where he shows, That besides the actual
taking away of Life, a Person may violate that Command. 1. By Rash Anger. 2. By
Disgraceful and Reviling Words. Thence Learn, That every Evil Motion of our
Hearts against our Neighbor, all unjust Anger toward him, all Terms of
Contempt put upon him, are forbidden by the Law of God, no less than the gross
Act of Murder it self.

23 Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there remembrest that
thy brother has ought against thee; 24 Leave there thy gift before the altar,
and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy
gift. 25 Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with
him: lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and the judge
deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison. 26 Verily, I say
unto thee, Thou shall by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the
uttermost farthing.

For preventing the Sin of rash Anger, which in our Savior's Account is a
Degree of Murder, he exhorts all his Disciples and Followers to Brotherly
Agreement, and to seek Mutual Reconciliation with each other. Agree with thine
Adversary: That is, thy offended, or offending Brother: Agree with him, as
becomes a Man; Quickly, as becomes a Christian: Implying, that it is a
necessary Duty for every Christian to seek Reconciliation sincerely and
speedily, with such as have offended him, or have been offended by him. Obs. 2.
The Argument or Motive with which Christ enforces his Exhortation to Brotherly
Reconciliation; drawn from the Peril and Danger of the Neglect; and this is
Twofold: The First respects our present Duties and Services, when we wait upon
God at his Altar, and attend upon him in Holy Offices. None of our Performances
will find Acceptance with God, if there be found Malice and Hatred, Anger and
Ill Will against our Brother. Learn, That no Sacrifice we can offer will be
acceptable to God, so long as we our selves are Implacable to Men. A Second
Danger respects us, when we appear before God in Judgment; then God will be our
Adversary, Christ our Judge, Satan our Accuser, Hell our Tormentor; If now from
the Heart we do not every one of us forgive our Brother his Trespasses.

27 Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shall not commit
adultery, 28 But I say unto you, That whosoever looks on a woman to lust
after her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart.

Our Savior next proceeds to Explain the Seventh Commandment, which forbids
Adultery; by which the Pharisees understood, only the gross Act of Uncleanness,
and Carnal Lying with a Woman. But, says our Savior, Whoever secretly in his
Heart desires such a thing, and casts his Eye upon a Woman in order to such an
Act, entertaining only a Thought of it with Pleasure and Delight, he is an
Adulterer in God's Account. Learn, That such is the Purity and Spirituality of
the Law of God, that it condemns Speculative Wantonness, no less than Practical
Uncleanness; and forbids not only the outward Action, but the secret Purpose
and Intention, and first Outgoings of the Soul after unlawful Objects.

29 And if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: for
it is profitable for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that
thy whole body should be cast into hell. 30 And if thy right hand offend thee,
cut it off, and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of
thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell.

Our Savior had condemned Ocular Adultery in the foregoing Verse, or the
Adultery of the Eye; He that looks on a Woman to lust after her, has
committed Adultery with her in his Heart. Whence Note, That the Eye is an Inlet
to Sin, especially the Sin of Uncleanness; Lust enters the Heart at the Window
of the Eye. Now in these Verses Christ prescribes a Remedy for the Cure of this
Eye-Malady; If thine Eye offend thee, pluck it out: Which is not to be
understood Literally, as if Christ commanded any Man to maim his Bodily
Members; but Spiritually, to Mortify the Lusts of the Flesh, and the Lusts of
the Eye, which otherwise will prove a dangerous Snare to the Soul. Learn, 1.
That Sin may be avoided; it is our Duty to avoid whatsoever leads to it, or may
be an Occasion of it; if we find the View of an Insnaring Object will Inflame
us, we must, though not put out our Eye, yet make a Covenant with our Eye, that
we will not look upon it. Note, 2. That the best Course we can take to be kept
from the Outward Acts of Sin, is to Mortify our Inward Affection and Love to
Sin. This is to Kill it in the Root; and if once our Inward Affections be
mortified, our Bodily Members may be spared and preserved; for they will no
longer be Weapons of Sin, but Instruments of Righteousness unto Holiness.

31 It has been said, Whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a
writing of divorcement. 32 But I say unto you, That whosoever shall put away
his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causes her to commit adultery:
and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced, commits adultery.

Our Blessed Savior still proceeds in Vindicating and Clearing the Seventh
Commandment from the corrupt Glosses of the Pharisees. Almighty God had
tolerated the Jews in Case of Uncleanness to put away their Wives, by a Bill of
Divorce, Deuteronomy. 24. v. 1. Hereupon the Pharisees maintained it Lawful to put
away the Wife upon every slight Occasion. This Abuse Christ corrects, and
shows, That Divorce, except in Case of Adultery, is a certain Breach of the
Seventh Commandment. Learn, 1. That so Indissoluble is the Marriage-Covenant
betwixt Two Persons, that nothing but Adultery, which violates the Bands of
Marriage, can dissolve or disannul it. 2. When Persons are justly put away, it
is unlawful for them to Marry to any other, or for others knowingly to Marry to
them.

33 Again, ye have heard that it has been said by them of old time, Thou shall
not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine oaths. 34 But I
say unto you, Swear nor at all; neither by heaven, for it is God's throne: 35
Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem, for it is the
city of the great king. 36 Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou
can not make one hair white or black.

The next Commandment which our Savior Expounds and Vindicates, is the Third,
which requires a Reverent Use of God's Name. Now the Pharisees taught, that
Perjury was the only Breach of this Commandment; and that Swearing was nothing,
if they did not Forswear themselves: And that Persons were only obliged to
Swear by the Name of God in Public Courts of Justice; but in their ordinary
and common Discourse, they might Swear by any of the Creatures. Now in
opposition to these Wicked Principles and Practices, Christ says, Swear not at
all: That is, 1. Swear not Profanely in your ordinary Discourse. 2. Swear not
Unduly by any of the Creatures; for that is to ascribe a Deity to them. 3.
Swear not Lightly, upon any Trifling or Frivolous Occasion; for Oaths upon
small Occasions, are great Sins: So that an Oath is not here forbidden by our
Savior, but restrained. Learn, That though light and needless, common and
ordinary Swearing be a very great Sin; yet to take an Oath upon a Solemn
Occasion, when Lawfully called thereunto, is a Christian and Necessary Duty.

37 But let your communication be, yea, yea; nay, nay: for whatsoever is more
than these, comes of evil.

Here our Lord prescribes a proper Means and Remedy for shunning the Occasion
and Danger of Rash Swearing; and that is, by using and accustoming our selves
in Conversation, to a true Simplicity, and constant Plainess of Speech; either
Affirming or Denying, according to the Nature of the Thing; letting Oaths
alone, till we are called to them upon great Occasions, for ending Strife
between Man and Man. Learn, That the great End of Speech being to Communicate
the Sense of our Minds each to other, we ought to use such Plainess and
Simplicity in Speaking, that we may believe one another without Oaths, or more
Solemn and Religious Asseverations.

38 Ye have heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth. 39 But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall
smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. 40 And if any man
will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also.
41 And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain.

Our Savior here Vindicates the Sixth Commandment, which obliges us to do no
Wrong to the Body of our Neighbor. God had given a Law to the Public
Magistrate, to require an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth, when a
Person was wronged: Hereupon the Pharisees taught, That a private Person
wronged by another, might exact Satisfaction from him to the same degree, in
which he had been Wronged by him; if he had lost an Eye by another, he might
revenge it, by taking away the Eye of another. But, says Christ, I say unto
you, Resist not Evil; that is, seek not private Revenge, but leave the Avenging
of Injuries to God and the Magistrate. Teaching us, That Christians ought
rather to suffer a double Wrong, than to seek a private Revenge: Christianity
obliges us to bear many Injuries patiently, rather than to avenge one privately.

42 Give to him that asks thee, and from him that would borrow of thee, turn
thou not away.

Our Savior here presses the Law of Charity upon his Disciples: This is
Twofold; a Charity in Giving to them that Beg, and a Charity in Lending to them
that desire to Borrow: Christianity obliges all those which have Ability, to
abound in Works of Charity of all sorts and kinds whatsoever. He that is truly
Charitable, does not only Give, but Lend; yea, sometimes Lends, looking for
nothing again: It is not enough to act Charity of one sort, but we must be
ready to act it in every kind, and to the highest Degree that our Circumstances
and Abilities will admit.

43 Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall love thy neighbor, and
hate thine enemy: 44 But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully
use you, and persecute you:

Another corrupt Gloss which the Pharisees had put upon the Law of God, our
Savior here takes notice of: The Law said, Thou shall love thy Neighbor,
Levit. 19.18. this they interpreted, to relate only to their own Countrymen
the Jews; concluding, that they might hate all the Uncircumcised Nations, as
Enemies: But, says our Savior, I require you to love all Men; for if Enemies
must not be shut out of our Love, none must. Love your Enemies; here the inward
Affection is required. Bless them that curse you; there outward Civility and
Affability is required. Do good to them that hate you; here real Acts of
Kindness and Charity are commanded to be done by us to our bitterest and most
malicious Enemies. Pray for them that despitefully use you, and persecute you:
These are the highest Expressions of Enmity that can be, Calumny and Cruelty;
yet are we commanded to Pray for those that touch us in these two tenderest
Points, our Reputation, and our Life. Learn, That Christianity obliges us to
bear a sincere Affection toward our most malicious Enemies; to be ready upon
all Occasions, to do Good unto them, and to Pray for them.

45 That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven. for he
makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the
just and on the unjust.

To encourage us to the foregoing Duty of Loving our Enemies, our Savior
propounds the Example of God himself to our Imitation, That you may be the
Children of your Father; that is, that you may be known to be the Children of
your Father which is in Heaven, by your likeness to him, and imitation of him.
Note, That the best Evidence we can have of our Divine Sonship, is our
Conformity to the Divine Nature, especially in those Excellent Properties of
Goodness and Forgiveness.

46 For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the
publicans the same? 47 And if ye salute your brethren only, what do you more
than others? do not even the publicans so?

Yet farther to encourage us to this Duty of Loving our Enemies, Christ assures
his Disciples, that he expects more from them, than from others; more than
common Humanity and civil Courtesy toward Friends; for even Heathens by the
Light of Nature were taught to love those that love them: But he expected that
Christianity should teach them better, and lead them farther, even, To love
their Enemies, and to bless them that curse them. Note, Love for Love is
Justice; Love for no Love is Favor and Kindness; but Love for Hatred and
Enmity, is Divine Goodness; a Christ-like Temper, which will render us
Illustrious on Earth, and Glorious in Heaven.

48 Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.

That is, Aim at Perfection in all Christian Virtues and Divine Graces, but
particularly, in this of Love; in Imitation of your Heavenly Father, who is the
perfect Pattern of all desirable Goodness, and adorable Perfections. To be
perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect, is indeed impossible, as to
Equality, but not as to Imitation. The Word rendered here Perfect, by St.
Matthew, is elsewhere by St. Luke rendered Merciful, Luke 6.36. Implying, That
Charity is the Perfection of a Christian's Graces: He that is made perfect in
Love, is perfect in all Divine Graces, in the Account of God. Learn, That no
less than perfect and complete Perfection in Grace, and particularly in the
Grace of Love and Charity, is, and ought to be the Aim of every Christian in
this Life, and shall be his Attainment in the next.

CHAP. VI.
This Chapter is a Continuation of our Savior's Incomparable Sermon upon the
Mount, in which he cautions his Disciples against the Hypocrisy and Vainglory
of the Pharisees, both in their Almsgiving and Prayers: The former in the first
Four Verses of this Chapter, which speak thus:

1 TAKE heed that you do not your alms before men, to be seen of them:
otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. 2 Therefore,
when thou do thine alms, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the
hypocrites do, in the synagogues, and in the streets, that they may have glory
of men. Verily, I say unto you, they have their reward. 3 But when thou do
alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does: 4 That thine alms
may be in secret: and thy Father which sees in secret, himself shall reward
thee openly.

Observe here, 1. The Duty directed to, Almsgiving after a right manner; Do not
your Alms before Men; some Copies read it, Do not your Righteousness before
Men: Because Almsgiving is a considerable part of that Righteousness and
Justice, which we owe unto our Neighbor; he that is Uncharitable, is Unjust:
Acts of Charity, are Acts of Justice and Equity. It also intimates to us, That
the Matter of our Alms should be Goods righteously gotten; to give Alms of what
is gotten unjustly, is Robbery, and not Righteousness. Observe, 2. Our
Savior's cautionary Direction in giving of Alms, Take heed that you do them
not to be seen of Men. It is one thing to do our Alms that Men may see them,
and another thing to do them that they may be seen of Men. We ought to do Alms
before Men, that GOD may be glorified; but Not to be seen of Men, that our
Selves may be applauded. Obs. 3. The particular Sin, which our Savior warns
his Disciples against in giving their Alms, namely, Ostentation and Vainglory,
which the Pharisees were notoriously guilty of; Sounding a Trumpet, to call
People about them when they gave their Alms. Thence Learn, That the doing any
Good Work, especially any Work of Charity and Mercy vain-gloriously, not with
an Eye at God's Glory, will certainly miss of the Reward of Well-doing in
another World. Obs. 4. The Advice given by our Savior for the Prevention of
this Sin and Danger; and that is, to do our Alms as secretly as we can; Let not
thy left Hand know what thy right Hand does: That is, conceal it from thy
nearest Relations, and if possible, from thy Self. Note thence, That the
Secrecy of our Charity is one good Evidence of its Sincerity. Hence the
Egyptians made the Emblem of Charity to be a Blind Boy, reaching out Honey to a
Be that had lost her Wings.

5 And when thou prayest, thou shall not be as the hypocrites are: for they
love to pray standing in the synagogues, and in the corners of the streets,
that they may be seen of men. Verily, I say unto you, they have their reward. 6
But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut thy
door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in
secret, shall reward thee openly.

Here our Savior warns his Disciples against the same Pharisaical Hypocrisy
in Praying, which he had before reproved in Almsgiving. It was Lawful to Pray
in the Synagogues, and to Pray standing, and that before Men; but to do this
upon design to be Applauded by Men, is condemned by Christ. Our Business in
Prayer lies with God, we are not to concern our selves, how Men like our
Performances; it is sufficient, if God does approve, and will accept them. To
cure the foregoing Vanity, Christ directs to Secret Prayer in our Closets,
where God is the Witness, and will be the Rewarder of our Sincerity. Note, That
Secret Prayer is a commanded and encouraged Duty, and when in Sincerity
performed, shall be attended with a public and glorious Reward: Pray to thy
Father which is in secret, etc.

7 But when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: for they
think that they shall be heard for their much speaking. 8 Be ye not therefore
like unto them: for your Father knows what things ye have need of, before ye
ask him.

A vainglorious Ostentation in Prayer was condemned by our Savior in the
former Verse; here a vainglorious Multiplication of Words, by idle
Tautologies, and impertinent Repetitions, is condemned also: After the manner
of the Heathen, who expect to have their Prayers granted by God for the
Multiplicity of Words used by themselves. Hence Note, That a Christian's
Business in Prayer being not to inform God; (For he knows what things we
need, before we ask him;) nor yet to move and persuade God, (for he is Our
Father;) it certainly argues an undue Aprehension of God, when we lengthen out
our Prayers with vain Repetitions and a multitude of Words.

9 After this manner therefore pray ye:

As if Christ had said, for preventing these and all other Faults in Prayer, I
will my self give you a Complete Form of Prayer, to be used when you Pray with
others, and an exact Pattern and Platform for your Imitation when you Pray
alone by your selves. Note, That the Lord's Prayer is both a Perfect Form of
Prayer which ought to be used by us, and also a Pattern and Platform, according
to which all our Prayers ought to be framed. St. Matthew says, After this
manner Pray ye; St. Luke says, When ye Pray, say,

9 Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name. 10 Thy kingdom come.
Thy will be done in earth as it is heaven. 11 Give us this day our daily bread.
12 And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. 13 And lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, and the power,
and the glory, for ever. Amen.

The Sense and Signification of this best of Prayers, is this: Oh thou our
Father in Jesus Christ! who remainest in thy Throne in Heaven, and art there
perpetually Praised, and perfectly Obeyed by Glorious Angels and Glorified
Saints; Grant that Thy Name may be Glorified, Thy Throne Acknowledged, and Thy
Holy Will Obeyed here on Earth below, by us thy Sons and Servants, most
sincerely and readily, and in some proportion to what is done in Heaven. And
because by reason of the Frailty of our Natures, we cannot subsist without the
Comforts and Supports of Life, We crave, That such a Proportion of the Good
Things of this Life may be given in unto us, as may be sufficient for us; and
that we may be content with our Allowance. And knowing that thy Holiness and
Justice obliges thee to punish Sin and Sinners, we Plead with thee, for the
sake of thy Son's Satisfaction, to Pardon to us our daily Trespasses which we
are guilty of in this State of Imperfection; as we do freely and heartily
Forgive others that have offended and wronged us. And seeing that by reason of
the Frailty of our Natures, we are prone to rush upon, and run into Temptation;
we crave, That by the Power of thy Omnipotent Grace we may be kept from Satan's
Temptations, from the World's Allurements, from our own Evil Inclinations, and
be preserved unblamable to thine Everlasting Kingdom; which is exalted over all
Persons, over all Places, over all Things, in all Times, past, present, and to
come: And accordingly, in Testimony of our Desires, and in Assurance to be
Heard and Answered, we say Amen. So be it, So let it be, Even so, O Lord, let
it be for ever.

14 For, if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father will also
forgive you. 15 But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
Father forgive your trespasses.

There being no Duty to which our corrupt Natures are more backward, than this
of Forgiving Injuries, our Savior repeats that Duty over and over, and
frequently inculcates it in the Holy Gospels: Assuring us, That Forgiving
others, is the indispensible Condition upon which we are to expect Forgiveness
from God. Learn thence, That every time we go to God in Prayer, and beg
Forgiveness of him, as we Forgive others, if we do not Forgive them heartily
and sincerely, fully and freely, readily and willingly, we Lie in the Face of
GOD, and our Prayers are a sort of Imprecations against our Selves.

16 Moreover, when ye fast, be not as the hypocrites, of a sad countenance: for
they disfigure their faces, that they may appear unto men to fast. Verily, I
say unto you, they have their reward. 17 But thou, when thou fastest, anoint
thine head, and wash thy face: 18 That thou appear not unto men to fast, but
unto thy Father which is in secret: and thy Father which sees in secret, shall
reward thee openly.

The next Duty which our Savior instructs his Disciples in, is that of
Religious Fasting, which is a Devoting of the whole Man, Soul and Body, to a
Solemn and Extraordinary Attendance upon GOD, in a particular Time, set apart
for that purpose; in order to the Deprecating of his Displeasure, and for the
Supplicating of his Favor; accompanied with an Abstinence from Bodily Food,
and Sensual Delights, and from all Secular Affairs, and Worldly Business. Now
our Savior's Direction as to this Duty of Fasting is double: 1. He cautions us
to beware of an Abuse in Fasting: Be not as the Hypocrites are, of a sad
Countenance; that is, Do not affect a sullen Sadness, Ghastliness and
Unpleasantness of Countenance, like the Hypocritical Pharisees, who vitiate and
discolor their Faces, do mar and abolish their Native Complexion. Hypocrisy
can paint the Face Black and Sable, as well as Pride with Red and White. 2. He
counsels us to take the right way in Fasting; To Anoint the Head, and Wash the
Face: That is, to look as at other times, using our ordinary Garb and Attire,
and not to affect any thing that may make us look like Mourners, when really we
are not so. Where we may Note, That though Hypocrites by their Dejected
Countenances and Mortified Habits, do seek to gain an Extraordinary Reputation
for Piety and Devotion, yet the sincere Christian is to be abundantly satisfied
with God's Approbation of his Services, and with the silent Applause of his own
Conscience.

19 Lay not up for your selves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust does
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal. 20 But lay up for your
selves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust does corrupt, and where
thieves do not break through nor steal. 21 For where your treasure is, there
will your heart be also.

Observe here, 1. Something implied; namely, That every Man has his Treasure;
and whatsoever, or wheresoever that Treasure is, it is attractive, and draws
the Heart of Man unto it: For every Man's Treasure is his Cbief Good. 2.
Something permitted; namely, the Getting, Possessing, and Enjoying of Earthly
Treasure, as an Instrument enabling us to do much Good. 3. Something
prohibited; and that is, the Treasuring up of Worldly Wealth, as our Chief
Treasure: Lay not up Treasures on Earth; that is, Take heed of an Inordinate
Affection to, of an excessive Pursuit after, of a vain Confidence and Trust in
any Earthly Comfort, as your Chief Treasure. 4. Here is something commanded;
But lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven: Treasure up those Habits of
Grace, which will bring you to an Inheritance in Glory: Be Fruitful in Good
Works, Laying up in store for your selves a good Foundation, against the time
to come, that ye may lay hold of Eternal Life. Obs. 5. The Reasons assigned, 1.
Why we should not lay up our Treasure on Earth; because all Earthly Treasures
are of a perishing and uncertain nature, they are subject to Moth and Rust, to
Robbery and Theft; the perishing Nature of Earthly Things ought to be improved
by us, as an Argument to sit loose in our Affections toward them. 2. The
Reason assigned, why we should lay up our Treasure in Heaven, is this: Because
Heavenly Treasures are subject to no such Accidents and Casualties, as Earthly
Treasures are, but are durable and lasting. The things that are not seen, are
eternal: The Treasures of Heaven are inviolable, incorruptible, and
everlasting. Now we may know whether we have chosen these Things for our
Treasure, by our high Estimation of the Worth of them, by our sensible
Apprehension of the Want of them, by the Torrent and Tendency of our Affection
toward them, and by our laborious Diligence and Endeavors in the Pursuit
after them. Where the Treasure is, there will the Heart be also.

22 The light of the body is the eye: if therefore thine eye be single, thy
whole body shall be full of light. 23 But if thine eye be evil, thy whole body
shall be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness,
how great is that darkness?

In the foregoing Verses, our Savior acquainted us what in our Affections and
Judgments we should esteem as our Chief Treasure: Now this Judgment concerning
our Chief Treasure, is by our Savior here compared to the Eye; as the Eye is
the Candle of the Body, that inlightens and directs it, so our Understanding
and Judgment of the Excellency of Heaven, and the Things Above, will draw our
Affections toward them, and quicken our Endeavors after them. Note thence,
That such as our Judgment is concerning Happiness, such will our Desires and
Endeavors be, for the Attainment of that Happiness. Our Affections are guided
by our Apprehensions; where the Esteem is high, Endeavors will be strong.

24 No man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the
other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. Ye cannot serve
God and mammon.

Observe here, A twofold Master spoken of, God, and the World. God is our
Master, by Creation, Preservation, and Redemption; he has appointed us our
Work, and secured us our Wages. The World is our Master, by Intrusion,
Usurpation, and a general Estimation; too many esteeming it as their Chief
Good, and delighting in it as their Chief Joy. Obs. 2. That no Man can serve
these Two Masters, who are of contrary Interests, and issue out contrary
Commands: When two Masters are subordinate, and their Commands subservient each
to other, the difficulty of Serving both is not great; but where Commands
interfere, and Interests clash, it is impossible. No Man can serve God and the
World, but he may serve God with the World: No Man can seek God and Mammon
both, as his Chief Good, and Vltimate End; because no Man can divide his Heart
betwixt GOD and the World. Learn, That to love the World as our Chief Good, and
to serve the World as our Chief and Sovereign Commander, cannot stand with the
Love and Service which we bear and owe to God. The World's Slaves, whilst
such, can be none of God's Freemen.

25 Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat,
or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on: is not the
life more than meat, and the body than raiment? 26 Behold the fowls of the air:
for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your
heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not much better than they?

The next Sin which our Savior cautions his Disciples against, is immoderate
Care for the things of this Life; such a solicitous and vexatious Care for Food
and Raiment, as is accompanied with Diffidence and Distrust of GOD's Fatherly
Providence over us, and Provision for us; and the Arguments which our Savior
uses to dissuade from this Sin, are many and cogent, laid down in the following
Verses.

27 Which of you by taking thought, can add one cubit to his stature? 28 And
why take ye thought for raiment? Consider the lilies of the field how they
grow; they toil not, neither do they spin. 29 And yet I say unto you, that even
Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of these. 30 Wherefore if God
so cloth the grass of the field, which to day is, and to morrow is cast into
the oven, shall he not much more cloth you, O ye of little faith? 31 Therefore
take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or what shall we drink? or
wherewithal shall we be clothed? 32 (For after all these things do the
Gentiles seek) For your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these
things.

Four Arguments are here used by our Savior, to dissuade us from the Sin of
Anxious Care; it is needless, it is fruitless, it is heathenish, it is brutish. 1.
It Is needless; Your heavenly Father knows that you have need of these things,
and will certainly provide for you; and what need you take Care, and God too?
2. It Is fruitless; Which of you by taking thought, can add one Cubit to his
Stature? That is, by all our Solicitous Care we can add nothing, either to the
Length or Comfort of our Lives. 3. It Is heathenish; After all these things do
the Gentiles seek. 4. It Is brutish, nay, worse than brutish; The Fowls of the
Air, and the Beasts of the Field are fed by God, much more shall his Children:
Has God a Breakfast for every little Bird that comes chirping out of its Nest?
And for every Beast in the Wilderness that comes leaping out of its Den? And
will he not much more provide for you, Oh ye of little Faith? Surely he that
feeds the Ravens when they Cry, will not starve his Children when they Pray.

33 But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you.

That is, Let your first and chief Care be to promote the Kingdom of Grace in
this World, and to secure the Kingdom of Glory in the next; and in order unto
both, seek after an Universal Holiness and Righteousness, both of Heart and
Life; and then fear not the want of these Outward Comforts, they shall be added
in Measure, though not in Excess; to Satisfy, though not to Satiate; for Health,
though not for Surfeit. Obs. 1. That Christians must here on Earth set themselves
to seek Heaven, or the Kingdom of God. 2. That God's Kingdom cannot be sought,
without God's Righteousness: Holiness is the only way to Happiness. 3. That
Heaven, or the Kingdom of God, must be sought in the first place, with our
chief Care, and principal Endeavor. 4. That Heaven being once secured by us,
all Earthly Things shall be superadded by God, as he sees needful and
convenient for us.

34 Take therefore no thought for the morrow: for the morrow shall take thought
for the things of it self: sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.

Here our Savior reinforces his Dehortation from Solicitous Care for Worldly
Things, assuring us, That every Day will bring with it a sufficient Burden of
Trouble, and therefore we ought not to torment our selves, by antedating our
own Sorrows, and foretelling what may, or may not come to pass. Learn, That it
is a Painful, Sinful, and Unprofitable Evil, to perplex our selves with
distrustful and distracting Fears of what may come upon us: Every Day has its
own Duty and Difficulty; and though Sufferings must be expected, and prepared
for, yet we must not torment our selves to Day, with the Fears of what may be
to Morrow; but every Day cast our Burden of Care upon that God, who daily
cares for us.

CHAP. VII.
Our Blessed Savior having continued his Sermon on the Mount in the former
Chapter, concludes it in this, with an Exhortation to several Duties; the First
of which is, To forbear Rash Judging of others.

1 JUDGE not, that ye be not judged. 2 For with what judgment ye judge, ye
shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you
again.

Observe here, The Prohibition, and the Reason of that Prohibition. The
Prohibition, Judge not: This is not meant of our Selves, but of our Neighbor.
Self-judging is a great Duty, Judging others a grievous Sin: Yet is not all
Judging of others condemned, but a Judging of our Neighbor's State or Person,
rashly and rigidly, censoriously and uncharitably; especially unrighteously and
unjustly? And the Reason of the Prohibition is added, If we Judge others
Rashly, God will Judge us Righteously. Learn thence, That a Rash and Censorious
Judging of Others, renders a Person liable and obnoxious to the Righteous
Judgment of God.

3 And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but
considerest not the beam that is in thine own eye? 4 Or how will thou say to
thy brother, Let me pull out the mote out of thine eye; and behold, a beam is
in thine own eye? 5 Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own
eye; and then shall thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of thy brother's
eye.

By the Mote in our Brother's Eye, is to be understood small and little Sins,
or some supposed Sins: By the Beam in our own Eye, is meant some Notorious Sin
of our own. Learn, 1. That those who are most Censorious of the lesser
Infirmities of Others, are usually most notoriously Guilty of far greater
Failings Themselves. 2. That those who desire others should look upon their
Infirmities with a Compassionate Eye, must not look upon the Failings of others
with a Censorious Eye. 3. That there is no such way to Teach us Charity in
Judging others, as to exercise Severity in Judging of our selves.

6 Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls
before swine; lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again, and rent
you.

By that which is Holy, understand the Word and Ordinances in general; but
Admonition and Reproof in particular: By Dogs and Swine, Incorrigible and
Unreclaimable Sinners, hardened Scorners of Holy Things: It Is a Proverbial
Speech, expressing, how sure Charitable Reprehensions are to be cast away upon
Incorrigible Sinners. Learn, 1. That it is possible for Sinners to arrive at
such an Height and Pitch in Wickedness and Sin, that it may be a Christian's
Duty, not to Admonish or Reprove them. Obs. 2. How Christ provides, as for the
Honor of his Word, so for the Safety of those that Publish it. As Christ will
not have his Word offered to some Sinners, lest they should abuse it; so lest
they should abuse those that bring it. When Sinners turn Rinish Swines, and we
are in danger of being rent by them, Christ himself gives us a Permission to
cease Reproving of them.

7 Ask, and it shall be given you: seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall
be opened unto you. 8 For every one that asks, receives: and he that
seeks, finds: and to him that knocks, it shall be opened. 9 Or what man
is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone? 10 Or if
he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? 11 If ye then being evil, know how
to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is
in heaven give good things to them that ask him?

Observe here, A Precept, and a Promise; the Precept, or Duty commanded, is
Importunity and Constancy in Prayer; we must ask, seek, and knock: The Promise,
or Mercy insured, is Audience and Acceptance with God. Note, 1. That Man is a
poor, indigent, and necessitous Creature; full of Wants, but unable to supply
them. 2. That God is an All-sufficient Good, able to supply the Wants, and to
relieve the Necessities of his Creatures, if they call upon him, and cry unto
him. 3. Yet if we do not presently receive what we ask, we must still continue
to seek and knock; though Prayer be not always answered in our time, yet shall it
never fail of an Answer in God's time. 4. That Natural Propensity, which we
find in our Breasts, to hear the Desires, and to supply the Wants of our own
Children, ought to raise in us a confident Expectation, That Almighty God will
hear our Prayers, and supply our Wants, when we Call upon him: If a Father will
give when a Child asks, much more will God. If ye being evil, know how to give
good Gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your Father, etc.

12 Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets.

Observe here, 1. An Incomparable Rule of Life, Always to do, as we would be
done by. Note, That the Great Rule of Righteousness and Equity in all our
Dealings with Men, is this; To do as we would be done unto; it is a short Rule,
a full Rule, and a clear Rule; both the Light of Nature and the Law of CHRIST
bind it upon us. Obs. 2. The Commendation of this Rule, It is the Law and the
Prophets; that is, the Sum of the Old Testament; so far as concerns our Duty to
our Neighbor, and the Substance of the Second Table. Learn, That it is the
Design of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, first, to render Men dutiful and
obedient to God, and then righteous and charitable one to another. This is the
Law and the Prophets, yea, the whole of the Law and the Prophets, to Love GOD
above our selves, and to Love our Neighbor as our selves.

13 Enter ye in at the strait gate, for wide is the gate, and broad is the way
that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat: 14 Because
strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few
there be that find it.

Observe here, 1. That every Man is a Traveller in a certain Way. 2. That there
are but Two Ways, in which the Race of Mankind can Travel; the one strait and
narrow, that leads to Life and Salvation; the other broad and wide, which leads
to Hell and Destruction. 3. That because of the Difficulties in the Way of
Salvation, and the Easiness of the Way to Hell and Destruction; hence it is
that so few Walk in the one, and so many in the other. 4. That Christians
having the strait Way to Heaven revealed to them in and by the Word of God,
should choose rather to go in that Way alone to Life; than to run with the
Multitude in that broad Way, which leads down to the Chambers of Death and Hell.

15 Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves. 16 Ye shall know them by their fruits: Do
men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? 17 Even so every good tree
brings forth good fruit: but a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit. 18 A
good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit: neither can a corrupt tree bring forth
good fruit. 19 Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and
cast into the fire. 20 Wherefore by their fruits ye shall know them.

Observe here, 1. A Caution given, Beware of False Prophets. There were two
sorts of Deceivers, which our Savior gave his Disciples a special Warning of;
namely, False Christ's, and False Prophets: False Christ's were such as pretended
to be the True Messiah; False Prophets were such who pretended to own
Christianity, but drew People away from the Simplicity of the Gospel. Obs. 2.
The Ground of this Caution, They come in Sheeps-cloathing, but inwardly are
ravening Wolves: That is, they make fair Pretenses to Strictness in Religion,
and to greater Measures and Degrees of Mortification and Self-Denial than
others. Whence we Learn, That such as go about to Seduce others, usually
pretend to Extraordinary Measures of Sanctity themselves, to raise an
Admiration amongst those who judge of Saints more by their Looks, than by their
Lives; more by their Expressions, than by their Actions. What Heavenly Looks
and Devout Gestures, what Long Prayers and Frequent Fastings had the
Hypocritical Pharisees, beyond what Christ or his Disciples ever practiced?
Obs. 3. The Rule laid down by Christ, whereby we are to Judge of False
Teachers; By their Fruits we shall know them. Learn, That the best Course we
can take to Judge of Teachers pretending to be sent of God, is to Examine the
Design and Tendency of their Doctrines, and the Course and Tenor of their
Conversations. Good Teachers, like good Trees, will bring forth the good Fruits
of Truth and Holiness; but Evil Men and Seducers, like corrupt Trees, will
bring forth Error and Wickedness, in their Life and Doctrine.

21 Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven: but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. 22 Many
will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name? and
in thy Name have cast out devils? and in thy Name done many wonderful works? 23
And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you: depart from me ye that
work iniquity.

Not every one, that is, Not any one that says, Lord, Lord; that is, that
owneth me by way of Profession, by way of Prayer, and by way of Appeal, shall
be Saved; But he that does the Will of my Father, sincerely and universally.
Learn hence, 1. That Multitudes at the Great Day shall be really disowned by
Christ, as none of his Servants, that did Nominally own him for their Lord and
Master: Many that have now Prophesied in his Name, shall then Perish in his
Wrath: Many that have cast out Devils now, shall be cast out to Devils then:
Such as have now Done many Wonderful Works, shall then Perish for Evil Workers.
Note, 2. That a bare Name and Profession of Christianity, without the Practice
of it, is a very Insufficient Ground to Build our Hopes of Heaven and Salvation
upon. 3. That Gifts, Eminent Gifts, yea, Extraordinary and Miraculous Gifts,
are not to be rested in, or depended upon, as Sufficient Evidences for Heaven
and Salvation. Gifts are as the Gold which Adorns the Temple, but Grace is like
the Temple that Sanctifies the Gold.

24 Therefore, whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will
liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock: 25 And the rain
descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house:
and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock. 26 And every one that hears
these sayings of mine, and does them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man,
which built his house upon the sand: 27 And the rain descended, and the floods
came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house: and it fell, and great was
the fall of it.

Our Savior here concludes his Excellent Sermon, with an Elegant Similitude:
The Wise Builder, is not the frequent Hearer, but the faithful Doer of the
Word; or the Obedient Christian; the House is Heaven, and the Hope of Eternal
Life; the Rock is Christ; the Building upon the Sand, is resting in the bare
Perform^nce of Outward Duties; the Rains, the Winds, and the Floods, are all
kind of afflicting Evils, Sufferings, and Persecutions that may befall us.
Note, 1. That the Obedient Believer is the only Wise Man, that Builds his Hopes
of Heaven upon a sure and abiding Foundation. Note, 2. That such Professors as
rest in the Outward Performance of Holy Duties, are Foolish Builders; their
Foundation is weak and sandy, and all their Hopes of Salvation vain and
uncertain.

28 And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were
astonished at his doctrine: 29 For he taught them as one having authority, and
not as the scribes.

Here we have Two Things Observable: 1. The Manner of our Lord's Teaching, it
was with Authority; that is, it was Grave and Serious, Pious and Ardent, Plain
and Profitable. With what Brevity, without Darkness! With what Gravity, without
Affectation! With what Eloquence, without Meretricious Ornament, were our
Lord's Discourses! The Majesty he showed in his Sermons made it evidently
appear, that he was a Teacher sent of GOD, and clothed with his Authority.
Observe, 2. The Success of his Teaching; The People were Astonished at his
Doctrine: Affected with Admiration, believing him to be an Extraordinary
Prophet. Learn, That such is the Power of Christ's Doctrine, especially when
accompanied with the Energy of his Holy Spirit, that it makes all his Auditors
Admirers; it causes Astonishment in their Minds, and Reformation in their
Manners.

CHAP. VIII.
This Chapter is called by St. Ambrose, Scriptura Miraculosa, the Miraculous
Scripture; there being several great Miracles recorded in this Chapter: As the
Cleansing of the Leper, the Curing of the Centurion's Servant, the Appeasing of
the Winds, etc. Our Savior having delivered his Doctrine in the former
Chapters; in this he backs his Doctrine with Miracles, for the Establishment
and Confirmation of it.

1 WHEN he was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him. 2
And behold, there came a leper, and worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will,
thou can make me clean. 3 And Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him,
saying, I will, be thou clean. And immediately his leprosy was cleansed. 4 And
Jesus says unto him, See thou tell no man, but go thy way, show thy self to
the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them.

Several Particulars are here Observable; as, 1. The Petitioner, and that is a
Leper, he came and Worshipped Christ, and petitions him to Heal him, saying,
Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. Where he discovers a firm Belief
of Christ's Power, but a Diffidence and Distrust of Christ's Will, to Heal him.
Learn, Christ's Divine Power must be fully assented to, and firmly believed, by
all those that expect Benefit by him, and Healing from him. Obs. 2. How readily
our Savior grants his Petition; Jesus touched him, saying, I will, be thou
clean. Our Savior by touching the Leper, showed himself to be above the Law,
as GOD; though subject to the Law, as Man; for by the Ceremonial Law, the Leper
was forbidden to be Touched. Hence Learn, That Christ's curing the Leper by the
Word of his Mouth, and the Touch of his Hand, showed his Divine Power, and
proved himself to be truly and really GOD. Leprosy being called by the Jews
the Finger of God, a Disease of his sending, and of his removing; our Savior
therefore as a Proof of his being the Messiah, tells the Disciples of John,
That the Lepers were cleansed, Matthew. 11.5. and the Dead raised: Which being
put together, intimates, That the Cleansing of the Leper is as peculiar an Act
of Divine Power, as the Raising of the Dead; and accordingly, 2 King. 5.7. said
the King, Am I a God, that this Man sends to me, to cure a Man of his Leprosy?
Obs. 3. The Certainty and Suddeness of the Cure; Immediately his Leprosy was
cleansed: Christ not only cured him without Means, but without the ordinary
Time required for such a Cure. Thus Christ showed both Power and Will to Cure
him Miraculously, who believed his Power, but questioned his Willingness.
Observe, 4. The Charge and Command given by Christ after the Cure: 1. To tell
it to no Man; wherein the Modesty, Humility, and Piety of Christ is discovered,
together with the Care of his own Safety. His Modesty, in not desiring his Good
Deeds should be proclaimed; his Humility, in shunning vainglorious Applause
and Commendation; his Piety, in desiring all the Praise, Honor and Glory
should redound entirely to God; and his C^re of his own Safety, lest the
Publishing of this Miracle should create him untimely Danger from the
Pharisees. The Second Part of the Charge which Christ gave the recovered Leper,
was, To show himself to the Priest, and offer the Gift which Moses commanded
for a Testimony unto them: That is, as a Testimony to the Jews, that he was the
Messiah, and that he did not oppose the Ceremonial Law given by Moses. Where
Note, That our Savior would have the Ceremonial Law punctually Observed, so
long as the Time for its Continuance did endure; though he came to destroy that
Law, yet whilst it stood, he would have it observed.

5 And when Jesus was entered into Capernaum, there came unto him a centurion,
beseeching him, 6 And saying, Lord, my servant lies at home sick of the
palsy, grievously tormented. 7 And Jesus says unto him, I will come and heal
him. 8 The centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou
should come under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant shall be
healed. 9 For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me: and I say
to this man, Go, and he goes: and to another, Come, and he comes: and to my
servant, Do this, and he does it. 10 When Jesus heard it, he marvelled, and
said to them that followed, Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great
faith, no not in Israel.

The Second Miracle our Savior works in this Chapter, is the Healing of the
Centurion's Servant: Where Obs. 1. The Person that applies to our Savior for
Help and Healing; he was a Gentile, an Heathen, a Roman Soldier, an Officer and
Commander; yet he believes in, and relies upon the Power of Christ. Note, That
such is the Freeness of Divine Grace, that it extends it self to all Sorts and
Ranks, to all Orders and Degrees of Men, without Exception. Even the Bloody
Trade of War yields worthy Clients to Christ. He does not so much regard who we
are, and whence we are; as what we are, and with what Dispositions and
Inclinations we come unto him. Observe, 2. The Person whom the Centurion comes
to Christ for; not for Himself, nor for his Son, but for his Servant; his
Servant is sick, he does not drive him out of Doors, nor stand gazing by his
Bedside, but looks out for Help and Relief for him; a Worthy Example. Some
Masters have not so much Regard to their sick Servants, as they have for their
Oxen or their Swine; but he is not worthy of a good Servant, that in a time of
Sickness is not willing to serve his Servant. A conceit of Superiority, must
beget in no Man a Neglect of Charitable Offices toward Inferiors. Obs. 3. Unto
whom the Centurion seeks, and with what Zeal and Application; he seeks not to
Wizards and Conjurers, but to the Physician for his poor Servant; yea, to
Christ, the best Physician; and this not with a formal Relation in his Mouth,
but with a vehement Aggravation of the Disease; My Servant is grievously
tormented: Where the Master's Condolency and tender Sympathy with his afflicted
Servant, is both matter of Commendation, and Imitation also. Obs. 4. The happy
Mixture of Humility and Faith which was found in this Centurion; he owns his
Unworthiness of having Christ come under his Roof; yet acknowledges Christ's
Power, that by the speaking of a Word his Servant might be Healed by him.
Humility is both the Fruit of Faith, and the Companion of Faith; an humble Soul
has an high Esteem of Christ, and a low Esteem of himself. Obs. 5. How our
Blessed Savior exceeds both his Desires and his Expectations; Christ says not
only, I will Heal him, but, I will Come and Heal him: Wonderful Condescension!
In St. John, chapter 4. ver. 47. we read of a certain Nobleman and Ruler, that
twice entreated our Savior to come to his House and Heal his Son; but our Lord
refused, and did not stir a Foot: Here the Centurion does but barely tell
Christ of his poor Servant's Sickness, and Christ both unasked and undesired
says, I will come and Heal him. Oh how far was Christ from seeming in the least
to honor Riches, and despise Poverty! He that came in the Form of a Servant,
goes down and visits a sick Servant upon his poor Pallat-Bed, that would not
visit the rich Couch of the Ruler's Son. How should we stoop to the lowest
Offices of Love and Kindness to one another, when Christ thus condescendingly
abased Himself before us? Obs. 6. The Notice and Observation which our Savior
takes of the Centurion's Faith; He wondered at it from him, who had wrought it
in him: Christ wrought this Faith as God, and wondered at it as Man: What can be
more Wonderful, than to see CHRIST. Wonder! We do not find our Savior wondering
at Worldly Pomp and Greatness. When the Disciples wondered at the Magnificence
of the Temple, Christ rather rebuked them, than wondered with them. But when he
sees the gracious Acts of Faith, he is ravished with Wonder. Let it teach us to
place our Admiration where Christ fixes his: Let us be more affected with the
least Measures of Grace in a Good Man, than with all the Gaieties and Glory of
a Great Man: Let us not Envy the one, but Admire the other.

11 And I say unto you, that many shall come from the east and west, and shall
sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven: 12 But
the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness: there shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth. 13 And Jesus said unto the centurion, Go thy
way, and as thou have believed, so be it done unto thee. And his servant was
healed in the self same hour.

This was the first Occasion that Christ took to speak of the Calling of the
Gentiles, and the Rejection of the Jews. Observe here, That the Unbelieving
Jews are called the Children of the Kingdom, because Born within the Pale of
the Visible Church; they presumed that the Kingdom of Heaven was Entailed upon
them, because they were Abraham's Seed; they boasted of, and gloried in their
External and Outward Privileges. Note thence, 1. That Gospel Ordinances and
Church Priviledges enjoyed, are a special Honor to a People admitted to the
Participation of them: Our Savior here styles the Jews upon that Account, The
Children of the Kingdom. 2. That such Privileges enjoyed, but not improved, do
provoke Almighty God to inflict the heaviest of Judgments upon a People. The
Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter Darkness; that is, into
the Darkness of Hell, where shall be perpetual Lamentations for the Remembrance
of the Gospel kindly offered, but unthankfully rejected.

14 And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his wive's mother laid,
and sick of a fever. 15 And he touched her hand, and the fever left her: and
she rose and ministered unto them.

The next Miracle which our Savior wrought, was in Curing Peter's Wive's
Mother of a Fever; the Miracle was not in Curing an Incurable Distemper, but in
the Way and Manner of Curing: For, 1. It was by a Touch of our Savior's Hand.
2. It was Instantaneous, and Sudden; Immediately the Fever left her. 3. The
visible Effects of her Recovery presently appeared, She instantly arose, and
ministered unto them. That she could Arise, argued her Cure Miraculous; that she
could and did Arise, and Administer unto Christ, argued her Thankfulness, and a
great Sense of his Goodness upon her Mind. Note here, 1. That Marriage in the
Ministers of the Gospel, yea, even in the Apostles themselves, and in Peter,
the chiefest of them, was neither censured, nor condemned by our Savior. St.
Peter had a Wife and Family, which Christ condescends to Visit. Observe, 2.
That the first thing which Christ takes notice of in the House, which he
condescends to Visit, is, what Aileth any in it; what Need they stand of his
Help and Healing; and accordingly, together with his Presence, he affords them
Relief. Learn, 3. That when Christ has graciously Visited and Healed any of his
Servants, it ought to be their first Work, and next Care, to Administer unto
Christ; that is, to employ their Recovered Health, and improve their Renewed
Strength in his Service.

16 When the even was come, they brought unto him many that were possessed with
devils: and he cast out the spirits with his word, and healed all that were
sick: 17 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet,
saying, Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.

It was very common about the Time of our Savior's Coming in the Flesh, for
the Devil bodily to Possess Persons, and very grievously to Torment them. This
is one of the sad and dismal Evils which Sin has made us liable and obnoxious
to, to be Bodily Possessed by Satan; when we give Satan the Power of our Hearts,
it is a just and righteous thing with God, to give him the Possession of our
Bodies. But who is the Person that Dispossesses Satan? Christ Jesus: It Is a
stronger than the Strong Man, that must cast out Satan: Our Jesus, in whom we
trust, by his Powerful Word alone can deliver from Satan's Power, and all the
sad Effects and Consequences thereof. But Observe, With what Condolency and
Sympathizing Pity, he exercises these Acts of Mercy and Compassion toward poor
Creatures, he is said to take our Infirmities upon Himself, and to bear our
Sicknesses; he bare the Guilt, which was the Cause of these Griefs and Sorrows;
and he bare the Sorrows themselves, by a tender Sympathy with us under the
Burden of them. Christ considers our Sufferings as his own: He is afflicted in
all our Afflictions, and pained with all our Pains; in this Sense, He took our
Infirmities, and bare our Sicknesses.

18 Now when Jesus saw great multitudes about him, he gave commandment to
depart unto the other side. 19 And a certain scribe came, and said unto him,
Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go. 20 And Jesus says unto
him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests: but the Son of
man has not where to lay his head.

Observe here, A Person resolving to follow Christ; a Good Resolution, if made
deliberately, and not rashly, for Sinister Ends and Secular Advantages; which,
it is to be feared, was the Case here, by the Answer which our Savior gives;
for, says he, Foxes have Holes, etc. that is, my Condition in this World is
very poor, worse than the Birds of the Air; for they have their fixed Nests; or
the Beasts of the Earth, for they have their Dens and Holes; but I have no
fixed Habitation. Note, 1. That many Persons take up rash and sudden
Resolutions to follow Christ, before they have well considered what it will
cost them; what they are like to gain or lose, by being his Disciples. 2. That
such Men may find themselves miserably mistaken, who expect to gain any thing
by following of Christ, but their Souls Salvation.

21 And another of his disciples said unto him, Lord, suffer me first to go and
bury my father. 22 But Jesus said unto him, Follow me, and let the dead bury
their dead.

We must not sup^^se by this Prohibition, that Christ disallows or disapproves
of any Civil Office from one Person to another, much less of a Child to a
Parent, either living or dying: But he lets us know, 1. That no Office of Love
and Service to Man, must be preferred before our Duty to God, unto whom we owe
our first Obedience. 2. That Lawful and Decent Offices become Sinful, when they
hinder greater Duties. 3. That such as are called to the Work and Employment of
the Ministry, must mind that alone, and leave Inferior Duties to Inferior
Persons: As if our Savior had said, Others will serve well enough to Bury the
Dead; but thou that art a Consecrated Person, must do that unto which thou art
consecrated and set apart. Under the Law, the Priests might not come near a
dead Corpse, nor meddle with the Interrment of their own Parents; unto which our
Savior probably alludes.

23 And when he was entered into a ship, his disciples followed him. 24 And
behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch that the ship was
covered with the waves: but he was asleep. 25 And his disciples came to him,
and awoke him, saying, Lord save us: we perish. 26 And he says unto them, Why
are ye fearful, O ye of little faith? Then he arose and rebuked the winds and
the sea, and there was a great calm. 27 But the men marvelled, saying, What
manner of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him?

Observe here, 1. Christ and his Disciples no sooner put forth to Sea, but
Dangers attend, and Difficulties do accompany them; a Tempest arose, and the
Ship was covered with Waves. Learn thence, That the Presence of Christ it self,
does not exempt his Disciples and Followers from Trouble and Danger; here is a
great Tempest about the Disciples Ears, though Christ was in their Company. Obs.
2. The Posture our Savior was in when this Tempest arose; he being weary on
the Land, was fallen asleep in the Ship: Our Blessed Redeemer hereby showed
himself to be truly and really Man; as he took upon him our Human Nature, so he
subjected himself to our Human Infirmities. Obs. 3. The Disciples Application
made to him; they awoke him with a sad Outcry, Lord save us, we perish; here
was Faith mixed with Human Frailty: They had Faith in his Power, that he could
save them; but being asleep, they concluded he must awake, before he could save
them: Whereas, though his Human Nature was asleep, yet his Divine Nature neither
slumbred nor slept. Learn hence, That the Prevalency of Fear in a time of great
and imminent Danger, though it may argue weakness of Faith, yet it is no Evidence
of want of Faith: In the midst of the Disciples Fears, they believed Christ's
Power. Obs. 4. A double Rebuke given by our Savior: 1. To the Winds and Seas,
next, to the Fears of his Disciples: He rebukes the Winds and the Seas, and
instantly they are calm; when the Sea was as furious as a Madman, Christ by
his Divine Power calms it. Learn hence, That the most raging Winds and
outrageous Seas, cannot stand before the Rebukes of Christ; if once he Rebukes
them, their Rage is down: GOD lays a Law upon the most Lawless Creatures, even
when they seem to act most lawlesly. 2. Christ rebukes his Disciples Fears, Why
are ye fearful? No sooner was the Storm up, but their Fears were up; they
forgot that the Lord High-Admiral of the Ocean was on-board the Ship; and were
as much over-sett with their Boisterous Passions, as the Vessel was with the
Tempestuous Winds; and accordingly Christ rebukes the Tempest within, and then
the Tempest without; first he calms their Hearts, and then the Seas. From this
Instance we see, that great Faith in the Habit, may appear little in Act and
Exercise: The Disciples Faith in forsaking all and following Christ, was great
Faith; but in this present Act, their Faith was weak, through the Prevalency of
their Fear.

28 And when he was come to the other side, into the country of the Gergesenes,
there met him two possessed with devils, coming out of the tombs, exceeding
fierce, so that no man might pass by that way.

We read of few, if any, in the Old Testament, that were possessed with Evil
Spirits, but of many in the New Testament. Our Savior came into the World to
destroy the Works of the Devil; therefore he suffered Satan to enter some Human
Bodies, to show his Divine Power in casting them out. Note here, 1. That the
Evil Angels by their Fall lost their Purity, but not their Power. 2. That they
do no oftener exert their Power in doing Mischief to the Bodies and Lives of
Men, is from the Restraining-Power of GOD, the Devils cannot do all the
Mischief they would, and they shall not do all they can.

29 And behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with thee, Jesus
thou Son of God? art thou come hither to torment us before the time?

Observe, The Devils knew Christ to be the Son of GOD, and that he came into
the World to be a Savior, but not their Savior; therefore they cry out, What
have we to do with Thee? Or Thou with us? Oh what an uncomfortable Faith is
this, to believe that Christ is a Savior, and at the same time to know that he
is none of our Savior! But what is their Outcry against Christ? This, Art
thou come to torment us before the time? Learn, 1. That there are Tortures
appointed to the Spiritual Natures of Evil Angels. The Fire of Hell is
conceived to be, partly Material, and partly Spiritual; partly Material, to
work upon the Bodies of Evil Men; and partly Spiritual, to work upon the Souls
of Men, and the Spirits of Evil Angels. Learn, 2. That though the Devils be now
as full of Discontent as they can be, yet they are not so full of Torment as
they shall be; their Speech here intimates, that there will be a time when
their Torments shall be increased, when they shall have their fill of Torment:
Therefore they pray, Increase not our Torments, before the appointed Time of
their Increase.

30 And there was a good way off from them an herd of many swine, feeding. 31
So the devils besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, suffer us to go away
into the herd of swine.

Observe here, 1. A notable Evidence of Satan's Limited Power, that a whole
Legion of Devils had not Power to destroy one Man, nor were able to hurt the
meanest Creature without Permission. Obs. 2. The Devils Acknowledgment of their
own Impotency, and Christ's Power; their Asking Leave of Christ to go into the
Swine, shows that they could not go of themselves. Learn hence, 1. The
Restlesness of Satan's Malice; he will hurt the Swine, rather than not hurt at
all. 2. That though Satan's Malice be infinite, yet his Power is limited and
bounded; as he cannot do all the Mischief he would, so he shall not do all he
can.

32 And he said unto them, Go. And when they were come out, they went into the
herd of swine: and behold, the whole herd of swine ran violently down a steep
place into the sea, and perished in the waters.

Although Christ seldom wrought any Destructive Miracle, and although he certainly
foresaw, that the Swine would perish in the Waters; yet that the People might
see, how great the Power and Malice of the Devil would be, if not restrained by
Christ, he permitted him to enter into the Swine; Christ said unto them, Go;
and how glad was Satan of this Permission, to enter the Swine, in order to
their Destruction. Let it teach us our Duty, by Prayer to commit our selves,
and all that we have, Morning and Evening, into the Hands of GOD's Care: All
that we have in the House, and all that we have in the Field, that it may be
preserved from the Power and Malice of Evil Spirits.

33 And they that kept them, fled, and went their ways into the city, and told
every thing; and what was befallen to the possessed of the devils. 34 And
behold, the whole city came out to meet Jesus, and when they saw him, they
besought him that he would depart out of their coasts.

Obs. 1. What a contrary Effect this Miracle which Christ wrought, had upon
these People: Instead of Believing on him for his Miraculous Cure of the
Possessed, the Loss of their Swine enrages them, and makes them desire Christ
to depart from them. Temporal Losses are so great in Worldly Men's Estimation,
that Spiritual Advantages are nothing esteemed. Carnal Hearts prefer their
Swine before their Savior; and had rather lose Christ's Presence, than their
Worldly Profit. Obs. 2. How Unanimous and Importunate these Gadarens were, to
get rid of Christ; the whole City came out, and are not only willing with his
Departure, but they beseech him to depart out of their Coasts. Learn hence,
That deplorably sad is the Condition of such from whom Christ departs; more
deplorably sad their State, who say unto Christ, depart; but most deplorably
sad is the Case of them that entreat and beseech Christ to depart from them:
Thus did these Gadarens, and accordingly Christ took Ship and departed from
them, and we never read of his return more unto them.

CHAP. IX.
1 AND he entered into a ship, and passed over, and came into his own city.

In the last Verse of the foregoing Chapter, the Gadarens with one Consent
desire CHRIST to depart out of their Coasts; ^here we find our Savior,
according to their desire, departing from them into his own City, which was
Capernaum; for Bethlehem brought him forth, Nazareth brought him up, and
Capernaum was his Dewlling Place. From their Desire of Christ's Departure, and
from Christ's departing according to their Desire, we Learn, That the Blessed
Jesus will not long trouble that People with his Presence, who are weary of his
Company, and desirous of his Departure.

2 And behold, they brought to him a man sick of the palsy, lying on a bed:
and Jesus seeing their faith, said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, be of good
cheer, thy sins be forgiven thee.

Observe 1. The Patient, One sick of the Palsy, which being a Resolution of
the Nerves, weakens the Joints, and confines the Person to his Bed or Couch. As
a Demonstration of Christ's Divine Power, he was pleased to single out some
Incurable Diseases (as the World accounts them) to work a Cure upon, as the
Leprosy and Palsy. 2. The Physician, Jesus Christ; he alone is that Wise,
Faithful, and Compassionate Physician, that can and does Cure both Soul and
Body. Obs. 3. The Moving, or Impulsive Cause of this Cure, Jesus seeing their
Faith; that is, their firm Persuasion that he was clothed with a Divine Power,
and able to help; together with their Confidence in his Goodness, that he was
as willing as he was able; and no sooner did they exercise their Faith in
Believing, but Christ did exert his Divine Power in Healing. Obs. 4. The
marvelous Efficacy and Power of Faith; it obtained not only what was desired,
but more than was expected; they desired only the Healing of the Body; but
Jesus seeing their Faith, Heals Body and Soul too, saying, Be of good cheer,
thy Sins are forgiven thee.

3 And behold, certain of the scribes said within themselves, This man
blasphemeth.

See here how the best of Men are sometimes charged with saying and doing the
worst of things; to Do well, and Hear ill, was the Portion of Christ himself;
and may be the Portion of the holiest of those that belong to Christ: The
Innocent Jesus was accused of Blasphemy, of Sorcery, and of the blackest
Crimes. Innocence it self can protect no Man from Slander, and False
Accusations.

4 And Jesus knowing their thoughts, said, Wherefore think ye evil in your
hearts? 5 For whether is easier to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee: or to say,
Arise and walk? 6 But that ye may know that the Son of man has power on earth
to forgive sins, (then says he to the sick of the palsy) Arise, take up thy
bed, and go unto thine house.

Our Savior here gives the Pharisees a Twofold Demonstration of his Godhead:
First, By letting them understand that he knew their Thoughts; for to search
the Hearts, and to know the Thoughts of the Children of Men, is not in the
Power either of Angels or Men, but the Prerogative of God only. Secondly, By
assuming to himself a Power to Forgive Sins; the Son of Man has Power to
Forgive Sins. Our Savior here, by Forgiving Sins in his own Name, and by his
own Authority, does give the World an undeniable Proof, and convincing Evidence
of his Godhead; for, Who can Forgive Sins, but GOD only?

7 And he arose, and departed to his house. 8 But when the multitude saw it,
they marvelled, and glorified God, which had given such power unto men.

Note here, The Multitude marvelled, but not believed; they admire our Savior
for an Extraordinary Man, but did not believe in him, as the Son of God: They
praise God, for giving such Power to Heal the Bodies of Men; but not for
sending his Son into the World, to Save the Souls of Men. Learn hence, That the
sight of Christ's Miracles is not sufficient to work Faith in the Soul, but
requires the concurring Operation of the Holy Spirit; the one may make us
marvel, the other must make us believe.

9 And as Jesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man, named Matthew, sitting
at the receipt of custom: and he says unto him, Follow me. And he arose, and
followed him.

Obs. here, The Number of our Lord's Apostles not being filled up, what a
strange Election and Choice he makes; Matthew, a grinding Publican, is the Man.
Learn, Such is the Freeness of God's Grace, that it chooses, and such is the
Efficacy of it, that it over-powers and brings in the worst of Sinners unto
God; Matthew a Publican, Zaccheus an Extortioner, Manasseh a Murderer, Paul a
Persecutor; all these are brought home to God by the Power of Converting Grace.
Obs. 2. Matthew's ready Compliance with God's Call, He arose and followed
Christ. When the Inward Call of the Spirit accompanies the Outward Call of the
Word, the Soul readily complies, and presently yields Obedience to the Voice of
God. Christ oft-times speaks by his Word to our Ear, and we hear not, we stir
not; but when he speaks by his Spirit to our Hearts, Satan shall not hold us
down, the World shall not keep us back, but we shall arise, and follow our Lord
and Master.

10 And it came to pass, as Jesus sat at meat in the house, behold, many
publicans and sinners came and sat down with him and his disciples.

Observe here, Christ invited Matthew to a Discipleship, Matthew invites Christ
to a Feast; the Servant invites his Master, a Sinner invites his Savior. We do
not find, where ever Christ was invited to any Table, that he refused to go; if
a Pharisee, if a Publican invited, he constantly went; not for the Pleasure of
Eating, but for the Opportunity of Conversing, and doing Good: Christ feasts
us, when we feast him. From Matthew's Example, Learn, That new Converts are
full of Affection toward Christ, and very expressive of their Love unto him.
Such as before Conversion Disesteemed him, do afterward kindly and
respectfully Entertain him: Matthew touched with a sense of Christ's Rich Love,
makes him a Royal Feast. Obs. farther, How at this Feast many Publicanes and
Sinners were present, of Matthew's Acquaintance no doubt, and probably invited
by him, that they might also see Christ, and be Partakers of the same Grace
with him. Whence we Learn, That Grace teaches a Man to desire, and seek the
Conversion of others; and such as are truly brought home to Christ themselves,
will study and endeavor to bring in all their Acquaintance to Christ also.

11 And when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto his disciples, Why eats
your Master with publicans and sinners?

See here, what a Grief it is to Wicked Men, to see others brought in to
Christ; the Wicked Pharisees murmur, repine, and envy, instead of admiring
Christ's Condescension, and adoring his Divine Goodness: They censure him for
conversing with Sinners; but Christ tells them in the following Verses, that he
converst with them as their Physician, not as their Companion.

12 But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them, They that be whole need not a
physician, but they that are sick. 13 But go ye, and learn what that means, I
will have mercy and not sacrifice: for I am not come to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance.

As if our Lord had said, With whom should the Physician converse, but with his
Sick Patients? Now I am come into the World to do the Office of a kind
Physician unto Men; surely then I am to take all Opportunities to Help and Heal
them: They that are Sick need the Physician; but for you Pharisees, who are
whole and well in your own Opinion, and swelled with a Conceit of your own
Righteousness, I have no Hopes of doing any Good upon you; for such as think
themselves whole, desire no Physician's Help. Learn hence, 1. That Sin is the
Soul's Malady, its Spiritual Disease and Sickness. 2. That Christ is the
Physician appointed by God, for the Cure and Healing of this Disease and
Malady. 3. That there are Multitudes Spiritually Sick, who yet think themselves
sound and whole. 4. That only such as are sensible of their Spiritual Sickness,
are Subjects capable of Cure, and the Persons whom Christ is an Healing
Physician to: They that are whole need not the Physician, but they that are
sick.

14 Then came to him the disciples of John, saying, Why do we and the Pharisees
fast often, but thy disciples fast not? 15 And Jesus said unto them, Can the
children of the bridechamber mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? but
the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then
shall they fast. 16 No man puts a piece of new cloth unto an old garment:
for that which is put in to fill it up, takes from the garment, and the rent
is made worse. 17 Neither do men put new wine into old bottles: else the
bottles break, and the wine runs out, and the bottles perish: but they put
new wine into new bottles, and both are preserved.

The Pharisees themselves had a Contention with our Savior in the foregoing
Verses; here they set on the Disciples of John, to contend with him about
Fasting; alleging, that the Disciples of John fasted often, Christ's Disciples
not at all: Our Savior owns it, that his Disciples did not fast at present,
for two Reasons. 1. Because it was Unsuitable to them. 2. Because it was
Intolerable for them. It was Unsuitable to them, because of Christ's Bodily
Presence with them; this made it a time of Joy and Feasting, not of Mourning
and Fasting: While Christ the Bridegroom is with them, they must feast and
rejoice; when removed from them, there will be Cause enough to fast and mourn.
Christ is the Bridegroom, and his Church the Bride, which he has Espoused and
Married to himself; and whilst his Spouse did enjoy his Bodily Presence with
her, it was a Day of Joy and Rejoicing to her, and Mourning and Fasting was
improper for her. Again: This Discipline of Fasting was at present Intolerable
for the Disciples, for they were raw, green, and tender, and could no more bear
the Severities of Religion at present, than an old Garment could bear a piece
of new stiff Cloth to be set into it, which will make the Rent worse, if the
Garment comes to a stretch; or no more than old Bottles can keep new Wine. Thus
says Christ, My Disciples are young and green, tender and weak, newly
converted; they cannot bear the Severer Exercises of Religion presently; but
when I am ascended into Heaven, I will send down my Holy Spirit, which shall
enable them to all the Duties which the Gospel injoyns. Hence we may Gather,
That Young Converts, till grown up to some Consistency in Grace, must not be
put upon the Severer Exercises of Religion; but handled with that Tenderness
and Gentleness, which becomes the mild and merciful Dispensation of the Gospel.
Our Savior here commends Prudence to his Ministers; that they put not their
People upon Duties beyond their Strength, but consult their Progress in
Christianity, and the Proficiency they have made in Religion, and treat them
accordingly.

18 While he spoke these things unto them, behold, there came a certain ruler,
and worshipped him, saying, My daughter is even now dead: but come and lay thy
hand upon her, and she shall live. 19 And Jesus arose, and followed him, and so
did his disciples.

The humble Posture in which this Man came unto Christ, namely, falling at his
Foot and worshipping him; which was not only a Sign of tender Affection toward
his Daughter, but an Evidence of his Faith in our Blessed Savior; yet his
confining Christ's Power to his Bodily Presence, and to the Touch of his Hand,
was a Token of the Weakness of his Faith: Come, says he, and lay thy Hand upon
her, and she shall live: As if Christ could not have Cured her, without either
coming to her, or laying his Hand upon her. Note here, That although all that
come to Christ, are not alike strong in Faith, yet our Blessed Redeemer refuses
none that come unto him with a sincere Faith, though in much weakness of Faith.
Jesus arose, and followed him.

20 (And behold, a woman which was diseased with an issue of blood twelve
years, came behind him, and touched the hem of his garment. 21 For she said
within her self, If I may but touch his garment, I shall be whole. 22 But Jesus
turned him about, and when he saw her, he said, Daughter; be of good comfort,
thy faith has made thee whole. And the woman was made whole from that hour.)

Whilst Christ is on his way to the Ruler's House, a diseased Woman comes
behind him, touches his Garment, and is instantly Healed: The Virtue lay not in
her Finger, but in her Faith; or rather in Christ, which her Faith
Instrumentally drew forth. Obs. here, How Faith oft-times meets with a sweeter
Welcome, than it could expect. This poor Woman came to Christ, trembling, but
went away triumphing; Christ bids her, Be of good Comfort, her Faith had made
her whole.

23 And when Jesus came into the ruler's house, and saw the minstrels and the
people making a noise, 24 He said unto them, Give place, for the maid is not
dead, but sleeps. And they laughed him to scorn. 25 But when the people were
put forth, he went in, and took her by the hand, and the maid arose. 26 And the
same hereof went abroad into all that land.

Our Savior being come to the Ruler's House, finds the People very busily
preparing for the Interrment of the dead Corpse, with Music and other
Solemnities. This Custom of having Music at Funerals, came from the Heathens,
no mention is made thereof in the Old Testament; we read of tearing the Flesh,
shaving the Head, eating the Bread of Mourners; also of Funeral-Songs, but
these were only sung with the Voice; but Instruments of Music at Funerals,
came from the Pagans. Weeping and Lamentation are the most proper
Funeral-Musick; then, nothing sounds so well as a Sigh, nor is any thing so
much in season, as a Tear: Yet are all Demonstrations of immoderate and
excessive Mourning, both hurtful to the Living, and dishonorable to the Dead;
nor is it an Argument of more Love, but an Evidence of less Grace. Observe
next, In what sense our Savior affirms that the Damsel was not dead. Mortua
est vobis, mihi Dormit, says St. Jerome; She is Dead to you, but Asleep to me: I
can as easily raise her from Death, as you can awake her out of Sleep. Her Soul
was separated from her Body, but not yet fixed in its Eternal Mansion. Souls
departed are under the Conduct of Angels, good or bad, to their several Places
of Bliss or Misery. Probably, the Soul of this Damsel was under the Guard of
Angels near her dead Body, waiting the Pleasure of Christ in reference to it;
either to restore it again to the Body, or to translate it to its Eternal
Mansion.

27 And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying, and
saying, Thou Son of David, have mercy on us. 28 And when he was come into the
house, the blind men came to him: and Jesus says unto them, Believe ye that I
am able to do this? they said unto him, Yea, Lord. 29 Then touched he their
eyes, saying, According to your faith, be it unto you. 30 And their eyes were
opened, and Jesus straightly charged them, saying, See that no man know it. 31
But they, when they were departed, spread abroad his fame in all that country.

The Ruler, and others who came to Christ for Cure, and Healing, believed him
to be a Man, unto whom Almighty God had Communicated Divine Power. But it is
observable, that these poor Blind Men did believe him to be the Messiah, by
their calling him the Son of David; and according to their Faith, so was their
Success; their Faith capacitated them for a Cure. But why did our Lord enjoin
the Blind Men Silence, and straightly charge them to tell no Man of the Cure?
Herein the great Modesty and Humility of Christ appeared, in avoiding all
Ostentation and Commendation; as also a due Care of his own Safety, lest the
publishing of his Miracles should create him untimely Danger from the Pharisees.

32 As they went out, behold, they brought to him a dumb man possessed with a
devil. 33 And when the devil was cast out, the dumb spoke: and the multitudes
marvelled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel.

Still our Lord goes about doing Good; before he Healed the Diseased, here he
Helps the Possessed. Learn, 1. That amongst the many Calamities which Sin has
rendered Human Nature liable and obnoxious to, this is one, to be Bodily Possessed
by Satan. This Man's Dumbness was caused by the Devil's Possession. Learn, 2.
That one Demonstration of Christ's Divine Power, and a convictive Evidence of
his being truly and really God, was his Casting our Devils by the Word of his
Power.

34 But the Pharisees said, He casts out the devils through the prince of the
devils.

See here the dreadful and sad Effects of Blindness, Obstinacy, and Malice; the
Pharisees charge Christ with making a Contract with the Devil, affirming, that
he derived his Power from him: But how unlikely was this, that Satan should
lend our Savior a Power against himself, and for the Destruction of his own
Kingdom? Oh how dangerous is a wilful and obstinate Opposition of the Truth! It
provokes God to deliver a Person up to final Obduracy.

35 And Jesus went about all the cities and villages, teaching in their
synagogues, and preaching the gospel of the kingdom, and healing every
sickness, and every disease among the people. 36 But when he saw the
multitudes, he was moved with compassion on them, because they fainted, and
were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd.

Observe here, 1. Our Savior's great Work and Business in this World; it was
doing Good both to the Bodies and Souls of Men; the most pleasant and
delightful, the most happy and glorious Work, that a Person can be employed
about. 2. His unwearied Diligence and Industry, in this great and good Work; He
went about all the Cities and Villages, Preaching the Gospel, and Healing
Diseases; he traveled from Place to Place, to seek Occasions, and to lay hold
upon all Opportunities of being Useful and Beneficial to Mankind. Obs 3. The
particular Instance of our Lord's Goodness and Compassion toward the People in
those Cities and Villages where he Traveled; they wanted the Preaching of the
Gospel, that is, Faithful Dispensers of it. For though they had the Scribes and
Pharisees to Teach them, they Instructing them rather in their own Traditions,
than in the Simplicity of the Gospel; Christ pities the People, as Sheep
without a Shepherd. Thence Learn, That idle and lazy, unskilful and unfaithful
Laborers in Christ's Harvest, are no Laborers in his Account. They were as
Sheep having no Shepherd.

37 Then says he unto his disciples, The harvest truly is plenteous, but the
laborers are few. 38 Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will
send forth laborers into his harvest.

Note here, 1. That God's Church is an Harvest-Field. 2. That the Ministers of
God are Laborers in his Harvest, under GOD, the Lord of the Harvest. 3. That
to God alone does it belong to send forth Laborers into his Harvest; and none
must thrust themselves in, till God sends them forth. 4. That the Number of
Faithful Laborers in God's Harvest, is always comparatively small and few. 5.
That it is the Church's Duty, to pray, and that earnestly and incessantly, to
the Lord of the Harvest, to increase the Number of Faithful Laborers, and to
send forth more Laborers into his Harvest.

CHAP. X.
This Chapter acquaints us with the First Commission which our Savior gave his
Disciples, to Preach the Gospel: He directs them, First, Whither to go, and to
whom to Preach; namely, to the Jews, whom he calls, The lost Sheep of the House
of Israel. He instructs them Secondly, As to the Doctrine he would have them
Preach; namely, the Doctrine of Repentance. And Lastly, He arms them against
all the Difficulties they might meet with in their Ministry; and particularly,
fortifies them against the Fears of Poverty and Persecution.

1 AND when he had called unto him his twelve disciples, he gave them power
against unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sickness,
and all manner of disease.

As the Jewish Church arose from Twelve Patriarchs, so did the Christian Church
become planted by Twelve Apostles; the Person commissionating them, was Christ.
None are to undertake the Work and Calling of the Ministry, but those whom
Christ appoints; and the Persons commissionated, were Disciple^, before they
were Apostles: To teach us, that Christ will have such as Preach the Gospel, to
be Disciples before they are Ministers; trained up in the Doctrine of the
Gospel, before they undertake a Public Charge.

2 Now the names of the twelve apostles are these; The first, Simon, who is
called Peter, and Andrew his brother, James the son of Zebedee, and John his
brother, 3 Philip, and Bartholomew, Thomas, and Matthew the Publican, James the
son of Alpheus, and Lebbeus, whose surname was Thaddeus, 4 Simon the Canaanite,
and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.

Observe here, Of the Twelve Apostles, Peter is named first, and Judas last.
Peter is named first, because probably elder than the rest: or because for
Order-sake, he might Speak before the rest: From whence may be inferred a
Primacy, but no Supremacy; a Priority of Order, but no Superiority of Degree.
As the Foreman of a Grand-Inquest has a Precedence, but no Preheminency. Judas
is named last, with a Brand of Infamy set upon him, that he was the Traditor,
the Person that Betrayed his Lord and Master. Learn thence, That though the Truth
of Grace be absolutely necessary to a Minister's Salvation, yet the want of it
does not disannul his Office, nor hinder the Lawfulness of his Ministry: Judas,
though a Traitor, was yet a Lawful Minister.

5 These twelve Jesus sent forth, and commanded them, saying, Go not into the
way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not. 6 But go
rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

This was only a Temporary Prohibition, whilst Christ was here upon Earth, the
Jews being Christ's own People, of whom he came, and to whom he was promised,
the Gospel is first Preached to them; but afterward the Apostles had a Command
to Teach all Nations, and after Christ's Ascension, Samaria received the Gospel
by the Preaching of Philip. From the Character which Christ gives of the Jews,
calling them Lost Sheep, we Learn, 1. That the Condition of a People before
brought home to Christ by the Ministry of the Gospel, is a Lost Condition:
Sinners are as Lost Sheep, wandering and going astray from God, till the
Ministry of the Word finds them. 2. That the great Work and Office of the
Ministers of the Gospel is to call home, and to bring in, lost Sheep unto Jesus
Christ the Great Shepherd. Go, says Christ, to the lost Sheep, etc.

7 And as ye go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Observe here, 1. The Duty injoined the Apostles, in order to the bringing home
of Lost Souls to Christ, and that is, Preaching; As ye go, Preach. Note thence,
That the plain and persuasive Preaching of the Gospel, is the Special Means
appointed by Christ for the Salvation of Lost Sinners. Obs. 2. The Doctrine
they are injoined to Preach, namely, that The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand;
that is, that the promised Messiah was come, and had set up his Kingdom in the
World, and expected their Obedience to his Laws. Where note, How that the
Preaching of John, of Christ, and his Apostles, was one and the same; namely,
the Doctrine of Repentance: Repent, say they all, for the Kingdom of Heaven is
at Hand: that is, the Time of the Messiah's Appearing, which has been so long
expected, is now come.

8 Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out devils: freely
ye have received, freely give.

Here our Savior impowers his Apostles to work Miracles, for the Confirmation
of their Doctrine; but gives them a Charge to work them freely, without making
any private Advantage to themselves. Where Obs. 1. How Beneficial the Miracles
were, (which Christ and his Apostles wrought) to Mankind. Moses's Miracles,
were as great Judgments as Wonders; but these were Beneficent; they delivered
Men from Miseries, from Bodily Diseases, from the Power and Malice of Evil
Spirits: They healed the Sick, and cast out Devils. Obs. 2. That Jesus Christ,
to show himself a free Savior, and that whatever came from him, was the Effect
of Free Grace, gave his Apostles a Charge to dispense their Power in working
Miracles freely, without Money, and without Price.

9 Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses: 10 Nor scrip for
your journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves: (for the
workman is worthy of his meat)

This Command of Christ was Temporary, and extended only to the Apostles first
Journey, which they were soon to dispatch: Our Savior encourages them to trust
God; first, for Protection; take no Staves with you, that is, no striking or
smiting Staves for your own defense. Preachers must be no Strikers. Though a
Walking-Staff they might take with them: Itinerant-Preachers might be wearied
with Traveling, as well as with Speaking. Next for Provision; he would not
have them over-solicitous for that neither; saying, The Workman is worthy of
his Meat. As it is a Minister's great Duty, to trust GOD for his Maintenance;
so it is the People's Duty, to take care for their Minister's comfortable
Subsistence. The Labourer is worthy of his Hire, and the Workman is worthy of
his Meat.

11 And into whatsoever city or town ye shall enter, inquire who in it is
worthy: and there abide till ye go thence. 12 And when ye come into an house,
salute it. 13 And if the house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if
it be not worthy, let your peace return to you. 14 And whosoever shall not
receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house or city,
shake off the dust of your feet. 15 Verily I say unto you, It shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for
that city.

Our Savior proceeds to direct his Disciples, how to manage this their first
Journey in Preaching the Gospel; he injoins them, 1. To observe the Rules of
Decency, in their going from one Place to another; not like Beggars, wandering
from House to House; but having entered a City or Village, to make enquiry, who
stood best affected to the Gospel, and there turn in. 2. Our Savior injoins
them Civil and Religious Courtesy toward those whom they applied themselves
unto. When ye come into an House, salute it; give it a Civil Salutation, but
especially a Christian and Spiritual Salute, wishing them Mercy, Grace, and
Peace. 3. He encourages his Apostles in the want of Success; if they hear you
not, Shake off the Dust of your Feet. This Action was Emblematical, and
signified, That Almighty God would in like manner shake off them, and esteem
them no better than the vilest Dust. Note, That those who despise the Message
which the Ministers of the Gospel bring, shall hereafter find the Dust of their
Feet, and the Ashes of their Grave, to give a Judicial Testimony against them
in the Day of CHRIST. Wherever the Word is Preached, it is for a Testimony
against them; for if the Dust of a Minister's Feet bear Witness against the
Despisers of the Gospel, their Sermons much more.

16 Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves: be ye therefore
wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.

Our Savior, in this and the following Verses, arms his Apostles against all
the Difficulties, Dangers, and Discouragements which they might meet with in
the Course of their Ministry: He tells them, he sent them forth as Sheep
amongst Wolves; intimating thereby unto them, that the Enemies of the Gospel
have as great an Inclination from their Malicious Nature, to devour and destroy
the Ministers of Christ, as Wolves have from their natural temper to devour
Sheep: He therefore recommends to them, Prudence and Innocence; Be wise as
Serpents, to avoid the World's Injuries; and Harmless as Doves, in not
revenging them. The Ministers of Christ must not be altogether Doves, lest they
fall into Dangers; nor altogether as Serpents, lest they endanger others. For
as Piety without Policy is too simple to be safe, so Policy without Piety is
too subtle to be good. Our Savior in this Text teaches us, That Wisdom and
Innocence should dwell together.

17 But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to the councils, and they
will scourge you in their synagogues. 18 And ye shall be brought before
governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them and the
gentiles. 19 But when they deliver you up, take no thought how, or what ye
shall speak: for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall speak.
20 For it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your Father which speaks in
you.

Here our Savior lets his Apostles know, that for their Owning Him, and
Preaching his Gospel, they should be brought before all sorts of Magistrates,
and in all kinds of Courts: But he advises them, when they are brought before
Kings and Princes, not to be anxiously thoughtful what they should say; for it
should be given in that Hour, what they should, Answer. Learn hence, That though
Truth may be opposed, yet Truth's Defenders shall never be ashamed; and rather
than they shall want a Tongue to plead for it, GOD himself will prompt them by
his Spirit, and suggest such Truths to their Minds, as all their Opposers shall
not be able to gainsay.

21 And the brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the
child: and the children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to
be put to death. 22 And ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake: but he
that indureth to the end, shall be saved.

Our Savior goes on in a farther Discovery of the World's Hatred, and Enmity
against the Gospel, and the Preachers of it; and gives all Christians in
general, and his Ministers in particular, to understand, That such is the
Enmity of the World against Holiness, and the Professors of it, that it will
overcome and extinguish, even the Natural Affection of the nearest and dearest
Relations toward each other. Grace teaches us, To lay down our Lives for the
Brethren; but Corruption teaches Brother to take away the Life of Brother; The
Brother shall deliver the Brother to Death. Yet Observe, Our Savior comforts
his Disciples, that there will be an end of these Sufferings; and assures them,
That if their Faith and Patience did hold out unto the end, they should be
saved. This is our Comfort, that if our Sufferings for Christ end not in our
Lifetime, they will end with our Lives.

23 But when they persecute you in this city, flee ye into another: for verily
I say unto you, Ye shall not have gone over the cities of Israel, till the Son
of man be come.

Our Savior here directs his Apostles to a prudent Care of their own
Preservation, and allows them to flee in time of Persecution; assuring them,
That before they had gone through all the Cities of the Jews, Preaching the
Gospel, he would certainly come in Judgment against Jerusalem, and with
Severity destroy his own Murderers, and their Persecutors. Learn, That Christ
allows his Ministers the liberty of Flight in time of Persecution, that they
may preserve their Lives for future Service. Surely, it is no Shame to fly, when
our Captain commands it, and also practices it, Matthew. 2. Christ by his own
Example has Sanctified that State of Life unto us, and by his Command made it
Lawful for us.

24 The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his lord. 25 It
is enough for the disciple, that he be as his master, and the servant as his
lord: if they have called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more
shall they call them of his household?

Our Savior here teaches all Christians, but especially Ministers, how
unreasonable and absurd it is for them, to expect kinder Usage from an unkind
World, than he Himself met with: Are we greater, holier, or wiser than He? Why
then should we expect better Usage than he? Was he hated, persecuted, reviled,
murdered, for the Holiness of his Doctrine, and the Usefulness of his Life?
Why then should any of us Think strange of the Fiery Trial, as if some strange
thing had befaln us? 1 Pet. 4.12. Is it not enough, That the Disciple be as his
Master, and the Servant as his Lord, but must he hope to be above him?

26 Fear them not therefore: for there is nothing covered, that shall not be
revealed; and hid, that shall not be known. 27 What I tell you in darkness,
that speak ye in light: and what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye on the
house tops.

Christ here exhorts his Disciples to a free Profession, and open Publication
of the Doctrine of the Gospel, from this Consideration, That whatever they say
or do shall be brought to light, proclaimed and published to the World. As
Wicked Men have cause to fear, because their Evil Deeds shall be made evident;
so Good Men have cause to rejoice, because their Goodness and Good Deeds shall
be made manifest. Let it be our Care to do Good, and it shall be CHRIST's Care
to discover the Goodness which we do, to vindicate it from Misconstruction, and
set it in its clearest Light.

28 And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul:
but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.

Obs. here the following Particulars. 1. An unwarrantable Fear condemned; and
that is, the sinful, servile, slavish Fear of impotent Man. Fear not him that
can kill the Body. 2. An holy, awful, and prudential Fear of the Omnipotent God
commended. Fear him that is able to kill both Body and Soul. 3. The Persons
that this Duty of Fear is recommended to, and bound upon; Christ's own
Disciples, yea, his Ministers and Ambassadors; they both may and ought to fear
him; not only for his Greatness and Goodness, but upon the account of his
Punitive Justice; as, Being able to cast both Soul and Body into Hell: Such a
Fear is not only Lawful but Laudable, not only commendable but commanded, and
well becomes the Servants of God themselves.

29 Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing? and one of them shall not fall to
the ground without your Father. 30 But the very hairs of your head are all
numbered. 31 Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows.

Obs. here, 1. The Doctrine which our Savior Preaches to his Disciples; and
that is, the Doctrine of Divine Providence; which concerns it self for the
meanest Creatures, even the Birds of the Air, and the Hairs of our Heads, do
fall within the compass of God's Protecting Care. 2. Here is the Use which our
Savior makes of this Doctrine; namely, to fortify the Spirits of his
Disciples against all distrustful Fears, and distracting Cares. Learn, That the
Consideration of the Divine Care, and Gracious Providence of GOD over us and
ours, ought to antidote our Spirits against all distrustful Fears whatsoever.
If an Hair from the Head falls not to the Ground without a Providence, much
less shall the Head it self; if the very Excrements of the Body, (such are the
Hair) be taken Care of by God, surely the more noble Parts of the Body, and
especially the noblest Part of our selves, our Souls, shall fall under his
particular Regard.

32 Whosoever therefore shall confess me before men, him will I confess also
before my Father which is in heaven. 33 But whosoever shall deny me before men,
him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven.

Obs. here, 1. That not to confess Christ, in his Account is to deny him; and
to deny him, is to be ashamed of him. 2. That whosoever shall deny, disown, or
be ashamed of Christ; either in his Person, in his Gospel, or in his Members,
for any Fear or Favor of Man, shall with Shame be disowned, and eternally
rejected by Him at the Dreadful Judgment of the Great Day. CHRIST may be Denied
three ways. Doctrinally, by an Erroneous and Heretical Judgment. Verbally, by
Oral Expressions. Vitally, by a Wicked and Unholy Life. But Woe to that Soul
that denies CHRIST any of these Ways.

34 Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace,
but a sword. 35 For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and
the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in
law. 36 And a man's foes shall be they of his own household.

We must distinguish here, betwixt the Intentional Aim of Christ's Coming, and
the Accidental Event of it. His Intentional Aim, was to propagate and promote
Peace in the World; but through the Corruption of Man's Nature, the Accidental
Event of his Coming is War and Division: Not that these are the genuine and
natural Fruits of the Gospel, but Occasional and Accidental only. Note, That
the Preaching of the Gospel, and setting up the Kingdom of Christ in the World,
though it be not the Natural Cause, yet it is the Accidental Occasion of all that
War and Tumult, of all that Distraction and Confusion, which the World abounds
with.

37 He that loves father or mother more than me, is not worthy of me: and he
that loves son or daughter more than me, is not worthy of me. 38 And he that
takes not his cross, and follows after me, is not worthy of me. 39 He that
finds his life shall lose it: and he that loses his life for my sake, shall
find it.

Our Savior by these Expressions, does not condemn Natural Love and Affection,
either to our Relations, or our own Lives; but only regulates and directs it;
and shows, that our first and chief Love must be bestowed upon Himself. We may
have tender and relenting Affections, toward our dear Relations; but then the
Consideration of CHRIST's Truth and Religion, must take Place of these; nay, of
Life it self; nay, when these come in Competition, we are to regard them no
more, than if they were the Objects of our Hatred. Luke 14.26. If a Man hate
not his Father, etc. Learn hence, That all the Disciples of Christ should be
ready and willing whenever God calls them to it, to quit all their Temporal
Interests and Enjoyments, even Life it self; and to submit to any Temporal
Inconvenience, even Death it self: And all this willingly, cheerfully, and
patiently; rather than disown their Relation to Christ, and quit the Profession
of his Truth and Religion. 2. That such as for Secular Interest, and the
Preservation of Temporal Life, do renounce their Profession of Christ and his
Religion; they do not only greatly hazard their Temporal Life, but expose their
Eternal Life to the greatest Danger. He that finds his Life, shall lose it,
etc.

40 He that receives you, receives me; and he that receives me, receives
him that sent me. 41 He that receives a prophet, in the name of a prophet,
shall receive a prophet's reward; and he that receives a righteous man, in the
name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. 42 And
whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones, a cup of cold
water only, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no
wise lose his reward.

Here in the close of the Chapter, our Blessed Savior encourages his Apostles
to Faithfulness in their Office; by assuring them, that he should reckon and
esteem all the Kindness shown to them, as done unto himself: And to encourage
the World to be kind to his Disciples and Ministers, he assures them, that even
a Cup of cold Water should meet with a liberal Reward: How cold is their
Charity, who deny a Cup of cold Water to the Ministers and Disciples of Christ!
Learn, 1. That there is some special and eminent Reward due to the Faithful
Prophets of GOD, above other Men. 2. That he that shall entertain a Prophet,
and do any good Office for him, under that Name; that is, for his Office-sake,
shall be Partaker of that Reward. 3. That the least Office of Love, and Respect
of Kindness and Charity, which we show to any of the Ministers or Members of
Jesus Christ, for his sake, Christ accounts it as done unto himself, and it
shall be rewarded by himself.

CHAP. XI.
1 AND it came to pass, when Jesus had made an end of commanding his twelve
disciples, he departed thence to teach, and to preach in their cities.

Our Blessed Savior having sent forth his Twelve Apostles in the foregoing
Chapter, to Plant and Propagate the Gospel, we find him in this Chapter
following them himself, in that great and necessary Work; He departed to Teach
and to Preach in their Cities. CHRIST, the Great Bishop and Shepherd of Souls,
sent not forth the Apostles as his Curates, to labor and sweat in the
Vineyard, whilst he took his Ease at Home; but he followed them himself: His
Word of Command to them was, Praeite Sequar; Go ye before, I will follow after.
Note, 1. That Preaching of the Gospel is a great and necessary Work, incumbent
upon all the Ministers of Christ, let their Dignity and Preheminency in the
Church be what it will: None of the Servants are above their Lord. 2. That if
there be a Distinction betwixt Teaching and Preaching, (as some apprehend) they
are both the Work of Christ's Ministers; who are obliged from their Master's
Example to perform both: Teaching is in order to the Conversion of Sinners, and
Preaching in order to the Edification of Saints.

2 Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of
his disciples, 3 And said unto him, Art thou he that should come, or do we look
for another?

It was not for John's Information, that he sent his Disciples to Christ, but
for their Satisfaction, that he was the true and promised Messiah; John was
assured of it himself by a Sign from Heaven at our Savior's Baptism, Matthew.
3.17. But John's Disciples, out of a great Zeal to him their Master, envied
Christ himself, and were unwilling to believe any Person greater than their
Master: Therefore John out of a Pious Design, to confirm his Disciples in the
Belief of Christ's being the true Messiah, sends them to our Savior, to hear
the Doctrine which he taught, and to see the Miracles which he wrought. Learn
hence, What a Pious Desire there is in such as know Christ experimentally
themselves, to bring all that belong to them, to a Saving Acquaintance with him.

4 Jesus answered and said unto them, Go, and show John again those things
which ye do hear and see: 5 The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk,
the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the
poor have the gospel preached to them.

Observe here, 1. The Way and Means which our Savior takes for the Conviction
and Satisfaction of John's Disciples, that he was the true Messiah; he appeals
to the Miracles wrought by himself, and submits the Miracles wrought by him to
the Judgment of their Senses; Go, and show John the Miracles which you hear and
see. Obs. 2. The Miracles themselves; The Blind receive their sight, the Lame
walk, the Deaf hear, etc. Christ was all this in a Literal Sense, and in a
Mystical Sense also, he was an Eye of Understanding to the Ignorant, a Foot of
Power to the Weak: He opened an Ear in deaf Hearts, to receive the Word of
Life: And the Poor are Evangelized; that is, turned into the Spirit and Temper
of the Gospel; the Rich hear the Gospel, but the Poor receive it; that is, they
feel the powerful Impressions of it: As we say, such a one is Italianized, when
his Carriage is such, as if he were a Natural Italian. The Passive Verb (...)
denotes, Non Actum Praedicationis, sed Effectum Evangelii Praedicati; the Good
Effect which the Gospel had upon the Hearts and Lives of the Poor, transforming
them into the likeness of it self. Learn, It is a Blessed Thing, when the
Preaching of the Gospel has such a powerful Influence upon the Minds of Men,
that the Temper of their Minds, and the Actions of their Lives are a lively
Transcript of the Spirit and Temper of the Holy JESUS.

6 And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.

Our Savior here, by pronouncing them Blessed that are not offended in him,
does intimate the Misery of those who stumble at him, and to whom he is a Rock
of Offense. Some are offended at the Poverty of his Person, others are offended
at the Sublimity and Sanctity of his Doctrine. Some are offended at his Cross,
others are offended at his Free Grace: But such as instead of being Offended at
CHRIST, Believe in him, and bottom their Expectations of Heaven and Salvation
upon him, are in a Happy and Blessed Condition: Blessed is he, that shall not
be offended in me.

7 And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning
John, What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with with the
wind? 8 But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment?
behold, they that wear soft clothing, are in king's houses. 9 But what went ye
out for to see? A prophet? yea, I say unto you, and more than a prophet. 10 For
this is he of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face,
which shall prepare thy way before thee.

Our Savior having given Satisfaction to John's Disciples, next enters upon a
large Commendation of John himself: Where Observe, 1. The Persons whom he
commended him before; not John's own Disciples, for they had too high an
Opinion of their Master already, and were so much addicted to John, that they
envied Christ for his sake: See Joh. 3.26. Behold, Christ Baptizeth, and all
Men come unto him. It was a great Eyesore, that Christ had more Hearers and
Followers than John; therefore not before John's Disciples, but before the
Multitude, Christ commends John: For as John's Disciples had too high, so the
Multitude had too low an Opinion of him; possibly because of his Imprisonment
and Sufferings. There was a time, when the People had high Thoughts of John,
but now they undervalued him. Learn thence, The great uncertainty of Popular
Applause; the People contemn to day, whom they admired yesterday; he who to day
is cried up, to morrow is trodden down. The Word and the Ministers are the same,
but this proceeds from the Fickleness and Inconstancy of the People; nothing is
so mutable as the Mind of Man, nothing so variable as the Opinion of the
Multitude. Observe, 2. The Time when our Savior thus commended John; not in
the time of his Prosperity and Greatness, when the People flockt after him, and
Herod got him to Court, and reverenced him; but when the giddy Multitude had
forsaken him, and he was fallen into Disgrace at Court, and had Preached himself
into a Prison: Now Christ vindicates his Innocence, maintains his Honor,
proclaims his Worth; and tells the People, that the World was not worthy of
such a Preacher as John was. Learn thence, That Christ will stand by, and stick
fast to his Faithful Ministers, when all the World forsakes them. Let the World
slight and despise them at their pleasue, yet Christ will maintain their
Honor, and support their Cause; as they bear a Faithful Witness to Christ, so
Christ will bear Witness to their Faithfulness for him. Obs. 3. The
Commendation it self. Our Savior commends John, 1. For his Constancy; he was
not a Reed shaken with the Wind; that is, a Man of an unstable and unsettled
Judgment, but fixed and steadfast. 2. For his Sobriety and high Measures of
Mortification; he was no delicate voluptuous Person, but grave, sober, and
severe; he was mortified to the Glory and Honor, to the Ease and Pleasures of
the World. John wrought no Miracles, but his Holy Conversation was as effectual
as Miracles, to prevail with the People. 3. For his Humility; he might have
been what he would; the People were ready to cry him up for the Messiah, the
Christ of God, but John's lowly Spirit refuses all; He confessed, and denied
not; saying, I am not the Christ, but a poor Minister of his, willing, but not
worthy to do him Service. This will commend our Ministry to the Consciences of
our People; when we seek not our own Glory, but the Glory of Christ. 4. Our
Savior commends John for his clear Preaching and Revealing of CHRIST to the
People: He was more than a Prophet, verse. 9. because he pointed out Christ more
clearly and fully than any before him. The Ancient Prophets saw Christ afar
off; John beheld him Face to Face; they prophesied of him, he pointed at him,
saying, This is He. Whence Learn, That the Clearer any Ministry is in
discovering of CHRIST, the more Excellent it is.

11 Verily I say unto you, Among them that are born of women, there has not
risen a greater than John the Baptist: notwithstanding, he that is least in the
kingdom of heaven, is greater than he.

Our Savior having highly commended John in the soregoing Verses, here he sets
Bounds to the Honors of his Ministry; adding, That though John was greater than
all the Prophets that went before him, seeing more of Christ than all them, yet
he saw less than them that came after him. The meanest Evangelical Minister
that Preaches Christ come, is to be preferred before all the Old Prophets, who
Prophesied of Christ to come. That Minister who sets forth the Life, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension of Jesus Christ, Is greater in the Kingdom of
Heaven; that is, has an higher Office in the Church, and a more excellent
Ministry, than all the Prophets, yea, than John himself. The Excellency of a
Ministry, consists in the Light and Clearness of it. Now though John's Light did
exceed all that went before him, yet it fell short of them that came after him:
And thus he that was Least in the Kingdom of Grace on Earth; much more, he that
is least in the Kingdom of Glory in Heaven, Was greater than John.

12 And from the days of John the Baptist, until now, the kingdom of heaven
suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.

Our Savior goes on in commending John's Ministry, from the great Success of
it; it had that powerful Influence upon the Consciences of Men, that no
Soldiers were ever more violent and eager in the storming and taking a strong
Hold, than John's Hearers were in pursuing the Kingdom of Heaven. Never any
Minister (before) discovered the Messiah and his Kingdom so clearly as John
did; and therefore never was there such Zeal to press into the Kingdom of
Heaven amongst any, as the Hearers of John had. Learn hence, 1. That the
clearer Knowledge any People have of the Worth and Excellency of Heaven, the
more will their Zeal be inflamed in the pursuit of Heaven. 2. That all that do
intend and resolve for Heaven, must offer violence in the taking of it; none
but the violent are victorious: They take it by Force. Which Words are both
Restrictive, and Promissive. They are the violent, and none other, that take
it; and all the violent shall take it. Though careless Endeavors may prove
abortive, vigorous prosecution shall not miscarry.

13 For all the prophets, and the law prophesied until John. 14 And if ye will
receive it, this is Elias which was for to come. 15 He that has ears to hear,
let him hear.

Here is still a farther Commendation of John. The Law and the Prophets, till
the coming of John, did foretell the Messiah; but not so determinately, not so
nearly, not so clearly, as John did: And accordingly, he was that Elias which
Isaiah and Malachy foretold should be the Harbinger and Forerunner of Christ.
But why has John the Baptist the Name of Elias? Possibly because they were
alike zealous in the Work of GOD; they were alike successful in that Work, and
they were alike persecuted for their Work; the one by Jezebel, the other by
Herodias.

16 But whereunto shall I liken this generation? It is like unto children
sitting in the markets, and calling unto their fellows, 17 And saying, We have
piped unto you, and ye have not danced: we have mourned unto you, and ye have
not lamented. 18 For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He
has a devil. 19 The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold,
a man gluttonous, and a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners: but
wisdom is justified of her children.

Our Savior in these Words describes the perverse Humor of the Pharisees,
whom nothing could allure to the Embracing of the Gospel, neither John's
Ministry, nor CHRIST's. This our Savior sets forth two Ways. 1. Allegorically,
verse. 16, 17. 2. Properly, verse. 18, 19. By way of Allegory, he compares them
to sullen Children, whom nothing would please, neither Mirth, nor Mourning: If
their Fellows Piped before them, they would not Dance, if they sang Mournful
Songs to them, they would not Lament. That is, the Pharisees were of such a
Censorious and Capricious Humor, that GOD himself could not please them, though
he used variety of Means and Methods, in order to that End. Next, our Lord
plainly interprets this Allegory, by telling them, That John came to them
neither eating nor drinking; that is, not so freely and plentifully, as other
Men, being a very austere and mortified Man, both in his Diet and in his Habit:
And all this was designed by God, that the Austerity of his Life, and Severity
of his Doctrine, might awaken the Pharisees to Repentance: But instead of this,
they censure him for having a Devil; because he delighted in Solitude, and
avoided Converse with Men. According to the Ancient Observation, that every
Solitary Person is either an Angel, or a Devil. John being thus rejected,
Christ himself comes to them, who being of a free and familiar Converse, not
shunning the Society of the worst of Men, even of the Pharisees themselves, but
complying with their Customs, and accompanying with them at their Feasts; yet
without the least Compilnace with them in their Sins. But the Freedom of our
Savior's Conversation displeased them, as much as John's Reservedness of
Temper; for they cry, Behold a Man gluttonous: Christ's Affability toward
Sinners, they call Approbation of their Sins; and his Sociable Disposition,
Looseness and Luxury. Learn hence, 1. That the faithful and zealous Ministers of
GOD, let their Temper and Converse be what it will, cannot please the Enemies
of Religion, and the Haters of the Power of Godliness; neither John's
Austerity, nor Christ's Familiarity, would gain upon the Pharisees. It is our
Duty in the Course of our Ministry, to seek to please all Men for their Good:
But after all our Endeavors to please all, we shall please but very few; but
if God and Conscience be of the Number of those Few, we are Safe and Happy.
Obs. 2. That it has been the old Policy of the Devil, that he might hinder the
Success of the Gospel, to fill the Minds of Persons with an Invincible
Prejudice against the Ministers and Dispensers of the Gospel. Obs. 3. That
after all the Scandalous Reproaches cast upon Religion, and the Ministers of
it; such as are Wisdom's Children, wise and good Men, will justify Religion;
that is, Approve it in their Judgments, Honor it in their Discourses, and
Adorn it in their Lives. Wisdom is justified of her Children.

20 Then began he to upbraid the cities wherein most of his mighty works were
done, because they repented not. 21 Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee
Bethsaida: for if the mighty works which were done in you, had been done in
Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes. 22
But I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of
judgment, than for you.

Our Savior having gone through the Cities of Galilee. Preaching the Doctrine of
Repentance, and Confirming his Doctrine with Miracles, and finding multitudes
after all his Endeavors remaining in their Impenitency, he proceeds to upbraid
them severely for that their Contempt of Gospel Grace: Then began he to upbraid
the Cities, etc. Where, Observe, 1. The Cities upbraided, Chorazin, Bethsaida,
and Capernaum; in their Pulpits he daily Preached, and those Places were the
Theaters upon which his Miracles were wrought; other Cities only heard, these
saw; but where he Preached most, he Prevailed least. Like some Fishermen, he
caught least in his own Pond. Obs. 2. What he upbraids them for; not for
Disrespect to his Person, but for Disobedience to his Doctrine; Because they
repented not. The great Design of Christ, both in the Doctrine which he
preached, and in the Miracles which he wrought, was to bring Men to Repentance;
that is, to forsake their Sins, and Live well. Obs. 3. Whom he upbraids them
with; Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah, Nations rude and barbarous, out of
the Pale of the Church; ignorant of a Savior, and of the Way of Salvation by
him. Therefore instead of Wooing them, he denounces Woes against them. Learn,
That the higher a People rise under the Means, the lower they fall, if they
miscarry. They that have been nearest to Conversion, and yet not converted,
shall have the greatest Condemnation when they are judged. Capernaum's Sentence
shall exceed Sodom's for Severity, because she exceeded Sodom in the Enjoyment
of Means and Mercy.

23 And thou Capernaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shall be brought down to
hell; for if the mighty works which have been done in thee, had been done in
Sodom, it would have remained until this day.

This City lying under greater Guilt than the rest, Christ names it by it self,
without the rest; nay, he does not only name it, but notify it, as being
lifted up to Heaven by Signal Favors and Privileges; namely, Christ's
Presence, Chnst's Preaching, and Miracles. Obs. 1. Capernaum's Privilege
enjoyed; though a poor obsecure Place in it self, yet she was by the Person,
Ministry, and Miracles of Christ, lifted up to Heaven. Learn thence, That
Gospel Ordinances and Church Priviledges enjoyed, are a mighty Honor and
Advancement to the poorest Persons and obscurest Places. Obs. 2. An heavy Doom
denounced, Thou shall be brought down to Hell; that is, thy Condition shall be
as sad, as that of the worst of Men, for thy Non-proficiency under the Means
enjoyed. Learn thence, That Gospel Ordinances and Church Priviledges enjoyed,
but not improved, provoke Almighty God to inflict the sorest of Judgments upon
a People. Thou Capernaum, exalted to Heaven, shall be brought down to Hell.

24 But I say unto you, That it shall be more tolerable for the land of Sodom,
in the day of judgment, than for thee.

Observe here, 1. That there shall be a Day of Judgment. 2. That in the Day of
Judgment, some Sinners shall fare worse than others; there are Degrees of
Punishment among the Damned. 3. That the worst of Heathens, who never heard of
a Savior, nor ever had an Offer of Salvation by him, shall fare better in the
Day of Judgment, than those that continue impenitent under the Gospel. CHRIST
here avouches, that Capernaum's Sentence shall exceed Sodom's, for Severity.

25 At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them unto babes. 26 Even so Father, for so it seemed good in
thy sight.

In these Verses, our Savior glorifies his Father, for the wise and free
Dispensation of his Gospel Grace, to the meanest and most ignorant; whilst the
Great and Learned Men of the World undervalued and despised it. Learn, 1. That
till GOD reveals himself, his Nature and Will; no Man can know either what he
is, or what he requires. Thou have revealed. 2. That the Wise Men of the World
have in all Ages despised the Mysteries of the Gospel, and have therefore been
Judicially given up by GOD to their own wilful Blindness. Thou have hid these
things from the Wise and Prudent. 3. That the most Ignorant and most Humble,
not the most Learned and most Proud, do stand ready to receive and embrace the
Gospel-Revelation. Thou have revealed them unto Babes. 4. That this is no less
pleasing to Christ, than it is the Pleasure of the Father. Even so Father, as
it seemed good in thy sight. As if Christ had said, Father, thy Election and
Choice pleases me, as being the Choice and Good Pleasure of thy Wisdom.

27 All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knows the Son
but the Father: neither knows any man the Father, save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal him.

In this Verse, our Savior opens his Commission, and declares, 1. His
Authority; that all Power is committed to Him, as Mediator, from God the
Father. 2. His Office; to reveal his Father's Mind and Will to a Lost World. No
Man knows the Father, but the Son: That is, the Essence and Nature of the
Father, the Will and Counsel of the Father; only as the Son reveals them.
Learn, That all our Saving Knowledge of God is in and through Jesus Christ; he,
as the Great Prophet of his Church, reveals the Mind and Will of GOD unto us
for our Salvation, and no Saving Knowledge without him.

28 Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest.

Here we have a sweet Invitation, backed with a gracious Encouragement; Christ
invites such as are weary of the Burden of Sin, of the Slavery of Satan, of the
Yoke of the Ceremonial Law, to come unto him for Rest and Ease; and as an
Encouragement, assures them, that upon their coming to Him, they shall find
Rest. Learn, 1. That Sin it is the Soul's Laborious Burden. Come unto me ye
that Labor. Laboring supposes a Burden to be labored under; this Burden is
Sin's Guilt. 2. That such as come to Christ for Rest, must be Laden Sinners. 3.
That Laden Sinners not only may, but ought to come to Christ for Rest; they may
come, because invited; they ought to come, because commanded. 4. That the Laden
Sinner, upon his coming, shall find Rest. Come, etc.

29 Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart:
and ye shall find rest unto your souls.

Obs. 1. Christ's Disciples, must wear Christ's Yoke. This Yoke is twofold; a
Yoke of Instruction, and a Yoke of Affliction. Christ's Law is a Yoke of
Instruction; it restrains our Natural Inclinations, it curbs our Sensual
Appetites; it is a Yoke to corrupt Nature; this Yoke Christ calls his Yoke,
Take my Yoke upon you: 1. Because he as a Lord, lays it upon our Necks. 2.
Because he as a Servant, bore it upon his own Neck first, before he laid it
upon ours. Obs. 2. That the Way and Manner how to bear Christ's Yoke, must be
learnt of Christ himself. Take my Yoke upon you, and learn of me; that is,
Learn of me, both what to bear, and how to bear. Obs. 3. That Christ's Humility
and Lowlimindedness is a great Encouragement to Christians, to come unto him,
and learn of him, both how to obey his Commands, and how to suffer his Will and
Pleasure. Learn of me, for I am meek.

30 For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

Observe here, 1. Christ's Authority and Greatness; he has Power to impose a
Yoke, and inflict a Burden. My Yoke: My Burden. 2. His Clemency and Goodness,
in imposing an easy Yoke, and a light Burden. My Yoke is easy, my Burden is
light; that is, my Service is good and gainful, profitable and useful; not only
tolerable, but delightful; and as is my Yoke, such is my Burden: the Burden of
my Precepts, the Burden of my Cross, both light, not absolutely, but
comparatively; the Weight of my Cross is not comparable with the Glory of my
Crown. Learn, That the Service of Christ, though hard and intolerable to Corrupt
Nature, yet is a most desirable and delightful Service to Grace, or Renewed
Nature; Christ's Service is easy to a Spiritual Mind. 1. It is easy as it is
a Rational Service; consonant to Right Reason, though contradictory to Depraved
Nature. 2. Easy, as it is a Spiritual Service; delightful to a Spiritual Mind.
3. Easy, as it is an Assisted Service; considering that we work not in our own
Strength, but in God's. 4. Easy, when once it is an Accustomed Service; though
hard to Beginners, it is easy to Progressors; the farther we walk, the sweeter
is our Way. 5. Easy, as it is the most Gainful Service; having the Assurance
of an Eternal Weight of Glory, as the Reward of our Obedience. Well therefore
might our Holy LORD say to his Followers, My Yoke is easy, and my Burden is
light.

CHAP. XII.
Our Blessed Savior in this Chapter, takes occasion to Instruct his Disciples
in the Doctrine of the Sabbath; showing, that Works of Necessity and Mercy may
be performed upon that Day, without any Violation of the Divine Command.

1 AT that time Jesus went on the sabbath day through the corn, and his
disciples were an hungered, and began to pluck the ears of corn, and to eat.

Obs. here, The poor Estate, and low Condition of Christ's own Disciples in
this World; they wanted Bread, and are forced to pluck the Ears of Corn, to
satisfy their Hunger. God sometimes su^^ers his dearest Children in this World
to fall into Straits, and to taste of Want, for the Trial of their Faith, and
dependence upon his Power and Providence.

2 But when the Pharisees saw it, they said unto him, Behold, thy disciples do
that which is not lawful to do on the sabbath day.

Obs. here, 1. The Persons finding Fault with this Action of the Disciples, the
Pharisees; many of whom accompanied our Savior, not out of any good Intention,
but only with a Design to cavil at, and quarrel with every thing, that either
Christ or his Disciples said or did. Obs. 2. The Action which they found fault
with; The Disciples plucking of the Ears of Corn on the Sabbath Day. Where
Note, It is not the Theft, which the Disciples are accused for by the
Pharisees: For to take in our Necessity so much of our Neighbor's Goods, as we
may reasonably suppose, that if he were present, and knew our Circumstances, he
would give us, is no Theft; but it is the servile Labor on the Sabbath, in
gathering the Corn, that the Pharisees scruple. Learn thence, How zealous
Hypocrites are for the lesser Things of the Law, whilst they neglect the
weightier; and how superstitiously addicted to Outward Ceremonies, placing all
Holiness in the Observation of them.

3 But he said unto them, Have ye not read what David did when he was an
hungered, and they that were with him, 4 How he entered into the house of God,
and did eat the shewbread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for
them which were with him, but only for the priests? 5 Or have ye not read in
the law, how that on the sabbath days the priests in the temple profane the
sabbath, and are blameless? 6 But I say unto you, that in this place is one
greater than the temple.

In these Words, our Savior defends the Action of his Disciples in plucking
the Ears of Corn in their Necessity, by a double Argument: 1. From David's
Example; Necessity freed him from Fault in eating the Consecrated Bread, which
none but the Priests might lawfully eat; for in Cases of Necessity, a
Ceremonial Precept must give place to a Moral Duty; Works of Mercy and
Necessity, for preserving our Lives, and the better fitting us for
Sabbath-Services, are certainly lawful on the Sabbath Day. 2. From the Example
of the Priests in the Temple, who upon the Sabbath do break the outward Rest of
the Day, by Killing their Sacrifices, and many other Acts of Bodily Labor;
which would be accounted Sabbath-Prophanation, did not the Service of the
Temple require and justify it. Now says our Savior, If the Temple-Service
can justify Labor on the Sabbath, I am greater than the Temple, and my
Authority and Service can justify what my Disciples have done. From the whole
we Learn, That Acts of Mercy, which tend to fit u^^^r Works of Piety, not only
may, but ought to be done on the Sabbath Day.

7 But if ye had known what this means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice,
ye would not have condemned the guiltless.

Learn hence, That the Law of Mercy is much more excellent than the Law of
Ceremonies; and where both cannot be observed, the less must give place to the
greater. God never intended, that the Ceremonies of his Service in the First
Table, should hinder Works of Mercy prescribed in the Second Table. All GOD's
Commands are for Man's Good. Where both cannot be obeyed, he will have the
Moral Duty performed, and the Ceremonial Service omitted: He will have Mercy,
and not Sacrifice; that is, he will have Mercy rather than Sacrifice, where
both cannot be had.

8 For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day.

As if Christ had said, I, who am Lord of the Sabbath, declare to you, that I
have a Power to dispense with the Observation of it; and it is my Will, that
the Sabbath which was appointed for Man, should yield to Man's Safety and
Welfare. Christ the Son of Man, was really the Son of GOD; and as such, had
Power over the Sabbath, to dispense with it, yea, to abrogate and change it at
his pleasure.

9 And when he was departed thence, he went into their synagogue. 10 And
behold, there was a man which had his hand withered: and they asked him,
saying, Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days? that they might accuse him.
11 And he said unto them, What man shall there be among you, that shall have
one sheep, and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay hold
on it, and lift it out? 12 How much then is a man better than a sheep?
wherefore it is lawful to do well on the sabbath days.

Here we have another Dispute betwixt our Savior and the Pharisees, concerning
the Sabbath; Whether it be a Breach of that Day, mercifully to Heal a Person
having a withered Hand? Christ confutes them from their own Practice, telling
the Pharisees that they themselves judged it Lawful to help out a Sheep, or an
Ox, if fallen into a Pit on that Day: How much more ought the Life of a Man to be
preferred? Here we may remark, how Inveterate a Malice the Pharisees had
against our Savior, when they could find no Crime to charge him with, they
blame him for working a merciful and miraculous Cure upon the Sabbath Day. When
Envy and Malice (which are evermore quick-sighted) can find no Occasion of
Quarrel, it will invent one, against the Innocent.

13 Then says he to the man, Stretch forth thine hand: and he stretched it
forth; and it was restored whole like as the other. 14 Then the pharisees went
out, and held a council against him, how they might destroy him. 15 But when
Jesus knew it, he withdrew himself from thence: and great multitudes followed
him, and he healed them all, 16 And charged them that they should not make him
known:

Obs. 1. The merciful and miraculous Cure, wrought by our Savior's Power, upon
the Impotent Man; He said unto him, Stretch out thine Hand; and his Hand was
restored. Obs. 2. What a contrary Effect this Cure had upon the Pharisees;
instead of convincing them, they conspire against him: Christ's Enemies, when
Arguments fail, fall to Violence. Obs. 3. The prudent Means which our Savior
uses for his own Preservation, He withdrew himself. Christ's Example teaches
his Ministers their Duty; to avoid the Hands of Persecutors, and prudently to
preserve their Lives, unless when their Sufferings are like to do more good
than their Lives. Obs. 4. The great Humility of Christ, in concealing his own
Praises; he had no Ambition that the Fame of his Miracles should be spread
abroad, for he sought not his own Glory; neither would he by the Noise of his
Miracles, enrage the Pharisees against him to take away his Life; knowing that
his Time was not yet come, and he had much Work to do before his Death.

17 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, saying,
18 Behold, my servant whom I have chosen, my beloved, in whom my soul is well
pleased: I will put my Spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment to the
Gentiles. 19 He shall not strive, nor cry neither shall any man hear his voice
in the street. 20 A bruised reed shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he
not quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory. 21 And in his Name shall
the Gentiles trust.

That is, our Blessed Savior did those Good Acts before spoken of, that it
might appear, that he was the True Messiah prophesied of by Isaias the Prophet,
Chap. 42.1, 2. Behold my Servant, whom I have set apart for Accomplishing the
Work of Salvation for a Lost World; he by the Fullness of my Spirit, shall Teach
the Nations the Way of Truth and Righteousness: He shall not subdue Men by
Force and Violence, but as the Prince of Peace, shall deal gently with the
Weak, and cherish the Least Measures of Grace, and Degrees of Goodness. Obs.
here, 1. A Description of Christ as Mediator; he is God the Father's Servant,
employed in the most Noble Service; namely, that of the Instructing and Saving
a Lost World. Obs. 2. With what Meekness and Gentleness Christ sets up his
Spiritual Kingdom in the World; he does not with Noise and Clamor, with Force
and Violence, Subdue and Conquer; but with Meekness and Gentleness, gains
Persons Consent to his Government and Authority. Observe, 3. The Gentle
Carriage of Christ, in Treating those of Infirmer Grace; he does and will
graciously preserve, and tenderly cherish the smallest Beginings, the Weakest
Measures, and the Lowest Degrees of Sincere Grace which he observes in any of
his Children and People.

22 Then was brought unto him one possessed with a devil, blind and dumb: and
he healed him, insomuch that the blind and dumb both spoke and saw. 23 And all
the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the son of David? 24 But when the
Pharisees heard it, they said, This fellow does not cast out devils, but by
Beelzebub the prince of the devils.

As a farther Instance of Christ's Miraculous Power, he Heals one whom the
Devil had cast into a Disease, which deprived him both of Speech and Sight: At
this Miracle the Multitude wonder, saying, Is not this the Son of David? That
is, the promised Messiah: The Pharisees hearing this, with great Bitterness and
Contempt said, This Fellow casts out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of
Devils. Observe from hence, How Obstinacy and Malice will make Men misconstrue
the Actions of the most Holy and Innocent; CHRIST Casts out Devils, say the
Pharisees, by the help of the Devil. There never was any Person so Good, nor
any Action so Gracious, but they have been subject both to Censure and
Misconstruction. The best Way is, to square our Actions by the Right Rule of
Justice and Charity, and then let the World pass their Censures at their
Pleasure. When the Holy and Innocent JESUS was thus assaulted, what Wonder is
it, if we his Sinful Servants be Branded on all sides by Reviling Tongues? Why
should we expect better Treatment than the Son of GOD?

25 And Jesus knew their thought, and said unto them, Every kingdom divided
against it self, is brought to desolation: and every city or house divided
against it self, shall not stand: 26 And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided
against himself; how shall then his kingdom stand? 27 And if I by Beelzebub
cast out devils, by whom do your children cast them out? therefore they shall
be your judges. 28 But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the
kingdom of God is come unto you. 29 Or else, how can one enter into a strong
man's house, and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong man, and then
he will spoil his house? 30 He that is not with me: is against me, and he rhat
gathers not with me, scatters abroad.

Our Blessed Savior to clear his Innocence, and to convince the Pharisees of
the Unreasonableness of this their Calumny and False Accusations; offers
several Arguments to their Consideration. 1. That it was very unlikely that
Satan should lend him this Power, to use it against himself. As Satan has a
Kingdom, so he has Wit enough to preserve his Kingdom, and will do nothing to
weaken his own Interest. Now if I have received my Power from Satan, for
Destroying him and his Kingdom, then is Satan divided against himself. 2. Our
Savior tells them, they might with as much Reason attribute all Miracles to
the Devil, as those that were wrought by Him. There were certain Jews amongst
themselves, who cast out Devils in the Name of the GOD of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; Christ asks the Pharisees, By what Power these their Children Cast them
out? They acknowledged, that those did it by the Power of GOD; and there was no
Cause, but their Malice, why they should not acknowleledge that what he did was
by the same Power. If I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God, then the Kingdom
of God is come unto you; that is, the Messiah is come; because he wrought these
Miracles, to prove that he was the Messiah. 3. Another Argument to prove, That
the Miracles which Christ wrought were by the Power of God, and not by the Help
of Satan is this; The Devil is very strong and powerful; and there is no Power
but God's only, that is stronger than his. Now, says Christ, if I were not
assisted by a Divine Power, I could never cast out this strong Man, who reigns
in the World as in his House: It must be a stronger than the strong Man, that
shall bind Satan; and who is he, but the GOD of Strength?

31 Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven
unto men: but the blasphemy against the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto
men. 32 And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it shall be
forgiven him: but whosoever speaks against the holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

Obs. 1. How our Savior makes a Difference betwixt speaking against the Son of
Man, and speaking against the Holy Ghost. By Speaking against the Son of Man,
is meant all those Reproaches which were cast upon our Savior's Person as Man,
without reflecting upon his Divine Power as GOD, which he testified by his
Miracles. Such were their reproaching him with the Meaness of his Birth, their
censuring him for a Winebibber, and a Glutton, and the like. But by Speaking
against the Holy Ghost, is meant, their Blaspheming and Reproaching that Divine
Power whereby he wrought his Miracles; which was an immediate Reflection upon
the Holy Spirit, and a Blaspheming of him. Observe, 2. The Nature of this Sin
of Speaking against the Holy Ghost: It consisted in this, that the Pharisees
seeing our Savior work Miracles, and cast out Devils by the Spirit of God;
contrary to the Conviction of their own Minds, they maliciously ascribe his
Miracles to the Power of the Devil; charging him to be a Sorcerer and Magician,
and to have a Familiar Spirit, by whose Help he did those Mighty Works; when in
truth he did them by the Spirit of God. Observe, 3. That this Sin above all
others, is called Unpardonable, and upon what Account it is so: The Case of
such Blasphemers of the Holy Spirit, is not only dangerous, but desperate;
because they resist their last Remedy, and oppose the best Means for their
Conviction. What can God do more, to convince a Man that Jesus Christ is the
True Messiah, than to work ^^^^cles to that purpose? Now if when Men see plain
Miracles wrought, they will say, it is not God that works them, but the Devil;
as if Satan would conspire against himself, and seek the Ruin of his own
Kingdom. There is no way left to convince such Persons, but they must and will
continue in their Opposition to Truth, to their inevitable Condemnation.

33 Either make the tree good, and his fruit good; or else make the tree
corrupt, and his fruit corrupt: for the tree is known by his fruit.

These Words may either referr to the Pharisees, or to Christ himself. If to
the Pharisees, the Sense is, You hypocritical Pharisees show your selves what
you are, by your Words and Actions, even as the Fruit shows what the Tree is.
If they referr to Christ, then they are an Appeal to the Pharisees themselves,
to judge of our Savior and his Doctrine by the Miracles which he wrought: If
he wrought by the Devil, his Works would be as bad as the Devil's; but if his
Works were good, they must own them to be wrought by the Power of God. The
Expression implies, That a Man may be known by his Actions, as a Tree may be
judged by his Fruit; yet not by a single Action, but by a Series of Actions;
not by a particular Act, but by our general Course.

34 O generation of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? for out
of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

Note here, 1. The Fervency and Zeal of our Savior's Spirit, in the
Compellation given to the Pharisees; he calls them, a Generation of Vipers;
intimating, that they were a venomous and dangerous sort of Men. Learn thence,
That it is not always Railing and Indiscreet Zeal, to call Wicked Men by such
Names as their Sin deserves. Obs. farther, From our Savior's Saying, that Out
of the Abundance of the Heart, the Mouth speaks; that the Heart is the
Fountain both of Words and Actions; and according as the Heart is, so are the
Current of Men's Words and Actions, either good or evil.

35 A good man out of the good treasure of the heart, brings forth good
things: and an evil man out of the evil treasure, brings forth evil things.

Obs. here, A double Treasure discovered in the Heart of Man. 1. An Evil
Treasure of Sin and Corruption, both Natural and Acquired, from whence proceeds
Evil Things. Now this is called a Treasure, not for the Preciousness of it, but
for the Abundance of it; a little does not make a Treasure: And also for the
Continuance of it; though it be perpetually overflowing in the Life, yet does the
Heart continue full; this Treasure of Original Corruption in Man's Nature, it
may be drawn low in this Life by Sanctifying Grace; but it can never be drawn
dry. 2. Here is a Good Treasure of Grace discovered, in a Sanctified and
Renewed Man; which is the Source and Spring from whence all Gracious Actions do
proceed and flow: For as the Heart of Man by Nature is the Fountain, from
whence all Sin springs, so the Heart renewed by Grace, is the Source and Spring
from whence all Gracious Actions do proceed and flow.

36 But I say unto you, That every idle word that men shall speak, they shall
give account thereof in the day of judgment.

There are Two Sorts of Words, for which we must be Judged; Sinful Words, and
Idle Words. Sinful Words are Blasphemous Words, Censorious Words, Lying and
Slandering Words. Idle Words, are such as favor nothing of Wisdom or Piety;
that have no tendency to make Men either Wiser, or Better: How light soever Men
make of their Words now, yet in GOD's Balance another Day they will be found to
weigh very heavy.

37 For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemned.

Observe here, The Argument which our Savior uses, to move us to Watchfulness
over our Words; By our Words we shall be justified; not Meritoriously, but
Declaratively: Good Words declare Goodness in our selves, and we shall be
declared Good to others by our Words; if our Words and Actions do correspond
and agree with one another. Death and Life are in the Power of the Tongue: That
is, according to the right or wrong Using of the Tongue, we may judge and
gather whether Men are Dead or Alive, as to God; and bound for Heaven, or Hell.

38 Then certain of the scribes and of the Pharisees answered, saying, Master,
we would see a sign from thee. 39 But he answered and said to them, An evil and
adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there shall no sign be given to
it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas. 40 For as Jonas was three days and three
nights in the whale's belly: so shall the Son of man be three days and three
nights in the heart of the earth. 41 The men of Niniveh shall rise in judgment
with this generation, and shall condemn it, because they repented at the
preaching of Jonas, and behold, a greater than Jonas is here. 42 The queen of
the south shall rise up in the judgment with this generation, and shall condemn
it: for she came from the uttermost parts of earth to hear the wisdom of
Solomon, and behold, a greater than Solomon is here.

Observe here, 1. The Request which the Pharisees make to Christ; Master, we
would see a Sign from thee. But had not Christ showed them signs enough
already? What, were all the Miracles wrought in their sight, but convincing
Signs that he was the true Messiah; but Infidelity mixed with Obstinacy, is
never satisfied. Obs. 2. Our Savior's Answer to the Pharisees Request; he
tells them that they should have one Sign more, to wit, that of his
Resurrection from the Dead: For as Jonas lay buried Three Days in the Whale's
Belly, and was then wonderfully restored: So should (and did) our Savior
continue in the Grave part of Three Natural Days, and then rise again. Obs. 3.
How CHRIST declares the Inexcusableness of their State, who would not be
convinced by the former Miracles he had wrought, that he was the true Messiah;
nor yet be brought to Believe in him by this last Sign or Miracle of his
Resurrection. The Ninivites shall condemn the Pharisees, They repented at the
Preaching of Jonas; but these would not be convinced by the Preaching and
Miracles of JESUS: The Queen of Sheba also, who came from the South to hear and
admire the Wisdom of Solomon, shall rise up in Judgment, against those that
reject CHRIST, who is the Wisdom of the Father; and the Doctrine delivered by
him, which was the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God. Learn, That the Sins of
Infidelity and Impenitency are exceedingly heightened, and their Guilt
aggravated, from the Means afforded by God to bring a People to Faith and
Obedience. The Sin of the Pharisees in Rejecting Christ's Miracles and
Ministry, was by far greater than that of the Ninevites; had they rejected
Jonas his Message and Ministry, sent by God amongst them.

43 When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry
places, seeking rest, and finds none. 44 Then he says, I will return into my
house from whence I came out, and when he is come, he finds it empty, swept,
and garnished. 45 Then goes he, and takes with himself seven other spirits
more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the last state
of that man is worse than the first. Even so shall it be also unto this wicked
generation.

The Design and Scope of this Parable, is to show that the Pharisees by
rejecting the Gospel, and refusing to Believe in Christ, were in a sevenfold
worse Condition, than if the Gospel had never been Preached to them, and a
Savior had never came among them; because by our Savior's Ministry Satan was
in some sort cast out: But for rejecting Christ and his Grace, Satan had got a
sevenfold stronger Possession of them now, than before. From this Parable,
Learn, 1. That Satan is an Unclean Spirit; he has lost his Original Purity, his
Holy Nature, in which he was created; and is become universally filthy in
himself; no Means being allowed him by God, for the purging of his filthy and
unclean Nature. Nay he is a perfect Enemy to Purity and Holiness, maligning all
that love it, and would promote it. 2. That Satan is a restless and unquiet
Spirit; being cast out of Heaven, he can rest no where; when he is either gone
out of a Man through Policy, or cast out of a Man by Power, he has no Content or
Satisfaction, till he returns into a filthy Heart, where he delights to be as
the Swine in miry places. 3. That wicked and profane Sinners have this unclean
Spirit dwelling in them; their Hearts are Satan's House and Habitation; and the
Lusts of Pride and Unbelief, Malice and Revenge, Envy and Hypocrisy, these are
the Garnishings of Satan's House. Man's Heart was God's House by Creation, it is
now Satan's by Usurpation, and Judiciary Tradition. 4. That Satan by the
Preaching of the Gospel may seem to go out of Persons, and they become sober
and civilized; yet may he return to his old Habitation, And the last end of
that Man may be worse than the beginning.

46 While he yet talked to the people, behold, his mother and his brethren
stood without, desiring to speak with him. 47 Then one said unto him, Behold,
thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with thee. 48 But
he answered and said unto him that told him, Who is my mother? and who are my
brethren? 49 And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said,
Behold my mother, and my brethren. 50 For whosoever shall do the will of my
Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother.

Observe here, 1. The Verity of Christ's Humane Nature; he had Affinity and
Consanguinity with Men, Persons near in Blood to him, called his Brethren, that
is, his Cosin-Germans. 2. That the Holy Virgin her self was not wholly free
from Failings and Infirmities; for here she does untimely and unseasonably
interrupt our Savior, when Preaching to the People, and employed about his
Father's Business. 3. That Christ did not neglect his Holy Mother, nor
disregard his near Relations; but showed, that he preferred his Father's
Service before them. 4. Learn, How dear Believers are to Jesus Christ; he
preferrs his Spiritual Kindred, before his Natural. Alliance in Faith, and
Spiritual Relation to Christ, is much nearer and dearer than Alliance by Blood:
To bear Christ in the Heart, is much better than to bear him in the Womb.
Blessed be God, this greatest Privilege is not denied to us even now: Though,
see Christ we cannot, yet love him we may; his Bodily Presence cannot be
enjoyed by us, but his Spiritual Presence is not denied us. Though Christ be not
ours in House, in Arms, in Affinity, in Consanguinity; yet in Heart, in Faith,
in Love, and Service, he is, or may be, Ours. Verily, Spiritual Regeneration
brings Men into a more Honorable Relation to Christ, than Natural Generation
ever did. Whosoever shall do the Will of my Father, he is my Brother, Sister,
and Mother.

CHAP. XIII.
1 THE same day went Jesus out of the house, and sat by the seaside. 2 And
great multitudes were gathered together unto him, so that he went into a ship,
and sat, and the whole multitude stood on the shore. 3 And he spoke many things
unto them in parables, saying, --

The foregoing Chapter gave us an Account of an Awakening Sermon preached by
our Savior to the Pharisees. In this Chapter we are acquainted with the
Continuance of his Preaching to the Multitude: Where three things are
Observable, 1. Our Lord's Assiduity and unwearied Diligence in Preaching of the
Gospel; for this Sermon was made the same Day with that in the former Chapter,
Verse. 1. The same Day went Jesus out, and sat by the Seaside. A good Pattern
for the Preachers of the Gospel to follow. How ashamed may we be to Preach Once
a Week, when our Lord Preached Twice a Day. Obs. 2. The Place our Lord Preached
in, a Ship; not that he declined the Temple or the Synagogue, when he had the
Opportunity; but in the want of them, Christ thought an House, a Mountain, a
Ship, no unmeet Place to Preach in. It is not the Place that Sanctifies the
Ordinance, but the Ordinance that Sanctifies the Place. Obs. 3. The Manner of
our Lord's Preaching; it was by Parables and Similitudes: Which was an Ancient
Way of Instruction among the Jews, and a very Convincing Way; working upon Men's
Minds, Memories, and Affections; making the Mind attentive, the Memory
retentive, and the Auditors inquisitive after the Interpretation of the
Parable. Some are of Opinion, that our Savior's Parables were suited to his
Hearers Employments; some of whom being Husbandmen, he resembles his Doctrine
to Seed sown in the Field: For thus he speaks:

-- 3 Behold, a sower went forth to sow. 4 And when he sowed, some seeds fell
by the way-side, and the fowls came, and devoured them up. 5 Some fell upon
stony places, where they had not much earth: and forthwith they sprung up,
because they had no deepness of earth: 6 And when the sun was up, they were
scorched, and because they had not root, they withered away. 7 And some fell
among thorns: and the thorns sprung up and choked them. 8 But other fell into
good ground, and brought forth fruit, some an hundred fold, some sixty fold,
some thirty fold. 9 Who has ears to hear, let him hear.

The Scope of this Parable is, to show that there are Four several Sorts of
Hearers of the Word, but One Sort only that Hear to a Saving Advantage: And to
show us the Cause of the different Success of the Word Preached. Here Observe,
1. The Sower, Christ and his Apostles; he, the prime and principal Sower; they,
the secondary and subordinate Seedsmen. Christ sows his own Field, his
Ministers sow his Field; he sows his own Seed, they sow his Seed. Woe unto us,
if we sow our own Seed, and not Christ's. Obs. 2. The Seed sown, the Word of
God. Fabulous Legends, and Unwritten Traditions, which the Seeds-Men of the
Church of Rome sow, these are not Seed, but Chaff; or, their own Seed, not
Christ's. Our Lord's Field must be sown with his own Seed, not with mixed Grain.
Learn, 1. That the Word of God preached is like Seed sown in the Furrows of the
Field. As Seed has a Fructifying Virtue in it, by which it increases, and
brings forth more of it is own kind; so has the Word of God a Quickening Power,
to regenerate and make alive dead Souls. Learn, 2. That the Seed of the Word
where it is most plentifully sown, is not alike Fruitful. As Seed does not
thrive in all Ground alike, so neither does the Word fructify alike in the
Hearts of Men: There is a Difference both from the Nature of the Soil, and from
the Influence of the Spirit. Learn, 3. That the Cause of the Word's
Unfruitfulness, is very different, and not the same in all: In some, it is the
Policy of Satan, that Bird of Prey, which follows God's Plough, steals away the
Precious Seed; in others, it is a hard Heart of Unbelief; in others, the Cares
of the World, like Thorns, choke the Word, overgrow the Good Seed, draw away
the Moisture of the Earth, and the Heart of the Soil, and hinders the
Influences of the Sun. The far greater part of Hearers are fruitless and
unprofitable Hearers, Learn, 4. That the best Ground does not bring forth Fruit
alike; some good Ground brings forth more, and some less; Some thirty, some
sixty, and some an hundred fold. In like manner, a Person may be a profitable
Hearer of the Word, although he does not bring forth so great a Proportion of
Fruit as others, provided he brings forth as much as he can.

10 And the disciples came, and said unto him, Why speak thou unto them in
parables? 11 He answered and said unto them, Because it is given unto you to
know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given.

Here we have the Disciples Question, and our Savior's Answer. Their Question
is, Why speak thou to the People in Parables, which they do not understand?
They cannot see the Soul of thy Meaning, through the Body of thy Parables. Christ
answers, To you my Disciples, and such as you are, who love the Truth, and
desire to obey it, the Spirit gives you an Affective, Operative, and
Experimental Knowledge, not barely to know these things, but to believe them,
and feel the Power of them, in and upon your own Hearts: But the Generality of
Hearers do satisfy and content themselves with a bare Notional Knowledge of
what they hear; a Parable therefore is well enough for them. Learn, 1. That the
Doctrines of the Gospel are Mysteries. 2. That it is a matchless and unvaluable
Privilege, practically and savingly to understand and know Gospel-Mysteries.
3. That this Privilege all are not Sharers in, nor Partakers of, but only
those to whom it is given: Unto you it is given to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom, but to them it is not given.

12 For whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance: but whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away, even that he
has.

That is, whosoever improves the Measures of Grace received, shall obtain
farther Measures and Degrees of it: But from him that does not improve what he
has already received, shall be taken away, that which to himself or others, he
seems to have; his Common Gifts, and Moral Endowments. Learn, That where
there are Beginnings of True Grace, and a right and wise Improvement of it, God
will make rich Additions of more Grace to the present Stock which we have
received.

13 Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing, see not: and
hearing, they hear not, neither do they understand. 14 And in them is fulfilled
the prophecy of Esaias, which says, by hearing, ye shall hear, and shall not
understand: and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive. 15 For this
peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their
eyes they have closed; lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and should understand with their heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them.

These Words of our Blessed Savior, as I conceive, have a peculiar Reference
and Relation to the Pharisees; who attended upon Christ's Ministry, not with an
honest simplicity of Mind, to be instructed by it, but to carp and cavil at it.
Our Savior tells them, he had formerly spoken things very plainly and clearly
to them, and also wrought Miracles before them, to convince them of the
Divinity of his Person, and of the Verity of his Doctrine: But they would not
believe, either his Person or his Doctrine to be from God; and therefore he
would now speak to them in dark Parables, that they may be Judicially Blinded;
they shut their Eyes against the clearest Light, and said they would not see;
and now Christ closes their Eyes, and says, they shall not see. Learn hence, To
acknowledge the Divine Justice, which speaks darkly to them that despise the
Light: Such who see, and yet see not; they shall see the Shell, but not the
Kernel; they shall hear the Parable, but not understand the Spiritual Sense and
Meaning of it. When wilful Blindness of Mind is added to Natural Blindness, it
is a just and righteous thing with God, to superadd Judicial Blindness, and to
give them Obstinacy of Heart, His Curse unto them.

16 But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear. 17
For verily I say unto you, that many prophets and righteous men have desired to
see those things which ye see, and have not seen them: and to hear those things
which ye hear, and have not heard them.

Here our Savior pronounces such of his Disciples and Followers Blessed, who
received the Truths of the Gospel so far, as they were already taught them; he
assures them, that they shall receive farther Light, and fuller Measures of
Spiritual Illumination: Blessed are your Eyes, for they see. Learn, That such
as have received the least Measures of Spiritual Knowledge and Saving
Illumination, and do improve it, they are in an happy and blessed Condition;
for as they are capable of farther Measures of Divine Knowledge, so shall they
be Partakers of them.

18 Hear ye therefore the parable of the sower. 19 When any one hears the
word of the kingdom, and understands it not, then comes the wicked one, and
catches away that which was sown in his heart: this is he which received seed
by the way-side. 20 But he that received the seed into stony places, the same
is he that hears it, and anon with joy receives it: 21 Yet has he not root
in himself, but dureth for a while: for when tribulation or persecution arises
because of the word, by and by he is offended. 22 He also that received seed
among the thorns, is he that hears the word: and the care of this world, and
the deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and he becomes unfruitful. 23 But
he that received seed into the good ground, is he that hears the word, and
understands it, which also bears fruit, and brings forth, some an hundred
fold, some sixty, some thirty.

As if our Lord had said, You my Disciples, who are not satisfied with a Sound
of Words, I will explain to you the Sense and Signification of this Parable:
The Scope of which is, to show the different Effects which the Word of God has
upon Men's Hearts, and the Reason of that Difference. The Seed is the Word, the
Sower is the Preacher, the Soil is the Heart and Soul of Man. Now our Savior
assures us, that the Hearts of some Hearers are like Highway-Ground, in which
the Seed is not covered with the Harrow of Meditation; others are like
Stony-Ground, in which the Word has no Root, no Root in their Understandings,
Memories, Conscience, Will, or Affections: But They are offended, either at the
Depth and Profoundness of the Word, or at the Sanctity and Strictness of it, or
at the Plainess and Simplicity of it. Again, some Hearers our Lord compares to
Thorny-Ground. Thorns are Covetous Desires, which choke the good Seed, shadow
the Blade when sprung up, keep off the Influences of the Sun, and draw away the
Fatness of the Soil from the Seed. All these Effects have Thorns in and among
the Seed: And the like Effects have Worldly Affections and Covetous Desires in
the Heart of Man, rendering the Word unfruitful and unprofitable. But the good
Christian hears the Word attentively, keeps it retentively, believes it
steadfastly, applies it particularly, practices it universally, and brings forth
Fruit with Patience and Perseverance; Fruit that will redound to his Account,
in the Great Day of Account. Learn, 1. That no Hearers are in Christ's Account
Good Hearers of the Word, but such as bring forth the Fruits of an holy,
humble, and peaceable Conversation. 2. That a Person may be a good Hearer of
the Word, if he brings forth the best Fruit he can, though it be not in so great
a Proportion as others do: As some Ground brings forth Thirty, some Sixty, and
some an Hundredfold; In like manner do all the sincere Hearers of the Word;
they all bring forth Fruit, though not all alike; all in Sincerity and Reality,
though not all to the same Degree, and none to Perfection.

24 Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is
likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field: 25 But while men slept,
his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his way. 26 But when
the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared the tares also.
27 So the servants of the householder came and said unto him, Sir, did thou
not sow good seed in thy field? from whence then has it tares? 28 He said unto
them, An enemy has done this. The servants said unto him, Will thou then that
we go and gather them up? 29 But he said, Nay; lest while ye gather up the
tares, ye root up also the wheat with them. 30 Let both grow together until the
harvest: and in the time of harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather ye
together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to burn them: but gather the
wheat into my barn.

The Design and Scope of this Parable is, to show that there is no Expectation
of Universal Purity in the Church of God in this Life; but as the Tares and the
Wheat grow together in the same Field, so Hypocrites and Sincere Christians
are, and will be intermixed in the same Church, and can hardly be discerued one
from the other. St. Jerome observes, that in the Eastern Countries, the Tares
and the Wheat were so like one another whilst they were in the Blade, that
there was no knowing them asunder. Learn, 1. That in the Outward and Visible
Church there ever has been, and will be a Mixture of Good and Bad, of Saints
and Sinners, of Hypocrites and Sincere Christians, until the Day of Judgment.
2. That in that Day, Christ will make a thoro' and a perfect Separation, and
divide the Tares from the Wheat; that is, the Righteous from the Wicked. 3.
That in the mean Time none ought to be so offended at this Mixture in the
Church, as to separate from Church Communion on that Account: until the Harvest
it is not to be expected, that the Tares and the Wheat should be perfectly
separated. Yet Observe, 4. That though the Tares are forbidden to be plucked up,
when fown, yet it is the Churches Duty, all she can, to hinder their ^owing.
Though we must not roo^ the Wicked up, yet we must prevent the rooting of
Wickedness all we can. Our Savior that forbad to pluck up the Tares, did not
forbid to hinder their Sowing.

31 Another parable put he forth unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is
like to a grain of mustard seed, which a man took and sowed in his field. 32
Which indeed is the least of all seeds, but when it is grown, it is the
greatest among herbs, and becomes a tree: so that the birds of the air come
and lodge in the branches thereof. 33 Another parable spoke he unto them, the
kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman took and hid in three
measures of meal, till the whole was leavened. 34 All these things spoke Jesus
unto the multitude in parables, and without a parable spoke he not unto them:
35 That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, saying, I will
open my mouth in parables, I will utter things which have been kept secret from
the foundation of the world.

Our Savior's Design in this Parable is, to show, how the Gospel from small
and little, from unlikely and contemptible Beginnings, should spread and
increase, fructify and grow up; Like as Mustard-see, one of the smallest of
Grains, grows up to a considerable tallness; and as a little Leaven turns a
great Heap of Meal into its own Nature; so the Gospel should spread and
increase, Nations and Countries becoming Christian. Learn, That how small
Beginnings soever the Gospel had in it is first Plantation, yet by the
Fructifying Blessing of God, it has had, and shall have a wonderful Increase.

36 Then Jesus sent the multitude away, and went into the house: and his
disciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the parable of the tares of
the field. 37 He answered and said unto them, He that sows the good seed, is
the Son of man: 38 The field is the world: the good seed are the children of
the kingdom: but the tares are the children of the wicked one: 39 The enemy
that sowed them, is the devil: the harvest is the end of the world: and the
reapers are the angels. 40 As therefore the tares are gathered and burnt in the
fire; so shall it be in the end of the world. 41 The Son of man shall send
forth his angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that
offend, and them which do iniquity; 42 And shall cast them into a furnace of
fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. 43 Then shall the righteous
shine forth as the sun, in the king-of their Father. Who has ears to hear, let
him hear.

The Parable of the Tares of the Field, Christ is pleased to explain to his
Disciples after this manner. The Person Sowing Good Seed, was himself, the Son
of Man; who first Planted the Gospel: The Field in which the Seed was sown, was
the World; that is, the Church in the World: The Good Seed, called The Children
of the Kingdom, are sincere Christians: The Tares, called The Children of the
Wicked One; are profane Sinners, and unsound Hypocrites: The Enemy is the
Devil, the Harvest is the End of the World, and the Angels are the Reapers.
Learn, 1. That the Mixture of the Tares and the Wheat, of the Rghteous and the
Wicked, must and shall remain in the Church unto the End of the World. 2. That
in the End of the World, the Angels shall perform the Work of Separation,
gathering the Righteous from among the Wicked; when every one's Harvest shall
be according to his Fruit; The Righteous shining in the Kingdom of their
Father, the Wicked cast into a Furnace of Fire.

44 Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid in a field: the
which when a man has found, he hides, and for joy thereof goes and sells
all that he has, and buyeth that field. 45 Again, the kingdom of heaven is
like unto a merchant-man, seeking goodly pearls: 46 Who when he had found one
pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he had, and bought it.

By the Treasure hid in the Field, and the Pearl of great Price, are
understood, the Grace of the Gospel, and the Way to Life and Salvation, therein
discovered: He that is thoroughly convinced of the Worth and Excellency of
Grace, will part with all that he has to purchase and obtain them. Learn, That
the Sinner who will have Interest in Christ, and a Part in Gospel Grace, must
part with all that he has to purchase and obtain them: Not part with his Goods
and Lands, with his Wife and Children; for these are none of his own, but lent
him by God for his use. His Sins are his own, and nothing else; these must be
sold, not pawned: He that will have part in Christ, must part with all his
Sins, and that for ever.

47 Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto a net that was cast into the sea,
and gathered of every kind. 48 Which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and
sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the bad away. 49 So
shall it be at the end of the world: the angels shall come forth, and sever the
wicked from among the just; 50 And shall cast them into the furnace of fire,
there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth.

The Design and Scope of this Parable also, is to set forth the State of the
Gospel Church, which is like a Floor, where Chaff is mixed with Wheat; a Field,
where Tares are mixed with good Corn; a Net, where bad Fishes are involved with
the good. As the Wheat must not be removed out of the Floor, before the time of
Winnowing; nor the Tares gathered out of the Field, before the time of Reaping;
nor the good Fishes break through the Net to get from the bad, before the time of
Separation: So must not Christians forsake a Churches Communion, because of the
present Mixture of Good and Bad in the Church. For a mixed Communion in the
Church, and the good Christians communicating with the bad, does neither defile
the Ordinances of Christ, nor pollute those that sincerely join in them.

51 Jesus says unto them, Have ye understood all these things? They say unto
him, Yea, Lord. 52 Then said he unto them, Therefore every scribe which is
instructed unto the kingdom of heaven, is like unto a man that is an
householder, which brings forth out of his treasure things new and old.

Obs. here, 1. The Title, which our Savior puts upon Gospel Ministers, they
are Houshold-Stewards. 2. He points out the Office of those Stewards; and that
is, to provide for the Household, both with Plenty and Variety. He must bring
forth out of his Treasure, in Plenty; and Things new and old, for their
Variety. There are two Essential Qualifications in a Steward, Faithfulness and
Prudence: He must be honest and faithful, in bringing out of his own Treasure,
not another's; and he must be prudent, in bringing things new, as well as old;
not new Truths, but old Truths in a new Dress; lest the Household by always
feeding upon the same Dish, do nauseate it, instead of being nourished by it.

53 And it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these parables, he
departed thence. 54 And when he was come into his own country, he taught them
in their synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, and said, Whence has
this man this wisdom, and these mighty works? 55 Is not this the carpenter's
son? is not his mother called Mary? and his brethren, James, and Joses, and
Simon, and Judas? 56 And his sisters, are they not all with us? whence then
has this man all these things? 57 And they were offended in him. --

Obs. here, 1. Christ's tender and compassionate Regard to his own Countrymen,
the People of Galilee and Nazareth; he Preached to them, in their Synagogues.
2. The Effect which his Doctrine had upon them; They were Astonished at it, but
not Converted by it; they Admire, but did not Believe. 3. The Cause of their
rejecting Christ's Ministry, was the Meaness of his Person, the
Contemptibleness of his outward Condition, the Poverty of his Relations. Is not
this the Carpenter's Son? Mark 6.3. He is called the Carpenter: Whence the
Fathers concluded, that our Savior during the time of his obscure Privacy,
wrought upon Joseph's, his reputed Father's Trade; and Justin Martyr says, he
made Ploughs and Yoaks. Sure we are, our Lord spent no Time in Idleness, though
we are not certain how he employed his Time before he entered his Public
Ministry. Note, That the Poverty and Meaness of Christ's Condition, was that
which multitudes stumbled at; and which kept many, yea, most, from believing on
him. None but a Spiritual Eye, can discern Beauty in an humbled Savior. Is not
this the Son of the Carpenter? 2. That it is no Impediment to, nor Hindrance of
our Faith, that we never saw Christ's Person in the Flesh, nor knew his
Parentage and Education; for here are his own Countrymen, who daily saw his
Person, heard his Doctrine, and were Witnesses of his Holy Conversation; yet
instead of believing in him, were offended at him.

57 -- But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honor, save in his
own country, and in his own house.

Our Savior tells them, he does not wonder that so few of his own Countrymen,
to whom he had been so familiarly known, did despise his Person, and reject his
Doctrine; for a Prophet generally has least Esteem, where he has been brought
up; because perhaps the Follies of his Childhood, and Indecencies of his Youth,
are remembered and reported to his Disparagement. Learn, 1. That there is a real
Tribute of Honor due, and payable to every Prophet, or Faithful Minister of
Jesus Christ. 2. That the Ministers of Christ for the most part, have least
Honor from their own Countrymen, to whom they are best known.

58 And he did not many mighty works there, because of their unbelief.

Christ was unable, because they were unwilling; his Impotency was occasioned
by their Infidelity; he did not, because he would not: And that he would not,
proceeded from a Defect in their Faith, not from any Deficiency in Christ's
Power: Their Unbelief bound his Hands, and hindered the Execution of his Power.

CHAP. XIV.
The former part of this Chapter gives us an Account of the Death of John the
Baptist, together with the Occasion of it; which was his plain and faithful
Reproving of Herod for the Vncleaness he lived in.

1 AT that time Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus; 2 And said unto
his servants, This is John the Baptist, he is risen from the dead, and
therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him.

Obs. here, 1. How strange it was, that Herod should not hear of the Fame of
Jesus till now; all the Country and adjoining Regions had rung of his Fame,
only Herod's Court hears nothing. Miserable is that Greatness, which keeps
Princes from the Knowledge of Jesus Christ. How Plain is it from hence, that
our Savior came not at Court, he once sent indeed a Message to that Fox
(Herod,) whose Den he would not approach. Teaching us by his Example, not to
affect, but to avoid outward Pomp and Glory. The Courts of Princes are too
often a very bad Air for Piety and Religion to thrive in. Obs. 2. The
Misconstruction of Herod, when he heard of our Savior's Fame: This (says he)
is John the Baptist, whom I Beheaded. His Conscience told him, he had offered
an unjust Violence to an Innocent Man; and now he is afraid that he is come
again to be revenged on him for his Head. A Wicked Man needs no worse Tormenter
than his own Mind. Oh the Terrors and Tortures of a Guilty Conscience! How
great are the Anxiety of Guilt, and the Fears of Divine Displeasure, than which
nothing is more stinging, and perpetually tormenting!

3 For Herod had laid hold on John, and bound him, and put him in prison for
Herodias sake, his brother Philip's wife. 4 For John said unto him, It is not
lawful for thee to have her. 5 And when he would have put him to death, he
feared the multitude, because they counted him as a prophet.

Observe here, 1. The Person, that put the Holy Baptist to Death; 'twas Herod,
'twas Herod the King, 'twas Herod that invited John to Preach at Court, and
heard him gladly. 1. It was Herod Antipas, Son to that Herod who sought
Christ's Life, Matthew. 2. Cruelty runs in a Blood. Herod the Murderer of John
who was the Forerunner of Christ, descended from that Herod who would have
murdered Christ himself. 2. 'Twas Herod the King. Sad! That Princes who should
always be Nursing-Fathers to, should at any time be the Bloody Butchers of the
Prophets of God. 3. 'Twas Herod that heard John gladly: John took the Ear and
the Heart of Herod, and Herod binds the Hands and Feet of John. Oh how
inconstant is a Carnal Heart to good Resolutions! The Word has oft-times an
Awakening Influence, where it does not leave an Abiding Impression upon the
Minds of Men. Obs. 2. The Cause of the Baptist's Death; it was for telling a
King of his Crime. Herod cut off that Head, whose Tongue was so bold to tell
him of his Faults. The Persecution which the Prophets of God fall under, is
usually for telling Great Men of their Sins: Men in Power are impatient of
Reproof, and imagine that their Authority gives them a License to Transgress.
Obs. 3. The plain Dealing of the Baptist in reproving Herod for his Crime;
which in one Act, was Adultery, Incest, and Violence, Adultery, that that he
took another's Wife; Incest, that he took his Brother's Wife; Violence, that he
took her in spite of her Husband. Therefore John does not mince the Matter,
and say, It is not Convenient; but, It is not Lawful for thee to have her; it
was not the Crown and Scepter of Herod that could daunt the Faithful Messenger
of God. There ought to meet in God's Ministers, both Courage and Impartiality.
Courage, in fearing no Faces; Impartiality, in sparing no Sins. For none are so
great, but they are under the Authority and Command of the Law of God.

6 But when Herod's birthday was kept, the daughter of Herodias danced before
them, and pleased Herod. 7 Whereupon he promised with an oath, to give her
whatsoever she would ask. 8 And she, being before instructed of her mother,
said, Give me here John Baptist's head in a charger. 9 And the king was sorry:
nevertheless, for the oath's sake, and them which sat with him at meat, he
commanded it to be given her. 10 And he sent and beheaded John in the prison.
11 And his head was brought in a charger, and given to the damsel; and she
brought it to her mother.

Several Observables are here to be taken Notice of. 1. The Time of this
Execrable Murder, it was upon Herod's Birthday. It was an Ancient Custom
among the Eastern Kings, to Celebrate their Birth-Days; Pharaoh's Birthday was
kept, Genesis 40. Herod's here; both with Blood: Yet these Personal Stains do not
make the Practice unlawful. When we solemnize our Birthday, with Thankfulness
to our Creator and Preserver, for Life and Being, for Protection and
Preservation to that Moment; and recommend our selves to the Care of his good
Providence for the Remainder of our Days: This is an Act of Piety and Religion.
But Herod's Birthday was kept with Revelling and Feasting, with Music and
Dancing: Not that Dancing, which in it self is a set, regular, harmonious
Motion of the Body, can be unlawful; any more than Walking or Running: Although
Circumstances may make it sinful. But from this disorderly Banquet on Herod's
Birthday, we Learn, That Great Men's Feasts and Frolicks are too often a
Season of much Sin. Obs. 2. The Instigator and Promoter of the Holy Baptist's
Death. Herodias and her Daughter: That Good Man falls a Sacrifice to the Fury
and Malice, to the Pride and Scorn of a Lustful Woman; for being a Rub in the
Way of her Licentious Adultery. Resolute Sinners, who are mad upon their Lusts,
run furiously upon their Gainsayers, though they be the Prophets of God
themselves; and resolve to bear down all Opposition they meet with in the
Gratification of their Unlawful Desires. Obs. 3. With what Reluctance Herod
consented to this Villainy; The King was sorry. Wicked Men oft-times sin with a
troubled and disturbed Conscience; they have a mighty Struggle with themselves,
before they commit their Sins; But at last, their Lusts get Mastery over their
Consciences. So did Herod's here: For, 4. Notwithstanding his Sorrow, he
commands the Fact: He sent and Beheaded John in the Prison: And a threefold
Cord tied him to this Performance. 1. The Conscience of his Oath. See his
Hypocrisy; he made Conscience of a rash Oath, that made no Scruple of real
Murder. 2. Respect to his Reputation: Them that sat with him, heard him
promise, and will be Witnesses of his Levity, if he do not perform. Insisting
upon Punctilio's of Honor, has hazarded the Loss of Millions of Souls. 3. A
Loathness to discontent Herodias and her Daughter. Oh vain and foolish
Hypocrite, who dreaded the displeasing of a wanton Mistress, before the
offending of God and Conscience. Obs. 5. These wicked Women not only require
the Baptist to be Beheaded, but that his Head be brought in a Charger to them.
What a Dish was here, to be served up at a Prince's Table on his Birthday? A
dead Man's Head swimming in Blood! How prodigiously insatiable is Cruelty and
Revenge! Herodias did not think her self safe, 'till John was dead: She could
not think him dead, till his Head was off; she could not think his Head off,
till she had it in her Hand. Revenge never thinks it has made sure enough. Oh
how cruel is a wicked Heart, that could take Pleasure in a Spectacle of so much
Horror! How was that Holy Head tossed by impure and filthy Hands: That true and
faithful Tongue, those sacred Lips, those pure Eyes, those mortified Cheeks,
are now insultingly handled by an Incestuous Harlot, and made a Scorn to the
drunken Eyes of Herod's Guests. From the whole, Learn, 1. That neither the
Holiest of Prophets, nor the Best of Men, are more secure from Violence, than
from Natural Death. He that was Sanctified in the Womb, Conceived and Born with
so much Miracle, Lived with so much Reverence, and Observation; is now at
Midnight obscurely Murdered in a close Prison. Learn, 2. That it is as true a
Martyrdom, to Suffer for Duty, as for Faith: He Dies as truly a Martyr, that
Dies for doing his Duty, as he that Dies for professing his Faith, and bearing
Witness to the Truth.

12 And his disciples came, and took up the body and buried it, and went and
told Jesus. 13 When Jesus heard of it, he departed thence by ship into a desert
place, apart: and when the people had heard thereof, they followed him on foot
out of the cities.

The Disciples of John hearing that their Holy Master was thus basely and
barbarously Murdered, took up his dead Body and buried it. Whence we Learn,
That the Faithful Servants of God are not ashamed of the Sufferings of the
Saints, but will testify their respect unto them both living and dead. Observe
farther, How our Blessed Savior upon the notice of John's Death, flies into
the Desert for the Preservation of his own Life. Jesus knew that his Hour was
not yet come, and therefore he keeps out of Herod's way. It is no Cowardice to
fly from Persecutors, when Christ our Captain both practices it himself, and
directs us to it, saying, When they persecute you in one City, flee, etc.

14 And Jesus went forth, and saw a great multitude, and was moved with
compassion toward them, and he healed their sick.

Observe here, With what Condolency and tender Sympathy the compassionate Jesus
exercised Acts of Mercy and Compassion, toward the Miserable and Distressed.
He was moved with Compassion; that is, touched with an inward Sense and Feeling
of their Sorrow; And healed their Sick. Those that came to Christ for Healing,
found Three Advantages of Cure, above the Power and Performance of any Earthly
Physician; to wit, Certainty, Bounty, and Ease. Certainty, in that all Comers
were infallibly cured: Bounty, in that they were freely cured, without Charge:
And Ease, in that they were cured without Pain.

15 And when it was evening his disciples came to him, saying, This is a desert
place, and the time is now past; send the multitude away, that they may go into
the villages, and buy themselves victuals.

Note here, 1. The Disciples Pity toward the Multitude, that had long attended
upon Christ's Ministry in the Desert; they presuming the People hungry, having
fasted all the Day, request our Savior to dismiss them, that they may procure
some Bodily Refreshment. Learn thence, That it well becomes the Ministers of
Christ to respect the Bodily Necessities, as well as to regard the Spiritual
Wants of their People. As the Bodily Father must take Care of the Soul of his
Child, so must the Spiritual Father have respect to the Bodily Necessities of
his Children. Obs. 2. The Motion which the Disciples make on the behalf of the
Multitude: Send them away, that they may buy Victuals. Here was a strong
Charity, but a weak Faith. A strong Charity, in that they desire the People's
Relief; but a weak Faith, in that they suppose they could not otherwise be
relieved, but by sending them away to buy Victuals: Forgetting that Christ who
had Healed the Multitude miraculously, could as easily Feed them miraculously,
if he pleased: All things being equally easy to Omnipotency.

16 But Jesus said unto them, They need not depart, give ye them to eat.

Obs. here, 1. Our Savior's strange Answer to the Disciples Motion; They need
not depart, says Christ. Need not? Why, the People must either feed or famish?
Victuals they must have, and this being a desert Place, there was none to be
had. Surely then there was need enough. But, 2. Christ's Command was more
strange than his Assertion; Give ye them to eat. Alas! Poor Disciples! They had
nothing for themselves to eat, how then should they give the Multitude to eat?
When Christ requires of us, what of our selves we are unable to perform, it is
to show us our Impotency and Weakness, and to provoke us to look up to him,
That works all our Works, in us and for us.

17 And they say unto him, We have here but five loaves, and two fishes.

Note here, What a poor and slender Provision the Lord of the whole Earth has
for his Household and Family; Five Loaves, and those Barley; two Fishes, and
they small: Teaching us, That these Bodies of ours must be fed, but not
pampered. Our Belly must not be our Master, much less our God. We Read but
twice that Christ made any Entertainments, and both times his Guests were fed
with Loaves and Fishes, plain Fare and homely Diet. The end of Food is to
sustain Nature, we stifle it with a Gluttonous variety: Meat was ordained for
the Belly, the Belly for the Body, the Body for the Soul, and the Soul for God.
Obs. farther, As the quality of this Victuals was plain and course, so the
quantity of it was small and little; Five Loaves and two Fishes. Well might the
Disciples say, what are these among so many? The Eye of Sense and Reason sees
an impossibility of those Effects which Faith can easily apprehend, and Divine
Power more easily produce.

18 He said, Bring them hither to me. 19 And he commanded the multitude to sit
down on the grass, and took the five loaves, and the two fishes, and looking up
to heaven, he blessed and brake, and gave the loaves to his disciples, and the
disciples to the multitude.

Obs. 1. How the Master of the Feast Marshals his Guests, he commands them all
to sit down: None of them Reply, sit down, but to what? Here are the Mouths,
but where is the Meat? We can soon be set, but whence shall we be served?
Nothing of this; but they obey and expect. Oh how easy is it to trust God, and
rely upon Providence, when there is Corn in the Barn, and Bread in the
Cupboard; but when our Stores are all empty, and nothing is before us, then to
depend upon an invisible Bounty, is a true and noble Act of Faith. Obs. 2. The
Actions performed by our Blessed Savior. He Blessed, and Brake, and gave the
Loaves to his Disciples, and they to the multitude. 1. He Blessed, Teaching us
by his Example in all our Wants to look up to Heaven for a Supply; to wait upon
God for his Blessing, and not to sit down to our Food as a Beast to his Forage.
2. He brake the Loaves. He could have multiplied them whole, why would he
rather do it in the breaking? Perhaps to teach us that we are to expect his
Blessing in the Distribution, rather than in the Reservation of what he gives
us. Scattering is the way to Increasing: Not Grain hoarded up in the Granary,
but scattered in the Furrows of the Field, yields increase. Liberality is the
way to Riches, and Penuriousness the Road to Poverty. 3. Christ gave the Bread
thus broken to his Disciple, that they might distribute it to the Multitude.
But why did not our Lord distribute it with his own Hand, but by the Hands of
his Disciples? Doubtless to win respect to his Disciples from the People. The
same course does our Lord take in spiritual distributions. He that could feed
the World by his immediate H^nd, chooses rather by the Hands of his Ministers
to the divide the Bread of Life to all Hearers.

20 And they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up of the fragments
that remained, twelve baskets full. 21. And they that had eaten were about five
thousand men, besides Women and children.

They did all Eat, not a Crumb or a Bit, but to Satiety and Fullness; They did
Eat and were filled, yet twelve Baskets remained: More is left than was at
first set on. So many Bellies, and yet so many Baskets filled. The Miracle was
doubled by an Act of boundless Omnipotency. It is hard to say which was the
greater Miracle, the miraculous Eating, or the miraculous Leaving. If we
consider what they Eat, we may justly wonder that they left any thing; if what
they Left, that they Eat any thing. Observe farther, These Fragments, though of
Barley-Bread and Fish-bones, must not be lost; but by our Savior's Command
gathered up. The Liberal Housekeeper of the World will not allow the loss of
his Orts. Oh how fearful then will the account of those be, who have large and
plentiful Estates to answer for as lost, being spent upon their Lusts in Riot
and Excess!

22 And straightway Jesus constrained his disciples to get into a ship, and to
go before him unto the other side, while he sent the multitudes away.

Jesus constrained them, that is, he commanded them to go away before him: No
doubt they were very loath to leave him, and to go without him; both out of the
Love which they bear to him, and themselves. Such as have once tasted the
sweetness of Christ, are hardly drawn away from him; however, as desirous as
the Disciples were to stay with Christ, yet at his word of command, they depart
from him: Where Christ has a Will to command, his Disciples and Followers must
have a Will to obey.

23 And when he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into a mountain apart
to pray: and when the evening was come, he was there alone.

Observe here, 1. Christ dismisses the Multitude, and then retires to pray;
Teaching us by his Example, when we have to do with God, to dismiss the
multitude of our Affairs and Employments, of our Cares and Thoughts. O how
unseemly is it to have our Tongues talking to God, and our Thoughts taken up
with the World. Obs. 2. The place Christ retires to for Prayer; a Solitary
Mountain; not so much for his own need, for he could be alone when he was in
Company; but to teach us, that when we Address our selves to God in Duty, we
are to take all the Helps, Furtherances and Advantages we can for the doing of
it. When we converse with God in Duty, O how good is it, to get upon a
Mountain, to get our Hearts up above the World, above worldly Employments, and
worldly Cogitations. Obs. 3. The occasion of Christ's Prayer: He had sent the
Disciples to Sea, he foresaw the Storm arising, and now he gets into a Mountain
to Pray for them, that their Faith might not fail them when their Troubles were
upon them. Learn hence, That it is the singular Comfort of the Church of God,
that in all her Difficulties and Distresses, Christ is interceeding for her;
when she is on the Sea conflicting with the Waves, Christ is upon the Mountain
praying for her Preservation.

24 But the ship was now in the midst of the sea, tossed with waves: for the
wind was contrary.

Note here, The great danger the Disciples were in, and the great difficulties
they had to encounter with; they were in the midst of the Sea, they were tossed
with the Waves, the Wind was contrary, and Christ was absent. The Wisdom of God
often suffers his Church to be tossed upon the Waves of Affliction and
Persecution, but it shall not be swallowed up by them: Often is this Ark of the
Church upon the Waters; seldom off them; but never drowned.

25 And in the fourth watch of the night, Jesus went unto them walking on the
sea.

Christ having seen the distress of his Disciples on the Shore, he hastens to
them on the Sea. It was not a Stormy and Tempestuous Sea that could separate
betwixt him and them: He that waded through a Sea of Blood, and through a Sea
of Wrath to Save his People, will walk upon a Sea of Water to Succor and
Relieve them. But, Observe, The time when Christ came to help them, not till
the fourth Watch, a little before the Morning. They had been many Hours upon
the Waters conflicting with the Waves, with their Fears and Dangers. God often
times lengthens out the Troubles of his Children before he delivers them, but
when they are come to an Extremity, that is the season of his Succors. As God
suffers his Church to be brought into extremities before he help her. So he
will help her in extremity. In the Fourth Watch Jesus came, etc.

26 And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled,
saying, It is a spirit; and they cried out for fear.

See how the Disciples take their Deliverer to be a Destroyer: Their Fears were
highest when their Deliverer and Deliverance were nearest. God may be coming
with Salvation and Deliverance for his Church, when she for the present cannot
discern him.

27 But straightway Jesus spoke unto rhem, saying, Be of good cheer: It is I,
be not afraid.

Observe, When the Disciples were in the saddest Condition, how one word from
Christ revives them; it is a sufficient support in all our Afflictions, to hear
Christ's Voice speaking to us, and to enjoy his favorable Presence with us.
Say but, Oh Savior, (it is I) and then let Evils do their worst: That one word
(it is I) is enough to lay all Storms, and to calm all Tempests.

28 And Peter answered him, and said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto
thee on the water. 29 And he said, Come. And when Peter was come down out of
the ship, he walked on the water to go to Jesus. 30 But when he saw the wind
boisterous, he was afraid: and beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord, save
me.

Observe here, 1. The mixture of Peter's Faith and Distrust: It was Faith that
said, Master; it was Distrust that said, If it be thou: It was Faith that said,
Bid me come to thee: It was Faith that enabled him to step down on the Watery
Pavement: It was Faith that said, Lord, save me: But it was Distrust that upon
the sight of a mighty Wind, Feared: It was Distrust that made him Sink. Oh the
imperfect composition of Faith and Fear in the best of Saints here on Earth!
Sincerity of Grace is found with the Saints on Earth: Perfection of Grace with
the Saints in Heaven: Here the Saints look forth Fair as the Moon; which has
some Spots in her greatest Beauty: Hereafter they shall be Clear as the Sun,
whose Face is all Bright and Glorious. Obs. 2. That whilst Peter Believes, the
Sea is as firm as Brass under him; when he begins to Fear, then he begins to
Sink. Two Hands upheld Peter, the Hand of Christ's Power, and the Hand of his
own Faith. The Hand of Christ's Power laid hold on Peter, and the Hand of
Peter's Faith laid hold on the Power of Christ. If we let go our hold on
Christ, we Sink; if he lets go his hold on us, we drown. Now Peter Answered his
Name Cephas, and Sunk like a Stone.

31 And immediately Jesus stretched forth his hand, and caught him, and said
unto him, O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? 32 And when they
were come into the ship, the wind ceased. 33 Then they that were in the ship,
came and worshipped him, saying, Of a truth, thou art the Son of God.

Obs. here, 1. The Mercy of Christ is no sooner sought but found: Immediately
Jesus put forth his Hand and caught him. Oh with what speed, and with what
Assurance should we flee to that Sovereign Bounty, from whence never any Suitor
was sent away empty. Obs. 2. Though Christ gave Peter his Hand, yet with his
Hand he gave him a Check: O thou of little Faith, why did thou doubt? Though
Christ likes Believing, yet he dislikes Doubting. A Person may be truly
Believing, who nevertheless is sometimes Doubting; but his Doubting eclipses
the Beauty of his Believing.

34 And when they were gone over, they came into the land of Genesaret. 35 And
when the men of that place had knowledge of him, they sent out into all that
country round about, and brought unto him all that were diseased. 36 And
besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment: and as many as
touched, were made perfectly whole.

Obs. 1. Our Savior's unwearied Diligence, in going about to do good: He no
sooner landeth, but goes to Genesaret and heals their Sick. 2. The Peoples
Charity to their Sick Neighbors in sending abroad to let all the Country know
that Christ the great Physician was come amongst them. 3. Obs. Where lay the
Healing Virtue: Not in their Finger, but in their Faith; or rather in Christ,
whom their Faith apprehended.

CHAP. XV.
1 THen came to Jesus Scribes and Pharisees, which were of Jerusalem, saying, 2
Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? for they wash not
their hands when they eat bread.

The former part of this Chapter acquaints us with a great Contest between our
Savior and the Pharisees about their Traditions and old Customs, which they
valued more than the Commandments of God: They accused the Disciples for Eating
Bread with unwasht Hands, which though it were in it self but a Decent Custom,
the Pharisees made it a Religious Rite; for which reason, our Savior and his
Disciples would not observe it. Whence we learn, That what is in it self, and
may without offense be done as a Civil Custom, ought to be discountenanced and
opposed when Men require it of us as a Religious Act.

3 But he answered and said unto them, Why do you also transgress the
Commandment of God by your tradition? 4 For God commanded, saying, Honor thy
father and mother: and, he that curses father or mother, let him die the
death. 5 But ye say, Whosoever shall say to his father or his mother, It is a
gift by whatsoever thou might be profited by me, 6 And honor not his
father, or his mother, he shall be free. Thus have ye made the commandment of
God of none effect by your tradition.

Observe here, 1. The heavy Charge which our Savior brings in against the
Pharisees; namely, For violating an Express Command of God, and preferring
their own Traditions before it: You make void the Comandments of God by your
Traditions. Obs. 2. The Command which our Savior instances in, as violated by
them, it is the Fifth Commandment, which requires Children to Relieve their
Parents in their Necessity. Now though the Pharisees did not deny this in plain
Terms, yet they made an Exception from it, which if Children had a mind,
rendered it void and useless. For the Pharisees taught, that in case any would
give a Gift to the Temple, which Gift they called Corban, and of which they
themselves had a great share; that then Children were discharged from making
any fu^^er Provision for their Poor, Aged or Impotent Parents: And might say
unto them after this manner, That which thou ask for thy Supply, is given to
God, and therefore I cannot Relieve thee. So that Covetous and Graceless
Children looked upon it as the most frugal way, once for all, to Fine to the
Temple, rather than pay the constant Rent of daily Relief to their poor
Parents. Learn, That no Duty, Gift or Offering to God is accepted, where the
Duty of Charity is neglected. It is more acceptable to God to refresh the
Bowels of his Saints, who are the Living Temples of the Holy Ghost, than to
adorn material Temples with Gold and Silver.

7 Ye hypocrites, well did Esaias prophecy of you, saying, 8 This people
draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors me me with their lips: but
their heart is far from me. 9 But in vain they do worship me, teaching for
doctrine the commandments of Men.

Our Savior reproves the Hypocritical Pharisees for these things, 1. That they
preferred Humane Traditions before the Divine Precepts. 2. That by their Humane
Traditions, they made void the Worship of God. It is God's undoubted
Prerogative to prescribe all the parts of his own Worship; and whoever presumes
to add thereunto, they worship him in vain. Our Savior farther shows, that all
this proceeded from the Insincerity of their Hearts: This People honors me
with their Lips, but their Heart is far from me. Whence Learn, 1. That the
removing of the Heart far from God in Worship, is a great Sin, and an high
Degree of Hypocrisy. 2. That whatever Outward Show and Profession of Religion
Men make, if their Hearts be not right with God; and what they do, proceeds not
from an Inward Principle of Love and Obedience to God, they are under the Reign
and Power of Hypocrisy. Ye Hypocrites, in vain do ye worship me.

10 And he called the multitude, and said unto them, hear and understand. 11
Not that which goes into the mouth defiles a man: but that which comes out
of the mouth, this defiles a man.

Our Blessed Savior leaving the Pharisees with some dislike, applies himself
to the Multitude, and shows them the true Spring, and Original Fountain of all
Spiritual Pollution and Vncleaness: Namely, the Filthiness and Impurity of
Man's Heart and Nature; which boiling in the Heart, the Scum runs out at the
Mouth: Thereby informing the Multitude, That not that which is Eaten, but that
which is Spoken, defiles a Man: Not the Meat eaten with the Mouth, but the
Wickedness of the Heart vented by the Mouth, Pollutes a Person in God's Account.

12 Then came his disciples, and said unto him, Know thou that the Pharisees
were offended, after they heard this saying? 13 But he answered and said, Every
plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up. 14 Let
them alone: they be blind leaders of the blind. And if the blind lead the
blind, both shall fall into the ditch.

Obs. here, 1. How the Disciples wonder, that our Savior did so little regard
the Displeasure of the Pharisees; Know thou not, that the Pharisees were
offended? Although nothing vexed the Pharisees more, than the Discovery of their
False Doctrine before the Multitude, yet our Savior did not stick to detect
their Errors, and to declare the Truth; let the Effects of their Displeasure
be what they would. Sinful Man-pleasing is fruitless and endless. Obs. 2. Our
Lord's Answer; which shows a double Reason why he thus slighted the Offense
taken by the Pharisees. 1. He compares the Pharisees Doctrine and Tradition to
noisome Weeds in the Church; planted there, not by God, but themselves; and
consequently shall certainly be rooted up. In Matters of Religion, if Men will
act according to the Dictates of their own Fancies, and not walk by the Rule of
God's Word, they may please themselves perhaps, but they can never please their
Maker. Divine Institution is the only sure Rule of Religious Worship. 2. Christ
compares the Pharisees themselves to blind Guides. They are blind Leaders of
the Blind: Leaders and Followers, both blind, who will certainly and suddenly
fall into the Ditch of Temporal and Eternal Destruction. Learn, 1. That
Ignorant, Erroneous, and Unfaithful Ministers, are the heaviest Judgments that
can befall a People. 2. That the following of such Teachers and blind Guides,
will be no Excuse to a People another Day; much less free them from the Danger
of Eternal Destruction.

15 Then answered Peter, and said unto him, Declare unto us this parable. 16
And Jesus said, Are ye also yet without understanding? 17 Do not ye yet
understand, that whatsoever enters in at the mouth, goes into the belly, and
is cast out into the draught? 18 But those things which proceed out of the
mouth, come forth from the heart, and they defile the man. 19 For out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false
witness, blasphemies. 20 These are the things which defile a man: but to eat
with unwashen hands, defiles not a man.

The Disciples desiring the Interpretation of the foregoing Parable, our
Savior gives it them; but withal expostulates with them, that they did not
understand a thing so obvious and plain; Are ye yet without Understanding? As
if he had said, Have you sat thus long under my Ministerial Teaching, and
enjoyed the Benefit of my Company and Conversation, And yet are no farther
Proficients in Knowledge? Whence Learn, That our Lord expects a Proficiency in
Knowledge from us, answerable to the Opportunities and Means of Knowledge
enjoyed by us. Next, he gives them the Sense and Signification of the Parable;
telling them, that it is out of a Sinful Heart, that all Sin proceeds: The
Heart is the Cage of Nest which is full of these unclean Birds, and from whence
they take their flight. Though the Occasions of Sin are from without, yet the
Source and Original of Sin is from within. Learn, That the Heart of Man is the
Sink and Seed-Plot of all Sin, and the Fountain of all Pollution; the Life
could not be so bad, if the Heart were not worse: All the Irregularity of our
Lives, flows from the Impurity of our Hearts and Natures.

21 And Jesus went thence, and departed into the coasts of Tire and Sidon. 22
And behold a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him,
saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David, my daughter is grievously
vexed with a devil.

Observe here, The constant Employment of our Savior, He went about doing
Good, from Place to Place; in the Borders of Tire and Sidon he finds a Faithful
Woman of the Race of the Canaanites, who becomes an humble Supplicant to
Christ, while the Jews neglected so great Salvation. Yea, she not only speaks,
but cries unto him. Were we duly affected with our Spiritual Wants, we could
speak to God in no other Language, than that of Cries and Tears; nothing but
Cries can pierce Heaven. Obs. 2. Though all Israel could not Example the Faith of
this Canaanite, yet was her Daughter tormented with a Devil. Learn, That
neither Truth, nor Strength of Faith, can secure us either against Satan's
inward Temptations, or outward Vexations; and consequently, the worst of Bodily
Afflictions are no sufficient Proof of Divine Displeasure. Obs. 3. The Daughter
did not come to Christ for her self, but the Mother for her. Perhaps the Child
was not so sensible of its own Misery, but the good Mother feels both the
Child's Sorrow and her own. True Goodness teaches us to appropriate the
Afflictions of others to our selves; it causes us to bear their Griefs, and to
sympathize with them in their Sorrows.

23 But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him,
saying, Send her away, for she cries after us.

Strange! That a miserable Supplicant should cry and sue, whilst the God of
Mercy is speechless. What? Is the Fountain of Mercy dried up? Oh Savior! We
have often sound Cause to wonder at thy Words, but never till now at thy Silence.
Learn hence, That Christ does sometimes delay to return an Answer to a
well-qualified Prayer. Sometimes his People do not Pray enough earnestly;
sometimes they Pray too earnestly, for some Outward and Temporal Mercy;
sometimes the Mercy they Pray for is not good for them; or it may be, it is not
yet good for them. Let us not then judge of God's Hearing Prayer, by his
present Answer.

24 But he answered and said, I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.

Obs. When our Savior does Answer, he gives not one Word of Comfort, but
rather a Repulse. Christ has ofttimes Love in his Heart to his People, when
they can read none in his Countenance, nor gather it from his Discourse. Obs.
The Answer it self. Christ says not, I am sent to the lost Sheep of the House
of Adam; but, To the lost Sheep of the House of Israel. The Jews are compared
unto Sheep, the Gentiles unto Dogs. Christ insinuates, that though she were a
lost Sheep of Adam, yet not being one of the lost Sheep of Israel, he could do
nothing for her.

25 Then came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me.

Yet has not this poor Woman done; Christ's former Silence, and his present
Denial, cannot silence her: She Comes, she Worships, she Cries, Lord, help me.
Oh what an undaunted Grace is the Grace of Faith! It has a strong Heart, and a
bold Forehead, peremptory Denials cannot dismay it. This Woman will not
despond, though her Prayer of Faith, from the Knees of Humility, succeed not.

26 But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and
to cast it to dogs.

Obs. here, The seeming Severity of Christ to this poor Woman; he calls her not
a Woman, but a Dog; and as it were spurns her from his Feet, with an harsh
Repulse. Did ever so severe a Word drop from those mild Lips? What shall we
say? Is the Lamb of God turned Lion? That a Woman in Distress imploring Pity,
yea, a good Woman, and an humble Suppliant, should be thus rated out of
Christ's Presence for a Dog. Learn hence, That Christ puts the strongest Faith
of his own Children upon the severest Trials: The Trial had never been so
sharp, if her Faith had not been so strong. Usually, where God gives much
Grace, he tries Grace much.

27 And she says, Truth, Lord; yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from
their master's table.

Observe how her Humility grants all, her Patience overcomes all, she meekly
desires to possess the Dog's place; not to crowd to the Table, but to creep
under it, and to partake of the Crumbs of Mercy that fall from thence. Indeed
she showed one of the best Qualities of a Dog, in keeping her Hold where she
had once fastened; not letting go, or giving over, until she had gotten what she
desired. Learn hence, That nothing is so pleasing unto Christ, as to see his
People following him with Faith and Importunity, when he seems to withdraw from
them.

28 Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith: be it
unto thee, even as thou will. And her daughter was made whole from that very
hour.

The Disciples observing her Behavior, might have been ready to say; O Woman,
great is thy Patience, great is thy Humility: But says Christ, Great is thy
FAITH; he sees the Root, we the Branches. Nothing but Faith could thus temper
the Heart, thus strengthen the Soul, thus charm the Tongue. Oh powerful Grace
of Faith, which Christ himself could no longer withstand, but cries out as a
Person overcome by the prevalency of it; Oh Woman, great is thy Faith. Note,
That no Grace ever goes away from Christ uncrowned: Though we may wait long for a
Mercy, yet the Hand of Faith never knocked in vain at the Door of Heaven. Mercy
is as surely ours, as if we had it, if we have but Faith and Patience to wait
for it. This good Woman found it so, to her unspeakable Comfort: And the same
shall we find, in the Exercise of the same Grace.

29 And Jesus departed from thence, and came nigh unto the sea of Galilee, and
went up into a mountain, and sat down there. 30 And great multitudes came unto
him, having with them those that were lame, blind, dumb, maimed, and many
others, and cast them down at Jesus feet, and he healed them: 31 Insomuch that
the multitude wondered, when they saw the dumb to speak, the maimed to be whole,
the lame to walk, and the blind to see: and they glorified the God of Israel.

Obs. here, 1. The Charity. 2. The Faith of the Multitude; in bringing the
Blind, the Deaf, and the Dumb to Christ: Their Charity, in lending Eyes to the
Blind, and a Tongue to the Dumb; who could neither come to Christ themselves,
nor speak for themselves. Every Man has a Tongue to Speak for himself, happy is
he that has a Tongue to Pray and Intercede for others: This Charity did the
People exercise here. Observe also, Their Faith; they laid the Lame and the
Blind down at Jesus Feet, relying upon his Power, and believing his Willingness
to Help and Heal them. Observe farther, The Effect of this Miracle upon the
Multitude, it was Twofold. 1. They were struck with Admiration and Wonder, to
see such Cures wrought as exceeded the Course of Nature, and the Power of Art.
2. They glorified the God of Israel. That is, they acknowledged it to be a
wonderful Work of Power and Mercy wrought by that God whom Israel worshipped.
Whence we Learn, That the Miraculous Works of Christ which he wrought before
the Multitude, were obvious to their Senses; and did constrain the Beholders
(if not blinded with Pharisaical Obstinacy) to acknowledge the Power of God
communicated to Christ, and to praise him for it: The Multitude marvelled, and
glorified God.

32 Then Jesus called his disciples unto him, and said, I have compassion on
the multitude, because they continue with me now three days, and have nothing
to eat: and I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way. 33
And his disciples say unto him, Whence should we have so much bread in the
wilderness, as to fill so great a multitude? 34 And Jesus says unto them, How
many loaves have ye? and they said, Seven, and a few little fishes. 35 And he
commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground. 36 And he took the seven
loaves, and the fishes, and gave thanks, and brake them, and gave to his
disciples, and the disciples to the multitude.

Here we have the Second Miracle of Christ's compassionate Feeding the Hungry
Multitude. Chap. XIV. we read of 5000 fed with five Loaves and two Fishes; here
Christ feeds 4000 with seven Loaves, and a few small Fishes. Where Observe,
That Christ fed fewest, when he had most Provision; when he had Seven Loaves,
he fed but 4000; when he had but five Loaves, he fed 5000. Thus the Wisdom and
Power of Christ is glorified by him, as he pleases. The feeding of one Thousand
with one Loaf, was as true a Miracle as the feeding seven Thousand. Our Savior
did put forth the Power of his Godhead in working Miracles, after what manner
seemed best to his own Wisdom. Observe farther, A double Action performed by
our Savior. 1. He gave Thanks; that is, he prayed for a Blessing upon the Food:
Teaching us our Duty, That if the Son of God did look up to Heaven, and Bless
his Food, we should not sit down to our Food, as a Beast to his Fodder, without
craving a Blessing upon it. The next Action was, He gave to his Disciples. But
why did he distribute the Loaves by the Hand of his Disciples? Answ. Because
the Disciples questioned through the weakness of their Faith, Whether such a
Multitude as 4000 could be fed with so small a Provision as seven Loaves. Now
our Savior to convince them how easily he could do that thing which they
adjudged impossible, he distributes the Bread by them; making use of their own
Eyes and Hands, for their Conviction and Satisfaction. Thus Christ to shame the
Unbelief of his Disciples, makes them not only Spectators, but Actors in that
Work which they judged impossible to be effected.

37 And they did all eat, and were filled: and they took up of the broken meat
that was left, seven baskets full. 38 And they that did eat were four thousand
men, beside women and children. 39 And he sent away the multitude, and took
ship, and came into the coasts of Magdala.

They did all eat, not a Crumb or a Bit, but to Fullness and Satisfaction; yet
Seven Baskets remain; answering the Number of the Loaves, as the Twelve Baskets
in the former Miracle answered the Twelve Apostles: In both, more is left than
was at first set on: It is hard to say, which was the greater Miracle, the
Miraculous Eating, or Miraculous Leaving. If we consider what they eat, we may
justly wonder that they left any thing: If what they left, that they eat any
thing. Observe lastly, Christ would not have these Fragments lost, but gathered
up; the Great Housekeeper of the World will not allow the Loss of his Orts. Oh
how dreadful will the Account of those be, who have large and plentiful Estates
to Answer for, as Lost, being spent upon their Lusts, in Riot and Excess!

CHAP. XVI.
1 THE Pharisees also with the Sadduces came, and tempting, desired him that he
would show them a sign from heaven. 2 He answered and said unto them, When it
is evening, ye say, It will be fair weather: for the sky is red. 3 And in the
morning, It will be foul weather to day, for the sky is red and lowering. O ye
hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky, but can ye not discern the
signs of the times? 4 A wicked and adulterous generation seeks after a sign,
and there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas.
And he left them, and departed.

Obs. here, 1. The Persons demanding of our Savior a Sign, the Pharisees and
Sadduces, Persons of contrary Opinions and Interests; yet both agree in
Tempting and Opposing Christ. Learn thence, That Wicked Men, how opposite
soever they are one to another, yet can agree together in Opposing Christ, and
Undermining his Truth. Obs. 2. The Sign demanded, Show us a Sign from Heaven:
As if they had said, Put us not off with such Earthly Signs as we have seen, in
multiplying Loaves; but let us see a Miracle from Heaven; such as Moses and
Elias wrought. This they desired, not so much for their Satisfaction, as out of
Curiosity, nay, Wicked Treachery. Learn thence, That to demand a Sign, not to
confirm our Faith, but to harden our selves in our Unbelief, is a dangerous
Tempting of Christ. Obs. 3. Our Savior's Rejection of this Demand of the
Pharisees to give them a Sign; Oh ye Hypocrites, says he, ye can discern the
Face of the Sky, but ye cannot discern the Signs of the Times. As if he had
said, Did not Malice and Obstinacy blind your Eyes, ye might as easily see and
discern, that these are the Times of the Messiah, and that I am he, by the
Miracles wrought by me; as you can make a Judgment of the Weather, by looking
upon the Sky. Learn, That to pretend more Ignorance or Uncertainty in
discerning the Signs of Gospel Times, than the Signs of the Weather, is great
Hypocrisy: Ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the Face of the Sky, but can ye not
discern the Signs of the Times? Observe lastly, That our Savior does not
condemn the Study of Nature, or making Observation of the State of the Weather,
from the Face of the Sky. All that our Savior blames was, that they were
better skilled in the Signs of the Weather, than in the Signs of the Times. As
God by Natural Signs gives us Warning of a Change in Natural Things; so by his
Providential Dispensations he gives us Warning of a Change in Civil Things: He
that is Wise, will Observe these Things; and by their Observation, Will come to
Understand the Pleasure of the Lord.

5 And when his disciples were come to the other side, they had forgotten to
take bread. 6 Then said Jesus unto them, Take heed, and be ware of the leaven
of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces. 7 And they reasoned among themselves,
saying, It is because we have taken no bread. 8 Which when Jesus perceived, he
said unto them; O ye of little faith, why reason ye among your selves, because
ye have brought no bread? 9 Do ye not yet understand, neither remember the five
loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? 10 Neither the
seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? 11 How is
it that ye do not understand, that I spoke it not to you concerning bread, that
ye should beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces? 12 Then
understood they how that he bade them not beware of the leaven of bread; but of
the doctrine of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces.

Observe here, 1. How dull the Disciples of Christ were under Christ's own
Teaching, and how apt to put a Carnal Sense upon his Words; they apprehended he
had spoken to them of the Leaven of Bread, what he intended of the Leaven of
the Pharisees Doctrine. Obs. 2. The smart and sharp Reproof which Christ gave
his Disciples, for not understanding the Sense and Signification of what he
spoke. The Lord Jesus Christ is much displeased with his own People, when he
discerns Blindness and Ignorance in them, after more than ordinary Means of
Knowledge enjoyed by them. How is it, that ye do not yet understand? Obs. 3.
The Metaphor which Christ sets forth the corrupt Doctrine of the Pharisees by;
he compares it to Leaven, partly for its Sowrness, and partly for its
Diffusiveness. Leaven is a piece of sower Dough, that diffuses it self into the
whole Mass or Lump of Bread with which it is mixed. From whence our Savior
intimates, that the Pharisees were a sower and proud sort of People; and their
Doctrines, like themselves, poisonable and pernicious in their Consequences;
the Contagion of which our Lord warns his Disciples to avoid and shun. Whence
Learn, That Error is as damnable as Vice; Persons Erroneous in their Judgments
are to be avoided, as well as those that are Lewd and Wicked in their
Conversations. He that has a due Care of his Soul's Salvation, must as well
beware of Erroneous Principles, as of Debauched Practices. Obs. 4. Our Savior
does not command his Disciples to separate from Commmunion with the Pharisees,
and oblige them not hear their Doctrine; but only to beware of the Errors that
they mix with their Doctrine. We may, and ought to hold Communion with a
Church, though Erroneous in Doctrine, if not Fundamentally Erroneous. Separation
from a Church, is not justifiable upon any other Ground, than that which makes
a Separation betwixt God and that Church: Which is either the Apostasy of that
Church into gross Idolatry; or in Point of Doctrine, into damnable Heresy.

13 When Jesus came into the coasts of Cesarea Philippi, he asked his
disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I the Son of man am? 14 And they said,
Some say that thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, and others Jeremias, or
one of the prophets. 15 He says unto them, But whom say ye that I am? 16 And
Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God. 17
And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jona: for
flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in
heaven.

Observe here, Our Savior's Question, and the Disciples Answer. Our Savior's
Question is twofold: 1. Whom do Men say that I am? Not that the Son of God was
ignorant what Men said of him; but he had an Intention more firmly to settle
and establish his Disciples in the Belief of his being the promised Messiah.
And therefore, 2. He puts the Question to them, Whom do you my Disciples say
that I am? You, that have heard the Holiness of my Doctrine, and seen the
Divinity of my Miracles. What say you to me? And what Confession do you make of
me? Christ expects greater Measures of Grace and Knowledge, and higher Degrees
of Affiance and Faith, from those that have enjoyed the greatest Means of Grace
and Knowledge. The Disciples were Eye and Ear-Witnesses of his Doctrine and
Miracles, and accordingly he expects from them a full Confession of his
Divinity. Obs. 2. The Answer returned, 1. By the Apostles in general; And they
said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist, some Elias, some Jeremias. It Is
no new thing (it seems) to find Diversity of Judgments and Opinions, concerning
Christ, and the Affairs of his Kingdom. We find, that when our Savior was
amongst Men, who daily both saw and heard him, yet there was then a Diversity
of Opinions concerning him. 2. Peter in the Name of the rest, and as the Mouth
of all the Apostles, makes a full and open Confession of his Deity; Thou art
Christ, the Son of the living God. Whence Note, That the Vail of Christ's
Humane Nature did not keep the Eye of his Disciples Faith from seeing him to be
One in Substance with the Father: Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God.
Observe, 3. How highly pleased our Savior was with this Confession; he
pronounces Peter, and the rest in him, Blessed, who had by him made this
Christian Confession; Blessed art thou, Simon; and tells him, 1. What did not
enable him to make that Confession, Not Flesh and Blood; that is, not Man, nor
the Wisdom and Reason of Man. 2. But positively, God the Father, by the
Operation of his Spirit, and the Dispensation of the Gospel, has wrought this
Divine Faith in you, and drawn forth this Glorious Confession from you, that I
am indeed the Son of God. Thence Learn, That no Man can savingly believe that
Jesus Christ is the Eternal Son of God, and Savior of the World; but he, in
whom God himself by his Holy Spirit has wrought such a Persuasion by the
Ministry of the Gospel.

18 And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will
build my church: and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

Observe here, 1. As Peter confessed Christ, so Christ confesses him; Peter
said, Thou art Christ; Christ says, Thou art Peter; alluding to his Name, which
signifies a Rock: He having made good that Title, by the Strength, Stability,
and Firmness of his Faith. Obs. 2. A double Promise made by Christ to Peter: 1.
For the Building: 2. For the Upholding of his Church. For the Building of his
Church: 1. Upon this Rock will I build my Church. Upon what Rock? Upon Peter,
The Rock Confessing, say the Papists: But if so, no more is said of Peter here,
than of all the Apostles elsewhere; Galat. 2.9. James and John are called
Pillars, as well as Peter. So that Peter's Superiority over the rest of the
Apostles can with no show of Reason be from hence inferred. Upon Christ the
Rock Confessed, say the Protestants; for Christ is the Foundation-Stone upon
which his Church is built: Ephesians. 2.20. Ye are built upon the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone. So
then, not upon Peter the Rock Confessing, but upon Christ the Rock Confessed,
and upon the Rock of Peter's Confession; that Fundamental Truth, that Christ is
the Son of the Living God, is the Church built. Upon this Rock will I build my
Church. Super hanc Confessionis tuae Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. 2. Here
is our Savior's Promise, for the Upholding, as well as the Building of his
Church; The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it: That is, All the Policy
and Power of the Devil and his Instruments, shall neither destroy my Church,
nor extinguish the Light of this Divine Truth, which thou have now made
Confession of; namely, That I am the true Messiah, the Son of the living God.
Note, 1. That Jesus Christ is the Builder, and will be the Upholder of his
Church. 2. That the Church upheld by Christ's Power and Promise, shall never be
vanquished by the Devil's Policy or Strength. Upon this Rock will I build, etc.
and the Gates, etc.

19 And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven: and whatsoever
thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou shall
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

Observe here, 1. The Person to whom this Promise is made; namely, to Peter
with the rest of the Apostles; the Confession being made by him, in the Name of
the rest. Elsewhere we find the same Authority and Power given to them all,
which is here committed unto Peter. Joh. 20.23. Whose Sins soever ye remit,
they are remitted. Although there might be a Priority of Order amongst the
Apostles, yet no Superiority of Power was founded in any one of them, over and
above the rest. Obs. 2. the Power promised; I will give thee the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven; that is, the Key of Doctrine, and the Key of Discipline, or
full Power and Authority to Preach the Gospel, to Administer Sacraments, and
Execute Church Censures. The Speech is Metaphorical, and alludes to Stewards
and Officers in great Houses, to whose Trust the Keys of the Household are
committed. Christ's Ministers are the Stewards of his House, into whose Hands
the Keys of his Church are committed by Christ. The Pope would snatch them out
of all Hands, and keep them in his own; he snatches at Peter's Keys, but makes
shipwreck of Peter's Faith; arrogating Peter's Power, but abrogating his Holy
Profession. Learn, 1. That the Authority and Power which the Ministers of the
Gospel do exercise and execute, is from Christ. I will give thee the Keys of
the Kingdom. 2. That this Power of the Keys, Christ dispensed promiscuously to
all his Apostles, and never designed it as a Peculiar for St. Peter: As they
all made the same Profession of Faith by Peter, so they all received the same
Authority and Power with Peter.

20 Then charged he his disciples, that they should tell no man, that he was
Jesus the Christ.

It may seem strange, that our Savior should charge his Disciples, to tell no
Man that he was Jesus the Christ, seeing the Knowledge of it was so necessary.
The Reason is conceived to be, 1. Because the Glory of his Godhead was not to
be fully manifested till after his Resurrection, and then to be published by
himself, and confirmed by his own Miracles. 2. Lest the Knowledge of it should
have hindered his Death: For, Had the Rulers known, they would not have
Crucified the Lord of Glory. Learn, That Christ has his own fit Times, and
proper Seasons, in which he reveals his own Mysteries to the World. 2. That
Christ was so intent upon laying down his Life for Sinners, that he would not
have his Death hindered by an untimely Declaration of his being truly and really
God: After his Death it was, that He declared himself to be the Son of God with
Power, by the Resurrection from ^he Dead.

21 From that time forth began Jesus to show unto his disciples, how that he
must go unto Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the elders, and chief
priests, and scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day.

Obs. 1. The Wisdom of our Savior, in acquainting his Disciples with the near
Approach of his Death and Sufferings. This he did for several Reasons: 1. To
let them understand that he was really God, (as they had just before confessed
him to be) by his foreknowing and foretelling things to come. 2. To convince
them of their Error, in apprehending that his Kingdom was of this World, and
that he was to Reign here as a Temporal Prince. 3. To prevent their being
offended at his Sufferings, and to prepare them for their own; that they might
neither shrink at them, nor sink under them. Obs. 2. The Persons foretold by
Christ, that should be the bloody Actors in the Tragedy of his Death; namely,
the Rulers and Chief Priests: It was the Poor that received Christ, and
embraced the Gospel; it was the Great Ones of the World that rejected him, and
set him at naught; and the Rulers both in Church and State, condemned and
crucified him.

22 Then Peter took him, and began to rebuke him, saying, Be it far from thee,
Lord: this shall not be unto thee.

No doubt Peter spoke all this out of a sincere intention, and with a singular
Affection toward our Savior; but Pious Intentions, and Good Affections, will
not justify unwarrantable Actions. From this Counsel of St. Peter to Christ we
Learn, 1. How ready Flesh and Blood is to oppose all that tends to Suffering:
Master, spare thy self. 2. What need we have to be fortified against the
Temptations of Friends as well as of Enemies; for Satan can make good Men his
instruments to do his Work, when they little think of it. Peter little
suspected that Satan set him on work to hinder the Redemption of Mankind by
dissuading Christ from Dying. But observe in the next Verse with what
indignation Christ rejects Peter's Advice.

23 But he turned, and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an
offense unto me: for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those
that be of Men.

Christ looked upon Peter with Anger and Displeasure; Christ heard Satan
speaking in Peter. 'Twas Peter's Tongue, but Satan tuned it; therefore Christ
calls Peter by Satan's Name: They that will do the Devil's Work, shall have the
Devil's Name too. He that would hinder the Redemption of Mankind, is Satan, an
Adversary to Mankind. From our Savior's smart Reproof given to Peter, Learn,
That no Love or Respect to Men's Persons or Piety, must draw us to flatter them
in their Sins, or cause us to speak lightly of their Sins. From our Savior's
Resolution not to favor himself, notwithstanding Peter's Advice, Learn, That
so intent was the Heart of Christ, upon the great Work of Man's Redemption,
that he could not bear the least word that should obstruct him in it, or divert
him from it.

24 Then said Jesus unto his disciples, If any M^n will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.

Observe here, 1. How our Savior recommends his Religion to every Man's
Choice; not attempting by force and violence to compel any to the Profession of
it. If any Man will come after me, that is, If any Man choose and resolve to be
a Christian. 2. Our Savior's Terms propounded. 1. Self-denial, Let him deny
himself. By which we are not to understand the Denying and Renouncing of our
Senses in matters of Faith, nor yet the Renouncing of our Reason in matters of
Religion; but by Self-denial is meant, that we should be willing to part with
all our Earthly Comforts, and quit all our Temporal Enjoyments for the sake of
Christ and his Holy Religion. 2. Gospel-Suffering, He must take up his Cross:
An Allusion to a Roman Custom, that the Malefactor who was to be Crucified,
took his Cross upon his Shoulder, and carried it to the place of Execution.
Where Note, Not the making of the Cross for our selves, but the patient bearing
of it when God lays it upon our Shoulder, is the Duty enjoined: Let him take up
his Cross. 3. Gospel-Service, He must follow me, that is, Obey my Commands, and
follow my Example: He must set my Life and Doctrine continually before him, and
must be daily Correcting and Reforming of his Life by that Rule and Pattern.

25 For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it; and whosoever will lose
his life for my sake, shall find it.

Observe here, 1. That the Love of this Temporal Life, is a great Temptation to
Men to deny Christ, and to Renounce his Holy Religion. 2. That the surest way
to attain Eternal Life is Cheerfully to lay down a Mortal Life, when the Glory
of Christ and his Service calls us thereunto.

26 For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his
own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul.

Learn, 1. That God has entrusted every one of us with a Soul of inestimable
worth and preciousness, capable of being saved or lost, and that to all
Eternity. 2. That the Gain of the whole World is not comparable with the Loss
of one precious Soul. The Soul's Loss is an incompensable and irrecoverable
Loss.

27 For the Son of Man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his angels:
and then he shall reward every man according to his works.

There is a twofold Judgment spoken of by this Evangelist St. Matthew, namely,
a particular coming of Christ to execute Vengeance on the Jews at the
Destruction of Jerusalem; and a general coming at the Day of Judgment. If we
understand this place of the latter, we have then, 1. The Judge Described, The
Son of Man, he who was, and is, both God and Man, shall Judge both Angels and
Men. 2. The Splendor of that Day declared, He shall come in Glory with his
Holy Angels. The Attendance of Angels shall be requir^d by Christ, not for
Necessity, but for Majesty. 3. ^he Work and Business of that Day demonstrated,
and that is, To Render to every Man according to his Works. Learn, That the
Judgment of the great Day will be both Glorious and Righteous: Christ will be
Glorious in his Person, and Glorious in his Attendance; and the Judgment will
be according to Righteousness; Without respect of Persons, according to what
has been done in the Body.

28 Verily I say unto you, There be some standing here, which shall not taste
of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.

A threefold Sense and Interpretation is given of these words, 1. Some will
have them referr to our Savior's Transfiguration, mentioned in the next
Chapter: As if he had said, Some of you, as Peter, James and John, shall
shortly see me upon Mount Tabor in such Glory as I will come in to Judgment. 2.
Others understand the words of Christ's exercising his Kingly Power in the
Destruction of Jerusalem and the Jewish Nation; which St. John did Live to see.
3. Others referr the Words to the Times of the Gospel after Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension, when the Gospel was propagated and spread far and
near, according to St. Mark 9.1. There are some standing here that shall not
taste of Death, till they see the Kingdom of God come with Power; that is, till
they see the Increase and Enlargement of the Church by the Gospel. Thence Note,
That where the Gospel is powerfully Preached, and cheerfully Obeyed, there
Christ comes most Gloriously in his Kingdom.

CHAP. XVII.
1 AND after six days, Jesus takes Peter, James, and John his Brother, and
brings them up into an high mountain apart, 2. And was transfigured before
them, and his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light.

The former part of this Chapter gives us an Account of our Savior's Glorious
Transfiguration: He laid as it were the Garments of frail Humanity and
Mortality aside for a little time, and assuming to himself the Robes of Majesty
and Glory, the Rays of his Divinity darted forth, his Face shined with a
pleasing Brightness, and his Raiment with such a Glorious Luster, as did at
once both Dazzle and Delight the Eyes of the Beholders. Here Observe, 1. The
Reasons of our Lord's Transfiguration, 1. To Demonstrate and Testify the Truth
of his Divinity, That he was Christ the Son of the Living God. According to St.
Peter's Confession just before. This Divine Glory was an Evidence of his Divine
Nature. 2. Christ was thus transfigured to prefigure the Glory of his Second
Coming to Judgment, when he shall be admired of his Saints, as here he was
admired by his Disciples. Obs. 2. The Choice which our Savior makes of the
Witnesses of his Transfiguration, his Three Disciples, Peter, James, and John.
But why Disciples? Why Three Disciples? Why these Three? 1. This
Transfiguration was a Type and Shadow of the Glory of Heaven: Christ therefore
vouchsafes the Earnest and first Fruits of that Glory only to Saints; upon whom
he intended to bestow the full Harvest, 2. Three Disciples were Witnesses
sufficient to Testify this Miracle: Judas was unworthy of this Favor; yet
lest he should murmur, or be discontented at his being left out, others are
also left out besides him. 3. These Three, rather than others; because, 1.
These Disciples were more eminent for Grace, Zeal and Love to Christ; and
consequently, are most highly dignified and honored by him. The most eminent
Manifestations of Glory are made by God to those that are most eminent in
Grace. 2. These Three were Witnesses of Christ's Agony and Passion; to prepare
them for which, they are here made Witnesses of his Transfiguration. This
glorious Vision upon Mount Tabor, fitted them to abide the Terrors of Mount
Calvary. Learn, That those whom God singles out, for the greatest Trials, he
will fit beforehand with the best Enablements.

3 And behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with him.

Observe here, The Glorious Attendants upon our Savior at his Glorious
Transfiguration; they were two; two Men, and those two Men, Moses and Elias.
This being but a Glimpse of Christ's Glory, not a full Manifestation of it,
only Two of the Glorified Saints attend upon Christ at it: When he shall come
in his full Glory, then Thousands o^ Thousands shall attend him. These two
Attendants were two Men, not two Angels; because Men were more nearly concerned
in what was done, they were not only Spectators, but Partners. Man's
Restoration was Christ's principal Aim, the Angels Confirmation his less
principal Design. But why Moses and Elias? 1. Moses the Giver of the Law, and
Elias the Chief of the Prophets, attending both upon Christ, did show the
Consent of the Law and the Prophets with Christ, and their Fulfilling and
Accomplishment in him. 2. Because these two were the most laborious Servants of
Christ. Both adventured their Lives in God's Cause, and therefore are highly
honored by Christ. Such as honor him, he will honor.

4 Then answered Peter and said unto Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here:
if thou will, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias.

Observe here, 1. The Person supplicating, Peter. No doubt the other two, James
and John, were much affected, but Peter is most servent and forward, yet there
is no arguing with the Papists from his Fervency, to his Superiority, his
Personal Prerogatives were not hereditary. Obs. 2. The Person supplicated.
Jesus, not Moses or Elias; the Disciples make no Prayer, no Suit to them, but
to Christ only. Prayers to Saints departed are both vain and unlawful. Obs. 3.
The Supplication it self, and that was for their Continuance where they were.
It is good for us to be here. Oh what a ravishing Comfort is the Fellowship of
the Saints, but the Presence of Christ among them, renders their Joys
transporting. Obs. 4. Their Proffer of Service to farther this Continuance; Let
us make Three Tabernacles. This Motion was well meant and devout. St. Peter
will stick at no Cost or Pains for the Enjoyment of Christ's Presence, and his
Saints Company, yet was the Motion unadvised and rash. St. Peter errs, in
desiring a Perpetuity of that Condition, which was but transient and momentary.
This Vision was only a Taste of Glory, not a full Repast. He errs, in that he
would bring down Heaven to Earth, and take up with Tabor, instead of Heaven. He
errs, in that he would enter upon the Possession of Heavens Glory, without
suffering, and without dying. Peter would be clothed upon, but was not willing
to be uncloathed. Learn, 1. That a Glimpse of Glory is enough to wrap a Soul
into Ecstasy, and to make it out of Love with Worldly Company. 2. That we are
apt to desire more of Heaven upon Earth, than God will allow: We would fain
have the Heavenly Glory come down to us, but we are unwilling to go by Death to
that; we know not what we say when we talk of Felicity, in Tabernacles upon
Earth.

5 While he yet spoke, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them: and behold, a
voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased: hear ye him.

Observe here, 1. A Cloud was put before the Disciples Eyes, for two Reasons.
1. To allay the Luster and Resplendency of that Glory which they were swallowed
up with. As we cannot look upon the Sun in its full Brightness, but under a
Cloud by Reflection: So the Glory of Heaven is insupportable, till God vails it,
and shelters us from the Surcharge of it. 2. A Cloud overshadows them, to
hinder their farther prying and looking into the Glory. We must be content to
behold God here through a Cloud darkly, ever long we shall see him Face to
Face. Obs. 2. The Testimony given by God the Father out of the Cloud concerning
Jesus Christ his Son: This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Here
Note, 1. The Dignity of his Person, he is a Son, therefore, for Nature
coessential, for Dignity coequal, for Time coeternal with the Father; and a
Beloved Son, because of his Likeness and Conformity to him. Father's Likeness
is the cause of Love, and a Union of Wills causes a mutual endearing of
Affections. Note, 2. The Excellency of his Mediation. In whom I am well
pleased. Christ in himself was most pleasing to God the Father, and in and
through him he is well pleased with all Believers. Christ's Mediation for us
makes God appeaseable to us. Note 3. The Authority of his Doctrine. Hear him,
Not Moses and Elias, who were Servants, but Christ my Son, whom I have
commissioned to be the great Prophet and Teacher of my Church: Therefore adore
him, as my Son, believe in him, as your Savior, and hear him as your Lawgiver.
He honors Christ most that obeys him best. The obedient Ear honors Christ
more than either the gazing Eye, the adoring Knee, or the applauding Tongue.
This is my beloved Son, hear him.

6 And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and were sore
afraid. 7 And Jesus came, and touched them, and said, Arise, and be not afraid.
8 And when they had lift up their eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus only. 9 And
as they came down from the mountain Jesus charged them, saying, Tell the vision
to no man, until the Son of man be risen again from the dead.

Observe here, 1. The Effect which this Voice from Heaven had upon the
Apostles, it cast them into a Passion of Horror and Amazement. They were sore
afraid, and fell on their Face. Learn thence, That such is the Majesty and
Glory of God, that Man in his sinful State cannot bear so much as a Glimpse of
it, without great Consternation and Fear. How unable is Man to hear the Voice
of God? And yet how ready to despise the Voice of Man? If God speaks by
himself, his Voice is too terrible; if he speaks by his Ministers, ir is too
contemptible. Obs. 2. The Person by whom the Disciples were recovered out of
these amazing Fears, into which they were cast, namely, by Christ. Jesus came,
and said, be not afraid. Learn, That it is Christ alone, who can raise and
comfort those whom the Terrors of the Almighty have dejected and cast down.
Obs. 3. The manner how Christ recovered them out of this passionate Amazement,
it was threefold; 1. By his Gracious Approach, he came unto them. Christ will
come with Comfort unto his Children, when they are disabled from coming to him
for Comfort. 2. By his comfortable Touch; He came and touched them. Christ
comforts Believers by a real and close Application of himself unto them. An
unapplied Christ saves none, comforts none. 3. By his comforting Voice, He
said, be not afraid. It Is a Word of Assurance, that there is no Ground nor
Cause of Fear, and it is a Word of Assistance. It Is Verbum Operatorium, he that
said unto them, Arise, be not afraid, did by his Spirit breath Life, and
conveigh Strength into their Souls to enable them to arise. Obs. 4. The strict
Injunction given by Christ to his Disciples, not to publish or proclaim this
Vision till after his Resurrection, for two Reasons; 1. Lest it should hinder
his Passion: For had the Rulers of the World known him to be the Lord of Life
and Glory, they would not have crucified him: Therefore Christ purposely
concealed his Deity, to give way to his Passion. 2. Christ being now in a State
of Humiliation would have his Majesty veiled, his Glory concealed, and
consequently forbids that the Glorious Vision of his Transfiguration should be
published, and accordingly charges his Disciples, That they tell the Vision to
no Man till he was risen.

10 And his disciples asked him, saying, Why then say the scribes, that Elias
must first come? 11 And Jesus answered and said unto them, Elias truly shall
first come, and restore all things: 12 But I say unto you, that Elias is come
already, and they knew him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they listed:
likewise shall also the Son of man suffer of them. 13 Then the disciples
understood that he spoke unto them of John the Baptist.

Here we have the Disciples Question, and our Savior's Answer. They ask our
Savior how the Observation of the Jewish Doctors holds good, that Elias must
come before the Messiah come? We see the Messiah, but we see no Elias; our
Savior answers, that Elias was come already. Not Elijah in Person, but one in
the Spirit and Power of Elias. One of his Spirit and Temper, to wit, John the
Baptist, who was prophesied of under the Name of Elias. And indeed great was
the Resemblance between the Elias of the Old Testament, and of the New; viz.
John the Baptist. They were both born in bad Times, they were both Zealous for
God and Religion; they were both undaunted Reprovers of the Faults of Princes,
and they were both hated, and implacably persecuted for the same. Learn, That
Hatred and Persecution, even unto Death, has often been the Lot and Portion of
such as have had the Courage and Zeal to improve the Faults of Princes. Elias
is come, and they did unto him whatsoever they would.

14 And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a certain man,
kneeling down to him, and saying, 15 Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is
lunatic, and sore vexed: for often times he falls into the fire, and often into
the water. 16 And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not cure him.

Observe here, 1. A sick Patient brought to Christ the great Physician for Cure
and Healing. A Lunatic, that is, a Person at certain times of the Moon,
afflicted with the Falling Sickness. 2. This Sickness of his was aggravated by
Satan, who bodily possessed him, and cruelly cast him into the Fire, and into
the Water, but rather for Torture than Dispatch: Oh how does Satan, that
malicious Tyrant, rejoice in doing Hurt to Mankind. Lord, abate his Power,
since his Malice will not be abated. Obs. 3. The Person that brought him forth
for Cure; his compassionate Father, who kneeled down, and cried out. Need will
make a Person both humble and eloquent. Every one has a Tongue to speak for
himself; happy is he that keeps a Tongue for others. 4. The Physicians that he
was brought unto. First, To the Disciples; and when they could not cure him,
then to Jesus. We never apply our selves importunately to the God of Power,
till we totally despair of the Creatures help.

17 Then Jesus answered and said, O faithless and perverse generation, how long
shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him hither to me.

These Words are a severe Rebuke, given by Christ to his own Disciples. Where,
Observe, the Persons upbraided; his Disciples and the Sin upbraided with
Unbelief. Oh faithless Generation! Yet was it not the total Want of Faith, but
the Weakness and Imperfection of Faith, that they were upbraided with, and
reproved for. Hence learn, 1. That secret Unbelief may lie hid and undiscerned
in a Person's Heart, which neither others nor himself may take any Notice of,
until some Trial does discover it. The Disciples were not sensible of that
Unbelief, which lay hid in them, till this Occasion did discover it. Learn, 2.
That the great Obstacle and Obstruction of all Blessings, both Spiritual and
Temporal coming to us, is our Unbelief. Oh faithless Generation.

18 And Jesus rebuked the devil, and he departed out of him: and the child was
cured from that very hour.

Observe here, With what Facility and Ease our Savior cured this poor Man, who
was bodily possessed by Satan: With one Word speaking, he delivered the
distressed Person from the Malice and Power of Satan. Thence Learn, That how
long soever, and how strong soever Satan's Possession has been in a Soul,
Christ can eject and cast him out both easily and speedily.

19 Then came the disciples to Jesus apart, and said, Why could not we cast him
out? 20 And Jesus said unto them, Because of your unbelief: for verily I say
unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say unto this
mountain, Remove hence to yonder place, and it shall remove; and nothing shall
be unpossible unto you. 21 Howbeit, this kind goes not out, but by prayer and
fasting.

Observe here, How ashamed the Disciples were of this open Rebuke given them by
their Master; they privately ask him the Cause of their ill Success, Why they
could not cast out Satan according to the Power promised them to work Miracles.
Our Savior tells them, that their Power to work this Miracle now failed them,
for a double Reason: 1. For their Unbelief, by which we are to understand the
Weakness of their Faith, not their total Want of Faith. 2. Because they
neglected the special Means appointed by God, in order to that end; to wit,
Fasting and Prayer. That is, a Fervor of Devotion, joined with Faith and
Fasting. Thence Learn, That Fasting and Prayer are two special Means of
Christ's Appointment, for the enabling of us victoriously to overcome Satan,
and to cast him out of our selves or others. We must set an edge upon our Faith
by Prayer, and upon our Prayer by fasting.

22 And while they abode in Galilee, Jesus said unto them, The son of man shall
be betrayed into the hands of men? 23 And they shall kill him, and the third
day he shall be raised again. And they were exceeding sorry.

Observable it is, how frequently our Savior forewarned his Disciples of his
Approaching Sufferings. All was little enough to arm them against the Scand^l
of the Cross, and to reconcile them to the Thoughts of what he was to suffer
for them, and they were to suffer with him. Learn, That we can never hear too
much of the Doctrine of the Cross. Nor can we be too often instructed in our
Duty to prepare for a suffering Condition. As Christ went by his Cross to his
Crown, from a State of Abasement to a State of Exaltation, so must all his
Disciples and Followers likewise.

24 And when they were come to Capernaum, they that received tribute money,
came to Peter, and said, Does not your master pay tribute? 25 He says, Yes.
And when he was come into the house, Jesus prevented him, saying, What think
thou, Simon? of whom do the kings of the earth take custom or tribute? of their
own children, or of strangers? 26 Peter says unto him, Of strangers. Jesus
says unto him, Then are the children free. 27 Notwithstanding, lest we should
offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take up the fish that
first comes up: and when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a piece
of money: that take, and give unto them for me and thee.

Observe here, 1. The question put to St. Peter; Does your Master pay Tribute?
This Tribute-money originally was a Tax paid Yearly by every Jew to the Service
of the Temple, to the value of 15 Pence an Head: But when the Jews were brought
under the Power of the Romans, this Tribute-money was paid to the Emperor, and
was changed from an Homage-penny to God, to a Tribute-penny to the Conqueror.
The Collectors of this Tribute-money ask Peter, whether his Master would pay it
or not? Observe 2. the Answer returned, positively and suddenly, He does pay.
Peter consults not first with our Savior, whether he would pay it; but knowing
his Readiness to render to all their Due, he says, Yes. There was no truer
Paymaster of the King's Dues, than he that was King of Kings. He preached it,
and he practiced it. Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's. Yet
Observe, 3. Our Savior insinuates his own Exemption, Privilege, and Freedom
from paying this Tribute-money, as he was the Son of God, the Universal King:
Subjects pay Tribute, but King's Children are free. Though Christ was free from
paying Tribute by a natural Right, yet he would not be free by voluntary
Dispensation. Therefore Obs. 4. to prevent all Scandal and Offense, he works a
Miracle rather than the Tribute-money should go unpaid. Whether Christ by his
Almighty Word created this Piece of Money in the Mouth of the Fish, (which was
Half a Crown, for himself and St. Peter, who had an House in Capernaum, and was
there to pay his Poll) or whether Christ caused the Fish to take up this piece
of Money at the bottom of the Sea, is not necessary to inquire, nor possible to
determine. Our Duty is, 1. Reverentially to adore that Omnipotent Power, which
could command the Fish to be both his Treasurer, to keep his Silver; and his
Purveyor, to bring it to him. 2. Industriously to imitate his Example, in
shunning all Occasions of Offense, especially toward those whom God has placed
in Sovereign Authority over us. Obs. Lastly, The Poverty of our Holy Lord, and
his Contempt of Worldly Wealth and Riches. He had not so much as 15 Pence by
him to pay his Poll. Christ would not honor the World so far as to have any
part of it in his own Possession. The best Man that ever lived in the World had
not a Penny in his Purse, nor an House to hide his Head in.

CHAP. XVIII.
1 AT the same time came the disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who is the greatest
in the kingdom of heaven?

Notwithstanding our Blessed Savior had so often told his Disciples that his
Kingdom was not of this World, yet they still dreamt of a Temporal and Earthly
Kingdom, which he, as the Messiah, should show forth the Glory of, after his
Resurrection, in which there should be distinct Places of Honor, and Offices
one above another; and accordingly at this time the Ambition of the Disciples
led them to enquire of our Savior who should have the chief Place of Honor
and Dignity under him in that his Kingdom. Learn hence, That the best and
holiest of Men are too subject to Pride and Ambition, to court Worldly Dignity
and Greatness, to affect a Precedence before, and a Superiority above others:
The Disciples themselves were tainted with this Itch of Ambition, which
prompted them to enquire of their Master, Who should be greatest in the Kingdom
of his Church?

2 And Jesus called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them,
3 And said, Verily I say unto you, Except ye be converted, and become as little
children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Our Savior intending to cure this Pride and Ambition in his Disciples, first
preaches to them the Doctrine of Humility, and to enforce his Doctrine, he sets
before them a little Child, the proper Emblem of Humility; assuring them, that
unless they be converted, or turned from this Sin of Pride and Ambition, and
become as a little Child in Lowliness of Mind, and Contempt of Worldly
Greatness, they cannot be saved. Learn hence, 1. That no Sins are more odious
and abominable in the Sight of God, than Pride and Ambition, especially amongst
the Ministers of the Gospel. Learn 2. That Persons already converted do stand
in need of farther Conversion: They that are converted from a State of Sin, may
want to be converted from a particular Act of Sin: This was the Disciples Case
here; they were turned from a Course of Sin, but they wanted a Conversion from
a particular Act of Sin; to wit, from Ambition.

4 Whosoever therefore shall humble himself as this little child, the same is
greatest in the kingdom of heaven.

As if our Lord had said, That Apostle, or that Minister, who thinks as meanly
of himself as a little Child, and is humble and lowly in his own Esteem, he
deserves the highest Place of Dignity and Honor in my Church. Note, That the
truly humble Person, who is freest from affecting Preheminency, is most worthy
of the highest Dignity and Eminency in the Church of God, and in the Account of
Christ: The way to be Honorable is to be Humble. Before Honor is Humility.

5 And whosoever shall receive one such little child in my Name, receives me. 6
But who so shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
drowned in the depth of the sea.

Our Savior having declared, that the humblest Persons should be always
highest in his Esteem; he next declares, how exceeding dear and precious such
Christians are to him, who resemble little Children in Humility of Heart, and
Innocence of Life: Assuring the World, that whatever Kindness and Respect is
showed to such for his sake, he reckons shown to himself; and all that
Disrespect and Unkindness which is offered to them, he accounts as done unto
himself: So near is the Union, and so dear the Relation betwixt Christ and his
Members, that whatever Good or Evil is done to them, he reckons as done unto
himself.

7 Woe unto the world because of offenses: for it must needs be that offenses
come: but woe to that man by whom the offense comes.

Two things are here Observable: 1. The Necessity of Scandalous Offenses: It
must needs be, that Offenses come. 2. The Misery and Mischief that comes by
them: Woe unto the World because of Offenses. Woe to such as give Offense; this
is Va Indignantis, the Woe of one Denouncing; and, Woe to such as Stumble at
Offenses given, this is Vae Dolentis, the Woe of one Lamenting. From the whole,
Note, 1. That Scandals or Offensive Actions in the Church of Christ, will
certainly fall out amongst those that profess Religion, and the Name of Christ;
Offenses will come. Their necessity is partly from the Permission of God,
partly from the Malice of Satan, partly from the Wickedness and Deceitfulness
of Men's own Hearts and Natures. 2. That Scandalous and Offensive Actions from
such as profess Religion and the Name of Christ, are Baneful and Fatal
Stumbling Blocks to wicked and worldly Men. 3. That the Offense which wicked
Men take at the Falls of the Professors of Religion, to the hardening of
themselves in their wicked Practices, is Matter of just and great Lamentation:
Woe unto the World, because of Offenses.

8 Wherefore if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut them off, and cast them
from thee: it is better for thee to enter into life halt or maimed, rather than
having two hands, or two feet, to be cast into everlasting fire. 9 And if thine
eye offend thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: it is better for thee to
enter into life with one eye, rather than having two eyes, to be cast into hell
fire.

This Command of Christ is not to be understood Literally, as if it were our
Duty to Maim our Bodily Members; but the Exhortation is, to cut off all
Occasions that may betray us unto Sin; and to mortify our darling and beloved
Lusts, though as dear to us as our right Eye. Learn, 1. That Sin may be avoided;
it is our Duty to avoid whatever leads unto it, or may be the Instrument or
Occasion of it. 2. That the best way to be kept from the Outward Acts of Sin,
is to mortify our Inward Affection and Love to Sin. If our Love and Affection
to Sin be mortified, our Bodily Members may be preserved, for they will no
longer be Weapons of Sin, but Instruments of Holiness.

10 Take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you,
that in heaven their angels do always behold the Face of my Father which is in
heaven.

Obs. here, 1. A cautionary Direction given by Christ to the Men of the World,
concerning his Members: Take heed that ye offend not one of my little ones;
that is, that ye do not undervalue and neglect, much less injure and afflict
them. 2. A Reason assigned, Because their Angels being constantly and
immediately in the presence of God, are perpetually ready to execute his Will,
by revenging any Wrongs and Injuries done unto his Friends and Children. Learn,
1. What is the Office and Employment of the Glorious Angels; namely, to be the
immediate Attendants upon the Royal Person of the Supreme King and Sovereign of
the World. Learn hence, 2. In what Esteem good Men are with God, and what a
mighty Regard he has for the meanest of his Children, in that he commits the
Care and Preservation of them to the Holy Angels, who are nearest to him, and
in highest Favor and Honor with him.

11 For the Son of man is come to save that which was lost. 12 How think ye? If
a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray, does he not leave
the ninety and nine, and goes into the mountains, and seeks that which is
gone astray? 13 And if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you, he
rejoices more of that sheep, then of the ninety and nine which went not
astray. 14 Even so it is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that
one of these little ones should perish.

Here our Savior continues his Argument, against giving Offense to his
Children and Members; he came into the World to redeem and save them; therefore
none ought to scandalize and offend them. And to illustrate this, he comparts
himself to a good Shepherd, who regards every one of his Sheep; and if any
wander or go astray, he seeks to recover it with Desire and Joy. Learn, 1. That
the natural Condition of Mankind is like that of wandering Sheep; they err and
go astray from God, their chief Good, and the Object of their complete
Happiness. 2. That it was the Work and Business, the Care and Concern of Jesus
Christ to seek and recover lost Souls, as the Shepherd does his lost Sheep. 3.
That the Love and Care of Christ toward his ^heep, in seeking to save, and to
preserve them, is a forcible Argument unto all not to scandalize and offend,
much less to persecute and destroy them.

15 Moreover, if thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his
fault between thee and him alone: if he shall hear thee, thou have gained thy
brother. 16 But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more,
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. 17
And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: but if he
neglect to hear the church, let him be unto thee as an heathen man, and a
publican.

In these Words our Savior gives us an excellent Rule for the Duty of
Fraternal Correption, or Brotherly Admonition. Where Note, 1. That Brotherly
Reproof and Admonition is a Duty incumbent upon Church Members. 2. That it may
be administered successfully, it must be administered privately and prudently. 3.
When private Admonition prevails not, Christ has appointed Church Governors,
to execute Church Censures on the obstinate and irreclaimable. 4. Persons
justly falling under the Censures of the Church, and rightly excommunicate, are
to be looked upon as Contumacious and Stubborn Offenders, and the Members of
the Church to shun Society and Conversation with them: If he neglect to hear
the Church let him be unto thee as an Heathen Man, and a Publican.

18 Verily I say unto you, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, shall be bound in
heaven: and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

That is, whomsoever the Officers of my Church shall justly excommunicate upon
Earth, shall without Repentance be shut out of Heaven; and whosoever upon their
true Repentance shall be absolved on Earth, shall be absolved in Heaven. Learn,
That Christ will ratify in Heaven whatsoever the Church assembled does in his
Name upon Earth; whether to the censuring of the Guilty, or absolving of the
Penitent. this Power of binding and loosing is by Christ committed to his
Church.

19 Again, I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on earth, as touching
any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is
in heaven. 20 For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am
I in the midst of them.

Here we have a Gracious Promise made by Christ, of his Presence, with all his
Members in general, and with his Ministers in special: Whenever they meet
together in his Name, that is, by his Authority, in Obedience to his Command,
and with an Eye at his Glory. Whenever they celebrate any sacred Institution of
his, or execute any Church Censures, he will be i^ the midst of them, to
quicken their Prayers, to guide their Counsels, to ratify their Sentence, to
accept their Endeavors. Learn, 1. That Christ will be graciously present with,
and amongst his People, whenever they assemble and meet together in his Name,
be it in never so small a number. 2. That Christ will in a special manner be
present with the Guides and Officers of his Church, to direct their Censures,
and to confirm the Sentence pa^^ed in his Name, and pronounced by his Authority
upon obstinate Offenders.

21 Then came Peter to him, and said, Lord, how often shall my brother sin
against me, and I forgive him? till seven times? 22 Jesus says unto him, I say
not unto thee, Until seven times, but until seventy times seven.

Here St. Peter puts a Question to our Savior, how often Christians should
forgive Offenses to their Brethren, professing Repentance. Christ answers, That
there should be no end of our mutual forgiving one another; but we are to
multiply our Pardon as our Brother manifests his Repentance. Not that we are
hereby obliged to take the frequent Offender into our Bosom, and to make him
our Intimate, but to lay aside all Malice, and all Thoughts and Desires of
Revenge, and to stand ready to do him any Office of Love and Friendship. Learn,
1. That to fall often into the same Offense against our Brother, is a great
Aggravation of our Offense. 2. That as the Multiplication of Sin is a great
Aggravation of Sin, so the Multiplication of Forgiveness is a great
Demonstration of a Godlike Temper in us. He that multiplies Sin, does, like
Satan, Sin abundantly; and he that multiplies Pardon, does, like God, pardon
abundantly.

23 Therefore is the kingdom of heaven likened unto a certain king which would
take account of his servants. 24 And when he had begun to reckon, one was
brought unto him which ought him ten thousand talents. 25 But forasmuch as he
had not to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and children,
and all that he had, and payment to be made. 26 The servant therefore fell
down, and worshipped him, saying, Lord, have patience with me, and I will pay
thee all. 27 Then the lord of that servant was moved with compassion, and
loosed him, and forgave him the debt. 28 But the same se vant we t out, and
found one of his fellow servants, which ought him an hundred pence: and he laid
hands on him, and took him by the throat, saying, Pay me that thou owe. 29
And his fellow servant fell down at his f^et, and besought him, saying, Have
patience with me, and I will pay thee all. 30 And he would not; but went and
cast him into prison, till he should pay the debt. 31 So when his
fellow servants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came and told unto
their lord all that was done. 32 Then his lord, after that he had called him,
said to him, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt, because thou
desiredst me: 33 Should not thou also have had compassion on thy
fellow servants, even as I had pity on thee? 34 And his lord was wroth, and
delivered him unto the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto
him. 35 So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your
hearts forgive not every one his brother their trespasses.

Our Blessed Savior, to enforce the foregoing Doctrine of mutual Forgiveness,
propounds a Parable; the main Scope of which is to show, that unless we do
actually forgive, and pass by Injuries done to us, we cut our selves off from
all Interest in God's pardoning Mercy, and must expect no Forgiveness at the
Hands of God. From the whole, Note 1. That as we all stand in need of
Forgiveness from God, so likewise of Forgiveness from one another. 2. That we
all stand bound by the Laws of our Holy Religion, to forbear and forgive one
another. 3. That Almighty God has made the forgiving one another, the certain
and necessary Condition of his forgiving us. 4. That such as are inexorable
toward their Brethren, shall find Almighty God hard to be entreated toward
themselves. We may expect the same Rigor and Severity from God, which we show
to Men. 5. That the Freeness of God's Love in forgiving us ought to be both an
Argument to excite us to forgive one another, and also a Rule to direct us in
the manner of forgiving each other. Does God forgive us when he has Power in
his Hand to punish us? So must we, when we have Ability and Opportunity for
Revenge. Does God forgive universally all Persons? So must we all Provocations.
Does he forgive freely, and willingly, heartily, and sincerely? We must be as
forward in forgiving, as they in provoking.

CHAP. XIX.
1 AND it came to pass that when Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed
from Galilee, and came into the coasts of Judea beyond Jordan: 2 And great
multitudes followed him, and he healed them there.

The Country of the Jews was divided into Three Provinces, namely, Galilee,
Samaria, and Judea. In Galilee were the Cities of Nazareth, Corazin, Bethsaida,
and Capernaum; here Christ dwelt and spent a considerable part of his time,
preaching to them, and working Miracles among them. But now comes the Time in
which our Holy Lord takes his Leave of this Province of Galilee, and returned
no more to it: Woe to that People, whose Unthankfulness for Christ's Presence
and Ministry amongst them, causes him finally to forsake them. Having left
Galilee, our Holy Lord passes through Samaria, (the Samaritans being prejudiced
against him, and refusing to receive him) and comes into the Coasts of Judea,
where Multitudes of People flocked after him. But Observe the Quality of his
Followers, not the great Ones of the World, not many Mighty, not many Noble;
but the Poor and Despised Multitude, the Sick and Weak, the Deaf and Blind, the
Diseased and Distressed. Thence Observe, That none but such as find their Need
of Christ, will seek after him, and come unto him. None will apply to him for
Help till they feel themselves helpless. Great Multitudes of the Sick and
Diseased came unto him, and he healed them all.

3 The Pharisees also that came unto him, tempting him, and saying unto him, Is
it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause?

Observe here, 1. That wheresoever our blessed Savior went, the Pharisees
followed him: Not out of a sincere Intention, but with Design to ensnare him;
and accordingly they propound a Question to him concerning Divorce; whether a
Man might put away his Wife upon any Occasion, as the manner of the Jews was?
Concluding, that they should entrap him in his Answer, whatever it was. If he
denied the Lawfulness of Divorce, then they would charge him with contradicting
Moses, who allowed it. If he affirmed it, then they would condemn him for
contradicting his own Doctrine, Chap. 5.32. for favoring Men's Lusts, and for
complying with the wicked Custom of the Jews, who upon every slight and
frivolous Occasions, put away their Wives from them. Learn hence, 1. That
wheresoever our Lord went, as he had Disciples and Sincere Followers, so the
Devil stirred him up bitter and malicious Enemies, who sought to render his
Person unacceptable, and his Doctrine unsuccessful. 2. That of all Christ's
Enemies none had such a bitter Hatred and Enmity against his Person, Ministry,
and Miracles, as the Pharisees. Men of great Knowledge, who rebelled against
the Light of their own Consciences, and the clear Convictions of their own
Mind. 3. That such wa^ the Wisdom of our Savior in all his Answers to his
Enemies, that neither their Wit nor Malice could lay hold upon any thing to
ensnare him: For observe the Piety and Prudence of his Answer to the Pharisees
in the next Words.

4 And he answered and said unto them, Have ye not read, that he which made
them at the beginning, made them male and female? 5 And said, for this cause
shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they
twain shall be one flesh. 6 Wherefore they are no more twain, but one flesh.
What therefore God has joined together, let not man put asunder.

Observe here, Christ gives no direct Answer to the Pharisees ensnaring
Question, but referrs them to the first Institution of Marriage. When God made
them one, to the Intent that Matrimonial Love might be both incommunicable and
indissoluble. Whence Learn, 1. The Sacred Institution of Marriage. It is an
Ordinance of God's own Appointment, as the Ground and Foundation of all Sacred
and Civil Society. What God has joined together. Learn, 2. The Antiquity of
this Institution it was from the Beginning. He which made them at the
Beginning, made them Male and Female. Marriage is almost as old as the World,
as old as Nature; there was no sooner One Person, but God divided him into Two;
and no sooner was there Two, but he united them into One. Learn hence, 3. The
Intimacy and Nearness of this endeared and endearing Relation; the Conjugal
Knot is tied so close, that the Bonds of Matrimonial Love are stronger than
those of Nature. Stricter is the Tie betwixt Husband and Wife, than that
betwixt Parent and Child, according to God's own Institution. For this Cause
shall a Man leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife.

7 They say unto him, Why did Moses then command to give a writing of
divorcement, and to put her away? 8 He says unto them, Moses, because of the
hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put away your wives: but from the
beginning it was not so. 9 And I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his
wife, except it be for fornication, and shall marry another, commits
adultery: and whosoever marries her which is put away, does commit adultery.

Observe here, the Pharisees Demand, and our Savior's Reply. They demand, Why
Moses commanded to put away the Wife by a Bill of Divorce? Where Note, the
wicked Abuse which the Pharisees put upon Moses, as if he had commanded them,
whereas he only permitted to put them away. Moses suffered it for the Hardness
of their Hearts. That is, he did not punish it; not allowing it as good, but
winking at it as a lesser Evil, because the Jews were so barbarously cruel to
their Wives, as to turn them away upon every Disgust. Now our Savior in his
Reply referrs them again to the Primitive Institution of Marriage, bidding them
compare the Precept and their Practice together; for in the Beginning it was
not so. Learn, That according to the Word and Will of God, nothing can violate
the Bonds of Marriage, and justify a Divorce between Man and Wife, but the
defiling of the Marriage Bed by Adultery and Uncleanness. This is the only Case
in which Man and Wife may lawfully part. Whosoever shall put away his Wife,
except for Fornication, commits Adultery.

10 His disciples say unto him, If the case of the man be so with his wife, it
is not good to marry.

That is, if a Man be so strictly tied by Marriage, it is best for him not to
marry. A very rash Saying of the Disciples, discovering both their great
Carnality, and also the Tyranny of a sinful Practice grown up into Custom.
Learn, 1. That the best of Men have their Weaknesses and Infirmities; and the
Flesh takes its Turn to speak as well as the Spirit in them. All that the
Saints say is not Gospel. Learn, 2. How impatient Nature is of Restraint, and
how desirous of sinful Liberty, and to be freed from the Ties and Bonds which
the Holy and Wise Laws of God put upon it.

11 But he said unto them, All men cannot receive this saying, save they to
whom it is given. 12 For there are some eunuchs, which were so born from their
mother's womb: and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men: and
there be eunuchs, which have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heavens
sake. He that is able to receive it, let him receive it.

As if our Lord had said, You my Disciples do not consider what you say. All
Men without sinning against God cannot abstain from Marriage. But those only to
whom God has given the Gift of Continency, and Grace of Chastity. Some indeed
by Nature or natural Impotency are unfit for Marriage. Others wickedly are made
unfit by Castration, others by Religious Mortification bring under their
Bodies. That being freed from the Encumbrances that attend a Marriage State,
they may give up themselves the better to the Exercises of a Holy Life. Learn,
1. That Almighty God has given to diverse Persons different Tempers and
Constitutions: Some can subdue their impure Desires and Affections without the
Remedy of Marriage, others cannot. 2. That Continency, or an Ability to live
chastely, without the use of Marriage, is the special Gift of God, not common
to all, but bestowed only upon some. A Gift it is worthy of our fervent
Prayers, worthy of our best Endeavors. 3. That a Vow of Chastity is not in our
Power; to quench a natural Affection requires a Supernatural Gift. All have not
received it, but he that is able to receive it, let him receive it.

13 Then were brought unto him little children, that he should put his hands on
them, and pray: and the disciples rebuked them. 14 But Jesus said, Suffer
little children, and forbid them not to come unto me: for of such is the
kingdom of heaven. 15 And he laid his hands on them, and departed thence.

Observe here, A solemn Action performed. Children are brought to Christ to be
blessed by him. Where Note, 1. The Persons brought, Children, young Children,
sucking Children, as the Word imports; St. Luke 18.15. They brought them in
their Arms, not led them by the Hands. 2. The Person they are brought unto,
Jesus Christ; but for what End? Not to Baptize them, but to Bless them: The
Parents looking upon Christ as a Prophet, a great Prophet, the great Prophet,
do bring their Infants to him, that they may receive the Benefit of his
Blessing and Prayers. Whence Learn, 1. That Infants are Subjects, capable of
Benefit by Jesus Christ. 2. That it is the best Office that Parents can perform
unto their Children, to bring them unto Christ, that they may be made Partakers
of that Benefit. 3. If Infants be capable of Benefit by Christ, if capable of
his Blessing on Earth, and Presence in Heaven; if they be Subjects of his
Kingdom of Grace, and Heirs of his Kingdom of Glory, then they may be baptized.
For they that are in Covenant, have a Right to the Seal of the Covenant. If
Christ denies not Infants the Kingdom of Heaven, which is the greater, what
Reason have his Ministers to deny them Baptism, which is the less?

16 And behold, one came and said unto him, Good master, what good thing shall
I do that I may have eternal life?

Observe here, A Person addressing himself to Christ, and propounding an
important question to him; namely, What he should do to gain Eternal Life.
Where Note, 1. He believes the Certainty of a future State. 2. He professes his
Desire of an Eternal Happiness in that State. And, 3. He declares his Readiness
to do some good thing, that he may obtain that Happiness. Learn, That the Light
of Nature, or natural Religion, directs and teaches Men, that good Works are
necessary to Salvation, or that some good thing must be done by Men, that at
Death expect Eternal Life. What good thing shall I do, that I may have Eternal
Life? It is not talking well, and professing well, but doing well, and living
well, that entitles us to Eternal Life.

17 And he said unto him, Why call thou me good? there is none good but one,
that is God: but if thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

The Person thus addressing himself unto Christ, was either a Pharisee, or a
Disciple of the Pharisees, who did not own Christ to be God, or to come from
God, but taught that Eternal Life was attainable, by fulfilling of the Law in
that imperfect Sense, which the Pharisees gave of it. And accordingly, 1.
Christ reproves him for calling him Good, Why call thou me Good? When thou will neither own me to be God, nor to come from God. For there is none Good;
that is, Essentially and Originally Good, but God only: Nor any derivatively
Good, but he that receives his Goodness from God also. Obs. 2. That our
Savior might convince him of the Error of the Pharisees, who believed that
they might, without the Knowledge of him, the true Messiah, enter into Life, by
keeping the Law of God according to that lax and loose Interpretation, which
they, the Pharisees, had given of it; he bids him, Keep the Commandments. Where
Note, Christ calls him off from outward Ceremonies, which the Pharisees
abounded in, to the Practice of Moral Duties; yet withal lets him understand,
that if he expected Salvation by the Moral Law, he must keep it perfectly and
exactly without the least Deficiency, which is an Impossibility to Man in his
lapsed Estate. Learn, 1. That such as seek Justification and Salvation by the
Works of the Law only, must keep the whole Law, or Covenant of Works, perfectly
and exactly. Learn, 2. That the best way to pr^pare Men for Jesus Christ, is to
let them see their own Impotency, to keep and fulfill the Covenant of Works.

18 He says unto him, Which? Jesus said, Thou shall do no murder, Thou shall
not commit adultery, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness,
19 Honor thy father and thy mother: and, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. 20 The young man says unto him, All these things have I kept from my
youth up: what lack I yet?

Observe here, That the Duties our Savior instances in are the Duties of the
second Table, which Hypocrites are most failing in; but the sincere Practice of
our Duty to our Neighbor, is a singular Evidence of our Love to God. These
Duties of the second Table the young Man says he had kept from his Youth, and
perhaps might say it truly according to the Pharisees Interpretation, which
condemned only the gross outward Act, not the inward Lust and Motion of the
Heart. Learn hence, How apt Men are to think well of themselves, and to have
too high an Opinion of their own Goodness, and Righteousness before God. All
these have I kept from my Youth.

21 Jesus said unto him, If thou will be perfect, go and sell that thou have,
and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven: and come and
follow me.

That is, Thou that have been all thy Days a Pharisee, if now thou will be a
Christian, thou must maintain a Readiness and Disposition of Mind, to part with
all that thou have in this World, at my Call, and at my Command, and follow
after me. Learn, That such as enter themselves Disciples of Christ, must be
ready at Christ's Call to part with all for Christ's sake that they have in
this World. 2. All that profess themselves to be Christ's Disciples must be his
Followers; that is, They must obey his Doctrine, and imitate his Example, his
Holiness, his Humility, his Heavenly mindedness, his Patience and Meekness, his
Readiness to forgive Injuries; and the same Mind must be in us, which was in
Christ Jesus.

22 But when the young man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful: for he
had great possessions.

This parting with all for Christ seemed so hard a Condition to the young Man,
that he went away sorrowful from Christ. Whence Learn, 1. That a Man wedded to
the World will renounce Christ, rather than the World, when both stand in
Competition. 2. That Unregenerate and Carnal Men are exceeding sorrowful, and
sadly concerned, when they cannot have Heaven upon their own Terms, and win it
in their own way. The young Man went away sorrowful.

23 Then said Jesus unto his disciples, Verily I say unto you, that a rich man
shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Our Blessed Savior takes occasion from what had past to discourse with his
Disciples concerning the Danger of Riches, and the Difficulty that attends rich
Men in their way to Salvation. A rich Man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom
of God. Whence Note, 1. That rich Men do certainly meet with more Difficulties
in their Way to Heaven, than other Men? It Is difficult to withdraw their
Affections from Riches, to place their Supreme Love upon God in the midst of
their Abundance. It Is difficult to depend upon God in a rich Condition. The
Poor commits himself to God, but a Rich Man's Wealth is his strong Tower. 2.
That yet the Fault lies not in Riches, but in Rich Men, who by placing their
Trust, and putting their Confidence in Riches, do render themselves incapable
of the Kingdom of God.

24 And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of
a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.

These Words were a Proverbial Speech among the Jews, to signify a thing of
great Difficulty, next to an Impossibility. And they import thus much, that it
is not only a very great Difficulty, but an Impossibility for such as abound in
Worldly Wealth, to be saved, without an extraordinary Grace and Assistance from
God. It Is hard for God to make a Rich Man happy, because he thinks himself
happy without God.

25 When his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then
can be saved.

The Disciples understanding how naturally and strongly Men love the World, and
how Idolatrously and Inordinately their Hearts run out upon it; they say unto
Christ, Lord, who can be saved? Learn, 1. That when the general Difficulties,
which lie in the Way of Salvation, are laid forth, and sufficiently understood,
we may justly wonder that any are, or shall be saved. 2. That such are the
special and peculiar Difficulties in the rich Man's Way to Heaven, that his
Salvation is Matter of Wonder and great Admiration to the Disciples of Christ.
When the Disciples heard this, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then
can be saved?

26 But Jesus beheld them, and said unto them, With men this is unpossible, but
with God all things are possible.

As if Christ had said, Were all Men left to themselves, no Man, either Poor or
Rich, would be saved; but God can bring Men to Heaven by the mighty Power of
his Grace, he can make the Rich in Estate, Poor in Spirit; and them that are
Poor in this World, Rich in Grace. Learn, 1. That it is impossible for any Man,
Rich or Poor, by his own natural Strength, to get to Heaven. 2. That when we
are discouraged with the Sense of our own Impotency, we should consider the
Power of God, and act our Faith upon it. With God all things are possible.

27 Then answered Peter, and said unto him, Behold, we have forsaken all, and
followed thee; what shall we have therefore? 28 And Jesus said unto them,
Verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when
the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon
twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

The Apostles having heard our Savior's Command to the young Man, to sell all,
and give to the Poor, St. Peter in the Name of the rest tells Christ that they
had left all, and followed him; Behold we have forsaken all. Where Note, how
Peter magnifies that little which he had left for Christ, and ushers it in with
a Note of Observation and Admiration also, Behold, we have forsaken all, what
shall we have then? Learn thence, That although it be very little that we suffer
for Christ, and less that we have to forsake upon his Account, yet we are apt
to magnify and extol it, as if it were some great matter. Lord, we have left
all? What all? His tattered Fisher-Boat, and his ragged Nets; a great all, next
to nothing at all, scarce worthy to be mentioned: Yet how is it magnified!
Behold, Lord, we have left all: But observe our Lord's kind and gracious
Answer; You that have left all to follow me, shall be no Losers by me. For in
the Regeneration; that is, at the Resurrection, when Believers shall be
perfectly renewed, both in Soul and Body, and shall enjoy my Kingdom then as I
sit upon the Throne of my Glory, so shall you sit with me in an higher Degree
of Dignity and Honor, Judging the Twelve Tribes of Israel; that is, the Jews
first for their Unbelief, and then all other Despisers of Gospel Grace and
Mercy. Learn, 1. That such Ministers as do most Service for Christ, and forsake
most to follow him, shall in his Kingdom partake of most Honor and Dignity
with him, and from him. 2. That as the Ministers of Christ in general, so his
Twelve Apostles in particular shall set nearer the Throne of Christ, and have
an higher place in Glory at the great Day, than ordinary Believers.

29 And every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or
father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my Names sake, shall
receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life.

The foregoing Promise, v. 28. respected the Apostles; this all Christians, who
forsake their dearest Enjoyments for Christ. He assures them, they shall be
recompensed in this Life an Hundred fold: How? Non formaliter, sed eminenter:
Not in Specie, but in Valor; not in Kind, but in Equivalency: Not an Hundred
Brethren, or Sisters, or Lands, but first, he shall have that in God, which all
Creatures would be to him, if they were multiplied an Hundred times; 2dly, The
Gifts and Graces, the Comforts and Consolations of the Holy Spirit, shall be an
Hundredfold better Portion, than any thing we can part with for the sake of
Christ, and his Gospel here. Learn hence, That though we may be Losers for
Christ, yet shall we never be Loosers by him.

30 But many that are first, shall be last; and the last shall be first.

A twofold Sense and Interpretation is given of these Words. The First respects
the Jews and Gentiles in general, the Second, all Professors of Christianity in
particular. The Jews, as if Christ had said, Look upon themselves as first, and
nearest to the Kingdom of Heaven, but for their Infidelity they shall be last
in it: That is, shall never come there. And the Gentiles, who are looked upon
as Dogs, and farthest from Heaven, shall be first there, upon their Conversion
to me, and Faith in me. As the Words respect all Professors, the Sense is, Many
that are first in their own Esteem, and in the Opinion of others, and forward
in a Profession of Religion, yet at the Day of Judgment they will be last and
least in mine and my Father's Estimation and Account. And many that were little
in their own, and less in the Esteem of others, who had a less Name and Vogue
in the World, shall yet be first and highest in my Favor. Learn hence, That
the Day of Judgment will frustrate a great many Persons Expectations, both as
touching others, and concerning themselves. Many will miss of Heaven, and be
last, which looked upon themselves to be first. And many will find others in
Heaven, whom they least expected there. The Lord judges not as Man judges. We
judge of Men by outward Appearances, but we are sure that the Judgment of God
is according to Truth. He can neither be deceived, nor yet deceive.

CHAP. XX.
1 FOR the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which
went out early in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyard. 2 And when
he had agreed with the laborers for a penny a day, he sent them into his
vineyard. 3 And he went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle
in the marketplace, 4 And said unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard, and
whatsoever is right, I will give you. And they went their way. 5 Again he went
out about the sixth, and ninth hour, and did likewise. 6 And about the eleventh
hour he went out, and found others standing idle, and says unto them, Why
stand ye here all the day idle? 7 They say unto him, Because no man has hired
us. He says unto them, Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatsoever is right,
that shall ye receive.

A twofold Sense and Interpretation is given of this Parable. The one Literal,
the other Analogical. The Historical and Literal Sense relates to the calling
of the Gentiles. The Jews were the first People that God had in the World, they
were hired into the Vineyard betimes in the Morning, the Gentiles not till the
Day was far spent; yet shall the Gentiles, by the Favor and Bounty of God,
receive the same Reward of Eternal Life which was promised to the Jews, who
bare the Heat of the Day, while the Gentiles stood idle. In the Analogical
Sense we may understand all Persons indefinitely, called by the Gospel into the
visible Church, those that are called last, shall be rewarded together with the
first; and accordingly the Design and Scope of this Parable is to show the
Freeness of Divine Grace in the Distribution of those Rewards which the Hand of
Mercy conferrs upon God's faithful Servants. The Vineyard is the Church of God,
the Husbandman is God himself, the Laborers are particular Persons. God's
going at diverse times into his Vineyard imports the several Ages of Man's Life;
some are called early in the Morning, some at Noon, others at Night. Now when
God comes to dispense his Rewards, those that entered first into the Vineyard,
and did most Service for God, shall be plentifully rewarded by him, and such as
came in later, but did faithful Service, shall not miss of a merciful Reward.
Learn, 1. That so long as a Person keeps out of Christ's Vineyard and Service,
he is Idle. Every unregenerate Man is an idle Man. 2. That Persons are called
by the preaching of the Gospel at several Ages and Periods of Life into God's
Vineyard; that is, into the Communion of the visible Church. 3. That such as do
come in, though late, into God's Vineyard, and work diligently, and faithfully,
shall not miss of a Reward of Grace at the Hand of free Mercy.

8 So when even was come, the lord of the vineyard says unto his steward, Call
the laborers, and give them their hire, beginning from the last unto the
first. 9 And when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour, they
received every man a penny. 10 But when the first came, they supposed that they
should have received more, and they likewise received every man a penny. 11 And
when they had received it, they murmured against the good man of the house, 12
Saying, These last have wrought but one hour, and thou have made them equal
unto us, which have born the burden and heat of the day. 13 But he answered one
of them, and said, Friend, I do thee no wrong; did thou not agree with me for
a penny? 14 Take that thine is, and go thy way: I will give unto this last,
even as unto thee. 15 Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own?
is thine eye evil, because I am good? 16 So the last shall be first, and the
first last* for many be called, but few chosen.

Here observe, 1. That the time of God's full rewarding of his Laborers is the
Evening of their Days; that is, when their Work is done. When the Evening was
come, the Lord of the Vineyard called his Laborers, and gave them their Hire;
not but that they have part of their Reward in Hand, but it is chiefly laid up
in Hope. Obs. 2. That though God makes no difference in his Servants Wages for
the time of their Work, yet he will make a difference for the degrees of their
Service. Undoubtedly they that have done most Work, shall receive most Wages.
He that sows bountifully, shall reap bountifully; God will reward every Man
according to his Works; that is, not only according to the Nature and Quality,
but the Measure and Degree of his Works. All shall have Equity, but all shall
not have equal Bounty. Obs. 3. That all Inequality in the Distribution of
Rewards does not make God an unjust Accepter of Persons; he may dispense both
Grace and Glory, in what Measure and Degree he pleases, without the least
Shadow of Unrighteousness. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine
own? Obs. 4. That when we have done much Service for God, by laboring longer
than others in his Vineyard, it is our Duty to have a low Esteem both of our
Services and our selves, for the first shall be last, and the last first: That
is, they that are first and highest in their own Esteem, shall be last and
least in God's Account.

17 And Jesus going up to Jerusalem, took the twelve disciples apart in the
way, and said unto them, 18 Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man
shall be betrayed unto the chief priests, and unto the scribes, and they shall
condemn him to death, 19 And shall deliver him to the Gentiles to mock, and to
scourge, and to crucify him: and the third day he shall rise again.

This is now the third time that Christ had acquainted his Disciples very
lately with his approaching Sufferings and bloody Passion. He did it twice
before, Chap. 16, and Chap. 17. yet now he mentions it again, that they might
not be dismayed, and their Faith might not be shaken to see him dye, who called
himself the true Messiah, and the Son of God. The first time he told his
Disciples of his Death in general, the second time he declares the means by
Treason; now he tells them the manner by crucifying, that he should be
Scourged, Mocked, Spit upon, and Crucified: All this he did to prevent his
Disciples Dejection at his Sufferings. Learn thence, That it is highly
necessary that the Doctrine of the Cross be often preached to us; that so being
armed with Expectation of Sufferings before they come, we may be the less
dismayed and disheartened when they come. Our Lord's frequent forewarning his
Disciples of his Death and Sufferings was to forearm them with Expectation of
his Sufferings, and with Preparation for their own.

20 Then came to him the mother of Zebedee's children, with her sons,
worshipping him, and desiring a certain thing of him. 21 And he said unto her,
What will thou? she says unto him, Grant that these my two sons may sit, the
one on thy right hand, and the other on the left in thy kingdom.

Observe here, 1. The Persons making this Request to Christ. Zebedee's
Children; that is, James and John, by the Mouth of their Mother. They spoke by
her Lips, and made use of her Tongue to usher in a Request which they were
ashamed to make themselves. Obs. 2. The Request it self, Grant that these Two
may sit, the one on thy Right, the other on thy Left Hand. Where, Note, How
these Disciples did still dream of Christ's Temporal Kingdom, (although he had so
often told them, that his Kingdom was not of this World,) and ambitiously seek
to have the Preference and Pre-eminence in that Kingdom. See here, how these
poor Fishermen had already learnt craftily to fish for Preferment. Who can
wonder to see some Sparks of Ambition and Worldly Desires in the holiest
Ministers of Christ, when the Apostles themselves were not free from aspiring
Thoughts, even when they lay in the Bosom of their Savior? Ambition has all
along infected Churchmen, and troubled the Church even from the very first
Original and Foundation of it. Obs. 3. Both the Unseasonableness and
Unreasonableness of this Request made by the Disciples. Christ speaks of his
Sufferings to them, and they sue for Dignity and great Places from him, in
optimis non nihil est pessimi. The holiest, the wisest, and best of Men in this
their imperfect State are not wholly free from passionate Infirmities. Who
would have expected that when our Savior had been preaching the Doctrine of
the Cross to his Disciples, telling them that he must be Mocked, Scourged, Spit
upon, and Crucified for them; that they should be seeking and suing to him for
Secular Dignity and Honor, Pre-eminence and Power? But we plainly see the best
of Men are but Men at the best; none are in a State of Perfection on this side
Heaven.

22 But Jesus answered and said, Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink
of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am
baptized with? they say unto him, We are able.

Our Savior in his Answer tells these Disciples, 1. That they were greatly
ignorant of the Nature and Quality of his Kingdom, which was not Secular, but
Heavenly; but the Carnal Notion of a Glorious Earthly Kingdom upon Earth, in
which they should be delivered from the Roman Power, was so deeply imprinted in
their Minds, that they frequently declared their Expectation of it,
notwithstanding all the Assurances which Christ had given them of the contrary.
Obs. 2. The Course which our Savior takes to cool the Ambition of his
Disciples; he tells them, they must expect here not Crowns on their Heads, but
a Cross on their Backs; they must first taste of his Sufferings, before they
talk of his Glory, and patiently suffer for him, before they expect to reign
with him; plainly intimating, that the Cross is the way to the Crown, Suffering
the way to Reigning, and that those that suffer most for Christ shall partake
of highest Dignity and Glory from him. Obs. 3. The presumptuous Confidence
which the Disciples had of their own Strength and Ability for Sufferings. Are
ye able, says Christ, to drink of my Cup? They reply, We are able. Alas, poor
Disciples! when it came to the Trial, they all cowardly forsook him, and fled.
A bold Presumption makes us vaunt of our own Ability; holy Jealousy makes us
distrustful of our own Strength. Those that are least acquainted with the
Cross, are usually the most confident Undertakers.

23 And he says unto them, Ye shall drink indeed of my cup, and be baptized
with the baptism that I am baptized with: but to sit on my right hand, and on
my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is
prepared of my Father.

Observe here, Our Blessed Savior's wonderful Mildness and Gentleness toward
his Disciples; he does not with Passion, much less with Indignation, reprehend
them, either for their Ambition or Presumption, but makes the best of their
Answer, and encourages their good Intentions: He tells them, they should have
the Honor to share with him in his Sufferings, to pledge him in his own Cup,
and after a Conformity to him in his Sufferings, they might expect to be
Sharers with him in his Glory. Yet observe, that when Christ says, That to sit
at his Right Hand was not his to give, He means, as he was Man; or as he was
Mediator, for elsewhere, as God, we find him asserting his Power to dispose of
the Kingdom of Heaven. John 10.28. I give unto them Eternal Life.

24 And when the ten heard it, they were moved with indignation against the two
brethren. 25 But Jesus called them unto him, and said, Ye know that the princes
of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great, exercise
authority upon them. 26 But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be
great among you, let him be your minister: 27 And whosoever will be chief among
you, let him be your servant.

That Christ might effectually quench those unhappy Sparks of Ambition which
were kindled in his Apostles Minds, he tells them, that Supremacy and Dominion
belong to Secular Princes, not to Evangelical Pastors, who ought to carry
themselves with Humility toward one another; not that Christ directs to a
Parity and Equality amongst all his Ministers, and forbids the Preheminency of
some over others, but the Affectation of Superiority, and the Love of
Preheminency, is that which our Savior disallows. Learn, 1. That so far ought
the Ministers of Christ to be from affecting a Domination and Superiority of
Power over their Fellow-Brethren, that in Imitation of Christ their Lord and
Master, they ought to account themselves Fellow Servants. I am amongst you,
says Christ, as one that serves. 2. That such Ministers as do love and affect
Pre-eminence and Superiority, are most unfit for it. and they deserve it best,
who seek it least. 3. That the Dignity and Honor which the Ministers of Christ
should chiefly and only affect, is in another World; and the way to be greatest
and highest there, is to be low and humble here, mean in our own Eyes, and
little in our own Esteem. Whosoever will be chief, (says Christ) let him be
your Servant.

28 Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and
to give his life a ransom for many.

To encourage his Disciples to this condescending Humility one toward another,
our Savior propounds to them his own instructive Example; I came not to be
ministered unto, (says Christ) but to minister to the Wants and Necessities of
others, both for Soul and Body. Oh what a Sight will it be, as if our Lord had
said, to behold an humble God, and a proud Creature; an humble Savior, and an
haughty Sinner. Yea, our Lord urges his Example farther, that as he laid down
his Life for us, so should we be ready to lay down our Lives for one another.
Did Christ lay down his Life for us, and shall not we lay down a Lust for him?
Our Pride, our Ambition, our Affectation of Dignity and Superiority over others.

29 And as they departed from Jericho, a great multitude followed him. 30 And
behold, two blind men sitting by the way side, when they heard that Jesus
passed by, cried out, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of David. 31
And the multitude rebuked them, because they should hold their peace: but they
cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O Lord, thou son of David. 32 And
Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What will ye that I shall do unto
you? 33 They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened. 34 So Jesus had
compassion on them, and touched their eyes: and immediately their eyes received
sight, and they followed him.

This Chapter concludes with a famous Miracle, wrought by Christ upon two blind
Men in the Sight of a great Multitude which followed him. Where obs. 1. The
blind Men's Faith, in acknowledging Christ to be the true Messiah, for so much
the Title of the Son of David signifies. 2. Their Fervency, in crying so
earnestly to Christ for Mercy, and Healing. Have mercy upon us, thou Son of
David. A true Sense of Want will make us cry unto Christ for Help earnestly,
and with undeniable Importunity. Obs. 3. The great Condescension of Christ
toward these poor blind Men: He stood still, he called them, he had Compassion
on them, he touched their Eyes, and healed them. A mighty Instance of Christ's
Divine Power. He that can open blind Eyes with a touch of his Finger, is really
God. His Touch is an Omnipotent Touch. Obs. 4. Although Christ well knew the
Condition of these blind Men, yet before he will restore them to sight, they
must sensibly complain of the want of Sight, and cry unto him for Mercy and
Healing. Learn thence, That although Christ perfectly knows all our Wants, yet he
takes no notice of them, till we make them known to him by Prayer. Obs. 5. The
best Way and Course which the blind Men took to express their Thankfulness to
Christ for recovered Sight, they followed him. Learn thence, That Mercy from
Christ is then rightly improved, when it engages us to follow Christ. This
should be the effect of all Salvations wrought for us. He praises God best,
that serves and obeys him most; the Life of Thankfulness consists in the
Thankfulness of the Life.

CHAP. XXI.
1 AND when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage, unto the
mount of Olives, then sent Jesus two disciples, 2 Saying unto them, Go into the
village over against you, and straightway ye shall find an ass tied, and a colt
with her: loose them, and bring them unto me. 3 And if any man say ought unto
you, ye shall say, The Lord has need of them; and straightway he will send
them.

The former part of this Chapter gives us an Account of our Savior's Solemn
and Triumphant Riding into the City of Jerusalem. Where Observe, That in all
our Savior's Journeys and Travails from Place to Place, he constantly went
like a poor Man on foot, without Noise, and without Train; now he goes up to
Jerusalem to die for Sinners he rides, to show his great Cheerfulness in that
Service, and his Forwardness to lay down his Life for us. But what does he ride
upon? An Ass, according to the manner of great Persons amongst the Jews; but
especially to fulfill the Prophecy, Zach. 9.9. that the Messiah, a King of the
Jews, should come riding upon an Ass. But this Ass was a Colt, the Foal of an
Ass, on which never Man had rode before, says St. Mark Chapter 11. 12. signifying
thereby, that the most unruly and untamed Creatures become obedient and
obsequious to him; and upon a borrowed Ass, the use of which he demands;
thereby manifesting his Sovereign Right to all the Creatures; and accordingly
he bids his Disciples tell the Owner of the Ass, that the Lord had need of him;
not our Lord, but the Lord; that is, he that is the Lord of all, whose are the
Cattle upon a Thousand Hills; he that is Lord of all the Beasts, and the Owners
too. Observe farther, That notwithstanding Christ's supreme Right to the Ass
and the Colt, he will have neither of them taken without the Owner's Knowledge,
or against his Will; but the Disciples must acquaint him with it, and by a
double Argument move him to it. 1. Christ's Right of Dominion and Sovereignty
over them; he is the Lord that sends for them. 2. His present Occasion for
them; the Lord has need of them. Obs. lastly, What a clear and full
Demonstration Christ here gave of his Divine Nature, by his Omnisciency in
foreseeing and foretelling the Event; by his Omnipotency, in inclining the
Heart, and overruling the Will of the Owner to let the Colt go, and by an Act
of Sovereignty as he was Lord of the Creatures to command, and call for their
Service when he needed them.

4 All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
prophet, saying, 5 Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy king comes unto
thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass.

Here the Reason is assigned why Christ rode upon the Ass into Jerusalem, it
was to fulfill an ancient Prophecy, that the Messiah or King of the Jews should
come riding upon that Beast into Jerusalem. There was not any Prophecy of
Christ more plainly fulfilled than this. The Prophecy alluded to, is Zach. 9.9.
Rejoice greatly, oh Daughter of Zion, shout, oh Daughter of Jerusalem, behold
thy King comes unto thee; he is just, and having Salvation, lowly and riding
upon an Ass, and upon a Colt, the Foal of an Ass. Where Note, the Character
given of the Messiah, he is the Supreme King and Governor of his Church; thy
King comes. The Errand that he comes upon, Bringing Salvation, and the
Entertainment which his Church was to give him: Namely, To receive him with
Triumphs of Joy, and Universal Acclamations. Rejoice, oh Daughter of Zion, and
shout, oh Jerusalem, for Joy.

6 And the disciples went, and did as Jesus commanded them, 7 And brought the
ass, and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and they set him thereon. 8
And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way; others cut down
branches from the trees, and strawed them in the way. 9 And the multitudes that
went before, and that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David:
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest.

Observe here, 1. The Obedience of the Disciples, and the Motions of the
Multitude; the Disciples never dispute their Lord's Commands, nor raise
Objections, nor are afraid of Dangers, but speedily execute their Lord's
Pleasure, and find every thing according to their Lord's Prediction. When our
Call is clear, our Obedience must be speedy. What God commands, we are not to
dispute, but to obey. The Disciples did as Jesus commanded them. Obs. 2. The
Actions of the Multitude, in acknowledging Christ to be their King. They cast
their Garments on the Ground for him to ride upon, according to the Custom of
Princes when they ride in State; and they do not only disrobe their Backs, but
expend their Breath in joyful Acclamations, and loud Hosanna's; wishing all
manner of Prosperity to this meek, but mighty King. In this princely, yet poor
and despicable Pomp, does our Savior enter into the famous City of Jerusalem:
Oh how far was our Holy Lord from affecting Worldly Greatness and Grandeur! He
despised that Glory which Worldly Hearts fondly admire; yet because he was a
King, he would be proclaimed such, and have his Kingdom confessed, applauded, and
blessed: But that it might appear, his Kingdom was not of this World, he abandons
all Worldly Magnificence. Oh glorious, yet homely Pomp! Oh meek, but mighty
Prince!

10 And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying, Who is
this? 11 And the multitude said, This is Jesus the Prophet of Nazareth of
Galilee.

This is not the first or only time that Jerusalem was moved and troubled at
the Appearance of Christ; at his Birth, Matthew. 2. we read all Jerusalem was
troubled, together with Herod; and now he that rides into Jerusalem, though in so
mean a Port, yet there is a new Commotion. Jerusalem, instead of being thankful
for his Company, is troubled at his Presence. Thence Learn, That such Persons
and Places a^ have the greatest Helps and Privileges afforded to them, are not
always the most answerable in their Returns of Thankfulness. It Is not Christ's
Presence with us, but his Welcome to us, that makes us happy. Christ is daily
taught in our Synagogues, and preached in our Streets, yet alas! Multitudes are
ignorant of him, and say with the Men of Jerusalem, when Christ was before
their Eyes, Who is this?

12 And Jesus went into the temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and
bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the money changers, and the
seats of them that sold doves, 13 And said unto them, It is written, my house
shall be called the house of Prayer, but ye have made it a den of thieves.

Our Blessed Savior having entered Jerusalem, Observe his first Walk was not
to the Palace, but to the Temple, and his Work there was to purge and reform:
All Reformation of Manners must begin first at the House of God. Our Lords
Business was to reform the Temple, not to ruin it. Places dedicated to public
Worship, if profaned and polluted, ought to be purged from their Abuses, not
pulled down and destroyed, because they have been abused. But what was the
Profanation of the Temple, which so offended our Savior? Answ. Within the
third or outward Court of the Temple, there was a public Mart, or Market held,
where were sold Oxen, Sheep, and Doves, and such things as were needful for
Sacrifice; many of the Jews coming an Hundred Miles to the Temple, it was
burdensome to bring their Sacrifices so far with them: Wherefore order was
taken by the Priests, that Sheep and Oxen, Meal and Oil, and all other
Requisites for Sacrifice, should be had for Money close by the Altar, to the
great ease of the Offerer. Nothing could be more plausible than this Plea. But
the fairest Pretenses cannot bear out a Sin with God; therefore our Blessed
Savior in Indignation at so foul an Abuse, whips out these Chapmen, casts down
their Tables, and vindicates the Honor and Reputation of his Father's House.
Learn hence, That there is a Reverence due to God's House for the Owner's sake,
and for the Service sake. Nothing but Holiness can become that Place, where God
is worshipped in the Beauty of Holiness. Observe, Lastly, The Reason which our
Savior gives for this Act of his; for (says he) It is written, my House shall
be called an House of Prayer: Whereby Prayer is to be understood the whole
Worship and Service of Almighty God, of which Prayer is an eminent and
principal Part: That which gives Denomination to an House, is certainly the
chief Work to be done in that House. Now God's House being called an House of
Prayer, certainly implies, that Prayer is the chief and principal Work to be
performed in his House; yet must we take heed that we set not the Ordinances of
God at Variance one with another; we must not idolize one Ordinance, and
villifie another, but pay an awful Respect and Regard to all the Institutions
of our Maker.

14 And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple, and he healed them.
15 And when the chief priests and scribes saw the wonderful things that he did,
and the children crying in the temple, and saying, Hosanna to the Son of David;
they were sore displeased, 16 And said unto him, Hear thou what these say?
And Jesus says unto them, Yea; have ye never read, Out of the mouth of babes
and sucklings thou have perfected praise?

Observe here, 1. That our Blessed Savior works his Miracles not secretly in a
Corner, but openly in the Temple, and submits them to the Examination of all
Persons Senses. A Miracle is a supernatural Action, which is obvious to Sense.
Popish Miracles are talked of by many, but seen by none. Obs. 2. That Christ's
Enemies are never more incensed, than when his Divine Power is most exerted,
and his Divine Nature owned and acknowledged. When the chief Priests saw the
Miracles which Jesus did, and heard the Children, crying, Hosanna to the Son of
David, they were displeased. Obs. 3. That Christ can glorify himself by the
Mouth of Babes and Sucklings; he can form and fit up what Instruments he
pleases, to show forth his Excellencies, and celebrate his Praises. Out of the
Mouths of Babes and Sucklings thou have perfected Praise.

17 And he left them, and went out of the city into Bethany, and he lodged
there. 18 Now in the morning as he returned into the city, he hungered. 19 And
when he saw a fig tree in the way, he came to it, and found nothing thereon,
but leaves only, and said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee henceforward for
ever. And presently the fig tree withered away.

Our Blessed Savior having driven the Buyers and Sellers out of the temple,
lodges not that Night in Jerusalem, but withdraws to Bethany, a Place of
Retirement from the Noise and Tumult of the City. Where Note, Our Lord's Love
of Solitude and Retiredness. How delightful is it to a good Man, to dwell
sometimes within himself, to take the Wings of a Dove, and fly away, and be at
rest: Yet the next Morning our Lord returns to the City; he knew when to be
solitary, and when to be sociable; when to be alone, and when to converse in
Company. In his Passage to the City he espies a Fig Tree; and being an hungry,
(to show the Truth of his Humanity) he goes to the Fig Tree, and finds it full
of Leaves, but without any Fruit. Displeased with this Disappointment, he
curses the Tree which had deceived his Expectation. This Action of our Savior,
in cursing the barren Fig Tree, was Typical; an Emblem of the Destruction of
Jerusalem in general, and of every Person in particular, that satisfies himself
with a withered Profession, bearing Leaves only, but no Fruit. As this Fig Tree
was, so are they; nigh unto cursing. Learn thence, That such as content
themselves with a Fruitless Profession of Religion, are in great danger of
having God's Blasting added to their Barrenness.

20 And when the disciples saw it, they marvelled, saying, how soon is the
fig tree withered away? 21 Jesus answered and said unto them, Verily I say unto
you, If ye have faith and doubt not, ye shall not only do this which is done to
the fig tree, but also if ye shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and
be thou cast into the sea; it shall be done. 22 And all things whatsoever ye
shall ask in prayer, believving, ye shall receive.

The Disciples being filled with Admiration at the sudden withering of the
Fig Tree, thereupon our Savior exhorts them to have Faith in God: That is,
firmly to rely upon the Power of God, whereby he is able; upon the Goodness of
God, whereby he is willing to fulfill his Promises to us. Learn, 1. That Faith
is a necessary Ingredient in Prayer. Praying without Faith is like shooting
without Bullet; it makes a noise, but does no Execution. 2. That whatsoever
good thing God has made the Matter of a Promise, shall be given to good Men,
praying in Faith. Whatsoever ye ask in Prayer, believing, ye shall receive.

23 And when he was come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of
the people came unto him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority do
thou these things? and who gave thee this authority? 24 And Jesus answered and
said unto them, I also will ask you one thing; which if ye tell me, likewise
will tell you by what authority I do these things. 25 The baptism of John,
whence was it? from heaven, or of men? and they reasoned with themselves,
saying, If we shall say, From heaven; he will say unto us, Why did ye not then
believe him? 26 But if we shall say, Of men; we fear the people; for all hold
John as a prophet. 27 And they answered Jesus, and said, We cannot tell. And he
said unto them, Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.

The Pharisees having often questioned our Savior's Doctrine before, they call
in question his Mission and Authority now. Although they might easily have
understood his Divine Mission by his Divine Miracles. Almighty God never
empowered any to work Miracles that were not sent by him; when the Adversaries
of Christ can object nothing against his Doctrine, they then quarrel with him
about his Commission and Calling, and demand by what Authority he does teach
and work Miracles. Our Blessed Savior well understanding their Drift and
Design, answers them one Question, by asking them another. The Baptism of John,
was it from Heaven, or of Men? Was it of Divine Institution, or of Humane
Invention? Implying, that the calling of such as call themselves the Ministers
of God, ought to be from God. No Man ought to take this Honor upon himself,
but he that is called of God, as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. The Pharisees reply, they
could not tell whence John had his Mission and Authority, this was a manifest
Untruth; by refusing to tell the Truth, they fall into a Lie. One Sin ensnares,
and draws Men into the Commission of more. Such as will not speak exact Truth,
according to their Knowledge, they fall into the Sin of Lying against their
Consciences. Our Savior answers them, Neither tell I you by what Authority I
do these things. He does not say, I cannot, or I will not tell you; but I do
not, I need not tell you, because the Miracles which I work before you are a
sufficient Demonstration of my Divine Commission, that I am sent of God amongst
you; for God never set the Seal of his Omnipotence to a Lie, nor empowered an
Impostor to work real Miracles.

28 But what think you? A certain man had two sons, and he came to the first,
and said, Son, go work to day in my vineyard. 29 He answered and said, I will
not: but afterward he repented, and went. 30 And he came to the second, and
said likewise: And he answered and said, I go, sir; and went not. 31 Whether of
them twain did the will of his Father? They say unto him, The first. Jesus
says unto them, Verily I say unto you, that the publicans and the harlots go
into the kingdom of God before you. 32 For John came unto you in the way of
righteousness, and ye believed him not: but the publicans and the harlots
believed him. And ye, when ye had seen it, repented not afterward, that ye
might believe him.

The Design and Scope of this Parable is to show, That Publicans and Harlots;
that is, the vilest, the prophanest and worst of Sinners, who upon the hearing
of Christ's Doctrine and Miracles, did repent and believe, were in a much
better Condition than the proud Pharisees; who, though they pretended to great
Measures of Knowledge and high Degrees of Holiness, yet did obstinately oppose
Christ, disobey his Doctrine, deny his Miracles, and set at naught his Person.
Learn hence, That the greatest, the vilest, and the worst of Sinners, upon
their Repentance and Faith in Christ, shall much sooner find Acceptance with
God, than proud Pharisaical Justiciaries, who confidently rely upon their own
Righteousness. Publicans and Harlots (says Christ here to the Pharisees) shall
go into the Kingdom of God before you. Publicans were the worst sort of Men,
and Harlots the worst kind of Women; yet did these repent sooner, and believed
in Christ before the proud Pharisees.

33 Hear another parable: There was a certain householder which planted a
vineyard, and hedged it round about, and dug a winepress in it, and built a
tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a far country. 34 And when
the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the husbandmen, that
they might receive the fruits of it. 35 And the husbandmen took his servants,
and beat one, and killed another, and stoned another. 36 Again he sent other
servants, mo than the first: and they did unto them likewise. 37 But last of
all he sent unto them his Son, saying, They will reverence my Son. 38 But when
the husbandmen saw the Son, they said among themselves, This is the heir, come,
let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. 39 And they caught him,
and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him.

In this Parable God compares the Jewish Church to a Vineyard, himself to an
Householder; his Planting, Pruning, and Fencing his Vineyard, denotes his Care
to furnish his Church with all needful Helps and Means to make it spiritually;
fruitful; his letting it out to Husbandmen signifies his committing the Care of
his Church to the Priests and Levites, the public Pastors and Governors of
the Church; his Servants are the Prophets and Apostles, whom he sent from time
to time, to admonish them to bring forth Fruit answerable to the Cost which God
had expended on them. His Son is Jesus Christ, whom the Rulers of the Jewish
Church slew and murdered. The Scope of the Parable is to discover to the Jews,
particularly, to the Pharisees, their obstinate Impenitency under all Means,
their bloody Cruelty to the Prophets of God; their Tremendous Guilt, in
crucifying the Son of God. For all which, God would unchurch them finally, and
ruin their Nation, and set up a Church among the Gentiles, that should bring
forth better Fruit than the Jewish Church ever did. From the whole, Note, 1.
That the Church is God's Vineyard, exceeding dear and precious to the Planter
and the Owner of it. 2. As dear as God's Vineyard is unto him, in case of
Barrenness and Unfruitfulness, it is in great Danger of being destroyed, and
laid waste by him. 3. That the only Way and Course to engage God's Care over
his Vineyard, and to prevent his giving it to other Husbandmen, is to give him
the Fruits of it. It is but a Vineyard that God lets out, it is no Inheritance;
no People ever had so many Promises of God's Favor as the Jews had, nor ever
enjoyed so many Privileges, whilst they stood in his Favor, as the Jews did.
Yet though they were the first, and the natural Branches, they are broken off,
and we Gentiles stand by Faith, let us not be highminded, but fear, Romans 11. v.
20.

40 When the Lord therefore of the vineyard comes, what will he do unto those
husbandmen? 41 They say unto him, He will miserably destroy those wicked men,
and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall render him the
fruits in their seasons.

Observe here, At the first mentioning of the Parable, the Pharisees express a
bitter Indignation against such wicked Servants, not considering what a
dreadful Sentence they passed upon themselves, and their own Nation. Little did
they think that hereby they condemned their Temple to be burnt, their City to
be destroyed, their Country to be ruined; but in these Words they vindicate
God, they condemn themselves, and own the Justice of God, in inflicting the
severest Punishments on them.

42 Therefore say I unto you, The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and
given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.

Which Words are the Application that our Savior makes of the foregoing
Parable concerning the Vineyard; which the chief Priests and Pharisees did not
apprehend themselves to be concerned in, till he brought the Application of it
home unto them. Therefore say I unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken
from you, etc. Note, 1. The greatest Mercy that God can bestow upon any People,
is, his giving his Kingdom to them; that is, all Gospel Ordinances, and
Church Priviledges leading to the Kingdom of Heaven. 2. Observe the Terms, upon
which God either gives or continues his Kingdom to a Church and Nation. And
that is, upon bringing forth the Fruits thereof. Learn, 3. That the greatest
Judgment which can befall a People, is the taking away the Kingdom of God from
them. The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given, etc.

43 Jesus says unto them, Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone which
the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the corner: this is the
Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes? 44 And whosoever shall fall on
this stone, shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him
to powder.

These Words are taken out of the 118th Psalm, which the Jews understood to be
a Prophecy of the Messiah, and accordingly Christ applies them to himself. The
Church is the Building intended, Christ himself the Stone rejected. The
Rejecters, or the Builders Rejecting, were the Heads of the Jewish Church; that
is, the chief Priests and Pharisees. God, the great Master Builder of his
Church, takes this precious Foundation. Stone out of the Rubbish, and sets it
in the Head of the Corner. Nevertheless there are some who stumble at this
Stone. Some through Ignorance, others through Malice stumble at his Person, at his
Doctrine, at his Institutions. These shall be broken in pieces. But on
whomsoever this Stone shall fall, it will grind them to Powder. That is,
Christ himself will fall as a burdensome Stone upon all those that knowingly
and maliciously oppose him; and particularly upon the Jews, who not only
rejected him, but persecuted and destroyed him. Thus Christ tells the chief
Priests and Pharisees their own particular Doom, and also declares what will be
the fatal Issue of all that Opposition which is made against himself and his
Church. It will terminate in their inevitable and irreparable Destruction.
Whosoever shall fall on this Stone, shall be broken; and on whomsoever it shall
fall, it will grind them to Powder.

45 And when the chief priests and Pharisees had heard his parables, they
perceived that he spoke of them. 46 But when they sought to lay hands on him,
they feared the multitude, because they took him for a prophet.

When the chief Priests came to understand that these Parables were all applied
to them, that they were the Murderers of the King's Son. That they were the
Builders that rejected the chief Cornerstone, they are enraged at the close
Application made to themselves; and had not Fear restrained them, would have
laid violent Hands upon him. Learn thence, That nothing does more provoke and
exasperate unsound Hypocrites, than the particular Application, and close
coming home of the Word of God unto their Hearts and Consciences. So long as
the Truths of God are generally delivered, Sinners are easy, looking upon
themselves as unconcerned; but when the Word of God comes close to them, and
says, Thou art the Man. This is thy Wickedness. They are angry at the Message,
and rage at the Messenger.

CHAP. XXII.
1 AND Jesus answered, and spoke unto them again by parables, and said, 2 The
kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which made a marriage for his
Son, 3 And sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the
wedding: and they would not come. 4 Again he sent forth other servants, saying,
Tell them which are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen and my
fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: come unto the marriage: 5 But
they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his
merchandise. 6 And the remnant took his servants, and entreated them
spitefully, and slew them. 7 But when the king heard thereof, he was wroth: and
he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and burnt up their
city. 8 Then says he to his servants, The wedding is ready, but they which
were bidden were not worthy. 9 Go ye therefore into the high ways, and as many
as ye shall find, bid to the marriage. 10 So those servants went out into the
high ways, and gathered together all as many as they found, both bad and good:
and the wedding was furnished with guests. 11 And when the king came in to see
the guests, he saw there a man which had not a wedding garment: 12 And he says
unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a wedding garment? and
he was speechless. 13 Then said the king to the servants, Bind him hand and
foot, and take him away, and cast him into utter darkness: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

The Design and Scope of this Parable of the Marriage-Supper, is to set forth
that Gracious Offer of Mercy and Salvation, which was made by God in and through
the preaching of the Gospel to the Church of the Jews. The Gospel is here
compared to a Feast, because in a Feast there is Plenty, Variety, and Dainties.
Also to a Marriage Feast, being full of Joy, Delight and Pleasure. And to a
Marriage Feast made by a King, as being full of State, Magnificence and
Grandeur. To this Marriage Feast or Gospel-Supper, Almighty God invited the
Church of the Jews, and the Servants sent forth to invite them, were the
Prophets and Apostles in general; and John the Baptist in particular, whom they
entreated spitefully, and slew. The making light of the Invitation signifies
the Generality of the Jews Refusal and careless Contempt of the Offers of Grace
in the Gospel. By the Armies which God sent forth to destroy those Murderers,
are meant the Roman Soldiers, who spoiled and laid waste the City of Jerusalem,
and were the severe Executioners of God's Wrath and Judgment upon the wicked
Jews. The High Ways signify the despised Gentiles, who upon the Jews Refusal,
were invited to this Supper, and prevailed with to come in. The King's coming
in to see his Guests, denotes, that Inspection which Christ makes into his
Church in the times of the Gospel. By that Man without the Wedding Garment,
understand such as are destitute of true Grace and real Holiness, both in Heart
and Life in the Examination of him. Christ says, Friend, how came thou in
hither? Not Friends, why came you along with him. Teaching us, That if unholy
Persons will press in to the Lord's Supper, the Sin is theirs; but if we come
not, because they will come, the Sin is ours. The Presence of an unholy Person
at the Lord's Table ought not to discourage us from our Duty, or cause us to
turn our Back upon that Ordinance. The Command to bind the unqualified Person
Hand and Foot, and to cast him into utter Darkness, plainly intimates, that the
Condition of such Persons as live under the Light, and enjoy the Liberty of the
Gospel, but walk not answerably to their Profession, is deplorably sad and
doleful. They do not only incur Damnation, but no Damnation like it. Bind him
Hand and Foot, and cast him into utter Darkness. From the whole, Note, 1. That
the Gospel for its Freeness and Fullness, for its Varieties and Delicacies, is
like a Marriage-Supper. 2. That Gospel Invitations are mightily disesteem'd. 3.
That the Preference which the World has in Men's Esteem is the great cause of
the Gospel's Contempt. They went, one to his Farm, and the other to his
Merchandise. 4. That such as are Careless in the Day of Grace, shall
undoubtedly be Speechless in the Day of Judgment. 5. That Christ takes a more
particular Notice of every Guest that comes to his Royal Supper, than any of
his Ministers do take, or can take. There was but one Person without the
Wedding Garment, and he falls under the Eye and View of Christ. 6. That it is
not sufficient that we come, but clothed we must be, before we come, if ever
we expect a Gracious Welcome to Christ's Supper; clothed with Sincerity,
clothed with Humility, clothed with Love and Charity; if we be not thus
clothed, we shall appear naked to our Shame, and hear that dreadful Charge,
Bind him Hand and Foot, and cast him into utter Darkness; where is weeping, and
gnashing of Teeth.

14 For many are called, but few are chosen.

This is our Blessed Savior's Application of the foregoing Parable to the
Jews; he tells them, that many of them, indeed all of them were called; that
is, invited to the Gospel-Supper, but with few, very few of them was found that
sincere Faith, and that sound Repentance, which does accompany Salvation. Learn
thence, That amongst the Multitude of those that are called by the Gospel unto
Holiness and Obedience, few, very few comparatively, do obey that Call, and
shall be Eternally saved.

15 Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might entangle him in
his talk. 16 And they sent out unto him their disciples, with the Herodians,
saying, Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of God in
truth, neither carest thou for any man; for thou regardest not the person of
men. 17 Tell us therefore, what think thou? Is it lawful to give tribute
unto Caesar, or not? 18 But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, Why
tempt ye me, ye hypocrites? 19 Show me the tribute-money. And they brought unto
him a penny. 20 And he says unto them, Whose is this image and superscription?
21 They say unto him, Cesar's. Then says he unto them, Render therefore unto
Caesar the things which are Cesar's: and unto God, the things that are God's. 22
When they had heard these words, they marvelled, and left him, and went their
way.

Here we have another new Design, to entangle our Blessed Savior in his
Discourse. Where observe, 1. The Persons employed to put the insnaring Question
to our Savior; namely, the Pharisees and the Herodians. The Pharisees were
against paying Tribute to Caesar, looking upon themselves as a free People, and
the Emperor as an Usurper. But the Herodians were for it. Herod being made by
the Roman Emperor, King of the Jews, was zealous for having the Jews pay
Tribute to Caesar, and such of the Jews as sided with him, and particularly his
Courtiers and Favorites were called Herodians. Obs. 2. The Policy and wicked
Craft here used, in employing these two contrary Sects, to put the Question to
our Savior concerning Tribute. Thereby laying him under a Necessity (as they
hoped) to offend one side, let him answer how he would. If to please the
Pharisees he denied paying Tribute to Caesar, then he is accused of Sedition;
if to gratify the Herodians he voted for paying Tribute, then he is looked
upon as an Enemy to the Liberty of his Country, and exposed to a popular Odium:
It has been the old Policy of Satan and his Instruments, to draw the Ministers
of God into Dislike, either with the Magistrates, or with the People; that they
may either fall under the Censure of the one, or the Displeasure of the other.
Obs. 3. With what Wisdom and Caution our Lord answers them, he first calls for
the Tribute-Money, which was the Roman Penny, answering to Seven Pence
Halfpenny of our Money, Two of which they paid by way of Tribute or Poll-Money
for every Head to the Emperor. Christ asks them, whose Image or Superscription
their Coin bore? They answer, Caesar's: Render then, says Christ, to Caesar the
things that are Caesar' s. As if he had said, The admitting of the Roman Coin
amongst you, is a Testimony that you are under Subjection to the Roman Emperor,
because the coining and imposing of Money is an Act of Sovereign Authority. Now
you having owned Caesar's Authority over you, by accepting of his Coin as
current amongst you, give unto him his just Dues, and render unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar' s. Learn thence, That there was no truer Paymaster of
the King's Dues, than he that was King of Kings; he preached it, and he
practiced it. Matthew. 17.27. And as Christ is no Enemy to the Civil Rights of
Princes, and his Religion exempts none from paying their Civil Duties: So
Princes should be as careful not to rob him of his Divine Honor, as he is not
to wrong them of their Civil Rights. As Christ requires all his Followers to
render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, so should Princes oblige all
their Subjects to Render unto God the things that are God's.

23 The same day came to him the Sadduces, which say that there is no
resurrection, and asked him, 24 Saying, Master, Moses said, If a man die,
having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed unto
his brother. 25 Now there were with us seven brethren, and the first, when he
had married a wife, deceased, and having no issue, left his wife unto his
brother. 26 Likewise the second also, and the third, unto the seventh. 27 And
last of all the woman died also. 28 Therefore in the resurrection, whose wife
shall she be of the seven? for they all had her. 29 Jesus answered and said
unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God. 30 For
in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage; but are as
the angels of God in heaven. 31 But as touching the resurrection of the dead,
have ye not read that which was spoken unto you by God, saying, 32 I am the God
of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not the God of
the dead, but of the living. 33 And when the multitude heard this, they were
astonished at his doctrine.

Our Blessed Savior having put the Pharisees and Herodians to silence, next
the Sadducees encounter him. This Sect denied the Imm rtality of the Soul, and
the Resurrection of the Body, and as an Objection against both, they propound a
Case to our Savior, of a Woman that had had Seven Brethren successively to her
Husbands: They demand, Whose Wife of the Seven this Woman shall be at the
Resurrection? As if they had said, If there be a Resurrection of Bodies, surely
there will be a Resurrection of Relations too, and the other World will be like
this, in which Men will marry as they do here. And if so, whose Wife of the
Seven shall this Woman be, they all having an equal Claim to her? Now our
Savior for resolving of this Question, 1. Shows the different State of Men in
this World, and in the other World. The Children of this World, says Christ,
Marry, and are given in Marriage, but in the Resurrection they do neither. As
if our Lord had said, After Men have lived awhile in this World, they die, and
therefore Marriage is necessary to maintain a Succession of Mankind; but in the
other World Men shall become Immortal, and live for ever; and then the Reason
of Marriage will wholly cease. For when Men can die no more, there will be no
need of any new Supplies of Mankind. 2. Our Savior having got clear of the
Sadducees Objection, by taking away the Ground and Foundation of it, he
produces an Argument for the Proof of the Soul's Immortality, and the Body's
Resurrection. Thus, Those to whom Almighty God pronounces himself a God, are
alive; but God pronounced himself a God to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, many
Hundred Years after their Bodies were Dead; therefore their Souls are yet
alive, otherwise God could not be their God; for he is not the God of the Dead,
but of the Living. From the whole, Note, 1. That there is no Opinion so absurd,
no Error so monstrous, that having had a Mother, will die for lack of a Nurse.
The beastly Opinion of the Mortality of the Soul, and the Annihilation of the
Body, finds Sadducees to profess and propagate it. Note, 2. The Certainty of
another Life after this, in which Men shall be eternally happy, or intollerably
miserable, according as they behave themselves here; though some Men live like
Beasts, they shall not die like them, nor shall their last end be like theirs.
Note, 3. That glorified Saints in the Morning of the Resurrection shall be like
unto the Glorious Angels; not like them in Essence and Nature, but like them in
their Properties and Qualities, in Holiness and Purity, in Immortality and
Incorruptibility, and in their manner of Living; they shall no more stand in
need of Meat or Drink, than the Angels do, but shall live the same Heavenly,
Immortal and Incorruptible Life, that the Angels live. Note, 4. That all those
that are in Covenant with God, whose God the Lord is, their Souls do
immediately pass into Glory, and their Bodies at the Resurrection shall be
Sharers in the same Happiness with their Souls. If God be just, the Soul must
live, and the Body must rise: For good Men must be rewarded, and wicked Men
punished; God will most certainly some time or other plentifully reward the
Righteous, and punish the evil Doers; but this being not always done in this
Life, the Justice of God requires it to be done in the next.

34 But when the Pharisees had heard that he had put the Sadducees to silence,
they were gathered together. 35 Then one of them which was a lawyer, asked him
a question, tempting him, and saying, 36 Master, which is the great commandment
in the law? 37 Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all my mind. 38 This is the first
and great commandment. 39 And the second is like unto it, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. 40 On these two commandments hang all the law and the
prophets.

The Sadducees being put by Christ to silence, the Pharisees again encounter
him; they send to him a Lawyer, that is, one of their Interpreters and
Expounders of the Law of Moses, who propounds this Question to him, Which is
the great Commandment in the Law? Our Savior tells them, It is to love the
Lord with all the Heart, with all the Soul, and with all the Mind. That is,
which all the Powers, Faculties, and Abilities of the Soul, with the greatest
Measure, and highest Degrees of Love. This is the Sum and Substance of the
Duties of the first Table. And the second is like unto it, not equal with it,
but like unto it. The Duties of the second Table are of the same Authority, and
of the same Necessity with the first. As a Man cannot be saved without the Love
of God, so neither without the Love of his Neighbor. On these two Commandments
hang all the Law and the Prophets. That is, the whole Duty of Man required by
Moses and the Prophets, is comprehended in, and may be reduced to these Two
Heads; namely, The Love of God, and our Neighbor. From the whole, Note, 1.
That the Fervency of all our Affections, and particularly the Supremacy of our
Love, is required by God as his Right and Due. Love must pass through, and
possess all the Powers and Faculties of the Soul; the Mind must meditate upon
God, the Will must choose and embrace him, and the Affections must take
Complacency and Delight in him; the measure of loving God is to love him
without measure. God reckons that we love him not at all, if we love him not
above all. Note, 2. That thus to love God is the first and great Commandment.
Great, in regard of the Object, which is God, the first Cause, and the chief
Good. Great, in regard of the Obligation of it. To love God is so indispensible
a Command, that God himself cannot free us from the Obligation of it; for so
long as he is God, and we his Creatures, we shall lie under a natural and
necessary Obligation to Love and serve him. Great, in regard of the Duration of
it, when Faith shall be swallowed up in Vision, and Hope in Fruition; Love will
then be perfected in a full Enjoyment. Note, 3. That every Man may, yea, ought
to love himself, not his sinful self, but his natural self, and especially his
Spiritual self, the new Nature in him. This, it ought to be his particular Care
to increase and strengthen. Indeed there is no express Command in Scripture for
a Man to love himself, because the Light of Nature directs, and the Law of
Nature binds and moves every Man so to do. God has put a Principle of
Self-love, and of Self-preservation, into all his Creatures, but especially
into Man. Note, 4. As every Man ought to love himself, so it is every Man's Duty
to love his Neighbor as himself. 1. Not as he does love himself, but as he
ought to love himself. 2. Not in the same Degree and Measure that he loves
himself, but after the same manner, and with the same kind of Love, that he
loves himself. As we love our selves freely and readily, sincerely and
unfeignedly, tenderly and compassionately, constantly and perseveringly; so
should we love our Neighbor. Though we are not commanded to love our Neighbor
as much as we love our selves, yet we are to love him like as we love our
selves. Note, Lastly, That the Duties of the first and second Table are
inseparable. The Love of God and our Neighbor must not be parted. He that
loves not his Neighbor, whom he has seen, never loved God, whom he has not
seen. A conscientious Regard to the Duties of both Tables will be an Argument
of our Sincerity, and an Ornament to our Profession. Let it then be our Prayer,
and daily endeavor, that we may love the Lord our God with all our Heart, and
our Neighbor as our selves. For this is the Sum of the Law, and the Substance
of the Gospel.

41 While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them, 42 Saying,
What think ye of Christ? whose Son is he? They say unto him, The Son of David.
43 He says unto them, How then does David in spirit call him Lord saying, 44
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footstool? 45 If David then call him Lord, how is he his Son? 46
And no man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man (from that day
forth) ask him any mo questions.

The Pharisees had often put forth several Questions maliciously unto Christ,
and now Christ puts forth one Question innocently unto them. Namely, What they
thought of the Messiah whom they expected. They reply, that he was to be the
Son of David, a Secular Prince descending from David, that should deliver them
from the Power of the Romans, and restore them to their Civil Rights. This was
the Notion they had of the Messiah, that he should be a Man, the Son of David,
and nothing more. Our Savior replies, Whence is it then that David calls the
Messiah Lord? Psalm. 110. v. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord: How could he be both
David's Lord, and David's Son? No Son is Lord to his Father; therefore if
Christ were David's Sovereign, he must be more than Man, more than David's Son.
As Man, so he was David's Son; as God-man, so he was David's Lord. Note hence,
1. That although Christ was truly and really Man, yet he was more than a bare
Man. He was Lord unto, and was the Salvation of his own Forefathers. Note, 2.
That the only way to reconcile the Scriptures which speak concerning Christ, is
to believe and acknowledge him to be God and Man in one Person. The Messiah as
Man was to come forth out of David's Loins, but as God-Man he was David's
Sovereign and Savior. As Man, he was his Father's Son; as God, he was Lord to
his own Father.

CHAP. XXIII.
1 THen spoke Jesus to the multitude, and to his disciples, 2 Saying, The
Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat: 3 All therefore whatsoever they
bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works: for they
say, and do not.

The Scribes and Pharisees so often mentioned in the Gospels were the great
Doctors, and Spiritual Guides amongst the Jews. Scribe is the Name of an
Office, Pharisee the Name of a Sect. They were both Learned in the Law, and
Teachers of the Law of Moses. Our Blessed Savior in the former part of this
Gospel held many Conferences with these Men, and used the most persuasive
Arguments to convince them, both of their Errors and Wickedness. But their
Obstinacy and Malice being such, that neither our Savior's Ministry nor
Miracles would convince them, hereupon our Lord denounces in this Chapter Eight
several Woes against them. But first he charitably warns his Disciples and the
Multitude against the Pernicious Practices of this sort of Men, saying, The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Seat; that is, they teach and expound the
Law of Moses, which they were wont to do sitting. Whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe and do. That is, what they teach you consonant to the
Word of God, and agreeable to the Writings of Moses and the Prophets: If they
go not out of Moses Chair into their own unwritten Traditions, follow their
Doctrine, and obey their Precepts. But do not after their Works, follow not
their Example, take heed of their Pride and Hypocrisy, of their Ambition and
Vainglory. Obey their Doctrine, wherein it is sound; but follow not their
Example, wherein it is corrupt. Learn, 1. That the Personal Miscarriages of
Ministers must by no Means beget a Disesteem of their Office and Ministry.
Charity must teach us to distinguish betwixt the Calling and the Crime. 2. That
the infallible Truths of God recommended to us by a vicious Teacher, ought to
be entertained and obeyed by us without either Scruple or Prejudice. What the
Pharisees themselves (says Christ) bid you observe, that observe and do. 3.
That no People are obliged to follow their Teacher's Pattern and Example any
farther, than it is agreeable to Scripture-Rule, and conformable to Christ's
Example. Do not after their Works, who say, and do not.

4 For they bind heavy burdens, and grievous to be born, and lay them on men's
shoulders, but they themselves will not move them with one of their fingers.

These heavy Burdens which the Pharisees laid upon the Peoples Shoulders, were
Counsels and Directions, Rules and Canons, Austerities and Severities, which
the Pharisees introduced and imposed upon their Hearers, but would not undergo
the least part of those Severities themselves. If we do not follow our own
Counsels, we must not think to oblige our People to follow them. No Man ought
to press upon others what he is unwilling to perform himself. It is very sinful
to give that Counsel to others which we refuse to take our selves.

5 But all their works they do, for to be seen of men: they make broad their
phylacteries, and enlarge the borders of their garments, 6 And love the
uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues, 7 And
greetings in the markets, and to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi.

In these Words our Blessed Savior admonishes his Disciples and the Multitude
to take heed of imitating the Pharisees in their Ostentation and Hypocrisy, in
their Ambition and Vainglory, and he instances in Three Particulars, wherein
they expressed it. 1. All their Works, says Christ, they do to be seen of Men.
To do good Works, that Men may see them, is a Duty; but to do all or any of our
Works to be seen of Men, is Hypocrisy. 2. They make broad their Phylacteries,
and enlarge the Borders of their Garments. These Phylacteries were certain
Scrowls and Labels of Parchment, in which were written the Ten Commandments,
and some Sections of the Law; these they tied to their Foreheads, and pinned
upon their left Sleeve, that the Law of God might be continually before their
Eyes, and perpetually in their Remembrance. This Ceremony they judged God
prescribed them. Deuteronomy. 6.8. Thou shall bind them for a Sign upon thine Hand,
and they shall be as frontlets between thine Eyes. By enlarging the Borders of
their Garments, our Savior points at the Fringes and blue Ribbonds which the
Jews did wear upon their Garments, in Obedience to the Command, Numb. 15.37,
38. As the Threads in those Fringes and Ribbonds close woven together, did
represent the Connection, Complication, and inseparable Conjunction of God's
Commandments among themselves; so the wearing of these Fringes was to put them
in Mind of the Laws of God, that which way soever they turned their Eyes, they
might meet with some pious Admonition to keep the Law of God. Now the
vainglorious Pharisees, that they might be thought more mindful of the Law of
God than other Men, did make their Phylacteries broader, and their Fringes
thicker and longer than other Men. 3. They fondly affected, and ambitiously
contended for the first and uppermost Seats in all Conventions, as at Feasts,
and in the Synagogues, and loved to be respectfully saluted in open and public
Places, and to have Titles of Honor, such as Rabbi, Master, Father, and
Doctor, put upon them. Now that which our Savior condemns is the Pharisees
fond Affectation of these little things, and unduly seeking their own Honor
and Glory. It was not their taking, but their loving the uppermost Rooms at
Feasts, that Christ condemns. From the whole, Note, 1. That Hypocrites are most
in affecting Ceremonial Observations, and outward Parts of commanded Duties,
neglecting the Substance of Religion it self. These Pharisees were for carrying
a Library of God's Law on their Clothes, scarce a Letter of it in their Hearts.
They wore the Law of God, as frontlets before their Eyes, but not engraven on
the Tables of their Hearts. Observe, 2. That the Nature of Hypocrisy is to
study more to seem Religious in the Sight of Men, than to be Religious indeed
before God. The Hypocrite is the World's Saint, and not God's. He courts the
World's Acceptance more than the Divine Favor and Approbation.

8 But be not ye called Rabbi: for one is your master, even Christ, and all ye
are brethren. 9 And call no man your father upon the earth: for one is your
Father, which is in heaven. 10 Neither be ye called masters: for one is your
master, even Christ. 11 But he that is greatest among you, shall be your
servant. 12 And whosoever shall exalt himself, shall be abased; and he that
shall humble himself, shall be exalted.

The Word Rabbi signifies a Doctor or Teacher, eminently endowed with Variety
of Knowledge, whose Place it was to sit in an exalted Chair, or chief Seat in
the Synagogue; their Disciples and Scholars sat upon lower Forms at the Feet of
their Teachers. Our Savior does not simply condemn the giving or receiving of
these Titles of Rabbi, Master, and Father: But the things forbidden, are 1. A
vainglorious Affectation of such Titles as these, the ambitious seeking of
them, and glorying in them. 2. He condemns that Authority, and Dominion over
the Consciences of Men, which the Pharisaical Doctors had usurped, telling the
People that they ought to believe all their Doctrines, and practice all their
Injunctions as the Commands of the Living God. They did in effect assume
Infallibility to themselves. Learn hence, 1. That there have been in all Ages
of the Church, a sort of Teachers, who have usurped Authority and Dominion over
the Faith and Consciences of Men. 2. That Christians ought not to submit their
Faith and Conscience in Matters of Religion to any Humane Authority whatsoever,
nor to give up themselves absolutely to the Conduct of any Man's Judgment or
Opinion in Matters of Faith. 3. That Christ alone, the great Prophet and
infallible Teacher of his Church, is the only Person to whose Doctrine and
Precepts we owe absolute Faith and Obedience. One is your Master, even Christ.
4. As God will abase, and Men will despise the Proud, especially Ministers, who
are such; so shall God exalt, and Men will honor them that stoop to the
meanest Services for the Good of Souls. Whosoever exalts himself, shall be
abased. This was a Sentence often used by our Savior, and was a frequent
Saying among the Jews.

13 But woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites: for ye shut up the
kingdom of heaven against men: for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer
ye them that are entering, to go in.

From this Thirteenth Verse to the Thirtieth, the Pharisees have Eight several
Woes denounced against them by our Savior: The first is for perverting the
Scriptures, and keeping the true Sense and Knowledge of them from the People.
This St. Matthew calls the shutting up of the Kingdom of Heaven against Men.
St. Luke calls it, A taking away the Key of Knowledge from Men, which is an
Allusion to a known Custom among the Jews in Admission of their Doctors; for
those that had Authority given them to interpret the Law and the Prophets, were
solemnly admitted into that Office, by delivering to them a Key and a
Table Book. So that by the Key of Knowledge is meant the Interpretation and
Understanding of the Scriptures; and by taking away the Key of Knowledge, is
signified first, that they arrogated to themselves alone the Understanding of
the Scriptures; secondly, that they kept the true Knowledge of the Scriptures
from the People, especially the Prophecies which concerned the Messiah, and so
they hindered Men from embracing our Savior's Doctrine, who were otherwise
well enough disposed for it. Learn hence, 1. That the Knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures is absolutely and indispensibly necessary, in order to Salvation.
This our Savior calls the Key, which lets Men into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Learn, 2. That great is the Guilt, and inexcusable the Fault of those who
deprive the People of the Knowledge of the Scriptures. They shut the Kingdom of
Heaven against Men, and do what in them lies to hinder their Eternal Salvation.
Men may miscarry with their Knowledge, but they are sure to perish for want of
Knowledge.

14 Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites: for ye devour widows houses,
and for a pretense make long prayers; therefore ye shall receive the greater
damnation.

The second Woe denounced against the Pharisees, is for their gross Hypocrisy,
in coloring over their Covetousness, with a Pretense of Religion; making long
Prayers in the Temple and Synagogues for Widows, and thereupon persuading them
to give bountifully to the Corban, or the common Treasure of the Temple. Some
part of which was employed for their Maintenance. Learn, 1. It is no new thing
for designing Hypocrites to cover the foulest Transgression with the Cloak of
Religion. The Pharisees make long Prayers a Cover for their Covetousness. 2.
That to make use of Religion in Policy for Worldly Advantage-sake, is the way
to be damned with a Vengeance for Religion-sake. Woe unto you Scribes, etc.

15 Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites: for ye compass sea and land
to make one Proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child
of hell than your selves.

The next Woe denounced is for their false-ended Zeal and Earnestness, in
proselyting Heathens to the Jewish Religion; not with a pious Intention to save
them, but to serve themselves upon them, to have their Consciences and Purses
under their Power; and when you have poisoned them, says our Savior, by your
corrupt Doctrine, and hardened them in a course of Sin by your wicked Example,
they are more the Children of Hell than before you practiced upon them. Learn,
1. Great is the Diligence, and indefatigable the Industry which false Teachers
use, in gaining Proselytes to their Opinion and Party. They compass Sea and
Land to make one Proselyte. 2. That such as are proselyted to Error, are
oft-times faster rivetted in their false Opinions, than their Teachers
themselves. They are made twofold more the Children of Hell than your selves.

16 Woe unto you, ye blind guides, which say, Whosoever shall swear by the
temple, it is nothing: but whosoever shall swear by the gold of the temple, he
is a debtor. 17 Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gold, or the
temple that sanctifies the gold? 18 And whosoever shall swear by the altar, it
is nothing: but whosoever swears by the gift that is upon it, he is guilty.
19 Ye fools and blind: for whether is greater, the gift, or the the altar that
sanctifies the gift? 20 Whosoever therefore shall swear by the altar, swears by
it, and by all things thereon. 21 And whosoever shall swear by the temple, swears
by it, and by him that dwells therein. 22 And he that shall swear by heaven,
swears by the throne of God, and by him that sits thereon.

The fourth Woe, which our Savior denounces against the Pharisees, is for their
false and erroneous Doctrine concerning Oaths. 1. They taught Men to swear by
the Creatures. 2. They taught that some Oaths made by the Creatures were
obligatory and binding, others not. Particularly they affirmed, that if a Man
swear by the Temple, or the Altar, it was nothing; that is, he was not bound by
such an Oath. But if a Man swear by the Gold of the Temple, and the Altar; that
is, by the Gifts offered to the Corban, or Treasury of the Temple, and by the
Sacrifices and Oblations on the Altar: Such an Oath they affirmed was binding,
because it was for their Profit, that the Gifts on the Altar, and the Gold
brought into the Treasury should be accounted most holy, seeing that would
encourage the People to be the more ready to contribute and offer. This horrid
Hypocrisy and Covetousness our Blessed Savior here sharply reproves, and
shows, that Oaths made by the Creatures, though unlawful, yet being once made,
did oblige, as if the Parties had sworn by God himself; for he that swears by
the Temple, swears by it, and him that dwells therein. Learn, 1. That
swearing by the Creatures is no new Sin, but as old as the Pharisees. 2. That
swearing by the Creatures is a great Profanation of the Name of God, and a
mighty Provocation to him. 3. That this notwithstanding, if the Matter of such
Oaths be not sinful, they are obligatory and binding. He that swears by the
Creatures, swears indeed by the God of the Creatures: For, says our Savior,
he that swears by the Heavens, swears by the Throne of God, and him that
sits thereon.

23 Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites: for ye pay tithe of mint,
and anise, and cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law,
judgment, mercy, and faith: these ought ye to have done, and not to leave the
other undone. 24 Ye blind guides, which strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel.

The next Woe denounced is for the Pharisees Ostentation of a precise keeping of
the Law in smaller Matters, and neglecting weightier Duties. They paid Tithe of
Mint, Anise and Cummin, but at the same time omitted Judgment, Mercy and Faith;
that is, just dealing with Men, Charity toward the Poor, and Faithfulness in
their Promises and Covenants one with another. This, says our Savior, is to
strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel. A Proverbial Expression, intimating,
that some Persons pretend great Niceness and Scrupulosity about small Matters,
and none, or but little about Duties of the greatest moment. Hence Note, 1.
That Hypocrites lay the greatest Stress upon the least Matters in Religion, and
place Holiness most in those things where God places it least. Ye tithe Mint,
etc. but neglect the weightier Matters of the Law. Observe, 2. That although some
Duties are of greater moment than others, yet a good Man will omit none, but
perform every Duty, the least as well as the greatest, in Obedience to the
Command of God. These things ought you to have done, and not to leave the other
undone.

25 Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites: for ye make clean the
outside of the cup, and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion
and excess. 26 Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the cup
and platter, that the outside of them may be clean also.

Our Savior does not here condemn their Legal, or Traditional washing of Pots
and Cups, or any External Decency and Cleanliness in Conversation: But his
Design is to show them the Vanity of outward Purity, without inward Sanctity,
and to convince them of the necessity of cleansing the heart, in order to the
purifying and reforming the Life. Plainly intimating, 1. That Men's Lives could
not be so bad, if their Hearts were not worse, all the Obliquity of their Lives
proceeding from the Impurity of their Hearts and Natures. 2. That an holy Heart
will be accompanied with an Holy Life. A Man may be outwardly pure, and yet
inwardly filthy; but he that has a pure Heart, will live a Pure and an Holy
Life. Cleanse that which is within the Cup, that the outside may be clean also.

27 Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye are like unto whited
sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of dead
men's bones, and of all uncleanness. 28 Even so ye also outwardly appear
righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.

Here we have a Woe denounced against the Pharisees for cheating and deceiving
the People with an outward Show, and external Appearance of Piety and Religion:
Their Lives were seemingly very Religious, but their Hearts were full of
Hypocrisy, and all Impurity, like Sepulchers painted without, and full of
Rottenness within. Whence Learn, That the great Design of Hypocrisy is to
cheat the World with a vain and empty Show of Piety. The Ambition of the
Hypocrite is to be thought good, not to be so; he is the World's Saint, not
God's.

29 Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites: because ye build the tombs
of the prophets, and garnish the sepulchers of the righteous, 30 And say, If we
had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them
in the blood of the prophets. 31 Wherefore ye be witnesses unto your selves,
that ye are the children of them which killed the prophets. 32 Fill ye up then
the measure of your fathers. 33 Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can
ye escape the damnation of hell?

This is the eighth Woe denounced by our Blessed Savior against the Pharisees
for their grand Hypocrisy, in pretending great Honor to the Saints departed,
building their Tombs, and garnishing their Sepulchers, and declaring against
their Father's Impiety. That had they lived in their Days, they would not have
been Partakers with them in the Blood of the Prophets. Now their Hypocrisy
appeared in three Particulars: 1. In that they continued in their own
Wickedness, and yet commended the Saints departed; they magnify the Saints,
but multiply their Sins; and instead of imitating their Virtues, they content
themselves with garnishing their Sepulchers. 2. In professing great Respect to
the dead Saints, and at the same time persecuting the living. Palpable
Hypocrisy! And yet as gross as it is, it prevails to this Day. The Church of
Rome, who magnify Martyrs, and canonize Saints departed, have yet added to
their numbers, by shedding of their Blood. 3. In taking false measures of their
Love to the Saints departed, from their building their Tombs, and garnishing
their Sepulchers; whereas the best Evidence of our Love unto them is the
imitating their Virtues, and cherishing their Followers. It Is gross Hypocrisy
to pay Respect to the Relics of Saints, and Veneration to their Images, and at
the same time, to persecute and afflict their Followers. Learn hence, 1. That
the World has all along loved dead Saints better than the living. Mortui non
mordent, the dead Saint's Example how bright soever, is not so scorching and
troublesome at a distance; and he himself no longer stands in other Men's
Light; whereas the living Saint's Example is a cutting Reproof to Sin and Vice.
Obs. 2. That there is a certain Civility in Humane Nature, which leads Men to a
just Commendation of the Dead, and to a due Estimation of their Worth. The
Pharisees here, though they persecuted the Prophets, whilst alive, yet had they a
mighty Veneration for their Piety and Virtue after they were dead, and thought
no Honor too great to be done unto them. Note, 3. That it is the grossest
Hypocrisy to pretend to love Goodness, and yet hate and persecute good Men.
These Hypocritical Pharisees pretended high to Piety and Religion, and at the
same time killed the Prophets, and stoned them that were sent unto them. 4.
That the highest Honor we can pay to the Saints departed, is not by raising
Monuments, and building Tombs to their Memory; but by a careful Imitation of
their Piety and Virtue, following the Holiness of their Lives, and their
Patience and Constancy at their Deaths.

34 Wherefore behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes, and
some of them ye shall kill and crucify, and some of them ye shall scourge in
your synagogues, and persecute them from city to city: 35 That upon you may
come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous
Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias, son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the
temple and the altar. 36 Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come
upon this generation.

Observe here, A Prophetical Prediction, and a severe Denunciation. 1. A
Prediction, foretelling what cruel Usage the Apostles should meet with from the
Jews, Killing and Crucifying some, Scourging and Stoning others; which
accordingly was fulfilled in the Crucifying of St. Peter, the Scourging of St.
Paul, in the Stoning of St. Stephen, and Killing of St. James. The first
Planters and Propagators of the Gospel sealed their Doctrine with their Blood,
and the Blood of the Martyrs has all along been the Seed of the Church. Obs. 2.
A severe Denunciation, That upon you may come all the Righteous Blood shed upon
the Earth, from Abel to Zacharias, the Son of Jehoiada, (2 Chronicles. 24.20.) who
was the last Prophet, whose Murder is related by Name in the Old Testament.
These Words are not to be understood as if the End and Intent of Christ's
sending the Prophets were, that the Jews might put them to Death, and bring
their righteous Blood upon themselves. This was the Consequent and Event indeed
of their sending, but by no means the Design and Intent of it. Learn, 1. That
raging Persecutors have no Regard either to the extraordinary Mission, or
eminent Sanctity of Persons, who reprove them for their Sins. I send unto you
Prophets (says our Savior) wise Men and Scribes, and some of them ye shall
Kill and Crucify. 2. That as the Piety of the Persons, so neither can the
Sanctity of the Place discourage and deterr bloody Persecutors from their Rage
and Fury against the Prophets of God. In the Temple it self, in the Court of
the House of the Lord, even betwixt the Porch and the Altar was Zacharias
slain. 3. That it is a righteous Thing with God to punish the Children for the
Impieties of their Parents. This is to be understood, 1. where the Children
tread in their Father's Steps, and continue in their Parents Sins; which they
do, if they do not confess them, abhor them, and be humbled for them. 2. This
is to be understood of Temporal Evils, not of Eternal Punishments. No Man shall
for his Father's Sins lie down in Everlasting Burnings. As our Fathers Faith
will not let us into Heaven, so neither will their Impiety shut us into Hell.
At the Day of Judgment every Man shall be separately considered according to
his Deeds.

37 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them
which are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy children
together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would
not! 38 Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. 39 For I say unto you, Ye
shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in
the Name of the Lord.

Our Lord concludes this Chapter with a Pathetical Lamentation over Jerusalem.
His Ingemination, or doubling of the Word, Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, shows the
Vehemence of Christ's Affection toward them, and the Sincerity of his Desires
for their Salvation. Obs. 1. The great Kindness and Compassion of Christ to the
Jews in general, and Jerusalem in particular, set forth by a lively Metaphor
and Similitude; that of an Hen gathering her Chickens under her Wings. As the
Hen does tenderly cherish, and carefully hide, and cover her Young from the Eye
of the Destroyer; so would Christ have shrouded and sheltered this People from
all those Birds of Prey, and particularly from the Roman Eagle, by which they
were at last devoured. Again, As the Hen continues her Call to her young ones
from Morning to Night, and holds out her Wings for shelter to them all the Day
long; so did Christ wait for this Peoples Repentance and Conversion for more
than Forty Years after they had killed his Prophets, and murdered himself,
before they met with a final Overthrow. Obs. 2. The amazing Obstinacy and
Wilfulness of this People, in rejecting this Grace and Favor, this Kindness
and Condescension of the Lord Jesus Christ. I would have gathered you, but ye
would not. Obs. 3. The Fatal Issue of this Obstinacy. Behold your House is left
unto you desolate. Is left; that is, certainly and suddenly will be so. The
Present-Tense put for the Paulo post futurum, it denotes both the Certainty and
Proximity of this People's Ruin. Learn, 1. That the Ruin and Destruction of
Sinners is wholly chargeable upon themselves; that is, on their own Wilfulness
and Obstinacy. I would have gathered you, says Christ, but ye would not. Learn,
2. How deplorably and inexcusably they will perish, who perish by their own
Wilfulness under the Gospel. 3. That there is no Desire like unto God's Desire
of a People's Repentance; no Longing like unto God's Longing for a People's
Salvation. Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem! how often would I have gathered thee? When
shall it once be?

CHAP. XXIV.
1 AND Jesus went out, and departed from the temple; and his disciples came to
him for to show him the buildings of the temple. 2 And Jesus said unto them,
See ye not all these things? Verily I say unto you, There shall not be left
here one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.

Our Blessed Savior had often acquainted his Disciples with his approaching
Death at Jerusalem: The Son of Man must go up to Jerusalem to be Crucified. Now
in this Chapter he acquaints them with the Destruction that should come upon
Jerusalem in general, and upon the Temple in particular, for their putting him
the Son of God to Death. The Disciples looking upon the Temple with Wonder and
Admiration, were apt to think that the Temple, in regard of its invincible
Strength, could not be destroyed; or that at least, in regard of its incredible
Magnificence, 'twas great pity it should be destroyed; and accordingly they say
to Christ, See what goodly Buildings are here; as if they had said, Master,
what great Pity is it, that such a magnificent Structure should become a
ruinous Heap? But hence we Learn, 1. That Sin brings Cities and Kingdoms, as
well as particular and private Persons, to their end. There are no places so
strong, but an Almighty God is able to destroy them; and Sin is sufficient to
lay them waste. Observe, 2. That the Threatenings of God are to be feared, and
shall be fulfilled, whatever appearing Improbabilities there may be to the
contrary. God had threatened Jerusalem with Destruction for her Sin, and now it
is not all her Strength that can oppose his Power. Learn, 3. That
notwithstanding Magnificence and Worldly Glory does mightily dazzle our Eye, yet
how little does it affect Christ's Heart. Even the Temple it self, that most
magnificent Structure, Christ values no more than an Heap of Rubbish, when the
Impiety of the Worshippers had devoted it to Destruction. Not one Stone, says
Christ, shall be left upon another unthrown down. This threatening was fulfilled
Forty Years after Christ's Death, when Titus the Roman Emperor destroyed the
City, and burnt the Temple, and Turnus Rufus, the General of his Army, ploughed
up the very Foundation, upon which the Temple stood. Thus was the Threatening of
God fulfilled; Jer. 26.18. Zion shall be ploughed as a Field, and Jerusalem
shall become Heaps. The Truth and Veracity, the Faithfulness and Fidelity of
God is as much concerned in the Execution of his Threatenings, as in the
Performance of his Promises.

3 And as he sat upon the mount of olives, the disciples came unto him
privately, saying, Tell us, when shall these things be? and what shall be the
sign of thy coming, and of the end of the World? 4 And Jesus answered, and said
unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you. 5 For many shall come in my Name,
saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.

A double Question is here propounded by the Disciples to our Savior. First,
As to the time of the Temple's Destruction. Secondly, As to the Signs of that
Destruction. As to the former, the time when the Temple should be destroyed.
See the Curiosity of Humane Nature, both in desiring to know what should be
hereafter, and also when that hereafter should be. Thence Learn, That there is
found with all of us an itching Curiosity and Desire, rather to inquire and pry
into the hidden Counsels of God's secret Will, than to obey the manifest
Declarations of God's revealed Will. Tell us when these things shall be? As to
their second Question, What should be the Sign of his coming? Our Savior
acquaints them with this amongst many others, That there should arise false
Christ's, false Prophets, and Seducers, a multitude of Impostors, that should
draw many after them; therefore he bids them, Take heed and beware. Where
Observe, That Christ does not gratify his Disciples Curiosity, but acquaints
them with their present Duty, to watch against Deceivers and Seducers, who
should have the Impudence to affirm themselves to be Christ. Some, Christ
Personal, or the Messiah; others, Christ Doctrinal, affirming their erroneous
Opinions to be Christ's Mind and Doctrine. From the whole, Note, 1. That there
will be many Seducers, many erroneous Persons, and false Opinions before the
end of the World. For Jerusalem's Destruction was a Type and Emblem of the
World's Destruction. 2. That such Seducers will come in Christ's Name, and
their Errors and false Opinions shall be given out to be the Mind of Christ. 3.
That many will be seduced, and carried away with their fair Pretenses, and
plausible Deceits. 4. That Christ's own Disciples had need to take heed, lest
they themselves being led away by the Error of the Wicked, do fall from their
own Stedfastness. Take heed that no Man deceive you, for many will come in my
Name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.

6 And ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars: see that ye be not troubled:
for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet. 7 For nation
shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there shall be
famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes in diverse places. 8 All these are the
beginning of sorrows.

The next Sign which our Savior gives his Disciples of Jerusalem's
Destruction, is the many Broyls and Commotions, civil Discords and Dissentions,
that should be found amongst the Jews. Famines, Pestilence, and Earthquakes,
fearful Sights, and Signs in the Air. And Josephus declares, that there
appeared in the Air, Chariots and Horses, Men skirmishing in the Clouds, and
encompassing the City; and that a Blazing Star, in fashion of a Sword, hung
over the City for a Year together. Learn, 1. That War, Pestilence and Famine,
are Judgments and Calamities, inflicted by God upon a sinful People for their
Contempt of Christ and Gospel Grace. Ye shall hear of Wars, Famine and
Pestilence. 2. That although these be mighty and terrible Judgments, yet are they
the Forerunners of worser Judgments. All these are the Beginnings of Sorrow.

9 Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you: and ye
shall be hated of all nations for my Names sake. 10 And then shall many be
offended, and shall betray one another, and shall hate on another. 11 And many
false prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many. 12 And because iniquity
shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. 13 But he that shall endure unto
the end, the same shall be saved.

Our Savior here goes on, in giving farther Signs of the Destruction of
Jerusalem. 1. He declares the sharp Persecutions which should fall upon the
Apostles themselves; they shall kill you. Thence Learn, That the keenest and
sharpest edge of Persecution is usually turned against the Ambassadors of
Christ, and falls heaviest on the Ministers of God. You shall be hated and
killed. The next Sign is the Apostasy of Professors upon the Account of those
Persecutions. Then shall many be offended. Shall betray one another, and hate
one another. Learn hence, That Times of Persecution for Christianity are
constantly Times of Apostasy from the Christian Profession. 2. That Apostates
are usually the bitterest Persecutors. Omnis Apostata est osor sui ordinis.
They shall betray one another, and hate one another. A third Sign is the
abounding of false Teachers. Many false Prophets shall arise, and shall deceive
many. Where Note, That the fair Pretenses, and subtle Practices of Heretical
Teachers, have drawn off many from the Truth, whom open Persecution could not
drive from it. A fourth Sign is the Decay and Abatement of Zeal for God, and
Love one to another. The Love of many shall wax cold. That is, both toward
God, and toward Man. When Iniquity abounds Trouble waxes hot; and when Trouble
waxes hot, false Love waxes cold, and true Love waxes colder than it was
before: The cold Blasts of Persecution blow up the Love of a few, but blow out
the Love of many more. These are the Signs laid down by our Savior,
foretelling the Destruction of Jerusalem; and forasmuch as Jerusalem's
Destruction was not only a Forerunner, but a Figure of Christ's coming to
Judgment, these are also the Signs, foretelling the Approach of that dreadful
Day. Verse 13. He that endures to the end, the same shall be saved. Our
Savior closes his Discourse with an Exhortation to Constancy and Perseverance.
Teaching us, That there is no such way to overcome Temptation and Persecution,
as by keeping our Integrity, and persevering in our Fidelity to Christ. 2. That
Constancy and Perseverance in our Integrity and Fidelity toward Christ, is
sometimes attended with Temporal Salvation and Deliverance in this Life, but
shall certainly be rewarded with Eternal Salvation in the next. He that
endures to the end, the same shall be saved.

14 And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a
witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come.

Here our Blessed Savior comforts his Disciples with a threefold
Consideration. 1. That his Gospel how hated and persecuted soever, should be
plainly and persuasively preached. This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be
preached. Therefore called the Gospel of the Kingdom, because it discovers the
Way to the Kingdom of Heaven. Observe, 2. The Extent of the Gospel's
Publication, it shall be preached unto all Nations; that is, to the Gentile
World, not only amongst the Jews, but amongst the chief and principal Nations
of the Gentiles also. Observe, 3. The Design and End of the Gospel's
Publication, and that is for a Witness or Testimony; namely, for a Witness of
God's Mercy and Grace offered to Sinners, and of their Obstinacy who reject it.
Learn thence, That the preaching of the Gospel wherever it comes proves a
Testimony to them to whom it comes. To the Humble and Teachable it is a
Testimony for, to the Scorners and Despisers it is a Testimony against; or in
the Words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.16. To some it is the Savor of Death unto
Death, to others the Savor of Life unto Life.

15 When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by
Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place, (whosoever reads, let him
understand.)

The Sense is, when ye shall see the Armies of the Romans, who are an
Abomination to you, and an Occasion of great Desolation where they go; when you
shall see that abominable desolating Army begirting the Holy City of Jerusalem,
then call to mind the Prophecy of Daniel, which primarily belonged to
Antiochus, but secondarily to Titus, and shall now be fully completed. For the
Siege shall not be raised, till both City and Temple be razed to the Ground.
Learn thence, That God has Instruments ready at his Call to lay waste the
strongest Cities, and to ruin the most flourishing Kingdoms which do oppose the
Tenders of his Grace, and can make those whom Men most abhor, to be the
Occasions of their Destruction.

16 Then let them which be in Judea, flee into the mountains. 17 Let him which
is on the housetop, not come down to take any thing out of his house: 18
Neither let him which is in the field, return back to take his clothes.

The meaning is, As soon as you shall see the Roman Army appear before the City
of Jerusalem, let every one that values his own Safety fly as far, and as fast
as he can, even as Lot fled out of Sodom; and let such as fly be glad if by
flight they can save their Lives, though they lose their Goods, their Clothes,
and all things beside. From hence, Learn, 1. That when Almighty God is pouring
forth his Fury upon a sinful People, it is lawful, yea, a necessary Duty, by
flight, to endeavor the hiding and sheltring of themselves from the
approaching Calamity and Desolation. When ye shall see Jerusalem encompassed
with Armies, then flee to the Mountains. 2. That in the Case of flight before a
bloody Enemy and Army, if we lose all that we have, and our Lives be given us
for a Prey, we fare well, and the Lord deals very mercifully with us.

19 And woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck in those
days. 20 But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the
sabbath day:

Here our Savior declares the doleful Distress of those that could not flee
from the Siege of Jerusalem; as Women big with Child, and such as give Suck,
who by that Means are like to lose their Lives. And he farther adds, that it
would increase the Calamity, if their Flight should happen to be in the Winter,
when none can fly either fast, or far; or if they should be forced to flee on
the Sabbath Day, when the Jews scrupled traveling, farther than a
Sabbath-Day's Journey, which was about Two Miles. From hence Learn, That it is
a great Addition to the Trouble and Disquiet of a good Man's Spirit, when the
Day of his Spiritual Rest is interrupted; and instead of enjoying Communion
with God in his House, he is driven from House and Home, and flies before the
Face of an enraged Enemy. Pray ye, says our Savior, that your Flight be not on
the Sabbath Day. That being a Day of Holy Rest.

21 For then shall be great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of
the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be. 22 And except those days should
be shortened, there should no flesh be saved: but for the elects sake those
days shall be shortened.

The doleful Miseries and dreadful Calamities which were coming upon the Jews
in general, and upon Jerusalem in particular, are here foretold by our Savior,
partly from the Roman Army without, and partly from the Seditions and Factions
of the Zealots within, who committed such Outrages and Slaughters, that there
were no less than an Hundred Thousand slain, and Ninety-seven Thousand carried
away Captive, and made Prisoners. They that bought our Savior for Thirty
Pence, were now themselves sold Thirty for a Penny. Now did the Temple it self
become a Sacrifice, a whole Burnt-Offering, and was consumed to Ashes. Yet
Observe, Christ promises that these Calamitous Days should be shortened, for the
Elects sake. God had a Remnant which he determined should survive this
Destruction, to be an holy Seed; and accordingly the Providence of God so
ordered, that the City was taken in Six Months, and the whole Country
depopulated in Eighteen. Whence Observe, How the Lord intermixes some Mercy
with the extremest Misery, that does befall a People for their Sin. On this side
Hell no Sinners can say that they feel the Strokes of Justice to the utmost, or
that they have Judgment without Mercy.

23 Then if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there: believe
it not. 24 For there shall arise false Christ's, and false prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall
deceive the very elect. 25 Behold, I have told you before. 26 Wherefore, if
they shall say unto you, Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth: behold, he
is in the secret chambers, believe it not.

The Jews had all along cherished in themselves a vain Expectation, that the
promised Messiah should be a Temporal Deliverer that should set them at Liberty
from the Power and Slavery of the Romans; and accordingly Christ declares to
his Disciples here, that immediately before Jerusalem's Destruction, several
Persons taking the Advantage of this Expectation, would make themselves Heads
of Parties, and pretend that they were the true Messiah, who would save and
deliver them from their Enemies, if they would repair to them, and follow after
them. Hereupon our Lord cautions his Disciples against such false Christ's and
false Prophets, and bids them believe them not, though they did never so many
great Signs and Wonders, and promised them never such Glorious Deliverances.
Learn hence, That the Church's great Danger is from Seducers that come in
Christ's Name, and pretending to work Signs and Wonders by his Authority. 2.
That such is the Power of Seduction and Delusion, that many are carried away
with Seducers and false Teachers. 3. That the Elect themselves, if left unto
themselves, might be seduced; but Divine Power guards them against Seduction
and Delusion. They shall deceive, if it were possible, the very Elect.

27 For as the lightning comes out of the east, and shines even unto the
west: so shall also the coming of the Son of man be.

There is a threefold coming of Christ spoken of in the New Testament. 1. His
coming in his Spiritual Kingdom by the preaching of the Gospel among the
Gentiles. 2. His coming to destroy Jerusalem Forty Years after his Ascension.
3. His final Coming to Judgment at the great Day. All these Comings of the Son
of Man for their Suddenness and Unexpectedness are compared unto Lightning,
which in a moment breaks out of the East, and shines unto the West. Learn
hence, That the Coming and Appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ to the judging
of wicked and impenitent Sinners, it will be a very certain, sudden, and
unexpected Appearance.

28 For wheresoever the carcass is, there will the eagles be gathered together.

If the coming of Christ be understood in the former Verse of his coming to
destroy Jerusalem, then by the Carcass in this Verse are to be understood the
People of Jerusalem, and the Body of the Jewish Nation: And by the Eagles are
to be understood the Roman Armies, who carried an Eagle in their Standard.
These were the Instruments which Almighty God made use of, as his Rod and
Scourge to chastise and punish the People of Jerusalem. Learn thence, That the
appointed Messengers of God's Wrath, and the Instruments of his Vengeance will
suddenly gather together, certainly find out, and severely punish and plague an
impenitent People devoted to Destruction. Where the Carcass is, (the Body of
the Jewish Nation,) there will the Eagles (the Roman Soldiers) be gathered
together.

29 Immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the sun be darkened,
and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven,
and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken. 30 And then shall appear the
sign of the son of man in heaven.

Our Savior goes on in figurative Expressions, to set forth the Calamities
that should befall the Jewish Nation, immediately after the Destruction of
Jerusalem. The Sun shall be darkened; that is, all their Glory and Excellency
shall be eclipsed, all their Wealth and Prosperity shall be laid waste, their
whole Government Civil and Ecclesiastical destroyed; and such Marks of Misery
found upon them, as never were seen upon a People. By the Sign of the Son of
Man, the Papists, will have understood, the Sign of the Cross. Others
understand it of those Prodigies, which were seen a little before the
Destruction of Jerusalem, which Josephus mentions, as namely, A Comet in the
form of a Sword hanging over the City for a Year together: A Light in the
Temple, and about the Altar seen at Midnight for half an Hour. A Cow led by the
Priest to be sacrificed, calved a Lamb. A Voice heard in the Temple, saying,
Abeamus hinc, Let us go hence. Learn hence, God does premonish before he
punish; he warns a People of Destruction often, before he destroys them once.

30 And then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see the
Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory. 31 And
he shall send his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather
together his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other.

Then shall the Tribes mourn; that is, then shall the Jews be convinced that
their Destruction was the Punishment of their Sin, in rejecting and crucifying
Christ; and accordingly they that pierced him, shall behold him, and mourn over
him. Thus it was before the Destruction of Jerusalem, and thus will it be
before the final Judgment. They that pierced him shall be brought before him.
Lord, how will the Sight of a pierced Christ pierce their Souls with Horror;
they who have not seen a pierced Christ in the Sorrows of Repentance, shall
hereafter see him in the Sorrows of Despair. To behold Christ with the Eye of
Sense hereafter, will be very dreadful and terrible to all those that have not
beheld him with the Eye of Faith here. And he shall send his Angels with the
Sound of a Trumpet. Those that apply this to the Destruction of Jerusalem, by
the Angels understand the Ministers of the Gospel, who by the Trumpet of the
Word did bring in Believers throughout all Judea, who were saved from that
Destruction. Those that understand it of the general Judgment, take it
literally, that Christ at the great Day will send forth his Holy Angels, and
gather all his Elect to himself with the sound of a Trumpet. Probably, as there
was an audible Sound of a Trumpet at the giving of the Law, so there shall be
the like Sound of a Trumpet, when Christ shall summon the World to Judgment,
for transgressing of that Law. A joyful Sound, will this be to the Friends of
Christ. A doleful dreadful Sound in the Ears of his Enemies.

32 Now learn a parable of the fig tree, When his branch is yet tender, and
puts forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh: 33 So likewise ye, when ye
shall see all these things, know that it is near, even at the doors. 34 Verily
I say unto you, this generation shall not pass, till all these things be
fulfilled. 35 Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass
away. 36 But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the angels of heaven,
but my Father only.

Here our Blessed Savior declares Two Things with reference to his coming. 1.
The Certainty of the Thing it self. 2. The Uncertainty of the Time. The
Certainty of his coming he sets forth by the Similitude of the Fig Tree, whose
beginning to bud declares the Summer at Hand. Thus when they should see the
forementioned Signs, they might conclude the Destruction of their City and
Temple to be nigh at Hand, and that some then living should see all these
Predictions certainly fulfilled: Whatever Christ foretells shall certainly be
fulfilled, his Word being more firm than the Fabric of Heaven and Earth. Obs.
2. The Uncertainty, as to the precise Time, when this Judgment should come. No
Angel in Heaven, nor Creature on Earth could determine the Time, only the
glorious Persons in the Godhead; the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Learn, 1.
That all things are not revealed to the Angels themselves, but such things only
as it concerns them to know, and the Wisdom of God thinks fit to reveal. 2.
That the precise Time of the Day of Judgment is kept by God as a Secret to
himself, he will not have us know that Hour, to the Intent that we may be upon
our watch every Hour.

37 But as the days of Noah were, so shall also the coming of the Son of man
be. 38 For as in the days that were before the flood, they were eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into
the ark, 39 And knew not until the flood came, and took them all away; so shall
also the coming of the Son of man be. 40 Then shall two be in the field, the
one shall be taken, and the other left. 41 Two women shall be grinding at the
mill, the one shall be taken, and the other left.

In these Verses our Savior declares that Jerusalem's Destruction, and the
World's final Desolation at the great Day, would be much like the Destruction
of the old World, and that in two Respects; 1. In regard of Unexpectedness. 2.
In regard of Security, and Sensuality. How sensual and secure was the old World
before the Flood. They were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in
Marriage. That is, wholly given up to Sensuality and Debauchery, and did not
know of the Floods coming; that is, did not consider it, till it swept them
away. Thus was it in the Destruction of Jerusalem, and so will it be in the end
of the World. Learn hence, 1. That as the old World perished by Infidelity,
Security and Sensuality, so will the same Sins be prevailing before the
Destruction of this present World. As it was in the Days of Noah, so shall it
be when the Son of Man comes. 2. That the true Reason why Sinners are drowned
in Sensuality, and given over to Security, is this, because they do not believe
the Certainty, or consider the Proximity and Nearness of an approaching
Judgment. The old World knew not of the Floods coming. Strange! when Noah had
told them of it an Hundred and Twenty Years together. The meaning is, They did
not consider it, and prepare for it. To such as are unprepared for, and
unapprehensive of Death and Judgment, those Evils are always sudden although Men
be never so often warned of them. But to such as are prepared, Death is never
sudden, let them die never so suddenly.

42 Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your Lord does come. 43 But know
this, that if the good man of the house had known in what watch the thief would
come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house to be broken
up. 44 Therefore be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not, the Son
of man comes.

Here we have the Application made by our Savior of the foregoing Doctrine
concerning the Certainty and Suddenness of a future Judgment. Watch therefore
always; not without Intermission, but without giving over, that ye may be not
only in an habitual, but actual Readiness for my Appearance. Learn thence, That
it is the indispensible Duty, and ought to be the indefatigable Endeavor of
every Christian, to stand upon his Watch in a prepared Readiness, for Christ's
Appearance, both for his coming to us, and for our going to him. Watch always,
for ye know not the Hour when your Lord comes.

45 Who then is a faithful and wise servant, whom his lord has made ruler over
his household, to give them meat in due season? 46 Blessed is that servant, whom
his lord when he comes shall find so doing. 47 Verily I say unto you, that he
shall make him ruler over all his goods.

These Words may be applied two ways. 1. To all the faithful Servants of Christ
in general. Thence Learn, That for a Person to spend and end his Days in the
Service of Christ, and doing his Will, gives good Assurance of a blessed
Condition. Blessed is that Servant. 2. To the Ministers of the Gospel in
special, may these Words be applied. And here Obs. 1. The Character and Duty of
a Gospel-Minister. He is the Steward of Christ's Household, to give them their
Meat in due Season. Obs. 2. The Qualifications requisite in such Stewards,
Faithfulness and Prudence. Who then is that faithful and wise Steward? Obs. 3.
The Reward insured to such Stewards as answer these Qualifications. Blessed is
that Servant. Learn hence, 1. That the Ministers of the Gospel are in a special
Sense the Stewards of Christ's Household. 2. That Faithfulness and Prudence are
the necessary and indispensible Qualifications of Christ's Stewards. 3. That
wherever these Qualifications are found, Christ will graciously and
abundantly reward them. Our Faithfulness must respect God, our Selves, and our
Flock, and includes Integrity of Heart, Purity of Intention, Industry of
Endeavor, Impartiality in our Administrations. Prudence appears in the choice
of suitable Subjects, in the choice of fit Language, in exciting our own
Affections, in order to the moving of our People. Ministerial Prudence will
teach us by the Strictness and Gravity of our Deportment, to maintain our
Esteem in the Consciences of our People. It will assist us to bear Reproach,
and direct us to give Reproof; he that is silent, cannot be innocent: Reprove
we must, or we cannot be faithful; but prudently, or we cannot be successful.

48 But and if that evil servant shall say in his heart, My lord delayeth his
coming, 49 And shall begin to smite his fellow servants, and to eat and drink
with the drunken: 50 The lord of that servant shall come in a day, when he
looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of; 51 And shall cut
him asunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocries: there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Our Lord in these Verses describes an unfaithful and negligent Steward, and
denounces the dreadful Sentence of Wrath hanging over him; he is described, 1.
By the Character of Infidelity, he believes not Christ's coming to Judgment,
though he preaches it to others; he says in his Heart, My Lord delayeth his
coming. 2. He is described by his Hatred, Envy, and Malignity against his
Fellow Servants, that were more painful and faithful than himself. He begins to
smite, at least with the Virulence of his Tongue, if not with the Violence of
his Hand. 3. By his associating with the wicked, and strengthening their Hands
by his ill Example. He eats and drinks with the Drunken. That is, as their
Associate and Fellow-Companion. Thus the unfaithful Servant is described; next
his Judgment and Sentence is declared. Obs. 2. The tremendous Judgment that
shall come upon unfaithful Stewards. 1. Christ will surprise them in their Sin
and Security, by coming in an Hour when they looked not for him. 2. He will
execute Temporal Vengeance upon them. He will cut them asunder, or hew them in
pieces, as the Jews did their Sacrifices. That is, separate his Soul from his
Body by untimely Death. Hence some Observe, That God seldom suffers slothful,
sensual, wicked and debauched Ministers to live out half their Days. 3. Christ
will punish them with Eternal Destruction also. Appointing them their Portion
with Hypocrites. That is, with the worst of Sinners, they shall have a double
Damnation. As the Hypocrite has a double Heart, a double Tongue, and is a
double Sinner, so shall he undergo a double Damnation. Learn hence, That such
Ministers as neglect the Service of God, and the Souls of their People; as they
are ranked amongst the worst sort of Sinners in this Life, so shall they be
punished with them in the severest manner in the next. When Satan destroys the
Souls of Men, he shall answer for it as a Murderer only, not as an Officer
that was entrusted with the Care of Souls. But if the Steward does not provide,
if the Shepherd does not feed, if the Watchman does not warn, they shall answer
not only for the Souls that have miscarried, but for an Office neglected, for a
Talent hidden, and for a Stewardship unfaithfully administered. Woe unto us, if
at the great Day we hear distressed Souls roaring out their Complaints, and
howling forth that doleful Accusation against us: Lord! Our Stewards have
defrauded us, our Watchmen have betrayed us, our Guides have misled us.

CHAP. XXV.
Our blessed Savior in the Close of the foregoing Chapter had exhorted all
Christians to the great Duty of Watchfulness, and to be in a Posture of
Readiness against his coming. Which Duty he is pleased to inculcate again in
this Chapter, and accordingly he urges the Necessity of it from two eminent
Parables; the former, Of the Ten Virgins, v. 1. and the latter, Of a Man
traveling into a far Country, v. 14.

1 THen shall the kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins, which took
their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom. 2 And five of them were
wise, and five were foolish.

By the Kingdom of Heaven here is meant the State of the visible Church here on
Earth; it cannot be understood of the Kingdom of Glory, for there are no
foolish Virgins in that Kingdom, nor yet of the invisible Kingdom of Grace; for
therein are no foolish Virgins neither. But in the visible Church here on Earth
there ever has been a Mixture of wise and unwise, of Saints and Hypocrites.
Five of these Virgins were wise, and five were foolish. Where Observe, our
Lord's great Charity, in supposing and hoping that amongst the Professors of
the Gospel, the number of sincere Christians is equal with Hypocritical
Professors. Five were wise, and Five foolish. Teaching us, that we should not
confine the Church of Christ within a narrow Compass, nor confine our Charity
to a few, and think none shall go to Heaven but those of our own Party and
Persuasion, but to extend our Charity to all Christians that hold the
Foundation with us, and to hope well of them. Lord! let me rather err on the
charitable Hand, than be found on the censorious and damning side; this is to
imitate my Savior, whose Charity supposed as many wise as foolish Virgins, as
many Saints as Hypocrites in the Church. All these Virgins are said to take
their Lamps, and go forth to meet the Bridegroom. For understanding which, we
must know, that our Savior alludes to the ancient Custom of Marriages, which
were celebrated in the Night; when usually Ten young Men attended the
Bridegroom, and as many Virgins attended the Bride, with Lamps in their Hands,
the Bridegroom leading home his Bride by the Light of those Lamps. By these
Virgins are shadowed forth the Professors of Christianity. The foolish Virgins
are such as satisfy themselves with a bare Profession, without bringing forth
Fruits answerable thereunto. The wise Virgins are such as walked answerable to
their Profession, persevered and continued steadfast therein, and abounded in
the Graces and Virtues of a good Life. They are called Virgins for the Purity
of their Faith, for the Purity of their Worship, and for the Purity of their
Conversations.

3 They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no oil with them: 4 But
the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.

By the Lamps are meant an outward Profession of Faith and Holiness. By Oil in
their Lamps is to be understood that solemn Profession of Repentance, and
Faith, which all Christians make in Baptism. By Oil in the Vessels is meant the
Sanctifying and Saving Graces of the Holy Spirit; the Growth and Improvement of
them, with Constancy and Perseverance in them. Observe here, wherein the wise
and foolish Virgins agreed, and wherein they differed. They agreed thus far,
that both took their Lamps, both lighted them, they both had Oil in their
Lamps; the difference was not that the wise had Oil, and the foolish had none,
but in this, that the wise took care for a future Supply of Oil to feed their
Lamp. When the first Oil was spent, some Professors, like foolish Virgins,
content themselves with a blazing Lamp of an outward Profession, without
concerning themselves to secure an inward Principle of Grace and Love, which
should maintain that Profession, as the Oil maintains the Lamp. As the Lamp
will not long hold burning without a Stock of Oil to feed it; so a Profession
of Religion, though never so glorious, will not be lasting nor persevering
without a Principle of Faith and Love in the Heart to support and maintain it.
Learn hence, That the true Wisdom of a Christian consists in this, to take
care, that not only the Lamp of his Life may shine by outward Profession, but
that the Vessel of his Heart may be furnished with the Graces of the Holy
Spirit, as a prevailing and abiding Principle.

5 While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.

That is, while Christ delays his coming to Persons by Death and Judgment, they
are not so diligent as they ought, to prepare themselves for Death and
Judgment. Instead of being upon their Watch and Guard, they slumbered and
slept. Note, That not only visible Professors, but the holiest and best of
Christians are very prone to Spiritual Slumber. Whilst the Bridegroom tarried,
they all slumbered and slept. Spiritual Slumber consists in this. When Graces
are not lively, and kept in exercise, particularly Faith, Hope, and Love; when
there is an Abatement of our Love and Zeal, an Intermission of our Care and
Watchfulness; this is a degree of Spiritual Slumber, yet the Saints Slumber is
not a prevailing Slumber, it is nor an Universal Slumber, it is not in all the
Faculties of the Soul; if there be Deadness in the Affections, yet is there not
Searedness in the Conscience. I sleep, says the Church, but my Heart awaketh,
Cant. 5.2. Still there is a Principle in the Soul which takes God's part, and
the Christian groans under the Burden of his dull and drowsy State. But the
greatest Wisdom is, to maintain a constant Watch; that we may at no time be
surprised by the Bridegroom's coming, or be in a Confusion when Death and
Judgment shall overtake us. Blessed are those Virgins, whose Lamps always burn
bright.

6 And at midnight there was a cry made, Behold, the bridegroom comes, go ye
out to meet him.

At Midnight, that is, at the most dismal and unseasonable time, when all the
Virgins were fast asleep; and when awaked in great Affrightment, could not on a
sudden consider what to do. Such is the Case of those who put off their
Repentance, and Preparation for another World, till they are surprised by Death
and Judgment. Lord, how will the Midnight Cry of the Bridegroom's coming
terrify and amaze the unprepared Soul! What a surprising Word will this be,
Behold, the Bridegroom comes? Learn hence, That the Bridegroom will certainly
come, though at his own time; and then all shall be called upon, both prepared
and unprepared, to go forth to meet him. Reason says he may come, because there
is a just God that will render to every one according to his Deeds, and reward
both Body and Soul for all the Services they have done for God. The Body shall
not always remain like a solitary Widow in the Dust, but shall meet its old
Companion the Soul again. And as Reason says he may come, Faith says he will
come, and argues from the Promise of Christ, John 14.3. and from the Purchase
of Christ; from Christ's Affection to us, and from our Affection to him: Faith
has seen him upon the Cross, and determines she shall see him in the Clouds.
The Bridegroom will certainly come at his own time, happy they that are ready
to go forth to meet him.

7 Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps. 8 And the foolish
said unto the wise, Give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone out.

The Virgins arising, and trimming their Lamps, does denote their actual
Preparation for Christ's Coming and Appearance, and their putting themselves
into a Posture of Readiness to receive him. Thence Learn, That a believing
Apprehension of the Certainty and Suddenness of our Lord's Coming and Approach
will rouse us out of our Spiritual Slumber, and prepare us to meet him with Joy
and Assurance. Then they arose and trimmed their Lamps. And the foolish said to
the wise, give us of your Oil, for our Lamps are gone out. Observe here, 1. A
Request made, Give us of your Oil. There is a time when the Neglecters of Grace
will be made sensible of the Worth of Grace by the want of it. Such as now
undervalue, yea, villifie the Grace of God, will be heard to say, Oh give us of
your Oil. Obs. 2. The Reason of the Request, For our Lamps are gone out. Thence
Learn, That the Lamp of Profession will certainly go out, which has not a Stock
of Grace to feed and maintain it.

9 But the wise answered, saying, Not so; lest there be not enough for us and
you; but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves.

Observe here, 1. The wise Virgins Denial, Not so. They will part with no Oil.
Learn thence, That it must be the Care of every one to get Grace of his own,
otherwise the Grace of others will do him no Good. It Is not what others have
done, nay, not what Christ himself has done, that will save us, without our own
Endeavors. Obs. 2. The Reason of their Denial, Lest there be not enough for us
and you. Thence Note, That such Christians as have most Grace, or the largest
Stock of Grace, have none to spare; none to spare, in regard of their Occasions
for Grace on Earth, and in regard of their Expectations of Glory in Heaven.
Obs. 3. The Advice and Counsel given; Go to them that sell, and buy for your
selves. Some take this for an Exhortation, others for a mocking Derision. Go to
them that sell. That is, say some, to the Shops of the Ordinances, where it may
be had. Thence Note, That such as would have Grace, must have timely Recourse
to the Ordinances and Means of Grace. Go to them that sell. Others understand
the Words ironically, and as spoken by way of Derision. Go to them that sell.
If you know where to find them, and either buy or borrow for your selves. Learn
thence, That it is the greatest Folly in the World to have Oil to buy, when we
should have Oil to burn: To have our Grace to seek, when we should have it to
exert and exercise. It is no time to get Grace when the Bridegroom is come, and
the Day of Grace is past and over.

10 And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came, and they that were ready,
went in with him to the marriage, and the door was shut.

Observe here, 1. Christ will come at the great Day to his People as a
Bridegroom, and to the wicked as a Judge. The Relation now begun betwixt Christ
and his Church shall then be publicly solemnized. Obs. 2. The Qualification of
the Persons, who shall enter with the Bridegroom into Heaven. Such as are
ready, went in with him. This Readiness is twofold, Habitual and Actual;
Habitual Readiness consists in the State of the Person (justified and pardoned)
in the Frame of the Heart (sanctified and renewed) and in the Course of the
Life, universally and perceivingly Holy and Righteous, consists our Actual
Preparation. Obs. 3. The doleful Condition of such as were unready. The Door is
shut against them, the Door of Repentance, the Door of Hope, the Door of
Salvation, all shut, eternally shut, and by him that shuts, and none can
open. Learn hence, The utter Impossibility of ever getting our Condition
altered by us, when the Day of Grace and Salvation is once over with us. Woe to
such Souls, who by the Folly of their own Delays have caused the Door of
Conversion and Remission to be everlastingly shut against their own Souls.

11 Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. 12
But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you, I know you not.

Observe here, The Virgin's Petition, and the Bridegroom's Reply. The Petition,
Lord, Lord, open to us. Learn thence, That how negligent soever Men are of
Heaven and Salvation here, there are none but will desire it earnestly, and
importunately hereafter, Afterward; that is, when too late. Observe farther
the Bridegroom's Reply, I know you not; that is, I own and approve you not.
There is a twofold Knowledge that Christ has, a Knowledge of simple Intuition,
and a Knowledge of special Approbation; the former Knowledge Christ has of all
Men, the latter only of good Men. Learn hence, That it will be a dreadful
Misery for any Persons, but especially for such as have been eminent
Professors, to be disowned by Christ at his coming, to hear that dreadful Word
from the Mouth of Christ, Verily, I know you not.

13 Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day, nor the hour wherein the Son
of man comes.

Here we have our Lord's Application of the foregoing Parable, to be always
upon our Watch, continually upon our Guard to meet the Bridegroom in Death and
Judgment, because we know not the time of his Coming and Approach. Learn hence,
That Watchfulness and a prepared Readiness is a great Duty that lies upon all
those who believe and look for Christ's Coming and Appearance. Happy Souls, who
are found in a Posture of Readiness at the Bridegroom's Approach, standing with
Lamps trimmed, Loins girded, Lights burning; that is, improving and exercising
their Graces, abounding in all the Fruits of the Spirit, and in all the
substantial Virtues of a good Life. Such and only such shall have an Entrance
abundantly administered unto them into the everlasting Kingdom.

14 For the kingdom of heaven is as a man traveling into a far country, who
called his own servants, and delivered unto them his goods: 15 And unto one he
gave five talents, to another two, and to another one, to every man according
to his several ability, and straightway took his journey.

Observe here, The Person intrusting, Christ; the Persons entrusted, all
Christians: The Talents they are entrusted with, Goods; that is, Goods of
Providence, Riches and Honors; Gifts of Mind, Wisdom, Parts, and Learning;
Gifts of Grace, all these Goods, Christ dispenses variously; more to some,
fewer to others, but with Expectation of Improvement from all. Learn, 1. That
Christ is the great Lord of the Universe, and Owner of all his Servant's Goods
and Talents. 2. That every Talent is given us by our Lord to improve and employ
for our Master's Use and Service. 3. That it pleases the Lord to dispense his
Gifts variously amongst his Servants, to some he commits more, to others fewer
Talents. 4. That to this Lord of ours every one of us must be accountable and
responsible for every Talent committed to us, and entrusted with us.

16 Then he that had received the five talents went and traded with the same,
and made them other five talents. 17 And likewise he that had received two, he
also gained other two. 18 But he that had received one, went and dug in the
earth, and hid his lord's money.

The former Verses gave an Account of the Lord's Distribution; these acquaint
us with the Servants Negotiation. Some traded with, and made Improvement of
their Talents, others traded not at all; yet is it not said, that they did
imbezzle the Talent, but not improve it. Learn, It is not sufficient to
justify us, that we do not abuse our Talents; it is Fault enough to hide them,
and not improve them; the slothful Servant shall no more escape Punishment,
than the wasteful Servant.

19 After a long time, the lord of those servants comes, and reckons with
them. 20 And so he that had received five talents, came and brought other five
talents, saying, Lord, thou delivered'st unto me five talents: behold, I have
gained besides them five talents mo. 21 His Lord said unto him, Well done, thou
good and faithful servant; thou have been faithful over a few things, I will
make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord. 22 He
also that had received two talents, came and said, Lord, thou delivered'st unto
me two talents: behold, I have gained two other talents besides them. 23 His
lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful servant, thou have been;
faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou
into the joy of thy lord.

Note here, 1. That the Wisdom of God dispences his Gifts and Graces variously,
as so many Talents to his Servants, to be employed and improved for his own
Glory, and his Churches Good. 2. That all such Servants as have received any
Talents, must look to reckon and account for them; and this Account must be
particular, personal, exact and impartial. 3. That all such Servants as have
been faithful in improving their Talents, at Christ's coming shall be both
commended and rewarded also. Well done good and faithful Servant: enter into
the Joy of thy Lord. Where Obs. 1. That the State of the Blessed is a State of
Joy. 2. That the Joy which the Blessed partake of, is the Joy of their Lord;
that is, the Joy which he provides, and which he possesses. 3. That the way
after which the Saints partake of this Joy, is by entering into it, which
denotes the highest, and the fullest Participation of it. The Joy is too great
to enter into them, they must enter into that; Enter thou into the Joy of thy
Lord.

24 Then he which had received the one talent, came and said, Lord, I knew thee
that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou have not sown, and gathering
where thou have not strawed: 25 And I was afraid, and went and hid thy talent
in the earth: lo, there thou have that is thine. 26 His lord answered and said
unto him, Thou wicked and slothful servant, thou knew that I reap where I
sowed not, and gather where I have not strawed: 27 Thou ought therefore to
have put my money to the exchangers, and then at my coming I should have
received mine own with usury.

Observe here, 1. That he that received but One Talent, is called to an Account
as well as he that received Five. Heathens that have but One Talent, namely,
the Light of Nature, must give an Account for that One Talent, as well as
Christians that have Five, must account for Five. Obs. 2. The slothful
Servant's Allegation; I knew thee to be an hard man, and I was afraid. Where
Note, His Prejudice against his Master, and the effect of that Prejudice, he
was afraid; and the Fruit of his Fear, He hid his Talent in the Earth. Learn
hence, That Sinners entertain in their Minds very hard and unkind Thoughts of
God; they look upon him as an hard Master, rigorous in his Commands, and
difficult to be pleased. Learn 2. That such hard Thoughts of God do naturally
occasion slavish Fear, which is a great Hinderance to the faithful Discharge of
our Duty to God. Obs. 3. The Master's Reply to the slothful Servant's
Allegation, which contains an Exprobation, or upbraiding of him for his Sloth
and Negligence; Thou wicked and slothful Servant. Where Note, 1. That the
slothful Servant is a wicked Servant, as well as the unfaithful Servant. 2.
That wicked and slothful Servants, to excuse themselves, will not stick to
charge their Miscarriages upon God himself. Thou were an hard Man. 3. That no
Excuses whatsoever shall serve either the slothful or unfaithful Servant at the
Bar of Christ.

28 Take therefore the talent from him, and give it unto him which has ten
talents. 29 For unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have
abundance: but from him that has not shall be taken away, even that which he
has. 30 And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

These Words contain the Sentence denounced by Christ upon the slothful
Servant; his Punishment is first a Punishment of Loss. Take the Talent from
him. Learn thence, That not improving the Gifts of God given as Talents to us,
provokes God to take them from us, as well as mis-improving. From him that has
not; that is, from him that improveth not, shall be taken from him that which
he has. 2. Follows the Punishment of Sense, Cast him into utter Darkness,
where is weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Learn thence, That Hell is a Place and
State of inexpressible Misery and Torment. A dismal Place, as being deprived of
the Sight and Enjoyment of God, of Christ, of Saints and Angels. A doleful
Place, full of overwhelming Sorrow and despairing Grief. The gnashing of their
Teeth signifies their being full of Rage and Indignation against God, against
the Saints, and against themselves.

31 When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with
him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory. 32 And before him shall be
gathered all nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a
shepherd divides his sheep from the goats: 33 And he shall set the sheep on
his right hand, but the goats on the left.

From hence, to the end of the Chapter, we have a Draught and Scheme of the
general Judgment. Where Observe the Person judging, the Son of Man; the Persons
judged, Good and Bad; the one called Sheep, for their Innocence and Meekness;
the other Goats, for their Unruliness and Uncleanness. Observe also the manner
of his coming to Judgment, most August and Glorious. Glorious in his Person,
glorious in his Attendants. Learn, That Christ's Appearance at the great Day to
the judging of the World, it will be a splendid and a glorious Appearance. He
will come with Power, and in great Glory, in regard of the Dignity of his
Person, and the Quality of his Office, and the Greatness of his Work. He will
appear as a King in the midst of his Nobles, to take off the Scandal and
Ignominy of the Cross, and as a Recompense for his Abasement and Humiliation.
To strike the Hearts of his Enemies with Dread and Fear, and to fill the Souls
of his People with Joy and Confidence. Let us therefore propound it to our
Faith; to believe, it to our Fear, to tremble at the Thoughts of it; to our
Hope and Love, that we may expect and wait, look and long for it. Observe
farther the Work of this Judge, first, to congregate; secondly, to segregate.
He shall first gather all Nations. Learn, That at the general Judgment all that
have lived shall be summoned to the Bar of Christ; Persons of all Sexes, of all
Ages, of all Nations, of all Conditions; having gathered them together, he
shall next segregate and separate them, as a Shepherd his Sheep. Thence Learn,
That though there be a Mixture and Confusion of the Godly, and the Wicked here,
yet at the Day of Judgment there will be a Separation made betwixt them, and
they shall never come together more.

34 Then shall the king say unto them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

Here follows the Sentence which Christ will pronounce upon the Righteous and
the Wicked at the great Day; first the Sentence of Absolution upon the
Righteous, then the Sentence of Condemnation upon the Wicked. Learn thence,
That at the Day of Judgment the Godly shall be absolved before the Wicked are
condemned. The Reasons are, because it is more delightful to God to reward, than
to punish; to save, than to destroy; because it is suitable to Christ's Love to
begin with his Saints, and to be admired by them. Also to put his Saints out of
Fear, as to their Eternal Condition, and to bring them near to himself, and to
set them upon the Throne with himself, as Assessors and Judges of the wicked
World. 1 Cor. 6.3. Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the World? Lastly,
With respect to the Wicked, that they may be the more affected with their Loss,
and have a vexatious and tormenting Sense of that Happiness which they have
refused. Observe next, the joyful Sentence pronounced, Come ye Blessed of my
Father. Where Note, 1. The joyful Compellation, Ye Blessed. Which Term is
opposed to these Two Things. 1. To the Worlds Judgment of them, which accounts
them vile and accursed. Here is an Absolution from their unjust Censures. 2. To
the Sentence of the Law, which pronounces all its Transgressors accursed, Gal.
3.10. but says Christ, I that have redeemed you from the Curse of the Law,
pronounce you Blessed. But why, Blessed of my Father! 1. To point out the
Fontal Cause of all our Happiness, the Love of the Father. This prepared the
Kingdom. 2. This Expression shows how the Divine Persons glorify one another.
As the Spirit glorifies the Son, so the Son glorifies the Father, and referrs
all to him. Therefore Christ says not, Come my redeemed ones, but, Come ye
blesled ones; not, Come you that were redeemed by me, but, Come ye blessed of
my Fathee; it is his good Pleasure to give you the Kingdom. Learn hence, That
the Lord Jesus Christ at his second Coming will adjudge all his People unto a
State of glorious and everlasting Happiness, which his Father has prepared, and
himself has purchased for them. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you.

35 For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me
drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: 36 Naked, and ye clothed me: I was
sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

Here our Savior sets forth, not the meritorious Cause of his Saint's
Happiness, but the infallible Signs of such as should inherit that Happiness;
the Character of the Persons that might expect it. Such as fed him, clothed and
visited him in his Members. Where Note, 1. That the Godly having their Sins
forgiven in this World, probably there shall be no mention made of them in the
Day of Judgment. Christ here only mentions the good Works of his Saints; Ye fed
me, ye clothed, not a Word of their Failings. Obs. 2. That they are not the
Duties of the first, but of the second Table, which here Christ mentions,
because Works of Charity are more visible to the World than Works of Piety.
Learn hence, 1. That at the great Day every Man's Sentence shall be pronounced
according to his Works. 2. That Works of Charity done out of Love to Christ,
shall be particularly observed, and bountifully rewarded by Christ at the great
Day. The Question then will be, not how have you Heard, Prayed, or Preached,
but whom have you Fed, Clothed, and Visited. 3. That whatever Good or Evil is
done to the poor Members of Christ, Christ reckons it as done unto himself. I
was an hungry, and ye gave me Meat.

37 Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, when saw we thee an hungered,
and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee drink? 38 When saw we thee a stranger,
and took thee in? or naked, and clothed thee? 39 Or when saw we thee sick, or
in prison, and came unto thee? 40 And the King shall answer, and say unto them,
Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of
these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.

Here we have a Dialogue or interchangeable Discourse betwixt Christ and his
faithful Servants at the great Day; where Observe their Question, and his
Reply. Their Question, Lord, when did we feed thee, cloth, or visit thee? We
have forgot the Time, though such is thy Goodness to remember it. Learn thence,
That Christ keeps a faithful Record of all our Acts of pious Charity, when we
have forgotten them. If we remember to do Good, Christ will be sure to remember
the Good we have done. Ay, and reward it as well as remember it: Again, this
Question of theirs may proceed from Admiration and Wonder, and from an humble
Sense of their own Nothingness, and from the Greatness of Christ's
Condescension, in taking notice of such mean Services, and requiting them with
such a Transcendent Reward. Learn hence, That when Christ comes to reward his
Children and People, they will wonder and be astonished at the Poverty and
Meanness of their own Services, and at the Transcendency and Greatness of his
Rewards. Observe next, Our Lord's Reply, Inasmuch as ye did it to the least of
these of my Brethren, ye did it unto me. Where Obs. 1. The Title put by Jesus
Christ upon his poorest and meanest Members, My Brethren, 2. The Resentment of
the Kindness showed to his Brethren, as shown unto himself; Inasmuch as ye did
it to them, ye have done it to me. Learn thence, That such is the indearing
Intimacy betwixt Christ and his Members, that whatever is done to any of them,
is esteemed by him as done unto himself.

41 Their shall he say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels:

Here we have the Sentence of Condemnation denounced against the Wicked. Where
Obs. 1. The Posture in which they are found at Christ's Left Hand. This does
not so much denote the Ignominy of the Place, (though placing at the Left Hand is
less honorable) as the Impiety of their Choice they took up with left hand
Mercies, the Mercies of the Footstool, Wealth and Riches, Dignity and Honor.
As for the good Things, which are at God's Right Hand for evermore, they never
sought after these. Verily, a Man may know his future State by his present
Choice. Obs. 2. The Title given to wicked Men, Ye cursed. Not cursed of my
Father, because cursing is God's strange Work. We force him to it, he delights
not in it. Obs. 3. The Sentence it self. Where Note, 1. The Punishment of Loss,
Depart from me. Learn thence, That it is the Hell of Hell to the damned, that
they must everlastingly depart from, and lose the comfortable Fruition and
Enjoyment of God in Christ. It Is to be deprived of an infinite Good. Hell is a
deep Dungeon, where the Sunshine of God's Presence never comes. 2. The
Punishment of Sense, Depart into everlasting Fire. Where Note, Its Severity,
it is Fire, its Eternity, it is everlasting Fire. Learn thence, That there are
everlasting Torments in Hell prepared for the Wicked; there is a State of
Torment, and a Place of Torment, provided by God. All Princes have not only
their Palace, but their Prison. God has the Palace of Heaven, for Enjoyment of
himself, and his Friends; and the Prison of Hell for the punishing his Enemies.
The Nature of the damned's Misery is set out by Fire, and the whole Man, Body
and Soul, shall be tormented in it. 1. The Body, in all its Members; their Eyes
with affrighting Spectacles, the Devil and his Angels, and their old Companions
in Sin, every time they behold these, it revives their Guilt, and enrages their
Despair. Their Ears are filled with Yellings and Howlings, and hideous
Outcries. 2. The Soul shall suffer in Hell, by reflecting upon its own Choice,
by remembering Time sinfully wasted, Seasons of Grace sadly s^ighted, the
Mercies of God unworthily abused. Lord, how will the Remembrance of past
Mercies aggravate present Miseries.

42 For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave no
drink: 43 I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: naked, and ye clothed me
not: sick, and in prison, and ye visited me not. 44 Then shall they also answer
him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, or a thirst, or a stranger, or
naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? 45 Then shall he
answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one of
the least of these, ye did it not to me.

Observe here, 1. How Christ lays the Charge of the Wicked's Damnation upon
themselves alone. You gave me no Meat, you took me not in. Man, and Man alone
is the Cause of his own Destruction and Damnation. Obs. 2. The Kind of Sin
charged on the Wicked at the great Day. Consider it 1. In its generical Nature;
it is a Sin of Omission. Whence Learn, That Sins of Omission are certainly
damning, as well as Sins of Commission. Consider it, 2. In its specifical
Nature; it is a Sin of Unmercifulness, or Want of Love to Christ and his
Members. Learn thence, That one reigning Sin, one prevailing Corruption, is
enough to damn a Person, because it deprives a Man of the Grace of the Gospel,
and excludes him from all the Benefit of the Promises. Note, Lastly, If such as
do not give to Christ in his Members shall be miserable at the great Day, what
will the Condition of them be that take from them, who strip and starve them,
who persecute and hate them? Who imprison or banish them? If the Uncharitable
shall scarcely be saved, yea, shall certainly be damned, where shall the
Unmerciful and Cruel appear?

46 And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into
life eternal.

Observe here, 1. That though the Righteous are first judged, yet the Sentence is
first executed on the Wicked. These shall go into everlasting Punishment. Obs.
2. That Men's States and Conditions in another World will be different, as
their Ways and Doings have been in this World. 3. That everlasting Life shall
be the Portion of the Godly, and everlasting Punishment the Portion of the
Wicked. God grant that the Horrors of eternal Darkness, and the dismal Thoughts
of a miserable Eternity, may effectually discourage every one of us from a
wicked and impenitent Course of Life; for who can dwell with the devouring
Fire? Who can dwell with everlasting Burnings?

CHAP. XXVI.
1 AND it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these sayings, he said unto
his disciples, 2 Ye know that after two days is the feast of the passover, and
the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified. 3 Then assembled together the chief
priests, and the scribes, and the elders of the people, unto the palace of the
high priest, who was called Caiaphas, 4 And consulted that they might take
Jesus by subtilty, and kill him. 5 But they said, Not on the feast day, lest
there be an uproar among the people.

Several things are here Observeable; as 1. The Persons conspiring against our
blessed Redeemer's Life, namely, the chief Priests, Scribes, and Elders, that
is, the whole Sanhedrim, or general Council: These lay their malicious Heads
together, to contrive the Destruction of the innocent Jesus. Learn thence, That
general Councils have erred, and may err. Here was a general Council,
consisting of Priests, Doctors, and Elders, with the High Priest their
President, yet erring in a Point of Doctrine concerning the Messiah, not
believing Jesus to be the Son of God, notwithstanding all the convincing
Miracles which he had wrought before them. Obs. 2. The manner of this
Conspiracy against our Savior's Life; it was clandestine, secret, and subtle,
they consulted how they might take him by Subtilty, and kill him. Learn thence,
That Satan makes use of the Subtilty of crafty Men, and abuses their Parts as
well as their Power, for his own Purposes. Satan never sends a Fool of his
Errand. Obs. 3. The Time when this Conspiracy was managed, at the Time of the
Passover. Indeed at first the chief Priests did not incline to that time,
fearing a Tumult and Vproar among the People; but Judas presenting them with a
fair Opportunity to apprehend him, they changed their Purpose, and accordingly
at the Feast of the Passover our Savior suffered. This was not without a
Mystery, that Christ the true Lamb of God, whom the Paschal Lamb typified and
represented, should be offered up at the Feast of the Passover. Signifying
thereby, that he was the true Paschal Lamb, and that the Legal Shadow ought to
cease in the Exhibition of him. Learn hence, That not only the Death of Christ
in general, but all the Circumstances relating to it, were foreordained by God
himself, as the Place where, at Jerusalem; the Time when, at the Feast of the
Passover; that Time did God devise best for this Lamb to be a Sacrifice.

6 Now when Jesus was in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, 7 There came
unto him a woman having an alabaster box of very precious ointment, and poured
it on his head, as he sat at meat.

This Woman St. John says was Mary, the Sister of Lazarus, who, to show her
Love to Christ, and put Honor upon him, took a precious Box of Ointment, and
poured it upon our Savior's Head, according to the Custom of the Eastern
Countries, who used so to do at their Feasts and Banquets, to which David
alludes, Psalm. 23.5. Learn hence, 1. That where true Love to Christ prevails in
the Heart, nothing is adjudged too dear for Christ. This Box of Ointment
murmuring Judas valued at 300 Pence; which reckoning the Roman Penny at Seven
Pence Halfpenny, makes of our Money Nine Pounds Seven Shillings and Six Pence.
Love (we see) spares for no Cost, but where the Esteem of Christ is high, the
Affection will be strong. Note, 2. That where strong Love prevails toward
Jesus Christ, it suffers not it self to be outshined by any Examples. The
weakest Woman that strongly loves Jesus Christ, will piously strive with the
greatest Apostle to express the Fervor of her Love unto him. I do not find any
of the Apostles at thus much Cost to put Honor upon Christ, that this poor
Woman was at. Love knows no Bounds, no Measures.

8 But when his disciples saw it, they had indignation, saying, To what purpose
is this waste? 9 For this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to
the poor.

That is, when Judas, and some other Disciples, whom he had influenced, saw
this Action, they murmured; particularly Judas blamed this holy Woman for
needless Prodigality, and did tacitly reflect upon Christ himself, for
suffering that wasteful Expense. Oh how does a covetous Heart think every thing
too good for Christ! He that sees a pious Action well done, and seeks to
undervalue it, shows himself possessed with a Spirit of Envy. Judas his
invidious Spirit makes him censure an Action, which Christ highly approved.
Learn thence, That Men who know not our Hearts, may, through Ignorance or
Prejudice, censure and condemn those Actions, which God does commend, and will
graciously reward. Happy for this poor Woman, that she had a more righteous
Judge to pass Sentence upon her Action than wicked Judas.

10 When Jesus understood it, he said unto them, Why trouble ye the woman? for
she has wrought a good work upon me. 11 For ye have the poor always with you,
but me ye have not always. 12 For in that she has poured this ointment on my
body, she did it for my burial.

Observe here, How readily our Lord vindicates this good Woman: She says
nothing for her self, nor need she, having such an Advocate. 1. Christ rebukes
Judas; why trouble ye the Woman? Plainly intimating that it is no small Trouble
to a Gracious Spirit to find their good Works misinterpreted and
misrepresented; next, he defends the Action, calling it a good Work; because
done out of a Principle of Love to Christ, she has wrought a good Work upon
me. And Lastly, He gives the Reason of her Action, she did it for my Burial. As
Kings and great Persons were wont in those Eastern Countries at their Funerals
to be embalmed with Odours and sweet Perfumes: So, says our Savior, this
Woman, to declare her Faith in me, as her King and Lord, does with this Box of
Ointment, as it were beforehand, embalm my Body for its Burial. True Faith puts
Honor upon a crucified, as well as a glorified Savior. This holy Woman
accounts Christ worthy of all honor in his Death, believing it would be a
sweet smelling Sacrifice unto God, and the savor of Life unto his People.

13 Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached in the
whole world, there shall also this, that this woman has done, be told for a
memorial of her.

Our Savior having defended this holy Woman from the Calumny of Judas in the
foregoing Verses, in this he declares that she should be rewarded with an
honorable Memorial in all Ages of the Church. Where ever the Gospel is
preached, this shall be spoken of her. Oh what Care does Christ take to have
the good Deeds of his Children not buried in the Dust with them, but be had in
everlasting Remembrance. Though Sin causes Men to rot above Ground, to stink
alive; and when they are dead leaves an inglorious Memory upon their Graves,
yet will the Actions of the Just smell sweet, and blossom in the Dust.

14 Then one of the twelve, called Judas Iscariot, went unto the chief priests,
15 And said unto them, What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you?
and they covenanted with him for thirty pieces of silver. 16 And from that time
he sought opportunity to betray him.

Observe here, 1. The Person betraying our Blessed Redeemer, Judas: Judas, a
Professor; Judas, a Preacher; Judas, an Apostle, and one of the Twelve, whom
Christ had chosen out of all the World, to be his dearest Friends, and his own
Family and Household. Shall we wonder to find Friends unfriendly or unfaithful
toward us, when our Savior had a Traitor in his own House? Obs. 2. The
Heinousness of his Sin, in betraying Christ: He betrayed Christ Jesus, a Man;
Christ Jesus, his Master; Christ Jesus, his Maker; the first was Murder, the
second Treason. Learn thence, That it is no strange or uncommon thing, for the
vilest of Sins, and most horrid Impieties, to be acted by such Persons, as make
the most eminent Pro^ession of Holiness and Religion. Obs. 3. What was the Sin
occasioning and leading Judas to the committing of this horrid Sin. It was
Covetousness. I do not find that Judas had any particular Malice against
Christ's Person, but a base and unworthy Spirit of Covetousness possessed him;
this made him sell his Master. Covetousness is the Root-Sin, an inordinate
Desire and Love of Riches, an eager and unsatiable Thirst after the World, is
the Parent of the most monstrous and unnatural Sins: Therefore remember we our
Savior's Caution, Luke 12.15. Take heed, and beware of Covetousness; he
doubles the Caution, to show us both the great Danger of the Sin, and the great
Care we ought to take to preserve our selves from it. Obs. 4. How small a Sum
tempted the covetous Mind of Judas to betray his Master, Thirty Pieces of
Silver; which amounted but to Three Pounds and Fifteen Shillings of our Money.
This was the Price of a Slave or common Servant, Exodus 21. as Christ took upon
him the Form of a Servant, so his Life was valued at the rate of an ordinary
Servant's Life. It may seem a wonder, that the High Priests should offer no
more for the Life of our Savior, and that Judas should accept so little. But
the Wisdom of God overruled this Matter, for fulfilling that Prophecy, Zach.
11.12. They weighed for my Price Thirty Pieces of Silver. Let not any Christian
be concerned, that he is despised and undervalued; he can never meet with so
great a Reproach, so low an Abasement for Christ, as Christ underwent for him.
Observe Lastly, Judas his Folly, as well as his Treachery; he that might have
demanded what he pleased for this Purchase, he says unto the chief Priests,
What will ye give me? As if he had said, I am resolved to sell him at any rate,
give me what you will for him. Nay, farther, Judas covenanted, and they
promised, but whether it was now paid, appears not. Learn, That such a Person
as has a vile and base Esteem of Jesus Christ, will part with him upon any
Terms. The bare Expectation of a few Sheckles of Silver will make such a one
willing to part with the Pearl of great Price.

17 Now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples came to
Jesus, saying unto him, Where will thou that we prepare for thee to eat the
passover? 18 And he said, Go into the city to such a man, and say unto him, The
master says, My time is at hand, I will keep the passover at thy house with my
disciples. 19 And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed them, and they made
ready the passover.

The Time for the Celebration of the Passover being now at Hand, Christ sends
Two of his Disciples to Jerusalem, to prepare things necessary, in order
thereunto: Accordingly they enter the City, and find the Master of an House,
whose Heart Christ, by his Divine Power, had so inclined, that he willingly
accommodated them upon this Occasion. Our Blessed Savior had not a Lamb of his
own, and possibly no Money in his Purse to buy one, but he finds as excellent
Accommodations in this poor Man's House, as if he had dwelt in Ahab's Ivory
Palace, and had had the Provisions of Solomon's Table. Learn hence, That Christ
has such an Influence upon, and Command over the Spirits of Men, that he can
incline them to do what Service soever he pleases for him. When Christ has a
Passover to celebrate, he will prepare an House, and dispose the Heart to a
free Reception of himself. Learn, 2. That Christ being under the Law, observes
and keeps the Law of the Passover. Thus he fulfilled all Righteousness; and
although the Ceremonial Law was to receive its Abolishment in the Death of
Christ, yet all the time of his Life he punctually observed it.

20 Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve.

Observe here, The Impudent Forehead of this bold Traitor Judas, who presumed
as soon as he had sold his Master, to sit down at the Table with him, and
partake with the other Disciples of the solemn Ordinance of the Passover; had
the Presence of Judas polluted the Ordinance to any besides himself, doubtless
our Savior would never have permitted his bold Intrusion. Learn hence, 1. That
nothing is more ordinary than for unholy Persons presumptuously to rush in upon
the solemn Ordinances of God, which they have no Right, whilst such, to partake
of. 2. That the Presence of such Persons pollutes the Ordinances only to
themselves, holy Persons are not polluted by the Sins of such. For to the Pure
all things are Pure.

21 And as they did eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall
betray me.

What an astonishing Word was this? One of you my Disciples shall betray me.
Can any Church on Earth expect Purity in all its Members, when Christ's own
Family of Twelve had a Traitor and a Devil in it. Yet though it was very sad to
hear that one should betray him, it was Matter of Joy that it was but One; One
Hypocrite in a Congregation is too much, but there is cause of rejoicing if
there be no more. But why did not Christ name Judas, and say, Thou art he that
shall betray me? Doubtless to draw him to Repentance, and to prevent giving
Judas any Provocation. Lord, how sad is it for such as pretend Friendship to
Christ, and call themselves of his Family and Acquaintance, who eat of his
Bread, and yet lift up the Heel against him.

22 And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto
him, Lord, is it I?

Observe here, 1. The Disciples Sorrow, and next the Effect of that Sorrow.
Their Sorrow was (as well it might) exceeding great. Well might innocent
Disciples be overwhelmed with Sorrow, to hear that their Master should dye;
that he should dye by Treason, that the Traitor should be one of themselves.
But though their Sorrow was great, yet was the Effect of their Sorrow very good;
it wrought in them an holy Suspicion of themselves, and caused every one to
search himself, and say, Master, is it I? Thence Learn, That it is possible for
such secret Wickedness to lurk in our Hearts as we never suspected, which Time
and Temptation may draw forth in such a manner, as we could not believe; and
therefore it is both wise and holy to suspect our selves, and be often saying,
Lord, is it I? There is no better Preservative from Sin, than to be jealous
over our selves with a godly Jealousy. Observe farther, That though the
Disciples Fear and Sorrow made them jealous and suspicious, yet was it of
themselves, not of one another; nay, not of Judas himself. Every one said,
Master, is it I? Not Master, is it Judas? Learn hence, That true Sincerity and
Christian Charity will make us more suspicious of our selves than of any other
Person whatsoever. It always hopes the best of others, and fears the worst
concerning our selves.

23 And he answered and said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the
same shall betray me. 24 The Son of man goes as it is written of him: but woe
unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed: it had been good for that man
if he had not been born. 25 Then Judas which betrayed him, answered, and said,
Master, is it I? He said unto him, Thou have said.

Here our Savior acquaints his Disciples who it was that had designed his
Death, even he that dipped with him in the Dish, or he to whom he gave the Sop.
Observe, The Traitor whom Christ less loved, he has the Sop given to him; the
other Disciples, whom Christ loved better, had no such particular Boon. Outward
good Things are not always given to the Children of Men in Love, but are
sometimes bestowed in Displeasure; there is no measuring Christ's Affection by
Temporal Blessings, no concluding either Love or Hatred by these things.
Observe farther, how Judas could sit still, and hear the Threats of Judgment
denounced against himself without Concern; he hears Christ say, Woe to the Man
by whom the Son of Man is betrayed, and is no more blank'd than Innocence it
self: Resolved Sinners run on desperately in their wicked Courses, and with
open Eyes, see and meet their own Destruction, and are neither dismayed at it,
nor concerned about it. Observe farther, That this shameless Man had the
Impudence to say to Christ, Master, is it I? Our Savior gives him a direct
Affirmation, Thou have said. Did not Judas (think we) blush, and cast down his
guilty Eyes, and let fall his dro^ping dead at so gauling an Intimation?
Nothing less, Lord, how does Ob^ur^cy in Sin steel the Brow, and make it
incapable of all relenting Impressions? Observe Lastly, How Christ preferrs
Nonentity before Damnation. It had been better for that Man he had never been
born. A Temporal miserable Being is not worse than no Being, but an Eternal
miserable Being is worse than no Being at all. Eternal Misery is much worse
than Nonentity. It had been better for Judas he had not been born, than to
commit such a Sin, and lie under such Wrath, and that everlasting. Oh better to
have no Being, than not to have a Being in Christ!

26 And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it,
and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. 27 And he
took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it:
28 For this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the
remission of sins. 29 But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of the
fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's
kingdom. 30 And, when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of
Olives.

Immediately after the Celebration of the Passover follows the Institution of
the Lord's Supper. In which Observe, 1. The Author of this new Sacrament. Jesus
took Bread. Note thence, That to institute a Sacrament is Christ's sole
Prerogative; it is the Churches Duty to celebrate the Sacraments, but she has
Power to make none. This belongs only to Christ. Observe 2. The Time of the
Institution, the Night before his Passion. The Night before he was betrayed,
Jesus took Bread. Learn thence, That it is very necessary when Sufferings are
approaching to have Recourse to the Table of the Lord, which affords both an
Antidote against Fear, and is Restorative to Faith. Observe here, 3. The
Sacramental Elements, Bread and Wine. Bread, representing his Body; and Wine,
his Blood. Observe 4. The Ministerial Actions, the Breaking of the Bread, and
the Blessing of the Cup. As to the Bread, Jesus took it; that is, set it apart
from common Use, and separated it for Holy Ends and Purposes. He blessed it;
that is, prayed for a Blessing upon it; and brake it, thereby shadowing forth
his Body broken upon the Cross. And he gave it to his Disciples, saving, This
broken Bread signifies my Body suddenly to be broken upon the Cross for your
Redemption and Salvation. Do this in Remembrance of me, and of my Death. As to
the Cup, Christ having set it apart by Prayer and Thanksgiving, he commands his
Disciples to drink all of it, and subjoins a Reason for it; For This is my
Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for Remission of Sins. That is, The
Wine in this Cup represents the shedding of my Blood, by which the new Covenant
betwixt God and Man was ratified and confirmed. Whence we Learn, That every
Communicant has an undoubted Right to the Cup, as to the Bread in the Lord's
Supper. Drink ye all of it, says Christ; therefore to deny the Cup to the Laity
is contrary to the Institution of Christ. After the Celebration was over, our
Savior and his Disciples sang an Hymn, as the Jews were wont to do at the
Passover, the Six Eucharistical Psalms, from 113th to the 119th Psalm. Learn
hence, How fit it is that God be glorified in his Church, by singing of Psalms,
and in particular, when the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper is celebrated. When
they had sung an Hymn, they went unto the Mount of Olives.

31 Then says Jesus unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this
night: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock
shall be scattered abroad.

Here our Savior acquaints his Disciples, that by reason of his approaching
Sufferings, they should all of them be so exceedingly offended with him, that
they would certainly forsake and leave him; which accordingly came to pass.
Learn thence, That Christ's dearest Friends forsook him, and left him alone in
the midst of his greatest Distress and Danger. Obs. 2. What was the Cause of
this their Flight, it was the Prevalency of their Fear. Thence Note, How sad it
is for the holiest and best of Men to be left under the Power of their own
Fears in a Day of Temptation.

32 But after I am risen again, I will go before you into Galilee.

Observe here, The wonderful Lenity of Christ toward his timorous and fearful
Disciples; notwithstanding their cowardly Flight from him, he tells them he
would not forsake them, but love them still; and as an Evidence of it, would
meet them in Galilee: I will go before you into Galilee, there shall you see
me. And when they did see him, he never upbraided them with their Timerousness,
but was Friends with them, notwithstanding their late Cowardice. Christ's Love
to his Disciples is like himself, unchangeable and everlasting. Having loved
his own, he loved them unto the end.

33 Peter answered and said unto him, Though all men shall be offended because
of thee, yet will I never be offended. 34 Jesus said unto him, Verily I say
unto thee, That this night before the cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. 35
Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee.
Likewise also said all the disciples.

See here what strong Purposes and settled Resolutions, both Peter and all the
Apostles had to keep close to Christ; but how did their Self-confidence fail
them? Learn thence, That Self-confidence is a Sin, too too incident to the
holiest and best of Men. Though all Men forsake thee, yet will not I. Good Man,
he resolved honestly, but too too much in his own Strength. Little, little did
he think what a Feather he should be in the Wind of Temptation, if once God
left him to the Power and Prevalency of his own Fears. Observe farther, That
the Rest of the Apostles had the like Confident Opinion of their own Strength
with St. Peter. Likewise also said they all. Note thence, That the holiest of
Men know not their own Strength till it comes to the Trial. Little did these
good Men imagine what a cowardly Spirit they had in them, till Temptation put
it to the Proof.

36 Then comes Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and says unto
the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder. 37 And he took with
him, Peter, and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful, and very
heavy. 38 Then says he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto
death: tarry ye here, and watch with me. 39 And he went a little further, and
fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will. 40 And he
comes unto the disciples, and finds them asleep, and says unto Peter, What,
could ye not watch with me one hour? 41 Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation: the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. 42 He went
away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if this cup may
not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done. 43 And he came, and
found them asleep again: for their eyes were heavy. 44 And he left them, and
went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the same words.

Our Blessed Savior being now come with his Disciples into the Garden, he
falls there into a bitter and bloody Agony, in which he prayed with wonderful
Fervency and Importunity to his Heavenly Father. His Sufferings were now coming
on a great pace, and he meets them upon his Knees, and would be found in a
praying Posture. Learn thence, That Prayer is the best Preparative for, as well
as the most powerful Support under the heaviest Sufferings that can befall us.
As to this Prayer of our Savior's in the Garden, many things are very
Observable. As 1. The Place where he prayed, In the Garden; but why went Christ
thither? Was it to hide or shelter himself from his Enemies? Nothing less; for
if so, it had been the most improper Place, because he was wont to retire
thither to pray. John 18.2. Judas knew the Place, for Jesus oft-times resorted
thither; so that Christ went thither, not to shun, but to prepare himself by
Prayer to meet his Enemies. Obs. 2. The time when he entered the Garden for
Prayer, it was in the Evening; here he spent some Hours in pouring out his Soul
to God; for about Midnight Judas and the Soldiers came, and apprehended him in
a praying Posture. Teaching us by his Example, that when eminent Dangers are
before us, especially, when Death is apprehended by us, to be very much in
Prayer to God, and very fervent in our Wrestlings with him. Obs. 3. The Matter
of our Lord's Prayer, that if possible the Cup might pass from him. That is,
those bitter Sufferings which were then before him; particularly the
insupportable Burden of his Father's Wrath. He prays, if possible that his
Father would excuse him from this dreadful Wrath, his Soul being amazed at it.
But what! Did Christ then begin to repent of his Undertaking for Sinners? Did
he shrink and give back when it came to the Pinch? No, no, as Christ had Two
Natures, being God and Man, so he had Two distinct Wills; as Man he feared and
shunned Death, as God-man he willingly submitted to it; the Divine Spirit, and
the Humane Nature of Christ did now assault each other with disagreeing
Interests, till at last Victory was got on the Spirit's side. Again, This
Prayer was not absolute, but conditional, If it be possible. Father, it may be,
if thou art willing, if it please thee, let it pass; if not, I will drink it.
Learn hence, 1. That the Cup of Sufferings is in it self considered a very
bitter and distasteful Cup, which Humane Nature abhorrs, and cannot but desire
and pray may pass from it. 2. That yet ofttimes the Wisdom of God is pleased to
put this bitter Cup of Affliction into the Hands of those whom he does most
sincerely love. 3. That when God does so, it is their Duty to drink it with
humble Submission, and cheerful Resignation. Not my Will, but thine be done.
Obs. 4. The manner how our Lord prayed; and here we shall find it, 1. A
solitary Prayer, he went by himself alone, out of the hearing of his Disciples;
he said to them, Tarry ye here, while I go and pray yonder. Mark, Christ did
neither desire his Disciples to pray with him, or to pray for him. No, he must
tread the Wine Press alone; not but that Christ loved and delighted in his
Disciples Company, but there were Occasions when he thought fit to leave them,
and to go alone to God in Prayer. Thence Learn, That the Company of our best
Friends is not always seasonable. Peter, James and John, were Three good Men,
but Christ bids them tarry, while he went aside for private Prayer. There are
Times and Cases when a Christian would not be willing that the dearest Friend
he has in the World should be with him, or understand and hear what passes
betwixt him and his God. 2. This Prayer of Christ was an humble Prayer; that is
evident by the Postures into which he cast himself; sometimes Kneeling,
sometimes Lying prostrate upon his Face. He lies in the very Dust; lower he
cannot fall; and his Heart was as low as his Body. And such was the Fervor of
his Spirit, that he prayed himself into an Agony. Oh let us blush to think how
unlike we are to Christ in Prayer, as to our praying Frame of Spirit! Lord,
what Drowsiness and Deadness? What Laziness and Dullness? What Stupidity and
Formality is found in our Prayers? How often do our Lips move, and our Hearts
stand still? 3. It was a repeated and reiterated Prayer. He prayed the first,
second, and third time. He returns upon God over and over, plies him again and
again, resolving to take no Denial. Learn thence, That Christians ought not to
be discouraged, though they have sought God again and again for a particular
Mercy, and no Answer of Prayer has come unto them. Observe also, How our Lord
used the same Prayer three times over, saying the same Words. A Person then may
pray with, and by a Form of Prayer, and yet not pray formally, but in a very
acceptable manner unto God. Christ both gave a Form of Prayer to his Disciples,
and also used one himself. Observe next, The Posture in which our holy Lord
found his own Disciples, when he was in his Agony, they were sleeping, when he
was praying. Oh wonderful! that they could sleep at such a time. Hence we
gather, That the best of Christ's Disciples may be sometimes overtaken with
Infirmities, with great Infirmities, when the most important Duties are
performing. He comes to his Disciples, and finds them sleeping. Observe next,
The gentle Reproof he gave the Disciples for sleeping; What, could you not
watch with me one Hour? Could you not watch, when your Master is in such
Danger? Could you not watch with me, when I am going to deliver up my Life for
you? What, not one Hour, and that the parting Hour too! After his Reprehension
he subjoins an Exhortation; Watch and pray, that ye enter not into Temptation;
and superadds a forcible Reason, For though the Spirit be willing, yet the Flesh
is weak. Thence Learn, That the holiest and best resolved Christians, who have
willing Spirits for Christ and his Service, yet in regard of the Weakness of
the Flesh, or the Frailty of Humane Nature, it is their Duty to watch and pray,
and thereby guard themselves against Temptations. Watch and pray, -- for though
the Spirit is willing, yet --

45 Then comes he to his disciples, and says unto them, Sleep on now, and
take your rest; behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is betrayed
into the hands of sinners. 46 Rise, let us be going: behold, he is at hand that
does betray me. 47 And while he yet spoke, lo, Judas one of the twelve came,
and with him a great multitude with swords and staves from the chief priests,
and elders of the people. 48 Now he that betrayed him, gave them a sign,
saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he, hold him fast. 49 And
forthwith he came to Jesus, and said Hail Master; and kissed him. 50 And Jesus
said unto him, Friend, wherefore art thou come? Then came they and laid hands
on Jesus, and took him.

Our Savior having poured out his Soul in Prayer to God in the Garden, he is
now ready, and waits for the coming of his Enemies, being first in the Field:
Accordingly, While he yet spoke, came Judas, one of the Twelve, and under his
Conduct a Band of Soldiers to apprehend him. It was the Lot and Portion of our
Blessed Redeemer to be betrayed into the Hands of his mortal Enemies by the
Treachery of a false and dissembling Friend. Observe here, The Traitor, the
Treason, the Manner how, and the Time when this treasonable Design was
executed. Obs. 1. The Betrayer, Judas, all the Evangelists carefully describe
him by his Name, Judas, by his Surname, Iscariot, lest he should be mistaken
for Jude the Brother of James. God is tender of the Names and Reputations of
his upright-hearted Servants. He is also described by his Office, One of the
Twelve. The Eminence of his Place and Station was an high Aggravation of his
Transgression. Nay, in some respect he was preferred above the rest, having a
peculiar Trust reposed in him, he bare the Bag: That is, he was Almoner, and
Steward of Christ's Family, to take Care for the necessary Accommodations of
Christ and his Apostles; and yet this Man, thus called, thus honored, thus
respectfully treated by Christ, for the Lucre of a little Money, perfidiously
betrays him. Oh, whither will not a bad Heart, and a busy Devil carry a Man?
Learn hence, 1. That the greatest Professors had need be jealous of their own
Hearts, and look well to the Grounds and Principles of their Profession. A
Profession begun in Hypocrisy will certainly end in Apostasy. Learn 2. That
Persons are never in such eminent Danger, as when they meet with Temptations
exactly suited to their Master-Lusts. Covetousness was Judas's Master-Sin; the
Love of the World made him a Slave to Satan, and the Devil lays a Temptation
before him, which suits his Temper, hits his Humor, and it prevails
immediately. Oh pray, pray that ye may be kept from a strong and suitable
Temptation, a Temptation suited to your predominant Lust and Inclination. Obs.
2. As the Betrayer Judas, so the Treason it self with its aggravating
Circumstances; he led an armed Multitude to the Place where Christ was, gave
them a Signal to discover him, and encouraged them to lay Hands upon him, and
hold him fast. This was the hellish Design Satan put into his Heart, and it has
these aggravating Circumstances attending it. He had seen the Miracles which
Christ wrought by the Power of God, and could not but know him to be a Divine
Person. He could not sin out of Ignorance or blind Zeal, but the Love of Money
made him do what he did. Farther, what he did was not done by the Persuasions
of any, but he was a Voluntier in this Service. The High Priests neither sent
to him, nor sent for him, but he offers his Service, and no doubt they were
very much surprised to find one of Christ's own Disciples at the Head of a
Conspiracy against him. Learn hence, That no Man knows where he shall stop or
stand when he first enters the Ways of Sin; should any one have told Judas that
his Love of Money would at last so far prevail upon him, as to make him sell
the Blood of Jesus Christ, he would have answered as Hasael did Elisha. Is thy
Servant a Dog, that I should do this thing? Wickedness like Holiness does not
presently come to its full Strength in the Soul, but grows up by insensible
degrees. Obs. 3. The manner how this hellish Plot was executed; partly by
Force, and partly by Fraud; by Force, in that he came with a Multitude, armed
with Swords and Staves; and by Fraud he gives him a Kiss, and says, Hail,
Master. Here was Honey in the Tongue, and Poison in the Heart. Learn we hence,
To beware of Men; when we see too too glittering Appearances, we may suspect
the inside. Charity for others is our Duty, but too great Confidence may be our
Snare. There is so much Hypocrisy in many, and so much Corruption in all, that
we must not be too confident. Obs. 4. The time when this treasonable Design was
executed upon Christ; when he was in the Garden with his Disciples, exhorting
them to Prayer and Watchfulness, dropping Heavenly and most seasonable Counsels
upon them. While he yet spoke, lo, Judas came, and the Multitude with him.
Judas found Christ in the most heavenly and excellent Employment, when he came
to apprehend him. Oh how happy is it, when our Sufferings find us in God's Way,
engaged in his Service, and engaging his Assistance by fervent Supplication.
Thus did our Lord's Sufferings meet him, may they so meet us.

51 And behold, one of them which were with Jesus, stretched out his hand, and
drew his sword, and stroke a servant of the high priests, and smote off his
ear. 52 Then said Jesus unto him, Put up again thy sword into his Place: for
all they that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. 53 Think thou
that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than
twelve legions of angels? 54 But how then shall the scriptures be fulfilled,
that thus it must be?

The rude Multitude laying Hands upon Christ, the Disciples who had remitted
their Watch, do resume their Courage, and are willing to rescue their Master if
they can; particularly, Peter draws his Sword, and cuts off the Ear of Malchus,
one of the forwardest to lay hold on Jesus. Observe here St. Peter's Zeal and
sincere Love for his Lord and Master; it was in great Sincerity spoken, Though I
dye with thee, I will not deny thee. But why did not St. Peter draw his Sword
upon Judas, rather than Malchus? Perhaps because though Judas was more faulty,
yet Malchus was more forward to arrest and carry off our Savior. How does a
pious Breast swell with Indignation at the Sight of any open Affront offered
unto Christ. Observe further, That though St. Peter's Heart was sincere, yet his
Hand was rash: Good Intentions are no Warrant for irregular Actions, and
accordingly Christ, who accepted his Affection, reproves him for the Action:
Put up thy Sword, for they that take the Sword shall perish by the Sword. Learn
hence, That Christ will thank no Man to fight for him without a Warrant and
Commission from him. To resist a lawful Magistrate, even in Christ's own
Defense, is rash Zeal, and discountenanced by the Gospel. Observe Lastly, Our
Lord's absolute Refusal to be rescued out of his Enemies Hands, with the Reason
of it; did I incline to be rescued by Force? As if our Lord had said, I could
command all the Troops of Angels in Heaven, to show themselves upon that
Occasion; but how can this stand with the Decree of my Father, with the
Declarations of the Scripture, with the Demonstration of my Mercy, and with the
Salvation of miserable Mankind? Learn hence, That Christ was infinitely more
concerned for the Salvation of lost Sinners, than for his own Death and
Sufferings; more concerned for our Eternal Salvation, than for his own Temporal
Preservation. Had he been rescued by the Power of Angels, we had fallen a Prey
into the Paw of Devils.

55 In that same hour said Jesus to the multitudes, Are ye come out as against
a thief with swords and staves for to take me? I sat daily with you teaching in
the temple, and ye laid no hold on me. 56 But all this was done, that the
scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples forsook
him, and fled.

We had an Account of our Lord's Apprehension in the former Verses, here the
sad Effect of it upon his Disciples; They all forsake him and fled. They that
said all to Christ, v. 25. Though we should dye with thee, yet will we not deny
thee, do here all of them desert and forsake him; when it came to the push, not
a Man of them stands by him. Learn hence, That the holiest Men know not their
own Hearts, when great Temptations and Trials are before them, till they come
to grapple with them, and to be engaged in them. We know not our own Strength
till Temptation puts us to the Proof.

57 And they that had laid hold on Jesus, led him away to Caiaphas the high
priest, where the scribes and the elders were assembled. 58 But Peter followed
him afar off unto the high priests palace, and went in, and sat with the
servants to see the end. 59 Now the chief priests and elders, and all the
counsel sought false witness against Jesus to put him to death; 60 But found
none: yea, though many false witnesses came, yet found they none. At the last
came two false witnesses, 61 And said, This fellow said, I am able to destroy
the temple of God, and to build it in three days. 62 And the high priest arose,
and said unto him, Answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witness
against thee? 63 But Jesus held his peace.

Judas having made good his Promise to the High Priest, and delivered Jesus a
Prisoner into their Hand, these Wolves of the Evening no sooner seize the Lamb
of God, but they thirst, and long to suck his innocent Blood. Yet lest it
should look like a downright Murder, they will allow him a Mock-Trial, and
abuse the Law, by perverting it to Injustice and Bloodshed. Accordingly they
industriously suborn false-witnesses to take away his Life, not sticking at the
grossest Perjury, so they might destroy him. The Chief Priests and Elders, and
all the Council, sought false Witness against Jesus to put him to Death.
Abominable Wickedness! Innocence it self cannot protect from Slander and false
Accusation. No Man is so innocent or good, whom false Witness may not condemn.
Yet Observe farther, Our Lord's Meekness and Patience, his submissive Silence
under all these wicked Suggestions and false Accusations. Jesus held his Peace,
v. 63. Guilt is clamorous and impatient, Innocence is silent, and careless of
mis-reports. Learn hence, That to bear the Revilings, Contradictions, and false
Accusations of Men, with a silent and submissive Spirit, is an excellent and
Christ-like Temper. Our Lord stood before his unjust Judges and false Accusers,
as a Sheep before the Shearer, dumb, and not opening his Mouth. Although a Trial
for his Life was managed most maliciously and illegally against him; when he
was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him that judges righteously. Oh let the same humble Mind
be in us which was also in Christ Jesus!

63 And the high priest answered and said unto him, I adjure thee by the living
God, that thou tell us whether thou be the Christ, the Son of God. 64 Jesus
says unto him, Thou have said: nevertheless, I say unto you, Hereafter shall
ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the
clouds of heaven. 65 Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He has
spoken blasphemy: what further need have we of witnesses? behold, now ye have
heard his blasphemy. 66 What think ye? They answered and said, He is guilty of
death. 67 Then did they spit in his face, and buffetted him, and others smote
him with the palms of their hands, 68 Saying, Prophecy unto us, thou Christ,
who is he that smote thee?

We observed even now that our Savior was silent, and did make no Reply to the
false Witnesses that evidenced against him at his Trial, because being so
manifestly contradicting, they did fall to the Ground of themselves. But now
when the Question was solemnly put by the High Priest, Art thou the Christ? He
said, I am. Thence Learn, That although we are not obliged to answer every
cavilling or ensnaring Question, yet we are bound faithfully to own, and freely
to confess the Truth, when we are solemnly called thereunto. Christ, who in the
former Verses was silent, and as a deaf Man that heard not, now witnesses a
good Confession: Teaching us, both by his Example and Command, to confess and
own both him and his Truth, when lawfully required; when our Silence will be a
denying of the Truth, a Dishonor to God, and a Scandal to our Brethren: Christ
knew that his Answer would cost him his Life, and yet he durst not but give it.
Art thou the Son of the Blessed, Jesus said I am. Yea, farther Observe, That as
Christ answered directly and plainly at his Trial, so he did not refuse to
answer upon Oath. I adjure thee by the living God, says the Judge of the Court,
that thou tell us whether thou art the Christ. That is, I require thee to
answer this Question upon Oath; for adjuring a Person, or requiring them to
answer upon Oath, was the manner of swearing among the Jews. Now to this
Adjuration our Savior answered plainly and directly, I am, Mark 14.61. Hence
Learn, That swearing before a Magistrate upon a just and great Occasion is
lawful: If Christ in the Fifth of St. Matthew forbids all Oaths, then here his
Practice was contrary to his own Doctrine; but it is evident that Christ
answered the Magistrate upon Oath, and so may we. Observe Lastly, The Sentence
of Condemnation, which the Council passed upon him for owning himself to be the
Son of God. He has spoken Blasphemy, and is worthy to die. Hereupon the unruly
Rabble affront him with the vilest Abuses, and most horrid Indignities: They
Spit in his Face, they Blindfold him, they Smote him with their Fists and
Palms of their Hands, and in a way of Contempt and Mockery they bid him Divine
or Prophecy, who it was that smote him. Learn hence, That there is no Degree
of Contempt, no Mark of Shame, no Kind of Suffering, which we ought to decline
or stick at, for Christ's sake, who hid not his Face from Shame and Spitting
upon our Account.

69 Now Peter sat without in the palace: and a damsel came unto him, saying,
Thou also wast with Jesus of Galilee. 70 But he denied before them all, saying,
I know not what thou say. 71 And when he was gone out into the porch,
another maid saw him, and said unto them that were there, This fellow was also
with Jesus of Nazareth. 72 And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the
man. 73 And after a while came unto him they that stood by, and said unto
Peter, surely thou also art one of them, for thy speech bewrays thee. 74 Then
he began to curse and to swear, saying, I know not the man. And immediately the
cock crew. 75 And Peter remembered the words of Jesus, which said unto him,
Before the cock crow thou shall deny me thrice. And he went out, and wept
bitterly.

This last Paragraph of the Chapter gives us an Account of the Fall and Rising
of Peter; of his Sin, in denying Christ, and of his Recovery by a speedy and
severe Repentance. Both must be considered distinctly. First, As touching his
Sin and Fall, there are Four Particulars Observable; namely, the Sin it self,
the Occasion of that Sin; the Reiteration and Repetition of it, and the
aggravating Circumstances attending it. Obs. 1. The Sin it self, the Denial of
Christ, I know not the Man, a manifest Untruth. Next, he adds an Oath to
confirm that Untruth; he swore that he knew not the Man. And last of all, he
wished an horrid Curse and Imprecation upon himself. That is, he wished himself
excommunicated and cast out of the Church. Say some, he wished himself
eternally separated from the Presence of God: Say others, he wished in effect
that the Devil might take him if he were acquainted with Jesus. The inordinate
Love of Life, and slavish Fear of Sufferings and Death, may draw the best Men
to commit the worst of Sins. Obs. 2. The Occasions of this Sin, and they were
Three; his following Christ afar off; his being in bad Company amongst Christ's
Enemies; and his presumptuous Confidence of his own Strength and Standing. 1.
His following of Christ afar off. To follow Christ is the Work of Faith, and
Fruit of Love; but to follow him afar off, was the Effect of Fear and Frailty.
Woe unto us when a Temptation comes if we be far off from Christ's Presence and
Assistance. 2. His being in wicked Company amongst Christ's Enemies. Oh Peter,
thou had better have been a cold by thy self alone, than sitting by a Fire,
compassed in with the Blasphemies of the wicked; where thy Conscience, though not
seared, was yet made hard. The way to escape prevailling Temptations to Sin, is
to shun such Places, and avoid such Companions, as in all Probability will
invite and draw us into Sin. 3. Confidence of his own Strength and Standing was
another Occasion of Peter's Falling. Pride and presumptuous Confidence have
been ever the Forerunners and Occasions of a Fall. Oh Lord! to presume upon our
selves is the ready way to provoke thee to leave us to our selves, if ever we
stand in the Day of Trial. It Is the fear of falling must enable us to stand,
Obs. 3. The Reiteration and Repetition of this Sin. He denies him a First,
Second, and Third Time. He denies him first with a Lie, then with an Oath, and
after all, with an Anathema, and a Curse. Oh how dangerous is it, not to resist
the first Beginnings of Sin.! If we yield to one Temptation, Satan will assault
us with more, and stronger. Peter proceeded from a bare Denial, first to
Perjury, then to Cursing and Imprecation. Obs. 4. The aggravating Circumstances
attending this Sin of Peter's, and they are these; 1. The Character of the
Person thus falling; a Disciple, an Apostle, a chief Apostle, a special
Favorite; who with James and John had the special Honor to be with Christ
upon Mount Tabor. Peter, who had preached and prophesied in Christ's Name, cast
out Devils, and wrought Miracles by Christ's Power, yet he denies him. 2.
Consider the Person whom he denies; his Master, his Savior and Redeemer; he
that had washed Peter's Feet but a little before; that eat the Passover with
Peter, and gave the Sacrament to Peter, yet this kind and condescending Savior
was denied by Peter. 3. Consider before whom he denies him, in the Company and
Presence of the chief Priests, Scribes and Elders, and their Servants, who
rejoiced at it, and were hardened by it. That one Disciple should sell him for
Money, and another Disciple deny him through Fear. 4. Consider the Time when he
denied him; verily it was but a few Hours after he had received the Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper from Christ's own Hand. How unreasonrble then is their
Objection against coming to the Lord's Table, because some that go to it
dishonor Christ as soon as they come from it. Such Examples must not
discourage us from coming to the Ordinance, but excite and increase our
Watchfulness after we have been there, to take heed that the future Conduct of
our Lives be suitable to the Solemnity of a Sacramental Table. 5. Consider the
smallness of his Temptation to deny Christ; a Damsel only put the Question to
him, Art thou not one of his Disciples? If a Band of armed Soldiers had
appeared to him, and affrighted him; had he been terrified by the high Priest's
Threatenings, bound and led away to Judgment, sentenced to an ignominious
painful Death, some Excuse might have been made for him: But to disown his
Relation to Christ at the Question of a Maidservant that kept the Door only;
the smalness of the Temptation was an Aggravation of the Crime. Ah, Peter, how
unlike thy self art thou at this time? Not a Rock, but a Reed, a Pillar blown
down by a Woman's Breath. Oh frail Humanity, whose Strength is Weakness and
Infirmity! Observe here, That in most of the Saint's Falls, recorded in
Scripture, either the first Inticers, or the accidental Occasion; were Women.
Thus in Adam's, Lot's, Sampson's, David's, Solomon's and Peter's. A weak
Creature may be a strong Tempter; nothing is too impotent or useless for the
Devil's Service. It was a great Aggravation of Peter's Sin, that the Voice of a
Maid, a Doorkeeper only, should be stronger to overcome him, than his Faith in
Jesus to sustain him. But what shall we say? Small things are sufficient to
cast us down, if God does not hold us up. We sink under any Burden, if he
sustains us not, and yield to every Temptation, if he leaves us to our selves.
A Damsel shall then make a Disciple shrink, and a Doorkeeper is enough to
drive an Apostle before her. And immediately the Cock crew. And Peter remembered
the Words of Jesus, which said unto him, Before the Cock crow, thou shall deny
me thrice, and he went out, and wept bitterly. Here we have an Account of St.
Peter's Rising and Recovery after his shameful Fall, by a renewed Act and
Exercise of Repentance. Where Observe, The Suddenness of his Repentance, the
Means of his Repentance, and the Manner of it. Obs. 1. The Suddenness of his
Repentance. Although his Sin was great, yet was his Repentance speedy, and
without Delay. From whence, Note, That Sins committed by the surprizal of a
sudden Temptation, are much sooner repented of, than where the Sin is
presumptuous and deliberate. David's Sins of Murder and Adultery were
presumptuous and deliberate Sins; he continued a long time in them, and lived
almost a Twelvemonth without any solemn Repentance of them. St. Peter's Sin was
hasty and sudden under a violent Passion of Fear, contrary to his settled
Purpose and Resolution of Constancy, and he takes the warning of the second
crowing of the Cock, and goes forth to express his Repentance. Obs. 2. The
Means of his Repentance, which was twofold. Less Principal, the crowing of the
Cock; more principal, Christ's looking upon Peter, and Peter 's remembering the
Words of Christ. 1. The less principal Means of St. Peter's Repentance was the
crowing of the Cock. As the Voice of the Maid occasioned him to sin, so the
Voice of the Cock occasioned him to repent. That God who can work without
Means, does sometimes work by weak and contemptible Means, and when he pleases
can open the Mouth of a Bird or a Beast for the Conversion of a Man. But why
should our Savior choose the crowing of the Cock as a Means to bring St. Peter
to Repentance? There is ever some Mystery in Christ's Instrument; the Cock was
a Preacher to call Peter to Repentance, there being something of Emblem between
the Cock and a Preacher. A true Minister must have the Wings of a Cock to rouse
up himself from Security, and to awaken others to a Sense of their Duty. He
must have the Watchfulness of a Cock to be ever ready to discover and forewarn
Danger; he must have the Voice of the Cock, to cry aloud, and tell Israel of
their Sins, and terrify the roaring Lion, and make him tremble. In a word, he
must observe the Hours of the Cock to crow at all Seasons of the Night, to
preach in Season, and out of Season, the glad Tidings of Salvation. But, 2. The
more principal Means of St. Peter's Recovery was, 1. Christ's looking upon
Peter. Christ first looks upon Peter with an Eye of Mercy, Grace and Pity,
before Peter looks upon his Sin in order to Repentance. Here take notice of the
Greatness of Christ's Grace, of his wonderful Love and Mercy to this poor
Disciple. When our Savior was upon his Trial for his Life, a time when our
Thoughts are wholly taken up about our selves, even then did Christ find
Leisure to think upon Peter, remember to turn about, and give him a pitiful,
but piercing Look; a Look, that melted his Heart, and dissolved it into Tears.
We never begin to lament for Sin, till we are first lamented by our Savior.
Jesus looked upon Peter. That is the first more principal Means of Peter's
Repentance; the second is, Peter 's remembering the Words of Christ before the
Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice. This Remembrance of Christ's Words
was an applicative and feeling Remembrance of them. He remembered the Prediction
of Christ, and applies it sensibly to himself. Teaching us, That the Efficacy
of Christ's Word in order to the bringing of a Soul unto Repentance, depends not
upon the Historical Remembrance of it, but upon the close Application of it to
every Man's Conscience. A sanctified Remembrance of Christ's Words, and our own
Sins, is an excellent Preparative to Repentance. Observe Lastly, The Manner of
St. Peter's Repentance. It was secret, he went out; it was sincere, he wept
bitterly; it was lasting and abiding, all the Days of his Life, and attended
with an extraordinary Zeal and Forwardness for the Service of Christ to the end
of his Life. 1. It was secret, he went out, Vere dolet, qui sine Test dolet.
He sought a Place of Retirement where he might mourn in secret; he cannot well
be thought to dissemble his Grief, who chooses no other Witness but the
Omnipresent God. Solitariness is most agreeable to an afflicted Spirit; and as
St. Peter's Sorrow caused him to go forth, so might also Shame: Christ looked
upon Peter, but how ashamed must Peter be to look upon Christ, considering that
he so lately denied to have ever seen him? 2. His Repentance was sincere, he
wept bitterly; his Grief was extraordinary, and his Tears abundant. There is
ever a weeping that follows Sin; Sin must cost the Soul Sorrow, either here, or
in Hell; we must mourn awhile, or lament for ever. Doubtless with Peter's Tears
there was joined hearty Confession of Sin to God, and smart Reflections upon
himself after this manner: Lord, what have I done? I, that did once acknowledge
my Master to be Christ, the Son of the living God, have since denied him with
Oaths, Curses and Imprecations: I, that promised to lay down my Life for his
sake, have yet disowned and denied him at the Voice of a Damsel. Oh what
Unfaithfulness, what Weakness, what Wickedness! Oh that my Head were Waters,
and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep all my Days for the Fault
of this one Night. Blessed indeed are the Tears of a converted Revolter, and
happy is the very Misery of a mourning Offender. 3. This holy Man's Repentance
was lasting and abiding, he had a lively Sense and Remembrance of this Sin upon
his Soul all his Life. Ecclesiastical History reports, that ever after, when
St. Peter heard the crowing of a Cock, he fell upon his Knees, and mourned;
others say, that he was wont to rise at Midnight, and spend the time in
penitent Devotion between Cock-crowing and Daylight; and the Papists, who love
to turn every thing into Superstition, began that Practice of setting a Cock
upon the top of Towers, and Steeples, and Chimneys, to put People in mind of
this Sin of Peter, and h^s Repentance by that Signal. Lastly, St. Peter's
Repentance was attended with an extraordinary Zeal and Forwardness for the
Service of Christ to the end of his Life. He had a burning Love toward Christ.
Thou that know all things, know that I love thee: And as an Evidence of
it, he fed Christ's Sheep; for in the Acts of the Apostles we read of his
extraordinary Diligence to spread the Gospel, and his Travels in order
thereunto are computed to be Nine Hundred and Fifty Miles: And the Wisdom of
God thought fit that this Apostle should preach the Gospel to the Jews, as St.
Paul did to the Gentiles; that as he had joined with the Jews in denying and
disowning Christ, so he should endeavor to persuade them to join with him in
Repentance, as he had joined with them in their Sin. His Sin was in some
Respect like theirs, therefore is he sent to preach the Gospel to them, and his
Diligence therein is an undoubted Proof and Evidence of his Repentance. Have
any of us fallen with Peter, though not with a formal abjuring, yet by a
practical denying of him, let us go forth and weep with him, let us be more
vigilant and watchful over our selves for time to come, let us express more
extraordinary Love unto, and Zeal for Christ, more Diligence in his Service,
and more Concernedness for his Honor and Glory. This would be an happy
Improvement of this Example. The Lord grant it may have that blessed Effect.
Amen.

CHAP. XXVII.
1 WHen the morning was come, all the chief priests and elders of the people
took counsel against Jesus to put him to death. 2 And when they had bound him,
they led him away, and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor.

The foregoing Chapter gave us an Account of Judas his Treason, in delivering
our Savior into the Hands of the chief Priests. In this Chapter we find our
holy Lord brought by the chief Priests unto Pontius Pilate the Roman Governor,
in order to his Arraignment and Condemnation. Whence Observe, that it has been
the old Policy of corrupt Church-Governors, to abuse the Power of the civil
Magistrate, in executing their cruel and unjust Censures upon holy and innocent
Persons. The chief Priests and Elders do not kill our Savior themselves, but
they deliver him over to the secular Power, and desire Pilate the civil
Magistrate to sentence and condemn him, which soon after we shall find he did.

3 Then Judas which had betrayed him, when he saw that he was condemned,
repented himself, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the chief
priests and elders, 4 Saying, I have sinned, in that I have betrayed the
innocent blood. And they said, What is that to us? see thou to that. 5 And he
cast down the pieces of silver in the temple, and departed, and went and hanged
himself.

Here we have a sad Relation of Judas his desperate Death, after an Hypocritial
Li^e; as also of the Horror of his Mind and Conscience before his Death.
Observe here, 1. The time when Judas repented, after it was too late. When he
saw that he was condemned, he repented. Learn thence, That they that will not
see their Sins timely to their Conversion, shall see them sooner or later to
their Confusion. Obs. 2. The Repentance it self, in the several Parts and
Branches of it. He was sorrowful for the Fact, he made Confession of his Sin,
and made Restitution for the Wrong done. He repented, saying, I have sinned,
and cast down the Thirty Pieces of Silver. Learn thence, That a wicked Man,
when Conscience is thoroughly awaked, may make Confession of his Sin, express
some Sorrow for it, and endeavor also the making some Satisfaction and
Restitution for the Wrong and Injury done by it. They that mourn for Sin, as
Sin: They that mourn more for the intrinsical Evil that is in Sin, than for the
Penal and Consequential Evils that follow Sin: They that confess Sin
voluntarily and freely, particularly, penitently, believingly, with an Eye of
Sorrow upon their Sin, and an Eye of Faith fixed upon their Savior: They that
make Restitution as an Act of Obedience to the Command of God, and as an Act of
Justice and Righteousness to their Neighbor, such Persons Repentance shall
find Acceptance with God. Obs. 3. The Answer and Reply which the wicked high
Priests and Elders make to despairing Judas. 1. They excuse themselves, What is
that to us? It Is natural to all Sinners to shift Sin from themselves, and to
lay it at any Door, rather than their own. Those that have had a Share in the
Pleasure and Profit of Sin, are yet very desirous to throw the Odium and Guilt
of it upon others. What is that to us? say these Monsters in Sin. 2. As they
excuse and acquit themselves, so they load and burden him; Look thou to that.
Lord, what miserable Comforters are Companions in Sin to one another, when
Distress and Sorrow comes upon them? When Sin comes to be questioned, in order
to its being punished; every Sinner is for shifting for himself, and leaves his
Fellow in the Suds. Let us then remember the Words of the Holy Ghost, He that
walks with wise Men shall be wiser, but a Companion of Fools shall be
destroyed. Obs. 4. The sad and fatal End of Judas, he went forth and hanged
himself. Horror and Despair took hold upon him, and seized his Consc^ence,
which was so intolerable, that he ran to the Halter for a Remedy. Learn hence,
1. That Conscience is a powerful, though invisible Executioner; the Wrath of Man
may be endured, but the Wrath of God is insupportable, and the Eruptions of
Conscience are irresistible. Oh how intolerable are those Scourges that lash us
in this tender and vital Part! Judas awakened with the Horror of his Fact,
Conscience begins to rouse, and the Man is unable to bear up under the furious
Revenges of his own Mind. Learn, 2. That there is an active Principle in Men's
Breasts and Bosoms, which seldom suffers daring Sinners to pass in quiet to
their Graves. Guilt is naturally troublesome and uneasy, it disturbs the Peace
and Serenity of the Mind, and fills the Soul with Storms and Thunder, both in
Life and Death: How vainly did Judas hope to take Sanctuary in a Grave, and to
meet with that Ease in another World which he could not find in this. Thus
ended this miserable Man, Judas. Lord, how earnest ought we to be for thy
persevering Grace, when neither the Presence, the Miracles, the Sermons, the
Sacraments of Christ could preserve and secure a Professor, a Disciple, an
Apostle, from the fatal Mischief of a ruinous Apostasy?

6 And the chief priests took the silver pieces, and said, It is not lawful for
to put them into the treasury, because it is the price of blood. 7 And they
took counsel, and bought with them the potters field, to bury strangers in. 8
Wherefore that field was called, The field of blood, unto this day. 9 (Then was
fulfilled that which was spoken by Jeremy the prophet, saying. And they took
the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him that was valued, whom they of the
children of Israel did value: 10 And gave them for the potter's field, as the
Lord appointed me.)

Observe here, 1. The Niceness and Scrupulosity of these Hypocrites; they made
no Scruple to give Money to shed Blood, but they scruple the putting that Money
into the Treasury, which was the Price of Blood. They are afraid to defile
their ^reasury, but are not afraid to polute their Souls. Thus Hypocrites
strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel; scruple a Ceremony, but make no
Conscience of Murder and Perjury. Observe, 2. The use which they put this
Money to, which Judas brought them; they bought with it a Field to bury
Strangers in. Thus Christ, who was himself a Stranger in a borrowed Grave, by
the Price of his Blood (being Thirty Pieces of Silver) conferred Graves on many
Strangers. Observe Lastly, How the Wisdom of God ordered it, that hereby a
Scripture-Prophecy was fulfilled, Zach. 11.13. They weighed for my Price Thirty
Pieces of Silver, and I took and cast them unto the Potter. Whence Learn, That
all the Indignities and debasing Sufferings, which the Lord Jesus underwent,
were not only fore-ordain'd by God, but also foretold by the holy Prophets: His
being Scourged, Buffetted, Spit upon, and here his being sold for Thirty Pieces
of Silver.

11 And Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor asked him, saying,
Art thou the king of the Jews? And Jesus said unto him, Thou say. 12 And
when he was accused of the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing. 13
Then says Pilate unto him, Hear thou not how many things they witness
against thee? 14 And he answered him to never a word, insomuch that the
governor marvelled greatly.

Observe here, 1. That our Savior readily answers Pilate, but refuses to
answer the chief Priests before Pilate. Pilate asks him, Art thou the King of
the Jews? Jesus readily answers, Thou say; or it is as thou say? But to
all the Accusations of the chief Priests, and to all that they laid to his
Charge before Pilate, our Savior answers never a Word, probably for these
Reasons. Because his Innocence was such as needed no Apology; because their
Calumnies and Accusations were so notoriously false, that they needed no
Confutation. To show his Contempt of Death, and to teach us by his own Example
Patience and Silence, when for his sake we are slandered and traduced. Learn
hence, That although we are not obliged to answer every captious and ensnaring
Question, nor to refute every Slander and false Accusation, yet are we bound
faithfully to own and confess the Truth, when we are solemnly called thereunto.
Our Savior as a deaf Man hears not, answers not the Calumnies of the chief
Priests; but when Pilate asks him, Art thou the King of the Jews? Or as St.
Mark has it, Art thou the Son of the Blessed? Jesus said, I am, though he knew
that Answer would cost him his Life. Hence the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.13. says, That
Christ before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good Confession. Teaching us,
Sometimes to hold our Peace, when our own Reputation is concerned; but never to
be silent, when the Honor of God, the Glory of his Truth, the Edification and
Confirmation of others, may effectually be promoted by our open Confession.
Then must we with Christ give a direct, plain, and sincere Answer. For whoever
denies him, or any Truth of his, knowingly and wilfully, him will Christ deny
in the Presence of his Father, and before all his Holy Angels.

15 Now at that feast the governor was wont to release unto the people a
prisoner, whom they would. 16 And they had then a notable prisoner, called
Barabbas. 17 Therefore when they were gathered together, Pilate said unto them,
Whom will ye that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus, which is called
Christ? 18 For he knew that for envy they had delivered him.

Now at the Feast; that is, at the Feast of the Passover, which by way of
Eminency is called the Feast, the Governor used to release a Prisoner,
(possibly by way of Memorial of their Deliverance out of Egypt,) accordingly
Pilate makes a Motion to them, that Christ may be the Prisoner set at Liberty
in Honor of their Feast; for he was sensible that what they did was out of
Envy and Malice. As Covetousness sold Christ, so Envy delivered him. Envy is a
killing and murdering Passion; Envy slays the silly one, Job 5.2. That is,
it slays the silly Person, who harbors this pestilent Lust in his Bosom, and
is like a Fire in his Bones continually preying upon him, causing him to pine
away, and dye miserably, because another lives happily. To envy another Man's
Prosperity is an Argument of the worst Simplicity: Yea, farther, as Envy
slays the silly one, so it prompts and provokes the Sinner to seek the
slaying of simple and innocent ones. Envy wishes the envied Person out of the
way, yea, out of the World; and if need be, will not only wish it, but lend a
lift toward it too: Witness the Chief Priests here, whose Envy was so
conspicuous, that Pilate himself takes notice of it, and says, He knew that for
Envy they had delivered him.

19 When he was set down on the judgment seat, his wife sent unto him, saying,
Have thou nothing to do with that just man; for I have suffered many things
this day in a dream, because of him.

There are several sorts or kinds of Dreams, Natural, Moral, Diabolical and
Divine. The Question is, what kind of Dream this was? Not Natural, all agree;
some think it was Diabolical, and that Satan hoped thereby to prevent the Work
of Man's Redemption by the Death of Christ. But if so, why had not Pilate the
Dream rather than his Wife? Probably this Dream was from God; for even our very
Dreams are ordered by God, our sleeping as well as our waking times are in
God's Hand. Learn hence, How wonderfully the Wisdom and Power of God is seen in
this Woman's Testimony, which she gave to the Innocence of our Savior. When
all his Disciples were fled from him, when none of his Friends durst speak a
Word for him, God raises up a Woman, a Stranger, a Pagan, to give Evidence of
his Innocence. And it is Observable, That at our Savior's Trial, not one Mouth
was opened to plead or speak a Word for him, in Defense of Innocence it self,
but only Pilate's and his Wife's; they both pronounce him Righteous, though they
were Gentiles and Pagans, whilst his own Kindred and Countrymen, the Jews,
thirst after his Righteous and Innocent Blood.

20 But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they should
ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus. 21 The governor answered and said unto them,
Whether of the twain will ye that I release unto you? They said, Barabbas. 22
Pilate said unto them, What shall I do then with Jesus, which is called Christ?
They all say unto him, Let him be crucified. 23 And the governor said, Why,
what evil has he done? but they cried out the more, saying, Let him be
crucified.

Observe here, 1. How exceedingly unwilling and averse Pilate was to be the
Instrument of our Savior's Death; one while he bids the Jews take him
themselves, and judge him according to their Law. Another while he offers to
save Christ in Honor of their Feast, when by Custom he was to release a
Prisoner, and this Prisoner he desired might be Jesus. When this would not
satisfy, he expostulates with them about our Savior's Innocence, what Evil
has he done? Nay, St. Luke says, Chapter 23. That Pilate came forth three times,
and professed that he found no Fault in him. Yet though Pilate was satisfied, the
Jews would not be denied. Thence Learn, That wicked Men and Hypocrites within
the visible Church may be guilty of such Tremendous Acts of Wickedness, as the
Conscience of Infidels and Pagans without the Church may boggle at, and protest
against. Pilate a Pagan absolves Christ, whilst hypocritical Jews, which had
heard his Doctrine, and seen his Miracles, do condemn him. But Obs. 2. Who
influenced the main Body of the Jews to desire Barabbas, and to destroy Jesus.
It was the chief Priests and Elders, they persuaded the Multitude. Woe to the
People when their Guides and Leaders are corrupt; for then they shall be
tempted by wicked Counsel: And woe unto them, much more, if they follow their
wicked and pernicious Counsels. Thus did the Jews follow their Guides the chief
Priests, till they had preserved Barabbas, and destroyed Jesus.

24 When Pilate saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a tumult was
made, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am
innocent of the blood of this just person: see ye to it.

Two Things are here Observable in Pilate's washing of his Hands. 1. By this
Action he pronounces our Savior's Innocence, and was willing thereby to
testify his own; that he did not consent to our Savior's Death, washing the
Hands being an usual Ceremony in Protestation of a Person's Innocence. But, 2.
It was great Folly and Fondness in Pilate, to think that washing of his Hands
did or could free him from the Guilt of innocent Blood. Oh Pilate! thou had
need rub hard if thou meanest to scour from thy Soul the Guilt of that Crimson
Sin which thou have committed; thy Guilt cleaves so close unto thee, that
nothing can expiate it but the Blood which thou have spilt; neither was it any
Excuse of Pilate's Sin, that what he did was to please the People, and to
gratify their Importunity. It is a fond Apology for Sins, when Persons pretend
that they were not committed with their own Consent, but at others Instigation
and Importunity.

25 Then answered all the people, and said, His blood be on us, and on our
children.

That is, Let the Guilt and Punishment of this Blood rest upon us and our
Posterity. A most horrid and impious Imprecation; the dreadful Effects of it
began to come upon them Forty Years after in the Destruction of Jerusalem, and
has rested and remained upon their Posterity to this Day, near Seventeen
Hundred Years, the Jews being Vagabonds over the Earth, abhorred by all Nations
wheresoever they come. This ought to be a Terror, and (...) Warning to all
Persons that they avoid all cursed Imprecations, and wicked Wishes upon
themselves or others. Woe to such as wish Damnation to themselves, Pox and
Plague upon others; how if God says Amen, and ratify in Heaven thy cursed
Imprecations made on Earth, as he did this of the wicked Jews, His Blood be on
us, and on our Children. Yet what they with a wicked Mind put up as a direful
Imprecation, we may with a pious Mind offer up to God as an humble Petition.
Lord, let thy Son's Blood, not in the Guilt and Punishment, but in the Efficacy
and Merit of it, be upon us, and upon our Posterity after us, for evermore.

26 Then released he Barabbas unto them: and when he had scourged Jesus, he
delivered him to be crucified.

As the Death of the Cross was a Roman Punishment, so it was the manner of the
Romans first to scourge and whip their Malefactors, and then deliver them to be
crucified. Now the manner of the Roman scourging is said to be thus: They
stripped the condemned Person, and bound him to a Post; Two strong Men first
scourged him with Rods of Thorns: Then Two others scourged him with Whips of
Cords full of Knots; and lastly, Two more with Whips of Wyre, and therewith
tore off the very Flesh and Skin from the Persons Back and Sides. That our
Savior was thus cruelly scourged seems to some not improbable from that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 129.3. The Ploughers ploughed upon my Back, and made long
Furrows. Which, if spoken Prophetically of Christ, was Literally fulfilled in
the Day of his Scourging. But why was the precious Body of our Blessed Lord
thus galled and torn with Scourgings? Doubtless to fulfill that Prophecy. I gave
my Back to the Smiters, and my Cheeks to them that plucked off the Hair. That
by his Stripes we might be healed. And to Learn us Patience from his Example,
why should we think it strange to be scourged, either with the Tongue, or the
Hand, or with both, when we see our dear Redeemer bleeding by Stripes and
Scourges before our Eyes?

27 Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus into the common hall, and
gathered unto him the whole band of soldiers. 28 And they stripped him, and put
on him a scarlet robe. 29 And when they had platted a crown of thorns, they put
it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand: and they bowed the knee before
him, and mocked him, saying, Hail king of the Jews. 30 And they spit upon him,
and took the reed, and smote him on the head. 31 And after that they had mocked
him, they took the robe off from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led
him away to crucify him.

The next part of our Lord's Sufferings consisted of cruel Mockings; our
blessed S^viour had said that he was the King of the Jews, not a Temporal King
to rule over them with Pomp and Power, but a Spiritual King to rule in the
Hearts of his People; but the Jews missing of their Expectation of a Temporal
King in Christ, look upon him as an Impostor, and accordingly they treat him as
a mock King, putting a Crown upon his Head, but a very ignominious and painful
one. A Crown of Thorns, a Scepter in his Hand; but it was of a Reed, and a Robe
of Purple or Scarlet, both which were used by Princes, and bowed the Knee
before him, as they were wont to do to Princes. Thus all the Marks of Scorn
imaginable are put upon our Blessed Redeemer, yet that which they did in jest,
God did in earnest; for all these things were Ensigns and Marks of Sovereignty,
and Almighty God caused the Regal Dignity of his Son to appear and shine forth
even in the midst of his greatest Abasement. Whence was all this Jearing and
Sport, but to flout Majesty? And why did Christ undergo all this Ignominy,
Disgrace and Shame, but to show us what was due unto us for our Sins, and to
give us an Example to bear all the Scorn, Reproach and Shame imaginable for his
sake, Who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised
the Shame.

32 And as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name: him they
compelled to bear his cross. 33 And when they were come unto a place called
Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a scull, 34 They gave him vineg^r to drink
mingled with gall: and when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink. 35 And
they crucified him, and parted his garments, casting lots: that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments among them,
and upon my vesture did they cast lots. 36 And sitting down, they watched him
there:

The Sentence of Death being past by Pilate, who can with dry Eyes behold the
sad Pomp of our Savior's bloody Execution? Forth comes the Blessed Jesus out
of Pilate's Gates, bearing that Cross, which soon after was to bear him. With
his Cross on his Shoulder he marches toward Golgotha; and when they see he can
go no faster, they force Simon the Cyrenian, not out of Compassion, but from
Indignation, to be the Porter of his Cross. This Cyrenian being a Gentile, not
a Jew, who bare our Savior's Cross, might signif^e and show that the Gentiles
should have a part in Christ, and be Sharers with the Jews in the Benefits of
his Cross. At length Christ comes to the Place of Execution, Golgotha, or Mount
Calvary. Here in a public Place, with infamous Company, betwixt Two Thieves,
he is Crucified; that is, fastened to a great Cross of Wood, his Hands stretched
forth abroad, and his Feet closed together, and both Hands and Feet fastened
with Nails; his naked Body was lifted up in the open Air, hanging betwixt
Heaven and Earth, thereby intimating that the crucified Person was fit to live
in neither. This shameful, painful and accursed Death, did the holy and
innocent Jesus undergo for Sinners. Some observe all the Dimensions of Length,
Breadth, Depth, and Height in our Savior's Sufferings; for Length his Passion
was several Hours long, from Twelve to Three, exposed all that time both to
Hunger and Cold; the Thieves crucified with him were not dead so soon; they
enduring but personal Pain, he undergoing the Miseries of all Mankind. But what
his Passion wanted in Length, it had in Breadth, extending over all the Parts
and Powers of his Soul and Body, no part free but his Tongue, which was at
Liberty to pray for his Enemies. His Sight was tormented with the scornful
Gestures of such as passed by, wagging their Heads. His Hearing grieved with
the Taunts and Jears of Priests and People; his Smelling offended with noisome
Savours in the Place of Skulls; his Taste with the Gall and Vinegar given him
to drink; his Feeling was wonderfully affected by the Nails, which pierced his
Hand and Feet, and the Crown of Thorns which pierced his tender Temples with a
Multiplicity of Wounds. And for the Depth of his Passion it was as deep as Hell
it self; enduring Tortures in his Soul, as well as Torments in his Body;
groaning under the Burden of Desertion, and crying out, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? Lastly, For the Height of his Sufferings, they were as
high as Heaven, his Person being innocent and infinite, no less than the Son of
God, which adds infinite Worth and Value to his Sufferings. Lord, let us be
able to comprehend with all Saints what is the Breadth and Length, Depth and
Height, and let us know the Love of Christ, which in suffering for us, passes
Knowledge. So infinite every way were the Dimensions of it.

37 And set up over his head, his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF
THE JEWS.

It was the manner of the Romans when they crucified any Man, to publish the
Cause of his Death in Capital Letters, placed over the Head of the Person. Now
see how the Wisdom and Providence of God powerfully overruled the Heart and
Pen of Pilate to draw this Title, which was truly honorable, and fix it to his
Cross: Pilate is Christ's Herald, and proclaims him, King of the Jews. Learn
hence, That the Regal Dignity of Christ was proclaimed by an Enemy, and that in
a time of his greatest Sufferings and Reproaches. Pilate did Christ a special
Honor, and an eminent piece of Service; he did that for Christ which none of
his own Disciples durst do; but he did it not designedly for his Glory, but
from the special overruling Power of Divine Providence: But the highest
Services performed to Christ undesignedly, shall never be accepted nor rewarded
by God.

38 Then were there two thieves crucified with him: one on the right hand, and
another on the left. 39 And they that passed by, reviled him, wagging their
heads, 40 And saying, Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three
days, save thy self: if thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross. 41
Likewise also the chief priests mocking him, with the scribes, and elders,
said, 42 He saved others, himself he cannot save: if he be the king of Israel,
let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him. 43 He trusted in
God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he said, I am the Son of
God. 44 The thieves also which were crucified with him, cast the same in his
teeth.

Here we have several Aggravations of our Lord's Sufferings upon the Ctoss. 1.
From the Company he suffered with, Two Thieves. It had been Disparagement
enough to our Blessed Savior to have been sorted with the Best of Men; but to
be numbered with the Scum of Mankind is such an Indignity as confounds our
Thoughts. This was intended by the Jews to dishonor him the more, and to
persuade the World that he was the greatest of Offenders; but God overruled
this, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. He was numbered with the
Transgressors. 2. Another Aggravation of our Lord's Sufferings on the Cross,
was the Scorn and mocking Derision, which he met with in his dying Moments,
from the common People, from the chief Priests, and from the Thieves that
suffered with him. The common People, both in Words and Actions expressed Scorn
and Detestation against him. They reviled him, wagging their Heads. The chief
Priests, though Men of Age and Gravity, not only barbarously mock him in his
extremest Misery, whom Humanity obliged them to Pity; but they scoff
Atheistically and Profanely, jeering at his Faith and Affiance in God,
tauntingly saying, He trusted in God, that he would deliver him; now let him
deliver him, if he will have him. Where Observe, That Persecutors are generally
Atheists, though they make a Profession of Religion. The chief Priests and Elders
here, though learned and knowing Men, yet they blaspheme God, and mock at his
Power, deride his Providence, which was as bad as to deny his Being. Hence we
may gather, that those who administer to God in Holy Things by way of Office,
if they be not the best, they are the worst of Men. No such bitter Enemies to
the Power of Godliness, as the Ministers of Religion, who were never acquainted
with the Efficacy and Power of it in their own Hearts and Lives. A Third
Aggravation of our Lord's Sufferings on the Cross was, That the Thief's that
suffered with him, reviled him with the rest. That is, one of them, as St. Luke
has it, or perhaps both of them might do it at first. Which if so, increases
the Wonder of the penitent Thieves Conversion. From the Thief's Impenitency we
Learn, That neither Shame nor Pain will change the Mind of a resolute Sinner,
but even then when he is in the very Suburbs of Hell will he blaspheme.

45 Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land unto the ninth
hour, 46 And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli,
Eli, Lamasabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? 47 Some of them that stood there, when they heard that, said, This man
calls for Elias. 48 And straightway one of them run, and took a sponge, and
filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink. 49 The
rest said, Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to save him. 50 Jesus
when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost.

Observe here, 1. How the Rays of Christ's Divinity, and the Glory of his
Godhead, breaks out and shines forth in the midst of that Infirmity, which his
Humane Nature labored under. He shows himself to be the God of Nature, by
altering the Course of Nature. The Sun is eclipsed, and Darkness overspreads
the Earth for Three Hours; namely, from Twelve a Clock to Three. Thus the Sun
in the Firmament becomes close Mourner at our Lord's Death, and the whole Frame
of Nature puts it self into a Funeral Habit. Obs. 2. That the Soul of Christ's
Sufferings consisted in the Sufferings of his Soul; the Distress of his Spirit
was more intolerable than the Torments of his Body, as appears by his mournful
Complaint, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Being the first Words of
the 22d. Psalm; and some conceive that he repeated that whole Psalm, it being
an admirable Narrative of the Dolours of his Passion. Learn hence, That the
Lord Jesus Christ, when suffering for our Sins, was really deserted for a Time,
and left destitute of all sensible Consolation. Why have thou forsaken me?
Learn farther, That under this Desertion Christ despaired not, but still
retained a firm Persuasion of God's Love unto him, and experienced necessary
Supports from him. My God, my God, These are Words of Faith and Affiance,
striving under Temptation. Christ was thus forsaken for us, that we might never
be forsaken by God; yet by God's forsaking of Christ, is not to be understood
any Abatement of Divine Love, but only a Withdrawing from the Humane Nature,
the Sense of hi^ Love, and a letting out upon his Soul a deep afflicting Sense
of his Displeasure against Sin. There is a total and eternal Desertion, by
which God utterly forsakes a Man, both as to Grace and Glory, being wholly cast
out of God's Presence, and adjudged to Eternal Torments, this was not
compatible to Christ, nor agreeable to the Dignity of his Person. But these is
a Partial and Temporary Desertion, when God for a little Moment hides his Face
from his Children; now this was both agreeable to the Dignity of Christ's
Nature, and also suitable to his Office, who was to satisfy the Justice of God
for our forsaking of him, and to bring us near to him, that we might ^e
received for ever. Observe Lastly, What a miraculous Evidence Christ gave of
his Divinity instantly before he gave up the Ghost. He cried with a loud Voice.
This showed that he did not dye according to the ordinary Course of Nature,
gradually departing and drawing on, as we express it. No, his Life was whole in
him, and Nature as strong at last as at first. Other Men dye gradually, and
toward their End their Sense of Pain is much blunted; they faulter, fumble,
and dye by degrees; but Christ stood under the Pains of Death in his full
Strength; his Life was whole in him. This was evident by the mighty Outcry he
made when he gave up the Ghost, contrary to the Sense and Experience of all
other Persons; this argued him to be full of Strength. And he that could cry
with such a loud Voice, (in articulo mortis) as he did, could have kept himself
from dying if he would. Hence we Learn, That when Christ died, he rather
conquered Death, than was conquered by Death. He must voluntarily and freely
lay down Life before Death could come at him.

51 And behold, the vail of the temple was rent in twain, from the top to the
bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent, 52 And the graves were
opened, and many bodies of saints which slept, arose, 53 And came out of the
graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto
many. 54 Now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus,
saw the earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared greatly,
saying, Truly this was the Son of God. 55 And many women were there (beholding
afar off) which followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto him. 56 Among
which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Joses, and the
mother of Zebedee's children.

Here we have an Account of several extraordinary and wonderful Things, which
occurred and fell out about the time that our Savior died. 1. The Vail of the
Temple rent asunder. That is, the Partition Wall of Stone between the Sanctuary
and the outer Court was now broken down. Signifying, That the ceremonial Law
was now abolished by the Death of Christ, and that by the Blood of Jesus we
have Access unto God, and may enter into the Holy of Holies. 2. The Earth
quaked. As there was an Universal Eclipse, so likewise an Universal Earthquake
at our Lord's Crucifixion, which did awaken many of the Saints, (that died
before our Savior's Incarnation) out of their dead Sleep. These arose both as
Witnesses of Christ's Resurrection, and also as Sharers in it. But none of them
arose till Christ was risen, he being the first Fruits of them that slept. And
these holy Persons that arose with him, possibly attended him to Heaven at his
Ascension. From hence we Learn, That Christ was the Savior of those that
believed in him before his Incarnation, as well as those that believed in him
since his Incarnation; and that the former are Partakers of the Fruit and
Benefit of his Death and Resurrection, no less than the latter. Observe next,
What Influence and Effect the sight of these prodigious Things had upon the
Centurion and the Soldiers: It convinced them, that verily this was the Son of
God. Here we see the Heathen Soldiers are sooner convinced of the Divinity of
Christ, than the unbelieving Jewish Doctors. Obstinacy and Unbelief filled
their Minds with an invincible Prejudice against Christ; so that neither the
Miracles done by him in his Life, nor wrought at his Death, could convince the
high Priests, that Christ was any other than an Impostor and Deceiver. Observe
Lastly, Who of Christ's Friends were Witnesses of his Death; They are Women who
followed him from Galilee, and ministered unto him; not one of his dear
Disciples, except St. John, who stood by the Cross with the Virgin Mary. What a
Shame was this for the Apostles to be absent from a Spectacle upon which the
Salvation of the whole World did depend; and what an Honor was this to the
Female Sex in general, and to these Women in particular, that they had the
Courage to follow Christ to his Cross, when all his Disciples forsook him and
fled. God can make Women Glorious Confessors of his Truth, and arm them against
the Fears of Sufferings, contrary to the natural Timor^^sness of their Tempers.
These Women wait upon Christ's Cross, when Apostles fly, and durst not come
near it.

57 When the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathea, named Joseph,
who also himself was Jesus disciple: 58 He went to Pilate, and begged the body
of Jesus: then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered. 59 And when Joseph
had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, 60 And laid it in
his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock: and he rolled a great
stone to the door of the sepulcher, and departed. 61 And there was Mary
Magdalene, and the other Mary sitting over against the sepulcher.

Here we have an Account given of our Lord's Funeral and Interment in the
Grave; such a Funeral as never was since Graves were first dug. Concerning
which we have these Particulars Observable: 1. The Preparatives that were made
for our Lord's Funeral; namely, the begging and perfuming of his dead Body; his
Body could not be buried, till by begging it was obtained of Pilate, the dead
Bodies of Malefactors being in the Power of the Disposal of the Judge. Pilate
grants it; and to manifest their dear Affection to their dead Lord, they wrap
the Body in fine Linen, with Spices to perfume it. But what need of Odours for
that Body which could not see Corruption: Though his holy Body did not want them,
yet the Affections of his Friends could not withhold them. Obs. 2. The Bearers
that carried his Body to the Grave, or the Persons concerned in solemnizing his
Funeral. Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus. Two rich Men, and Two secret
Disciples. 1. They were rich Men, Senators, honorable Counselors; and so that
Prophecy was fulfilled, Isa. 53. last. He made his Grave with the wicked, and
with the rich in his Death. 2. They were good Men as well as rich Men;
Disciples, though secretly, for fear of the Jews. Grace does not always make a
public and open show where it is. As there is much secret Riches in the Bowels
of the Earth, which no Eye ever saw, so there may be Grace in the Heart of a
Christian, which the World takes no notice of. We never heard any News of
Joseph of Arimathea till now, yet was he eminently rich, wise and good; a
Worthy, though a close Disciple. Much Grace may be where little is seen. Some
Gracious Persons cannot put forward, and discover themselves like others; and
yet such weak Christians perhaps, when a Trial comes, shall stand their Ground,
when stronger run away. We read of none of the Apostles at Christ's Funeral;
Fear had chased them away, though they professed a Readiness to die with Christ:
But Joseph and Nicodemus appear boldly for him. Let it be a Caution to strong
Christians neither to glory in themselves, nor to glory over the weak. If God
desert the strong, and assist the weak, the feeble shall be as David, and the
strong as Tow. Obs. 3. The Mourners that followed the Hearse; namely, the Women
that followed him out of Galilee, and particularly the Two Mary's; a very poor
Train of Mourners, a few sorrowful Women. Others are attended to their Graves
by their Relations and Friends, but Christ's Disciples were all scattered, and
afraid to own him either dying or dead. Our Blessed Lord affected no Pomp or
Gallantry in his Life, and it was no ways suitable either to the End or Manner
of his Death. Humiliation was designed in his Death, and his Burial was the
lowest degree of his Humiliation. Obs. 4. The Grave or Sepulcher in which they
buried him; it was in a Garden. As by the Sin of the first Adam we were driven
out of the Garden of Pleasure, the Earthly Paradise; so by the Sufferings of
the second Adam, who lay buried in a Garden, we may hope for an Entrance into
the Heavenly Paradise. It was in a Sepulcher hewed out of a Rock; that so his
Enemies might have no Occasion to cavil, and say that his Disciples stole him
away by secret Holes, or unseen Passages under Ground. And it was in a new
Sepulcher, in which never any Man was laid, lest his Adversaries should say it
was some other that was risen, or that he rose from the Dead by touching some
other Corpse. Obs. 5. The Manner of our Lord's Funeral, hastily, openly,
decently. It was done in haste, by reason of the Streights of Time, the
Preparation for the Passover caused them to be very expeditious; the Sabbath
was approaching, and they lay all Business aside to prepare for that. Learn
thence, How much it is our Duty to dispatch our Worldly Business as early as we
can toward the end of the Week, that we may be the better prepared to
sanctify the Lord's Day, if we live to enjoy it. We ought to remember that Day
before it come, and to sanctify it when it is come. Again, our Lord was buried
openly, as well as hastily; all Persons had Liberty to be Spectators, that none
might object there was any Fraud or Deceit used in or about his Burial. He was
also interred decently, his Body wrapped in fine Linen, and perfumed with
Odours, according to the Jewish Custom, which used not to unbowel, but embalm
their Dead. Obs. 6. The Reason why our Lord was buried, seeing he was to rise
again in as short a time as other Men lie by the Walls; and had his dead Body
remained a Thousand Years unburied, it could have seen no Corruption, having
never been tainted with Sin. Sin is the Cause of the Body's Corruption; it is
Sin that makes our Body stink worse than Carrion when they are dead. A Funeral
then was not necessary for Christ's Body upon the same Accounts that it is
necessary for ours. But, 1. He was buried to declare the Certainty of his
Death, and the Reality of his Resurrection, and for this Reason did God's
Providence order it, that he should be embalmed, to cut off all Pretensions.
For in this kind of embalming, his Mouth, his Ears, and his Nostrils, were all
filled with Spices and Odours, so that there could be no Latent Principle of
Life in him; being thus buried then, declares him to be certainly dead. 2. He
was buried to fulfill the Types and Prophecies that went before concerning him.
Jonas being Three Days and Three Nights in the Belly of the Whale was a Type of
Christ's being Three Days and Three Nights in the Heart of the Earth, and the
Prophet, Esaias 53.9. had declared the manner of his Funeral long before he was
born. He made his Grave with the Wicked, and with the Rich in his Death.
Pointing by that Expression at this Tomb of Joseph's, who was a rich Man; and
the Scriptures cannot be broken. 3. He was buried to complete his Humiliation;
They have brought me to the Dust of Death, says David, a Type of Christ. This
was the lowest Step he could possibly descend in his abased state; lower he
could not be laid, and so low his blessed Head must be laid, else he had not
been humbled to the lowest. 4. He went into the Grave, that he might conquer
Death in its own Territories and Dominions. Christ's Victory over the Grave
causes his Saints to triumph and sing, Oh Grave, where is thy Destruction? Our
blessed Lord has perfumed the Bed of the Grave by his own lying in it; so that
a Pillow of Down is not so soft to a Believer's Head as a Pillow of Dust.
Observe Lastly, what Use the Doctrine of our Lord's Burial may be unto us. 1.
For Instruction here we see the amazing Depths of our Lord's Humiliation. From
what, to what his Love brought him; even from the Bosom of his Father, to the
Bosom of the Grave. Now the Depth of his Humiliation shows us the Fullness and
Sufficiency of his Satisfaction, as well as the Heinousness of our
Transgression. 2. For Consolation against the Fears of Death and the Grave. The
Grave received Christ, but could not retain him. Death swallowed him up as the
Fish did Jonas, but quickly vomitted him up again; so shall it fare with Christ
mystical, as it did with Christ Personal; the Grave could not long keep him, it
shall not for ever keep us; as his Body rested in Hope, so shall ours also; and
though they see Corruption, which he did not, yet shall they not always lie under
the Power of Corruption. In a Word. Christ's lying in the Grave has changed and
altered the Nature of the Grave; it was a Prison before, a Bed of Rest now; a
loathsome Grave before, a perfumed Bed now. He whose Head is in Heaven, need
not fear to put his Foot into the Grave. Awake and sing thou that dwell in
the Dust, for the Enmity of the Grave is slain by Christ. 3. For Imitation, let
us study and endeavor to be buried with Christ, in respect of our Sins. I
mean, Romans 6.4. Buried with him into Death. Our Sins should be as a dead Body,
in several Respects. Are dead Bodies removed out of the Society of Men, so
should our Sins be removed far from us? Do dead Bodies in the Grave spend and
consume away by little and little? So should our Sins daily. Will dead Bodies
grow every Day more and more loathsome to others? So should our Sins be to our
selves. Do dead Bodies wax out of Memory, and are quite forgotten? So should
our Sins, in respect of any Delight that we take in remembering of them. We
should always remember our Sins to our Humiliation; but never think or speak of
them with the least Delight or Satisfaction; for this in God's Account is a new
Commission of them, and lays under an Additional Guilt.

62 Now the next day that followed the day of the preparation, the chief
Priests and Pharisees came together unto Pilate, 63 Saying, Sir, we remember
that that deceiver said, while he was yet alive, After three days I will rise
again. 64 Command therefore that the sepulcher be made sure, until the third
day, lest his disciples come by night, and steal him away, and say unto the
people, he is risen from the dead: so the last error shall be worse than the
first. 65 Pilate said unto them, Ye have a watch, go your way, make it as sure
as you can. 66 So they went, and made the sepulcher sure, sealing the stone,
and setting a watch.

This last Paragraph of the Chapter acquaints us with the Endeavors that the
Murderers of Christ used to prevent his foretold Resurrection: They ask and
obtain of Pilate, that his Sepulcher may be strongly guarded till the Third Day
was past and over, when probably they intended to have exposed his dead Body to
the view of the People; and accordingly a threefold Guard is set about the
Grave, the Stone, the Seal, and the Watch, concluding that Christ was safe
enough, either for rising or stealing: The Stone making the Grave sure, the
Seal making the Stone sure, and the Watch or Band of Soldiers making all sure.
The Stone being sealed with the public Seal, no Person might meddle with it
upon pain of Death. Where Note, 1. The wonderful Wisdom, the overruling Power
and Providence of God; by this excessive Care and extraordinary Diligence the
High Priests hoped to prevent our Savior's Resurrection, but the Truth and
Belief of it was hereby confirmed to all the World. How much Evidence had
Christ's Resurrection wanted, if the High Priests and Elders had not been thus
maliciously industrious to prevent his rising. Learn, 2. That the Endeavors
used to obstruct our Lord's Resurrection have rendered it more certain and
undoubted; had not all this Care and Caution been used by his Enemies, the
Grounds of our Faith had not been so strong, so evident, and so clear. It was
very happy, that the Jews were thus jealous and suspicious, thus careful and
distrustful; for otherwise the World had never received so full and perfect an
Evidence of Christ's Resurrection as now, whereon all our Comfort and Salvation
does depend. Verily their solicitous Care to suppress our Redeemer's
Resurrection has rendered it more conspicuous, and freed it from all Suspicion
of Forgery.

CHAP. XXVIII.
This last Chapter of St. Matthew contains the History of our Savior's
Resurrection, and gives us an Account of what he did on Earth between the time
of his Triumphant Resurrection, and his Glorious Ascension.

1 IN the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn, toward the first day of the
week, came Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, to see the sepulcher.

The Lord of Life was buried upon the Friday in the Evening of that Day on
which he was crucified; and his holy Body rested in the silent Grave, the next
Day, and a part of the Morning the Day following. Thus he arose again the Third
Day, neither sooner nor later; not sooner, lest the Truth of his Death should
have been questioned that he did not die at all; and not later, lest the Faith
of his Disciples should have failed. And accordingly, when the Sabbath was
past, and it dawned toward the first Day of the Week, in the Morning very
early, before Day, Mary Magdalen, and other devout Women, go to visit the holy
Sepulcher, intending, with their Spices and Odours, farther to imbalm our
Lord's Body. But Observe, Although the Hearts of these good Women did burn with
an Ardent Love and Zeal to their Crucified Lord, yet the commanded Duties of
the Sabbath are not omitted by them; they stay till the Sabbath is ended, and
then early in the Morning they go with Odours in their Hands to perfume his
Sacred Corpse; fearing neither the Darkness of the Night, nor the Presence of
the Watchmen: How great a Tribute of Respect and Honor is due and payable to
these Women for their Magnanimity and Courage. They followed Christ when his
Disciples left him; they accompanied him to his Cross, and followed his Hearse
to the Grave, when none of his Disciples durst appear. Learn hence, That
Courage is the special and peculiar Gift of God; and where God gives Courage,
it is not in Man to make afraid.

2 And behold, there was a great earthquake; for the angel of the Lord
descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and
sat upon it. 3 His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as
snow. 4 And for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as dead men.

Observe here, 1. With what Pomp and Triumph does our Lord arise. The Earth
that quaked before at his Crucifixion, quakes now again at his Resurrection; it
quaked then at the Dissolution, now at the Reunion of his Humane Nature, to
tell the World that the God of Nature then suffered, and now conquered.
Observe, 2. How an Angel is employed in Christ's Resurrection; He rolls away
the Stone. But could not Christ have risen then without the Angel's Help? Yes
sure, he that raised himself, surely could have removed the Stone: But God
thinks fit to send an Officer from Heaven to open the Prison Door of the Grave,
and by setting our Surety at Liberty, proclaims our Debt to the Divine Justice
fully satisfied. Besides, it was fit that the Angels who had been Witnesses of
our Savior's Passion, should also be Witnesses of his Resurrection. Observe,
3. How unable the Keepers of the Grave were to bear the Sight and Presence of
the Angel; they shake for Fear, and became as dead Men. Angels being pure and
perfect Spirits, Man is not able to bear the Sight of an Angel, no, not in
Humane Shape, without Terror and Affrightment; and if the Sight of an Angel be
so dreadful, what is the Sight of God himself?

5 And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for I know that
ye seek Jesus which was crucified. 6 He is not here: for he is risen: as he
said; come, see the place where the Lord lay. 7 And go quickly, and tell his
disciples that he is risen from the dead; and behold, he goes before you into
Galilee, there shall ye see him, lo, I have told you.

Observe here, 1. Our Lord's Resurrection asserted and declared, He is risen.
God never intended that the darling of his Soul should be lost in an obscure
Sepulcher; he is not here, says the Angel; that is, in the Grave, where you
laid him, where you left him. Death has lost its Prey, and the Grave has lost
her Guest. Observe, 2. It is not said, He is not here, for he is raised, but he
is risen. The Word imports the active Power of Christ, or the self-quickning
Principle by which Christ raised himself from the Dead. Acts 1.3. He showed
himself active after his Passion, Learn, That it was the Divine Nature or
Godhead of Christ which raised his Humane Nature from Death to Life. Others
were raised from the Grave by Christ's Power, he raised himself by his own
Power. Observe 3. The Testimony or Witness given to our Lord's Resurrection;
that of an Angel, The Angel said he is not here, but risen. But why is an Angel
the first Publisher of our Lord's Resurrection? Surely the Dignity of our
Lord's Person, and the Excellency of his Resurrection required that it should
be first published by an Angel; and accordingly it is worthy our Observation,
how very serviceable and officious the holy Angels were in attending upon our
Savior in the Days of his Flesh; an Angel foretells his Conception to the
Blessed Virgin; an Angel proclaims his Birth to the Shepherds; an Angel
succors him in his Temptations in the Wilderness; an Angel comforts him in his
Agony in the Garden; and at his Resurrection the Angel rolls away the Stone
from the Sepulcher, and brings the first Tidings of it to the Women. In his
Ascension the Angels bore him Company to Heaven; and when he comes again to
Judgment, he shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels. Observe, 4.
The Persons to whom our Lord's Resurrection was first made known, to Women, to
the Two Mary's: But why to the Women? God will make Choice of weak Means for
producing great Effects, knowing that the Weakness of the Instrument redounds
to the greater Honor of the Agent. In the whole Dispensation of the Gospel
Almighty God intermixes Divine Power with Humane Weakness. Thus the Conception
of Christ was by the Power of the Holy Ghost; but his Mother, a poor Woman, a
Carpenter's Spouse: So the Crucifixion of Christ was in much Meanness and
outward Baseness, being crucified between Two Thieves: But the Powers of Heaven
and Earth trembling, the Rocks rending, and the Graves opening, showed a
mixture of Divine Power. God will honor what Instruments he pleases, for the
Accomplishment of his own Purposes. But why to these Women, the Two Mary's, is
this Discovery of Christ's Resurrection first made? Possibly it was a Reward
for their Magnanimity and Masculine Courage. These Women clave to Christ when
the Apostles fled from him, and forsook him; they assisted at his Cross, they
attended at his Funeral, they watched his Sepulcher. These Women had more
Courage than the Apostles, therefore God makes the Women Apostles to the
Apostles; he sends them to tell the Apostles of the Resurrection, and they must
have the News at the second Hand. Oh what a tacit Rebuke was hereby given to
the Apostles! A secret Check, that they should be thus outdone by poor Women.
These holy Women went before the Apostles in the last Services that were done
for Christ, and therefore the Apostles here come after them in their Rewards
and Comforts. Observe 5. The Evidence which the Angel offers to the Women, to
evince and prove the Verity and Certainty of our Savior's Resurrection;
namely, by an Appeal to their Senses. Come see the Place where the Lord lay.
The Senses, when rightly disposed, are the proper Judges of all sensible
Objects; therefore Christ himself did appeal to his Disciples Senses concerning
the Truth of his own Resurrection. Behold my Hands and my Feet, that it is I my
self; and indeed, if we must not believe our Senses, we shall want the best
External Evidence for the Proof of the Truth of the Christian Religion; namely,
the Miracles wrought by Christ and his Apostles: For what Assurance can we have
of the Reality of those Miracles, but from our Senses? Therefore says our
Savior, If ye believe not me, yet believe the Works that I do. That is, the
Miracles which I have wrought before your Eyes. Now as my Senses tell me that
Christ's Miracles were true, so they assure me that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is false. From the whole Note, That the Lord Jesus Christ,
by the Omnipotent Power of his Godhead, revived and rose again from the Dead,
to the Terror and Consternation of his Enemies, and the unspeakable Joy and
Consolation of Believers.

8 And they departed quickly from the sepulcher, with fear and great joy, and
did run to bring his disciples word. 9 And as they went to tell his disciples,
behold, Jesus met them, saying, All hail. And they came, and held him by the
feet, and worshipped him. 10 Then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid: go tell
my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me.

Observe here, 1. What Haste and Speed these holy Women make to carry the News
of Christ's Resurrection to the Apostles; such as find and feel their Hearts
grieved for the Absence and Want of Christ, will be very ready to comfort such
as are in the same Condition. Oh how glad are these holy Women to carry the
good News of their Lord's Resurrection to the Heart-broken Disciples. Observe,
2. How these holy Women hasting in Obedience to the Angel's Command to tell the
Disciples, do meet with Christ in the way. Such as obey the Directions of God's
Ministers, seeking Christ in his own Way and Means, shall find him to their
Comfort sooner than they expected. These holy Women find Christ before they
looked for him; as they went to tell his Disciples, Jesus met them. Observe, 3.
The affectionate and loving Title which Christ puts upon his Disciples. Tell my
Brethren. He might have said, Go tell those Apostate Apostles, that cowardly
left me in my Danger, that durst not own me in the High Priest's Hall, that
durst not come within the Shadow of my Cross, nor within the Sight of my
Sepulcher. Not a word of this by way of upbraiding them for their late shameful
Cowardice, but all Words of Kindness, Go tell my Brethren. Where Note, That
Christ calls his Disciples Brethren after his Resurrection and Exaltation, as
he had done before in his State of Humiliation, to show the Continuance of his
former Affection to them, and that the Change of his Condition had wrought no
Change in his Affection toward his despised Members: But those that were his
Brethren before in the time of his Abasement are so still after his Exaltation
and Advancement. Observe Lastly, The Place where Christ chooses to meet with and
speak to his Disciples, not in Jerusalem, but in Galilee. I go before them into
Galilee, there shall they see me. Jerusalem was now a forsaken Place, a People
abandoned to Destruction; Christ would not show himself openly to them, but
Galilee was a Place where Christ's Ministry was more acceptable. Such Places
wherein Christ is most welcome to preach, shall be most honored with his
Presence. In Galilee shall they see me.

11 Now when they were going, behold, some of the watch came into the city, and
showed unto the chief Priests all the things that were done. 12 And when they
were assembled with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave large money
unto the soldiers, 13 Saying, say ye, His disciples came by night, and stole
him away while we slept. 14 And if this come to the governors ears, we will
persuade him, and secure you. 15 So they took the money, and did as they were
taught: and this saying is commonly reported among the Jews until this day.

Observe here, 1. How the Priests and Elders endeavor by a notorious Lie to
hinder the Belief of our Lord's Resurrection; they suborn and bribe the
Soldiers to say that his Corpse were stolen out of the Grave. Lies have been an
old Refuge, which the Enemies of Christ have all along had Recourse unto
^^lying is an ancient Device of Satan. But Observe, 2. What an improbable and
unlikely Lie this was, which they put into the Soldiers Mouths to vouch; Say,
his Disciples came and stole him away while we slept. If the Soldiers were
asleep, how could they discover the Disciples stealing away the Body? If awake,
why did they not prevent their stealing it? Besides, how improbable was it that
Christ's few and fearful Disciples should attempt to open the Sepulcher,
guarded by Soldiers? And as unlikely was it that the Soldiers should be all
asleep together, and so fast asleep too, that the great Stone at the Mouth of
the Sepulcher should be rolled away, and not one of the Soldiers awaked with
the Noise. Yet Observe farther, That this incredible Falsehood finds a fast and
firm rooting in the Belief of the Jews to this Day. Note thence, That it is a
Righteous Thing with God to deliver up to those strong Delusions, even to the
believing of notorious Lies, who will not yield their Assent to Divine Truths
upon the clearest Evidence, and most convincing Demonstration. How strange is
it, that such a Falsehood as this should find Belief amongst the Jews to this
Day? But where Truth is obstinately rejected, a Lie, though never so improbable,
is received.

16 Then the eleven disciples went away into Galilee, into a mountain, where
Jesus had appointed them. 17 And when they saw him, they worshipped him: but
some doubted.

This Meeting of our Savior and his Apostles upon a Mountain in Galilee was an
appointed and general Meeting. The Mountain is supposed to be that near
Capernaum, where he made that famous Sermon, called the Sermon on the Mount;
and the Meeting is supposed to be appointed as a general Rendezvous for
confirming the Faith of all his Disciples in the Certainty of his Resurrection.
Possibly our Lord appointed this Place in Galilee so far from Jerusalem, that
his Disciples might without Danger come thither to see their Savior alive
again after his Crucifixion. This is judged to be that famous Appearance, of
which St. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 15.6. When he was seen of above Five Hundred
Brethren at once. And those that saw him worshipped him who before had doubted.
Learn hence, That when Faith is once satisfied, and sees Christ to be God, it
engages the Soul to worship him. Divine Worship is due to Christ upon the
Account of his Divine Nature. No Creature can be the Object of Divine Worship,
therefore they that worship Christ by praying to him, and yet deny him to be
God, are certainly Idolaters. If Christ had had an Angelick Nature, that had
not made him capable of Divine Worship; for Adoration is founded only in
Divinity, and what is but Humane or Angelical, is not Adorable.

18 And Jesus came, and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in
heaven and in earth. 19 Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them
in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: 20 Teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with
you always even unto the end of the world: Amen.

Observe here, 1. A Power asserted. 2. An Authority delegated. 3. A Command
injoined. 4. A Promise subjoined. Observe, 1. A Power and Authority asserted by
our Savior as belonging to himself; All Power is given to me both in Heaven,
and in Earth. 1. In Heaven; which comprehends a Power of sending the Holy
Ghost; a Power over the Angels, and all the Host of Heaven; and a Power to
dispose of Heaven to all that shall believe in him. 2. In Earth; which
comprehends a Power to gather a Church out of all Nations, and Authority to
rule, govern and defend the same against all its Enemies. Learn hence, That all
Power and Authority concerning the Church of God; was given unto Christ, and
conferred upon him, upon the Account of his Meritorious Death and Triumphant
Resurrection. All Power is given to me. That is, as Mediator; but this Power
was inherent in him as God from all Eternity. Observe, 2. This Power delegated
by Christ to his Apostles; Go ye therefore, and teach, and baptize all Nations,
instructing them to observe all things whatsoever I command you. Here is a
threefold Power delegated by Christ to his Apostles. 1. To congregate and
gather a Church, a Christian Church, out of all the Heathen Nations throughout
the World. Before he had confined them only to Israel, now they must travel
from Country to Country, and proselyte the Heathen Nations, which before had
been taught of the Devil, and were led away by his Oracles and Delusions. Go
and disciple all Nations, without any Distinction of Country, Sex or Age
whatsoever, and make the Gospel Church as large as you can. Thence Note, That
the Apostles and first Planters of the Gospel had a Commission from Christ to
go amongst the Pagan-Gentiles, without Limitation; and were not to take up
their settled Residence in any one Nation, but to travel from Country to
Country, instructing them in the saving Mysteries of the Gospel. The second
Branch of their Power was to baptize in the Name of the whole Trinity,
Baptizing in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.
Where Observe, That all adult and grown Persons are to be first taught and
instructed before they be baptized. But it follows not from hence, that the
Children of such Parents may not be baptized before they are taught; for the
Apostles were to baptize all Nations, of which Children are a chief, if not the
chiefest part. Besides those that were proselyted to the Jewish Religion, though
before they were circumcised themselves, they were instructed in the Law of
God; yet when they were circumcised themselves, their Children were not denied
Circumcision at Eight Days old. In like manner have we no Reason to deny the
Children of baptized Parents, who are in Covenant themselves, the Sign and Seal
of the Covenant, which is Baptism, God having assured his People, that he will
be the God of them, and of their Seed. If this Privilege be denied, the
Children of Christian Parents are in a worse Condition than the Children of the
Jews, and consequently Infants are in a worse Condition since Christ's coming,
than they were before, and the Privileges of those that live under the Gospel
are streighter and narrower than those that lived under the Law. Observe
farther, In whose Name Persons are to be baptized; in the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. Where we have a Profession of our Belief in the holy
Trinity, a Dedication of the Person to the Worship and Service of the holy
Trinity, and a Stipulation or Covenant Promise that we will continue faithful
in the Service of Father, Son, and holy Spirit to our Lives end. The third
Branch of the Power which Christ delegated to his Apostles was by their
Ministry to press upon all their Converts an Universal Observance of, and
Obedience to all his Commands. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I
command you. Where Note, 1. That preaching is the ordinary and instituted Means
to convert Nations unto God. 2. That preaching must not only go before Baptism,
but follow after it. Obedience must be pressed upon, and practiced by all those
that enter into Covenant with God; otherwise they lie under a greater
Condemnation. 3. That preaching the Gospel is a chief part of the Ministers
Work, and no Apostle thought himself above that Duty. 4. As the Apostles did
not, so the Ministers of Christ ought not to teach any thing but what Christ
commands them. 5. As they are to teach what Christ commands them, so are they
to teach all things whatsoever Christ commands them; Teaching them to observe
all things whatsoever I command you. Lastly, Observe, The Promise subjoined; Lo
I am with you always to the end of the World. That is, I am and will be with
you and your Successors lawfully called by my Power and Authority, by the
Blessing and Assistance of my holy Spirit: I will be with you, to uphold my own
Ordinance, to protect, encourage, and reward you and all your Successors in the
faithful Discharge of your Trust; and this not for a Day, a Year, or an Age,
but to the End and Consummation of all Ages. Learn hence, That the Ministry of
the Word, and Administration of the Sacraments, are a standing and perpetual
Ordinance, to continue in the Christian Church throughout all Ages. Learn, 2.
That all the faithful Ministers of Christ, in what part of the World soever God
shall cast their Lot, and in what time soever they shall happen to live, may
comfortably expect Christ's Gracious Presence with their Persons, and his
Blessing upon their Endeavors. Lo, I am with you, I am always with you, and to
the end of the World I will be with you. Thanks be to Christ for the Gracious
Promise of his Spiritual and Perpetual Presence with his Ministers to the end
of the World. May this Promise cause us to gird up the Loins of our Minds,
increase our Diligence, Zeal and Fervor, accounting no Labor too great, no
Service too much, no Sufferings too severe, so that we may but finish our
Course with Joy, and fulfill the Ministry we are engaged in. Amen, Amen.

The End of St. MATTHEW.
EXPOSITORY NOTES, WITH PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS UPON The Holy Gospel ACCORDING
TO ST. MARK.

DEUTERONOMY. vi. Ver. 6, and 7. These Words which I command thee this Day, shall be
in thy Heart: And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children: And shall
talk of them when thou sit in thine House, and when thou walk by the
Way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up.

EXPOSITORY NOTES, WITH PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS UPON The Holy Gospel ACCORDING
TO ST. MARK.
St. Mark, the Writer of this Compendious History of our Blessed Savior's Life
and Death, was the Disciple and Companion of St. Peter; and some affirm that he
wrote his Gospel from St. Peter's Mouth, it being Dictated by St. Peter, and
Indicted by the Holy Ghost: But since we are assured that the Spirit of God
Indicted the Book, we need not trouble our selves to find out whose Hand it was
that held the Pen.

CHAP. I.
1 THE beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the son of God.

The Word Gospel signifies a Message of glad Tidings, and intimates to us, that
the Doctrine of the Gospel contains the most gladsome Tidings, the most joyful
Message that ever was sent from God to Mankind: Happy Tidings concerning our
Reconciliation with God, and Salvation by Jesus Christ. Oh how highly should we
prize, how steadfastly believe, how cordially embrace these good Tidings of
great Joy! Observe, 2. This Gospel is called the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
because Christ, as God, is the Author of this Gospel, and also the principal
Subject and Matter of it: Indeed St. John the Baptist was the first Publisher
and Preacher of the Gospel Doctrine, but Christ himself was the first and
principal Author, and likewise the chief Subject Matter of it; for whatever is
taught in the Gospel, relates either to the Person and Offices of Christ, or to
the Benefits received by him, or the Means of enjoying those Benefits from him.
Observe, 3. How St. Mark styles Christ the Son of God, as St. Matthew had
styled him before the Son of David; the one sets forth the Verity of his Humane
Nature, the other the Reality of his Divine Nature. Signifying to us, that the
true and promised Messiah was both God and Man in two distinct Natures, and one
Person for ever. He is true and real God, as well as the Father and the Holy
Ghost; not a mere Man, but God as well as Man.

2 As it is written in the Prophets, Behold, I send my messenger before thy
face, which shall prepare thy way before thee.

St. Mark begins his Gospel with an Account of St. John the Baptist's Preaching
and Ministry; and declares, 1. That the Prophets of old, particularly Isaiah
and Malachy, did long before foretell the Baptist's Message and Ministry; that
he should go before Christ as his Harbinger, to prepare the Way for him:
Behold, I send my Messenger to prepare thy Way. Where Note, 1. The Dignity and
Authority of the Ministers of Christ; they are his Messengers, sent by him to
deliver his Mind and Will unto his People. This Ministerial Mission is twofold;
Extraordinary, and Ordinary; the former, when God immediately by himself calls
Men to the Holy Function; the latter, when he uses the Ministry of Man in order
thereunto. Observe, 2. The Work and Office of the Ministers of Christ declared,
and that is, to prepare People to receive Jesus Christ offered and tendered to
them in the Gospel. Behold, I send my Messenger to prepare thy Way before thee.
Learn thence, That the great Design and End of the Ministry of the Word, is to
prepare and fit Men for entertaining the Holy Religion of Christ in their
Hearts, and to oblige them to walk according to the Rules and Directions of it
in their Lives.

3 The voice of one crying in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make his paths straight.

Here Note, 1. The Title given to John the Baptist: He is called a Voice, in
respect of his Ministerial Office, which was to speak forth, to promulge and
publish the Doctrine of Salvation. 2. The Quality or Kind of this Voice, a
crying Voice, the Voice of one crying. This implies, 1. His Earnestness and
Vehemence; his Zeal and Fervency in Preaching. When we lift up our Voice, and
cry aloud, we speak with Earnestness and Fervor. When our own Hearts are
warmly affected with what we preach, we may hope to affect the Hearts of our
Hearers. Why has God commissioned Men, rather than Angels, to be the Preachers
and Dispensers of his Word? But because we can speak to, and treat with Sinners
more feelingly, and more affectionately than the Angels can. 2. This crying of
the Holy Baptist in his Preaching implies his Liberty and Boldness, as well as
his Vehemence and Earnestness in delivering of his Message. The lifting up of
the Voice in speaking, argues Boldness and Courage in the Speaker, as on the
contrary, the depressing of the Voice shows Timerousness. Learn hence, That
the Ministers of the Word are to use both Zeal and Earnestness, and also
Courage and Boldness of Spirit, in delivering the Word and Message of God. Not
forbearing to reprove Sin, nor concealing any part of God's Truth, for fear of
M^n's Displeasure. Observe, 3. The Sum and Substance of what he cried, Prepare
ye the Way of the Lord, make his Paths straight. That is, Make ready your
selves, prepare your own Hearts to entertain the Doctrine and glad Tidings of
the Gospel. It is a Metaphorical Speech, taken from the Custom of Loyal and
Dutiful Subjects; who, when their Princ^ is coming to lodge in their ^ity, they
prep^re and make ready the way for his coming by removing every thing that may
obstruct or hinder his Progress. Learn hence, That Man's Heart by Nature is
very unfit to embrace and entertain the Lord Jesus Christ. We have naturally no
Fitness, no Disposition, no Inclination, to believe in him, or to submit unto
him. 2. If ever we desire to entertain Christ in our Hearts, we must first
prepare and make fit our Hearts for the receiving and embracing of him. For
though the Preparation of the Heart be from the Lord, yet he requires the
Exercise of our Faculties, and the Use of our Endeavors. He prepares our
Hearts, by enabling us to the Preparation of our own Hearts. This is done, by
getting a sight of the Evil of Sin, a sense of our Misery without Christ, an
hungring and thirsting Desire after him, a true Faith in him. Christ will lodge
in no Heart that is not thus made ready to receive him.

4 John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of repentance,
for the remission of sins.

A twofold Account is here given of St. John's Execution of his Ministry and
Office; first, his Baptizing; secondly, his Preaching. John did Baptize: That
is, admit Persons into the Church, by washing them with Water. John baptized
into the Name of Christ, who was to come; the Apostles baptized into the Name
of Christ, already come. The second Part of his Office was Preaching; where
Note, That Preaching of the Word, and Administration of the Sacraments, are to
go together, and belong only to the Ministers of the Word, lawfully called.
John did Baptize and Preach; but where and what did he preach? The place where,
was the Wilderness; a place not much frequented, though not altogether
uninhabited; a solitary, mean, and obscure place. Thither God had called him,
and there he contents himself. Learn hence, That the Ministers of God must be
content to execute their Ministry where God calls them, be the Place never so
mean and obscure, and the People never so rude and barbarous: John was a
Preacher of great Note and Fame, Jerusalem the chief City might seem more fit
for him, but God had called him to Preach in the Wilderness, and he would not
leave it. We must not leave our Place because it is mean and obscure, nor
desert our People, thinking them too base to instruct; but where God has called
us, we must there abide, till he that called us thither remove us thence.
Observe farther, as the Place where the Baptist preached, in the Wilderness; so
the Doctrine which he preached, namely, the Baptism of Repentance for the
Remission of Sin: That is, the Doctrine of Baptism, which seals Remission of
Sins to the Party baptized. Learn hence, That the Preaching of the Doctrine of
Repentance is absolutely necessary, and the Indispensible Duty of every
Gospel-Minister. John Baptist preached it, our Savior preached it, his
Apostles preached it. They went out Preaching every where, that Men should
repent.

5 And there went out unto him all the land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem,
and were all baptized of him in the river of Jordan, confessing their sins.

Here we have an Account of the Success of John's Ministry; 1. In the general
Concourse and Resort of the People to it. All Judea and Jerusalem; that is, a
great many of all Degrees and Ranks, of Ages and Sexes. John was famed for a
Prophet, and a Prophet was now a great Rarity. Malachy was the last Prophet
before John, and he lived about Five Hundred Years before John. Now the
Excellency of his Person, the Earnestness of his Preaching, the Acceptableness
of his Doctrine, that the Messiah was come, and the Austerity of his Life and
Conversation; all these caused the People to flock unto him. Learn hence, That
it is a great Encouragement to the Ministers of Christ, when People show
themselves ready and forward to repair unto the Places where the Word and
Sacraments are dispensed to them: All Judea and Jerusalem attended upon John's
Ministry. The second Fruit of John's Ministry was, that the People were ready
to receive at his Hand the Sacrament of Baptism; They were all baptized of him
in Jordan. Learn hence, That the Ministers of Christ ought not only to preach
the Word, but also to dispense the Sacraments to their People, even to all that
do desire them, and are fit to be Partakers of them. A third Fruit of John's
Ministry was his Hearers Profession of their true Repentance by the Confession
of their Sins: As the Profession of Repentance is requisite in all that are
Baptized, so a free and voluntary, ingenious and impartial Confession of Sin,
is a good Evidence and Testimony of the Truth and Sincerity of our Repentance.

6 And John was clothed with camels hair, and with a girdle of a skin about
his loins: and he did eat locusts, and wild honey.

This Verse acquaints us with the Strictness and Austerity of St. John's Life
in the Wilderness, which is laid down in two Things, in his mean and frugal
Apparel, and in his sober and temperate Diet. His Apparel was rough and hairy,
and his Girdle of Leather; as Elijah his Forerunner was clad before him, 2
Kings 1.8. His Diet was course and ordinary, Locusts and wild Honey; that is,
such plain and ordinary Food as the Wilderness afforded. His Example teaches
us, That the Ministers of the Gospel are not to affect either Bravery in
Apparel, or Delicacy in Diet, but both by their Habit and Diet set an Example
of Gravity and Sobriety before their People; being in these as well as in other
things an Example unto their Flocks.

7 And preached, saying, There comes one mightier then I after me, the latchet
of whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose.

Observe here, 1. The high Opinion that the Baptist had of Christ; he is
mightier than I: That is, a Person of greater Dignity and Excellency by far
than my self; whence may be gathered, that though Christ was Man, he was not mere
Man, but more than Man; even very God, equal with the Father; for John Baptist
was the greatest of them that were born of Women, Matthew. 11.11. yet says he,
Christ is mightier, or greater than I. How so? but in regard of the Dignity of
his Person, being both God and Man in two distinct Natures, and one Person.
Observe 2. The humble and low Estimation that the Baptist had of himself; His
Shoe-latchet I am not worthy to unloose: A proverbial Speech, implying, that he
was unworthy to do the basest and meanest Service for Christ. Oh how well does
Humility of Mind, an humble Apprehension, a low Esteem and Opinion of
themselves, and their own Gifts and Abilities, become the Messengers and
Ministers of Christ John was a Man of eminent Abilities, yet of Exemplary
Humility; he thought himself unworthy to unloose Christ's Shoe, or do the
meanest Office for him.

8 I indeed have baptized you with water: but he shall baptize you with the
holy Ghost.

John showed the Dignity of Christ's Person above his own in the former Verse;
in this he declares the Excellency of Christ's Office, and the meanness of his
own; I wash the Body with Water, but Christ cleanses the Soul by the Operation
of his Holy Spirit. Thence Learn, That though the Ministers of Christ do by
Christ's Command dispense the Outward Ordinance of Baptism, yet it is Christ
himself, that by the Inward Work of his Spirit does make it effectual to such
as receive it. I Baptize with Water, but he with the Holy Ghost.

9 And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee,
and was baptized of John in Jordan. 10 And straightway coming up out of the
water, he saw the heavens opened, and the Spirit like a dove descending upon
him. 11 And there came a voice from heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased.

See the Note on Matthew. 3.13. Observe, here 1. The great Condescension of
Christ, in seeking and submitting to the Baptism of John: Christ, though he was
John's Lord and Master, yea, Lord of Heaven and Earth, yet comes to hear John
Preach, and will be Baptized of his Messenger. Thence Learn, That the greatest
Persons should neither think themselves too great, nor too good to come unto
the Ministers of God, to hear the Word from his Mouth, or to receive the
Sacrament at his Hand. Christ, the Son of God, was content to be Baptized of
John, a mean Person in Comparison of himself. How dare then the greatest upon
Earth despise the Ministry of Man, being appointed by God? Observe, 2. The
solemn investing of Christ into the Office of a Mediator, by a threefold
Miracle; namely, the opening of the Heavens, the Descent of the Holy Ghost, and
God the Father's Voice or Testimony concerning his Son: The Heavens were
opened, to show that Heaven which was closed and shut against us for our Sins,
is now opened to us by Christ's undertaking for us. As Christ opened Heaven by
his meritorious Passion, so he keeps it open by his prevailing Intercession.
Next, The Holy Ghost descends like a Dove upon our Savior. Here we have a
Proof and Evidence of the Blessed Trinity. The Father speaks from Heaven, the
Son comes out of the Water, and the Holy Ghost descends in the Likeness of a
Dove. But why did the Holy Ghost now descend upon Christ? First, For the
Designation of his Person, to show that he was the Person set apart for the
Work and Office of a Mediator. Secondly, For the Sanctification of his Person
for the Performance of that Office. This was Christ's Unction, the Day in which
he was Anointed above his Fellows to be the King, Priest, and Prophet of his
Church, Isa. 61. v. 1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, he has anointed me,
etc. Observe, 3. The Voice of God the Father pronouncing, 1. The Nearness of
Christ's Relation to himself; This is my Son. 2. The Endearedness of his
Person; This is my Beloved Son. 3. The Fruit and Benefit of this near and dear
Relation unto us; In him I am well pleased. Hence Learn, 1. That there is no
Possibility for any Person to please God out of Christ, neither our Persons nor
our Performances can find Acceptance, but through him, and for his sake. 2. That
the Lord Jesus Christ is the Ground and Cause of all that Love which God the
Father shows to the Sons of Men: In Christ God is well pleased with us as a
reconciled Father; out of him a consuming Fire.

12 And immediately the spirit drives him into the wilderness. 13 And he was
there in the wilderness forty days tempted of Satan, and was with the wild
beasts, and the Angels ministered unto him.

Immediately. That is, 1. After his Baptism. Christ is no sooner out of the
Water of Baptism, but he is in the Fire of Temptation: Such as are Baptized
with Christ, and entered into the Profession of Christianity, they must look to
be assaulted with Satan's Temptations. Again, Immediately, that is, 2. After
the Father had declared his Complacency in him, and being well pleased with
him. Learn thence, That great Manifestations of Love from God, are usually
followed with great Temptations from Satan. The Spirit drives him; That is,
the Holy Spirit of God. For the Devil is seldom, if ever, called the Spirit,
but usually some Brand of Reproach is annexed, as the evil Spirit, or the
unclean Spirit, and the like. Christ was led by the Spirit, says St. Matthew,
4.1. He was driven by the Spirit, says St. Mark; that is, He was carried by a
strong Impulse of the Spirit of God, to be tempted by Satan, and did not go of
his own private Motion to enter the Lists with Satan. Teaching us our Duty, not
to run into, or rush upon Temptations without a Warrant and Call from God.
Observe next, the Place where Satan assaulted Christ with his Temptations; it
was a solitary Wilderness. No Place can privilege us from Temptations, or be a
Sanctuary from Satan's Assaults. The solitary Wilderness has a Tempter in it,
yea, Satan oft-times makes use of Men's Solitariness, to farther his
Temptations; and such as separate themselves from Humane Society, and give
themselves up to Solitude and Retirement, they give great Advantage to the
Tempter to tempt them. Observe next, the Time and Continuance of our Holy
Lord's Temptations; not for an Hour, a Day, a Week, or a Month, but for Forty
Days, and Forty Nights; not all the Time, but very often in that Time. Teaching
us what we are to expect from Satan; Temptations, not a few; he will not
solicit us once, but often, and follow us with fresh Assaults; but the only
way to overcome him, is as often to resist him. Observe farther, a special
Aggravation of our Lord's Temptations in the Wilderness, He was with the wild
Beasts, having no Comfort from Man, but only wild Beasts for his Companions,
which were more likely to annoy and hurt him, than any way to help and comfort
him. Here we have an Evidence of the Divine Power of Christ; who, as Lord of
the Creatures, can alter and change the Nature of the Creatures at his
Pleasure, restraining the most Savage and Hurtful Beasts from hurting, either
himself, or any of his People. Observe, lastly, The Supply sent in to Christ in
the Hour of Temptation. The Angels came and ministered unto him, Food to his
hungry Body, and Comfort to his tempted Soul. Learn thence, that those who in
the Hour of Temptation do hold out in resisting Satan, shall find, that the
Power and Faithfulness of God will not be wanting to them, to send in Succor
and Relief at last. Then the Devil leaves him, and behold Angels came and
ministered unto him.

14 Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching
the gospel of the kingdom of God, 15 And saying, the time is fulfilled, and the
kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel.

In this our Savior's first beginning to preach the Gospel, we have an Account
of the Time when, the Place where, and the Sum of what he preached. Observe 1.
The Time when our Lord began to preach, and that was after John the Baptist was
cast into Prison: Where Note, 1. The undue Reward which the Ministers of God do
sometimes meet with from a wicked World: They are hated, persecuted, and
imprisoned, for their Courage in reproving Sin: John for reproving Herod's
Incest, was put in Prison. Note, 2. John was no sooner in Prison, and stopped,
and hindered from preaching, but Christ began to preach. See the Care and
Kindness of God toward his Church, in that he never leaves it wholly destitute
of the Means of Instruction: When some of his faithful Ministers are restrained
from preaching, he stirs up others in their Rooms, not suffering all their
Mouths to be stopped at once. Observe, 2. The Place where our Lord first preached
in Galilee. The Land of Canaan in our Savior's time was divided into three
principal Provinces. On the South, Judea; on the North, Galilee; in the midst,
Samaria. Galilee was divided into the upper and lower Galilee; the higher was
called Galilee of the Gentiles, because it was the outmost part of the Land,
and so next unto the Gentiles. In this upper Galilee, Capernaum was the
Metropolis, or Chief, and Corazin, a lesser City. Now much of our Savior's
time was spent in Galilee; he was conceived and brought up at Nazareth, a City
in Galilee; he first preached at Capernaum in Galilee; he wrought the first
Miracle at Cana in Galilee. His Transfiguration was upon Mount Tabor in
Galilee, and our Savior's ordinary Residence was in Galilee; he came into
Judea, and up to Jerusalem only at the Feasts, and after his Resurrection he
appoints his Disciples to meet him in Galilee. Only his Nativity, his Passion,
and Ascension, were proper to Judea: His Nativity at Bethlehem, his Passion at
Jerusalem, and his Ascension upon Mount Olivet, hard by Jerusalem. Now all this
demonstrates Christ to be the true and promised Messiah; for according to
Prophecy the Messiah was to have his Presence and principal Abode in the
Province of Galilee, Isa. 9. v. 1, 2, 3, etc. yet because he was of Galilee,
the Jews would not believe him to be the Messiah, saying in Scorn, Can any good
thing come out of Galilee? Whereas our Savior's Habitation and free
Conversation there was a Proof unto them, and ought to have persuaded them,
that according to Prophecy he was the very Christ. Observe, 3. The Sum of what
our Lord preached, namely, a Doctrine, and an Exhortation. His Doctrine is,
That the Time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at Hand. That is, that
the Time foretold by the Prophets when the Kingdom of the Messiah should begin,
was now come. The Exhortation is, Therefore Repent, and Believe the Gospel.
From the former, Note, That the Messiah's coming, or our Savior's appearing in
the Flesh, was exactly at the time foretold by the Holy Prophets. The time is
fulfilled, the Kingdom of the Messiah is at Hand. Note, 2. That the great
Doctrines of Repentance and Faith are taught only in and by the Gospel, and
accordingly ought in a special Manner to be preached, and insisted upon by the
Ministers of the Gospel. The Doctrine of Christ and his Ambassador is and ought
to be the same; they both teach the great Doctrines of Faith and Repentance to
a lost World. Repent, and Believe the Gospel.

16 Now as he walked by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew his
brother, casting a net into the sea: (for they were fishers.) 17 And Jesus said
unto them, Come ye after me, and I will make you to become fishers of men. 18
And straightway they forsook their nets, and followed him. 19 And when he had
gone a little further thence, he saw James the son of Zebedee, and John his
brother, who also were in the ship mending their nets. 20 And straightway he
called them: and they left their father Zebedee in the ship with the hired
servants, and went after him.

In this History of our Savior's calling the four Disciples, Peter and Andrew,
James and John, Observe these Particulars. Obs. 1. The Meanness of the Persons
whom he calls, Illiterate Fishermen: Christ took hereby effectual Care, that
his Gospel should be known to be the Power of God, and not the Wisdom and
Device of Man; and that the Instruments should not carry away the Glory of the
Work. Obs. 2. Christ called his Apostles by Couples, Two and Two; first Peter
and Andrew, then James and John; thereby signifying to us, that the Work of the
Ministry requires the Concurrence of all Hands that are called to it. All the
Ministers of God should join their Hearts and Hands, and set their Shoulders as
one Man to this great Work, and all little enough (God knows) to carry it on
with Advantage and Success. Obs. 3. The Work which they are called from, and
called to, from being Fishermen, to be Fishers of Men; from catching Fish with
the Labor of their Hands, to catch Men with the Labor of their Tongues. Obs.
4. Our Savior's Command, first to follow him before they be sent out by him:
Follow me, and I will make you Fishers of Men. We must be Christ's Disciples
before we are his Ministers; his Followers, before we are his Ambassadors: We
must learn Christ, before we preach him; otherwise we may fish for a
Livelihood, but not for Souls. Obs. 5. The Gracious Promise which Christ gives
his Apostles for their Encouragement, namely, to qualify them for, and to
succeed them in their Office. I will make you Fishers of Men. Faithfulness and
Care, Diligence and Endeavor is our part, but the Blessing and Success is
Christ's; our Labor is only in the Cast, Christ's Power is wholly in the
Draught. Some Fish cleave to the Rocks, others play upon the Sands, more wallow
in the Mud; and verily we shall labor all our Days, and catch nothing, if
Christ does not bring our Fish to Net, and enclose them in it, as well as
assist us in the throwing and casting of it. Obs. 6. The Apostles ready
Compliance with our Savior's Call. Straightway they forsook Father and
Friends, Ship and Nets, and followed Jesus. Whom Christ calls, he calls
effectually; he draws whom he calls, and works their Hearts to a ready
Compliance with their Duty. Obs. 7. That upon their Call to the Ministry, they
leave off their Trade, they forsake their Ship and their Nets, and lie close to
their Ministerial Employment. Teaching us, That the Ministers of the Gospel
should wholly give themselves up to their great Work, and not incumber
themselves with secular Affairs, and worldly Business. Nothing but an
indispensible Necessity, in providing for a Family, can excuse a Minister's
encumbring himself with Worldly Concerns and Business.

21 And they went into Capernaum, and straightway on the sabbath day he entered
into the synagogue, and taught. 22 And they were astonished at his doctrine:
for he taught them as one that had authority, and not as the scribes.

Our Savior having called his Disciples, Peter and Andrew, James and John, to
follow him in order to their preaching of the Gospel; here we may observe how
he went himself along with them; teaching personally in the Synagogues
wherever he came: He did not send his Apostles forth as his Curates, and lie
at home himself upon his Couch of Ease. What shall we say to those lazy
Fishermen that set others to the Drag, but care only to feed themselves with
the Fish? Not willing to wet their Hand with the Net, or take any Pains
themselves. Our Savior did not thus, but when he sent forth his Apostles, he
still preached himself, he went into their Synagogues, and taught. Observe
farther, The Success of his preaching; the People were astonished at his
Doctrine, struck with Admiration, apprehending and believing him to be an
extraordinary Prophet, sent from God. Learn thence, That such is the Efficacy
of Christ's Doctrine, especially when accompanied with the Energy and Operation
of his Holy Spirit, that it makes all his Auditors Admirers; causing
Astonishment in their Minds, and Reformation in their Manners. Observe lastly,
The Reason of our Lord's Success in preaching; He taught as one having
Authority. He taught in his own Name, as being Lord of his Doctrine; not saying
with the Prophets, Thus says the Lord, but I say unto you. And he wrought
powerful Miracles, which accompanied his Doctrine. As Christ was careful to
preserve the Authority of his Person and Doctrine with the People, so is it the
Duty of his Ministers to demean themselves amongst their People, that neither
their Authority may be contemned, nor their Persons despised, but their
Doctrine and themselves reverenced and obeyed.

23 And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit, and he cried
out, 24 Saying, Let us alone, what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of
Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the holy One
of God. 25 And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him.
26 And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with aloud voice, he
came out of him. 27 And they were all amazed, insomuch, that they questioned
among themselves, saying, What thing is this? what new doctrine is this? for
with authority commands he even the unclean spirits, and they do obey him.

St. Mark having given an Account of our Savior's Doctrine which he preached,
v. 15. namely, the Doctrine of Faith and Repentance, he now acquaints us in the
remaining part of this Chapter, with the Miracles which he wrought for the
confirming of his Doctrine, and they are Three. First, The casting of a Devil
out of one possessed, v. 23. Secondly, The curing of Peter 's Wife's Mother of
a Fever, v. 29. Thirdly, The cleansing of a Leper, from v. 40. to the end of
the Chapter. His first Miracle was the casting out of a Devil out of one
possessed. There was a Man with an unclean Spirit: That is, an unclean Spirit
did enter into him, and bodily possess him. Amongst the many Calamities which
Sin has brought upon our Bodies, this is one, that we are liable to be bodily
possessed by Satan. The Devil has an inveterate Malice against Mankind, seeking
to ruin our Souls by his Suggestions and Temptations; and to destroy our Bodies
by some Means or other; but blessed be God, though his Malice be infinite, yet
his Power is limited and bounded; as he cannot do all the Mischief he would, so
he shall not do all he can. Oh how much is it our Interest, as well as our
Duty, by Prayer, to put our selves Morning and Evening under the Divine
Protection, that we may be preserved from the Power and Malice of evil Spirits!
Obs. 2. The Attribute or Title given to the Devil; he is called an unclean
Spirit. The Devils, those wicked Spirits of Hell, are most impure and filthy
Creatures; impure by Means of their original Apostasy; impure by Means of their
actual and daily Sins, such are Murder, Malice, Lying, and the like, by which
they continually pollute themselves; impure, by Means of their continual Desire
and Endeavor to pollute Mankind with the Contagion of their own Sin. Lord, how
foul is the Nature of Sin, which makes the Devil such a foul and unclean
Creature! Obs. 3. This unclean Spirit no sooner saw Christ, but he cried out.
Whence Note, That the Greatness of Christ's Power (being the Son of God) over
Devils and wicked Spirits is such, that it is very terrible and tormenting to
them; it was terrible to them in his State of Humiliation on Earth, and made
them then cry out; but Oh how terrible will his Power be to them at the great
Day, when Christ shall come in flaming Fire, to render Vengeance both to Men
and Devils! Obs. 4. The Substance of the Devil's Outcry: Let us alone, what
have we to do with thee? Art thou come to destroy us? Where Note, 1. That though
the Devils are now as full of Sin and Discontent as they can be, yet they are
not so full of Misery and Torment as they shall be. Art thou come to torment us
before the time? Says St. Matthew. 8.29. Art thou come to destroy us? Says St.
Mark: That is, to bring upon us our full and final Destruction. Implying, that
the Devil has not yet his full Judgment and complete Damnation. Therefore there
is certainly a Day of Judgment to come, and the Devils are in Chains of
Darkness, reserved to the Judgment of that great Day. But some by these Words,
Art thou come to destroy us? understand as much, as are thou come to restrain
us from the Exercise of our Power? Learn we thence, That the Devil thinks
himself destroyed when he is restrained from doing Mischief. Obs. 5. The Title
which the Devil puts upon our Savior: Jesus of Nazareth, the Holy One of God.
Although there was Ground for the common People's calling Christ, Jesus of
Nazareth, because he was bred and brought up there, and lived there during his
private Life, till about 30 Years of Age; Though he was not born there, but at
Bethlehem, yet it is conceived, that the Devil gave this Title to our Savior
in Policy, to disguise the place of Christ's Nativity, that so the Jews might
not believe him to be the true Messiah, because he was of Nazareth, whereas the
Messiah was to come out of Bethlehem. Therefore to the Intent that the Jews
might be at the greater Loss concerning Christ, and in Doubt of his being the
true Messiah, the Devil here calls him, not Jesus of Bethlehem, but Jesus of
Nazareth. But how comes the next Title out of the Devil's Mouth, The Holy One
of God? Could an Apostle? Could Peter himself make a Profession beyond this?
But how comes the Devil to make it? For no good End or Purpose we may be sure:
For he never speaks Truth for Truths sake, but for Advantage. Probably, 1. He
made this Profession, that so he might bring the Truth professed into
Suspicion, hoping that a Truth which received Testimony from the Father of Lies
would be suspected. 2. It might perhaps be done, that the People might believe
that our Savior had some Familiarity with Satan, and did work Miracles by his
Help, because he did confess him, and seem so much to honor him. From this
Instance and Example Learn, That it is possible for a Person to own and
acknowledge Christ to be the true and only Savior, and yet to miss of
Salvation by him. If a speculative Knowledge and a verbal Profession of Christ
were sufficient to Salvation, the Devil himself would not miss of Happiness.
Obs. 6. How our Savior rebukes the Devil for this Confession, and commands him
Silence: And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy Peace. But why was this Rebuke
given the Devil, when he spoke the Truth? Ans. 1. Because Christ knew that the
Devil confessed this Truth on purpose to disgrace the Truth. 2. Because the
Devil was no fit Person to make this Profession. A Testimony of Truth from the
Father of Lies is enough to render Truth it self suspected. Yet the Devil's
Evidence, that Christ was the Holy One of God, will rise up in Judgment against
the wicked Pharisees, who shut their Eyes against the Miracles, and stopped their
Ears against the Doctrine of the Holy One of God. Obs. lastly, How the unclean
Spirit obeys the Voice of Christ, though with great Reluctance and Regret, When
the unclean Spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud Voice, he came out.
Christ is Lord over the wicked Angels, and has an absolute Power and Authority
to overruled them, and command them at his Pleasure: If Christ says to the evil
Spirit, Come out, out he must come. Yet observe the Devil's Spite at parting,
he tears the Man, tortures his Body, throws him violently from Place to Place,
showing how loath he was to be dispossessed. Where Satan has once gotten an
hold, and settled himself for a time, how unwilling is he to be cast out of
Possession; yea, it is a Torture and Vexation to him to be cast out; it is much
easier to keep him our, than to cast him out. Satan may possess the Body by
God's Permission, but he cannot possess our Hearts, without our own Consent and
Approbation; it will be our Wisdom to deny him Entrance into our Souls at
first, by rejecting his wicked Motions and Suggestions; for when once entered,
he will, like the strong Man armed, keep the House, till a stronger than he
casts him out.

28 And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region round
about Galilee. 29 And forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they
entered into the house of Simon, and Andrew, with James and John. 30 But Simons
wives mother lay sick of a fever: and anon they tell him of her. 31 And he came
and took her by the hand, and lift her up, and immediately the fever left her,
and she ministered unto them.

The second Miracle which our Savior wrought in this Chapter to confirm the
Truth and Authority of his Doctrine was his raising up of Peter's Wives Mother
from her Bed of Sickness. Where Note, 1. That St. Peter, now a Disciple, and
afterward an Apostle, was a married Person. Neither the Prophets of the Old
Testament, nor the Ministers of the New, did abhor the Marriage Bed, nor think
themselves too pure for an Institution of their Maker. The Church of Rome, by
denying the Lawfulness of Priests Marriage, makes her self wiser than God, who
says, Heb. 13.4. Marriage is honorable amongst all Men. Obs. 2. Peter, though a
good Man, and his Wives Mother probably a gracious Woman, yet is his Family
visited with Sickness. Strength of Grace, and Dearness of Respect, even from
Christ himself, cannot prevail against Diseases. God's own Children are visited
with Bodily Sicknesses as well as others. Obs. 3. The charitable Care of St.
Peter and the other Disciples, forthwith to acquaint Christ with the Condition
of this Sick Person: Anon they tell him of her. The Care of our
Fellow Christians, especially when of the number of our near and dear Relations
in a time of Sickness, is not to be deferred or delayed. Outward Help for their
Bodies, and the Spiritual Help of our Prayers for their Souls, are both
straightway to be afforded them. Obs. 4. Christ's Divine Power manifested in
this miraculous Cure: He no sooner took her by the Hand, but the Fever left
her. The Miracle was not in curing an incurable Distemper, but in curing an
ordinary Distemper after a miraculous manner: namely, 1. By a Touch of the
Hand; 2. The Recovery was instantaneous and sudden: Immediately the Fever left
her. 3. The visible Effects of her Recovery instantly appeared, She arose and
ministered unto Christ and his Disciples. That she could arise, argued her Cure
miraculous; that she did arise, and did administer to Christ, argued her
Thankfulness. Learn thence, That after Christ has graciously healed any of us,
it ought to be our first Work and Care to administer unto Christ. That is, to
employ our recovered Health in the Service of Christ, and to improve our
renewed Strength to the Honor and Glory of Christ.

32 And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that were
diseased, and them that were possessed with devils: 33 And all the city was
gathered together at the door. 34 And he healed many that were sick of diverse
diseases, and cast out many devils, and suffered not the devils to speak,
because they knew him.

The Evangelist here declares sundry other Miracles wrought by our Savior
before the Door of Peter's House, where he now was: He healed all the Diseased
that were brought unto him, and cast out Devils out of them that were possessed
with them. But how comes it to pass that we read of so many possessed with
Devils in our Savior's time, and so few either before or since? Answ. 1.
Probably Satan perceiving that the Messiah was come in the Flesh to destroy his
Kingdom, did rage the more, and discover greater Malice and Enmity against
Mankind. 2. Perhaps Almighty God permitted Satan at that time to possess so
many, that Christ might have Occasion to manifest his Divine Power, by casting
Satan out: And accordingly we find our Savior dispossessing all that were
possessed by Satan. It is added, That he suffered not the Devils to speak,
because they knew him. That is, Christ would not be made known to be the Son of
God by the preaching of the Devil, to whom it belonged not to publish the
Gospel, lest the World should take from thence an Occasion to think that our
Savior held a Correspondency with those wicked Spirits, and that the Miracles
he wrought were performed by the Devil's Assistance, as being one in
Combination with him; possibly from the Devil's owning Christ to be the Holy
One of God, the Pharisees concluded, that there was a Compact and Agreement
betwixt them, and thereupon their Affirmation was grounded, he casts out
Devils by Beelzebub, etc.

35 And in the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went out and
departed into a solitary place, and there prayed.

Observe here, 1. The Duty performed by our Savior; namely, Prayer, solitary
and private Prayer. He went by himself alone out of the hearing of his
Disciples. The Company of our best Friends is not always seasonable, nor
acceptable; there are Times and Cases when a Christian would not be willing
that his dearest Relations upon Earth should hear that Intercourse which passes
betwixt him and his. God. Obs. 2. Christ chooses the Opportunity of the Morning
for Prayer, He rises a great while before Day, to set about this Work. Teaching
us, that the Morning is a fit Season, yea, the best Season for private Duties.
Now our Spirits are freshest, and our Minds freest, before the Distractions of
the Day break in upon us; it is better to go from Prayer to Business, than from
Business to Prayer.

36 And Simon and they that were with him followed after him. 37 And when they
had found him, they said unto him, All men seek for thee. 38 And he said unto
them, Let us go into the next towns, that I may preach there also: for
therefore came I forth. 39 And he preached in their synagogues throughout all
Galilee, and cast out devils.

Observe here Two Things, First, The great End of Christ in his Incarnation,
and coming into the World, namely, as a Prophet sent from God to reveal his
Will, and to publish the Doctrine of the Gospel. Therefore came I forth; that
is, to preach and plant the Gospel. Secondly, It being Christ's Design, not
only to plant, but propagate the Gospel, he would not confine his Ministry to
any particular Place, no, not to the great City of Capernaum, but resolves to
preach the Word in the smallest Towns and Villages. Leaving his Ministers
herein an instructive Example to be as willing to preach the Gospel in the
smallest Villages, as in the largest Cities, if God calls them thereunto. Let
the Place be never so obscure and mean, and the Congregation never so small and
little, if God sends us thither, the greatest of us must not think it beneath
us, to go and instruct an handful of People.

40 And there came a leper to him, beseeching him, and kneeling down to him,
and saying unto him, If thou will thou can make me clean. 41 And Jesus moved
with compassion, put forth his hand, and touched him, and says unto him, I
will, be thou clean. 42 And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy
departed from him, and he was cleansed. 43 And he straightly charged him, and
forthwith sent him away. 44 And says unto him, See thou say nothing to any
man: but go thy way, show thy self to the Priest, and offer for thy cleansing
those things which Moses commanded for a testimony unto them. 45 But he went
out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze abroad the matter: insomuch,
that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city, but was without in desert
places: and they came to him from every quarter.

The last Miracle of our Savior's, recorded in this Chapter, is his healing of
a leper; he came, beseeching Christ to heal him: Saying, If thou will thou
can make me clean. Where Obs. 1. He does not question Christ's Power, but
distrusts Christ's Willingness to heal him: Lord, if thou will thou can.
Christ's Divine Power must be fully assented to, and firmly believed by all
those that expect Benefit by him, and healing from him. Obs. 2. The great
Readiness of Christ to help and heal this distressed Person. Jesus touched him,
saying, I will, be thou clean. By the Ceremonial Law the Leper was forbidden to
be touched, therefore Christ's touching this Leper showed him to be above the
Law, and that he was the Lord of it, and might dispense with it; and his
healing the Leper by the Word of his Mouth, and Touch of his Hand, showed him
to be truly and really God. Leprosy amongst the Jews was an incurable
Distemper, called the Finger of God, a Disease of his sending, and of his
removing. Our Savior therefore, as a Proof of his being the true Messiah,
tells John's Disciples, Matthew. 11.5. That the Lepers were cleansed, and the
Dead raised by him; which two being joined together, do imply, that the
cleansing of Lepers is as much an Act of Divine Power, as the raising of the
Dead. And accordingly, 2 Kin. 5.8. it is said, Am I a God, that this Man sends
to me to cure a Man of his Leprosy. Obs. 3. The Certainty and Suddenness of
the Cure was a Proof of Christ's Divine Power: immediately his Leprosy was
cleansed. Christ not only cured him without Means, but without the ordinary
Time required for such a Cure. Thus Christ showed both Power and Will to cure
him miraculously, who believed his Power, but questioned his Willingness. Obs.
4. The Cause moving our Savior to cure this Leper, his Bowels were moved with
tender Pity and Compassion toward him. Christ's exercising Acts of Mercy and
Compassion, with such Condolency and Sympathizing Pity, should by way of
Example teach us to be inwardly moved with tender Compassion and Mercy toward
such as are in Misery. We are not only to draw out our Bread, but to draw out
our Soul to the Hungry. Obs. 5. A twofold Charge and Command given by Christ to
the Leper after his Cure, 1. To conceal, and Tell it to no Man. Where the great
Modesty, Humility and Piety of Christ is discovered, together with the Care of
his own Safety. His Modesty, in not desiring his good Deeds should be published
and proclaimed. His Humility, in shunning vainglorious Applause and
Commendation. His Piety, in desiring all Honor and Glory should redound
entirely to God. And the Care of his own Safety appeared, lest the publishing
of his Miracles should create him untimely Danger from the Pharisees. The
second part of the Charge given to the recovered Leper, was, To show himself to
the Priest, and offer the Gift which Moses commanded: for a Testimony unto
them: That is, to testify to the Jews, that he did not oppose the Ceremonial
Law, which required a Thank-Offering at his Hand, and that he was the true and
promised Messiah. Learn thence, That our Savior would have the Ceremonial Law
punctually observed, so long as the time for its Continuance did endure; though
he came to destroy that Law, yet whilst it stood, he would have it punctually
observed. Observe 6. Notwithstanding our Savior's strict Prohibition, the
Leper publishes the Fame of this Miracle. It Is like his Intention might be
good, in extolling his great Benefactor, but his acting contrary to Christ's
Command, was a Fault, and shows the Corruption of Humane Nature, in being most
forward to that which is most forbidden. It Is a Sin to do any thing against the
Command of Christ, though with never so good a Meaning, Purpose and Intention, to
Exalt and Honor Christ. Obs. Lastly, The Inconveniences which attended our
Savior upon this indiscreet Publication of the Miracle; and they were Two. 1.
Our Savior could no more enter into Capernaum, and other Cities, to preach in
an open Manner as he had done, by reason of the great Concourse of People after
him. 2. The Fame of this Miracle brought the People about him from all
Quarters; not so much to hear, as to see; not so much to hear his Holy and
Heavenly Doctrine which he taught, as to gratify their Curiosity with the
Sight of the Miracles which he wrought. Oh how many thronged after Christ, more
to have their Bodily Diseases cured, than their Souls healed. Christ desired
not their flocking after him upon this Account; therefore he retires from the
Breath of popular Applause; he would not openly enter into the City, but was
without in desert Places. Oh great Humility! How little did our Blessed
Redeemer regard the Applause and Commendation of Men? Constantly we find him as
soon as his public Preaching and working Miracles was over, he withdraws
himself from the Multitude into some private Place apart; he does not stay in
the Crowd with his Ear open to listen how Men admire the Preacher, and applaud
the Sermon; plainly showing that he sought his Father's Glory, not his own
Praise, or the People's Commendation; leaving his Example as an instructive
Pattern to all his Ministers and Ambassadors to take heed of Vainglory. Not to
affect Popularity, or seek the Applause and Commendation of Men in what they
do, resolving that Man's Opinion shall be nothing with them, but that the
pleasing of God, and doing their Duty to the Souls of their People, shall
always be their whole Scope.

CHAP. II.
1 ANd again he entered into Capernaum after some days, and it was noised that
he was in the house: 2 And straightway many were gathered together, insomuch
that there was no room to receive them, no not so much as about the door: and
he preached the word unto them.

In the last Verse of the foregoing Chapter we find how industriously our
Blessed Savior withdrew himself from the Concourse and Throng of People which
flocked after him from every Quarter; and to show how little he affected the
Applause and Commendation of the Multitude, he left the Cities, and was without
in desert Places. Hereby giving his Ministers an instructive Example to decline
Vainglory, and to shun popular Applause. But now the Words before us show,
that our Savior having entered (privately it is probable) into the City of
Capernaum, it is presently noised, and reported, that he was in the House, and
a mighty Concourse and Throng of People are after him, insomuch, that neither
the House, nor hardly the Streets, could contain them. Thence Learn, That such
as least seek after Honor and Applause from Men, are oft-times most Famous and
Renowned. Our Savior was so far from seeking the Peoples Praise and
Commendation, that he came into Capernaum without Observation, and betook
himself to his dwelling House there; but the more he sought to lie hid, the
more he was taken notice of. Honor flies from them that pursue it, and pursues
those that fly from it. The way to be Honorable is to be Humble. God seldom
honors a proud Man, by making him either eminently serviceable, or successful.
Observe farther, the People being come together, our Savior takes the
Opportunity to preach; And he preached the Word unto them. Teaching his
Ministers by his Example to embrace all Opportunities, in Season, and out of
Season, on the Lord's Day, and on the Week Day, to edify our People by our
Ministry, by our public Exhortations, by our private Instructions, and prudent
Admonitions, and holy Example.

3 And they came unto him, bringing one sick of the palsy, which was born of
four. 4 And when they could not come nigh unto him for the press, they
uncovered the roof where he was: and when they had broken it up, they let down
the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay. 5 When Jesus saw their faith, he
said unto the sick of the palsy, Son, thy sins be forgiven thee. 6 But there
were certain of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts, 7 Why
does this man thus speak blasphemies? who can forgive sins but God only? 8 And
immediately, when Jesus perceived in his spirit that they so reasoned within
themselves, he said unto them, Why reason ye these things in your hearts? 9
Whether is it easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Thy sins be forgiven
thee: or to say, Arise and take up thy bed and walk? 10 But that ye may know
that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive sins, (he says to the sick
of the palsy) 11 I say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go thy way
into thine house. 12 And immediately he arose, took up the bed, and went forth
before them all, insomuch that they were all amazed, and glorified God, saying,
We never saw it on this fashion.

Here we have the Relation of our Savior's miraculous healing of one sick of
the Palsy at Capernaum. Where, Obs. 1. The diseased and distressed Person, one
sick of the Palsy. Which Disease being a Resolution and Weakness of the
Nerves, enfeebles the Joints, and confines the Person to his Bed or Couch. As a
Demonstration of Christ's Divine Power he was pleased to single our the Palsy
and Leprosy, incurable Diseases, to work a Cure upon such as were afflicted
with them. Now this Person was so great a Cripple, by reason of the Palsy,
that he was born of Four. He could not go, nor was capable of being led, but
was carried by Four in his Bed or Couch. Obs. 2. As the Grievousness of the
Disease, so the Greatness of their Faith. The Man and his Friends had a firm
Persuasion that Christ was clothed with a Divine Power, and able to help him,
and they hoped in his Goodness that he was also willing to help him.
Accordingly the Roof of the Jewish Houses being flat, they uncover some part of
it, and let the Bed down with the sick Man in it, into the Room where Christ
was. Obs. 3. No sooner did they exercise their Faith in believing, but Christ
exerts his Divine Power in healing. And see the mavelous Efficacy of Faith,
it obtained not only what was desired, but more than was expected. They desired
only the healing of the Body, but Christ heals Body and Soul too. Son, be of
good Cheer, thy Sins are forgiven. Thereby our Savior shows them, that Sin is
the Original Cause of all Bodily Diseases, and consequently that in Sickness
the best way to find Ease and Deliverance from Pain, is first to seek for
Pardon. The Sense of Pardon in some degree will take away the Sense of Pain.
Obs. 4. The Exception which the Scribes took against our Savior for
pronouncing, that this Man's Sins were forgiven him. They accuse him of the Sin
of Blasphemy; urging, that it is God's peculiar Prerogative to pardon Sin.
Their Doctrine was true, but their Application false. Nothing more true than
that it is the highest degree of Blasphemy for any mere Man to arrogate to
himself the incommunicable Prerogative of God, which consists in an Absolute
and Authoritative Power to forgive Sin. But then their denying this Power to
Christ of forgiving Sin, which he had as God from all Eternity, and as
Mediator, God and Man, in one Person, when here upon Earth; this was Blasphemy
in them, the challenging of it; none in him. Obs. ^. Our Savior gives these
Scribes a twofold Demonstration of his Godhead, 1. By letting them understand
that he knew their Thoughts; Jesus perceived in his Spirit that they reasoned
within themselves. To search the Hearts, and to know the Thoughts and
Reasonings of Men, is not in the Power of Angels or Men, but the Prerogative of
God only, 2dly, By assuming to himself a Power to forgive Sin: For our Savior
here, by assuming to himself a Power of forgiving Sins in his own Name, and by
his own Authority, does give the World an undeniable Proof and convincing
Evidence of his Godhead; for who can forgive Sins but God only? Obs. 6. The
Effect of this Miracle upon the Minds of the People. They marvelled, and were
amazed, but not believed. They admire our Savior for an extraordinary Man, but
did not believe him to be God. Learn hence, That the Sight of Christ's Miracles
is not sufficient to work Faith in the Soul, without the concurring Operation
of the Holy Spirit. The one may make us marvel, the other must make us believe.

13 And he went forth again by the seaside; and all the multitude resorted
unto him, and he taught them, 14 And as he passed by, he saw Levi the son of
Alpheus sitting at the receipt of custom, and said unto him, Follow me. And he
arose, and followed him. 15 And it came to pass, that as Jesus sat at meat in
his house, many publicans and sinners sat also together with Jesus and his
disciples: for there were many, and they followed him. 16 And when the scribes
and Pharisees saw him eat with publicanes and sinners, they said unto his
disciples, How is it that he eats and drinks with publicans and sinners? 17
When Jesus heard it, he says unto them, They that are whole have no need of
the physician, but they that are sick: I came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance.

Obs. here, 1. The unwearied Pains and Diligence which our Savior used in the
Execution of his Ministerial Office and Calling: No sooner had he done
preaching in Capernaum and healing the sick of the Palsy, but he goes out
thence to the Sea side, to preach there. Oh Blessed Savior! How perpetually
were thou employed in the Labors of thy Calling, in the Service of thy Father,
and for the Good of Mankind! Thou went about doing Good, setting a Pattern
for all thy Ministers to follow. How does the Example of thy laborious
Diligence at once instruct and shame us! Obs. 2. The number of out Lord's
Disciples not being filled up, observe what a free and gracious, unexpected and
undeserved Choice he makes, Levi, that is, Matthew, (for he had both Names) a
grinding Publican, who gathered the Taxes for the Romans, and was probably
guilty (as others were) of the Sins of Covetousness, Extortion and Oppression,
yet is he called to follow Christ as a special Disciple. Learn thence, That
such is the Freeness of God's Grace, that it calls and converts Sinners unto
Christ when they think not of him, nor seek unto him. Little did Levi now think
of a Savior, much less seek after him, yet is he at this time called by him.
Matthew a Publican, Zacheus an Extortioner, Saul a Persecutor, all these are
brought home to God as Instances and Evidences of the mighty Power of
converting Grace. Obs. 3. Matthew's ready Compliance with Christ's Call; He
arose and followed him. When the inward Call of the Holy Spirit accompanies
the outward Call of the Word, the Soul readily complies, and presently yields
Obedience to the Voice of Christ. Christ oft-times speaks by his Word to our
Ears, and we hear not, we stir not; but when he speaks by his Spirit
efficaciously to our Hearts, Satan shall not hold us down, the World shall not
keep us back, but we shall with Levi instantly arise, and follow our Savior.
Obs. 4. Levi or Matthew, to show his Thankfulness to Christ, makes him a great
Feast. Christ invited Matthew to a Discipleship, Matthew invites Christ to a
Dinner. The Servant invites his Master, a Sinner invites his Savior. We do not
find that when Christ was invited to any Table, that he ever refused to go; if
a Publican, if a Pharisee invited him, he constantly went; not so much for the
Pleasure of eating, as for the Opportunity of conversing and doing Good. Christ
feasts us, when we feast him. Learn hence, That new Converts are full of
Affection toward Christ, and very expressive of their Love unto him. Matthew
touched with a Sense of Christ's rich Love, makes him a Royal Feast. Obs. 5.
The Cavil and Exception which the Scribes and Pharisees made at our Lord's free
Conversation. They censure him for conversing with Sinners; he justifies
himself, telling them that he conversed with them as their Physician, not as
their Companion. They that are whole need no Physician, says Christ, but they
that are Sick. As if our Lord had said, With whom should a Physician converse,
but with his sick Patients? Now I am come into the World to do the Office of a
kind Physician unto Men. Surely then I am to take all Opportunities of
conversing with them, that I may help and heal them, for they that are sick
need the Physician: But as for you Scribes and Pharisees, who are well and
whole in your own Opinion and Conceit, I have no Hopes of doing Good upon you;
for such as think themselves whole, desire no Physician's Help. From this
Assertion of our Savior, these Truths are suggested to us: 1. That Sin is the
Soul's Malady, its Spiritual Disease and Sickness. 2. That Christ is the
Physician appointed by God for the cure and healing of this Disease. 3. That
there are Multitudes of Sinners Spiritually sick, who yet think themselves
sound and whole. 4. That such, and only such as find and feel themselves
Spiritually sick, are Subjects capable of Christ's healing. They that are whole
need not the Physician, but they that are sick. I came not to call the
(Opinionatively) Righteous, but the (Sensible) Sinner to Repentance.

18 And the disciples of John, and of the Pharisees used to fast: and they come
and say unto him, Why do the disciples of John, and of the Pharisees fast, but
thy disciples fast not? 19 And Jesus said unto them, Can the children of the
bride-chamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them? as long as they have the
bridegroom with them, they cannot fast. 20 But the days will come, when the
bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those
days. 21 No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment: else the
new piece that filled it up, takes away from the old, and the rent is made
worse. 22 And no man puts new wine into old bottles: else the new wine does
burst the bottles, and the wine is spilled, and the bottles will be marred: but
new wine must be put into new bottles.

Observe here, 1. A great Difference betwixt John's Disciples and Christ's in
the Matter of Fasting. John's Disciples imitated him, who was a Man of an
Austere Life, and much given to fasting. Therefore is said, To come neither
eating nor drinking, Matthew. 11.18. On the other side, Christ's Disciples
followed him, who came eating and drinking, as other Men did; and yet though
there was a great Difference betwixt John's Disciples and Christ's in Matters
of Practice, yet were they all of one Faith and Religion. Thence Learn, That
there may be Unity of Faith and Religion among those who do not maintain an
Uniformity in Practice. Men may differ in some outward Religious Observations
and Customs, and yet agree in the Fundamentals of Faith and Religion. Thus did
John's Disciples and Christ's; the one fasted often, the other fasted not. Obs.
2. In that the Disciples of the Pharisees used to fast as well as John's
Disciples. We may Learn, That Hypocrites and wicked Men may be, and sometimes
are as strict and forward in the Outward Duties of Religion, as the holiest and
best of Christians: They pray, they fast, they hear the Word, they receive the
Sacraments: They do, yea, it may be, they out do, and go beyond the Sincere
Christian in External Duties, and outward Performances. Obs. 3. The defensative
Plea which our Blessed Savior makes for the not fasting of his Disciples; he
declares that it was neither suitable to them, nor tolerable for them, thus to
fast at present. Not suitable, in regard of Christ's bodily Presence with them.
This made it a time of Joy and Rejoicing, not of Mourning and Fasting. Christ
is the Bridegroom, and his Church the Bride; whilst therefore his Spouse did
enjoy his bodily Presence with her, it was a Day of Joy and Rejoicing to her,
and Mourning and Fasting were improper for her. But when Christ's bodily
Presence shall be removed, there will be Cause enough to fast and mourn. Again,
This Discipline of Fasting was not at present tolerable for the Disciples; for
they were raw, green, and tender, not fit for Austerities, nor could bear as
yet the Severities of Religion, no more than an old Garment could bear a piece
of new stiff Cloth to be set into it, which will make the Rent worse, if the
Garment comes to a Stretch: Or no more than old Bottles can keep new Wine. As
if our Savior had said, My Disciples at present are tender and weak, newly
called and converted; they cannot therefore bear the Severities of Religion
presently; but e're long I shall leave them, and go to Heaven, from whence I
will send down my Holy Spirit upon them, which shall enable them to all the
Duties which the Gospel enjoins. Now the intended Lesson of Instruction from
hence is this: That it is hurtful and dangerous for young Converts, for weak
Christians, to be put upon the severer Exercises of Religion, or to be urged to
the Performance of such Duties as are above their Strength. But they ought to
be handled with that Tenderness which becomes the mild and gentle Dispensation
of the Gospel. Our Savior here commends Prudence to his Ministers, in treating
their People according to their Strength, and putting them upon Duties
according to their Time and Standing.

23 And it came to pass, that he went through the corn fields on the
sabbath day, and his disciples began as they went, to pluck the ears of corn.
24 And the Pharisees said unto him, Behold, why do they on the sabbath day that
which is not lawful? 25 And he said unto them, Have ye never read what David
did, when he had need, and was an hungered, he, and they that were with him? 26
How he went into the house of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and
did eat the shewbread, which is not lawful to eat, but for the priest, and
gave also to them which were with him? 27 And he said unto them, The sabbath
was made for man, and not man for the sabbath: 28 Therefore the son of man is
Lord also of the sabbath.

Obs. here, 1. The Poverty, the low Estate and Condition of Christ's own
Disciples in this World; they wanted Bread, and are forced to pluck the Ears of
Corn, to satisfy their Hunger. God may, and sometimes does suffer his dearest
Children to fall into Streights, to taste of Want, for the Trial of their Faith
and Dependence upon his Power and Providence. Obs. 2. How the Pharisees (who
accompanied our Savior only with a Design to cavil at, and quarrel with every
thing that either he or his Disciples did) blame this Action of the Disciples,
namely, their plucking of the Ears of Corn on the Sabbath Day. Yet Note, First,
It was not any Theft, which the Disciples were charged with; for to take in our
Necessity so much of our Neighbor's Goods as we may reasonably suppose that if
he were present, and knew our Circumstances, he would give us, is no Theft. But
it is the servile Labor on the Sabbath, in gathering the Ears of Corn which
the Pharisees scruple. Whence Observe how zealous Hypocrites are for the lesser
things of the Law, whilst they neglect the greater, and superstitiously
addicted to outward Ceremonies; placing all Holiness in the Observation of
them, neglecting Moral Duties. Observe farther, 3. How our Savior defends the
Actions of his Disciples, in gathering the Ears of Corn in their Necessity, by
the Practice and Example of David. Necessity freed him from Fault and Blame, in
eating the Consecrated Bread, which none but the Priests might lawfully eat.
For in Cases of Necessity a Ceremonial Precept must give place to a Moral Duty.
Works of Mercy and Necessity for preserving our Lives, and the better fitting
us for Sabbath Services, are certainly Lawful on the Sabbath Day. Obs. 4. A
double Argument which our Savior uses to prove, that the Sabbath's Observation
may be dispensed with in a Case of absolute Necessity. 1. Drawn from the end of
the Sabbaths Institution; The Sabbath was made for Man. That is, Instituted of
God for the Good and Benefit of Mankind, both with Respect to their Souls, and
to their Bodies. The outward observing and keeping of the Sabbath is
subordinate to the Good of Man, and therefore the Good of Man is to be
preferred before the outward keeping of the Sabbath. 2. Argument is drawn from
the Authority which Christ the Institutor of the Sabbath has over it The Son of
Man is Lord also of the Sabbath; That is, He has Authority and Power both as
God, and as Mediator, to institute and appoint a Sabbath, to alter and change
the Sabbath, to dispense with the Breach of it upon a just and great Occasion.
And consequently Acts of Mercy, which tend to fit us for Works of Piety, not
only may, but ought to be done upon the Sabbath Day, which was the Proposition
which our Savior undertook to prove.

CHAP. III.
1 ANd he entered again into the synagogue, and there was a man there which had
a withered hand. 2 And they watched him, whether he would heal him on the
sabbath day, that they might accuse him. 3 And he says unto the man which had
the withered hand, Stand forth. 4 And he says unto them, Is it lawful to do
good on the sabbath day, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? but they held
their peace.

The former part of this Chapter reports to us a miraculous Cure wrought by
Christ upon a Man who had a withered Hand. The place where he wrought it, was
the Synagogue, the time when, was the Sabbath Day; the manner how, was by
speaking of a Word; the Persons before whom, were the envious and malicious
Pharisees. These Men were always cavilling at our Savior's Doctrine, and
slandering his Miracles; yet our Savior goes on with his Work before their
Faces, without either Interruption or Discouragement. Learn thence, That the
unjust Censures and malicious Cavils of wicked Men against us for well-doing,
must not discourage us from doing our Duty either toward God, or toward our
Neighbor. Though the Pharisees watched our Savior; and when their Envy and
Malice could find no Occasion of Quarrel, would invent and make one; yet such
was our Lord's Courage and Resolution, that he bids the Man which had the
withered Hand stand forth: To show that he was resolved to heal him,
notwithstanding their malicious Purpose to accuse him for it, as a Breaker of
the Sabbath. Opposition met with in doing our Duty must not discourage us from
doing Good, if we will follow the Example of our Blessed Redeemer.

5 And when he had looked round about on them with anger, being grieved for the
hardness of their hearts, he says unto the man, Stretch forth thine hand. And
he stretched it out: and his hand was restored whole as the other.

Obs. here, 1. The Pharisees sinful and graceless Disposition, and that was
Hardness of Heart. The Heart of Man is naturally hard, and full of Obstinacy
and Enmity against Christ; but there is an acquired Hardness, which Continuance
in Sin occasions; the Pharisees labored under both. Obs. 2. A double
Affection, which this Hardness of Heart, found in the Pharisees, did stir up in
Christ, namely, Anger and Indignation, Grief and Commiseration: He was grieved
for the Hardness of their Hearts. Learn hence, 1. That Humane Passions are not
sinful, and that Christian Religion does not destroy natural Affections. 2.
That Anger at Sin, either in our selves or others, if kept within its due
Bounds, is not only lawful, but commendable. 3. That our Anger against Sin
ought to be accompanied with Grief and Compassion toward Sinners. We should
pour out our Tears of Compassion, when Men pour forth their Abominations. 4.
That of all Sins Hardness of Heart and Unbelief are most grievous and
offensive, most displeasing and provoking to Jesus Christ: He looked about with
Anger, being grieved for the Hardness of their Hearts. Obs. 3. The sudden and
instantaneous Cure which our Savior wrought upon the Man that had the withered
Hand: Our Savior did not touch him, but only said to him, Stretch forth thy
Hand, and it was presently cured. Learn hence, That Christ's having absolute
Power over all bodily Diseases and Infirmities to cure them miraculously
without Means, only by a Word speaking, is one Argument that proves him to be
truly and really God.

6 And the Pharisees went forth, and straightway took counsel with the
Herodians against him, how they might destroy him. 7 But Jesus withdrew himself
with his disciples to the sea: and a great multitude from Galilee followed him,
and from Judea, 8 And from Jerusalem, and from Idumea, and from beyond Jordan,
and they about Tire and Sidon, a great multitude, when they had heard what
great things he did, came unto him. 9 And he spoke to his disciples, that a
small ship should wait on him, because of the multitude, lest they should
throng him. 10 For he h^d healed many, insomuch, that they pressed upon him for
to touch him, as many as had plagues. 11 And unclean spirits, when they saw
him, fell down before him, and cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God. 12 And
he straightly charged them, that they should not make him known.

Obs. here, 1. What a dismal Effect this famous Miracle of Christ's had upon
the Pharisees and Herodians. Instead of being convinced by it, they conspire
against him for it. These Herodians and Pharisees were of different Opinions,
Enemies to one another, yet they join together in seeking the Death of Christ.
The Pharisees were against paying Tribute to Caesar, looking upon themselves as
a free People, and accounting the Roman Emperor an Usurper. The Herodians were
for it. Herod being made by the Roman Emperor, King of the Jews, was zealous
for having the Jews pay Tribute to Caesar; and such of the Jews as sided with
him, particularly his Courtiers and Favorites were styled Herodians; but both
Pharisees and Herodians take Counsel against Christ. Learn thence, That Unity
and Consent is of it self alone far from being a Mark and Note of the true
Church. Unity in the Faith and Doctrine of Christ, and in the Profession and
Practice of the true Religion, is a Note indeed of the true Church: But Unity
in opposing Christ, his Person, his Doctrine, his People, is so far from being
a Mark of the true Church, that it is the Badge of the Antichristian Synagogue.
Obs. 2. The prudent Means which our Savior uses to preserve himself from the
Rage of the Pharisees, he withdrew himself from them. Christ's Example teaches
his Ministers their Duty in a time of Danger, to fly from Persecution, and to
endeavor to preserve their Lives, unless when their Sufferings are like to do
more Good than their Lives. Obs. 3. The great Zeal and Forwardness of the
People, in flocking after our Savior's Ministry; People come now at first from
all Places and Countries, from Judea, from Idumea, from beyond Jordan, from
Tire and Sidon, to hear his Doctrine, and see his Miracles. The People came
from all parts when our Savior first began to preach. His Ministers find it
thus: At their first coming amongst a People their Labors are most acceptable,
and they do most Good; our Peoples Affections are then warmest, and perhaps our
own too. Obs. 4. What sort of People they were which attended thus zealously
upon our Savior's Ministry, they were the common and ordinary People; the poor
received the Gospel, whilst the Pharisees and other Men of most Account, the
mighty, the noble, and the wise Men after the Flesh, despised our Savior's
Person, slighted his Ministry, and sought his Life. The ordinary and meanest
sort of People ever have been more zealous and forward in embracing the Gospel,
than ever the Great, the Rich, and the Honorable part of the World have been.
It is a sad, but a certain Truth, Heaven is a place, where few (comparatively)
of the great Men of the World are like to come; their Temptations are many,
their Lusts are strong, and their great Estates, through their own Abuse become
Fuel to their Lusts. Obs. 5. The Behavior of the unclean Spirits (the Devils)
toward our Savior, and our Savior's Carriage toward them: They fall down at
the very sight of him, they cry out, and confess him to be the Son of God; but
he sharply Rebukes them, and charges them that they should not make him known.
Not that our Savior would have the Knowledge of his Person suppressed, but
because the Devils were no fit Persons to preach Jesus Christ. A Truth out of
the Mouth of the Father of Lies is enough to render Truth it self suspected.
Besides, the time appointed for the full and clear Manifestation of the Godhead
of Christ was not yet come. This was not to be done till after his
Resurrection, the Divine Nature was to lie hid under the Veil of Christ's
Flesh, during his state of Humiliation and Abasement.

13 And he goes up into a mountain, and calls unto him whom he would: and
they came unto him. 14 And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him,
and that he might send them forth to preach: 15 And to have power to heal
sicknesses, and to cast out devils. 16 And Simon he surnamed Peter. 17 And
James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James, (and he surnamed them
Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder) 18 And Andrew, and Philip, and
Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the son of Alpheus, and
Thaddeus, and Simon the Canaanite, 19 And Judas Iscariot, which also betrayed
him: and they went into an house.

As the Jewish Church arose from Twelve Patriarchs, so the Christian Church
became planted by Twelve Apostles, the Person commissioning them was Christ.
None may undertake the Work and Calling of the Ministry but those whom Christ
appoints and calls. The Persons commissioned were Disciples before they were
Apostles; to teach us, That Christ will have such as preach the Gospel to be
Disciples before they are Ministers; trained up in the Faith and Doctrine of
the Gospel before they undertake a public Charge. Observe farther, The Holy
Preparative which our Savior uses, in order to this Election of his Apostles,
he goes up into a Mountain to pray upon that great Occasion. So says St. Luke
6.12. He went up into a Mountain to pray, and spent the night in Prayer to God.
And when it was Day he called his Disciples, and of them he chose Twelve. In
this Prayer no doubt he pleaded with his Father to furnish those that were to
be sent forth by him with all Ministerial Gifts and Graces. Learn thence, That
as Prayer is a necessary Preparative to all Duties, so more especially before
the public Election and Ordination of the Ministers of the Church; solemn
Prayer is to be used by such as are to ordain and choose them; our Lord's
Practice is to be a standing Rule herein to all Church Officers. Observe again,
Though Christ called his Apostles now, yet he did not send them forth now: He
ordained Twelve, that they should be with him. That is, that they might
converse with him, and be Eyewitnesses, and Ear-witnesses of his Life,
Doctrine and Miracles. And having been thus with Christ, and fitted and
prepared by him for their Work afterward, they went forth. Thence Learn, That
such as are to take upon them the Office of the Ministry, ought first to be
fitted and prepared for it, then solemnly called to it, before they enterprise
and undertake the Execution of it; if the Apostles here, who were called and
qualified extraordinarily, were to spend some Time with Christ to receive
Direction and Instruction from him before they went forth to preach; how much
more needful is it for such as are ordinarily called to be well-fitted and
furnished for the Ministerial Service before they undertake it. Observe next,
How the several Names of the Apostles are here Registered and Recorded: God will
honor those that honor him, and are the special Instruments of his Glory. Of
these Apostles, Peter is named first, and Judas last. Peter is named first,
because probably elder than the rest, or because for Order-sake he might speak
before the rest. From whence may be inferred a Primacy, but no Supremacy; a
Priority of Order, not a Superiority of Degree, As the Foreman of a Grand Jury
has a Precedence, but no Preheminency; he is first in order before the rest,
but has no Authority or Power over the rest. Judas is named last, with a Brand
of Infamy upon him; that he was the Traditor, the Person that betrayed his Lord
and Master. Whence Learn, That though the Truth of Grace be absolutely necessary
to a Minister's Salvation, yet the want of it does not disannul his Office, nor
hinder the Lawfulness of his Ministry. Judas, though a Traitor, was yet a Lawful
Minister. Observe lastly, That our Savior surnamed James and John Boanerges,
Sons of Thunder. St. Jerome thinks this Name was given them, because being with
Christ in the Mount at his Transfiguration, they heard the Father's Voice out
of the Cloud like Thunder: Others think them so called, because they were more
vehement and earnest than the rest in preaching, and did with greater Zeal and
Power sound forth the Doctrine of the Gospel like Thunder.

20 And the multitude comes together again, so that they could not so much as
eat bread. 21 And when his friends heard of it, they went out to lay hold on
him: for they said, He is beside himself. 22 And the scribes which came down
from Jerusalem, said, He has Beelzebub, and by the prince of the devils
casts he out devils. 23 And he called them unto him, and said unto them in
parables, How can Satan cast out Satan? 24 And if a kingdom be divided against
it self, that kingdom cannot stand. 25 And if a house be divided against it
self, that house cannot stand. 26 And if Satan rise up against himself, and be
divided, he cannot stand, but has an end. 27 No man can enter into a strong
man's house, and spoil his goods, except he will first bind the strong man, and
then he will spoil his house. 28 Verily I say unto you, All sins shall be
forgiven unto the sons of men, and blasphemies, wherewith soever they shall
blaspheme: 29 But he that shall blaspheme against the holy Ghost, has never
forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation: 30 Because they said, He
has an unclean spirit.

Observe here, 1. How truly our Lord's Word was verified. John 4.34. My Meat is
to do the Will of him that sent me; for he and his Apostles going into an House
to refresh themselves in their Hunger, the People pressed upon him so fast to
hear the Word, that he regards not the satisfying of his Hunger, but applies
himself to instruct the People. Lord! how exemplary was thy Zeal and Diligence
in preaching the everlasting Gospel to a lost World. As it is instructive to,
may it be imitated and followed by all thy Ambassadors. Obs. 2. The rash
Censure of our Savior's Friends; that is, his Kinsmen, concerning this Action,
in neglecting to eat Bread, and suffering the Multitude thus unseasonably to
press upon him. They conclude he is besides himself. Out of his right Mind, and
accordingly went out to lay hold upon him. Learn hence, 1. That the forward
Zeal and Diligence of Christ and his Ministers in preaching the Gospel is
accounted Madness and Frenzy by a Blind World. But they may say with the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.13. If we be besides our selves it is unto God. But who were
the Persons that thus looked upon our Savior as besides himself? Verily his
own Kindred and Relations according to the Flesh. Learn thence, That oft-times
the Servants of God meet with the strongest Temptations from, and are most
discouraged and molested by such as are their nearest Relations by Blood or
Alliance. This is a great Trial to find our Relations setting us back, instead
of helping us forward in the ways of Religion; but we must bear it patiently,
knowing, that not only others of God's Children, but Jesus Christ his own and
only Son, did experience this Trial. Observe 3. The malicious and wicked
Slander which the Scribes endeavored to fix upon our Blessed Savior; namely,
That he was possessed of the Devil, and by Familiarity with him, and Help from
him, cast forth Devils out of others. Good God! how was thine own and only Son,
the Holy and Innocent Jesus, censured, slandered, and falsely accused of the
worst of Crimes; of Gluttony, of Blasphemy, of Sorcery: Can any of thy Children
expect Freedom from the Persecution of the Tongue, when Innocence it self could
not protect thy Holy Son from Slander and false Accusation? Obs. 4. Our
Savior's Answer and just Apology for himself, in which are contained, 1. A
Confutation of their Calumny and Slander. 2. A Reprehension of the Scribes for
the same. 1. To confute this Slander, our Savior by several Arguments shows
how absurd and unlikely it is, that the Devil should cast out himself, and any
ways oppose or seek to destroy his own Kingdom. As if our Savior had said, Is
it likely that Satan would ^end me his Power to use it against himself? Surely
Satan will do nothing to weaken his own Interest, or shake the Pillars of his
own Kingdom. Now if I have received my Power from Satan for destroying him and
his Kingdom. Then is Satan like a Family divided within it self, and like a
Kingdom divided against it self, which can never stand, but be brought to
Desolation. Our Savior having sufficiently shown, that he did not work his
Miracles by the Power of the Devil, he next informs them from whence he had
that Power, even from God himself; and accordingly he compares Satan to a
strong Man well-armed, with Weapons to defend his House; and he compares
himself (clothed with Divine Power) to one that is stronger than the strong
Man. So that the Argument runs thus; The Devil is very strong and powerful, and
there is no Power but God's only that is stronger than his. If then (says
Christ) I were not assisted with a Divine Power, I could never cast out this
strong Man, who reigns in the Bodies and Souls of Men, as in his House; for it
must be a stronger than the strong Man that shall bind Satan, and who is he,
but the God of Strength. Learn hence, That Christ's Divine Power is only
Superior to Satan's Strength. He only can vanquish and overruled him at his
Pleasure, and drive him out of that Possession which he holds either in the
Bodies, or in the Souls of Men. Obs. 5. The Charge which our Savior brings
against the Scribes and Pharisees for Blaspheming his Divine Power, in working
Miracles. He charges them with sinning the unpardonable Sin against the Holy
Ghost. All Sin and Blasphemy shall be forgiven, but he that shall Blaspheme
against the Holy Ghost has never Forgiveness. As if Christ had said, All the
Reproaches which you cast upon me as Man are pardonable, as when you check me
with the Poverty and Meaness of my Birth; when you censure me for a
Wine-bibber, a Glutton, a Friend and Companion of Sinners, and the like unjust
Crimes: But when you Blaspheme that Divine Power, by which all my Miracles are
wrought, and contrary to the Convictions of your own enlightened Minds
maliciously ascribe all my Miracles to the Power of the Devil, which were
wrought indeed by the Power of the Holy Ghost, this makes your Condition not
only dangerous, but desperate, because you resist the last Remedy, and oppose
the best Means for your Conviction. For what can be done more to convince you
that I am the true and promised Messiah, than to work so many Miracles before
your Eyes to that Purpose. Now if when you see these, you will say it is not
the Spirit of God that works these, but the Power of the Devil; as if Satan
would conspire against himself, and seek the Ruin of his own Kingdom; there is
no Way or Means left to convince you, but you will continue in your Obstinacy,
and malicious Opposition to Truth, to your unutterable and inevitable
Condemnation.

31 There came then his brethren, and his mother, and standing without, sent
unto him, calling him. 32 And the multitude sat about him, and they said unto
him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee. 33 And he
answered them, saying, Who is my mother, or my brethren? 34 And he looked round
about on them which sat about him, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren.
35 For whosoever shall do the will of God, the same is my brother, and my
sister, and mother.

Obs. here, 1. The Truth and Verity of Christ's Humane Nature; he had Affinity
and Consanguinity with Men, Persons near in Blood to him by the Mother's side,
called here his Brethren, that is, his Kinsmen. Obs. 2. That the Mother of
Christ, though she was a Blessed and Holy Woman, yet was she not free from Sin,
but Failings and Infirmities are found with her. It was a Fault to interrupt
our Savior unseasonably at this time, when he was preaching to the People. The
like we see in her at other times. Luke 2.48. and John 2.3. No Saint here on
Earth ever was in a State of Sinless Perfection. Blessed be God we are hastening
to such a State. Obs. 3. That Christ did not neglect his Holy Mother, or
disregard his poor Kindred and Relations, but only showed that he preferred his
Father's Work and Business, before their Company and Acquaintance at this time.
Obs. 4. How exceeding dear, obedient Christians are to Jesus Christ; he
preferrs his Spiritual Kindred before his Natural, Alliance by Faith is more
valued by our Savior, than Alliance by Blood. To bear Christ in the Heart is a
greater Honor than to bear him in the Womb. Blessed be God, this great and
gracious Privilege is not denied us; even now. Although we cannot see Christ,
yet love him we may. His Bodily Presence cannot be enjoyed by us, but his
Spiritual Presence is not denied us. Though Christ be not ours in House, in Arms,
in Affinity, in Consanguinity, yet in Heart, in Faith, in Love, in Service, he
is or may be ours. Verily, Spiritual Regeneration brings Men into a more
honorable Relation to Christ, than Natural Generation ever did.

CHAP. IV.
1 ANd he began again to teach by the seaside: and there was gathered unto him
a great multitude, so that he entered into a ship, and sat in the sea, and the
whole multitude was by the sea, on the land. 2 And he taught them many things
by parables, and said unto them in his doctrine,

The foregoing Chapter acquainted us with the Blasphemous Slander which the
Scribes and Pharisees cast upon our Blessed Savior, accusing him for casting
out Devils by the Help of the Devil. This they did, no doubt, to discredit his
Person, and hinder his Ministry, yet for all this the People follow him in
great Multitudes, more than ever to hear him, and be instructed by him: Thence
Learn, That all the Power and Malice of Satan and wicked Men shall not be able
to suppress the Gospel, or hinder the free Course of it; yea, the more it is
opposed, the more it shall prevail; the more the Scribes and Pharisees
disgraced our Savior, and vilified his Doctrine, the more the People followed
him in Troops to be Partakers of his Ministry. Obs. 2. The Place where our Lord
now preached, in a Ship. Not that he declined the Temple, or the Synagogue,
when he had Opportunity, but in the want of them; Christ thought an House, a
Mountain, a Ship, no unmeet Place to preach in. It is not the Place that
sanctifies the Ordinance, but the Ordinance that sanctifies the Place. Obs. 3.
Our Savior's Gesture in preaching, he sat, it being the Custom of the Jewish
Church so to do. Mat. 23.2. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses Chair. Learn
thence, That in indifferent Rites and Orders touching the outward Worship of
God, we are to conform our selves to the Laudable Custom and Practice of the
Church in which we live, and whereof we are Members. Thus did our Savior, and
so ought we. Obs. 4. The manner of our Lord's Preaching, it was by Parables and
Similitudes, which was an ancient way of Instruction among the Jews, and a very
convincing way, working upon Men's Minds, Memories and Affections all at once,
making the Mind attentive, the Memory retentive, and the Auditors inquisitive
after the Interpretation of the Parable. Some are of Opinion that our Savior's
Parables were suited to his Hearers Employments, and accordingly many of his
Hearers being Husbandmen, he resembles his Doctrine to Seed sown in the Field.
For thus he speaks:

3 Hearken, Behold, there went out a sower to sow: 4 And it came to pass as he
sowed, some fell by the way side, and the fowls of the air came and devoured it
up. 5 And some fell on stony ground, where it had not much earth, and
immediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of earth. 6 But when the sun
was up, it was scorched, and because it had no root, it withered away. 7 And
some fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it, and it yielded
no fruit. 8 And other fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang up
and increased, and brought forth some thirty, some sixty, and some an hundred.
9 And he said unto them, He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

Several things are here Observable. As, 1. How Christ begins and ends the
Parable with an Admonition to diligent and serious Attention. Hearken, says
Christ, ver. 3. and he that has Ears to hear, let him hear, v. 9. This shows
us at once the People's Backwardness and Negligence, in applying their Minds to
hear and receive the Word of God, and also shows the Minister's Duty to excite
and stir up their People's Diligence and Attention in hearing God's Word. Obs.
2. What is the general Scope and Design of this Parable: Namely, To show, that
there are four several sorts of Hearers of God's Word, and but one good one,
but one sort only hear to a saving Advantage. Now as to the Matter of the
Parable, Note 1. The Sower is Christ and his Apostles. He the principal Sower,
they the Subordinate Seedsmen. Christ sows his own Field, his Ministers sow his
Field. He sows his own Seed, they his Seed. Woe unto us, if we sow our own Seed,
not Christ's. Note 2. The Seed sown, the Word of God; fabulous Legends, and
unwritten Traditions, which the Seedsmen of the Church of Rome sow; these are
not Seed, but Chaff, or their own Seed, and not Christ's. Our Lord's Field must
be all sown with his own Seed, with no mixed Grain. Learn 1. That the Word
preached is like Seed sown in the Furrows of the Field. As Seed has as a
fructifying Virtue in it, by which it increases and brings forth more of its
own kind; so has the Word of God a quickening Power to regenerate and make alive
dead Souls. 2. Learn from this Parable, That the Seed of the Word, where it is
most plentifully sown, is not alike fruitful. Seed does not thrive in all
Ground alike, neither does the Word fructify alike in the Souls of Men. There
is a Difference both from the Nature of the Soil, and from the Influence of the
Spirit. For though no Ground be naturally good, yet some is worse than other.
Learn 3. That the Cause of the Words Unfruitfulness is very different, not the
same in all. In some it is an hard Heart of Unbelief, in others the distracting
Cares of the World choke the Word. Like Thorns, which hinder the Corns growth,
by overshadowing it, by drawing away the Moisture and Heart of the Earth from
it, and by hindering the Influences of the Sun from cherishing it. Unto which
may be added the Policy of Satan, that Bird of Prey, which follows God's
Plough, and steals away the precious Seed of the Word out of the Furrows of
their Souls. Learn 4. That the best Ground does not bring forth Increase alike.
Some good Ground brings forth more, others less; some Thirty, some Sixty, some
an Hundredfold. In like manner a Person may be a profitable Hearer of the
Word, although he does not bring forth so great a Proportion of Fruit as others,
provided he brings forth as much as he can.

10 And when he was alone, they that were about him with the twelve, asked of
him the parable. 11 And he said unto them, Unto you it is given to know the
mystery of the kingdom of God: but unto them that are without, all these things
are done in parables: 12 That seeing they may see, and not perceive, and
hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest at any time they should be
converted, and their sins should be forgiven them. 13 And he said unto them,
Know ye not this parable? And how then will you know all parables?

Observe here, The Disciples Question, and our Savior's Reply. Their Question
is about the Sense and Meaning of the Parable. They own their Ignorance, and
desire better Information. It is no Shame for the best of Ministers, yea, the
best of Men, to acknowledge their own Ignorance in the Mysteries of Religion,
and to attend upon the Means of Instruction, in order to their further
Information. In our Savior's Answer, To you it is given to know the Mysteries
of the Kingdom of God, etc. Obs. 1. That the Doctrines of the Gospel are great
Mysteries. 2. That it is a matchless and invaluable Privilege, practically to
understand Gospel Mysteries. 3. That this Privilege all are not Sharers in,
and Partakers of, but only those to whom it is given. 4. That it is a Righteous
Thing with God to give such Persons over to further Blindness and Ignorance in
Spiritual Things, who wilfully reject the Truth, and shut their Eyes against
the Light and Evidence of it. The Pharisees had all along shut their Eyes, and
said, they would nor see, and now Christ closes their Eyes judicially, and says
they shall not see. Seeing ye shall see, and not perceive; and hearing ye shall
hear, and not understand.

14 The sower sows the word. 15 And these are they by the way side, where the
word is sown, but when they have heard, Satan comes immediately, and takes
away the word that was sown in their hearts. 16 And these are they likewise
which are sown on stony ground, who when they have heard the word, immediately
receive it with gladness: 17 And have no root in themselves, and so endure but
for a time: afterward when affliction or persecution arises for the word's
sake, immediately they are offended. 18 And these are they which are sown among
thorns: such as hear the word, 19 And the cares of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the
word, and it becomes unfruitful. 20 And these are they which are sown on good
ground, such as hear the word, and receive it, and bring forth fruit, some
thirty fold, some sixty, and some an hundred.

Here our Savior applies himself to interpret and explain the foregoing
Parable. The Seed is the Word, the Sower is the Preacher, the Soil is the Heart
and Soul of Man. Some Hearers Christ compares to the Highway Ground, in which
the Seed lies uncovered, for want of the Harrow of Meditation. Others to Stony
Ground, in which the Word has no Root. No Root in their Understandings, in
their Memories, Wills and Affections, but they are instantly offended, either
at the Depth and Profoundness of the Word, or at the Sanctity and Strictness of
the Word, or else at the Plainness and Simplicity of it. Again, Some Hearers
our Lord compares to Thorny Ground, Worldly and Covetous Desires, are as
Thorns, choking the good Seed; they shadow the Blade when sprung up, keep off
the Influences of the Sun, and draw away the Fatness of the Soil from the Seed.
All these mischievous Effects have Thorns among the Seed. And the like ill
Effects have worldly Affections, and covetous Desires in the Soul of Man;
rendering the Seed of the Word unfruitful and unprofitable. But the good
Christian hears the Word attentively, keeps it retentively, believes it
stedfestly, applies it particularly, practices it universally, and brings forth
Fruit perseveringly. Learn 1. That no Hearers are in Christ's Account good
Hearers of the Word, but such as bring forth Fruit answerable to their hearing.
2. That a Person may be a good Hearer of the Word in Christ's Account, if he
bring forth the best Fruit he can, though it be not in so great a Proportion as
others do. As some Ground brings forth Thirty, some Sixty, and some an
Hundredfold, in like manner do all sincere Hearers of the Word; they all bring
forth Fruit, though not all alike; all in Sincerity, though not all equally, and
none to Perfection.

21 And he said unto them, Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel, or
under a bed? and not to be set on a candlestick? 22 For there is nothing hid,
which shall not be manifested: neither was any thing kept secret, but that it
should come abroad. 23 If any man have ears to hear, let him hear. 24 And he
said unto them, Take heed what you hear: with what measure ye mete, it shall be
measured to you: and unto you that hear, shall more be given. 25 For he that
has, to him shall be given: and he that has not, from him shall be taken even
that which he has.

Observe here, 1. The End and Design of Christ in revealing his Word and Will
to his Disciples, and in communicating to them the Light of Spiritual
Knowledge; namely, That they may communicate it to others, and not keep it
close unto themselves. Even as the Candle in an House diffuses and disperses
its Light to all that come within the Reach of it. In like manner ought all
Christians, and particularly Christ's Ministers, by the Light of Life and
Doctrine, to direct Persons in their Way toward Heaven. Such as are enlightened
by God in any measure with the Knowledge and Understanding of his Word, ought
not to conceal and hide this Knowledge within themselves, but communicate it to
others, and employ it for the Good and Benefit of others. Obs. 2. The
Cautionary Direction given by Christ to his Disciples, To take heed how they
hear the Word. Such as would profit by hearing of the Word, must diligently
attend to the Matter of the Doctrine which they hear, and also to the manner
how they hear. Such is the Majesty and Authority of the Person that speaks to
us in the Word; such is the Sublimity and Spirituality of the Matter; and so
great is our Danger, if we miscarry under the Word, that it nearly concerns us
to take heed, both what we hear, and how we hear. Obs. 3. The Argument which
our Savior makes use of to quicken his Disciples to communicate the Knowledge,
and improve the Grace they had received for the Good and Benefit of others, To
him that has shall be given. That is, Such as improve their Spiritual Gifts
shall have them increased; such as improve them not, shall have them blasted.
Learn hence, That the best Course we can take to increase and thrive in Grace,
is to exercise and improve it. He that hides his Talent, does not only forfeit
it, but is in danger of being punished severely for the Non-improvement of it.

26 And he said, So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into
the ground, 27 And should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should
spring and grow up, he knows not how. 28 For the earth brings forth fruit
of her self, first the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in the
ear. 29 But when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he puteth in the
sickle, because the harvest is come.

This Parable of our Savior's is an instructive Lesson to the Ministers of the
Gospel, faithfully to do their Parts, in sowing the Seed of the Word amongst
their People, and then not to be over-solicitous about the Event, but to leave
the Issue to God, nor to be discouraged, though the Fruit of their Labor does
not presently appear. Accordingly Christ propounds the laborious Husbandman to
his Minister's Imitation. As the Husbandman, when he has prudently and
painfully cast his Seed into the Ground, is not Anxiously disquieted, but goes
to Bed, and rests in hope, and at length the Corn springs up; first the Blade,
next the Ear, then the Grain. In like manner, let the Ministers of God do their
Duty without Discouragement, In the Morning sow their Seed, and in the Evening
not withhold their Hand. And although the Seed sown does not appear presently,
it may be, not in our Days, but seems rotten among the Clods, yet may it appear
afterward with a plentiful Increase, when our own Heads are laid among the
Clods; verifying that Saying of our Savior, One sows, and another reapeth.
Learn hence, 1. That the Ministry of the Word is the ordinary, the necessary,
and the principal Means which God has appointed for sowing the Seeds of Grace
in the Hearts of his People. So is the Kingdom of God, as if a Man should cast
Seed into the Ground. 2. That the Virtue and Efficacy of the Word preached does
not depend upon the Parts of a Man, but upon the Power of God. The Seed
springs up he knows not how. Learn 3. That the Word of God sincerely
preached may be successful, though it be not presently successful; the Seed sown
in one Minister's Days may spring up in another's. Happy we, if as God's
Husbandmen we be employed in Plowing, Sowing, or Reaping; our Lord will reward
us. Secundum laborem, non fructum. Not according to our Success, but according
to our Endeavors. The Care and Endeavor is ours but the Blessing and Success
is God's.

30 And he said, Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God? or with what
comparison shall we compare it? 31 It is like a grain of mustard seed, which
when it is sown in the earth, is less than all the seeds that be in the earth.
32 But when it is sown, it grows up, and becomes greater than all herbs, and
shoots out great branches, so that the fowls of the air may lodge under the
shadow of it. 33 And with many such parables spoke he the word unto them, as
they were able to hear it. 34 But without a parable spoke he not unto them: and
when they were alone, he expounded all things to his disciples.

The Design of our Savior in this Parable, is to show how the Gospel Church
from small and little, from unlikely and contemptible Beginnings, should spread
and increase, fructify and grow up like as Mustard Seed; one of the smallest
of Grains, grows up to a considerable Tallness: Even so, Christ foretells, that
the Gospel should spread and increase, Nations and Countries becoming
Christian. Hence Learn, That how small Beginnings soever the Gospel had in its
first Plantation; yet by the fructifying Blessing of God it has had, and shall
have a wonderful Increase.

35 And the same day when the even was come, he says unto them, Let us pass
over unto the other side. 36 And when they had sent away the multitude, they
took him even as he was in the ship, and there were also with him other little
ships. 37 And there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into the
ship, so that it was now full. 38 And he was in the hinder part of the ship,
asleep on a pillow: and they awake him, and say unto him, Master, carest thou
not that we perish? 39 And he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the
sea, Peace, be still: and the wind ceased, and there was a great calm. 40 And
he said unto them, Why are ye so fearful? how is it that you have no faith? 41
And they feared exceedingly, and said one to another, What manner of man is
this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?

Observe here, 1. Our Savior and his Disciples no sooner put forth to Sea, but
Dangers attend, and Difficulties do accompany them; a Tempest arose, and that
Ship was covered with Waves which Christ himself was in, with his Disciples.
Learn thence, That the Presence of Christ it self does not exempt his Disciples
and Followers from Trouble and Danger. Here is a great Tempest about the
Disciples Ears, though Christ himself was in their Company. Obs. 2. The Posture
our Savior was in when this Tempest arose; he being wearied with the Labors
of the Day, was laid down upon a Pillow to sleep at Night, thereby showing
himself to be truly and really Man; and that as he took upon him our Humane
Nature, so he assumed the Infirmities of our Nature also, as Weariness and
Pain, Hunger and Thirst. Obs. 3. The Disciples Application made to Christ; they
awake him with a sad outcry, Master, carest thou not that we perish? Here was
Faith mixed with Humane Frailty. They believed that he could save them, but
being asleep, they conclude he must be awaked before they can be saved by him;
whereas, though his Humane Nature was asleep, yet his Divine Nature neither
slumbered nor slept. Learn hence, That the Prevalency of Fear in a time of
great and imminent Danger, though it may argue Weakness of Faith, yet is no
Evidence of a total want of Faith, in the midst of the Disciples Fears they
believed Christ's Power. Obs. 4. A doable Rebuke given by our Savior, first to
the Winds, next to the Fears of his Disciples. He rebukes the Winds, and
instantly they are calm. When the Sea was as furious as a madman, Christ with a
single Word calms it. Learn hence, That the most raging Winds and outrageous
Seas cannot stand before the Rebukes of Christ. Christ as God lays a Law upon
the most lawless Creatures, even when they seem to act most lawlesly. Observe
farther, Christ rebukes his Disciples Fears, Why are ye fearful? No sooner was
the Storm up, but their Fears were up; they forgot that the Lord high Admiral
of the Ocean, was on board the Ship, and were as much overset with their
boisterous Passions, as the Vessel was with tempestuous Winds; and accordingly
Christ rebukes the Tempest within, before the Storm without. First he calms
their Hearts, then he quiets the Seas. From this Instance of the Disciples we
may gather, that great Faith in the Habit may appear little in Act, and
exercise the Disciples Faith, in forsaking all, and following Christ, was great
Faith; but in this present Act, their Faith was weak, through the Prevalency of
their Fears. Oh the imperfect Composition of the best of Saints! Faith and Fear
will take their turns, and act their part whilst we are upon the Stage of this
World; e're long our Fears will be vanquished, and our Faith swallowed up in
Vision. Lord! set our Souls a longing for that joyful Hour.

CHAP. V.
1 ANd they came over unto the other side of the sea, into the country of the
Gadarenes. 2 And when he was come out of the ship, immediately there met him
out of the tombs, a man with an unclean spirit, 3 Who had his dwelling among
the tombs, and no man could bind him, no not with chains: 4 Because that he had
been often bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been plucked
asunder by him, and the fetters broken in pieces: neither could any man tame
him. 5 And always night and day, he was in the mountains, and in the tombs,
crying, and cutting himself with stones. 6 But when he saw Jesus afar off, he
ran and worshipped him, 7 And cried with a loud voice, and said, What have I to
do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God? I adjure thee by God, that
thou torment me not. 8 (For he said unto him, Come out of the man, thou unclean
spirit.) 9 And he asked him, What is thy name? and he answered, saying, My name
is Legion: for we are many. 10 And he besought him much, that he would not send
them away out of the country. 11 Now there was there nigh unto the mountains, a
great herd of swine feeding. 12 And all the devils besought him, saying, Send
us into the swine, that we may enter into them. 13 And forthwith Jesus gave
them leave. And the unclean spirits went out, and entered into the swine, and
the herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea, (they were about two
thousand) and were choked in the sea. 14 And they that fed the swine fled, and
told it in the city, and in the country. And they went out to see what it was
that was done. 15 And they come to Jesus, and see him that was possessed with
the devil, and had the legion, sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind, and
they were afraid. 16 And they that saw it, told them how it befell to him that
was possessed with the devil, and also concerning the swine. 17 And they began
to pray him to depart out of their coasts. 18 And when he was come into the
ship, he that had been possessed with the devil, prayed him that he might be
with him. 19 Howbeit, Jesus suffered him not, but says unto him, Go home to
thy friends, and tell them how great things the Lord has done for thee, and
has had compassion on thee. 20 And he departed, and began to publish in
Decapolis, how great things Jesus had done for him: and all men did marvel.

This piece of History gives us a very sad Relation of a Person that was
possessed with a Legion of Devils; we read of few, if any, in the Old
Testament, that were thus possessed, but of many in the New Testament. Our
Savior came into the World to destroy the Works of the Devil; therefore he
suffered Satan to enter some humane Bodies, to show his Divine Power in casting
him out. Note here, 1. That the evil Angels by their Fall lost their Purity,
but not their Power; for with God's Permission they have Power, not only to
enter into Men's Bodies, and to possess them, but also to distemper their
Minds, and drive them to Frenzy and Madness; causing them to offer Violence to
their own Lives, and to do Hurt and Mischief to their own Bodies. Thus did this
possessed Person here, wounding and cutting himself with Stones. Note 2. That
the Reason why the evil Angels do no oftener exert their Power in doing Mischief
to the Bodies and Lives of Men, is from the restraining Power of God. The
Devils cannot do all the Mischief they would, and they shall not do all they
can. Note 3. The Place where these evil Spirits delighted to make their Abode,
amongst the Tombs, or Graves, places desolate, forlorn and solitary, which are
apt to breed Horror of Mind, and give Advantage to Temptations. Learn thence,
That it is dangerous, and very unsafe, for Persons, especially in whom
Melancholy prevails, to give themselves to Solitariness, to frequent desolate
and forlorn Places, and to affect the being much alone, it giving Advantage to
Satan to set upon them with powerful Temptations. It is better to frequent
Humane Society, and especially to delight in the Society and Communion of the
Saints, by means whereof we may be more and more strengthened and fortified
against Satan's Temptations. Note 4. That the Devils own Christ to be the Son
of God, and that he came into the World to be a Savior, but not a Savior to
them; therefore they cry our, What have we to do with thee? Or thou with us?
Oh! what an uncomfortable Confession and Acknowledgment is this, to own Christ
to be a Savior, and at the same time to know that he is none of our Savior.
Note 5. That though the Devils do own Christ to be the Son of God, and do pay
Homage and Worship, and yield Service and Subjection to him as his Slaves and
Vassals, yet it is not a free and voluntary Service, but extorted father, and
forced from them by the Power of Christ. He worshipped, and cried out, saying,
What have I to do with thee? Note 6. What a Multitude of evil Spirits did enter
into one Man? Oh the extreme Malice and Cruelty of the Devil against Mankind^
in that so many evil Spirits did at once afflict and torment a single Person,
even a Legion, many Thousands of them. Observe also, The Unity and Agreement
which is amongst these evil Spirits, in doing Mischief, though there was a Legion
of them in this one Person, yet they have all but one Name. Learn, That the
very Devils have a sort of Unity amongst themselves, and in their Malice and
mischievous Designs against Mankind they are as one. How happy were it, if good
Men were as much united in Designs and Endeavors for the Glory of God, as
Devils conspire and combine against it. Note 7. The Outcry which the Devil
makes at the Appearance and Approach of Christ. Art thou come to torment us
before the time? From thence Learn, 1. That there are Tortures appointed to the
Spiritual Natures of evil Angels. 2. That the Devils are not so full of Torment
as they shall be. Although they are as full of Discontent as they can be, there
will be a Time when their Torments shall be increased, when they shall have
their Fill of torment. This they know, and accordingly thus they pray, Torment
us not before our Time. That is, increase not our Torments before the appointed
time of their Increase. Note 8. The Devils Request for Permission and Leave to
go into the Herd of Swine. Where Observe, First, The Devil's Malice; he will
hurt the poor Beasts, rather than not hurt at all. Secondly, His powerful
Restraint; he cannot hurt a Pig without a Permission. Suffer us to enter.
Satan's Malice indeed is infinite, but his Power is bounded; it is Potestas sub
potestate, A Power under a Power. If he could not hurt the Swine, much less can
he afflict the Body or Soul of Man without Leave and License. Note 9. How
Satan's Request is yielded to by our Savior, he permits the Devils to enter
into the Swine; not to satisfy their Desire in doing Mischief. But First, To
show his Power over the Devils, that they could do nothing without his
Permission; Next, To show how great the Power and Malice of the Devil would be,
if not restrained; and Lastly, That the Miracle of casting out such a Multitude
of Devils, might appear to be the greater. Learn hence, That sometimes Almighty
God, for wise Ends, and just Causes, does suffer the Devil to enjoy his Desire,
in doing Hurt and Mischief unto the Creatures. Jesus said unto them, Go. Note
10. What a contrary Effect this Miracle which Christ wrought, had upon these
People, instead of believing his Divine Power, upon the Sight of his miraculous
healing the possessed, the Loss of their Swine enrages them, and makes them
desire Christ to depart from them: Carnal Hearts prefer their Swine before
their Savior, and had rather lose Christ's Presence than their Worldly Profit.
So desirous were these Gadarens to get rid of our Savior's Company, that they
pray and beseech him to depart out of their Coasts. Learn hence, Sad is the
Condition of such from whom Christ departs, more sad the Condition of such who
say unto Christ, Depart; but most sad the Case of them who pray and beseech
Christ to depart from them. Thus did these Gadarens desire and beseech Christ
to depart from them, which accordingly he did, and we read no more of his
Return to them. Note lastly, How desirous the possessed Man was to continue
with Christ, after he was come to himself. He prayed that he might be with him.
This he might desire, partly to testify his Thankfulness to Christ, partly out
of fear of being repossess'd again by Satan, or perhaps to have the Opportunity
of hearing Christ's Doctrine, and seeing his Miracles: For such as have once
tasted that the Lord is gracious, and experienced the Pleasure and Profit of
Christ's Company, are very desirous of the Continuance of it, and exceeding
loath to part with it. However our Savior at this time did not think fit to
suffer him, knowing that more Glory would redound to God, by publishing this
Miracle to his Friends: Christ expects after eminent Deliverances wrought for
us, that we should be the Publishers of his Praises, and declare to all, far
and near, the great things which God has done for us.

21 And when Jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other side, much
people gathered unto him, and he was nigh unto the sea. 22 And behold, there
comes one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name, and when he saw him,
he fell at his feet, 23 And besought him greatly, saying, My little daughter
lies at the point of death, I pray thee come and lay thy hands on her that she
may be healed, and she shall live. 24 And Jesus went with him, and much people
followed him, and thronged him.

Obs. here, 1. The Person who came to Christ on Behalf of his sick Daughter,
described, by his Name, Jairus, by his Office, a Ruler of the Synagogue, by his
Gesture, he fell down at Jesus Feet, and worshipped him. This Gesture of his
was not only a Sign of tender Affection in him toward his Daughter, but also
an Evidence of his Faith in our Blessed Savior, yet his confining Christ's
Power to his bodily Presence, and to the Touch of his Hand, was a Token of the
Weakness of his Faith. Come, says he, and lay thine hand upon her, and she
shall live. As if Christ could not have cured her without either coming to her,
or laying his Hand upon her. Note. All that come to Christ are not alike strong
in Faith, yet our blessed Redeemer refuses none who come to him with a smeere
Faith, though in much Weakness of Faith. Obs. 2. How readily our Savior complies
with Jairus's Request. Jesus went with him. Although his Faith was but weak, yet
our Savior does not reject him, or deny his Suit, but readily goes with him.
Learn hence, How ready we should be to go to Christ in all our Distresses,
Afflictions, and Necessities, who is so ready to hear, and so forward to help
us, if we seek him in Sincerity, though our Faith be feeble. Obs. 3. The great
Humility of our Blessed Savior, in suffering himself to be thronged by poor
People. Much People followed him, and thronged him. Oh humble and lowly
Savior! How free was thy Conversation from Pride and Haughtiness: How willing
to converse with the meanest of the People for their Advantage. Our Lord did
not only suffer them to come near him, but even to throng him: What an Example
is here for the greatest Persons upon Earth to imitate and follow, not to
despise the Persons, nor disdain the Presence of the meanest and poorest of the
People; but to look upon some with an Eye of Favor, upon others with an Eye of
Pity, upon none with an Eye of Contempt.

25 And a certain woman which had an issue of blood twelve years, 26 And had
suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and
was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse, 27 When she had heard of Jesus,
came in the press behind, and touched his garment. 28 For she said, If I may
touch but his clothes, I shall be whole. 29 And straightway the fountain of her
blood was dried up: and she felt in her body that she was healed of that
plague. 30 And Jesus immediately knowing in himself, that virtue had gone out
of him, turned him about in the press, and said, Who touched my clothes? 31 And
his disciples said unto him, Thou see the multitude thronging thee, and
say thou, Who touched me? 32 And he looked round about to see her that had
done this thing. 33 But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done
in her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth. 34 And he
said unto her, Daughter, thy faith has made thee whole; go in peace, and be
whole of thy plague.

As our Savior was on his way to Jairus his House, a diseased Woman comes
behind him, touches his Clothes, and is presently healed; the Virtue lay not in
her Finger, but in her Faith, or rather in Christ, which her Faith
instrumentally drew forth. Obs. here, 1. The diseased Person, a Woman with a
Bloody Flux. Let Women here take notice of the Miseries which the Sin of the
first Woman has brought upon all Women, amongst which, this is one, that it has
made their Bodies subject to unnatural Issues and Fluxes of Blood. Obs. 2. The
long Continuance of this Disease. Twelve Years. It pleases God to lay long and
tedious Afflictions upon some of his Children in this Life, and particularly to
keep some of them a very long time under bodily Weakness, to manifest his Power
in supporting them, and to magnify his Mercy in delivering them. Obs. 3. This
poor Woman was found in the use of Means; she sought to Physicians for Help,
and is not blamed for it, though she spent all she had upon them. The use of
Physic is not to be neglected by us in times of Sickness, especially in
dangerous Diseases of the Body. To trust to Means is to neglect God, and to
neglect the Means is to tempt God. The Health of our Bodies ought to be dear
and precious to us, and all lawful Means ought to be used, both to preserve it,
to recover it, and confirm it. Obs. 4. The workings and acting of this poor
Woman's Faith, her Disease was unclean by the Ceremonial Law, and therefore to
be separate from Society, accordingly she is ashamed to appear before Christ,
but comes behind him to touch his Clothes, being firmly persuaded that Christ
had a Power communicated by God unto him, miraculously to cure incurable
Diseases. And see how our Savior encouraged her Faith, though she did not
believe him to he the Eternal Son of God, but one to whom God had communicated
a Power of healing bodily Diseases, yet says Christ, This thy Faith has made
thee whole. Learn hence, That Faith oft-times meets with a better Welcome from
Christ than it did or could expect. This poor Woman came to Christ trembling,
but went away triumphing. Obs. 5. Christ would have this Miracle discovered, he
therefore says, Who touches me, and I perceive that Virtue is gone out of me.
First, In Reference to himself, to manifest his Divine Power, that by the Touch
of his Clothes he could cure such an incurable Disease. Secondly, In Relation
to the Woman, that she might have Opportunity to give God the Praise and Glory
for the Cure: And Thirdly, With Respect to Jairus, that his Faith might be
strengthened in the Belief of Christ's Power to raise his Daughter.

35 While he yet spoke, there came from the ruler of the synagogues house,
certain which said, Thy daughter is dead, why troublest thou the Master any
further? 36 As Soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, he says unto the
ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid, only believe. 37 And he suffered no man
to follow him, save Peter, and James, and John the brother of James. 38 And he
comes to the house of the ruler of the synagogue, and sees the tumult, and
them that wept and wailed greatly. 39 And when he was come in, he says unto
them, Why make ye this ado, and weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleeps. 40
And they laughed him to scorn: but when he had put them all out, he takes the
father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were with him, and enters
in where the damsel was lying, 41 And he took the damsel by the hand, and said
unto her, Talitha cumi, which is being interpreted, Damsel (I say unto thee)
arise. 42 And straightway the damsel arose, and walked; for she was of the age
of twelve years: and they were astonished with a great astonishment. 43 And he
charged them straightly, that no man should know it: and commanded that something
should be given her to eat.

Obs. here, 1. The doleful News brought to Jairus his Ears, Thy Daughter is
dead. The Lord does sometimes suffer the Faith of his Saints to be hard put to
it, greatly assaulted with Difficulties and Trials. Obs. 2. Our Savior's
seasonable Word of Comfort, Be not afraid, only believe. Christ is ready to
comfort Believers in the Hour of their strongest Temptations and greatest
Trials. Obs. 3. Christ's Application of himself to the raising unto Life Jairus
his dead Daughter. In order to which, 1. He goes into the House only with three
of his Disciples, which were sufficient to witness the Truth of the Miracle.
Our Savior, to avoid all show of Vainglory, and to evidence, that he sought
not ambitiously his own Honor and Praise, would not work this great Miracle
publicly before all the People. 2. He rebukes them for the show they make of
immoderate Grief, and Sorrow for the dead Damsel, they wept and wailed^ eatly
with Ministress and musical Instruments, according to the Custom of the
Heathens, who by a mournful sort of Music did stir up the Passion of Grief at
their Funerals. To mourn immoderately for the dead is an Heathenish Practice
and Custom. It Is hurtful to the Living, and dishonorable to the Dead; nor is
it an Argument of more Love, but an Evidence of less Grace. 3. He adds a Reason
for this Rebuke and Reproof given them. The Damsel is not dead, but sleeps.
Vobis Mortua, mihi Dormit: She is Dead to you, but asleep to me. Not so dead as
to be beyond my Power to raise her to Life. Souls departed are under the
Conduct of Angels to their several Regions of Bliss or Misery. It is very
probable that the Soul of this Damsel was under the Guard of Angels near her
dead Body, waiting the Pleasure of God in order to its Disposal, either to
restore it again to the Body, or to translate it to its Eternal Mansion.
Observe farther, The Nature of Death in general, and of the Saints in
particular described. It Is a Sleep. Sleep is a State of Rest; Sleep is a sudden
Surprizal; in Sleep there is an insensible Passage of our Time; the Person
sleeping shall certainly awake, either in this World, or in the next. It will
be our Wisdom to prepare for the Bed of the Grave, and so to live, that when we
lie down in it, there may be nothing to disturb our Rest. Observe next, The
Words which our Savior used at the raising of the Damsel, Talitha Cumi.
Syriack Words, to show the Truth of the Miracle, not like a Conjurer, murtering
a Charm in unknown Words to himself; and also to show the Greatness of the
Miracle; that he was able to raise her by a Word speaking. Observe lastly, The
Charge given by our Savior not to divulge this Miracle. He charged them
straightly that none should know it. That is, not to divulge it imprudently to
such of the Scribes and Pharisees as would not be convinced by it, but only
cavil at it, and be the more enraged against him, and seek his Death before his
time was come. Also not to divulge it unseasonably, and all at once, but
gradually, and by degrees; for it was the Will of God, that the Divine Glory of
Christ should not be manifested to the World all at once, and on the sudden,
but by little and little during his State of Humiliation for his Resurrection
was the Time appointed for the full Manifestation of his Godhead. Romans 1.4.
Declared to be the Son of God with Power by the Resurrection from the Dead.

CHAP. VI.
1 AND he went out from thence, and came into his own country, and his
disciples follow him. 2 And when the sabbath day was come, he began to teach in
the synagogue: and many hearing him were astonished, saying, From whence has
this man these things? and what wisdom is this which is given unto him, that
even such mighty works are wrought by his hands? 3 Is not this the carpenter,
the son of Mary, the brother of James, and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon? and
are not his sisters here with us? and they were offended at him. 4 But Jesus
said unto them, A prophet is not without honor, but in his own country, and
among his own kin, and in his own house. 5 And he could there do no mighty
work, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed them. 6 And
he marvelled, because of their unbelief. And he went round about the villages
teaching.

Our Blessed Savior having in the former Chapter wrought two famous Miracles,
in curing a Woman of her Bloody Issue, and raising Jairus his Daughter from
Death, we find him here in the beginning of this Chapter passing into his own
Country; that is, to the City of Nazareth in Galilee, called his own City and
Country, because he was there conceived, there brought up, there Joseph, and
Mary and his Kindred dwelt, and Christ with them during his private Life, which
was till he was Thirty Years of Age. Now our Savior being come into his own
Country; Obs. 1. What his employment was; he preached in their Synagogues, and
held Communion with the Jewish Church, although she had many Corruptions in her.
Teaching us by his Example, not to desert and forsake the Communion of such a
Church, in which there is found neither Heretical Doctrine, nor Idolatrous
Worship; although many things be found in her, culpable and blameworthy. The
Jewish Church was certainly such, and yet our Savior maintained not occasional
only, but constant Communion with her. Obs. 2. The Influence and Effect which
our Savior's preaching had upon his own Countrymen, the People of Nazareth; it
did work Admiration in them, but not Faith; they were astonished, but did not
believe. Men may be mightily moved and affected by the Word, and yet may never
be converted by it; the Men of Nazareth wondered, and yet were offended; they
did not believe in him, but were offended at him. Obs. 3. The Ground and Cause
of this their Offense, and that was the Meaness of his Extraction, and the
Poverty of his Condition; Is not this the Carpenter? From whence the ancient
Fathers, particularly Justin Martyr, concluded, that our Savior did work upon
his Father Joseph's Trade during his Father's Life, and thence was called the
Carpenter's Son; and when Joseph was dead, (which was before Christ was Thirty
Years old, when he entered upon his Public Office) he was then called the
Carpenter. The Ancients say, he spent his time in making Ploughs and Yoaks, and
that thence it was that he drew so many Similitudes in his Preaching from the
Yoke and the Plough. This we are sure of, that our Lord lived not Thirty Years
before his Manifestation, idly and unprofitably. It is most probable, that he
followed his Father's Calling, and wrought under him, it being said, that he
was subject to him, Luke 2.15. as a Child to a Parent, and as a Servant to his
Master. Indeed after he entered upon his Prophetic Office, he no longer
followed Joseph's Calling, but applied himself wholly to the Work of the
Ministry. He made no more Ploughs, but one to break up hard Hearts; no more
Yoaks, but one for the Devil's Neck. However, in regard of our Savior's low
Extraction, and mean Education, His Countrymen were offended at him. Learn
hence, That the Poverty and Meaness of Christ's Condition was that which
Multitudes stumbled at, and which kept many, yea, most from believing on him.
None but a Spiritual Eye can discern Beauty in an humbled and abased Savior.
Learn 2dly, That it is the Property and Practice of profane Men to take
occasion from the outward Quality and Condition of God's Ministers, both to
despise their Persons, and to reject their Doctrine. Obs. 4. The Reason
assigned by our Savior why the Men of Nazareth despised him, and set him at
naught, because he was their Countryman and Acquaintance, their Familiarity
bred Contempt. Teaching us, That very often the faithful Ministers of God are
most contemned and dishonored, where they are most familiarly known. Sometimes
the Remembrance of their mean Original and Extraction, sometimes the Poverty of
their Parent's Condition, sometimes the Indecencies of their Childhood,
sometimes the Follies of their Youth are ripped up; all which are Occasions of
Contempt, and gave Ground for this proverbial Saying, That a Prophet is not
without Honor, save in his own Country. Which, like other proverbial Speeches,
holds true in the general, that for the most part it is so, but it is not
universally true in all Persons and Cases. However this good use may be made of
our Savior's Observation, to teach his Ministers to be wise, in conversing
with their People; not to make themselves cheap, and common in every Company,
nor too familiar with all sorts of Persons, nor to be light and vain in any
Company; for this will certainly breed Contempt both of their Persons and
Ministry. Our Duty is, by Strictness and Gravity of Deportment to maintain our
Esteem in the Consciences of our People, and to temper Gravity with a
Condescending Affability. That Minister which prostitutes his Authority,
frustrates the Ends of his Ministry, and is the Occasion of his own Contempt.
Obs. 5. How this People's Contempt of Christ's Person, and Unbelief of this
Doctrine, did hinder Christ from working Miracles amongst them. He could do no
mighty Works there. Not because he was unable, but they were unwilling. This
Inability proceeded from no Deficiency in Christ's Power, but from a Defect in
their Faith. He could not, because he would not; and he would not, because it
was not fit for him so to do. Although Christ be Omnipotent, and has all Power in
his Hand, yet Unbelief binds his Hands, and hinders him in the Execution of
that Power. Unbelief is such a Sin as keeps Men from being Partakers of the
Benefits of Christ. Obs. 6. How the Incredulity and Unbelief of this People was
so great, that Christ wondered at it. He marvelled because of their Unbelief.
Not because he was ignorant of the Cause of it, but because he had used such
mavelous Means for the curing them of their Unbelief. Learn hence, That
Unbelief is a great Sin at all times; but when Marvels are wrought for the cure
and healing of it, and it remains uncured; it is a mavelous Sin, and justly
causes Admiration and Wonder in Christ himself. He marvelled because of their
Unbelief.

7 And he calls unto him the twelve, and began to send them forth by two and
two, and gave them power over unclean spirits, 8 And commanded them that they
should take nothing for their journey, save a staff only: no scrip, no bread,
no money in their purse: 9 But be shod with sandals: and not put on two coats.
10 And he said unto them, In what place soever ye enter into an house, there
abide till ye depart from that place. 11 And whosoever shall not receive you,
nor hear you, when ye depart thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a
testimony against them. Verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for
Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, then for that city. 12 And they went
out, and preached that men should repent. 13 And they cast out many devils, and
anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them.

We heard before, Chap. 3. of our Savior's solemn calling his Apostles to
their Work and Office, now he sends them forth to execute their Office. Where
Observe, 1. The Person that sends them forth, Christ. Learn thence, That none
ought to take upon them the Office of Preaching, or any other Ministerial
Function in the Church, till thereunto lawfully called by Christ himself. The
Apostles were immediately called and sent forth by Christ himself, and received
the Doctrine which they taught immediately from Christ's own Mouth. His
Ministers now are called mediately, they receive their Authority from Christ by
the Hands of the Governors of his Church. Obs. 2. The manner of their sending,
by Two and Two in a Company, partly to make their Message of more Authority;
partly to testify their mutual Consent in the Doctrine which they taught; and
partly, to comfort and encourage, to help and strengthen, to assist and support
each other; in Imitation of this Example the Jesuits send forth their
Emissaries by Pairs. Learn hence, That the Ministers of the Word do stand in
great need of the mutual Help and Comfort, of the united Assistance and
Encouragement of each other in the weighty Duties of their Calling and
Function; like Laborers in the Harvest-Field they should help one another, the
strong endeavoring to strengthen the Hands of the Weak. But, Lord, what Tears
are sufficient to bewail the Want of Love and Unity, yea, the Prevalency of
that Envy and Malignity which is found too often amongst the Ministers of the
Gospel; so that instead of going forth Two by Two, happy is he that is alone in
a Place. Well might Melancthon bless God, when he lay a dying, that he was
going to a Place where he should be free from the implacable Hatred of Divines.
This is and ought to be for a Lamentation. Obs. 3. The Power given by Christ to
work Miracles for confirming the Doctrine of the Gospel which his Apostles
preached; he gave them Power over unclean Spirits, and they cast out Devils,
and anointed with Oil them that were sick, and healed them. This Power to work
Miracles was necessary for the Apostles; partly, to procure Reverence to their
Persons, being poor and unlearned Men, but principally to gain Credit and
Authority to their Doctrine; for the Doctrine of Faith in the Messiah as now
come and exhibited in the Flesh, being a strange and new Doctrine to the Jews;
the Truth and Certainty of it was to be extraordinarily ratified by Christ and
his Apostles Miracles. Some of which were casting out of Devils; and by
anointing with Oil to heal and recover sick Persons. This Gift of healing
remained some time in the Church, as appears from St. James 5.14. Is any sick,
anoint him with Oil in the Name of the Lord? Where observe, that the Apostles
did not use Oil as the Instrument and Means of healing (for then the Cure had
not been miraculous) but only as a Symbol of the Cure, or as an outward Sign
and Testimony of miraculous healing; which outward Sign was for the
strengthening of the Faith of such as were healed; assuring them, that as
certainly as their Bodies were anointed, so certainly should their Health and
Strength be restored. The Papists upon this ground their Sacrament of Extreme
Unction; but very vainly; for the Apostles anointed those that were sick as a
Sign of their Recovery; but the Papists anoint those that have the Pangs of
Death upon them; that their Sins may be blotted out, and the Snares of the
Devil avoided. Obs. 4. The Charge given by Christ to his Apostles at the time
of their sending out. This is threefold: First, Touching their Preparation for
their Journey; he bids them not take much Care, nor spend much Time in
furnishing themselves with Victuals, Money, Apparel, Weapons of Defense, and
the like, only take a Walking-Staff in their Hands, because they were to finish
their Journey speedily, and to return again to Christ. This Command of our
Savior to his Apostles, not to incumber themselves when going forth to preach
the Gospel, Teaches his Ministers their Duty, to free themselves as much as
possibly they can from Worldly Encumbrances, which may hinder them in the
Performance of their Office and Function. 2 Timothy 2.4. No Man that warreth,
intangleth himself with the Affairs of this Life. Secondly, Touching their
Lodging in their Journey. Our Savior advises them not to change it during
their stay in one Place; but into whatsoever House they first entered, they
should there continue till they departed out of that place. That so they might
avoid all show of Lightness and Inconstancy, and testify all Gravity and
Stayedness in their Behavior. This being a special Means to win Authority to
their Persons and Ministry. Thirdly, Christ gives a Charge to his Apostles
touching their Carriage toward such as should refuse to give Entertainment to
them and their Doctrine. They were to denounce the Judgments of God against
such Contemners, by shaking off the Dust of their Feet for a Testimony against
them. Thence Learn, That the Contempt of God's Ministers, and especially of
their Ministry and Doctrine, is an odious and execrable Sin detested by God,
and which ought to be abhorred by Man. Shake off the Dust of your Feet. This
Action was Emblematical, signifying that Almighty God would in like manner
shake them off as the vilest Dust. Learn 2dly, That wherever the Word is
preached, it is for a Testimony, either a Testimony for or against a People.
For if the Dust of a Minister's Feet bear Witness against the Despisers of the
Gospel, their Sermons much more. Observe Lastly, The dreadful Judgment
denounced by our Savior against the Contemners of the Apostle's Doctrine.
Verily it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment
than for that City. Where Note, 1. That there shall be a Day of Judgment. 2.
That in the Day of Judgment some Sinners shall fare worse than others. 3. That
of all Sinners the Condition of such will be saddest at the Day of Judgment,
who having lived under the Gospel, have died after all in Impenitency and
Infidelity. Verily I say unto you it will be more tolerable for Sodom and
Gomorrah, than, etc.

14 And king Herod heard of him, (for his name was spread abroad) and he said,
That John the Baptist was risen from the dead, and therefore mighty works do
show forth themselves in him. 15 Others said, That it is Elias. And others
said, That it is a prophet, or as one of the prophets. 16 But when Herod heard
thereof, he said, It is John whom I beheaded, he is risen from the dead. 17 For
Herod himself had sent forth, and laid hold upon John, and bound him in prison
for Herodias sake, his brother Philip's wife; for he had married her. 18 For
John had said unto Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brothers wife.
19 Therefore Herodias had a quarrel against him, and would have killed him, but
she could not. 20 For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an
holy, and observed him, and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard
him gladly. 21 And when a convenient day was come, that Herod on his birth day
made a supper to his lords, high captains, and chief estates of Galilee: 22 And
when the daughter of the said Herodias came in, and danced, and pleased Herod,
and them that sat with him, the king said unto the damsel, Ask of me whatsoever
thou will, and I will give it thee. 23 And he swear unto her, Whatsoever thou
shall ask of me, I will give it thee, unto the half of my kingdom. 24 And she
went forth, and said unto her mother, What shall I ask? And she said, The head
of John the Baptist. 25 And she came in straightway with haste unto the king,
and asked, saying, I will that thou give me by and by in a charger, the head of
John the Baptist. 26 And the king was exceeding sorry, yet for his oaths sake,
and for their sakes which sat with him, he would not reject her. 27 And
immediately the king sent an executioner, and commanded his head to be brought:
and he went, and beheaded him in the prison, 28 And brought his head in a
charger, and gave it to the damsel: and the damsel gave it to her mother. 29
And when his disciples heard of it, they came and took up his corpse, and laid
it in a tomb.

The History of John the Baptist's Death is here recorded by this Evangelist,
as St. Matthew had done before, Chapter 14.1, 2. here we have these Particulars
farther observable: 1. The Character and Description of a zealous and faithful
Minister. He is one that deals plainly, and durst tell the greatest Persons of
their Faults. Herod, though a King, is reproved by the Baptist for his Incest, in
taking his Brother's Wife. The Crown and Scepter of Herod could not daunt the
faithful Messenger of God. There ought to meet in the Ministers of God both
Courage and Impartiality. Courage, in fearing no Faces, Impartiality, in
sparing no Sins. Obs. 2. Who it was that commanded the Baptist to be beheaded.
It was Herod the King whom he had reproved. How sad is it when Kings, who
should be Nursing-fathers to the Church, do prove the bloody Butchers of the
Prophets of God. The severest Persecutions which the Prophets of God have
fallen under, are usually occasioned by their telling great Men of their
Crimes. Men in Power are impatient of Reproof, and imagine that their Authority
gives them a License to transgress. Obs. 3. The time of the Baptist's Death. It
was upon Herod 's Birthday. It was an ancient Custom among the Eastern Kings
to celebrate their Birth Days; Pharaoh did so, Genesis 40. and Herod here, but
both with Blood; yet these personal Stains do not make the Practice unlawful
when we solemnize our Birth-Days with Thankfulness to our Creator and
Preserver, and recommend our selves by Prayer to his Gracious Providence and
Protection for the Remainder of our Days. This is an Act of Piety and Religion.
But Herod's Birthday was kept with Revelling, with Feasting, with Music and
Dancing. All which were made sinful to him, by the Circumstances which did
attend it. Great Men's Feasts and Frolicks are too often the Season and
Occasion of much Sin. Obs. 4. The Instigators and Promoters of the Holy
Baptist's Death. Herodias and her Daughter. Lord! How deadly is the Malice of
Soul^ debauched with Lust. Imprisonment would not satisfy them, they must have
his Blood. Resolute Sinners who are mad upon their Lusts run furiously upon
their Opposers, and resolve to bear down all Opposition they meet with in the
Gratification of their unlawful Desires. Obs. 5. With what great Reluctance
Herod consented to this Villainy. The King was exceeding sorry. Wicked Men
oft-times sin with a troubled and disturbe^ Conscience, there is a mighty
Struggle betwixt their Reason and their Lusts, but at last they master their
Consciences, and choose rather to gratify their Lusts, than to obey their
Reason. So did Herod here; for notwithstanding his Sorrow, he commands the
Fact, he sent and beheaded John in the Prison. Obs. 6. The Motives and
Inducements which prevailed with Herod to behead this Holy Man. 1. The
Conscience of his Oath. Nevertheless for his Oath sake. See his Hypocrisy; he
made Scruple of a rash Oath, who made no Scruple of real Murder. See here not
only the Folly, but great Impiety of rash Vows, especially in ignorant Persons,
who think themselves obliged by them. Whereas it is their Duty, first to repent
of them, and then to break them as fast as they can. St. Chrysostom says, Herod
might have spared the Baptist's Head, and yet have kept his Oath to Herodias;
for he swear to give her only half of his Kingdom, and his Head was worth more
than his whole Kingdom. 2. Respect to his Reputation, not only for his Oath's
sake, but for them that sat with him. They heard him promise, and will be
Witnesses of his Inconstancy if he do not perform: Insisting upon Punctilio's
of Honor has hazarded the Loss of Millions of Souls. 3. His great
Unwillingness to discontent Herodias, and her Daughter. Oh vain and foolish
Hypocrite, who dreaded the displeasing of a wanton Mistress, more than the
offending of God and Conscience! Obs. 7. These bloody Women do not only require
the Baptist to be beheaded, but that his Head be brought in a Charger to them.
What a Dish was here to be served up at a Prince's Table on his Birthday! A
dead Man's Head swimming in Blood. How prodigiously insatiable is Cruelty and
Revenge? Herodias did not think her self safe till John was dead; she would not
think him dead till his Head was off, and would not believe his Head off till
the had it in her Hand. Revenge never thinks it has made sure enough. Oh how
cruel is a wicked Heart, that could take Pleasure in a Spectacle of so much
Horror! Methinks I see how that holy Head was tossed upon Herod's Table by
impure and filthy Hands. That true and faithful Tongue, those sacred Lips,
those chaste Eyes, those mortified Cheeks are now insultingly handled by a lewd
and incestuous Harlot, and made a Scorn to Herod's drunken Guests. Obs. 8. That
neither the Holiest of the Prophets, nor the Best of Men, are more secure from
Violence, than from natural Death. The Holy Baptist, who was sanctified in the
Womb, conceived and born with so much Miracle, lived with so much Reverence and
Observation, is now at Midnight obscurely murdered in a close Prison. Obs. 9.
That it is as true a Martyrdom to suffer for Duty, as for Faith. He dies as
truly a Martyr that dies for doing his Duty, as he that dies for professing his
Faith, and bearing Witness to the Truth. Obs. 10. How far Men may go in
Religion, and yet be far enough from saving Grace; they may reverence God's
Ministers, believe them to be holy and just Men, hear them with Delight and
Pleasure, protect and defend them from their Opposers, they may reform and do
many things, and yet be far from the Kingdom of God. Herod did all this, he
knew John to be an holy and just Man, reverenced and respected him, guarded and
kept him safe from Herodias Malice. For though he was imprisoned before, yet
Herod suffered none to hurt him, but heard him often with Pleasure and Delight.
Wicked and unregenerate Men may be so affected with the Word of God, as to
become Protectors and Defenders of those that dispense it, and yet receive no
saving Advantage by it. The plain and powerful preaching of the Word may win
upon, and prevail with an unregenerate Man to perform many good Duties, and to
forsake many known Sins, and yet may he after all remain under the Power of
Hypocrisy. Nay, from Herod's Example we may Learn, That a wicked Man may take
some Pleasure and Delight in hearing the Word preached, either the Generality
of the Truths asserted, or the Novelty of the Notions delivered, or the Wit and
Fancy. The graceful Elocution and Delivery, of the Preacher, may create a
present Delight, but it is neither a Spiritual Delight, nor an abiding Delight.
And when his Disciples heard of it, they came and took up his Corpse, and laid
it in a Tomb. When his Disciples heard it: That is, the Disciples of John
hearing that their holy Master was thus barbarously murdered, they took up his
dead Body, and decently interred it. Learn thence, That the faithful Servants
of God are not ashamed of the Sufferings of the Saints, but will testify their
Respects unto them, both living, dying, and dead, the Disciples of John give
their Master an honorable and respectful Burial. Fearing neither Herod's
Power, nor Herodias's Malice.

30 And the Apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus, and told him all
things, both what they had done, and what they had taught. 31 And he said unto
them, Come ye your selves apart into a desert place, and rest a while. For
there were many coming and going; and they had no leisure so much as to eat. 32
And they departed into a desert place by ship privately. 33 And the people saw
them departing, and many knew him, and ran afoot thither out of all cities, and
outwent them, and came together unto him. 34 And Jesus, when he came out, saw
much people, and was moved with compassion toward them, because they were as
sheep not having a shepherd: and he began to teach them many things.

Observe here, 1. How the Report of John's Death being brought to Christ, he
presently withdraws, and his Disciples with him from that Place into the
Desert. Christ will not long continue his Presence in those Places, where any
of his Servants are slain, and others of them are in Danger. Obs. 2. How our
Savior upon the Notice of John's Death flies into the Desert for his own
Preservation: His Hour was not yet come, and therefore he keeps out of Herod's
way. It is no Cowardice to fly from the Rage of Persecutors. Christ himself
both practiced it, and directs his Disciples to it, saying, When they persecute
you in one City, fly to another. We must not expose our Lives to Hazard, but
when the laying down our Lives will do God and Religion more Service than we
can do by living. Obs. 3. With what Condolency and Sympathizing Pity our
Blessed Savior exercised Acts of Mercy and Compassion, when the Objects of
Compassion were before him. Jesus seeing the Multitude was moved with
Compassion toward them. Christ, when here on Earth, did bear a tender and
compassionate Heart toward poor Creatures in Distress and Misery; and to our
Comfort he retains the same compassionate Nature and Disposition now in Heaven
which he had hereon Earth. Obs. 4. The Ground or Cause of this Compassion in
our Savior, because they were as Sheep, having no Shepherd. Learn thence, That
the Case of such a People is very sad, and to their Condition be much lamented
and pitied, who are destitute of able, faithful, and conscientious Pastors and
Teachers to feed them with the Spiritual Food of the Word and Sacraments. Where
Vision fails, the People perish. But was the Jewish Church now without Pastors,
as Sheep without a Shepherd? Had they not the Pharisees, the Scribes and
Doctors to teach and instruct them? Yes, no doubt, but they were no Pastors in
Christ's Account, because unfaithful Pastors. Thence Learn, That idle,
negligent, and unfaithful Pastors, are no Pastors in the Sight of God, and in
the Account of Christ. Jesus had Compassion on the Multitude, because they were
as Sheep, having no Shepherd.

35 And when the day was now far spent, his disciples came unto him, and said,
This is a desert place, and now the time is far passed: 36 Send them away, that
they may go into the country round about, and into the villages, and buy
themselves bread: for they have nothing to eat. 37 He answered and said unto
them, Give ye them to eat. And they say unto him, Shall we go and buy two
hundred penyworth of bread, and give them to eat? 38 He says unto them, How
many loaves have ye? go and see. And when they knew, they say, Five and two
fishes. 39 And he commanded them to make all sit down by companies upon the
green grass. 40 And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds, and by fifties. 41 And
when he had taken the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to heaven,
and blessed, and brake the loaves, and gave them to his disciples to set before
them; and the two fishes divided he among them all. 42 And they did all eat,
and were filled. 43 And they took up twelve baskets full of the fragments, and
of the fishes. 44 And they that did eat of the loaves, were about five thousand
men.

This Miracle of our Savior's feeding Five Thousand Men, besides Women and
Children, with Five Loaves and Two Fishes, is recorded by all Four Evangelists,
and in the History of it these following Particulars, are observable. Note 1.
The Disciples Pity toward the Multitude, who had long fasted, and wanted now
the ordinary Comforts and Supports of Life. It well becomes the Ministers of
Christ to respect the Bodily Necessities, as well as regard the Spiritual Wants
of Persons. Obs. 2. The Motion which the Disciples make to Christ on Behalf of
the Multitude. Send them away, that they may buy Victuals. Here was a strong
Charity, but a weak Faith. A strong Charity, in desiring the People's Relief;
but a weak Faith, in supposing that they could not otherwise be relieved, but
by sending them away; forgetting, that Christ, who had healed the Multitude
miraculously, could also feed them miraculously, if he pleased. All things
being equally easy to an Almighty Power. Obs. 3. Our Savior's strange Reply
to the Disciple's Request; They need not depart, give ye them to eat. Need not
depart? Why, the People must either feed or famish. Victuals they must have,
and a dry Desert will afford none, yet says Christ to his Disciples, Give ye
them to eat. Alas poor Disciples, they had nothing for themselves to eat, how
then should they give the Multitude to eat? When Christ requires of us what we
are unable to perform, it is to show us our Impotency and Weakness, and to
provoke us to look up to him, and depend by Faith on his Almighty Power. Obs.
4. What a poor and slender Provision the Lord of the whole Earth has for his
Household and Family. Five Barley Loaves, and Two small Fishes. Teaching us,
That these Bodies of ours must be fed, but not pumper'd; our Belly must not be
our Master, much less our God. The end of Food is to sustain Nature, we must
not stifle it with a Gluttonous Variety. And as the Quality of the Victuals was
plain, so the Quantity of it was small. Five Loaves and Two Fishes. Well might
the Disciples say, What are these among so many? The Eye of Sense and Reason
sees an utter Impossibility of those Effects which Faith can eas^ly apprehend,
and Divine Power more easily produce. Obs. 5. How Christ, the great Master of
the Feast, does marshal his Guests: He commands them all to sit down in Ranks
by Hundreds, and by Fifties. None of them reply, Sit down, but to what? Here
are the Mouths, but where is the Meat. We may soon be set, but when, or whence
shall we be served? Not a Word like this, but they obey and expect. Lord, how
easy is it to trust thy Providence, and rely upon thy Power, when there is
Corn in the Barn, Bread in the Cupboard, or Money in the Purse; but when our
Stores are all empty, and we have nothing in Hand, then to depend upon an
invisible Bounty, is a true and noble Act of Faith. Obs. 6. The Actions
performed by our Blessed Savior. He blessed, and brake, and gave the Loaves to
his Disciples, and they to the Multitude. 1. He blessed them. Teaching us by
his Example, never to use or receive the good Creatures of God for our
Nourishment without Prayers and Praise. Never to sit down to our Food as a
Beast to his Forage. 2. He brake the Loaves. He could have multiplied them
whole, why then would he rather do it in the breaking? Perhaps to teach us,
that we may rather expect his Blessing in the Distribution of his Bounty, than
in the Reservation of it. Scattering is the way to increasing; Liberality is
the way to Riches. 3. Christ gave the Bread thus broken to his Disciples, that
they might distribute it to the Multitude. But why did our Lord distribute the
Loaves by his Disciple's Hands? Doubtless to gain Respect to his Disciples from
the People. And the same Course does our Lord take in Spiritual Distributions.
He that could feed the World by his own immediate Hand, chooses rather by the
Hand of his Ministers to divide the Bread of Life amongst his People. Obs. 7.
The Certainty and the Greatness of the Miracle. They did all eat, and were
filled. They did all eat, not a Crumb, or a Bit, but to Satiety and Fullness.
All that were hungry did eat, and all that did eat were satisfied, and yet
Twelve Baskets of Fragments remain. More is left than was at first set on. It Is
hard to say which was the greatest Miracle, the miraculous Eating, or the
miraculous Leaving. If we consider what they eat, we may wonsider that they
left any thing; if what they left, that they eat any thing. Obs. 8. These
Fragments, though of Barley Loaves and Fish Bones, must not be l^st, but at our
Savior's Command gathered up. The Liberal Housekeeper of the World will not
allow the Loss of his Orts. Oh how tremendous will their Account be, who having
large and plentiful Estates, spend them upon their Lusts, being worse than lost
in God's Account!

45 And straightway he constrained his disciples to get into the ship, and to
go to the other side before unto Bethsaida, while he sent away the people. 46
And when he had sent them away, he departed into a mountain to pray. 47 And
when even was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and he alone on the
land. 48 And he saw them toiling in rowing: (for the wind was contrary unto
them) and about the fourth watch of the night, he comes unto them walking upon
the sea, and would have passed by them. 49 But when they saw him walking upon
the sea, they supposed it had been a spirit, and cried out. 50 (For they all
saw him, and were troubled) and immediately he talked with them, and says unto
them, Be of good cheer, it is I, be not afraid. 51 And he went up unto them
into the ship, and the wind ceased: and they were sore amazed in themselves
beyond measure, and wondered. 52 For they considered not the miracle of the
loaves, for their heart was hardened.

This Paragraph acquaints us with another Miracle, which our Savior wrought,
in walking upon the Sea to his Disciples; and herein we have Observable, 1. His
sending his Disciples to Sea, he constrained them to go into a Ship; not
compelling them against their Wills, but commanding them to take Ship, and go
before him. No doubt the Disciples were loath to this, unwilling to leave him,
and to go without him; for they that have once tasted the Sweetness of Christ's
Company and Acquaintance, are hardly and difficultly drawn away from him. Obs.
2. Christ having dismissed his Disciples and the Company, retires into a Mountain
to pray; to teach us, that when we address our selves to God in Duty, to take
all Helps, Furtherances, and Advantages for the doing of our Duty. We must
dismiss the Multitude before we address to God in Prayer; we must send away the
Multitude of worldly Cares, worldly Thoughts, worldly Concerns and Business,
when we would wait upon God in Duty. Obs. 3. The great Danger the Disciples
were in, and the Difficulties they were to encounter with. They were in the
midst of the Sea, tossed with the Waves, and the Winds were contrary; and which
was saddest of all, Christ was absent. The Wisdom of God sometimes suffers his
Children and People not only to be distressed, but greatly distressed, with a
variety of Distresses. Obs. 4. The seasonable Succor and Relief which Christ
afforded his Disciples. In the fourth Watch he came unto them, walking upon the
Waters. It was not a stormy and tempestuous Sea that could separate betwixt him
and them; he that waded through a Sea of Blood, and a Sea of Wrath, to save his
People, will walk upon a Sea of Waters to succor and relieve them. And the
time was the fourth Watch, about Four in the Morning, when they had been many
Hours conflicting with the Waves, and in great Danger of their Lives. To Teach
us, that Christ sometimes lengthens out the Trials of his Children before he
delivers them; but when they come to an Extremity, that is, the Season of his
Succor. Obs. 5. How the Disciples took their Deliverer for their Destroyer.
When they saw Christ, they cried out. Their Fears were highest when their
Deliverer and Deliverance was nearest; God may be coming with Salvation and
Deliverance to his People, when they for the present cannot discern it. Obs. 6.
When the Disciples were in the suddest Condition, one word from Christ revives
them; it is a sufficient support in all our Afflictions, to hear Christ's Voice
speaking to us, and to enjoy his favorable Presence with us. Say but, Oh
Savior, (it is I) and then let Evils do their worst: That one word (it is I)
is sufficient to allay all Storms, and to calm a Thousand Tempests. Obs.
Lastly, What Influence and Effect this Miracle had upon the Disciples, They
were sore amazed, and beyond measure astonished; they wonder at the ceasing of
the Winds, and calming of the Seas; but they had forgotten the Miracles of the
Loaves, which was a great Stupidity and Dullness in them, and argued Hardness of
Heart, and want of Consideration in them. Learn thence, That there is much
Stupidity of Mind, and Hardness of Heart, remaining unmortified in the best of
Saints, whilst here in an imperfect State; the work of Grace and Sanctification
is but imperfect here.

53 And when they had passed over, they came into the land of Genesareth, and
drew to the shore. 54 And when they were come out of the ship, straightway they
knew him, 55 And ran through that whole region round about; and began to carry
about in beds those that were sick, where they heard he was. 56 And
whithersoever he entered, into villages, or cities, or country, they laid the
sick in the streets, and besought him that they might touch, if it were but the
border of his garment: and as many as touched him were made whole.

Here Observe 1. The unwearied Diligence and Industry of our Savior in going
about to do good: He no sooner landeth, but goes to Genesareth, and heals
their Sick. It was the Great Business and Constant Employment of our Savior's
Life to Travel from Place to Place, that he might he Useful and Beneficial to
Mankind: He went to those that could not, and to those that would not, come to
him. Obs. 2. The People of Genesareth's Charity to their Sick Neighbors, they
send abroad to let all the Country know that Christ the great Physician was
come amongst them. There is a Duty of Love and Mercy which we owe unto those
that are in Affliction and Misery, namely, To afford them the best Help, Relief
and Succor, we are able, both in their inward and outward Afflictions. Obs. 3.
The Suddeness and Certainty of the Cure; they touched him and were made whole.
The Healing Vercue lay not in their Fingers, but in their Faith; or rather in
Christ, whom their Faith Apprehended.

CHAP. VII.
1 THen came together unto him the Pharisees, and certain of the Scribes which
came from Jerusalem. 2 And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with
defiled (that is to say, with unwashen) hands, they found fault. 3 For the
Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their hands often, eat not, holding
the tradition of the Elders. 4 And when they come from the market, except they
wash, they eat not. And many other things there be, which they have received to
hold, as the washing of cups, and pots, brazen vessels, and of tables. Then the
Pharisees and Scribes asked him, Why walk not thy disciples according to the
tradition of the elders, but eat bread with unwashen hands? 6 He answered and
said unto them, Well has Esaias prophesied of you, hypocrites, as it is
written, This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from
me. 7 Howbeit, in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men. 8 For laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the
tradition of men; as the washing of pots and cups: and many other such like
things ye do. 9 And he said unto them, Full well ye reject the Commandment of
God, that ye may keep your own tradition. 10 For Moses said, honor thy father
and thy mother: and whosoever curses father or mother, let him die the death. 11.
But ye say, If a man shall say to his father or mother, It is Corban, that is
to say, a gift, by whatsoever thou might be profited by me, shall be free.
12 And ye suffer him no more to do ought for his father, or his mother: 13
Making the word of God of none effect, through your tradition, which ye have
delivered: and many such like things ye do.

The former part of this Chapter acquaints us with a Conference or Disputation
which our Savior had with the Pharisees about their Superstitious Observation
of the Jewish Traditions. These Traditions were such Rites and Customs as were
delivered to them by the Elders and Rulers of the Jewish Church in former
times, which Traditions they Valued and Regarded mere than the express
Commandments of God. Learn thence, That Superstitious Men are always more Fond
of, and Zealous for the Traditions of Men in Divine Worship, than of the
express and positive Commands of God. Secondly, That it is the manner of such
Persons to Tie others to their own Practice and Example, in matters of
Religious Worship; and to Censure and Condemn all those who do not conform to
them in the smallest matters. The Pharisees here Censure the Disciples for
eating with unwashed Hands, because it was their Custom to wash when they did
eat; yet did not Christ or his Disciples refuse to wash before Meat, as it was
a Civil and Decent Custom, but because the Pharisees made it a Religious Rite:
Teaching us, that what is in it self indifferent, and may without offense be
done as a Civil Custom, ought to be Discountenanced and Opposed when required
of us as an Act of Religion. The Jews fearing lest they should touch any Person
or Thing that was unclean, and so be Defiled unawares, did use frequent
washings, as of Cups, Pots, Vessels, Tables, Beds, or Couches which they lay
upon when they eat. Thus Pharisaical Hypocrisy puts God off with outward
Cleansing, instead of inward Purity; regarding more the outward Cleanness of
the Hand, than the inward Purity of the Heart. This was the Accusation of the
Pharisees, to which our Savior Replies by way of Recrimination, that if his
Disciples did not observe the Tradition of the Elders, They (the Pharisees) did
reject and make void the Commandment of God, and did Worship him in vain,
Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. Learn hence, That all Service
and Worship which is offered to God, according to Man's Will and Ordinances,
and not according to the Rule of God's own Word, is Vain and Unprofitable:
Divine Institution is the only pure Rule of Religious Worship, as to the
Substance of it; here what God does not Command he forbids. Observe next, the
Instance which our Savior produces of the Pharisees Violating an express
Command of God, and prefering their own Traditions before it: He instances in
the Fifth Commandment, which requires Children to Relieve their Parents in
their Necessities. Now though the Pharisees did not deny this in plain Terms,
yet they made an exception from it, which if Children pleased, might render it
vain, void, and useless. For the Pharisees Taught, that in case the Child of a
Poor Parent that wanted Relief, would give a Gift to the Temple, which Gift
they called Corban, that is, a Gift Consecrated to God and Religious Uses, that
then the Children of such Poor Parents were discharged from making any farther
Provision for their Aged or Impotent Parents: But might reply after this
manner, that which thou ask for thy Supply, is given to God, and therefore I
cannot Relieve thee. So that Covetous and Graceless Children looked upon it as
the most frugal way, once for all, to fine to the Temple, rather than pay the
constant Rent of Daily Relief to their Poor Parents. Learn hence, That the
Practice of Moral Duties is required before, and is more acceptable to Almighty
God, than the most Solemn Acts and Exercises of Instituted Worship whatsoever.
I will have Mercy, says God, rather than Sacrifice, and to do Justice and
Judgment, is more acceptable to the Lord than Sacrifice. Secondly, That no
Duty, Gift or Offering to God is accepted, where the Duty of Charity is
neglected; it is much more acceptable to God to refresh the Bowels of his
Saints, who are the Living Temples of the Holy Ghost, than to Adorn Material
Temples with Gold and Silver. Corban, is a Syriack Word, signifying a Gift
given to God, The Pharisees applied these Gifts to the Use and Service of the
Temple; possibly, to Repair, Beautify and Adorn it; which had not been amiss,
if they had not taught, that such Gifts to the Temple did discharge Children
from the Duty of Charity to their Natural Parents. These Things ought they to
have done, in the first place, and not to leave the other undone.

14 And when he had called all the people unto him, he said unto them, Hearken
unto me every one of you, and understand. 15 There is nothing from without a
man, that entering into him, can defile him: but the things which come out of
him, those are they that defile the man. 16 If any Man have ears to hear, let
him hear. 17 And when he was entered into the house from the people, his
disciples asked him concerning the parable. 18. And he says unto them, Are ye
so without understanding also? do ye not perceive, that whatsoever thing from
without enters into the man, it cannot defile him, 19 Because it enters not
into his heart, but into the belly, and goes out into the draught, purging all
meats? 20 And he said, That which comes out of the man, that defiles the man.
21 For, from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murders, 22 Thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit,
lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness: 23 All these evil
things come from within, and defile the Man.

Our Blessed Savior leaving the Pharisees with some dislike, applies himself
to the Multitude; and instructs them in a very necessary and useful Doctrine
Touching the true Original Cause of all Spiritual Pollution and Uncleanness:
Namely, The Filthiness and Impurity of Man's Heart and Nature. And that it is
not the Meat eaten with the Mouth, but the Wickedness of the Heart vented by
the Mouth, which Pollutes a Person in God's Account. The Heart and Soul of Man
alone is capable of Sinful Defilement. Nothing can Defile a Person in God's
Account, but that which defiles the inward Man. Learn hence, 1. That the Heart
of Man is the Sink and Seed-plot of all Sin, the Source and Fountain of all
Pollution. 2. That all the Impiety of the Life proceeds from the Impurity and
Filthiness of the Heart. Men's Lives would not be so bad if their Hearts were
not worse. These Disciples desiring the Interpretation of the foregoing
parable, our Savior gives it them; but withal expostulates with them for not
understanding a matter so obvious and plain, Are ye yet without Understanding?
As if he had said, have you sat thus long under my Ministerial Teaching, and
enjoyed the Benefit of my Conversation, and yet are no further Proficients in
Knowledge? Plainly intimating that Christ expects a Proficiency in Knowledge
from us, proportionable to the Opportunities and Means of Knowledge enjoyed by
us. Having given them this Rebuke, he next acquaints them with the sense and
meaning of the Parable; namely, That it is out of a Wicked and Sinful Heart
that all Sin and Wickedness does proceed. Though the Occasions of Sin are from
without, yet the Source and Original of it is from within. The Heart of Man is
as a Cage full of Unclean Birds; Hence proceed Evil Thoughts, either against
God or our Neighbors. Adulteries, or all the Sins of the Flesh. Murders, that
is, all Cruelty and hard Dealing toward others. An Evil Eye, That is, an
Envious Spirit which frets and grieves at the Happiness of others, called an
Evil Eye, because Envy does much show and manifest it self in the outward
Countenance, and especially by the Eyes. From the whole, Note, That the best
way to hinder the progress of Sin in the Life, is to mortify it in the Heart,
to Crucify all inordinate Motions, Lusts and Corruptions in their root; for
the Heart is the first Seat and Subject of Sin, from whence it flows forth into
the Life and Conversation.

24 And from thence he arose and went into the borders of Tire and Sydon, and
entered into an house, and would have no man know it; but he could not be hid.
25 For a certain woman whose young daughter had an unclean spirit, heard of
him, and came and fell at his feet: 26 (The woman was a Greek, a Syrophenician,
by nation) and she besought him that he would cast forth the devil out of her
Daughter. 27 But Jesus said unto her, Let the children first be filled: for it
is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it unto the dogs. 28 And
she answered and said unto him, Yes, Lord, yet the dogs under the table eat of
the childrens crumbs. 29 And he said unto her, for this saying go thy way, the
devil is gone out of thy daughter. 30 And when she was come to her house, she
found the devil gone out, and her daughter laid upon the bed.

All along in the History of our Savior's Life, we are to take notice how he
went about from place to place doing good; being now come into the Borders of
Tire and Sidon, he finds a poor Woman of the Race of the Canaanites, who
becomes first an humble Supplicant, and then a Bold Beggar on the behalf of her
Possessed Daughter. Where Obs. 1. That though all Israel could not example the
Faith of this Canaanite, yet was her Daughter Tormented with the Devil. Learn
thence, That neither truth of Faith, nor strength of Faith, can secure against
Satan's inward Temptations or outward Vexations; and consequently the worst of
Bodily Afflictions are no sufficient proof of Divine Displeasure. Obs. 2. The
Daughter did not come to Christ for her self, but the Mother for her. Perhaps
the Child was not so sensible of its own Misery, but the Mother feels both the
Child's sorrow and her own. True Goodness teaches us to appropriate the
Afflictions of others to our selves, causing us to bear their Griefs, and to
Sympathize with them in their Sorrows Obs. 3. The seeming Severity of Christ to
this poor W^man; he calls her not a Woman, but a Dog, and, as it were, Spurns
her from the Table. Did ever so Severe a Word drop from those mild Lips? What
shall we say? Is the Lamb of God turned Lion, that a Woman in Distress
imploring Pity, should be thus rated out of Christ's Presence? But hence we
Learn, How Christ puts the strongest Faith of his own Children upon the
severest Trial. This Trial had never been so sharp if her Faith had not been so
strong: Usually where God gives much Grace, he tries Grace much. Obser. 4. The
Humble Carriage of this Holy Woman; her Humility grants all, her Patience
overcomes all, she meekly desires to possess the Dogs place; not to crowd to
the Table, but to creep under it, and to partake of the Crumbs of Mercy that
fall from thence. Indeed she showed one of the best qualities of the Dog, in
keeping her hold where she had once fastened, not letting go, nor giving over
until she had gotten what she desired. But nothing is so pleasing to Christ as
to see his People follow him, with Faith and Importunity, when he seems to
withdraw himself from them.

31 And again departing from the coasts of Tire and Sydon, he came unto the sea
of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis. 32 And they bring unto
him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his speech: and they beseech
him to put his hands upon him. 33 And he took him aside from the multitude, and
put his fingers into his ears, and he spit, and touched his tongue, 34 And
looking up to heaven, he sighed, and says unto him, Ephphatha, that is, be
opened. 35 And straightway his ears were opened, and the string of his Tongue
was loosed, and he spoke plain. 36 And he charged them that they should tell no
Man: but the more he charged them, so much the more a great deal they published
it. 37 And were beyond measure astonished, saying, He has done all things
well: he makes both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak.

See here (1.) The bitter Fruits and sad Effects of Sin, which has brought
Deafness, Dumbness, and Blindness, upon the Humane Nature. As Death, so all
Diseases entered into the World by Sin. Sin first brought Infirmities and
Mortality into our Natures; and the Wages of Sin are Diseases and Death.
Observe, (2.) That the Blessing of Bodily Health and Healing is from Christ,
who by his Divine Power, as he was God, miraculously and immediately healed
them that were brought unto him. Obser. (3.) The Actions and Gestures which our
Savior used in healing this Deaf Person. He put his Fingers into his Ears, he
spit and touched his Tongue. Not that these were Means or Natural Causes
effecting the Cure, for there was no healing Virtue in the Spittle; but only
outward Signs, Testimonies, and Pledges of Christ's Divine Power, and Gracious
Readiness to cure the Person in Distress. Obser. (4.) How Christ withdrew the
Person from the Multitude, whom he was about to help and heal. Teaching us in
all our Good Works to avoid all Show and Appearance of Ostentation and
Vainglory: To set God's Glory before our Eyes, and not seek our own Praise.
Observe, (5.) The Effect which this Miracle had upon the Multitude; it
occasioned their Astonishment and Applause, They were astonished, and said, He
has done all things well. It becomes us both to take Notice of the wonderful
Works of God, and also to magnify and extol the Author of them. This is one way
of glorifying our Creator.

CHAP. VIII.
1 IN those days the Multitude being very great, and having nothing to eat,
Jesus called his Disciples unto him, and said unto them, 2 I have compassion on
the multitude, because they have now been with me three days, and have nothing
to eat: 3 And if I send them away fasting to their own Houses, they will faint
by the way: for diverse of them came from far. 4 And his Disciples answered him,
From whence can a man satisfy these men with bread in the wilderness? 5 And he
asked them, How many loaves have ye? and they said, Seven. 6 And he commanded
the people to sit down on the ground: and he took the seven loaves, and gave
thanks, and brake, and gave to his Disciples to set before them: and they did
set them before the People. 7 And they had a few small fishes, and he blessed,
and commanded to set them also before them. 8 So they did eat and were filled:
and they took up of the broken meat that was left seven baskets. 9 And they
that had eaten were about four thousand, and he sent them away.

This Chapter begins with the Relation of a famous Miracle wrought by our
Savior, Namely, His feeding of Four Thousand Persons with Seven Loaves and a
few Fishes. And here we have observable, First, The tender Care which Christ
took of the Bodies of Men, to provide all Necessaries for their Support and
Comfort. He gives us Richly all things to enjoy. The great Housekeeper of the
World opens his Hand and fills all things living with Plenteousness. How
careful was our Savior here, that the Bodies of poor Creatures might not
faint, nor be over weak and weary by the way? therefore he would not dismiss
them without Refreshment. Obs. (2.) The Original Source and Spring from whence
this Care that Christ had of the Multitude, did proceed and flow. Namely, from
that Sympathizing Pity and Tender Compassion which the merciful Heart of Christ
did bear toward Persons in Distress and Misery. Learn thence, That the Tender
Pity and Compassion of Christ is not the Spring and Fountain of Spiritual
Mercies only, but of Temporal Blessings also. I have Compassion on the
Multitude, who have nothing to eat. Obs. (3.) How the Disciples, not seeing any
outward visible Means for the Peoples Support, conclude it impossible for so
many to be satisfied with the little Supply they had; Namely, Seven Loaves and
a few small Fishes. Learn thence, That a weak Faith soon grows Thoughtful, and
sometimes Distrustful at the Sight of Difficulties. Whence (say the Disciples)
can these Men be satisfied with Bread? Not considering that the Power of God in
Blessing our Food, is far above the Means of Food. It is as easy for him to
sustain and nourish us with a little, as with much. Man lives not by Bread,
but by the Blessing of God upon the Bread he eats. Obs. (4.) That although
Christ could have fed these Four Thousand without the Loaves; yet he takes and
makes use of them, seeing they might be had. Learn thence, That Christ did not
neglect his own appointed ordinary Means; nor do any thing in an extraordinary
way, farther than was absolutely necessary. Christ was above Means, and could
work without them, and when they failed, did so. But when the Means were at
hand he made use of them himself, to teach us never to expect That in a way of
Miracle, which may be come at in a way of Means. Obs. (5.) From our Lord's
Example, That Religious Custom of begging a Blessing upon our Food before we
set down to it, and of Receiving the good Creatures of God with Thanksgiving.
How unworthy is he of the Crumbs that fall from his own Table, who with the
Swine looks not up unto, and takes no thankful Notice of, the Hand that feeds
him? Obs. (6.) The Certainty and Greatness of the Miracle: They did all eat and
were filled. They did all eat, not a Crust of Bread, or a bit of Fish, but to
Satiety and Fullness. All that were hungry did eat, and all that did eat were
satisfied. And yet Seven Baskets remain, more is left than was at first set on.
It Is hard to say which was the greatest Miracle, the miraculous Eating, or
miraculous Leaving. If we consider what they eat, we may wonder that they left
any thing; if what they left, that they eat any thing. Obs. Lastly, Our Lord's
Command to gather up the Fragments Teaches us, That we make no waste of the
good Creatures of God. The Fragments of Fish-Bones and broken Bread must be
gathered up: The Liberal Housekeeper of the World will not allow the Loss of
his Orts. Frugality is a commendable Duty. God has made us Stewards, but not
absolute Lords of his Blessing. We must be accountable to him for all the
Instances of his Bounty received from him.

10 And straightway he entered into a ship with his disciples, and came into the
parts of Dalmanutha. 11 And the Pharisees came forth, and began to question
with him, seeking of him a sign from Heaven, tempting him. 12 And he sighed
deeply in his spirit, and said, Why does this generation seek after a sign?
Verily I say unto you, There shall be no sign given unto this generation. 13
And he left them, and departed to the other side.

Obs. Here (1.) The unreasonable Practice of the wicked Pharisees, in asking a
Sign of Christ; that is, some new and extraordinary Miracle to be wrought by
him, to demonstrate him to be the true and promised Messiah: But had not our
S^viour showed them Signs enough already? What were all the Miracles daily
wrought before their Eyes, but convincing Signs of his Divine Power? But
Infidelity mixed with Obstinacy is never satisfied. Obj. (2.) Our Savior's
Carriage toward these obstinate Pharisees, who persisted in their Unbelief. He
sighed deeply in his Spirit, and mourned for the Hardness of their Heart. Learn
thence, That to grieve and mourn for the Sins of others, to be affected with
them, and deeply afflicted for them, is a gracious and Christ-like Temper. It
is not sufficient to make an outward show of grieving for others Sins, but we
ought to lay them to Heart, and to be inwardly afflicted for them. Jesus sighed
deeply in his Spirit. Obs. (3.) A sharp Reproof given by our Savior to them,
at the same time that our Savior did inwardly grieve for the Pharisees
Wickedness, he did openly reprove them for it. It is not sufficient that we
mourn for the Sins of others, but we must prudently reprove them, as Occasion
is offered, and our Calling requires. Obs. (4.) The Sin which the Pharisees
are reproved for; namely, for seeking after a Sign. That is, for demanding new
Miracles, after he had wrought so many before their Eyes, to prove the Divinity
of his Person. Learn thence, That it is a Sin for any to require new Signs and
Miracles for the Confirmation of That Doctrine which has been already
sufficiently confirmed by Miracles. Yea, an heinous Sin, which deserves a
sharp Reproof and Censure. Observe Lastly, Our Savior's peremptory Denial of
the Pharisees presumptuous Request: There shall be no Sign given to this
Generation. That is, no such Sign or Miracles as they desire and would have. No
Sign or Miracle shall be wrought at their Motion and Suit: although after this,
Christ of his own Accord, and at his own Pleasure, wrought many Miracles before
their Eyes. Such as wilfully harden themselves against the Light of their own
Consciences, are righteously delivered up to Hardness of Heart, and final
Impenitency. These Hypocritical Pharisees shut their Eyes against the most
convictive Evidence; and they are given up to their own Obstinacy: Our Savior
left them and departed.

14 Now the disciples had forgotten to take bread, neither had they in the ship
with them more than one loaf. 15 And he charged them, saying, Take heed, beware
of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod. 16 And they
reasoned among themselves, saying, It is because we have no bread. 17 And when
Jesus knew it, he says unto them. Why reason ye, because ye have no bread?
perceive ye not yet, neither understand? have ye your hearts yet hardened? 18
Having eyes, see ye not? and having ears, hear ye not? and do ye not yet
remember? 19 When I brake the five loaves among five thousand, how many baskets
full of fragments took ye up? They say unto him, Twelve. 20 And when the seven
amongst four thousand, how many baskets full of fragments took ye up? And they
said, Seven. 21 And he said unto them, How is it that you do not understand?

Observe here (1.) How dull the Disciples of Christ were under Christ's own
Teaching, and how apt to put a carnal Sense upon his Words. They apprehended he
had spoke unto them of the Leaven of Bread, what he intended of the Leaven of
the Pharisees Doctrine. Obs. (2.) The Rebuke our Savior gives his Disciples
for not understanding the Sense and Signification of what he spoke. Christ is
much offended with his own People, when he discerns Blindness and Ignorance in
them after more than ordinary means of Knowledge enjoyed by them: How is it
that ye do not yet understand? Obs. (3.) The Metaphor by which Christ sets
forth the corrupt Doctrines of the Pharisees and Herodians. He compares it to
Leaven. Partly for its Sowerness; and partly for its Diffusiveness. Now the
Leaven of Herod, or the Herodians, is supposed to be This: That because Herod
was a Jew born, and made King of the Jews, and lived at the time when the
Messiah was expected, there were those that maintained the Opinion that he was
the promised Messiah: which Opinion Christ compares to Leaven, because as that
diffuseth it self into the whole Mass or Lump of Bread with which it is mixed:
So false Doctrine was not only evil and corrupt in it self, but apt to spread
its Contagion farther and farther, to the infecting of others with it. Learn
thence, That Error is as damnable as Vice, and Persons erroneous in Judgment to
be avoided, as well as those that are wicked in Conversation: and he that has a
due Care of his Soul's Salvation, will be as much afraid of erroneous
Principles, as he is of debauched Practices. Obs. (4.) Our Savior does not
command his Disciples to separate from Communion with the Pharisees, and oblige
them not to hear their Doctrine; but only to beware of their Errors, which they
mix with their Doctrine. We may and ought to hold Communion with a Church,
though erroneous in Judgment, if not fundamentally erroneous. For Separation
from a Church is not justifiable upon any other Grounds than that which makes a
Separation betwixt God and that Church, which is either Apostasy into gross
Idolatry, or in point of Doctrine into damnable Heresy. Obs. (5.) The Fault
observed by our Savior in his Disciples hardness of Heart, Have ye your Hearts
yet hardened? There may be, and often times is, some degree of Hardness of Heart
in sincere Christians: but this is not a total Hardness, but in some degree
only: and it is lamented, and humbled, or not indulged and delighted in. As
Christ is grieved for the Hardness of his Peoples Hearts, so are they grieved
also: it is both bitter and burthensom to them.

22 And he comes to Bethsaida, and they bring a blind man to him, and besought
him to touch him. 23 And he took the blind man by the hand, and led him out of
the town; and when he had spit on his eyes, and put his hands upon him, he
asked him if he saw ought. 24 And he looked up, and said, I see men as trees,
walking. 25 After that he put his hands again upon his eyes, and made him look
up: and he was restored, and saw every man clearly. 26 And he sent him away to
his house, saying, Neither go into the town, nor tell it to any man in the town.

Here we have recorded a special Miracle wrought by our Savior at Bethsaida,
in curing a blind Man brought unto him. Where Observe, (1.) What evident Proof
the Pharisees had of Christ's Divine Power and Godhead: He had before caused
the Deaf to hear, the Dumb to speak, the Lame to walk; now he makes the Blind
to see. Yet did the Pharisees obstinately resist all Means of their Conviction,
and continued in their Opposition to Truth, to their inevitable and unutterable
Condemnation. Obs. (2.) The wonderful Humility, the great Condescension of
Jesus Christ toward this Blind-Man: He took him by the Hand and led him,
himself. A great Evidence of his Condescending Humility, and of his Goodness
and Mercy; showing how ready and willing he was to help and heal him; see here
a singular Pattern of Humility and condescending Grace and Mercy in our dear
Redeemer, in that he vouchsafed with his own hands to take and lead a poor
Blind Man through the Streets of Bethsaida, in the sight of all the People. Let
us learn of him who was thus meek and lowly in heart. Obs. (3.) Our Lord leads
the Blind Man out of the Town before he heals him; not in the Town where all
the People might take notice of it. Thereby teaching us to avoid all show of
Ambition, all Appearance of Vainglory in what we do. Even as Christ sought not
his own Glory, but the Glory of him that sent him. Obs. (4.) The manner of the
Cure wrought upon this Blind Man; it was gradual and by degrees, not
instantaneous and at once; he had first a dark, dim, and obscure Sight,
afterward a clear and a perfect Sight. Christ thereby gave Evidence of his
Absolute and Omnipotent Power, that he was not tied to any particular Means, or
Manner, or Order of Working; but wrought his Miracles variously, as he saw to
be most fit for the Glory of God, and the Benefit of his People. Observe
Lastly, The Charge given by our Savior not to publish this Miracle in the Town
of Bethsaida; a Place where Christ had so often preached, and wrought so many
Miracles. But the Inhabitants had obstinately and contemptuously undervalued
and despised both his Doctrine and Miracles; therefore we read, Mat. 11.21.
that our Savior denounced a Woe against Bethsaida, assuring her, that it would
be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon, than for her. The higher a People rise
under the Means, the lower they fall, if they miscarry. Such a People as have
been nearest to Conversion, being not converted, shall have the greatest
Condemnation when they are judged.

27 And Jesus went out, and his disciples into the towns of Cesarea Philippi,
and by the way he asked his disciples, saying unto them, Whom do men say that I
am? 28 And they answered, John the Baptist: but some say, Elias: and others,
One of the prophets. 29 And he says unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And
Peter answers and says unto him, Thou art the Christ. 30 And he charged them
that they should tell no man of him. 31 And he began to teach them, that the
son of man must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders, and of the
chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again. 32
And he spoke that saying openly. And Peter took him, and began to rebuke him.
33 But when he had turned about, and looked on his disciples, he rebuked Peter,
saying, Get thee behind me, Satan: for thou savourest not the things that be of
God, but the things that be of men.

These Verses relate to us a Conference which our Savior had with his
Disciples, touching their own and others Opininion of his Person. Where Observe
(1.) The Place where Christ and his Disciples did confer; it was in the way as
they walked together. Teaching us our Duty to take all Occasions and
Opportunities for Holy Conference, for good Discourse touching Spiritual
Things, when in the House, when in the Field, when travailing in the way, Mal.
3.16. Then they that feared the Lord spoke often to one another. Obs. (2.) The
Conference it self: Whom do Men say that I am? That is, What do the common
People think and speak of me? not as if Christ were ignorant what Men said of
him, or did vain-gloriously enquire after the Opinion of the Multitude
concerning him; but with an Intention more firmly to settle and establish his
Disciples in the Belief of his being the true and promised Messiah. The
Disciples tell him, That some said, He was John the Baptist, others Elyas,
others one of the Prophets. It is no new thing it seems to find Diversity of
Judgments and Opinions concerning Christ and the Affairs of his Kingdom. When
our Savior was amongst Men who daily conversed with him, yet was there then a
great diversity of Opinions concerning him. Obs. (3.) How St. Peter, as the
Mouth of all the Apostles, and in their Name makes a full and open Confession
of Christ, acknowledging him to be the true and promised Messiah, Peter said,
Thou art the Christ. Whence Note, That the Vail of Christ's Humane Nature did
not keep the Eye of his Disciples Faith from seeing him to be truly and really
God. (2.) That Jesus the Son of the Virgin Mary was the Christ, the true
Messiah, or the Person ordained by God to be the Mediator betwixt God and Man;
the Redeemer and Savior of Mankind: Thou art the Christ. Obs. (4.) The Charge
and special Injunction given by our Savior to tell no man of him; that is, not
commonly and openly to declare that he was the Son of God and the true Messiah:
Because he was now in his State of Humiliation, and the Glory of his Divinity
was to be concealed till his Resurrection. Christ had his own fit Times and
proper Seasons, in which he revealed the great Mysteries of his Kingdom to the
World. Obs. (5.) The great Wisdom of our Savior in acquainting his Disciples
with the near Approach of his Death and Passion: thereby to prevent that
Scandal and Offense which otherwise they might have taken at his Sufferings:
the better to fit and prepare them to bear that great Trial, and to correct the
Error which they had entertained touching an Earthly Kingdom of Christ: that
the Messiah was to be a temporal Prince. Obs. (6.) St. Peter's Carriage toward
Christ upon this Occasion. He took him aside and began to blame him for
affirming that he must die. Oh how ready is Flesh and Blood to oppose all that
tends to Suffering. What need have we to be fortified against the Temptations
of our Friends, as well as of Enemies. Satan sometimes makes use of good Men as
his Instruments to do his Work by, when they little suspect it. Little did
Peter think, that Satan now set him on work to hinder the Redemption of
Mankind, by dissuading Christ from dying. Obs. (7.) With what Indignation
Christ rejects Peter's Admonition: Get thee behind me Satan. Christ heard Satan
speaking in Peter: 'Twas Peter's Tongue, but Satan tuned it, therefore Christ
calls Peter by Satan's Name. They that will do the Devil's Work, shall have the
Devil's Name too. He that would hinder the Redemption of Mankind is Satan, an
Adversary to Mankind. From our Savior's smart Reproof given to Peter, we
Learn, That no re^pect to Men's Persons, or regard to their Piety, must cause us
to flatter them in their Sins; or move us to speak favorably of their Sins. As
well as our Savior loved Peter, he rebukes him severely. Oh Lord! so intent
was thy Heart upon the great work of our Redemption, that thou could not bear
the least Word that should obstruct thee in it, or divert thee from it.

34 And when he had called the people unto him, with his disciples also, he
said unto them, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross and follow me. 35 For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it;
but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospels, the same shall
save it.

Observe here (1.) How our Blessed Savior recommends his Religion to every
one's Election and choice, not attempting by Force and Violence to compel any
Person to the embracing of it. If any Man will come after me, that is, If any
Man chooses and resolves to be a Christian. Obs. (2.) Our Savior's Terms
propounded; namely, Self-denial, Gospel-suffering, and Gospel-service. (1.)
Self-denial, Let him deny himself. By which we are not to understand, either
the denying of our Senses in Matters of Faith, or the renouncing our Reason in
the Matters of Religion: But a Willingness to part with all our Earthly
Comforts and Temporal Enjoyments for the sake of Christ, when called thereunto.
(2.) Gospel-suffering; He must take up his Cross. An Allusion to a Roman
Custom, that the Malefactor who was to be crucified, took his Cross upon his
Shoulder, and carried it to the Place of Execution. Where Note, That not the
making of the Cross, but the patient bearing of it, when God has made it and
laid it upon our Shoulders, is the Duty enjoined: Let him take up his Cross.
(3.) Gospel-service; Let him follow me, says Christ. That is, Obey my Commands,
and imitate my Example. He must set my Life and Doctrine continually before
him; and be daily correcting and reforming of his Life by that Rule and
Pattern. Obs. (3.) The Reasons urged by our Savior to induce Men to a
willingness to lay down their Lives for the sake of Christ and his Holy
Religion; He that will save his Life shall lose it; and he that is willing to
lose his Life for the Gospel's sake, the same shall find it. Intimating to us,
(1.) That the Love of this Temporal Life is a great Temptation to Men to deny
Christ, and to renounce his Holy Religion. And (2.) That the surest way to
attain Eternal Life is cheerfully to lay down our Temporal Life, when the Glory
of Christ, and the Honor of Religion requires it at our hand.

36 For what shall it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? 37 Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

Our Savior had shown in the former Verses the great Danger of seeking to save
our Temporal Life, by exposing to hazard our Eternal Life. This he confirms in
the Words before us by a double Argument: the first drawn from the Excellency
of Eternal Life, or the Life of the Soul The second drawn from the
Irrecoverableness of this Loss; or the Impossibility of Redeeming the Loss of
the Soul by any way or means whatsoever. What shall a Man give in exchange for
his Soul? Learn (1.) That Almighty God has entrusted every one of us with a
Soul of inestimable Worth and Preciousness, capable of being saved or lost, and
that to all Eternity. (2.) That the Gain of the whole World is not comparable
with the Loss of one precious Soul. The Soul's Loss is an inconceivable,
incompensable, and irrecoverable Loss.

38 Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in this
adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the son of man be ashamed,
when he comes in the glory of his father with his holy angels.

That is, whosoever shall deny, or disown me, either in my Person, my Gospel,
or my Members, for any Fear or Favor of Man, he shall with shame be disowned
and eternally rejected by me at the great Day. There are Two Passions that make
Persons disown Christ and Religion in the Day of Temptation; Namely, Fear and
Shame. Many good Men have been overcome by the former, as St. Peter and others;
but we find not any good Man in Scripture guilty of the latter; Namely, that
denied Christ out of Shame. This argues a rotten, unsound, and corrupt Heart.
If any Man thinks it beneath his Honor, and Quality to own the opposed Truths
and despised Members of Jesus Christ, he will think it much more beneath him,
his Honor and Dignity, to own them at the great Day. Learn hence, That it is
not sufficient that we own Christ by believing in him, but we must honor him
by an outward professing of him also. Secondly, That such as are ashamed of
Christ's Doctrine or Members, are ashamed of Christ himself. Thirdly, That such
as either for Fear dare not, or for Shame will not own the Doctrine of Christ,
or the Members of Christ now, shall find Christ ashamed to own and confess them
at the Great Day. Whosoever is ashamed of me and of my Words, in this
adulterous and wicked Generation; of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed,
when he comes in the Glory of his Father with his Holy Angels.

CHAP. IX.
1 AND he said unto them, verily I say unto you, That there be some of them
that stand here, which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the
kingdom of God come with Power.

There is a threefold Sense and interpretation given of these Words by
Expositors: (1.) Some refer the Words to the Times of the Gospel after Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension; when the Gospel was spread and propagated far and
near, and the Kingdom of God came with Power. Learn thence, That where the
Gospel is powerfully preached and cheerfully obeyed, there Christ comes most
gloriously in his Kingdom. (2.) Others understand these Words of Christ's
coming and exercising his Kingly Power in the Destruction of Jerusalem; which
some of the Apostles then standing by lived to see. (3.) Others (as most
agreeable to the Context) understand the Words as relating to our Savior's
Transfiguration: as if he had said, Some of you, meaning Peter, James and John,
shall shortly see me upon Mount Tabor, in such Splendour and Glory, as shall be
a Praeludium, a Shadow and Representation of that Glory which I shall appear in
when I come to Judge the World at the Great Day. And whereas our Savior says
not, there be some standing here, which shall not die, but which shall not
taste of Death. This implies Two Things; (1.) That after they had seen this
Transfiguration they must taste of Death as well as others. (2.) That they
should but taste of it, and no more. From whence Learn, (1.) That the faithful
Servants and Disciples of Christ must at length, in God's appointed Time, taste
and have experience of Death as well as others. (2.) That although they must
taste, yet they shall but taste of Death; they shall not drink off the Dregs of
that bitter Cup; though they fall by the hand of Death, yet shall they not be
overcome by it; but in the very Fall get Victory over it.

2 And after six days, Jesus takes with him Peter, James, and John; and
leads them up into a high mountain apart by themselves: and he was
transfigured before them.

Here we have the History of our Savior's Transfiguration, when he laid as it
were the Garments of our frail Humanity aside for a little time, assuming to
himself the Robes of Majesty and Glory, to demonstrate and testify the Truth of
his Divinity; for this Divine Glory was an Evidence of his Divine Nature; and
also an Emblem of that Glory which he and his Disciples, all his faithful
Servants and Followers shall enjoy together in Heaven.

3 And his Raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow: so as no Fuller on
Earth can white them. 4 And there appeared unto them Elias, with Moses, and
they were talking with Jesus. 5 And Peter answered and said unto Jesus, Master,
it is good for us to be here: let us make three tabernacles, one for thee, one
for Moses, and one for Elias. 6 For he wist not what to say; for they were fore
afraid. 7 And there was a cloud that overshadowed them, and a voice came out of
the cloud, saying, This is my Beloved Son; hear ye him. 8 And suddenly when
they had looked round about, they saw no man any more, save Jesus only with
themselves.

Observe here, First, That to confirm the Disciples Faith in the Truth of
Christ's Divine Nature, he was pleased to suffer the Rays of his Divinity to
dart forth before their Eyes, so far as they were able to bear it. His Face
shined with a pleasing Brightness, and his Raiment with such a glorious Luster,
as did at once both delight and dazzle the Eyes of the Disciples. Obs. (2.) The
Choice which our Savior makes of the Witnesses of this his glorious
Transfiguration; his Three Disciples, Peter, James, and John: But why
Disciples? Why Three Disciples? Why these Three? (1.) Why Disciples? Because
this Transfiguration was a Type and Shadow of the Glory of Heaven: Christ
vouchsafes therefore the Earnest and First Fruits of that Glory only to Saints,
upon whom he intended to bestow the full Harvest in due time. (2.) Why Three
Disciples? Because Three were sufficient to witness the Truth and Reality of
this Miracle. Judas was unworthy of this Favor; yet lest he should murmur or
be discontented, others are left out as well as he. But (3.) Why these Three,
rather than others? Probably, (1.) Because these Three were more eminent for
Grace, Zeal, and Love toward Christ. Now the most eminent manifestations of
Glory are made to those that are most excelling in Grace. (2.) These Three
Disciples were Witnesses of Christ's Agony and Passion; to prepare them for
which, they are here made Witnesses of his Transfiguration. This glorious
Vision upon Mount Tabor fitted them to abide the Terror of Mount Calvary. Obs.
(3.) The glorious Attendants upon our Savior at his Transfiguration. They were
Two, Two Men, and those Two Men Moses and Elias. This being but a Glimpse of
Christ's Glory, not a full Manifestation of it, only Two of the glorified
Saints attend at it. These Two Attendants are not Two Angels, but Two Men;
because Men were more nearly concerned than Angels, in what was done. But why
Moses and Elias rather than other Men? (1.) Because Moses was the Giver of the
Law; and Elias was the Chief of the Prophets. Now both these attending upon
Christ, did show the Consent of the Law and the Prophets with Christ, and their
Accomplishment and fulfilling in him. (2.) Because these Two were the most
laborious Servants of Christ; both adventured their Lives in God's Cause, and
therefore are highly honored by him. For, Those that honor him, he will
honor. Obs. (4.) The Carriage and Demeanor of the Disciples upon this great
Occasion. (1.) They Supplicate Jesus, not Moses and Elias; they make no suit to
them, but to Christ only, Master, it is good being here. Oh! what a ravishing
Comfort and Satisfaction is the Communion and Fellowship of the Saints! but the
Presence of Christ amongst them renders their Joys transporting. (2.) They
proffer their Service to farther the continuance of what they did enjoy: Let us
make Three Tabernacles; Saints will stick at no Pains or Cost, for the
Enjoyment of Christ's Presence, and his Peoples Company. Learn hence, That a
Glimpse of Heavens Glory is sufficient to wrap a Soul into Ecstasy, and to make
it out of Love with worldly Company. (2.) That we are apt to desire more of
Heaven upon Earth than God will allow. We would have the Heavenly Glory come
down to us, But are unwilling by Death to go up to That. Obs. (5.) How a Cloud
was put before the Disciples Eyes, when the Divine Glory was manifested to
them: partly to allay the Luster and Resplendency of that Glory which they were
swallowed up with. The Glory of Heaven is insupportable in this sinful State;
we cannot bear it unvailed. And partly to hinder their farther prying and
looking into that Glory. We must be content to behold God through a Cloud
darkly here, e're long we shall see him Face to Face. Obs. (6.) The Testimony
given out of the Cloud by God the Father, concerning Jesus Christ his Son: This
is my beloved Son, hear him. Where Note, (1.) The Dignity of his Person; he is
my Son. for nature co-essential and for time coeternal with his Father. (2.)
The Endearedness of his Relation he is my Beloved Son: because of his
conformity unto me and compliance with me, likeness is the cause of Love, and
an union and harmony of wills causes a mutual endearing of Affections. (3.) The
Authority of his Doctrine, hear ye him: not Moses and Elias: who were Servants:
but Christ my Son whom I have commissioned to be the great Prophet and Teacher
of my Church: Therefore Adore him as my Son: Believe in him as your Savior,
and hear him as your Lawgiver. The Obedient ear honors Christ more, then
either the gazing Eye: the Adoring Knee, or the Applauding Tongue.

9 And as they came down from the mountain, he charged them that they should
tell no man what things they had seen: till the Son of man was risen from the
Dead. 10 And they kept that saying with themselves, questioning what the rising
from the dead should mean? 11 And they asked him saying, why say the Scribes
that Elias must first come? 12 And he Answered and told them, Elias verily
comes first and Restores all things, and how it is written of the Son of man,
that he must Suffer many things and be set at naught. 13 But I say unto you,
that Elias is indeed come, and they have done unto him, whatsoever they listed,
as it is written of him.

Obs. here. (1.) The strict Injunction given by Christ to his Disciples, not to
publish or proclaim this glorious Vision, at his Transfiguration, till after
his Resurrection: because being now in a state of Humiliation, he would have
his Divine Majesty and Glory, veil^d and concealed. Learn hence, that the
Divine Glory of Christ's person, as God, was not to be manifested suddenly and
all at once: but gradually and by steps. First more obscurely by his Miracles,
by the forced Acknowledgments of Devils, by the free Confession of his
Disciples, and by the glorious Vision of his Transfiguration; but the more
clear and full, the more public and open manifestation of his divine Glory was
at the time of his Resurrection and Ascension. Obs. (2.) The Disciples
obedience to Christ's Injunction, to^ching the concealing of his
Transfiguration till after his Resurrection, they kept that saying with
themselves, questioning one with another, what the rising from the dead should
mean: not that they questioned the Resurrection in general, but Christ's
Resurrection only in particular, because his Resurrection did suppose his
death, and they could not conceive how the Messiah whom they erroneously
Supposed must be a temporal Prince, should suffer death at the hands of men,
Obs. (3.) The Question which the Disciples put to Christ, how the Observation
of the Jewish Doctors holds good, namely that Elias must come before the
Messiah come: we see the Messiah, but no Elias. Our Savior answers, That Elias
was come already, not Elias in person, but one in the Spirit and Power of
Elias; to wit, John the Baptist, who was prophesied of under the name of Elias;
there being a great Resemblance between the Elias, of the Old Testament, and of
the new, viz. John the Baptist, they were both Men of a mighty Zeal, for God
and Religion, they were both undaunted, reprovers of the faults of Princes, and
they were both implacably hated and persecuted for the same. Thence learn, that
hatred and persecution, even unto Death, has often been the lot and portion of
such Persons who have had the courage and Zeal, to reprove the faults of
Princes. Elias is indeed come, and they have done unto him, whatsoever they
Listed.

14 And when he came to his Disciples, he saw a great Multitude about them, and
the Scribes questioning with them. 15 And straightway all the people when they
beheld him, were greatly amazed and running to him, saluted him. 16 And he
asked the Scribes, what question ye with them. 17 And one of the multitude
answered and said, Master: I have brought unto thee my son, which has a dumb
spirit. 18 And wheresoever he takes him, he teareth him, and he someth, and
gnasheth with his Teeth, and pineth away: and I spoke to thy Disciples, that
they should cast him out, and they could not. 19 He answered him, and says: O
faithless generation, how long shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer
you? bring him unto me. 20 And they brought him unto him; and when he saw him,
straightway the spirit tare him, and he fell on the ground, and wallowed foming
21 And he asked his Father, How long is it ago, since that came unto him? And
he said, of a child. 22 And oft-times it has cast him into the fire, and into
the waters to destroy him: but if thou can do any thing, have compassion on
us, and help us 23 Jesus says unto him, if thou can believe, all things are
possible to him, that believes. 24 And straightway the Father of the child
cried out, with tears, and said, Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief. 25
When Jesus saw that the people came running together, he rebuked the foul
Spirit, saying unto him, Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee come out of
him, and enter no more into him. 26 And the Spirit cried, and rent him sore,
and came out of him, and he was as one dead, insomuch that many said, He is
dead. 27 But Jesus took him by the hand, and lifted him up, and he arose. 28
And when he was come into the house, his Disciples asked him privately, Why
could not we cast him out? 29 And he said unto them, This kind can come forth
by nothing, but by prayer and fasting.

Observe here. (1.) The person brought to Christ, for help and healing, one
Bodily possessed by Satan, who had made him deaf and dumb from his childhood; and
oft-times cast him into the Fire and Water, but rather to torment then to
dispatch him: Oh how does Satan, that malicious Tyrant rejoice in doing hurt to
their Bodies, as well as the soul of Mankind. Lord abate his power, since his
malice will not be abated? How great is thy goodness in preserving us from the
power and malice of evil Spirits, and how watchful is thy Providence over us,
to preserve us, when Satan is seeking by all imaginable means and methods, to
destroy us. Observe (2.) The Person that represents his sad condition, to our
Savior, his compassionate Father who kneeled down and cried out: need will
make a person both humble and eloquent. Every one has a Tongue to speak for
himself, happy he that keeps a Tongue for others. Observe (3.) The circumstance
of time. Satan had got possession of this person, very young, in his youth,
nay, in his childhood: and oh how hard was it to cast him out, after so long
possession; the Disciples could not do it with all their power and prayers: and
when our Savior himself by the power of his Godhead did dispossess him, it was
with foming and renting that he left him. Thus when Satan gets possession of
Persons hearts in their youth, oh how hard will it be to cast him out, it will
put the Soul to great grief, great pain, great sorrow of heart. Satan will
endeavor to hold his own, and keep the sinner his slave and vassal: if all the
power of Hell can keep him. Lord! convince young persons, that it is easier to
keep Satan out, then it is to cast him out of the possession of their hearts.
Observe (4.) The Physicians which this distressed Person is brought unto.
First, to the Disciples, and then to Jesus. We never apply our selves
importunately to the God of Power, till we despair of the Creatures help. But
why could not the Disciples cast him out? Christ tells them because of their
unbelief, that is, because of the weakness of their Faith, not the total want
of Faith. Whence learn, that secret unbelief may lie hid and undiscerned in the
heart, which neither others nor our selves may take notice of, until some trial
does discover it. Observe (5.) The poor man's humble Request, and Christ's
gracious reply. If thou can do any thing, help me, says the Father; if thou
can believe all things are possible, says our Savior. Note thence: that the
fault is not in Christ, but in our selves if we receive not that mercy from him
which we desire and need, there is no deficiency in Christ's power: the defect
lies in our Faith. Hereupon the man cries out with Tears, Lord, I believe help
thou my unbelief, if these were tears of Joy for the truth of his Faith, then
we gather, that the lowest degree and least measure of Faith is matter of Joy
unspeakable to the owner and possessor of it. If these were Tears of Sorrow for
the weakness of his Faith, then we may collect, that the Remains of Unbelief in
the children of God do cost them many tears: they are the burden and sorrow of
gracious Souls. The Father of the child cried out with Tears, Lord, I believe,
help my unbelief. Observe, (6.) With what facility and ease our Savior cast
out this stubborn Devil that had so long possessed this poor child, even with a
word speaking, how long soever Satan has kept possession of a Soul. Christ can
eject and cast them out both easily and speedily, one word of Christ's mouth is
sufficient to help us out of all distress both bodily and Spiritual. Yet did
our Lord suffer the evil Spirit to rage and rend the child before he went out
of him: not from any delight in the poor child's misery, but that the Multitude
seeing the Desperateness of the Case, might the more admire the power of Christ
in his Deliverance. Observe, (7.) The Sovereign Power and absolute Authority
which Christ had even here on Earth, when in his State of Humiliation over the
Devil and his Angels: he commands him to go out, and enter no more into the
child, and is obeyed. This was a proof and demonstration of the Godhead of our
Savior, that he had power and Authority over Devils, to command and overrule
them, to curb and restrain them at his Pleasure. And whereas Christ commands
the Devil, not only to come out, but to enter no more into the Person; it
implies, that Satan being cast out of his hole, earnestly desires to enter in
again, to recover his hold, and to regain his possession; but if Christ says
enter no more; Satan shall obey his voice. Observe (8.) The Disciples enquiry
into the Reasons why they could not cast this stubborn Devil out. According to
the power which he had given them to work Miracles. Christ tells them it was,
(1.) Because of their unbelief, by which understand the weakness of their
faith, not their total want of Faith. (2.) Because they did not in this
extraordinary case, apply themselves to the use of extraordinary means. Namely,
prayer and fasting. Learn hence, (1.) That in extraordinary cases, where the
Necessities either of Soul or Body do require it, Recourse must be had to the
use of extraordinary means, one of which is an importunate Application unto
God, by solemn Prayer. Secondly, that fasting and prayer are two special means
of Christ's own Appointment, for the enabling of his people Victoriously to
overcome Satan and cast him out of our selves or others. We must set an edge
upon our Faith by prayer, and upon our Prayer by fasting.

30 And they departed thence, and passed through Galilee, and he would not that
any man should know it. 31 For he taught his Disciples, and said unto them: The
Son of man is delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill him, and
after that he is killed, he shall rise the third day. 32 But they understood
not that saying, and were afraid to ask him.

Observable it is, how frequently our Savior forewarned his Disciples of his
approaching Sufferings, and as the Time of his suffering, grew near, he did
more frequently warn them of it. But all was little enough, to arm them against
the scandal of the Cross, and to reconcile their thoughts, to a suffering
Condition. The Disciples had taken up the common Opinion: that the Messiah was
to be a temporal Prince, and as such to reign here upon Earth, and they knew
not how to reconcile this, with his being delivered up into the hands of Men
that should kill him. And yet they were afraid to ask him concerning this
matter. Now from Christ's frequent forewarning his Disciples of approaching
Sufferings we may gather, That we can never hear, either too often, or too much
of the Doctrine of the Cross, nor be too frequently instructed in our Duty, to
prepare for a Suffering State. As Christ went by his Cross, to his Crown, from
a State of Abasement, to a state of Exaltation; so must all his Disciples and
followers likewise.

33 And he came to Capernaum: and being in the house, he asked them, What was
it, that ye disputed among your selves by the way. 34 But they held their
peace, for by the way, they had disputed among themselves: who should be the
greatest? 35 And he sat down, and called the twelve, and says unto them: If
any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and Servant of all.
36 And he took a child, and set him in the midst of them: and when he had taken
him in his arms, he said unto them. 37 Whosoever shall receive one of such
children in my Name, receives me: and whosoever shall receive me, receives
not me, but him that sent me.

It may justly seem a wonder, that when our blessed Savior discoursed so
frequently with his Disciples, about his sufferings, that they should at the
same time, be disputing among themselves, about precedence and preheminency,
which of them should be the greatest, the first in Place, and the highest in
Dignity and Honor. But from this instance we may learn, That the holiest and
best of men, are subject to Pride and Ambition. Prone to covet worldly Dignity
and Greatness, ready to catch at the bait of Honor, to affect a precedence
before, and a Superiority over others. The Apostles themselves were touched, if
not tainted with the Itch of Ambition: To cure which, our Savior preaches to
them the Doctrine of humility, where Observe (1.) Our Lord does not say, he
that is the first, but he that desires to be first, shall be last of all, and
Servant of all, teaching us, that all Persons in general, and Ministers in
particular, ought not to seek out places of dignity and preheminency for
themselves, but be sought out for them, he that is first in seeking them,
usually least deserves them, and last obtains them, if any man desire to be
first, the same shall be last of all. Observe (2.) Our Savior teaches his
Disciples Humility, by the Type and Example of a little child, which he sets
before them, as the proper Emblem of humility; showing them that they ought to
be as free from Ambition, as a young child, which affects nothing of precedence
or Superiority: Such as are of highest Eminency in the Church of Christ, ought
to be adorned with humility, and look upon themselves, as lying under the
greatest Obligations, to be most eminently useful and serviceable, for the
Churches good. Observe (3.) How exceeding dear and precious such persons are to
Christ, who resemble little children in true humility and lowliness of mind,
assuring the World, that whatsoever Kindness or Respect they show to them, he
accounts shown to himself. He that receives them, says Christ, receives me,
so near is the Union, so dear the Relation betwixt Christ and his Members, that
whatever good or Evil is done to them, he Reckons it as done unto himself.

38 And John answered him, saying, Master, we saw one casting out Devils in thy
Name, and he follows not us, and we forbad him, because he follows not us.
39 But Jesus said, Forbid him not, for there is no man that shall do a miracle
in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me. 40 For he that is not against
us, is on our part. 41 For whosoever shall give you a cup of water, to drink in
my Name: because ye belong to Christ, Verily I say unto you, he shall not lose
his reward. 42 And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe
in me. 42 It is better for him, that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and
he were cast into the Sea.

The Evangelist here sets down a conference betwixt our Savior Christ and St.
John his Disciple (...) where Obs. (1.) St. John's Relation, of a matter of
fact to Christ, namely, his forbidding one to cast out Devi^s in Christ's Name,
that did not follow Christ as they did, being his professed Disciples, though
only the Disciples which followed Christ had a commission to work Miracles; yet
were there others, (no Enemies to Christ) who in imitation of the Disciples did
attempt to do the like; and God was pleased for the honor of his Son, in whose
name they cast out Devils, to give them sometimes success. Almighty God may and
sometimes does give success to such Actions and Enterprises as are good in
themselves; though undertaken by persons that have no lawful call, or warrant
from God, to do them. Obs. (2.) The Action of the Disciples, toward this
person, we forbad him. This showed (1.) their Ignorance, in supposing that none
could be true Disciples, nor work Miracles, but such as followed them, we
forbad him, because he followed not us. (2.) their Rashness, in forbidding him
of their own heads, before they had consulted Christ about it. (3.) their Envy
and Emulation, in that they were grieved and discontented at this person's
casting out Devils, because he was not a follower of them. Oh the imperfect
Composition of the best of Saints; how much weakness, infirmity, and corruption
does John the beloved Disciple discover. Upon this Occasion, the sin of Envy
and Emulation against the gifts of God in others is very natural to men, to
good men, yea to the best of men, it is as difficult to look upon other men's
Gifts without envy, as to look upon our own without pride. Obs. (3.) Our
Savior's answer and reply, forbid him not; because our Savior knew that this
enterprise of casting out Devils in his Name, would in some manner and measure
redound to the Glory of his Name, although he undertook the matter without
sufficient warrant from Christ. We ought not to censure and condemn those who
do that which is good in it self, though they fail in the manner of it, and in
the means they use for effecting it. Obs. (4.) What Encouragement our Savior
gives the World to be kind to his friends and followers: he assures them, that
even a cup of cold water given for his sake, to such as profess his name, shall
not miss of a Reward. Learn thence, That the least office of Love and Respect,
of Kindness and Charity shown to any of the Ministers or Members of Jesus
Christ for his sake, is resented as done unto himself, and shall be rewarded by
himself. Obs. (5.) What an heinous and grievous Sin it is to scandalize or
offend any of the Disciples of Jesus Christ; he will most severely Judge and
punish such as give offense to them, (by any wrong or injury done unto them)
both in this Life and the next, it were better a Millstone were hanged about his
neck, and he were cast into the Sea.

43 And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter
into Life maimed, then having two Hands to go into Hell; into the Fire that
shall never be quenched. 44 Where the worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. 45 And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to
enter halt into Life, then having two feet to be cast into Hell: into the fire
that never shall be quenched. 46 Where their worm dies not, and their fire is
not quenched. 47 And if thine Eye offend thee, pluck it out, it is better for
thee to enter into the Kingdom of God with one Eye, then having two Eyes to be
cast into Hell Fire. 48 Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched.

In the former verse, Our Savior dissuaded from the Sin of Scandal, or giving
offense to serious and sincere Christistians, threatening a very grievous
Judgment against such as should any ways offend them. Now in these six Verses,
he prescribes a Remedy against that, and all other sins, namely, by avoiding
all occasions that leads to Sin. Here, Obs. (1.) The admonition or warning
given by Christ unto us, to remove far from us all occasions of Sin, though never
so dear unto us. We are not to understand the Command literally, as if it were
our Duty to maim our bodily Members, but metaphorically, to cut off all
occasions that may betray us unto Sin. Hence Note, That sin may be avoided; it
is our Duty to avoid whatever leads unto it, or may be the Instrument and
Occasion of it. Obs. (2.) A Reason enforcing the Admonition: This is drawn from
the benefit and advantage that will come by cutting off such occasions of Sin.
It will farther us in our attainment of eternal Life, and prevent our being
cast into Hell Fire. Now our Savior affirms, that it is better for a Man to
enter into Life, with the loss of all those things that are dear and precious
to him in this world, rather then go into Hell with the fruition and enjoyment
of them. Learn hence, That a diligent and daily care to avoid sin, and all
occasions that lead unto it, will be a special means to escape the Torments of
Hell, and farther us in our seize of Heaven and Eternal Life. Obs. (3.)
The Description which our Savior gives of the Torments of Hell, First by its
Extremity; it is like a gnawing worm and a consuming Fire. Secondly, and by its
Eternity, a worm that never dies, and a Fire that is never quenched. Learn
hence, That there is most certainly a place and state of punishment and torment
in another world for wicked men to suffer in, upon the score of Sin committed
in this world. Secondly, That the punishment and torments of the wicked in Hell
are intolerable and interminable of exquisite pain and endless Duration. Their
worm never dies, and the Fire is not quenched.

49 For every one shall be salted with fire, and every Sacrifice shall be
salted with salt.

Every one shall be salted with Fire, that is, every one of them mentioned in
the foregoing verses, who refuse to cut off a right hand, and pluck out a right
Eye, that is, to mortify their bosom lusts and beloved corruptions, which are
as dear as a right hand, or a right eye: every such wicked and unmortified
person shall be salted with Fire; That is, thrown into into Hell Fire, where
the worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched: as our Savior speaks v. 4.
And their being salted with Fire, Imports and Implies, that as to their beings
they shall be preserved (even as salt preserves things from corruption) that
they may be the Objects of the eternal wrath of God. So that for Sinners to be
salted with Fire, is to be given up to everlasting Destruction. Learn hence,
that all such unsavory sinners, as indulge their corrupt lusts and affections
shall be salted with fire, that is, given up to everlasting Destruction in Hell
Fire. But every Sacrifice shall be salted with salt, That is, every Christian
who has given up himself a real Sacrifice unto God, he shall be salted, not
with fire, but with salt, not with fire to be consumed and destroyed, but with
salt to be preserved and keep savoury. The grace of Mortification is that to
the Soul, which salt is to the Body, it preserves it from putrefaction, and
renders it savoury. Learn hence, (1.) That every Christian in this Life ought
to be a spiritual Sacrifice or oblation unto God. (2.) That there is a putrid
and corrupt part in every Sacrifice, in every Christian, which must be purged
out, and the Sacrifice purified and cleansed from. (3.) That the grace of
Mortification is the true salt which must clarify the Soul, and with which
every Sacrifice must be salted that will be a savoury offering unto God. Every
one shall be salted with Fire, and every Sacrifice shall be salted with salt.

50 Salt is good, but if the salt has lost its saltness, wherewith will ye
season it? have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another.

Our blessed Savior here compares Christians in general, and his Ministers in
particular unto Salt, for a double Reason. First, Because it is the nature of
Salt to preserve things from corruption and putrefaction and to render them
savoury and pleasant. Thus are the Ministers of Christ to labor and endeavor,
by the purity of their Doctrine, to sweeten putrefying Sinners, that they may
become Savory unto God, and man: and be kept from being fly-blown with Errors
and false Doctrine. Secondly, Because Salt has an Acrimony, a piercing power in
if, which subdues the whole lump and turns it into its own nature. Such a
piercing power is there in the ministry of the Word, that it subdues the whole
Man to the Obedience of it self. Have salt in your selves, and have peace one
with another. That is, let all persons, especially Ministers retain a seasoning
Virtue in themselves,; that they may sweeten and season others; even all that
they converse with, and as Salt has an uniting power, and knits the parts of
the body salted together: So the upholding of Union and Peace one with another,
will declare that you have salt in your selves. Learn hence, That it is the
Duty of all Christians, but especially of the Ministers of the Gospel, to
maintain brotherly concord and agreement among themselves; both as an Argument
of their Sincerity, and an Ornament to their profession.

CHAP. X.
1 AND he arose from thence, and comes into the coasts of Judea, by the
farther side of Jordan: and the people resort unto him again, and as he was
wont, he taught them again. 2 And the Pharisees came to him, and asked him, Is
it lawful for a man to put away his wife? tempting him. 3 And he answered and
said unto them, What did Moses command you? 4 And they said, Moses suffered to
write a bill of divorcement, and to put her away. 5 And Jesus answered and said
unto them, For the hardness of your heart he wrote you this precept. 6 But from
the beginning of the Creation God made them male and female. 7 For this cause
shall a man leave his Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife. 8 And they
twain shall be one flesh: so then they are no more twain, but one flesh. 9 What
therefore God has joined together, let no man put asunder. 10 And in the house
the Disciples asked him again of the same matter. 11 And he said unto them,
Whosoever shall put away his Wife, and marry another, commiteth adultery
against her. 12 And if a Woman shall put away her husband, and be married to
another, she commits adultery.

The first Verse of this Chapter, acquaints us with the great Labor and pains,
our Savior took in the exercise of his ministry, traveling from place to
place, in an hot Country, and that on foot, to preach the Gospel, when he was
here upon earth: Teaching all persons, but especially Ministers, by his
Example, to be willing to undergo Pains and Labor, even unto much weariness,
in the service of God, and in the Duties of their calling. For this is God's
Ordinance, that every one should feel the Burden of his calling, and the
painfulness of it. But Lord, how nice and delicate are some laborers in thy
Vineyard, who are willing to do nothing, but what they can do with ease, that
cannot endure to think of laboring unto weariness; but are sparing of their
pains for fear of shortning their days, and hasting their end. Whereas the Lamp
of our Lives can never be better spent or burnt out, then in lighting others to
Heaven. The following verses acquaint us, with an ensnaring question, which the
Pharisees put to our Savior, concerning the matter of Divorce; concluding that
they should entrap him in his answer, whatever it was, if he denied the
lawfulness of Divorce, then they would charge him with Contradicting: Moses who
allowed it. If he affirmed it, then they would condemn him for contradicting
his own Doctrine, St. Mat. v. 32. for favoring men's lusts, and complying with
the wicked custom of the Jews: who upon every slight and frivolous occasion put
away their Wives from them: But such was the Wisdom of our Savior in all his
answers to the ensnaring Pharisees; that neither their wit nor malice could lay
hold upon any thing to entangle him in his talk. Obs. Therefore the piety and
prudence of our Savior's answer to the Pharisees, he refers them to the first
institution of marriage. When God made Husband and Wife one flesh, to the
intent, that matrimonial Love might be both incommunicable and indissoluble,
and accordingly asks them; what did Moses command you? thereby teaching us,
that the best means for deciding all doubts, and resolving all controversies,
about matters of Religion; is to have Recourse unto the Scriptures, or the
written Word of God: what did Moses command you? Obs. Farther, How our Savior
to confute the Pharisees, and convince them of the unlawfulness of Divorces
used by the Jews; lays down the first institution of Marriage, and shows them
first, the Author, next the time, and then the end of the Institution: the
Author God. What God has joined together, etc. Marriage is an Ordinance of
God's own Appointment, as the Ground and Foundation of all sacred and civil
society. The time of the Institution was in the beginning; Marriage is almost
as old as the World, as old as Nature it self; there was no sooner one Person,
but God divided him into two, and no sooner was there two, but he united them
into one. And the end of the Instituti- of Marriage, Christ declares, was this,
that there might be not only an intimacy and nearness, but also an inseparable
Union and Oneness, by means of this endearing Relation: the congugal knot is
tied so close, that the Bonds of matrimonial love are stronger then those of
Nature. Stricter is the Tie betwixt husband and wife, then that betwixt parent
and child, according to God's own appointment. For this cause shall a man leave
Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife, and they Twain shall be one flesh.
And whereas our Savior adds, what God has joined together, let not man put
asunder; two things are hereby intimated to us. (1.) That God is the Author of
the close and intimate Union which is betwixt Man and Wife in a married
condition. (2.) That it is not in the power of man to untie, or dissolve that
Union which God has made betwixt Man and Wife in the married estate, yea, it is
a great sin to advise unto, or endeavor after the separation of them. Obs.
Lastly, Our Savior's private conference with the Disciples, after his public
disputation with the Pharisees about this matter of divorce. He tells his
Disciples, and in them, he tells all Christians to the end of the World, that
it is utterly unlawful for Man and Wife to be separated by Divorcement, one
from another, for any cause whatsover, except only for the sin of Adultery
committed by either of them after the Marriage. Learn hence, that according to
the Word and Will of God, nothing can violate the bonds of marriage, and justly
a divorce betwixt Man and Wife, save only the defiling of the marriage Bed by
Adultery and uncleanness. This is the only case in which Man and Wife may
lawfully part, and being for this cause parted, whether they may afterward
marry again to other Persons has been much disputed, but that the innocent and
injured person, whether Man or Woman (for there is an equal Right on both
sides) may not marry again, seems very unreasonable, for why should one suffer
for another fault.

13 And they brought young children to him, that he should touch them, and his
Disciples rebuked those that brought them. 14 But when Jesus saw it, he was
much displeased, and said unto them: Suffer the little children to come unto
me, and forbid them not: for of such is the Kingdom of God. 15 Verily I say
unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child, he
shall not enter therein. 16 And he took them up in his Arms, put his hands upon
them, and blessed them.

Obs. here a solemn Action performed; Children are brought to Christ to be
blessed by him. Where Note, (1.) The Persons Brought, children, young children,
sucking Children, as the Word imports, St. Luke 18.15. They brought them in
their Arms, not led them by the Hands. (2.) The Person they are brought unto;
Jesus Christ: But for what End? not to Baptize them, but to bless them: The
Parents looking upon Christ as a Prophet, a great Prophet, the great Prophet,
do bring their Infants to him, that they might receive the Benefit of his
Blessing and Prayers. Whence Learn, (1.) That Infants are capable of Benefit by
Jesus Christ. (2.) That it is the best Office that Parents can perform unto
their Children to bring them unto Christ, that they may be made Partakers of
that Benefit. (3.) If Infants be capable of Benefit by Christ, if capable of
his Blessing on Earth, and Presence in Heaven; If they be Subjects of his
Kingdom of Grace, and Heirs of his Kingdom of Glory, then may they be Baptized:
For they that are in Covenant, have a Right to the Seal of the Covenant. If
Christ denies not Infants the Kingdom of Heaven, which is the Greater, what
Reason have Ministers to deny them the Benefit of Baptism, which is the Less.

17 And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and
kneeled to him, and asked him, Good master, what shall I do that I may inherit
eternal life?

Obs. Here, (1.) A Person addressing himself to Christ with an important
Question in his Mouth: This Person was a young Man, a rich Man, and a Ruler; a
young Man in the Prime of his Age, a rich Man in the Fullness of his Wealth, and
a Ruler in the Prime of his Authority and Power. From whence Learn, That for
young Men, rich Men, especially Noble Men, to enquire the way to Salvation, is
very commendable, but very rare. Observe, (2.) As the Person addressing, so the
manner of the Address, he came running and kneeled to Christ. Where Observe his
Voluntariness, he came of himself, not drawn by others Importunity, nor drawn
by his own personal Afflictions. And his Readiness, he came Running: This
showed his Zeal and Forwardness to meet with Christ and be resolved by him. And
Lastly, His Humility, he Kneeled to him as an eminent Prophet and Teacher, not
knowing him to be the Son of God. Obs. (3.) The Address it self, What shall I
do to inherit Eternal Life? Where Note, (1.) He believes the Certainty of a
future State. (2.) He professes his Desire of an Eternal Happiness in that
State. (3.) He declares his Readiness to do some good thing, in order to the
obtaining of that Happiness. Hence Learn, That the Light of Nature, or Natural
Religion, teaches Men that good Works are necessary to Salvation; or, that some
good thing must be done by them, who at Death expect Eternal Life. It is not
talking well and professing well, but doing well that entitles us to Heaven and
Eternal Life.

18 And Jesus said unto him, Why call thou me good? there is none good, but
one, that is God.

As if Christ had said, Why call thou me good, when thou do not believe or
own me to be God? for there is none good, that is, essentially and originally
good, absolutely and immutably good, but God only; nor any derivatively good,
but he that receives his Goodness from God also: There is no mere Man that is
absolutely and perfectly good of himself, but by Participation and Derivation
from God only. See the Note on St. Matthew. 19.17.

19 Thou know the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do not
steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honor thy father and mother.

Observe here, That the Duties which our Savior instances in, are the Duties
of the Second Table, which Hypocrites are most failing in: But nothing is a
better Evidence of our unfeigned Love to God, than the sincere Performance of
our Duty to our Neighbors. Love to Man is a Fruit and Testimony of our Love to
God; for he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God
whom he has not seen? 1 John 4.20. Learn hence, That such as are defective in
the Duties of the Second Table, Charity and Justice, do make but a counterfeit
Show of Religion, though they pretend to the highest Measures and Degrees of
Love to God.

20 And he answered and said unto him, Master, all these have I observed from
my youth.

This Assertion of the young Man might be very true, according to the Pharisees
Sense and Interpretation of the Law, which condemned only the gross outward
Act, not the inward Lust and Motion of the Heart. An outside Obedience to the
Law this young Man had performed, this made him think well of himself, and
conclude the Goodness of his own Condition. Learn hence, How prone Men are to
think the best of themselves, and to have too high an Opinion of their own
Goodness and Righteousness before God: All these things have I kept from my
Youth: It is a natural Corruption in Men to think too well of themselves, and
of their own Goodness and Righteousness before God, but it is very dangerous
and fatal so to do.

21 Then Jesus beholding him, loved him, and said unto him, One thing thou
lackest, go thy way, sell whatsoever thou have and give to the poor, and thou
shall have treasure in heaven, and come take up the cross and follow me. 22 And
he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved, for he had great possessions.

Observe here, (1.) Christ's Compassion toward this young Man: He loved him
with a Love of Pity and Compassion, with a Love of Courtesy and Respect. There
may be some very amiable and lovely Qualities in natural and unregenerate Men,
and Goodness in what Kind or Degree soever it is, does attract and draw forth
Christ's Love toward a Person. If Christ did love Civility, what Respect has
he for sincere Sanctity? Obs. (2.) Our Lord's Admonition, One thing thou
lackest; which was true Self-denial in renouncing the Sin of Covetousness, and
the inordinate Love of worldly Wealth. We ought, upon God's Call, to maintain
such a readiness of Mind, as to be willing to part with all for God's sake,
which is dear unto us in this World. Obs. (3.) Our Lord's Injunction; Sell what
thou have, and give to the Poor. This was not a common but a special Precept,
belonging particularly to this young Man: it was a Commandment of Trial given
to him, like that given to Abraham, Genesis 22. to convince him of his corrupt
Confidence in his Riches: Yet is it thus far of general use to us all, to teach
us, so to contemn worldly Possessions, as to be willing to part with them when
they hinder our Happiness and Salvation. It follows, And take up the Cross, an
Allusion to the Roman Custom, when the Malefactor was to be crucified he bare
his Cross upon his Shoulder, and carried it to the Place of Execution. It Is not
the making, but the patient bearing of the Cross which is our Duty. Learn, That
all Christ's Followers should prepare their Shoulders for Christ's Cross. To
bear the Cross implies Faithfulness and Integrity without shifting, Patience
and Submission without murmuring, Joy and Cheerfulness without fainting. Obs.
(4.) The Effect which our Savior's Admonition had upon this young Person: He
was sad and grieved at that Saying. Thence Note (1.) That carnal Men are sad
and exceeding sorrowful, when they cannot win Heaven in their own way. (2.)
That such as are wedded to the World, will renounce Christ rather than the
World; when the World and Christ stand in Competition.

23 And Jesus looked round about and says unto his disciples, How hardly shall
they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God? 24 And the disciples were
astonished at his words. But Jesus answers again, and says unto them,
Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches, to enter into the
kingdom of God? 25 It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle,
than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. 26 And they were much
astonished, saying with themselves, Who then can be saved? 27. But Jesus
answered and said, With men it is impossible, but not with God; for with God
all things are possible.

From this Discourse of our Holy Lord's concerning the Danger of Riches, and
the Difficulty that attends Rich Men in their way to Heaven, we may collect and
gather, First, That Rich Men do certainly meet with more Difficulties in their
Way to Heaven, than other Men. It Is Difficult to withdraw their Affections from
Riches; to place their supreme Love upon God in the midst of their Abundance.
It Is difficult to depend entirely upon God in a Rich Condition; for the Rich
Man's Wealth is his strong Tower. Secondly, That yet the Fault lies not in
Riches, but in Rich Men, who by placing their Trust and reposing their
Confidence in Riches, do render themselves incapable of the Kingdom of God.
Obs. (3.) The Proverbial Speech which our Savior makes use of to set forth the
Difficulty of a Rich-Man's Salvation; It is easier for a Camel to go through a
Needle's Eye. This was a Proverb amongst the Jews, signifying a thing of great
Difficulty, next to an Impossibility, and it implies thus much: That it is not
only a very great Difficulty, but an utter Impossibility for such as abound in
worldly Wealth, and place their Confidence therein, to be saved without an
extraordinary Grace and Assistance from God. It Is hard for God to make a Rich
Man happy, because he thinks himself happy without God. Obs. (4.) The Disciples
are affected with Wonder and Admiration at this Doctrine of our Savior's, and
cry out, Who then can be saved? Learn thence, That such are the special and
peculiar Difficulties which lie in the Rich Man's way to Salvation, that their
getting to Heaven is matter of Wonder and Admiration to the Disciples of
Christ. Obs. (5.) How our Savior resolves this Doubt, by telling his
Disciples, That what was impossible with Men, was possible with God: implying,
That it is impossible for any Man, Rich or Poor, by his own Natural Strength to
get to Heaven. And (2.) That when we are discouraged with the Sense of our own
Impotency, we should consider the Power of God, and act our Faith upon it: With
God all things are possible.

28 Then Peter began to say unto him, Lord, we have left all and have followed
thee. 29 And Jesus answered and said, Verily I say unto you, there is no man
that has left house, or brethren, or sisters, or mother, or wife, or children,
or lands for my sake and the Gospels, 30 But he shall receive an hundred fold,
now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children,
and lands, with persecutions, and in the world to come eternal life. 31 But
many that are first shall be last, and the last first.

The Apostles having heard our Savior's Command to sell all and give to the
Poor, St. Peter, in the Name of the rest, tells Christ, That they had left all
to follow him. Where Note, How Peter magnifies that Little which he had left
for Christ, and ushers it in with a Note of Admiration, Lo! We have left all.
Learn hence, That though it be very little that we suffer for Christ, and have
to forsake upon his Account, yet are we apt to magnify and extol it, as if it
were some great Matter; Lord, we have left All, says Peter; What All, Man!
had thou to lose, besides thy ragged Nets and thy tattered Fisher-Boat? A
great All, next to nothing at all, scarce worth mentioning, and yet how is it
magnified; Behold, we have left all and followed thee. Observe next, Our Lord's
kind and gracious Answer, that those that leave all to follow him, shall be no
Losers by him: We may be Losers for Christ, we shall never be Losers by him;
for whatever we part with in this World for the sake of Christ, Houses or
Lands, Brethren or Sisters, we shall receive an hundred fold now in this Life.
But how so? Non formaliter, sed eminenter; non in specie, sed in valor; not in
Kind, but in Equivalency: Not an hundred Brethren, Sisters or Lands in Kind;
but he shall enjoy that in God, which all Creatures would be to him, if they
were multiplied an hundred times: And the Gifts and Graces, the Comforts and
Consolations of the Holy Spirit, shall be an hundred times better Portion than
any thing we can part with for the sake of Christ. For the Sense of those
Words, The first shall be last, etc. see the Note on Matthew. 30.19.

32 And they were in the way, going up to Jerusalem: and Jesus went before
them, and they were amazed, and as they followed, they were afraid: and he took
again the twelve and began to tell them what things should happen unto him. 33
Saying, Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the son of man shall be delivered to
the chief priests, and unto the scribes, and they shall condemn him to death,
and shall deliver him to the gentiles. 34 And they shall mock him, and shall
scourge him, and spit upon him, and kill him, and the third day he shall rise
again.

This is at least the Third time that Christ had acquainted his Disciples with
his approaching Sufferings. The first time he told his Disciples of his Death
in ge^eral; the second time he declares the Means, by Treason; now he tells
them the Manner, by Crucifying him: All this he did to prevent their Dejection
at his Sufferings. Learn hence, That it is highly necessary that the Doctrine
of the Cross be often preached to us, that so being armed with Expectation of
Sufferings before they come, we may be the less dismayed and disheartened when
they come. Our Lord's forewarning his Disciples so frequently of his Death and
Sufferings, was to fore-arm them with Expectation of his Sufferings, and with
Preparation for their own. Observe farther, Who were the Persons that were the
instrumental Causes of our Savior's Death, they were both Jews and Gentiles;
The Son of Man shall be delivered to the chief Priests, and they shall deliver
him to the Gentiles. Learn hence, That as both Jews and Gentiles had a hand in
the Death and Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, so are they by Faith capable
of an Interest in the Merit of his Death, and in the Virtue and Efficacy of his
Sufferings. Christ offered up his Blood to God, on the Behalf of them that shed
it.

35 And James and John the sons of Zebedee came unto him, saying, Master, we
would that thou should do for us, whatsoever we shall desire. 36 And he said
unto them, What would ye that I should do for you? 37 They said unto him, Grant
unto us, that we may sit one on thy right hand and the other on thy left hand
in thy glory. 38 But Jesus said unto them, Ye know not what ye ask; can ye
drink of the cup that I drink of? and be baptized with the baptism that I am
paptized with? 39 And they said unto him, We can. And Jesus said unto them, Ye
shall indeed drink of the cup that I drink of, and with the baptism that I am
baptized withal shall ye be baptized. 40 But to sit on my right hand and on my
left hand, is not mine to give; but it shall be given to them for whom it is
prepared. 41 And when the ten heard it, they began to be much displeased with
James and John.

Observe here, (1.) The ambitious Suit and Request of the Two Apostles James
and John, for Dignity and Superiority, Grant that we may sit one on thy right
hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy Glory, or in thy Kingdom. Where
Observe, That by Christ's Kingdom and Glory they understood an Earthly Temporal
Kingdom; for of that sort the Jews did expect the Kingdom of the Messiah should
be, and the Disciples themselves were tainted with the common Errors. Learn
hence, That Ambition and inordinate Desire of worldly Honor and Dignity, is a
Sin very natural and incident to the best of Men: Who can wonder to see some
Sparks of Ambition in the holiest of God's Ministers? when Christ's own
Apostles were not free from aspiring Thoughts, even when they lay in the Bosom
of our Savior. Obs. (2.) Both the Unseasonabless and Unreasonableness of this
Request made by James and John, Christ speaks of his Sufferings to them, and
they sue for Dignity and great Places from him. In optimis nonnihil est
pessime; The Holiest, the Wisest, and the Best of Men are not wholly free from
passionate Infirmities: Who could have thought, that when our Savior had been
preaching the Doctrine of the Cross to his Disciples, that they should at the
same time be seeking and suing to him for Secular Dignity and Honor,
Pre-eminence and Power? But the best of Men are but Men at the best, none are
in a State of Perfection on this side Heaven. Obs. (3.) Our Savior's Answer to
the Disciple's ambitious Request, and the course which he takes to cool their
Ambition; he tells them, they must expect here, not Crowns on their Heads, but
a Cross on their Backs, they must first taste of his Sufferings, before they
partake of his Glory; and those that suffer most for Christ, shall partake of
the highest Dignity and Glory from him. Obs. (4.) The presumptuous Confidence
which the Apostles had of their own Strength and Ability for Sufferings, Are ye
able, says Christ, to drink of my Cup? We are able, say the Disciples. Alas!
poor Men! when it came to the Trial, they all cowardly forsook him and fled.
Those that are least acquainted with Sufferings, are usually the most confident
Undertakers. See on Matthew. 20.22, 23.

42 But Jesus calls them unto him, and says unto them, Ye know that they
which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles, exercise lordship over them, and
their great ones exercise authority upon them. 43 But so shall it not be
amongst you: but whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister. 44
And whosoever of you will be the chiefest, shall be servant of all. 45 For even
the son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his
life a ransom for many.

To the end that our Blessed Savior might effectually quench those unhappy
Sparks of Ambition which were kindled in his Apostles Minds. He tells them,
That Supremacy and Dominion belong to secular Princes, not to Gospel Ministers,
who ought to carry themselves with Humility and Condescension one toward
another. Not that Christ directs to a Parity and Equality amongst his
Ministers: But only condemns the Affectation of Superiority, and the Love of
Preheminency. Learn hence, (1.) That the Ministers of Christ ought to be so far
from affecting a Domination and Superiority, over their Brethren, that in
Imitation of their Lord and Master, they ought to account themselves
Fellow Servants: The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister.
Obs. (2.) That such Ministers as do love and affect Pre-eminence and
Superiority, are most unfit for it; and they deserve it best, who seek it
least. (3.) That the Dignity and Honor which the Ministers of Christ should
chiefly, yea only affect, is in another World; and the way to be greatest and
highest there, is to be low and humble, mean in our own Eyes, and little in our
own Esteem. See Note on Matthew. 20.28.

46 And they came to Jericho: and as he went out of Jericho with his disciples,
and a great number of people, blind Bartimeus, the Son of Timeus, sat by the
high way side begging. 47 And when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he
began to cry out, and say Jesus thou son of David have Mercy on me. 48 And many
charged him that he should hold his peace, but he cried the more a great deal,
Thou Son of David have mercy on me. 49 And Jesus stood still and commanded him
to be called: and they call the blind man, saying unto him, Be of good comfort,
rise, he calls thee. 50 And he cast away his garment, rose, and came to
Jesus. 51 And Jesus answered and said unto him, what will thou that I should do
unto thee? The blind Man said unto him, Lord, that I might receive my sight. 52
And Jesus said unto him, Go thy way, thy faith has made thee whole. And
immediately he received his sight, and followed Jesus in the way.

This Chapter concludes with the recital of a famous Miracle wrought by our
Blessed Savior upon Blind Bartimeus, in the sight of a great Multitude which
followed him. Where Note, (1.) The Blind Man's Faith in Acknowledging Christ to
be the Messiah; for so much the Title of the Son of David signified. (2.) His
Fervency in crying so earnestly to Christ for Mercy and Healing, Have Mercy
upon me, thou Son of David. A true Sense of Want will make the Soul cry unto
Christ, with Earnestness and Importunity. Obs. (3.) The great Compassion and
Condescension of Christ toward this poor Blind Man, he stood still, he called
him, and enlightened his Eyes. A mighty Instance of Christ's Divine Power, he
that can open blind Eyes with a Touch of his Finger, is really God: His Touch
is an Omnipotent Touch. Obs. (4.) Although Christ well knew the Condition of
this Blind Man, yet before he will restore his Sight, he must sensibly complain
of the want of Sight, and cry unto him for Help and Healing. Christ knows all
his Creatures Wants, but takes no Notice of them, till they make them known to
him by Prayer. Obs. (5.) The Way and Course which the Blind Man takes to
express his Thankfulness to Christ for recovered Sight; he arose and followed
Jesus. Mercy from Christ is then well Improved when it engages us to follow
Christ. This should be the Effect of all Salvations wrought for us. He praises
God best, that serves him most: The Life of Thankfulness, consists in the
Thankfulness of the Life.

CHAP. XI.
1 AND when they came nigh to Jerusalem unto Bethphage, and Bethany, at the
mount of Olives, he sends forth two of his disciples, 2 And says unto them,
Go your way into the village over against you, and as soon as ye be entered into
it, ye shall find a colt tied, whereon never man sat, loose him, and bring him.
3 And if any Man say unto you why do you this? say ye that the Lord has need
of him, and straight way he will send him hither. 4 And they went their way,
and found the colt tied by the door without in a place where two ways met: and
they loose him. 5 And certain of them that stood there, said unto them, What do
ye loosing the colt? 6 And they said unto them even as Jesus had commanded, and
they let them go.

The former part of this Chapter acquaints us with our Savior's solemn and
triumphant riding into the City of Jerusalem. He who in all his Journeys
traveled like a poor Man on Foot, without Noise and without Train, now he goes
up to Jerusalem to die for Sinners, he Rides, to show his great forwardness to
lay down his Life for us: The Beast he rides on is an Ass, as the manner of
Kings and great Persons anciently was, and to fulfill that Prophecy, Zach. 9.9.
Tell ye the Daughter of Zion, behold, thy King comes riding upon an Ass. It
was also an Ass upon which never Man sat before. signifying thereby, that the
most unruly and untamed Creatures become obsequious to Christ. And this was a
borrowed Ass, whereby our Savior's Right to all the Creatures was manifested:
and accordingly he bids his Disciples tell the Owner, That the Lord had need of
him: not Your Lord, or Our Lord, but the Lord, that is, he that is Lord of all,
whose are the Cattle on a thousand Hills. Observe farther, That notwithstanding
Christ's supreme Right to the Colt, he will not have it taken without the
Owner's Knowled^e and Consent: Tell him that the Lord has need of him. Observe
Lastly, What a clear and full Demonstration Christ gave of his Divine Nature,
of his Omnisciency, in foreseeing and foretelling the Event; of his
Omnipotency, in inclining the Heart, and overruling the Will of the Owner to
let the Colt go; and of his Sovereignty, as he was Lord of the Creatures, to
command and call for their Service when he needed them.

7 And they brought the colt to Jesus, and cast their Garments on him, and he
sat upon him. 8 And many spread their Garments in the way, and others cut down
branches of trees, and strawed them in the way. 9 And they that went before,
and they that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in
the Name of the Lord. 10 Blessed be the kingdom of our father David, that
comes in the Name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest.

Obs. here, The Obedience of the Disciples, First, they did as Jesus commanded;
they do not dispute their Lord's commands, nor raise Objections, nor are afraid
of dangers; when our call is clear, our Obedience must be speedy; what Christ
commands we are not to dispute, but to obey. Obs. (2.) The actions of the
multitude in acknowledging Christ to be their King; They cast their Garments on
the ground for him to Ride upon, according to the Custom of Princes, when they
ride in state, and do not only disrobe their backs, but expend their Breath in
joyful Acclamations and loud Hosannah's, wishing all manner of prosperity to
their meek, but mighty King. In this Princely, yet poor and despicable pomp,
does our Savior enter the famous City of Jerusalem: Oh! How far was our holy
Lord from Affecting worldly greatness and grandeur. He despised that glory
which worldly hearts, fondly admire, yet because he was a King he would be
proclaimed such, and have his Kingdom confessed, applauded and blessed. But that it
might appear that his Kingdom was not of this World; he abandons all worldly
magnificence: Oh glorious, yet homely pomp! Oh meek, but mighty Prince!

11 And Jesus entered into Jerusalem, and into the Temple, and when he had
looked round about upon all things, and now the eventide was come, he went out
unto Bethany, with the twelve. 12 And on the morrow, when they were come from
Bethany, he was hungry. 13 And seeing a fig tree afar off, having leaves, he
came, if happily he might find any thing thereon: and when he came to it, he
found nothing but leaves: for the time of figs was not yet. 14 And Jesus
answered and said unto it, No man eat fruit of thee, hereafter for ever. And
his Disciples heard it.

Some move the Question here, how Christ came to curse a Tree for want of that
Fruit, which the season afforded not? It is answered, that Naturalists observe,
that the fig tree puts forth her fruit as soon as her leaf, that Tree is always
bearing, and whilst one fig is ripe, another is green, and whereas it is said,
that the time of figs was not yet; the meaning is, that the time of in
gathering of figs was not yet, but the tree having leafs showed it might have
fruit, accordingly Christ goes in expectation of its having fruit, but finding
none, either ripe or green, he curses the tree, for totally disappointing his
expectation: Besides Christ was wont not only to speak, but to work parables,
and this Action of his was typical. An Emblem of Jerusalem's destruction in
general, and of every Person in particular that satisfies himself with a
withered profession, bearing leafs only but no fruit, as this fig tree was, so
are they, nigh unto cursing. From whence Note, That all such as content
themselves with a fruitless profession of Religion, are in great danger of
having God's blasting added to their Earrenness.

15 And they came to Jerusalem, and Jesus went into the Temple, and began to
cast out them that sold and bought in the Temple, and overthrew the tables of
the money changers, and the seats of them that sold Doves. 16 And would not
suffer that any man should carry any Vessel through the Temple. 17 And he taught,
saying unto them, Is it not written, My house shall be called of all nations
the house of prayer? but ye have made it a den of thieves. 18 And the Scribes
and chief priests heard it, and sought how they might destroy him: for they
feared him, because all the people was astonished at his Doctrine. 19 And when
even was come, he went out of the city.

No sooner had our blessed Savior entered Jerusalem but his first walk was to
the Temple, and his first work there was to purge and reform. All Reformation
of manners must begin at the house of God. Yet observe our Lord's Business at
the Temple was not to ruin, but reform it only. Places dedicated to public
worship, if profaned and polluted ought to be purged from their abuses, not
pulled down and destroyed because they have been abused. But what was the
profanation of the Temple which so offended our Savior's? I answer, in the
outward Court of the Temple, there was a public mart or market kept, where
were sold Oxen, sheep, and Doves for Sacrifice. Many of the Jews coming an
hundred miles to the Temple, it was burdensome to bring their Sacrifices so
far with them. Wherefore the Priests ordered that sheep and oxen, meal and Oil
and such other Requisites for Sacrifice, should be had for money close by the
Altar, to the great ease of the offerer; nothing could be more plausible then
this plea. But the fairest pretenses cannot bear out a sin with God. Therefore
our blessed Savior in a just indignation whips out these Chap-men, casts down
their tables, and vindicates the honor and reputation of his Fathers house.
Learn hence, that there is a Reverence due to God's house, for the owners sake
and for the service sake. Nothing but holiness can become the place, where God
is worshipped in the beauty of holiness. Observe lastly, the Reason which our
Savior gives for this Act of his, is it not written (says he) my house shall
be called the house of Prayer? Where by Prayer is to be understood the whole
worship and service of God, of which Prayer is an eminent and principal part,
that which gives Denomination to an house is certainly the chief work to be
done in that house. Now God's house being called an house of prayer, certainly
implies that Prayer, is the chief and principal work to be performed in his
house. Yet, take we heed that we set not the ordinance of God at variance, we
must not idolize one ordinance and vilify another, but reverence them all.

20 And in the morning, as they passed by, they saw the fig tree dried up from
the roots. 21 And Peter called to remembrance, says unto him, Master, behold,
the fig tree which thou cursedst, is withered away. 22 And Jesus answering
says unto them, have faith in God. 23 For verily I say unto you, that
whosoever shall say unto this mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into
the Sea, and shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those things
which he says shall come to pass, he shall have whatsoever he says. 24
Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe
that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.

The blasting and sudden withering of the fig tree at the word of Christ,
plainly showed his divine Power, and by this miraculous operation our Savior
designed to show his Disciples the mighty power of Faith, That is, a full
persuasion of the power of God that he is able, and of the goodness of God,
that he is willing to grant whatever we ask according to his will, that has a
tendency to his glory and our Good. Learn hence, that Faith is a necessary and
principal ingredient in prayer, praying without Faith is like to a man's
shooting without bullet, it makes a noise but does no execution. 2dly, That
whatsoever good thing God has made the matter of his promise shall be given to
good men in a way of performance, provided they pray in says, whatsoever ye
desire believe that ye Receive them, and ye shall have them.

25 And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any: that your
Father also which is in heaven may ^orgive you your trespasses. 26 But if you
do not forgive, neither will your Father which is in heaven forgive your
trespasses.

There are two qualifications requisite in prayer, if we expect to find
Acceptance with God, namely, Faith and Love, to the first Christ had sp^ken in
the former verse, to the latter in this, when ye stand praying, forgive. They
who are su^ing for, and expecting forgiveness from God, must exercise
for^iveness toward others, or else their Prayers are a sort of imprecations
upon themselves. 2. Observe Christ speaks indefinitely, when ye pray, forgive;
he does not say, your Brethren, but Men, Mat. 6.14. If ye f^^^ive Men their
Trespasses, that is, all Men, good and bad, Friends and Enemies, if we forgive
one another freely, Our heavenly Father will forgive us fully. Our forgiving
one another is the indispensable Condition of God's forgiving us, and of
hearing the Prayers which are put up by us.

27 And they come again to Jerusalem, and as he was walking in the Temple,
there come to him the chief Priests, and the Scribes, and the Elders. 28 And
say unto him, by what Authority do Thou these things? and who gave Thee this
Authority to do these things? 29 And Jesus answered and said unto them: I will
also ask of you one Question, and answer me, and I will tell you by what
Authority, I do these things. 30 The Baptism of John, was it from Heaven? or of
Men? Answer me. 31 And they reasoned with themselves, saying, if we shall say
from Heaven, he will say, why then did ye not believe him? 32 But if we shall
say o^ Men, they feared the People, for all men counted John, that he was a
Prophet indeed. 33 And they answered and said unto Jesus, we cannot tell, and
Jesus answering says unto them, neither do I tell you, by what Authority I do
these things.

The Pharisees having often questioned our Savior's Doctrine before, they call
in question his Mission and Authority now, although they might easily have
understood his Divine Mission by his daily Miracles; for Almighty God never
empowered any to work Miracles, that were not sent by him. Our Blessed Savior
understanding their design, answers them one Question, by asking them another:
Says Christ, the Baptism of John, was it from Heaven, or of Men? Was it o^
Divine Institution, or of Humane Invention? implying very plainly, that the
calling of such as call themselves the Ministers of God, ought to be from God:
No Man ought to take that Honor upon him, but he that is called of God as was
Aaron, Heb. 5.4. The Pharisees reply, They could not tell whence John had his
Mission and Authority; this was a manifest untruth, by refusing to tell the
truth, they fall into a Lie against the Truth; one sin ensnares and draws men
into the Commission of many more. Such as will not speak exact truth according
to their Knowled^e, they fall into the Sin of Lying against their Knowledge and
their Conscience. Our Savior answers them, neither tel^ I you by what
Authority I do these things; he does not say, I cannot, or I will not tell you,
but I do not, I need not tell you, because the Miracles which I work before
you, are a sufficient Demonstration of my Divine Commission, that I am sent of
God amongst you, for God never set the Seal of his Omnipotence to a Lie, nor
empowered an Impostor to work real Miracles.

CHAP. XII.
1 AND he began to speak unto them by parables. A certain man planted a
Vineyard, and set an hedge about it, and dug a place for the wine-fat, and
built a tower, and let it out to Husbandmen, and went into a far Country. 2 And
at the season, he sent to the Husband men a Servant, that he might receive from
the Husband men of the fruit of the Vineyard. 3 And they caught him, and bear
him, and sent him away empty. 4 And again he sent unto them another Servant,
and at him they cast stones and wounded him in the head, and sent him away
shamefully handled. 5 And again he sent another, and him they killed, and many
others, beating some, and killing some. 6 Having yet therefore one Son, his
well beloved, he sent him also last unto them, saying, They will reverence my
Son. 7 But those Husband men said amongst themselves, this is the Heir, come,
let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours. 8 And they took him, and
killed him, and cast him out of the Vineyard.

In this Pa^able, the Jewish Church is compared to a Vineyard; Almighty God to
an Ho^sholder, his planting; pruning, and fencing his ^iney^rd, denotes his
care to furnish his Church with all needful helps and means to make it
spiritually fruitful. His letting it out to Husband men, signifies his
committing the care of his Church to the Priests and Levites, the public
Pastors and Governors of the Church; his Serv^nts are the Prophets and
Apostles, whom he sent from time to time to Admo^ish them, to bring forth Fruit
answerable to the cost which God had expended on them; his Son is Jesus Christ
whom the Rulers of the Jewish Church Sl^^ and Murdered. The d^sign and scope
of the Parable is to discover to the Jews, particularly to the Pharisees, their
obst^^te impenitency under all the means of Grace, their bloody crucify toward
the Prophet of God, their tremendous ^^uilt in Crucifying the Son of God; for
all which, God would unchurch them finally, ruin their Nation, and set up a
Church among the Gentiles that should bring forth better fruit then the Jewish
Church ever did. From the whole, Note (1). That the Church is Gods Vineyard. A
Vineyard is a place Enclosed, a place well Planted, well Fruited, and exceeding
Dear and Precious to the Planter and the Owner of it. (2) As dear as God's
Vineyard is unto him, in case of Barrenness and unfruitfulness, it is in great
danger of being destroyed and laid waste by him (3) That the only way and
course to engage God's care over his Vineyard, and to prevent its being given
to other Husbandmen, it is to give him the Fruits of it, it is but a Vineyard
that God lets out, it is no inheritance: No People ever had so many Promises of
God's favor, as the Jews had, not ever enjoyed so many Privileges whilst they
continued in his favor as they did, yet though they were the first and the
^^tural Branches, they are broken off, and we Gentiles st^nd by Faith; let us
not be high minded, but fear, Rom 11.^0.

9 What shall therefore the Lord of the Vineyard do? he will come and destroy
the Husbandmen, and will give the Vineyard unto others. 10 And have ye not read
the Scriptures? the stone which the Builders rejected, is ^^come the head of
the Corner. ^1 This was the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our E^^^^. 12
And they sought to lay hold on him b^^ ^^^red the People; for they knew that he
h^d spoken the Parable against them, and they l^ft him and went their way.

These words of our Savior are taken out of the 118th. Psalm, which the Jews
understood to be a Prophecy of the Messiah, and accordingly Christ applys them
to himself. The Church is the Building intended, Christ himself, the Stone
Rejected by the Rejectors, or the Builders Rejecting, are the Heads of the
Jewish Church, that is, the chief Priests and Pharisees. God the great Master
Builder of his Church, takes this precious foundation Stone out of the Rubbish,
and sets it in the head of the Corner; nevertheless there are many that stumble
at this Stone, some, through Ignorance, others, through Malice: Some are
offended at his Person, others at his Doctrine. These shall be broken in
pieces, but on whomsoever this Stone shall fall, it will grind them to powder,
that is, Christ himself will fall as a Burdensome Stone upon all them that
knowingly and maliciously oppose him, and particularly upon the Jews, who not
only rejected, but persecuted and destroyed him. Thus Christ tells the chief
Priests and Pharisees their own particular doom, and also declares what will be
the fatal Issue of all that opposition, which is made against Himself and his
Church, it will terminate in the inevitable destruction of all its opposers;
Whosoever shall fall on this Stone shall be broken, and on whomsoever it shall
fall it will grind them to Powder.

13 And they send unto him certain of the Pharisees, with the Herodians to
catch him in his words. 14 And when they were come, they say unto him, Master,
we know that thou art true, and carest for no man: for thou regardest not the
person of men, but teach the way of God in truth. Is it lawful to give
tribute to Caesar or not? 15 Shall we give or shall we not give? But he knowing
their hypocrisy, said unto them, why tempt ye me? bring me a penny, that I may
see it. 16 And they brought it, and he says unto them, whose is this image and
superscription? and they said unto him, Cesars. 17 And Jesus answering, said
unto them, render to Caesar, the things that are Cesars, and to God, the things
that are Gods And they marvelled at him.

Observe, here a grand design to entangle our Blessed Savior in his Discourse,
where Note, (1.) The persons employed to put the ensnaring question to Christ,
Namely, the Pharisees and Herodians. The Pharisees were against paying Tribute
to Caesar, looking upon themselves as a free People, and the Emperor as an
Usurper, but the Herodians were for it. Herod being made by the Ro^an Emperor,
King over the Jews, he was very zealous for having the Jews pay Tribute to
Caesar, and such of the Jews as sided with him, particularly his Courtiers and
Favorites were called Herodians. Note, (2.) The Policy and wicked craft here
used in employing these two contrary Parties, to put this question to our
Savior concerning Tribute, thereby laying him under a Necessity as they hoped,
to offend one side, let them answer how he would; if to please the Pharisees,
he denied paying Tribute to Caesar, then he is accused of Sedition; if to
gratify the Herodians, he voted for paying Tribute to Caesar, then he is looked
upon as an Enemy to the liberty of his Country, and exposed to a popular Odium.
Thus has it all along been the practice of Satan and his Instruments, to draw
the Ministers of God into dislike, either with the Magistrates, or with the
People, that they may fall under the Censure of the one, or the Displeasure of
the other. Obs. (3) With what wisdom and caution our Lord answers them, he
calls for the Roman Penny, answering to seven pence half penny of our Money;
two of which they paid by way of Tribute, as Poll-money for every head to the
Emperor. Christ asks them, whose Image or Superscription this their Coin bore?
They answer, Cesars. Render then, says he, to Caesar the things that are Cesars,
as if our Lord had said, your admit^ing of the R^man Coin amongst you, is an
Evidence that you are under Subjection to the Roman Emperor, because the
Co^ning and imposing of Money is an Act of Sovereign Authority, therefore you
having owned Cesar's Authority over you by accepting of his Coin amongst you;
Give unto him his just dues, and render unto Caesar the things that are Cesars:
Learn hence, (1.) That our Savior was no Enemy to Magistracy and Civil
Government, there was no truer Play Master of the King's dues than he that was
King of Kings, he preached it, and he practiced it, Matthew. 17.27. (2.) Where a
Kingdom is in Subjection to a Temporal Prince, whither his Right be by Descent,
Election, or by Conquest, the Subjects ought from a principle of Conscience to
pay Tribute to him. (3.) That as Christ is no Enemy to the Civil Rights of
Princes, and his Religion exempts none from paying their Civil dues, so Princes
should be as careful not to rob him of his Divine Honor, as he is, not to
wrong them of their Civil Rights, as Christ Requires all his Followers to
render unto Caesar, the things that are Cesars, so should Princes oblige all
their Subjects to Render unto God, the things that are Gods.

18 Then come unto him the Sadduces, which say there is no Resurrection, and
they asked him, saying. 19 Masters, Moses wrote unto us, if a man's brother
die, and leave his wife behind him, and leave no Children, that his brother
should take his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother. 20 Now there were
seven brethren; and the first took a wife, and dying left no seed. 21 And the
second took her and died, neither left he any seed, and the third likewise. 22
And the seven had her, and left no seed, last of all the woman died also. 23 In
the Resurrection therefore, when they shall rise, whose wife shall she be of
them? for the seven had her to wife. 24 And Jesus answering, said unto them, do
ye not therefore err, because ye know not the Scriptures, neither the power of
God? 25 For when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are
given in marriage, but are as the Angels which are in Heaven. 26 And as
touching the dead, that they rise, have ye not read in the Book of Moses, how
in the bush God spoke unto him, saying, I am the God of Abraham, the God of
Isaac, and of Jacob? 27 He is not the God of the dead, but of the living; ye
therefore do greatly err.

Our Blessed Savior having put the Pharisees and Herodians to silence in the
former verses, here he encounters the Sadduces. This Sect derived its name from
one Sadock, who denied the Immortality of the Soul, the Resurrection of the
Body, and Angels and Spirits: Here they propound a case to our Savior, of a
Woman who had seven Brethren successively to her Husbands, they demand whose
wise of the seven this Woman shall be at the Resurrection? as if they had said,
if there be a Resurrection of Bodies, surely there will be of Relations too,
and the other World, if there be such a place, will be like this, in which Men
will marry, as they do here, and if so, whose Wife of the seven shall this
Woman be, they all having an equal claim to her? Now our Savior for resolving
of this question, first shows the different state of Men in this, and in the
other World. The Children of this World, says our Savior, marry and are given
in Marriage, but in the Resurrection they do neither: As if Christ had said,
after Men have lived a while in this World they die, and therefore Marriage is
necessary to maintain a succession of Mankind. But in the other World, men
shall become immortal and live for ever, and then the reason of Marriage will
wholly cease; for when Men can die no more, there will be no need of any new
supplies of Mankind. Observe, Secondly, That our Savior having got clear of
the S^duces Objection, by taking away the foundation and ground of it, he
produces an Ar^ument for the proof of the Souls Immortality and the Bodies
Resurrection. Those to whom Almighty God pronounces himself a God, are
certainly a live; but God pronounced himself a God to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob
many hundred years after their Bodies were dead, therefore their Souls are yet
alive, for otherwise God could not be their God; because he is not the God of
the Dead, but of the Liv^ng: From the whole, Note. (1.) That there is no
Opinion so monstrous and absurd, that having had a Mother, will die for lack of
a Nurse: The beastly Opinion of the mortality of the Soul, and the Annihilation
of the Body, finds Saduces to profess and propagate it. N^te, (2.) The
certainty of another life after this, in which Men shall be eternally happy, or
intollerably miserable, according as they behave themselves here. Though some
Men live like Beasts, yet they shall not die like them, nor shall their last
end be like theirs. Note, (3.) That glorified Saints in the morning of the
Resurrection shall be like the glorious Angels, not like them in Essence and
Nature, but like them in their Properties and Qualities, in Holiness and
Purity, in Immortality and Incorruptibility, as also in their manner of living,
they shall stand in no more need of Meat and Drink then the Angels do, but
shall live the same he^venly, immortal, and incorruptible life that the Angels
live. Note, (4.) That all those who are in Covenant with God, whose God the
Lord is, their Souls do immediately pass into Glory, and their Bodies at the
Resurrectson shall be sharers in the same happiness with their Souls; if God be
just, the Soul must live and the body must rise, for good men must be Rewarded,
and wicked men Punished somewhere, either in this life, or in another: God will
most certainly at one time or other, plentifully Reward the Righteous, and
punish the wicked doers. But this being not always done in this life, the
justice of God requires that it be done in the next.

28 And one of the Scribes came, and having heard them reasoning together, and
perceiving that he had answered them well, asked him, which is the first
Commandment of all? 29 And Jesus answered him, the first of all the
Commandments is this, Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. 30 And thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with
all thy mind, and with all thy strength; this is the first Commandment. 31 And
the second is like, namely, this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self,
there is none other Commandment greater then these. 32 And the Scribes said
unto him, well, Master, thou have said the truth, for there is one God, and
there is none other but he. 33 And to love him with all the heart, and with all
the understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to
love his Neighbor as himself, is more then all whole burnt offerings and
sacrifices. 34 And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto
him, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God. And no man after that durst ask
him any question.

Observe here, (1.) A Question propounded to our Blessed Savior and his answer
thereunto; the Question propounded is this, Which is the first and great
Commandment? Our Saviors tells them, it is to love God with all their heart
and soul, with all their mind and strength, that is, with all the powers,
faculties, and abilities of the Soul, with the highest measures and most intent
degrees of Love; this is the sum of the Duties of the first Table, this is the
first and great Commandment, and the second is like unto it, he does not say,
equal with it. Although the duties of the second Table are of the same
Authority, and of the same necessity with the first, as no man can be saved
without the Love of God, so neither without the love of his Neighbor. Whence
Note, (1.) That the fervency of all our Affections, and particularly the
supremacy of our Love, is required by God as his right and due: Love must pass
thorough and possess all the powers and faculties of our Souls the mind must
meditate (...) God, the Will must chose and embrace him, and the Affections
must delight in him; the measure of loving God is to love him without measure,
God reckons that we love him not all, if we love him not above all. Note, (2.)
That thus to love God is the first great Commandment; Great, in regard of its
Object which is God, the first cause and the chief good, Great, in regard of
the Obligation of it: To love God i^ so indispensable a Duty, that God himself
cannot free us from the obligation of it, for so long as he is God, and we his
Creatures, we shall lie under a natural and necessary obl^^^ation to love and
serve him. Great, also is this Command and Duty in regard of the Duration and
C^ntinuance of it; when Faith shall be swallowed up in vis^on, and hope in
^^^ition, Love will then be perfected in a full Enjoyment. Note, (3.) That
every man may, yea, ought to love himself, not his sinful self, but his natural
self, especially his spiritual s^^^, the new nature in him. Thus it ought to be
his particular care to strengthen and increase, indeed there is no express
command in Scripture for a Man to love himself, because the Light of Nature
directs, and the Law of Nature binds ^very man so to do. God has put a
principle of self-love, and of self-preservation into all his Creatures, but
esp^c^ally into Man. Note, (4.). That a^ every man ou^ht to love himself, so is
it every Man's duty to love his Neighbor as himself, not as he does love
himself, but as he ought to love himself; yet not in the same de^ree that he
loves himself, but after the same manner and with the same kind of love, that
he loves himself. As we love our selves freely and readily, sincerely and
unfeignedly, tenderly and compassionately, constantly and continually, so
should we love our Neighbor also, though we love him not as much as we love
our selves, yet must we love him as truly as we love our s^lves. N^te lastly,
That the Duties of the first and second Table ^re i^ seperable, namely, love to
God and love to our Neighbor; these two must not be separated, he that loves
not his Neighbor whom he has seen, never loved God whom he has not seen. A
conscientious regard to the Duties of both Tables will be an Argument of our
Sincerity, and an Ornament to our Profession. Observe, lastly, The favorable
censure which our Savior passes upon this Scribe, he (...), he was not far
from the Kingd^m of God. N^te here, (1.) Some persons may be said to be far and
farther then others them the Kingdom of Heaven; some are farther in re^ard of
the means, they want the Ordinances, the Dispensation of the Word and
Sacraments; others are far from the Kingdom of God in regard of qualifications
and disp^sitions, of the former sort are all Heathens without the pale of the
Church, they are afar off; as the Apostle expresses it, Ephesians. 2.13. of the
latter sort are all gross and close Hypocrites within the Church, who whilst
they continue such, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Note, (2.) As some
Persons may be s^^d to be far from the Kingdom of God, so are there other^
which may be said not to be far, such who have escaped the p^llutions of the
World, abstained from open and scandalous Sins, are less wicked then multitudes
are, but are strangers to an inward, thorough and prevailing change in the
frame of their Hearts and course of their Lives; they have often said I would
be, but they never said I will be the Lords. When the work of Regeneration is
brought to the Birth, after all it proves an abortion: Lord! what a
disappointment will this be, to perish within sight of the promis^d Land, to b^
near Heaven in our expectation, and yet never the nearer in the Issue and
Event. Woe unto us if this be the C^^^^^^n of any of us, who have all our days
sat under the D^on of thy Gospel.

35 And Jesus answered and said, while he taught in the Temple, how s^y the
Scribes that Christ is the Son of David? 36 For David himself said by the Holy
Ghost, the (...) s^id to my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine
Enemies thy footstool. 37 D^vid therefore himself calls him Lord, and whence
is he then his Son? and the common people heard him gladly.

The Pharisees had often put forth several questions maliciously unto Christ,
and now Christ puts forth one question innocently unto them, namely, What they
thought of the Messiah whom they expected? They reply, that he was to be the
Son of David, that is, a secular Prince descending from David, who should
deliver them from the power of the Romans, and restore them to their Civil
Rights. This was the Notion they had of the Messiah, that he should be a mere
Man, the Son of David, according to the flesh and nothing more. Our Savior
replys, Whence is it then, that David calls the Messiah Lord? Psalm 110. v. 1.
The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand; how could he be, both
David's Lord and David's Son? No Son being Lord to his own Father, therefore if
Christ were David s Sovereign, he must be more than Man, more then David's Son;
as Man, so he was David's Son, as God-man, so he was David's Lord. Note hence
(1.) That although Christ was truly and really Man, yet he was more then a bare
Man, he was Lord unto, and the Salvation of his own Forefathers. Note, (2.)
That the only way to reconcile the Scriptures which speak concerning Christ, is
to believe and acknowledge him to be God and Man in one Preson; the Messiah as
Man, was to come forth out of David's Loins, but as God-man, he was David's
Sovereign and Savior: As Man, he was his Fathers Son, as God, he was Lord to
his own Father.

38 And he said unto them in his Doctrine, beware of the Scribes, which love to
go in long clothing, and love Salutations in the market place. 39 And the
chief seats in the Synagogues, and the uppermost rooms at feasts. 40 Which
devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayers; these shall receive
greater Damnation.

Observe here, What it is that our Savior condemns not civil Salutations in
the Market place, not the chief seats in Synagogues, not the uppermost Rooms at
Feasts; but their fond Affecting of these things, and their Ambitious aspiring
after them. It was not their taking, but their loving the uppermost Rooms at
Feasts which Christ condemns. Observe, (2.) How our Savior condemns the
Pharisees for their gross Hypocrisy, in coloring over their Covetousness with
a pretense of Religion, making long Prayers in the Temple and Synagogues for
Widows, and thereupon persuading them to give bountifully to Corban, that is,
the common Treasury for the Temple, some part of which was employed for their
maintenance; whence we learn, that it is no new thing for designing Hypocrites
to cover the fowlest Transgression with the cloak of Religion. The Pharisees
made long Prayers a cloak and cover for their Covetousness.

41 And Jesus sat over against the Treasury, and beheld how the people cast
money into the Treasury, and many that were rich cast in much. 42 And there
came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites, which makes a farthing.
43 And he called unto him his Disciciples, and says unto them, verily I say
unto you, that this poor Widow has cast more in, then all they which have cast
into the Treasury. 44. For all they did cast in of their abundance, but she of
her want did cast in all that she had, even all her living.

As our blessed Savior sat over against the Treasury, that is, that part of
the Court of the Temple, where the Corban, or Chests for receiving the Peoples
Offerings and Gifts were set, he observed and took notice of those that offered
their Oblations, and some that were rich offered very liberally; but a certain
poor Widow came and offered two Mites. Our Savior hereupon takes occasion to
instruct his Disciples in this comfortable Truth, namely, that Almighty God
accepts the will of those that give cheerfully, though they cannot give
largely: This poor Woman cast in more in respect of the inward affection of her
heart, and in proportion to her estate, then all those that were Rich and
Wealthy that had cast in before her, a mite to her, being more then a pound to
them. From the whole, Note, (1.) That the poorer, yea the poorest sort of
People are not exempted from good works, even they must exercise charity
according to their Abilities. Learn, (2.) That in all works of pious charity
which we perform, God looks at the heart, the will, and the affection of the
Giver, more then at the largeness and liberality of the Gift; if there be a
willing mind, says the Apostle, 2 C^r. 8.12. It is accepted according to what a
man has, and not according to what he has not.

CHAP. XIII.
1 AND as he went out of the Temple, one of his Disciples says unto him,
Master, see what manner of stones, and what buildings are here? 2 And Jesus
answering, said unto him, see thou these great buildings, there shall not be
left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down.

Our blessed Savior being now ready to depart from the Temple, never more
after this entering into it, and his Disciples showing him with wonder and
admiration the magnificient Structures and Buildings thereof; apprehending that
in regard of its invincible strength, it could not be destroyed, or that at
least in regard of its incredible magnificence, it was great pity it should be
destroyed: They say to Christ, Master, behold what Buildings are here? not
considering how sin will undermine and blow up the most famous Structures. Sin
brings Cities and Kingdoms, as well as particular persons to their end; not one
stone of this magnificent Structure (says Christ) shall remain unpulled down,
which threatening was exactly fulfilled after Christ's Death, when Titus the
Roman Emperor destro^ed the City, burnt the Temple, and Turnus Rufus the
General of his Army, ploughed up the very foundation on which the Temple stood.
Thus was the threatening of God fulfilled, Jer. 26.18. Zion shall be ploughed as
a Field, and Jerusalem shall bec^me an heap. Learn hence, (1.) That sin has
laid the foundation of ruin in the most flourishing Cities and Kingdom. (2.)
That the threatenings of God are to be feared, and shall be fulfilled whatever
appearing improbabilities there may be to the contrary. It Is neither the
Temples strength nor beauty that can oppose or withstand God's Power.

3 And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, over against the Temple, Peter, and
James, and John, and Andrew, asked him privately. 4 Tell us, when shall these
things be? and what shall be the sign when all these things shall be fulfilled?

A double question is here propounded to our Savior by his Disciples, namely,
When the Destruction of Jerusalem shall be? and what should be the signs of
that Destruction? See here, what an itching curiosity there is in the best of
Men to know Futurities, to know things that shall come to pass hereafter, and
when that hereafter is to come to pass. Oh! how happy were we, if as forward to
obey the Declarations of God's revealed will, as we are to pry into the hidden
Counsels of his secret Will; Tell us, say the Disciples, when shall these
things be?

5 And Jesus answering them, began to say, take heed, lest any man deceive you.
6 For many shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.
7 And when ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars, be ye not troubled, for
such things must needs be, but the end shall not be yet. 8 For nation shall
rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there shall be
earthquakes in diverse places, and there shall be famines and troubles: These
are the beginnings of sorrow. 9 But take heed to your selves, for they shall
deliver you up to Councils, and in the Synagogues ye shall be beaten; and ye
shall be brought before Rulers and Kings for my Sake, for a Testimony against
them. 10 And the Gospel must first be published among all Nations.

Here, and in the following Verses our Savior gives his Disciples the Signs
which should Fore-run the Destruction of Jerusalem; the first of which was
this, that there should arise false Christ's, false Prophets, and Seducers, such
as Theudas, and others, under the Name and Person of the Messiah; some
affirming themselves to be Christ Personal, or the promised Messiah, others to
be Christ Doctrinal; affirming their Erroneous Opinions to be the Mind and
Doctrine of Jesus Christ. Learn hence, That as there will be many Seducers,
before the end of the World (for Jerusalem's Destruction was a Type and Emblem
of the World's Destruction) and many will be seduced and misled by them: So it
is the Duty of Christ's own Disciples to take heed, lest they being also led
away by the Error of the Wicked, do fall from their own stedfastness; Take
heed, says Christ, That no man deceive you, for many will come in my Name,
saying, I am Christ, and will deceive many. The Second Sign of Jerusalem's
Destruction, was Wars, and Rumors of Wars; that is Civil Broyls and intestin
Commotion amongst themselves; as also Famine and Earthquakes. Whence Note,
That War and Fire, Earthquakes and Famine, are Judgments and Calamities
inflicted by God upon a sinful People, for their Contempt of Christ and
Gospel Grace. (2.) That although these be very Terrible Judgments, and
desolating Calamities, yet to an incorrigible and irreclaimable People are they
the Forerunners of worser Judgments. These are, says Christ, the beginning of
Sorrows. The third Sign of this approaching Destruction, was a general
Persecution of the Ministers of the Gospel, for Pre^ching the Doctrine of the
Gospel to a lost World; Ye shall be beaten, and brought before Kings, for my
sake, for a Testimony. From whence Note, That the Preaching of the Gospel,
where ever it comes, it will be for a Testimony to them to whom it comes,
either a Testimony for them, or against them; to the Humble it is a Testimony
for, to Despisers and Scorners, it is a Testimony against; if the Dust of the
Ministers Feet bear Witness against the Despisers of the Gospel, their Sermons
much more. The word of God delivered in the Scriptures, and dispensed in the
Ministry thereof, has its diverse and contrary Effects upon different and
contrary Subjects, from both which, yet Almighty God knows how to Raise his own
Glory; to the Humble and Teachable the Gospel is in Adjutorium; to the Scorners
and Despisers it will be in Testimonium; to some the Savor of Life unto Life,
to others the Savor of Death unto Death.

11 But when they shall lead you, and deliver you up, take no thought before
hand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate; But whatsoever shall be
given you in that Hour, that speak ye, for it is not ye that speak, but the
Holy Ghost. 12 Now the Brother shall Betray the Brother to death, and the
Father the Son; and Children shall rise up against their Parents, and shall
cause them to be put to Death. 13 And ye shall be hated of all Men for my Names
sake; but he that shall endure to the end, the same shall be Saved.

Here our Savior Acquaints his Disciples, That for Preaching the Gospel, they
should be brought before Kings and Rulers; but Advises them when they should be
so brought, not to be Anxiously Thoughtful and Sollicitous what they should
say, for it should be suggested to them by the Holy Ghost, what to say in that
Hour. Learn thence, That though the Truth of Christ may be opposed, yet the
Defenders of it shall never be ashamed, for rather than they shall want a
Tongue to plead for it, God himself will prompt them by his Holy Spirit, and
suggest such Arguments to them, as all their Enemies shall not be able to
gainsay. Observe farther, How our Savior describes the bitter Enmity of the
World against the Preachers of the Gospel, to be such as would over come and
extinguish even the Natural Affection of the nearest Relations one toward
another, The Brother shall betray the Brother t^ Death. Grace Teaches us to lay
down our Lives for the Brethren; but Corruption in General, and Enmity to the
G^spel in particular, teaches Brother to take away the Life o^ Brother, The
Brother shall betray the Brother to Death, Observe Lastly how our Savior
Comforts his Disciples, that there would be an End of these their sharp and
bitter Sufferings, assuring them, that if their Faith and Patience did hold out
unto the end, they should be Saved; this is our Comfort: Our Sufferings for
Christ may be sharp, but they shall be short; if our Sufferin^s for Christ end
not in our Lifetime, they will end with our Lives.

14 When ye shall see the Abomination of Desolation, spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet, standing where it ought not (let him that reads understand.)

The sense is, When ye shall see the Roman Army, which is an Abomination to
you, and an occasion of great Desolation wherever it goes, when you shall see
that Abominable Desolating Army, Begirting the City of Jerusalem, in order to
her Ruin, and being laid waste: Then call to mind the Prophecy of Daniel, which
primarily respected Antiochus, but secondarily Titus the Roman Emperor, and
shall now be fully Completed; for the Siege shall not be Raised, till both
City and Temple be Razed to the Ground. From whence Learn, (1.) That God has
Instruments ready at his call to lay waste the strongest Cities, and to Ruin
the most Flourishing Kingdoms which do reject his Son, and refuse the Tenders
of his Grace. (2.) That God can, and sometimes does make use of those very
Persons whom Sinners most abhor, to be the Instruments o^ their Punishment, and
the occasions of their Destruction: The Roman Army which was an Abomination to
the Jews, did God destroy them by.

15 Then let them in Judea, flee to the Mountains; and let him that is on the
Housetop not go down into the House, neither enter therein, to take any thing
out of his House. 16 And let him that is in the Field, not turn back again for
to take up his G^rm^nt. 17 But woe to them which are with Child, and to them
that give Suck in those days. 18 And pray ye, that your flight be not in the
Winter.

The meaning is, As soon as ye shall see the Roman Army appear before the City
of Jerusalem, let every one that values his own Safety, fly as far and as fast
as he can, as Lot fled from the Flames of Sodom, and be glad, if by flight he
can save his Life, though he loose Goods and Clothes, and all things beside.
Whence Learn, That when Almighty God is pouring forth his Fury upon a sinful
People, it is both Lawful, and a Necessary Duty by Fli^ht to endeavor to
shelter and secure our selves from the approaching Calamity and Desolation;
when ye see Jerusalem c^^mpassed with A^mies, flee to the Mountains. (2.) That
in Case of fli^ht before an Enraged Enemy and Bloody Army, if we loose all that
we have, and our Lives be given us for a Prey, we f^re well, and the Lord deals
very Graciously and M^^cifully with us. Next our Savior declares the doleful
Distress of those that could not flee from the Roman Army encompassing
Jerusalem, as Women great with Child, and others g^ving suck, who by that means
are like to loose their Lives; and adds farther, that it would increase the
Calamity, if their flight should happen to be in the Winter, or as St. Matthew
adds, on the Sabbath day, Matthew. 24.20. Pray ye that your flight be not in the
Winter, nor on the Sabbath Day; Flight in the Winter is sad, because we can
then fly neither fast nor far, and on the Sabbath Day it is very sorrowful,
that being the day of our Spiritual Labor, and of our Bodily Rest. Learn
thence, That it is a great Addition to the trouble and disquiet of a good Man's
Spirit, when the day of his Spiritual Rest is Interrupted, and instead of
Enjoying Communion with God in his House, he is driven from House and Home.

19 For in those days shall be Affliction, such as was not from the Beginning
of the Creation, which God Created unto this time, neither shall be. 20 And
except that the Lord had shortened those Days, no flesh should be Saved; but for
the Elects sake, whom he has Chosen, he has shortened those Days.

The dreadful Calamities which were coming upon the Jews in general, and
Jerusalem in particular, are here foretold by our blessed Savior, partly from
the Roman-Army without, and partly from the Seditions and Factions of the
Zealots within, who committed such outrages and Slaughters, that there were no
less than an Hundred Thousand Jews slain, and Ninety Seven Thousand taken
Prisoners. They that Bought our Savior for Thirty Pence, were now themselves
Sold Thirty for a Penny. Now did the Temple it self become a Sacrifice, a whole
Burnt-Offering, and was Consumed to ashes. Yet Observe, Christ promises, that
those days of Vengeance should be shortened for the Elects sake; God had a
Remnant which he designed shou d survive that Destruction, to be an Holy Seed,
and accordingly the Providence of God so ordered it, that the City was taken in
six Months, and the whole Country depopulated in Eighteen. From whence Observe,
How the Lord intermixes some Mercy with the extremest Misery that does b^fal a
People for their Sin, on this side Hell; No Sinner can say in this Life, that
they feel the strokes of Justice to the utmost, or that they have Judgment
without Mercy.

21 And then, if any Man shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or lo he is
there, Believe him not. 22 For false Christ's, and false Prophets shall rise,
and shall show Signs and Wonders, to Seduce if it were possible the very Elect.
23 But take ye heed, behold I have foretold you all things.

The Jews had all along cherished in themselves a vain expectation, that the
Promised Messiah should be a Temporal Deliverer, and set them at Liberty from
the Power and Slavery of the Romans, and accordingly our Savior declares to
his Disciples here, that immediately before Jerusalem's Destruction, several
Persons taking the Advantage of this Expectation, would make themselves Heads
of Parties, and pretend that they were the true Messiah, who should save and
deliver them from their Enemies, if they would follow them, hereupon our
Savior cautions his Disciples against such false Christ's, and false Prophets,
and bids them not believe them, though they did never so many great Signs and
Wonders, and promised them never such glorious Deliverances. From hence Note,
(1.) That the Churches great Danger is from Seducers, that come in Christ's
Name, and pretend to Work Signs and Wonders by his Authority. Note (2.) That
such is the power of Seduction and Delusion, That many in all Ages of the
Church have been carried away with Seducers and False Teachers. (3.) That the
Elect themselves, if lest to themselves, might be Seduced, but being guarded by
Divine Power against Seduction and Delusision, they shall be preserved from
that fatal Mischief; They shall seduce (if p ssible) even the Elect.

24 But in those days after that Tribulation, the Sun shall be darkened, and the
Moon shall not give her Light. 25 And the Stars of Heaven shall fall, and the
Powers that are in Heaven shall be shaken. 26 And then shall they see the Son
of Man coming in the Clouds, with great Power and Glory. 27 And then shall he
send his Angels, and shall gather together his Elect from the Four Winds; from
the utmost part of the Earth, to the uttermost part of Heaven.

Our Savior goes on in Figurative Expressions, to set forth the Calamities
that should befall the Jewish Nation, immediately after Jerusalem's Destruction;
The Sun shall be Darkened, that is, all their Glory and Excellency shall be
Eclipsed, all their Wealth and Prosperity shall be laid waste, their whole
Government, Civil and Ecclesiastical, destroyed; and such Marks of Misery found
upon them, as never were seen upon a People. Those that apply this to the
general Judgment, understand the words Literally, that Sun and Moon will then
have their Influences suspended, that the Holy Angels will be sent forth to
gather the Elect from all quarters of the World, with the sound of a Trumpet,
says St. Matthew. Probably, as there was an audible sound of a Trumpet at the
giving of the Law, so there shall be the like found of a Trumpet when Christ
shall Summon the World to Judgment for Transgressing of that Law. A joyful
Sound will this be to the Friends of Christ, a doleful, dreadful Sound in the
Ears of his Enemies.

28 Now Learn a Parable of the Fig Tree when her Branch is yet tender, and
puts forth Leaves, ye know that Summer is near. 29 So ye in like manner,
when ye shall see these things come to pass, know that it is nigh, even at the
door. 30 Verily I say unto you that this Generation shall not pass, till all
these things be done. 31 Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my words shall
not pass away. 32 But of that day and hour knows no Man, no not the Angels
that are in Heaven, neither the Son, but the Father.

Here our Blessed Savior declares two things with Reference to his Coming;
(1.) The Certainty of the thing it self; (2.) The Uncertainty of the Time. The
Certainty of his Coming he sets forth by the Similitude of the Fig Tree, whose
Beginning to Bud declares the Summer at hand. Thus our Savior tells them, that
when they should see the forementioned Signs, they might Conclude the
Destruction of their City and Temple to be nigh at hand; and accordingly some
then Living did see ^hese Predictions Fulfilled. Observe (2.) The Uncertainty
as to the precise Time when this Judgment should come; no Angel in Heaven, nor
Creature upon Earth could determine the Time, only the Glorious Persons in the
Godhead, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Learn hence, That all things are not
Revealed to the Angels themselves, but such things only as it Concerns them to
know, and the Wisdom of God thinks fit to Reveal. (2.) That the precise Time of
the Day of Judgment is kept by God as a Secret to himself; we are not to know
the Hour, to the intent we may be upon our Watch every Hour; Christ himself did
not know it as Man, but as GOD only.

33 Take ye heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the Time is. 34 For the
Son of Man is as a Man taking a far Journey; who left his House, and gave
Authority to his Servants, and to every Man his work, and commanded the Porter
to watch. 35 Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the Master of the House
comes; at Even, or at Midnight, or at Cock-crowing, or in the Morning. 36 Lest
coming suddenly, he find you sleeping. 37 And what I say unto you, I say unto
all, Watch.

Our Blessed Savior takes occasion from the foregoing Doctrine of the
Certainty and Suddenness of his coming to Judgment, to enforce the Duty of
diligent and industrious Watchfulness upon all his Disciples and Followers;
that is, to be upon their Guard against all Sin, and to be in an actual
readiness for his appearance and approach. Learn hence, That it is the
indispensable Duty, and ought to be the indefatigable endeavors of every
Christian to stand upon his Guard in a prepared readiness for Christ's
Appearance, both for his coming to them, and for their going to him. There is a
twofold readiness for Christ's coming, namely, Habitual and Actual; an
habitual readiness is a readiness or the state and condition; actual readiness
is the readiness of the Person: When we are furnished with all the Graces and
Virtues of a good life, when our Lamps are burning, and our Loins girded; our
Souls furnished with the Graces of God's Holy Spirit, and our Lives fruitful in
good Works. Blessed is that Servant, who when his Lord comes shall be found
thus Watching.

CHAP. XIV.
1 AFter two days was the feast of the Passover, and of unleavened Bread; and
the chief Priests, and the Scribes sought how they might take him by craft, and
put him to death. 2 But they said, not on the feast day, lest there be an
uproar of the People.

This Chapter gives us a sad and sorrowful account of the High Priests
Conspiracy against the Life of our Bl. Savior, in which we have Observable the
persons that made this Conspiracy, the manner of the Conspiracy, and the time
when this Conspiracy was made. (1.) The Persons Conspiring, are the chief
Priests, Scribes and Elders, that is, the whole Jewish Sanhedrim, or General
Council: They lay their malicious heads together, to contrive the Destruction
of the innocent Jesus. Thence Learn, That General Councils have erred, and may
err fundamentally in matters of Doctrine; so did this General Council at
Jerusalem, consisting of chief Priests, Doctors and Elders, with the high
Priest their President, in not believing Jesus to be the Messiah, after all the
Miracles wrought before their Eyes. Observe, (2.) The manner of this Conspiracy
against our Savior's Life, it was Clandestine, Secret and Subtle; they
consult how they may take him ^y craft and put him to Death. Thence Note, That
Satan makes use of the subtilty of crafty Men, and abuses their parts as well
as their Power for his own purposes and designs; the Devil sends no fools of
his Errand. Observe, (3.) The circumstance of time when this Conspiracy was
managed, at the Feast of the Passover, it being a custom among the Jews to
execute Malefactors at their Solemn Feasts, as at the Feast of the Passover,
the Feast of Weeks, and the Feast of Tabernacles; at which times, all the Jews
came up to Jerusalem to Sacrifice, and then they put Malefactors to Death, that
all Israel might see, and fear, and no^ do so wickedly. Accordingly this Feast
of the Passover was waited for, by the Jews as a fit opportunity to put our
Savior to Death; the only Objection was, that it might occasion a Tumult
amongst the People, there being such a mighty concourse at that time in
Jerusalem. But Judas making them a proffer, they readily comply with the
motion, and resolve to take the first opportunity to put our Savior to Death.

3 And being in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at meat,
there came a Woman, having an alablaster box of Ointment of Spikenard very
precious, and she brake the box, and poured it on his head. 4 And there were
some that had indignation within themselves, and said, why was this waste of
the Ointment made? 5 For it might have been sold for more then three hundred
pence, and have been given to the poor; and they murmured against her. 6 And
Jesus s^id, le^ her alone, why trouble you her? she has wrought a good work on
me. 7 For ye have the poor with you always, and whenever ye will, ye may do
them good, but me ye have not always. 8 She has done what she could, she is
come aforeh^nd to anoint my body to the Burying. 9 Verily I said unto you,
wheresoever this Gospel shall be Preached thorough out the World, this also
that she has done, shall be spoken of for a memorial of her.

Several particulars are Observable in this piece of History: As first, the
Action which this Holy Wom^n performed, she pours a Box of precious Ointment
upon our Savior's Head as he sat at Meat, according to the custom of the
Eastern Countries at their Feasts. Murmuring Judas valued this Ointment at
Three Hundred Pence, which makes of our Money, Nine Pounds Seven Shillings and
Six Pence, reckoning the Roman Penny at seven pence half penny. I do not find
that any of the Apostles were at thus much cost and charge to put honor upon
our Savior, as this poor Woman was. Learn hence, That where strong love
prevails in the heart toward Christ, nothing is adjudged too dear for him,
neither will it suffer it self to be out s^ined by any Examples; the weakest
Woman that strongly L^ves her Savior, will piously strive with the greatest
Apostle to express the fervor of her affection toward him. Observe, (2) How
this Action was resented and reflected upon by Judas, and some other Disciples
whom he had influenced, they had indignation within themselves, and said, to
what purpose is this waste? Oh! how does a covetous heart think every thing too
good for Christ? Happy was it for this poor Woman, that she had a more
righteous judge to pass sentence upon her Action, then murmuring Judas.
Observe, (3.) How readily our Holy Lord vindicates this good Woman, she says
nothing for her sel^, nor need she, having so good an Advocate: First, he
rebukes Judas, let her alone, why trouble ye the Woman: Next he justifies the
Action, she has wrought a good Work, because it flowed from a principle o^
Love to Christ, and lastly, he gives the Reason o^ her Action, she did it for
my Buryal. As Kings and great Persons were wont in those Eastern Countries at
their Funerals to be Embalmed with Odours and sweet Perfumes, so says our
Savior, This Woman to declare her Faith in me, as her King and Lord, does with
this Box of Ointment, as it were before hand, Embalm my Body for its Burial.
True Faith puts honor upon a Crucified, as well as Glorified Savior: This
holy Woman accounts Christ worthy of all honor in his Death, believing it
would be a sweet smelling Sacrifice unto God, and the Savior of Life unto his
People. Observe, (4.) Our Savior does not only justify and defend the Action
of this holy Woman, but magnifies and extolls it, declaring that she should be
rewarded for it with an honorable Memorial in all ages of the Church; wherever
this Gospel is preached, this shall be spoken of for a Memorial of her. Note
hence, the care which Christ takes to have the good Deeds of his Children not
buried in the dust with them, but had in everlasting remembrance. Though sin
causes men to rot above Ground, to stink alive, and when they are dead, leaves
an Ignominy upon their Graves; yet will the Actions of the just smell sweet and
Blossom in the Dust.

10 And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went unto the chief Priests to
betray him unto them. 11 And when they heard it, they were glad, and promised
to give him money. And he sought how he might conveniently betray him.

Observe here, (1.) The Person betraying our blessed Redeemer, Judas: Judas a
Professor, Judas a Preacher, Judas an Apostle, and one of the Twelve, whom
Christ had chosen out of all the world to be his dearest Friends, his Family
and Household; shall we wonder to find Friends unfriendly or unfaithful to us,
when our Savior had a Traitor in his own Family? Obse^ve, (2.) The heinous
nature of Judas his sin, he betrayed Jesus. Jesus his Maker, Jesus his Master,
it is no strange or uncommon thing for the vilest of sins, and most horrid
impi^ties to be acted by such persons as make the most eminent profession of
Holiness and Religion. Observe, (3.) What was the occasion that led Judas to
the commission of this sin? It was his inordinate Love of Money. I do not find
that Judas had any particular Malice, Spite, or ill Will against our Savior,
but a base and unworthy Spirit of Covetousness possessed him, and this made him
sell his Master. Covetousness is the root-sin, an eager and insatiable Thirst
after the world is the parent of the most monstrous and unnatural sins, for
which reason our Savior doubles his caution, Luke 12.15. Take heed and beware
of Covetousness, it shows us both the danger of the sin, and the great care we
ought to take to preserve our selves from it.

12 And the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the passover, his
Disciples said unto him, where will thou that we go and prepare, that we may
eat the passover? 13 And he sends forth two of his Disciples, and said unto
them, go ye into the City, and there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of
Water, follow him. 14 And wheresoever he shall go in, say ye to the good man of
the house, the Master says, where is the Guess-chamber, where I shall eat the
passover with my Disciples? 15 And he will show you a large upper room
furnished and prepared, there make ready for us. 16 And his Disciples went
forth, and came into the City, and found as he had said unto them: and they
made ready the passover.

The time for the Celebration of the Passover being now at hand, Christ sends
two of his Disciples to Jerusalem to prepare things necessary in order
thereunto. And here we have Observable, (1.) An eminent proof of Christ's
Divine Nature, in telling them all the particulars which they should meet with
in the City, as a Man bearing a pitcher of Water, etc. (2.) How readily the
heart of this House-holder was disposed to receive our Savior and his
Disciples, and to accommodate them with all things needful upon this occasion.
Our Blessed Savior had not a Lamb of his own, and peradventure no Money
wherewith to buy one; yet he finds as excellent Accommodation in this poor
Man's House, as if he had dwelt in Ahab's Ivory Palace, and had the Provisions
of Solomon's Table. When Christ has a Passover to Celebrate, he will dispose
the Heart to a free Reception of himself. The Room which Christ will enter
into, must be a large Room, an upper Room, a Room furnished and prepared; a
large Room is an enlarged Heart, enlarged with Love and Thankfulness; an upper
Room is an Heart Exalted, not puffed up with Pride, but lift up by Heavenly
Mindedness; a Room furnished, is a Soul adorned with the Graces of the Holy
Spirit; into such an Heart, and such only will Christ enter.

17 And in the evening he comes with the twelve. 18 And as they sat and did
eat, Jesus said, verily I say unto you, one of you which eats with me, shall
betray me. 19 And they began to be sorrowful, and say unto him, one by one, is
it I? and another said, is it I? 20 And he answered and said unto them, it is
one of the twelve that dippeth with me in the dish. 21 The Son of man indeed
goes as it is written of him, but woe to that man by whom the son of man is
betrayed: good were it for that man, if he had never been born.

Observe here, (1.) The unexampled Boldness of this impudent Traitor Judas, he
presumed as soon as he had sold his Master, to sit down at the Table with him,
and eat the Passover with the Disciples; had the presence of Judas polluted
this Ordinance to any, but himself, doubtless our Savior would never have
suffered him to approach unto it. But hence we Learn, (1.) That nothing is more
ordinary, then for unholy persons to press in unto the holy Ordinances of God,
which they have no right (whilst such) to partake of. (2.) That the presence of
such persons does pollute the Ordinance only to themselves; holy persons are
not polluted by their Sins, therefore ought not to be discouraged from coming
by their presence there. Observe, (2.) What a surprising and astonishing word
it was, which dropped from our Savior's Mouth amongst his Disciples: One shall
betray me, yea, one of you shall betray me. Can any Church upon Earth expect
purity in all its Members, when Christ's own family of Twelve had a Traitor and
a Devil in it? Yet though it was very sad to hear of one, it was matter of joy to
understand, that there was but one. One Hypocrite in a Congregation is too
much, but there is cause of rejoicing if there be no more. Observe, (3.) Christ
did not name Judas, and say, Thou, O perfidious Judas, art the Traitor, but one
of you shall betray me: Doubtless it was to draw him to Repentance, and to
prevent the giving him any provocation. Lord! how sad is it for any of thy
Family, who pretend friendship to Thee, to conspire with thine Enemies against
Thee? For any that eat of thy Bread, to lift up their heel against Thee?
Observe, (4.) The Disciples sorrow upon these words of Christ, and the effect
of that Sorrow. Their Sorrow was (as well it might) exceeding great: Well might
innocent Disciples be overwhelmed with Sorrow to hear that their Master should
die, that he should die by Treason, that the Traitor should be one of
themselves. But though their Sorrow was great, yet was the effect of their
Sorrow very good, it wrought in them an holy suspicion of themselves, and
caused every one to search himself, and say, Master, is it I? Learn hence, That
it is possible for such secret wickedness to lodge in the heart as we never
suspected, till Time and Temptation drew it forth: None of the Disciples
suspected, nay, Judas himself never apprehended that depth of iniquity and
hypocrisy which was found lodging in him. Yet Note, that though the Disciples
were jealous and suspicious, yet was it of themselves, not of one another, nay,
not of Judas himself, every one said, Master, is it I? not, Master, is it
Judas? True Sincerity and Christian Charity will make us more suspicious of our
selves, then of any other: it hopes the best of others, and fears the worst of
our selves. Observe, (5.) That though Judas sees himself pointed at by our
Savior, and hears the dreadful Threatenings denounced against him, that it had
been better for him, that he had ne-never been Born, yet he is no more Blank'd,
then innocence it self. Resolute Sinners run on desperately in their Evil
Courses, and with open Eyes see and meet their own Destruction, without being
either dismayed at it, or Concerned about it. This Shameless Man had the
Impudence to say to our Blessed Savior, Master, is it I? Our Savior gives him
a direct Answer, Thou say it. Did not Judas (think we) Blush extremely, cast
down his guilty Eyes, and let fall his drooping Head at so galling an
intimation? Nothing less; we read of nothing like it. Lord! How does obduracy
in Sin, steel the Brow, and make it incapable of all Relenting impressions.
Observe Lastly, How our Savior prefers Nonentity before Damnation; It had
been better for that Man he had never been born. A Temporal miserable Being is
not worse than no Being; but Eternal Misery is much worse than Nonentity;
Better to have no Being, then not to have a Being in Christ. It had been better
for Judas that he had never been Born, than to lie under Everlasting Wrath.

22 And as they did eat, Jesus took Bread, and blessed, and brake it, and gave
to them and said, Take, eat, this is my Body. 23 And he took the Cup, and when
he had given Thanks, he gave it to them, and they all drank of it. 24 And he
said unto them, This is my Blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many.
25 Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the Fruit of the Vine, until
that day that I drink it new in the Kingdom of God. 26 And when they had sung
an Hymn, they went out into the Mount of Olives.

Immediately after the Celebration of the Passover, our Lord Institutes his
Holy Supper; in which Institution we have Observable, The Author, the Time, the
Elements, and Ministerial Actions. Observe here, (1.) The Author of this new
Sacrament, Jesus took Bread; Note thence, That to Institute a Sacrament is the
sole Prerogative of Jesus Christ. The Church has no Power to make new
Sacraments, it is only her Duty to Celebrate those which her Savior has made.
Observe (2.) The Time of the Institution, the Night before his Passion; The
Night in which he was Betrayed, Jesus took Bread. Learn thence, That it is very
necessary when Sufferings are approaching, to have Recourse to the Table of the
Lord, which affords both an Antidote against Fear, and is a Restaurative to our
Faith. Observe (3.) The Sacramental Elements, Bread and Wine; Bread
representing the Body, and Wine the Blood of our dear Redeemer. Observe (4.)
The Ministerial Actions, The Breaking of the Bread, and the Blessing of the
Cup; as to the Bread, Jesus took it; that is, set it apart from Common Use, and
separated it for Holy Ends and Purposes; He Blessed it; that is, Prayed for a
Blessing upon it; and Brake it, thereby shadowing forth his Body broken upon
the Cross; and he gave it to his Disciples, saying, This broken Bread signifies
my Body, suddenly to be broken upon the Cross, for the Redemption and Salvation
of a lost World; Do this in Remembrance of my Death. As to the Cup; Christ
having set it apart by Prayer and Thanksgiving, he Commands his Disciples to
drink all of it, and accordingly they all drink of it, says this Evangelist,
and our Savior gives his Reason for it, v. 24. For this is my Blood of the New
Testament, which is shed for Remission of sins; that is, the Wine in this Cup
represents the shedding of my Blood, by which the New Covenant betwixt GOD and
Man is Ratified and Confirmed. Whence we Gather, That every Communicant has as
undoubted a Right to the Cup, as to the Bread in the Lord's Supper; Drink ye
all of this, says Christ; therefore to deny the Cup to the Common People is
Sacrilege, and directly contrary to our Savior's Institution. After the
Celebration was over, our Savior and his Disciples Sang an Hymn, as the Jews
were wont to do at the Passover, the six Eucharistical Psalms, from the 113th,
to the 119th Psalm; From Christ's Example we gather, how suitable it is to sing
a Psalm after the Celebration of the Lord's Supper; How fit is it, that God be
Glorified in his Church by singing of Psalms, and in particular when the Lord's
Supper is Celebrated; When they had Sung an Hymn, they went into the Mount of
Olives.

27 And Jesus says unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me this
Night; for it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be
scattered. 28 But after that I am Risen, I will go before you into Galilee. 29
But Peter said unto him, Although all shall be offended, yet will not I. 30 And
Jesus says unto him, Verily I say unto thee, That this day, even in this
Night, before the Cock Crow Twice, thou shall deny me Thrice. 31 But he spoke
more vehemently, if I should dye with thee, I will not deny thee in any wise.
Likewise also said they all.

Observe here, (1.) The Warning that our Savior gives his Disciples of their
Forsaking of him in the time of his Sufferings; All ye shall be offended,
because of me this night. Learn, that Christ's dearest Friends forsook and left
him alone in the midst of his greatest distress and danger. Observe (2.) What
was the Cause of their Flight; it was their Fear, the weakness of their Faith,
and the prevalency of their Fear. Oh how sad and dangerous is it, for the best
of Men to be left under the power of their own Fears, in the day of Temptation.
Observe (3.) Notwithstanding our Savior's Prediction, St. Peter's Presumption
of his own Strength and Standing, Though all Men forsake thee, yet-will not I.
Learn thence, That Self-confidence, and a Presumptuous Opinion of their own
Strength, is a sin very incident to the holiest and best of Men. This good Man
resolved honestly, no doubt, but too too much in his own strength. Little,
little did he think what a Feather he should be in the Wind of Temptation, if
once left to the Power and Prevalency of his own Fears: None are so near
falling, as those who are most confident of their own Standing; if ever we
stand in the day of Trial, it is the fear of falling that must enable us to
stand.

32 And they came to a place which was named Gethsemane; and he says unto his
Disciples, sit ye here, while I shall pray. 33 And he takes with him Peter,
and James, and John, and began to be sore amazed, and to be very heavy. 34 And
says unto them, My Soul is exceeding sorrowful unto Death, Tarry ye here and
watch. 35 And he went forward a little, and fell on the Ground and Prayed, That
if it were possible the Hour might pass from him. 36 And he said, Abba, Father,
all things are possible unto thee, Take away this Cup from me; nevertheless,
not as I will, but what thou will. 37 And he comes and finds them sleeping;
and says unto Peter, Simon, sleep thou? could not thou watch one Hour? 38
Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into Temptation; the Spirit truly is ready,
but the Flesh is weak. 39 And again he went away and prayed, and spoke the same
words. 40 And when he returned, he found them asleep again, for their Eyes were
heavy; neither wist they what to answer him. 41 And he comes the third time,
and says unto them, Sleep on now and take your rest; it is enough, the Hour is
come; behold the Son of Man is Betrayed into the Hands of Sinners; Rise up, let
us go, lo he that Betrayeth me is at hand.

Our Blessed Savior being now come with his Disciples into the Garden, he
falls there into a bitter and bloody Agony, in which he prayed with wonderful
Fervency and Importunity to his Heavenly Father; his Sufferings were now coming
on a great pace; and he meets them upon his Knees, and would be found in a
Praying Posture. Learn thence, That Prayer is the best Preparative for, as well
as the most powerful Support under the heaviest Sufferings that can befall us.
As to this Prayer of our Savior in the Garden, many things are very
Observable, as (1.) The place where he Prayed, the Garden. But why went Christ
thither? not with our first Parents to hide himself there amongst the Trees of
the Garden, from the Notice and Observation of his Enemies; But as a Garden was
the place where our Misery began; as the first scene of humane sin and misery
was Acted in a Garden; so does our Lord choose a Garden as the fittest place
for his Agony and Satisfactory pains to begin in: Again, this Garden was a
place of privacy and Retirement, where our Lord might best attend the Offices
of Devotion, preparatory to his Passion: John 18.2. tells us, That Jesus
ofttimes resorted to this Garden with his Disciples, and that Judas well knew
the place; It is evident then, that Christ went not into the Garden to shun his
Sufferings, but to prepare himself by Prayer to meet his Enemies. (2.) Observe
the Time when he entered into the Garden for Prayer; it was in the Evening
before he Suffered; here he spent some hours in pouring forth his Soul to God:
For about Midnight, Judas with his Black Guard came and Apprehended him in a
Praying Posture. Our Lord Teaching us by his Example, that when eminent Dangers
are before us, especially when Death is Apprehended by us, to be very much in
Prayer to God, and very fervent in our Wrestlings with him. Observe (3.) The
Matter of our Lord's Prayer, That if possible the Cup might pass from him, and
he might be kept from the Hour of Suffering; that his Soul might escape that
Dreadful Wrath at which he was so sore Amazed. But what! Did Christ then begin
to Repent of his Undertaking for Sinners? Did he shrink and give back when it
came to the pinch? No, nothing less; but as he had two Natures, being GOD and
Man, so he had two distinct Wills, as Man he feared and shunned Death; as GOD
man he willingly submitted to it: The Divine Nature, and the Humane Spirit of
Christ, did now Assault each other with disagreeing Interests. Again, this
Prayer was not Absolute but Conditional; If it be possible, Father, if it may
be; if thou art willing, if it please thee, let this Cup pass, if not, I will
drink it. The Cup of Sufferings we see is a very bitter and distastful Cup, a
Cup which Humane Nature abhors, and cannot desire, but pray against; yet does
God put this Bitter Cup of Affliction into the Hands oft-times of those whom he
does sincerely Love; and when he does do so, it is their Duty to drink it with
Silence and Submission, as here their Lord did before them; Father, let the Cup
pass, yet not my Will, but thine be done. Observe (4.) The Manner of our Lord's
Prayer in the Garden; and here we may Remark. (1.) it was a Solitary Prayer; he
went by himself alone, out of the Hearing of his Disciples. The Company of our
best and dearest Friends is not always Seasonable; there is a time to be
Solitary, as well as to be Sociable; there are Times and Cases when a Christian
would not be willing that the most intimate Friend he has in the World should
be with him, to hear what passes in secret betwixt him and his God. (2.) It was
an humble Prayer, that is Evident by the Postures into which he cast himself;
sometimes Kneeling, sometimes lying prostrate upon his Face; he lies in the
very Dust, and lower he cannot lie, and his Heart was as low as his Body. (3.)
It was a vehement, fervent, and most importunate Prayer; such was the fervor
of our Lord's Spirit, that he Prayed himself into an Agony. Oh let us blush to
think how unlike we are to Christ in Prayer, as to our praying-frame of Spirit.
Lord! what deadness and drowsiness, what stupidity and formality, what dullness
and Laziness is found in our Prayers? How often do our Lips move, when our
Hearts stand still? (4.) It was a Re-iterated and Repeated Prayer; he Prayed
the first, second, and third time, for the passing of the Cup from him; he
returns upon God over and over again, resolving to take no Denial. Let us not
be Discouraged, though we have sought God often for a particular Mercy, and yet
no Answer has been given in unto us. Our Prayers may be answered, though their
Answer for the present is suspended. A Prayer put up in Faith, according to the
Will of God, though it may be delayed, it shall not be lost. Our Savior Prayed
the first, second, and third Time, for the passing of the Cup, and although he
was not heard as to Exemption from Suffering, yet he was heard as to Support
under Suffering. Observe (5.) The Posture the Disciples were found in when our
Lord was in this Agony, Praying to his Father, They were fast asleep. Good God!
Could they possibly sleep at such a time as that was, when Christ's Soul was
exceeding Sorrowful? Could their Eyes be thus heavy? Learn thence, That the
best of Christ's Disciples may be, and oft-times are over-taken with
Infirmities; with great Infirmities, when the most important Duties are
performing; He comes to his Disciples, and finds them sleeping. Observe (6.)
The mild and gentle Reproof which he gives the Disciples for their sleeping;
Could ye not watch with me one hour? Could you not Watch when your Master is in
such Danger? Could you not Watch with me, when I am going to deliver up my Life
for you? What not one Hour? and that the parting Hour too? After his
Reprehension, he Subjoyns an Exhortation, Watch and Pray, that ye enter not
into Temptation, and super-adds a forcible Reason, for though the Spirit be
willing, yet the flesh is weak. Thence Learn, That the Holiest and best
Resolved Christians, who have willing Spirits for Christ and his Service, yet
in regard of the Weakness of the Flesh, or frailty of Humane Nature, it is
their Duty to Watch and Pray, and thereby guard themselves against Temptation;
Watch and Pray that ye enter not into Temptation, for though the Spirit is
willing, yet the flesh is weak.

43 And immediately while he yet spoke, comes Judas, one of the Twelve, and
with him a great Multitude, with Swords and Staves, from the Chief Priests, and
Scribes, and Elders. 44 And he that Betrayed him, had given him a Token,
saying, whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he, Take him and lead him away
safely. 45 And as soon as he was come, he goes straightway to him, and says,
Master, Master, and kissed him. 46 And they laid their hands on him, and took
him. 47 And one of them that stood by, dre^ a Sword, and smote a Servant of the
Highpriests, and cut off his Ear. 48 And Jesus answered and said unto them,
Are ye come out as against a Thief, with Swords and with Staves to take me? 49
I was daily with you in the Temple, Teaching, and ye took me not; but the
Scriptures must be Fulfilled. 50 And they all forsook him, and fled.

The Hour is now almost come, even that Hour of Sorrow which Christ had so
often spoken of, yet a little while, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the
hands of Sinners; for while he yet spoke, comes Judas with a Band of Soldiers,
to apprehend him; it was the Lot and Portion of our Dear Redeemer to be
Betrayed into the hands of his Mortal Enemies, by the Treachery of a false and
dissembling Friend. Here we have Observable, (1.) The Traitor, (2.) The
Treason, (3.) The Manner how, (4.) The Time when this Treasonable Design was
Executed. Observe (1.) The Traitor Judas. All the Evangelists carefully
describe him by his Name Judas, by his surname Judas Iscariot, lest he should
be mistaken for Jude the Brother of James. Almighty God takes great care to
preserve the Names of his upright-hearted Servants; he is further described by
his Office, One of the Twelve: The Eminency of his Place and Station, was an
high aggravation of his Transgression. Learn hence, That the greatest
Professors had need be very jealous of themselves, and suspicious of their own
Hearts, and look well to the Grounds and Principles of their Profession, for a
Profession begun in Hypocrisy, will certainly end in Apostasy. Learn farther,
That Persons are never in such eminent Danger, as when they meet with
Temptations exactly suited to their Master Lusts. Covetousness was Judas his
Master-sin; the Love of the World made him a Slave to Satan, and the Devil lays
a Temptation before him exactly suited to his Temper and Inclination, and it
instantly over-comes him. Oh pray we, that we may be kept from a strong and
suitable Temptation, a Temptation suited to our inclination, and predominant
Lust and Corruption. Observe (2.) The Treason of this Traitor Judas; he led on
an Armed Multitude to the place where Christ was, gave them a Signal to
discover him by, and bids them lay Hands upon him, and hold him fast. This
Treason of Judas is attended with these Hellish Aggravations; He had been a
Witness to the Miracles which our Savior had wrought by his Divine Power; and
therefore could not sin out of Ignorance; What he did was not at the
solicitation and persuasion of others, but he was a Voluntier in this Service;
the Highpriests did not send to him, but he went to them, offering his
Assistance: No doubt it was matter of Surprise to the Chief Priests, to find
one of Christ's own Disciples at the head of a Conspiracy against him! Lord!
How dangerous is it to allow our selves in any one secret or open Sin? None can
say how far that one Sin may in time lead us. Should any have told Judas that
his Love of Money, would at last make him sell his Savior, he would have said
with Hasael, is thy Servant a Dog that he should do this thing? That Soul can
never be safe, that Harbors one sin within its Breast. Observe (3.) The manner
how this Hellish Plot was Executed, partly by Force, and partly by Fraud; by
Force, in that Judas came with a Multitude, Armed with Swords and Staves; and
by Fraud, giving a kiss, and saying, Hail, Master; Here was Honey in the Lips,
but Poison in the Heart. Observe (4.) The Time when, the Place where, and the
Work which our Savior was about, when this Treasonable Design was Executed; he
was in the Garden with his Disciples, exhorting them to Prayer and
Watchfulness, dropping Heavenly Advice and Counsel upon them; while he yet
spoke, Lo! Judas came. Our Savior was found in the most Heavenly and Excellent
Employment, when his Enemies came to Apprehend him. Lord! How happy is it when
our Sufferings finds us in God's way, engaged in his Work, and engaging his
Assistance by fervent Supplication? Thus did our Lord's Sufferings meet him,
may ours in like manner meet us. Observe (5.) The Endeavors used by the
Disciples for their Master's Rescue. One of them, (St. Matthew says it was
Peter) draws his Sword, and cuts off the Ear of Malchus, who probably was one
of the forwardest to lay hands on Christ. But why did not St. Peter draw upon
Judas, rather than Malchus? because, though Judas was more Faulty, yet Malchus
was more forward to arrest and carry off our Savior: How does a pious Breast
swell with Indignation at the sight of any open Affront offered to its Savior.
Yet though St. Peter's Heart was sincere, his hand was Rash; good Intentions
are no Warrant for irregular Actions; and accordingly Christ, who accepted the
Affection, reproves the Action; Put up thy Sword, for they that take the Sword,
shall perish by the Sword; Christ will thank no Man to fight for him without a
Warrant and Commission from him. To resist a Lawful Magistrate, in Christ's own
Defense, is rash Zeal, and discountenanced by the Gospel. Observe Lastly, The
effect which our Savior's Apprehension had upon the Disciples, They all
forsook him and fled; They that said to Christ a little before, Though we
should dye with thee, yet will not we deny thee, do all here desert, and
Cowardly forsake him, when it came to the Trial. Learn hence, That the best and
holiest of men know not their own Hearts, when great Temptations and Trials are
before them, until such time as they come to grapple with them. No Man knows
his own strength, till Temptation puts it to the proof.

51 And there followed him a certain young Man, having a Linen Cloth cast
about his naked Body; and the young Man laid hold on him. 52 And he left the
Linen Cloth, and fled from them naked. 53 And they led Jesus away to the High
Priest, and with him were assembled all the Chief Priests, and the Elders, and
the Scribes. 54 And Peter followed him afar off, even into the Palace of the
High Priests, and he sat with the Servants, and warmed himself at the Fire. 55
And the Chief Priests and all the Council sought for Witness against Jesus to
put him to death, and found none. 56 For many bare false Witness against him,
but their Witness agreed not together. 57 And there arose certain and bare
false Witness against him, saying, 58 We heard him say, I will destroy this
Temple that is made with hands, and within three days I will build another,
made without hands. 59 But neither so did their Witness agree together. 60 And
the High Priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying, Answerest thou
nothing? What is it which these Witness against thee? 61 But he held his peace
and answered nothing; Again the High Priest asked him, and said unto him, Art
thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed? 62 And Jesus said, I am, And ye shall
see the Son of Man sitting on the Right hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds
of Heaven. 63 Then the High Priest rent his Clothes, and said, What need we any
farther Witnesses? 64 Ye have heard the Blasphemy, What think ye? and they all
condemned him to be Guilty of Death. 65 And some began to spit on him, and to
cover his Face, and to buffer him, and to say unto him, Prophecy, and the
Servants did strike him with the Palms of their hands.

Here we have the History of our Savior's Examination before the High Priest
and Council, who sat up all Night to Arraign and Try the Holy and Innocent
Jesus, for lest his Death should look like a downright Murder, they allow him
a Mock-Tryal, and abuse the Law, by perverting it to Injustice and Bloodshed.
Accordingly false Witnesses are suborned, who Depose, that they heard him say,
he would destroy their Temple, and build it again in three days. It is not in
the power of the greatest Innocence, to protect the most Innocent and Holy
Person from Slander and false Accusation; yea, no Person is so innocent and
good, whom false Witness may not Condemn. Observe (2.) Our Lord's Meekness and
Patience, his Silence under all these wicked Suggestions and false Accusations,
Jesus held his peace, and answered nothing, v. 61. Guilt is naturally Clamorous
and Impatient, but Innocence is silent and careless of Mis-Reports. Learn
hence, That to bear the Revilings, Contradictions, and false Accusations of
Men, with a silent and submissive Spirit, is an Excellent and Christ-like
Temper. Our Lord stood before his unjust Judge and false Accusers, even as a
Sheep before the Shearer, dumb and not opening his Mouth, even then when a
Trial for his Life was managed, and most maliciously and illegally against him,
When he was reviled, he reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not.
May the same humble Mind, and forgiving Spirit be in us, which was also in
Christ Jesus. Observe (3.) That although our Savior was silent and made no
Reply to the false Witnesses, yet now, when the question was solemnly put by
the High Priest; Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed, he answered, I
am. Thence Learn, That although we are not obliged to every insnaring Question
to make Answer, yet are we bound faithfully to own, and freely to confess the
Truth when solemnly called thereunto; when our Silence will be interpreted a
Denial of the Truth, a Dishonor to God, a Reproach and Scandal to our
Brethren; it will be a great Sin to hold our Peace; and we must not be silent,
though our Confession of the Truth hazards our Liberty, yea, our Life. Christ
knew that his Answer would cost him his Life, and yet he durst not but give it,
Art thou the Son of the Blessed, Jesus said, I am. Observe (4.) The Crime which
the High Priest pronounces our Savior to be Guilty of, that of Blasphemy; He
has spoken Blasphemy; Hereupon the High Priest rends his Clothes, it being
usual with the Jews so to do, both to show their Sorrow for it, and great
detestation of it, and indignation against it. Observe (5.) The vile Affronts,
and horrid Abuses, which the Enemies of our Savior put upon him, they spit in
his Face, they blind fold him, they smite him with their hands, and in Contempt
and Mockery, bid him prophecy who it was that smote him. Verily there is no
degree of Contempt, no mark of Shame, no kind of Suffering, which we ought to
decline or stick at for Christ's sake, who hid not his Face from shame and
spitting upon our Account.

66 And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there comes one of the maids of
the high Priest. 67 And when she saw Peter warming himself, she looked upon
him, and said, and thou also wast with Jesus of Nazareth. 68 But he denied,
saying, I know him not, neither understand I, what thou say; and he went out
into the Porch, and the cock crew. 69 And a maid saw him again, and began to
say to them that stood by, this is one of them. 70 And he denied it again, and
a little after, they that stood by, said again to Peter, surely thou art one of
them; for thou art a Galilean, and thy speech agrees thereto. 71 But he began
to curse and to swear, saying, I know not this man of whom ye speak. 72 And the
second time the Cock crew, and Peter called to mind the word that Jesus said
unto him, before the Cock crow twice, thou shall deny me thrice, and when he
thought thereon he wept.

This last Paragraph of the Chapter gives us an Account of the fall and rising
of Peter, of his sin in denying Christ, and of his recovery by Repentance, both
must be considered distinctly. First, as touching his sin and fall, there are
four particulars Observable relating thereunto, namely, the sin it self, the
occasion of that sin, the reiteration and repetition of it, and the aggravating
circumstances attending it. Observe, (1.) The Sin it self, the denial of Christ
Jesus his Lord, I know not the man, and this backed with an Oath, he swears
that he knew not the man, and at last wishes an horrid imprecation upon
himself, if he knew such a man. Verily the slavish and inordinate fear of
suffering, may draw the holiest and best men to commit the vilest and the worst
of sins. Observe, (2.) The occasions of this sin, and they were three, (1.) His
following of Christ afar off, to follow Christ is the effect of Faith, to
follow him afar off, is the fruit of fear and the effect of frailty. Woe unto us
when a Temptation comes, if we be far from Christ's presence and assistance.
(2.) His being in wicked company amongst Christ's Enemies, would we escape
Temptations to sin, we must then decline such company as will allure and draw
us into Sin. Peter had better have been a cold by himself alone, than warming
himself at a fire which was compassed in with the Blasphemies of the multitude,
where his Conscience though not feared was yet made hard. (3.) A presumptuous
Confidence of his own strength and standing was another occasion of Peter's
falling, though all men forsake thee, yet will not I; Oh, Lord! to presume upon
our selves is the ready way to provoke thee to leave us to our selves, if ever
we stand in the day of Trial, it is the fear of falling that must enable us to
stand. Observe, (3.) The reiteration and repetition of this sin, he denies
Christ again and again, he denies him first with a Lie, next with an Oath, then
with a curse: Lord! how dangerous is it, not to resist the first beginnings of
sin; if we yield to one Temptation, Satan will assault us with more and
stronger. Peter proceeded from a denial to a Lie, from a Lie, to an Oath, from
an Oath, to a curse; it is our wisdom vigorously to resist sin at the
beginning, for then have we most power and sin has least. Observe, (4.) The
aggravating circumstances attending this sin of Peter's, and they are these.
(1.) The Character of his Person, a Disciple, an Apostle, a chief Apostle, a
special Favorite, who with James and John had the honor to be with Christ at
his Transfiguration upon Mount Tabor, yet he denies Jesus Christ. (2.) The
Person whom he denies, his Master, his Savior and Redeemer, he that had washed
Peter's feet, that had eat the passover with Peter, that had given the ^^crament
to Peter, yet is this kind and condescending Savior denied by Peter. (3.)
Consider the Persons before whom he denies him, the chief Priests and Elders
and their Servants, oh! how grateful was it to them to see one Disciple sell
Christ for Money, and another deny him through fear. Consider (4.) The time
when he denied him, verily it was but a few hours after he had received the
Holy Sacrament from Christ's own Hand; how unreasonable then is their objection
against coming to the Lord's Table, that some who go to it, dishonor Christ as
soon as they come from it. Such examples ought not to discourage us from coming
to the Ordinance, but excite and increase our watchfulness after we have been
there, that our after deportment may be suitable to the Solemnity of a
Sacramental Table. Consider, (5.) The smallness of the Temptation he lay under
to deny his Lord and Master; a Damsel only speaks to him, Art thou not one of
his Disciples? had a band of armed Soldiers appeared to him and apprehended
him, had he been bound and led away to the Judgment-hall, and there threatened
with the Sentence of an Ignominious Death, some excuse might have been made for
him; but to disown his relation to Christ upon a word spoken by a sorry Maid
that kept the door only, the smallness of the Temptation was an high
Aggravation of the crime. Ah, Peter! how unlike thy self were thou at this
time, not a Rock but a Reed; A pillar blown down by a Woman's Breath, Oh, frail
humanity whose strength is weakness and infirmity. Note here, That in most of
the Saints falls recorded in Scripture either the first Enticers to them, or
the Accidental occasions of them, were the Female Sex; witness besides the
first fall, that of Adams; the fall of Lot, Sampson, David, Solomon and Peter.
A weak Creature may be a strong Temter; nothing is too impotent or useless for
the Devils Service. It was a great aggravation of Peter's sin, that the voice of
a Maid, a Doorkeeper only, should be stronger to overcome him, then his Faith
in Jesus to sustain him. But what shall we say? small things are sufficient to
cast us down, if God does not hold us up; we sink under any Burden, if God
sustains us not, and yield to the least Temptation, if he leaves us to our
selves. A Damsel shall then make a Disciple shrink, and a Doorkeeper is
sufficient to drive an Apostle before her. This is the Account in short of St.
Peter's Fall. Next follows the Relation of his Recovery and rising again by
Repentance. Here we have Observable, (1.) The suddenness of his Repentance.
(2.) The means of his Repentance. (3.) The manner of it. Observe, (1.) The
suddenness of his Repentance, as his sin was sad, so was his Repentance speedy.
Sins committed by surprise, and through the prevalency of a sudden Temptation,
are much sooner repented of then where the sin is presumptuous and deliberate.
David's murder and adultery were deliberate acts of Sin, in which he lay
almost twelve Months without any Solemn Repentance for them. St. Peter's denial
was hasty and sudden under a violent pang and passion of fear, and he takes the
warning of the Cock to go forth and weep for his Transgression. Observe, (2.)
The means of his Repentance which were twofold, the less principal was the
crowing of the Cock, the more principal Christ's looking upon Peter, and
Peter's remembering the word of Christ. (1.) The less principal means of St.
Peter's rising and recovery by Repentance, was the crowing of the Cock, as the
voice of the Maid occasioned him to sin, so the voice of the Cock occasioned
him to reflect, that God who always can work without means, can when ever he
please work by weak and contemptible means, and open the mouth of a Bird or a
Beast for the conversion of a Man. But why does our Lord make use of the
crowing of a Cock to be the means of bringing St. Peter to Repentance? There is
ever some mystery in Christ's Instruments; the Cock was a Preacher to call St.
Peter to Repentance, there being something of Emblem between the Cock and a
Preacher. The Preacher must have the wings of the Cock to rouse up himself from
security and to awaken others to a sense of their Duty; he must have the
watchfulness of the Cock to be ready to discover and forewarn Danger; he must
have the Voice of the Cock to cry aloud and tell Israel of their sins, and
terrify the Roaring Lion of Hell, and make him tremble: In a word, he must
observe the hours of the Cock to crow at all seasons of the Night, to preach in
Season, and out of Season the glad Tidings of Salvation. Again, (2.) The more
principal means of St Peter's Recovery, was first Christ's looking upon Peter;
Christ first looks upon Peter, before Peter looked either upon Christ, or upon
himself. Oh! wonderful Love and Grace toward this poor Disciple, when our
Savior was upon his Trial for his Life, (a time when our thoughts would be
wholly taken up about our selves) even then did Christ find leisure to think
upon Peter, to remember his disconsolate Disciple, to turn himself about and
give him a pitiful but piercing look, a look that melted him into Tears: We
never begin to lament our Sins, till we are lamented first by our Savior.
Jesus looked upon Peter, that was the first more principal means of his
Recovery and Repentance. But (2.) The other means was Peter's Remembering the
words of Christ, before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. Now this
remembrance was an applicative and feeling remembrance, he remembered the
prediction of Christ, and applied it sensibly to himself: Teaching us, that the
efficacy of Christ's word, in order to a sound Repentance, depends not upon the
Historical Remembrance of it, but upon the close application thereof to every
Man's Conscience. Observe, (3.) The manner of St. Peter's Repentance it was
secret, he went out, it was sincere he wept, yea, wept bitterly, says St.
Matthew; it was lasting and abiding even all the days of his Life. (1.) His
Repentance was secret he went out, vere Dolet, qui sine Test Dolet; he sought
a place of Retirement, where he might mourn in secret. Solitariness is most
agreeable to an afflicted Spirit, and as St. Peter's Sorrow caused him to go
forth, so might also shame put him upon going out. Christ looked upon him, but
how ashamed must he be to look upon Christ, considering that he so lately
denied that he had ever seen him. (2) St. Peter's Repentance was Sincere, he
wept, he wept bitterly; His Grief was extraordinary, and his Tears abundant;
there is ever a weeping that must follow sin, sin must cost the Soul sorrow,
either here or in Hell, we must either now mourn a while, or lament for ever;
doubtless with Peter's Tears there was joined hearty Confession of Sin to God,
and smart Reflections upon himself, we may suppose after this manner. Lord!
what have I done, I, that did once acknowledge my Master to be Christ the Lord,
have since denied him with Oaths and Imprecations; I, that promised to lay down
my Life for his sake, have yet disowned and denied him at the voice of a
Damsel. Oh! what weakness, what wickedness, what unfaithfulness was here: Oh!
that my Head were Waters, and mine eyes a fountain of Tears, that I might weep
all my days for the fault of this one Night. Blessed are indeed the Tears of a
Converted Revolter, and Happy is the very Misery of a mourning Offender. (3)
This holy Man's Repentance was lasting and abiding, he had a very quick sense,
and lively remembrance of this Sin upon his Soul all his life. Ecclesiastical
story Report, that ever after when St Peter heard the crowing of a Cock, he
fell upon his knees and wept: Others say, that he was wont to rise at Midnight,
and spend the time in penitent Devotion, between Cock-crowing and daylight;
and the Papists who delight to turn every thing into Superstition, began that
Practice of setting a Cock upon the top of Towers and Steeples, to put People
in mind of this sin of Peter's, and of his Repentance also by that Signal.
Lastly, St. Peter's Repentance was attended with an extraordinary Zeal and
forwardness for the Service of Christ, to the and of his Life; he had a burning
Love toward Christ, Lord, thou that know all things, know that I love
thee, and as evidence of it he feed Christ's Sheep; for in the Acts of the
Apostles, we read of his extraordinary Diligence to spread the Gospel, and his
Travels in order thereunto are computed to be 950 Miles. Have any of us fallen
with Peter, though not with a formal abjuring, yet by a practical denying of him?
Let us go forth and weep with him, let us be more vigilent and watchful for
time to come; let us express more extraordinary love unto and zeal for Christ;
more diligence in his Service, and more concernedness for his Honor and Glory.
This would be an happy improvement of this Example, the Lord grant it may have
that Blessed effect. Amen.

CHAP. XV.
1 AND straitway in the Morning the Chief Priests held a Consultation with the
Elders and the Scribes, and the whole Council, and bound Jesus, and carried him
away, and delivered him to Pilate.

The foregoing Chapter gave us an Account of Judas his Treason, in delivering
our Savior into the Hands of the Chief Priests. In this Chapter we find our
Holy Lord brought by the Chief Priests unto Pontius Pilate the Roman-Governour,
in order to his Condemnation. Whence Observe, That it has been the old Policy
of Corrupt Church Governors, to abuse the Power of the Civil Magistrate, in
Executing their cruel and unjust Censures and Sentences, upon holy and innocent
Persons. The Chief Priests and Elders do not kill our Savior themselves, (for
it was not Lawful for them to put any Man to Death, being themselves under the
Power of the Roman-Government) accordingly they deliver Christ over to the
Secular Power, and desire Pilate the Civil Magistrate, to Sentence and Condemn
him.

2 And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? and he answering said
unto him, thou say it. 3 And the Chief Priests accused him of many things,
but he answered nothing. 4 And Pilate asked him, saying, answerest thou
nothing? Behold, how many things they Witness against thee? 5 But Jesus yet
answered nothing, so that Pilate marvelled.

It is very Observable, how readily our Savior Answers before Pilate. Pilate
said, Art thou the King of the Jews; Jesus answered, Thou say it; or it is
as thou say^st. But to all the Accusations of the Chief Priests, and to all
that they falsely laid to his Charge before Pilate, our Savior answered never a
Word; ^e Answered Pilate, but would ^ot answer the Chief Priests a word before
Pilate, probably for these Reasons; because his Innocence was such as needed no
Apology, because their Calumnies and Accusations were so notoriously false,
that they needed no Confutation; to show his Contempt of Death, and to teach us
by h^s Example to despise the false Accusations of malicious Men; and to learn
us Patience and Submission, when for his sake we are slandered and Traduced;
for these Reasons our Savior was as a deaf Man, not answering the Calumnies of
the Chief Priests; but when Pilate asks him a question, which our Savior knew,
that a direct Answer to would cost him his Life, Art thou the King of the Jews?
he Replies, I am. Hence says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.13. That Jesus Christ before
Pontius Pilate, witnessed a good Confession. Teaching us, That although we may,
and sometimes ought to hold our Peace, when our own Reputation is Concerned,
yet must we never be silent, when the Honor of God, and his Truth may
effectually be promoted by a free, and a full Confession; For says Christ,
whoever denies me before Men, him will I deny in the presence of my Father, and
before all his Holy Angels.

6 Now at the Feast he Released unto them one Prisoner, whomsoever they
desired. 7 And there was one named Barabbas, which lay bound with them that had
made Insurrection with him, who had committed Murder in the Insurrection. 8
And the Multitude crying aloud, began to desire him to do as he had ever done
unto them. 9 But Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye that I Release unto you
the King of the Jews? 10 For he knew that the Chief Priests had delivered him
for Envy. 11 But the Chief Priests moved the People, that he should rather
Release Barabbas unto them. 12 And Pilate answered and said again unto them,
What will ye then that I shall do unto him whom ye call the King of the Jews.
13 And they cried out again, Crucify him. 14 Then Pilate said unto them, Why,
what Evil has he done? and they cried out the more exceedingly, Crucify him.
15 And so Pilate, willing to content the People, Released Barabbas unto them,
and delivered Jesus, when he had Scourged him, to be Crucified.

Now at the Feast, that is, at the Feast of the Passover, which by way of
Eminency is called the Feast, the Governor used to Release a Prisoner,
(possibly by way of Memorial of their Deliverance out of Egypt) accordingly
Pilate makes a Motion, that Christ may be the Prisoner set at Liberty, in
Honor of their Feast; for he was sensible, that what they did was out of Envy
and Malice. Observe here, (1.) What were the sins which immediately occasioned
the death of Christ, they were Covetousness and Envy; Covetousness caused Judas
to sell him to the Chief Priests, and Envy caused the Chief Priests to deliver
him up to Pilate to Crucify him; Envy is a killing and murdering Passion; Envy
slays the silly one, Job 5.2. That is, it slays the silly Person who
harbors this pestilent Lust in his Breast and Bosom; being like a Fire in his
Bones, continually preying upon his Spirits; and it is also the occasion of
slaying many an holy and innocent Person; for who can stand before Envy? The
Person Envying wishes the Envied out of the way, yea out of the World; and if
need be, will not only wish it, but lend a Lift upon occasion, toward it also.
Witness the Chief Priests here, whose Envy was so Conspicuous and Barefaced,
that Pilate himself takes notice of it; he knew that the Chief Priests had
delivered him for Envy. Observe (2.) How unwilling, how very unwilling Pilate
was to be the Instrument of our Savior's Death; One while he Expostulates with
the Chief Priests, saying, What Evil has he done? another while he bids them,
take him, and judge him according to their Law. Nay, St. Luke says, that Pilate
came forth three several times, professing, That he found no fault in him, Luke
23. From hence Note, That Hypocrites within the visible Church may be Guilty of
such Tremendous Acts of Wickedness, as the Consciences of Infidels and Pagans
without the Church may Boggle at, and Protest against. Pilate, a Pagan,
absolves Christ, whilst the Hypocritical Jews, that heard his Doctrine, and saw
his Miracles, do Condemn him. Observe Lastly, How Pilate suffers himself to be
overcome with the Jews Importunity, and contrary to the Light of his own Reason
and Judgment, delivers the holy and innocent Jesus, first to be Scourged, and
then Crucified; it is a vain Apology for Sin, when Persons pretend that they
were not committed with their own Consent, but at the Instigation and
importunity of others; Such is the Frame and Constitution of Man's Soul, that
none can make him either wicked or miserable, without his own Consent; Pilate
willing to content the People, when he had scourged Jesus, dilivered him to be
Crucified. Here Observe, That as the Death of the Cross was a Roman Punishment,
so it was the manner of the Romans, first to whip their Malefactors, and then
Crucify them: Now the Manner of the Roman Scourging is said to be thus: They
stripped the Condemned Person, and bound him to a Post, two strong Men first
Scourged him with Rods of Thorns; then two others Scourged him with Whips of
Cords full of Knots; and last of all, two more with Whips of Wire, and
therewith tore off the very Flesh and Skin from the Malefactors Back and Sides:
That our Blessed Savior was thus Cruelly Scourged by Pilate's Command, seems
to some not improbable, from that of the Psalmist, Ps. 129.3. The ploughers
ploughed upon my back, and made long Furrows, which if spoken Prophetically of
Christ, was Literally Fulfilled in the Day of his Scourging. But why was the
precious and tender Body of our Holy Lord thus Galled, Rent and Torn with
Scourging? Doubtless to Fulfill that Prophecy Isa. 50.6. I gave my back to the
smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the Hair; That by his Stripes
we might be healed; and from his Example Learn; not to think it strange if we
find our selves Scourged, with Tongue, with Hand, or with both, when we see our
dear Redeemer bleeding, by Stripes and Scourges before our Eyes.

16 And the Soldiers led him away into the Hall called Pretorium; and they call
together the whole Band. 17 And they clothed him with purple, and platted a
Crown of Thorns, and put it about his Head. 18 And began to Salute him; Hail,
King of the Jews. 19 And they smote him on the Head with a Reed, and did spit
upon him, and bowing their Knees worshipped him. 20 And when they had mocked
him, they took off the Purple from him, and put his own Clothes on him, and led
him out to Crucify him.

The next part of our Savior's Sufferings consisted of Cruel Mockings, he had
owned himself to be the King of the Jews, that is, a Spiritual King in and over
his Church; but the Jews expecting that the Messiah should have appeared in the
Pomp of an Earthly Prince, and finding themselves disappointed of their
Expectation in our Savior, they look upon him as a Deceiver and Impostor; and
accordingly treat him as a mock-King, with all the marks of Derision and Scorn;
for first, they put a Crown upon his Head, but a very ignominious and painful
one, a Crown of Thorns; they place a Scepter in his hand, but that of a Reed, a
Robe of Scarlet or Purple upon his Body; and then bowed their Knees unto him,
as they were wont to do before their Princes, crying, Hail, King; Thus were all
the marks of Scorn imaginable put upon our Dear Redeemer: Yet what they did in
Jest, God permitted to be done in Earnest; for all these things were Signs and
Marks of Sovereignty; and Almighty God caused the Regal Dignity of his Son to
shine forth even in the midst of his greatest Abasement; Whence was all this
Jearing and Sport? but to flout Majesty? and why did Christ undergo all this
ignominy, disgrace, and shame? but to show what was due unto us for our sins;
as also to give us an Example, to bear all the Scorn, Reproach, and Shame
imaginable for his sake, who for the joy that was set before him, despised the
shame, as well as endured the Cross.

21 And they compel one Simon a Cyrenian, who passed by, coming out of the
Country, the Father of Alexander and Rufus, to bear his Cross. 22 And they
bring him unto the place Golgotha, which is, being Interpreted, the place of a
Skull. 23 And they gave him to drink, Wine mingled with Myrrh, but he received
it not. 24 And when they had Crucified him, they parted his Garments, casting
Lots upon them, what every Man should take. 25 And it was the third Hour, and
they Crucified him. 26 And the Superscription of his Accusation was written
over, The King of the Jews. 27 And with him they Crucify two Thieves, the one
on his Right hand, the other on his Left. 28 And the Scripture was Fulfilled
which says, And he was numbered with the Transgressors. 29 And they that passed
by, railed on him, wagging their heads, and saying, Ah thou that destroyest the
Temple, and buildest it in three days. 30 Save thy self, and come down from the
Cross. 31 Likewise also the chief Priests mocking, said among themselves, with
the Scribes, He saved others, himself he cannot save. 32 Let Christ the King of
Israel descend now from the Cross, that we may see and believe; and they that
were Crucified with him, reviled him. 33 And when the sixth hour was come,
there was Darkness over the whole Land until the ninth hour. 34 And at the
ninth Hour Jesus cried with a loud Voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lamasabachthani?
which is, being Interpreted, My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me? 35 And
some of them that stood by, said, when they heard it, behold he calls Elias.
36 And one ran, and filled a Sponge of Vinegar, and put it on a Reed, and gave
him to drink; saying, let alone, Let us see whether Elias will come to take him
down. 37 And Jesus cried with a loud Voice, and gave up the Ghost.

The Sentence of Death being past by Pilate, who can, with dry Eyes behold the
sad Pomp of our Savior's Bloody Execution; forth-comes the Blessed Jesus out
of Pilate's Gate, bearing that Cross which soon after was to bear him; with his
Cross on his Shoulder he marches toward Golgotha, and when they see he can go
no faster, they force Simon the Cyrenian, not out of Compassion, but
Indignation, to be the Porter of his Cross. This Cyrenian being a Gentile, not
a Jew, that bare our Savior's Cross, thereby might be signified, that the
Gentiles should have a part in Christ, as well as the Jews, and be sharers with
them in the Benefits of the Cross. At length our Holy Lord comes to Golgotha,
the place of his bitter and bloody Execution; here in a public place, with
infamous Company, betwixt two Thieves, is he Crucified; that is, fastened to a
great Cross of Wood, his Hands stretched forth abroad, and his Feet closed
together, and both Hands and Feet fastened with Nails; his Naked Body was lifted
up in the open Air, hanging betwixt Heaven and Earth; signifying thereby, that
the Crucified Person deserved to live in neither. This shameful, painful and
accursed death did the holy and innocent Jesus suffer and undergo for shameless
Sinners. Some Observe all the Dimensions of Length, breadth, and Depth, and
Height in our Savior's Sufferings; for Length, his Passion was several Hours
long, from Twelve to Three, exposed all that Time, both to Hunger and Cold: The
Thieves that were Crucified with him, endured only Personal Pains, but he
underwent the Miseries of all Mankind. As to its Breadth, his Passion extended
over all the Powers and Parts of his Soul and Body; no part free, but his
Tongue, which was at Liberty to pray for his Enemies; His sight was tormented
with the scornful Gestures of those who passed by, wagging their Heads; his
Hearing grieved with the Taunts and Jears of the Priests and People; his
Smelling offended with noysom Savours, in the place of Skulls; his Taste with
the Gall and Vinegar given him to Drink; his Feeling was wonderfully affected
by the Nails which pierced his tender Nerves, with a Multiplicity of Wounds:
And for the Depth of his Passion, it was as deep as Hell it self; enduring
Tortures in his Soul, as well as Torments in his Body, groaning under the
Burden of Desertion, and crying out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Lastly, for the Height of his Passion, his Sufferings were as high as
Heaven; his Person being infinite as well as innocent, no less then the Son of
God which adds infinite worth and value to his sufferings. Lord! Let us be able
to comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth and length, depth and height
of our Savior's Love in suffering for us, and let us know that Love of his
which passes knowledge.

Observe next, the Inscription wrote by Pilate over our suffering Savior, This
is Jesus the King of the Jews; it was the manner of the Romans when they
crucified a Malefactor to publish the cause of his Death in Capital Letters,
placed over the head of the Person. Now it is observable how wonderfully the
wisdom of God overruled the heart and pen of Pilate to draw his Title which
was truly Honorable, and fix it to his Cross: Pilate is Christ's Herald, and
proclaims him King of the Jews. Learn hence, that the regal dignity of Christ
was proclaimed by an Enemy, and that in a time of his greatest Sufferings and
Reproaches; Pilate without his own Knowledge did our Savior an Eminent piece
of service, he did that for Christ which none of his own Disciples durst do,
not that he did it designedly, but from the special overruling providence of
God; no thanks to Pilate for all this, because the highest services performed
to Christ undesignedly shall neither be accepted nor rewarded by God. Observe
farther, the several Aggravations of our Lord's Sufferings upon the Cross. (1.)
From the company he suffered with, two Thieves; it had been a sufficient
Disparagement to our Blessed Savior, to have been sorted with the best of Men,
but to be numbered with the scum of Mankind, is such an indignity, as confounds
our thoughts. This was designed by the Jews to dishonor and disgrace our
Savior the more, and to persuade the world that he was the greatest of
Offenders, but God over ruled this also, for fulfilling an ancient Prophecy
concerning the Messiah, Isa. 53. last v. and he was numbered with the
Transgressors. (2.) Another Aggravation of our Lord's sufferings upon the
Cross, was the scorn and mocking derision which he met with in his dying
moments, both from the common People, from the chief Priests, and from the
Thieves that suffered with him. The common People reviled him, wagging their
heads, the chief Priests, though men of Age and Gravity, yet barbarously mock
him in his misery, and not only so, but they Atheistically scoff and jear at
his Faith and Affiance in God; saying, He trusted in God, that he would deliver
him, let him deliver him if he would have him. Where Note, That persecutors are
generally Atheistical Scoffers, the chief Priests and Elders though knowing
Men, yet they Blaspheme God: They mock at his Power and deride his Providence,
which is as bad as to deny his being; so that from hence we may gather, that
those who administer to God in holy things by way of Office, if they be not the
best, they are the worst of Men. No such bitter Enemies to the power of
Godliness as the Ministers of Religion, who were never acquainted with the
Efficacy and Power of it, upon their own hearts and lives. A third Aggravation
of our Lord's sufferings upon the Cross was this, that the Thieves that
suffered with him, reviled him with the rest, that is, one of them, as St. Luke
has it, or perhaps both of them might do it at first, which if so, increases
the wonder of the penitent Thiefs Conversion. From the impenitent Thiefs
Reviling Christ we learn, That neither shame, nor pain will change the mind of
a resolute Sinner, but even then when he is in the suburbs of Hell will he
Blaspheme. They that were crucified with him reviled him; but the most
aggravating circumstance of all the Rest in our Lord's Sufferings was this,
that he was forsaken of his Father, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
Thence Learn, That the Lord Jesus Christ when suffering for our sins, was
really deserted and forsaken by his Father, and left destitute of all sensible
Consolation; why have thou forsaken me? Learn farther, that under this
desertion Christ despaired not, but still retained a firm persuasion of God's
Love unto him, and experienced necessary supports from him: My God, my God,
these are words of Affiance and Faith. Christ was thus forsaken for us, that we
might never be forsaken by God, yet by God's forsaking of Christ, we are not to
understand any abatement of Divine Love, but only a withdrawing from the humane
Nature the sense of his Love, and a letting out upon his Soul a deep afflicting
sense of his Displeasure, against Sin: There is a Twofold desertion, the one
total, final, and eternal by which God utterly forsakes a person, both as to
Grace and Glory, being for sin wholly cast out of God's presence, and adjudged
to eternal Torments. This Christ was not capable of, nor could the Dignity of
his person admit it: The other is a partial Temporary desertion, when God for a
little moment hides his face from his Children. Now this was both agreeable to
Christ's Nature, and also suitable to his Office, who was to satisfy the
justice of God for our forsaking of him, and to bring us back again to God,
that we might be received for ever. Observe lastly, what a miraculous Evidence
Christ gave of his Godhead, instantly before he gave up the Ghost, he cried
with a loud Voice: This shows that he did not die according to the ordinary
course of Nature, gradually drawing on, as we express it, but his Life was
whole in him to the last, and Nature as strong as it was at first: Other men
die by degrees, and toward their end, their sense of pain is much blunted, but
Christ stood under the pains of death in his full strength, and his Life was
whole and entire in him to the very last moment. This was evident by the mighty
outcry he made when he gave up the Ghost, contrary to the sense and experience
of all persons; now he that could cry with such a loud voice as he did (in
Articulo mortis) could have kept himself from dying, if he would. Hence we
learn, That when Christ died, he rather conquered Death, then was conquered by
it, he must voluntarily and freely lay down his life before Death could come at
him.

38 And the vail of the Temple was rent in twain, from the top to the bottom.
39 And when the Centurion which stood over against him, saw that he so cried
out, and gave up the Ghost, he said, truly this man was the Son of God. 40
There were also women looking on afar off, among whom was Mary Magdalen, and
Mary the mother of James the less, and Joses, and Salome. 41. Who also when he
was in Galilee, followed him, and ministered unto him, and many other women
which came up with him unto Jerusalem.

Three circumstances are here Observable, (1.) A stupendous prodigy happening
upon the death of our Savior, the vail of the Temple was rent in twain from
top to bottom; there was a twofold vail of the Temple, one inward, the other
outward; the inward vail was an hanging which parted the most holy place from
the other part of the Temple, the outward vail was the partition wall of Stone,
between the Sanctuary and the outer Court By the rending of one of these vails,
God testified his Wrath against the Jews, and that he was now about to forsake
his Temple; that the Ceremonial Law was now abolished by the Death of Christ,
and that by the Blood of Jesus we have access unto God, and may enter into the
Holy of Holies, the Partition Wall 'twixt Jew and Gentile being pulled down.
Observe (2.) What influence the Manner and Circumstances of our Savior's Death
had upon the Centurion, and the Soldiers with him, they cry out, Verily this
was the Son of God. Where Observe, That the Heathen Soldiers are sooner
convinced of the Divinity of our Savior, then the unbelieving Jewish Doctors.
Obstinacy and Unbelief filled their minds with an invincible prejudice against
Christ, so that neither the Miracles wrought by him in his Life, or at his
Death, could convince them that Christ was any thing better than an Impostor
and Deceiver. None are so blind as those who through malicious obstinacy and
inveterate prejudice will not see. Observe (3.) Who of Christ's Friends were
witness of his Death? they are the Women that followed him, and ministered unto
him, not one of his dear Disciples dare come near him, except St. John who
stood by the Cross with the Virgin Mary. Oh! what a shame was this for the
Apostles, to be absent from a Spectacle upon which the Salvation of the whole
World did depend; and what an honor was this to the Female Sex in general, and
to these holy Women in particular, that they had the Courage to follow Christ
to his Cross, when all his Disciples forsook him and fled. God can make
timorous and fearful Women, bold and courageous Confessors of his Truth, and
fortify them against the fears of his Suffering, contrary to the natural
timerousness of their Temper; these Women wait upon Christ's Cross, when
Apostles fligh, and durst not come nigh it.

42 And now when the Even was come, because it was the preparation; that is,
the day before the Sabbath. 43 Joseph of Arimathea, an Honorable Counselor,
which also waited for the Kingdom of God, came, and went in boldly unto Pilate,
and craved the Body of Jesus. 44 And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead;
and calling unto him the Centurion, he asked him, whither he had been any while
dead. 45 And when he knew it of the Centurion, he gave the Body to Joseph. 46
And he brought fine Linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in Linen, and
laid him in a Sepulcher, which was hewn out of a Rock, and rolled a stone unto
the door of the Sepulcher. 47 And Mary Magdalene, and Mary the Mother of Joses,
beheld where he was laid.

The Circumstances of our Lord's Funeral, and Honorable Interment in the
Grave, are here Recorded by the Evangelist; such a Funeral as never was since
Graves were first dug. Where Observe, (1.) Our Lord's Body must be Begged
before it could be Buried; the dead Bodies of Malefactors being in the Power,
and at the Disposal of the Judge. Pilate grants it; and accordingly the dead
Body is taken down, wrapped in fine Linen, and prepared for the Sepulcher.
Observe (2.) The Person that bestows this Honorable Buryal upon our Savior,
Joseph of Arimathea, a Disciple no doubt, though he did not make a public and
open Profession; a Worthy, though a Close Disciple. Grace does not always make
a public and open show where it is; as there is much Secret Riches in the
Bowels of the Earth, which no Eye ever saw, so there is much Grace in the
Hearts of some Christians, that the Eye of the World takes little Notice of.
Some gracious Persons cannot put forward and discover themselves in Discourse
as others; and yet such weak Christians as the World counts them, perhaps shall
stand their Ground, when stronger run away. We read of none of the Apostles at
Christ's Funeral, fear had Chased them away; but Joseph of Arimathea, appears
boldly; if God strengthen the Weak, and leave the strong to the prevalency of
their own Fears, The weak shall be as David, and the strong as Tow. Observe
(3.) The Mourners that followed our Savior's Hearse; Namely, the Women which
came out of Galilee, and particularly the two Mary's; a very poor train of
Mourners; the Apostles were all scattered, and afraid to own their Lord and
Master, either Dying or Dead. And as our Lord affected no Pomp nor Gallantry in
his Life, so Funeral Pomp had been no way suitable, either to the End or Manner
of his Death. Humiliation was designed in his death, and his Buryal was the
lowest Degree of his Humiliation, and therefore might not be Pompous. Observe
(4.) The Grave or Sepulcher in which our Lord was Buried; it was in a Sepulcher
hewn out of a Rock, in a new Sepulcher, in a new Sepulcher in a Garden. (1.)
Our Lord was Buried in a Garden: As by the sin of the first Adam we were driven
out of the Garden of Pleasure, the Earthly Paradise, so by the Sufferings of
the Second Adam, who lay Buried in a Garden, we may hope for Entrance into the
Heavenly Paradise. (2.) It was in a Sepulcher hewn out of a Rock, that so his
Enemies might have no occasion to cavil, and say, that his Disciples stole him
away by secret holes, or un seen passages under Ground. (3.) It was in a new
Sepulcher, in which never any Man was laid, lest his Adversaries should say, it
was some other that was Risen, who was Buried there before him; or that he
Arose from the Dead by touching some other Corpse. Observe (5.) The Manner of
our Lord's Funeral, it was hasty, open, and decent; it was performed in haste,
by reason of the streights of Time; the Sabbath was Approaching, and they lay
all Business aside to prepare for that. Learn hence, How much it is our Duty to
dispatch our Worldly Business as early as we can, toward the End of the Week,
that we may be the better prepared to Sanctify the Lord's day, if we live to
enjoy it: Hence it is that we are called upon, to Remember that day before it
comes, and to Sanctify it when it is come. Again, our Lord was Buried openly,
as well as hastily, all Persons had Liberty to be Spectators, lest any should
object, that there was deceit and fraud used in or about our Saviors Buryal;
yet was he also Interred Decently, his Holy Body being wrapped in fine Linen,
and perfumed with Spices, according to the Jewish Custom. Observe, (6.) The
Reasons why our Lord was Buried, seeing he was to Rise again in as short a time
as other Men lie by the Walls; and had his dead Body remained a Thousand Years
un-buryed, it could have seen no Corruption, having never been tainted with
sin, sin is the Cause of the Bodies Corruption: it is sin that makes our Bodies
stink worse than Carrion when they are dead. A Funeral then was not necessary
for Christ's Body, upon the same Accounts that it is necessary for ours. But
(1.) Our Lord was Buried to declare the certainty of his Death, and the Reality
of his Resurrection, and for this Reason did God's Providence Order it, that he
should be Embalmed to cut off all Pretensions; for in this kind of Embalming,
his Mouth, his Ears, and his Nostrils, were all filled with Odours and Spices,
so that there could be no latent principle of Life in him; he being thus Buried
then, did demonstrate him to be certainly Dead. (2.) Christ was Buried to
fulfill the Types and Prophecies that went before concerning him, Jonas being
three days and three nights in the Belly of the Whale, was a Type of Christ's
being three days and three nights in the Heart of the Earth; yea the Prophet
Isa. Chap. 53.9. Declared our Lord's Funeral, and the Manner of it, long before
he was born; he made his Grave with the wicked, and with the Rich in his Death;
pointing by that Expression at this Tomb of Joseph's, who was a Rich Man, and
laid him in the Tomb designed for himself. (3.) He was Buried to complete his
Humiliation; They have brought me to the Dust of Death, says David, a Type of
Christ. This was the lowest step he could possibly descend in his abased State;
lower he could not be laid, and so low his blessed Head must be laid, else he
had not been Humbled to the lowest degree of Humiliation. (4.) Christ went into
the Grave, that he might Conquer Death in its own Territories and Dominions.
His Victory over the Grave, causes his Saints to Triumph and Sing, Oh Grave,
where is thy Destruction? Our dear Redeemer has perfumed the Bed of the Grave,
by his own lying in it; so that a Pillow of down is not so soft to a Believer's
Head, as a pillow of Dust. Observe Lastly, Of what use the Doctrine of our
Lord's Buryal may be unto us his Disciples and Followers; (1.) For Instruction;
Here we see the amazing Depths of our Lord's Humiliation, from what, and to
what his Love brought him? even from the Bosom of his Father, to the Bosom of
the Grave: Oh how does the depth of his Humiliation show us the Sufficiency of
his Satisfaction, and therewith the Heinousness of our Transgression. (2.) For
Consolation against the fears of Death, and the Grave; the Grave Received
Christ, but could not Retain him; Death swallowed him up, as the Fish did
Jonas, but quickly Vomited him up again; and so shall it fare with Christ
Mystical, as it did with Christ Personal, as it was done to the Head, so shall
it be done to the Members; the Grave could not long keep him, it shall not
always keep us; as his Body Rested in Hope, so shall ours also, and although we
see Corruption, yet shall we not always lie under the Power of Corruption; in
short, Christ's lying in the Grave, has Changed and Altered the Nature of the
Grave; it was a Prison before, a Bed of Rest now; a Loathsome Grave before, a
perfumed Bed now; he whose Head is in Heaven, need not fear to put his Feet
into the Grave; Awake, and sing, thou that dwell in the Dust, for the enmity
of the Grave is slain by Christ. (3.) For our imitation: Let us study and
endeavor to be Buried with Christ, in respect of our sins I mean, Romans 6.4.
Buried with him into Death: Our sins should be as a dead Body in several
Respects. Are dead Bodies removed out of the Society of Men? so should our sins
be removed far from us. Do dead Bodies in the Grave spend and consume by
Degrees? so should our sins daily. Will Dead Bodies grow every day more and
more Loathsome to others? so should our sins be to our selves. Do dead Bodies
wax out of Memory, and are quite Forgotten? so should our sins also, in respect
of any delight that we take in the remembering of them; we should always
Remember our Sins to our Humiliation, but never think or speak of them with the
least Delight or Satisfaction, for this in God's Account is a new Commission of
them, and lays us under an aggravated Guilt and Condemnation.

CHAP. XVI.
This last Chapter of St. Mark's Gospel contains the History of our Saviors
Resurrection, and gives us an Account of what he did upon Earth, between the
Time of his Triumphant Resurrection, and his Glorious Ascension.

1 AND when the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the Mother of James,
and Salome, had brought sweet Spices that they might come and anoint him. 2 And
very early in the Morning, in the first day of the week, they came unto the
Sepulcher, at the Rising of the Sun.

The Lord of Life was Buried on the Friday, in the Evening of that Day on which
he was Crucified, and his Holy Body Rested in the silent Grave all the next
day, and some part of the day following. Thus rose he again the third day,
neither sooner, nor later; not sooner, lest the truth of his Death should have
been questioned, that he did not dye at all; and not later, lest the Faith of
his Disciples should have failed. Accordingly when the Sabbath was past, Mary
Magdalene getting the other Women together, she and they set out before day, to
visit the Holy Sepulcher; and about Sunrising they get to it, intending with
their Spices and Odours farther to Embalm their Lord's Body. Here Observe (1.)
That although the Hearts of these Holy Women did burn with an ardent Zeal and
Affection to their Crucified Lord, yet the Commanded Duties of the Sabbath are
not omitted by them; they keep close, and silently spend that Holy Day in a
Mixture of Grief and Hope. A good Pattern of Sabbath-Sanctification, and worthy
of our Christian imitation. Observe (2.) These Holy Women go, but not
empty-handed: She that had bestowed a costly Alabaster upon Christ, whilst
alive, has prepared no less precious Odours for him now dead; thereby paying
their last Homage to our Savior's Corpse: But what need of Odours to Persume a
Body which could not see Corruption? True, his Holy Body did not want them, but
the Love and Affection of his Friends could not withold them. Observe, (3.)
How great a Tribute of Respect and Honor is due and payable to the Memory of
these Holy Women, for their great Magnanimity and Courage. They followed Christ
when his Cowardly Disciples left him; they accompanied him to his Cross, they
followed his Hearse to the Grave, when his Disciples durst not appear; and now
very early in the Morning they go to Visit his Sepulcher, fearing neither the
Darkness of the Night, nor the presence of the Watchmen. Learn hence, That
Courage is the special Gift of God, and if he gives it to the feebler Sex, even
to Timorous and fearful Women, it is not in the power of Men to make them
afraid.

3 And they said among themselves, Who shall roll us away the stone from the
door of the Sepulcher? 4 And when they looked, they saw that the Stone was
Rolled away, for it was very great. 5 And entering into the Sepulcher, they saw
a young Man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white Garment, and
they were afraid. 6 And he says unto them, Be not affrighted, ye seek Jesus of
Nazareth, which was Crucified, he is Risen, he is not here, behold the place
where they laid him. 7 But go your way, tell his Disciples and Peter, that he
goes before you into Galilee, there shall ye see him, as he said unto you. 8
And they went out quickly, and fled from the Sepulcher, for they trembled and
were amazed neither said they any thing to any Man, for they were afraid.

Observe here (1.) With what Pomp and Triumph does our Lord Arise? An Angel is
sent from Heaven to roll away the Stone; But could not Christ have Risen
without the Angels Help? yes doubtless; he that Raised himself, could surely
have Rolled away the Stone; but God thinks fit to send an Officer from Heaven,
to open the Prison-door of the Grave, and by setting our Surety at Liberty,
proclaims our Debt to the Divine Justice fully satisfied. Besides it was fit
that the Angels who had been Witnesses of our Savior's Passion, should also be
Witnesses of his Resurrection. Observe, (2.) Our Lord's Resurrection declared,
He is Risen, he is not here. Almighty God never intended that the darling of
his Soul, should be left in an obscure Sepulcher; He is not here, said the
Angel, where you laid him, where you left him; Death has lost its Prey, and the
Grave has lost its Prisoner. Observe, (3.) It is not said, He is not here, for
he is Raised, but he is Risen; the word imports the Active Power of Christ, or
the self-quickning Principle by which Christ Raised himself from the Dead, Acts
1.3. He showed himself alive after his Passion. Hence Learn, That it was the
Divine Nature, or Godhead of Christ, which Raised the Humane Nature, from Death
to Life; others were Raised from the Grave by Christ's Power, but he Raised
himself by his own Power. Observe (4.) The Testimony or Witness given of our
Lord's Resurrection, that of an Angel in Humane Shape, A young man clothed in
a long white Garment. But why is an Angel the first Publisher of our Savior's
Resurrection? Surely the Dignity of our Lord's Person, and the Excellency of
his Resurrection required that it should be thus Published: How very
serviceable and officious the Holy Angels were in Attending upon our Savior in
the days of his Flesh, see in the Note on Mat. 28.6, 7. Observe (5.) The
Persons to whom our Lord's Resurrection was first declared and made known, to
Women, to the two Mary's. But why to Women, and why to these Women? why to
Women? because God will make choice of weak Means, for producing great Effects;
knowing, that the weakness of the Instrument, redounds to the greater honor of
the Agent. In the whole dispensation of the Gospel, God intermixes Divine Power
with Humane Weakness: Thus the conception of Christ was by the power of the
Holy Ghost, but his Mother a poor Woman, a Carpenters Spouse; so the
crucifixion of Christ was in much meanness and outward baseness, being
crucified between two Thieves. But the powers of Heaven and Earth trembling,
the Rocks rending, the Graves opening, showed a mixture of Divine Power. Thus
here, God will honor what instruments he pleases for the accomplishment of his
own purposes; but why to these Women the two Marys is the first discovery made
of our Saviors Resurrection? possibly it was a reward for their magnanimity
and masculine Courage; these Women clave to Christ when the Apostles forsook
him, they assisted at his Cross, they attended at his Funeral, they waited at
his Sepulcher; these Women had more Courage than the Apostles, therefore God
makes them Apostles to the Apostles. This was a tacit Rebuke, a secret check
given to the Apostles, that they should be thus out done by Women; these holy
Women went before the Apostles in the last Services that were done for Christ,
and therefore the Apostles here come after them in their Rewards and Comforts.
Obs. (6.) The Evidence which the Angels offers to the Women to evince and prove
the verity and certainty of our Savior's Resurrection, namely, by an appeal to
their senses, behold the place where they laid him; the senses when rightly
disposed are the proper judges of all sensible Objects, and accordingly Christ
himself did appeal to his Disciples senses concerning the Truth of his own
Resurrection, Behold my Hands, and my Feet that it is I my self; and indeed if
we must not believe our Senses, we shall want the best external Evidence for
the proof of the certainty and truth of the Christian Religion, namely, the
Miracles wrought by Christ and his Apostles: For what Assurance can we have of
the reallity of those Miracles, but from our Senses, therefore says our
Savior, if ye believe not me, yet believe the works that I do, that is, the
Miracles which I have wrought before your Eyes. Now as my Senses tell me that
Christ's Miracles were true, so they assure me, that the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation is false. From the whole, Note, That the the Lord Jesus
Christ by the Omnipotent Power of his Godhead, revived and rose again from the
dead, the third day to the Terror and Consternation of his Enemies, and the
unspeakable joy and consolation of Believers. Observe lastly, the quick
dispatch made of the joyful news of our Lord's Resurrection to the sorrowful
Disciples, go tell the Disciples, says the Angel, go tell my Brethren, says
Christ, Matthew. 28.10. Christ might have said, go tell those Apostate Apostles
that cowardly left me in my danger, that durst not own me in the Highpriests
Hall, that durst not come within the shadow of my Cross, nor within sight of my
Sepulcher; not a word of this by way of upbraiding them for their late shameful
Cowardice, but all words of Kindness. Go tell my Brethren, where Note, That
Christ calls them Brethren after his Resurrection and Exaltation, thereby
showing that the change of his condition had wrought no change in his Affection
toward his poor Disciples, but those that were his Brethren before in the time
of his Abasement, are so still after his Exaltation and Advancement; Go tell my
Brethren, says Christ, Go tell my Disciples and Peter, says the Angel. Where
Note, That St. Peter is here particularly named, not because of his primacy and
superiority over the rest of the Apostles as the Church of Rome would have it;
but because he had denied Christ, and for that denial was swallowed up with
sorrow and stood most in need of comfort; therefore says Christ by the Angel,
speak particularly to Peter, be sure that his sad heart be comforted with this
joyful news, that he may know that I am friends with him, notwithstanding his
late Cowardice. Tell the Disciples and Peter; that he goes before you into
Galilee; but why into Galilee? because Jerusalem was now a forsaken place, a
people abandoned to destruction, but Galilee was a place where Christ's
Ministry was more acceptable. Such places shall be most Honored with Christ's
presence, where his Gospel is most accepted.

9 Now when Jesus was risen from the dead early, the first day of the week he
appeared first to Mary Magdalen out of whom he had cast seven Devils 10 And she
went and told them that had been with him, as they mourned and wept. 11 And
they, when they had heard that he was alive, and had been seen of her, believed
not. 12 After that he appeared in another form unto two of them, as they walked
and went into the Country. 13 And they went and told it unto the residue,
neither believed they them. 14 Afterward he appeared unto the eleven, as they
sat at meat, and upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart,
because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen.

An account is here given of a threefold appearance of Christ after his
Resurrection. (1). To Mary Magdalen, not to the Virgin Mary; and it is
observable that our Blessed Savior, after his Resurrection, first appeared to
Mary Magdalen a grievous Sinner, for the comfort of all true Penitents. Mary
goes immediately to his Disciples whom she finds weeping and mourning, and
tells them, she had seen the Lord, but they believed her not. The second
appearance was to the two Disciples going into the Country, that is, into the
Village of Emaus; as they were in the way, Jesus joyneth himself to their
Company, but there Eyes were holden by the power of God, that they did not
discern him in his own proper shape, but apprehended him to be another Person
whom they conversed with. His third appearance was to the Eleven as they sat at
Meat, whom he upbraids with their unbelief, and to convince them effectually,
that he was risen from the dead, he eats with them a piece of a broiled Fish,
and of an Honey Comb, not that he needed it, being he was now become immortal,
but to assure them he had still the same Body. From the whole, Note, how
industriously our Lord endeavors to confirm his Disciples Faith in the
Doctrine of his Resurrection, so slack and backward they were to believe that
the Messiah was risen again from the dead, that all the predictions of
Scripture, all the assurances they had received from our Savior's mouth, yea,
all the appearances of our Savior to them, after ^e was actually risen from
the dead, were little enough to confirm and establish them in the certain
belief that he was risen from the dead.

15 And he said unto them, go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to
every Creature. 16 He that believes, and is baptized shall be saved, but he
that believed not, shall be damned.

Here our Savior gives commission to his Disciples to congregate and gather a
Christian Church out of all Nations, to go forth and preach the Gospel to every
Creature, that is, to all reasonable Creatures that are capable of it, not to
the Jews only, but to the Gentiles also, without any distinction of Country,
Age or Sex whatsoever. Learn thence, that the Apostles and first planters of
the Gospel, had a commission from Christ to go amongst the Pagan Gentiles
without limitation or distinction, to instruct them in the savin^ mysteries of
the Gospel. The second Branch of their commission was to Baptize, where observe
the encoura^ing promise made by Christ, he that Believes and is Baptized shall
^e saved, that is, he that receives and embraces the Gospel preached by you,
and thereupon becomes a Proselite and Disciple of Christ, and receives Baptism
the Seal of the new Covenant, shall for all his former sins receive Pardon, and
upon his perseverance obtain Eternal Life; but he that stands out obstinately
and impenitently, shall certainly be damned. The two damning sins under the
Gospel are Infidelity and Hypocrisy, not receiving Christ for Lord and Savior
by some, or doing this feignedly by others, happy are they in whom the
preaching of the Gospel produces such a Faith as is the parent and principle of
Obedience, he that so believes and is Baptized shall be saved.

17 And these signs shall follow them that believe, in my Name shall they cast
out Devils, they shall speak with new tongues. 18 They shall tkae up Serpents,
and if they drink any thing, it shall not hurt them, they shall lay deadly
hands on the sick and they shall recover.

Here we have a gracious promise of Christ, that in order to the spreading and
propagating of the Gospel as far as may be, the Spirit should be poured forth
abundantly from on high upon the Apostles, and thereby they should be enabled
to work Miracles, to cast out Devils, to speak strange Languages, which we read
they did, Acts 2. And this power of working Miracles continued in the Church an
hundred years after Christ's Ascension, until Christianity had taken rooting
in the hearts of men, Ireneus lib. 2. chapter 58. says, that many believers besides
the Apostles had this power of working Miracles; as new set plants are watered
at first, till they have taken fast rooting, so that the Christian Faith might
grow the faster: God watered it with miracles at its first Plantation. Yet
Observe, That all the Miracles which they had power to work, were healing and
beneficent, not terrifying judgments, but acts of kindness and mercy; it was
our Saviors design to bring over persons to Christianity by Lenity, Mildness
and Gentleness, not to affright them into a compliance with astonishing
judgments which might affect their fear, but little influence their Faith; for
the will and consent of persons to the principles of any Religion (especially
the Christian) is like a royal fort which must not be stormed by violence, but
taken by surrender.

19 So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into
heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.

Here we have that grand Article of our Christian Faith asserted, namely, our
Savior's ascension into Heaven, together with his exaltation there, expressed
by his setting at God's right hand; he ascended now to Heaven in his humane
Nature, for in his Divine Nature he was there already; and it was necessary
that he should thus ascend in order to his own personal Exaltation and
Glorification. When he was on Earth, his Humility, Patience, and Self-denial
were exercised by undergoing God's Wrath, the Devil's Rage, and man's Cruelty.
Now he goes to Heaven that they may be rewarded; he that is a patient Sufferer
upon Earth, shall be a triumphant Conqueror in Heaven, also with respect to his
Church on Earth, was it needful and necessary that our Lord should ascend up
into Heaven; namely, to send down the Holy Spirit upon his Apostles, which he
did at the Feast of Pentecost. If I go not away (says Christ) the Comforter
will not come, but if I depart, I will send him to you; and likewise to be a
powerful Advocate and Intercessor with his Father in Heaven, on the behalf of
his Church and Children here upon Earth, Heb. 9.24. Christ is entered into
Heaven it self, there to appear in the presence of God for us; finally, Christ
ascended into Heaven to give us an assurance, that in due time we should ascend
after him, John 14.2. I go to prepare a place for you, hence the Apostle calls
our Savior, Our forerunner, Heb. 6. v. 19. Now if Christ in his Ascension was
a Forerunner, then there are some to follow after; to the same purpose is that
expression of the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.6. He has made us sit together in heavenly
places in Christ, that is, we are already sat down in him, and ere long shall
sit down by him; we are already sit down in him, as ou^ Head, and shall
hereafter sit down by him as his Members* The only way to this, namely, to
ascend unto and sit down with Christ in Heaven, is to live like him, and to
live unto him here on Earth; If any Man love me, he will follow me, and where I
am there shall als^ my servant be, St. Joh. 12.26.

20 And they went forth and preached every where, the Lord working with them,
and confirming the word with Signs following.

Observe here first the general publication of the Gospel by the Apostles. They
went forth and preached every where. Secondly, the reason of the Efficacy and
Success of it, namely, that Divine and miraculous power which accompanied the
Preaching of it; the Lord wrought with them, and c^nfirmed the word with Signs
following. (1.) Obs. The general publication of the Gospel by the Apostles,
they went forth and Preached every where. The industry of the Holy Apostles was
incredibly great, yet was their success greater then their industry, even
beyond all humane Expectation, which will evidently appear if we consider, (1.)
The vast spreading of the Gospel so far in so short a space of time, for in
thirty Years time after Christ's death, it was spread through the greatest part
of the Roman Empire, and reached as far as Parthia and India. (2.) The
wonderful power and efficacy which the Gospel had upon the lives and manners of
men, the generality of those that entertained the Gospel were obedient to it,
both in word and deed; because Christianity being an hated and persecuted
profession, no man could have any inducement to embrace it that did not resolve
to practice it, and live up unto it. (3.) The weakness and meanness of the
Instruments that were employed in propagating the Gospel, shows the success of
it to be very great and strange; a company of plain and illiterate Men, most of
them destitute of the advantages of Education, and unassisted by the
countenance of any Authority whatsoever; yet did they in a short space draw the
World after them. (4.) The powerful opposition which was raised against the
Gospel, namely, the prejudices of Education, the power of indwelling Lusts, and
also the powers of the World then in being, did strongly combine against it;
yet did Christianity bear up against all this opposition, and made its way
thorough all the resistance that the Lusts and prejudices of Men armed with the
power and authority of the whole world could make against it. (5.) The great
discouragements that Men were then under to embrace the Gospel and the
Christian profession; all the evils of this World threatened them, Mockings and
Scourgings, Banishment and Imprisonment, Reproach and Ruin, death in all its
fearful shapes was presented to them, to deter them from embracing this
Religion. Observe therefore, (2.) The reason of this wonderful Success the Lord
wrought with them, and confirmed the word with Signs following, the Lord
wrought with them; this points at the inward operation of the Holy Spirit upon
the minds of Men, and confirmed the word with Signs, that is, confirmed their
Doctrine with Miracles, such as healing Diseases, raising the Dead, casting out
Devils, inflicting corporal Diseases on scandalous persons, and sometimes Death
it self; from the whole we gather the Truth and Divinity of the Christian
Religion, that it was and is certainly of God, and therefore never could, never
can be overthrown.

The End of St. Mark.
EXPOSITORY NOTES WITH PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS UPON The Holy Gospel ACCORDING TO
ST. LUKE.

St. LUKE xxiii. 45, 46, 47. Then opened he their Understandings, that they
might understand the Scriptures. And he said unto them, Thus it is written, and
thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the Third day, and
that Repentance and Remission of sins should be Preached in his name among all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

EXPOSITORY NOTES, WITH PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS UPON The Holy Gospel ACCORDING
TO ST. LUKE.
CHAP. I.
1 FOrasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of
those things which are most surely believed amongst us. 2 Even as they
delivered them unto us, which from the beginning were eyewitnesses and
ministers of the word. 3 It seemed good to me also, having had perfect
understanding of all things from the very first, to write unto thee in order,
most excellent Theophilus. 4. That thou may know the certainty of those
things wherein thou have been instructed.

This Gospel, together with the Acts of the Apostles, were written by St. Luke,
the beloved Physician and Companion of St. Paul, who wrote, as did the rest of
the Evangelists, by the special Direction and Inspiration of the Holy Ghost;
where we may profitably Remark, the wonderful wisdom of God, who in Order to
the Confirming of our Faith in the Truth of the Gospel, raised up a sufficient
number of Witnesses to testify the verity and infallible certainty of all that
the Gospel delivers to us. Now this Evangelist St. Luke Dedicates this Gospel,
together with the Acts of the Apostles, to Theophilus, who was, as some think,
an Honorable Senator; or a Renowned and eminent Person in the Church, as
Others suppose: But many take the word Theophilus not for a proper Name, but
common Name, signifying every one that Loves God; to whom St. Luke addresses
his Discourse. The first four Verses of this Chapter are a Preface to the
following History, and acquaint us with the Reasons which induced St. Luke to
write, namely, because diverse Persons in that Age, had imprudently and
inconsiderately set upon writing Gospels, without direction from the Spirit of
God, whose Errors and Mistakes were to be corrected by a true Narrative. This
St. Luke declare he was able to make, having had perfect Understanding and
Knowledge of the Truth of those things he was about to Relate; partly by his
familiarity with St. Paul, and partly by his Conversation with the other
Apostles, who constantly attending our Savior, were Eye, and Ear-witnesses of
those things that are the Subject matter of the ^^^hing-History. Hence learn
(1.) That there were some Apocryphal Writings (or Writings which were not of
Divine Authority) Re^^ting to the New Testament, as well as to the Old, as the
Books of Asher, Gad, and Idd^, are recited in the Old Testament, but were never
received into the Canon of the Scripture. So were there some Gospels or
Historical Relations of our Savior's Life and Actions, wrote by Persons which
the Church never received, as not having the impress of God's Ordination. Note,
Secondly, that the Gospels which St. Luke and the other Evangelists wrote, have
nothing of fallibility or uncertainty in them: they wrote nothing but what they
either heard, or saw themselves, or else received from those that were Eye and
Ear-witnesses of matter of Fact. It seemed good to me to write, having had
perfect knowledge of all things from the very first.

5 There was in the days of Herod the king of Judea, a certain Priest named
Zacharias, of the course of Abia, and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron,
and her name was Elizabeth.

In this and the following Verses, the Holy Ghost gives us a Description of
John the Baptist, who was the Harbinger, and Forerunner of our Savior Christ;
he is described, first by his Parentage, being the Son of Zacharias and
Elizabeth. This Zacharias was a Priest who had a Course in the Temple, or a
right to officiate there when it came to his turn; for we read in 1 Chronicles.
24.10. That David appointed the Priests the Sons of Aaron, to minister by
Turns, and divided them into four and Twenty Courses. Every one Ministering in
the Temple by their Weeks. Here Note, That Zacharias a Priest, and attending
the Service of the Temple, was a married Person, having one of the Daughters of
Aaron to Wife, according to the command of God, Levit. 21.14. where the Priest
is required to marry one of his own Tribe. Learn hence, That neither the
Priests under the Law did, nor the Ministers of Christ under the Gospel ought
to abhor the Marriage Bed; nor judge themselves too pure for an Institution of
their Maker. The Doctrine of the Church of Rome, which forbids to marry, St.
Paul calls, a Doctrine of Devils.

6 And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord blameless.

Obs. here (1.) The sweet harmony of this Religious Couple in the ways of God,
They both walked in the commandments of God. It is an happy match when Husband
and Wife are one, not only in themselves, but in the Lord. Obs. (2.) the
Universality of their Holiness and Obedience, they walked, not in some, but in
all the Ordinances and Commandments of the Lord. Such as will approve
themselves to be sincerely religious, must make Conscience of every known Duty,
and endeavor to obey every Precept and Command of God. Obs. (3.) The high
Commendation which the Holy Spirit of God gives of this their Religious Course
of Holiness and Obedience, They are pronounced Blameless. He that lives
without gross Sin in a Gospel Sense, lives blameless, and without Sin. To live
without gross Sin is our Holiness on Earth, to be without any sin, will be our
Happiness in Heaven. Many sins may be in him that has true Grace, but he that
has Truth of Grace, cannot allow himself in any Sin. Such are the
Condescensions of the Covenant of Grace, that sincere Obedience is called
Perfection. Truth of Grace is our perfection on Earth, but in Heaven we shall
have Perfection as well as Truth. Obs. Lastly, a pattern for their imitation
who wait at God's Altar, and are employed in and about Holy Things, such ought
all the Ministers of the Gospel, and their Wives to be, what Zachary and
Elizabeth are here said to be; namely, Blameless; that is very innocent and
inoffensive in their daily Conversation.

7 And they had no child, because that Elizabeth was barren; and they both were
now well stricken in years.

Observe here (1.) This Holy pair Zachary and Elizabeth, were fruitful in Holy
Obedience, but Barren in Children: a Fruitful Soul, and a Barren Womb are
Consistent, and do oft-times meet together. This Religious Couple made no less
progress in Virtue then in Age, and yet their Virtue could not make their Age
Fruitful. Obs. (2.) Elizabeth was barren in the Flower of her Age, but much
more so in old Age. Here was a double obstacle, and consequently a double
instance of Divine Power in the Birth of John the Baptist, showing him to be a
Prophet very extraordinary, and miraculously sent by God. Obs. (3.) That when
Almighty God in old Times did long delay to give in the Blessing of Children to
Holy Women, he rewarded their Expectation with the Birth of some Eminent and
Extraordinary Person. Thus Sarah after long Barrenness brought forth an Isaac,
Rebeccah, a Jacob, Rachel a Joseph, Hannah a Samuel, and Elizabeth St. John the
Baptist. When God makes his People wait long for a particular Mercy, if he sees
it good for them, he gives it in at last with a double Reward for their
Expectation.

8 And it came to pass, that while he executed the Priests office before God,
in the order of his course. 9 According to the custom of the Priests office,
his lot was to burn incense, when he went into the Temple of the Lord.

Here Note (1.) That none but a Son of Aaron might offer Incense to God in the
Temple; and not every Son of Aaron neither, nay, not any of them at all
Seasons. God is a God of Order, and hates Confusion, no less than Irreligion.
And as under the Law of old, so under the Gospel at this Day, no man ought to
take this honor upon him, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. Obs.
(2.) That there were Courses of Ministration in the Legal Services, in which
the Priests did relieve one another weekly. God never purposed to burden any
of his Servants with Devotion, nor is he pleased when his Service is made
burdensome, either to, or by his Ministers. Many of the Sons of Aaron served
together in the Temple, according to the variety of their Employments, which
were assigned them by Lot: and accordingly it fell out at this time, that
Zachary was chosen by Lot to burn Incense. Obs. (3.) That Morning and Evening,
twice a day, the Priests offered up their Incense to God, that both parts of
the day might be Consecrated to him, who was the Maker and Giver of their Time.
This Incense offered up under the Law, represents our Prayers offered to God
under the Gospel. These Almighty God expects that we should (all his Church
over) send up to him, Morning and Evening. The Ejaculatory Elevations of our
Hearts should be perpetual, but if Twice a day we do not present God with our
Solemn Invocations; we make the Gospel less officious then the Law; and can we
reasonably think that Almighty God will accept of less now then would content
him then?

10 And the whole Multitude of the people were praying without, at the time of
Incense.

Observe here (1.) While the Incense was burning, the People were Praying;
whilst the Priest sends up his Incense in the Temple within, the People send up
their Prayers in the Court without. The Incense of the Priest, and the Prayers
of the People, meet; and go up to Heaven together. Hence Learn; That it is a
Blessed thing when both Minister and People jointly offer up their Prayers for
each other at the same Throne of Grace, and mutually strive together in their
S^pplications one with, and one for another. Obs. (2.) How both Priest and
People keep their place and Station; the Priest Burns Incense in the Holy
place, and the People offer up their Prayers in the outward Court. The people
might no more go into the Holy place to offer up their Prayers, then Zachary
might go into the Holy of Holies to burn Incense. Whilst the Partition Wall
stood betwixt Jew and Gentile, there was also a partition betwixt the Jews and
themselves. But now under the Gospel every Man is a Priest to God, and may
enter the Holy of Holies by the Blood of Jesus. But Lord! What are we the
better for this Great and Gracious freedom of Access to Thee, if we want Hearts
to prize and to improve our Privilege.

11 And there appeared unto him an Angel of the Lord, standing on the right
side of the Altar of Incense.

Whilst Zachary was praying to God, an Angel appears to Zachary; when we are
nearest God, the Good Angels are nighest us; they are most with us, when we are
most with him. The presence of Angels with us is no Novelty, but their
Apparition to us is so. They are always with us, but rarely seen by us. Let our
Faith see them, whom our Senses cannot discern: Their assumed Shapes do not
make them more present, but only more visible. Obs. (2.) The place as well as
the time where the Angel appeared, in the Temple and at the Altar, and on the
right side of the Altar of Incense. As the Holy Angels are always present with
us in our Devotions, so especially in Religious Assemblies, as in all places,
so most of all in God's House; They rejoice to be with us, whilst we are with
God, but they turn their Faces from us when we go about our Sins.

12 And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell upon him.

It was partly the suddenness, partly the unexpectedness, and partly the Glory
of the Apparition, that affrighted this Good Man. Glorious and sudden
Apparations do affright even the holiest and best of Men. We cannot bear the
sight and presence of an Angel without Consternation and Fear in this our frail
and sinful State. Oh happy hour, when mortality, and Sin being taken out of our
Natures, we shall not only behold the Glorified Angels without fear, but the
Glorious God, with Delight and Love. Lord! let me now see Thee by Faith,
hereafter by sight. Sit in alio Seculo, non in Hoc! visio tua, merces mea.

13 But the Angel said unto him, fear not Zacharias: for thy prayer is heard,
and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shall call his name John.

Observe here (1.) How Apprehensive this good Angel was of Zachary's Surprising
fear, and encourages him against it. The Holy Angels, though they do not express
it in words, yet they pity our frailties, and suggest Comfort to us. The Evil
Angels if they might, would kill us with Terror: The good Angels labor
altogether for our Tranquillity and cheerfulness. The Angel said unto him, fear
not. Obs. (2.) the Comfortable words spoken by the Angel to Zacharias, Thy
prayer is heard, and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a Son. No doubt Zachary
and Elizabeth had often prayed for a Child, and now God sends them one, when
they least expected it. Learn hence, That sometimes God gives in a Mercy to us
when we least expect it; yea, when we have given over looking for it. No doubt
this was the Case here. Zachary and Elizabeth being both well stricken in Age.
Obs. (3.) the Name which the Angel directs Zachary to give his Son; Thou shall
call his name John, which signifies Gracious, because he was to open the
Kingdom of Grace, and to preach the Grace of the Gospel through Jesus Christ.
The giving of significant names to Children has been an ancient and pious
practice; Names which either carried a Remembrance of Duty, or of Mercy.

14 And thou shall have joy and gladness, and many shall rejoice at his birth.
15 For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink neither
wine, nor strong drink, and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from
his mothers womb. 16 And many of the Children of Israel shall he turn to the
Lord their God. 17 And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias,
to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the just, to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.

Here the Angel declares to Zachary what kind of Son should be born unto him,
even one of eminent Endowments, and designed for extraordinary Services. The
proof of Children makes them either the Blessings or Crosses of their parents.
What greater comfort could Zachary desire in a child then is here promised to
him? (1.) he hears of a Son that should bring joy to himself, and many others,
even to all that did expect the coming of the Messiah, whose forerunner the
Baptist was. (2.) That he should be great in the sight of the Lord, that is, a
Person of great Eminency, and great Usefulness in the Church. A Person of great
Riches and Reputation is great in the sight of Men; but the Man of great
ability and usefulness, the Man of great Integrity and Serviceableness, he is
truly great in the sight of the Lord. They are little Men in the sight of the
Lord, that live in the World to little purposes, who do little Service for God,
and bring little Honor and Glory to him: But the Man that does all the
possible Service he can for God, and the utmost Good that he is capable of
doing to all Mankind; he is a person great in the sight of the Lord; and such
was the Holy Baptist. (3.) It is foretold that he should drink neither Wine nor
strong drink, that is, that he should be a very Temperate and Abstemious
Person, living after the manner of the Nazarites, though he was not separated by
any Vow of his own, or his Parents; but by the special designation and
appointment of God only. It was forbidden the Priests under the Law to drink
either Wine or strong Drink, upon pain of Death, during the time of their
Ministration, Levit. 10.9. And the Ministers of Christ under the Gospel, are
forbidden to be lovers of Wine, 1 Timothy 3.3. (4.) He shall be filled with the
Holy Ghost from his Mothers Womb; That is, he shall be furnished abundantly
with the extraordinary Gifts and sanctifying Graces of the Holy Spirit, which
shall very early appear to be in him, and upon him. (5.) His High and
Honorable Office is declared, That he should go before the Messiah, as his
Harbinger and Forerunner, with the same Spirit of Zeal and Courage against
Sin, which was found in the old Prophet Elias, whom he did so nearly resemble.
(6.) The great Success of his Ministry is foretold, namely, That he should turn
the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of
the just; That is, the Hearts of the Jews to the Gentiles, say some, that he
should bring Men (say others) even the most disobedient and rebellious
Pharisees and Sadduces, Publicans and Sinners unto Repentance, and to the
minding of Justice and Righteousness, and all moral duties; and thus he made
ready a people for the Lord. By fitting men to receive Christ upon his own
Terms and Conditions; namely, Faith, and Repentance. From the whole Note, That
those whom Almighty God designs for eminent Usefulness in his Church, he
furnishes with Endowments suitable to their Employments; and when he calls to
extraordinary Service, comes in with more then Ordinary Assistance. Here was
the Holy Baptist extraordinarily called, and as extraordinarily furnished for
his Office and Ministry.

18 And Zacharias said unto the Angel, whereby shall I know this, for I am an
old man, and my wife well stricken in years? 19 And the Angel answering said
unto him, I am Gabriel that stand in the presence of God, and am sent to speak
unto thee, and to show thee these glad tidings. 20 And behold thou shall be
dumb, and not able to speak, until the day that these things shall be
performed, because thou believe not my words, which shall be fulfilled in
their season. 21 And the people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that he
tarried so long in the Temple. 22 And when he came out, he could not speak unto
them: and they perceived that he had seen a Vision in the Temple: for he
beckned unto them, and remained speechless.

Observe here, Zachary being slow to believe so strange a Message, ask the
Angel by what Sign he should know that this thing, so far above the ordinary
Course of Nature, should come to pass. The Angel answers, that he was dispatched
by God as a Messenger extraordinary to declare this good News to him. And
seeing he was so hard to believe it, and required a Sign, he should have it,
but such an one as should be a punishment of his unbelief, as well as a Sign to
confirm his faith; namely, he should from thence forward, to the Birth of the
Child, be dumb and deaf, as the Original word signifies; because he had not
hearkened to the Angels Speech, he was struck deaf, and because he had gainsaid
it, he was made dumb. Learn hence, That the word of God in the mouth of his
Messengers, is God's own word, and as such to be received and believed. (2.)
That not believing their word is a sin which God will severely punish; it is
all one not to believe God, and not to believe the Messengers of God speaking
from him: Some Expositors will have this Dumbness of Zachary to be
prefigurative. The Priest at the dismission of the People, when the Service of
the Temple was finished, was to pronounce the Blessing Recorded, Numb. 6.24,
25. which when Zachary was about to do, he is struck dumb, and cannot perform
it. Signifying thereby, that the silencing of the Levitical Priesthood was now
at hand; that they must expect another kind of Worship, and that he who was to
bless indeed, namely, the Messiah was near at hand. Observe lastly, That though
Zachary ceased to speak, yet he did not cease to minister, he takes not his
dumbness for a dismission, but stays out the eight days of his Course, knowing
that the service of his heart and hand would be accepted of that God which had
bereaved him of his Tongue. Those powers which we have, we must make use of in
the public Service of God, who will accept us according to what we have;
pardoning our Infirmity, and rewarding our Sincerity.

23 And it came to pass, that as soon as the days of his ministration were
accomplished, he departed to his own house. 24 And after those days, his wife
Elizabeth conceived, and hid her self five months, saying: 25 Thus has the
Lord dealt with me, in the days wherein he looked on me, to take away my
reproach among men.

The Priests during the time of their Administration, had their Lodgings in
Buildings appertaining to the Temple. Zachary having ended his Administration,
leaves his Lodgings and returns to his House, where his Wife Elizabeth
conceiving, she hides her self; that is, Retires from Company, partly to
prevent the Discourse of people, until it was out of all doubt that she had
conceived: And partly to give her self opportunity of returning her Thankful
Acknowledgments unto God, who had given her this Miraculous Mercy; and had
thereby taken away her Reproach of Barrenness, which was so heavy and
insupportable among the Jews. Note here two things, (1.) How piously Elizabeth
ascribes this mercy to the power of God. Thus has the Lord dealt with me. It Is
God that keeps the Key of the Womb in his own hand, and makes the Fruit of it
his Reward, and therefore Children are to be owned as his special Gift. Note
(2.) how great a Reproach Bodily Barrenness is, in the sight of Man; but not so
great as Spiritual Barrenness in the sight of God: For this is at once a
Reproach to God, a Reproach to Religion, a Reproach to Professors, and to our
selves.

26 And in the sixth month, the Angel Gabriel was sent from God, unto a city of
Galilee, named Nazareth. 27 To a Virgin espoused to a man, whose name was
Joseph, of the house of David, and the Virgins name was Mary. 28 And the Angel
came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favored, the Lord is
with thee, blessed art thou among women. 29 And when she saw him, she was
troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind, what manner of Salutation this
should be. 30 And the Angel said unto her, fear not, Mary: for thou have found
favor with God. 31 And behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bring
forth a Son: and shall call his name Jesus. 32 He shall be great, and shall be
called the Son of the Highest. And the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne
of his Father David. 33 And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever:
and of his kingdom there shall be no end.

In this History of our Saviors miraculous and immaculate Conception, we have
several things Observeable, as (1.) The Messenger sent from Heaven to publish
the News of the Conception of the Son of God, an Angel: an evil Angel was the
first Author of our Ruin: a good Angel could not be the Author of our
Restoration, but is the joyful Reporter of it: Obs. (2.) The Angels Name,
Gabriel, which signifies the power of God: The same Angel who had many hundred
years before declared to the Prophet Daniel, the Coming of the Messiah. Obs.
(3.) The place which the Angel is sent unto, Nazareth, an obscure place; little
taken notice of, yea a City in Galilee, out of which arises no Prophet, even
there does the God of Prophets condescend to be Conceived. No blind corner of
Nazareth can hide the Blessed Virgin from the Angel. The favors of God will
find out his Children wherever they are withdrawn. Obs. (4.) The Person whom
the Angel is sent unto, To a Virgin espoused, whose name was Mary. For the
Honor of Virginity, Christ chose a Virgin for his Mother; for the Honor of
Marriage, a Virgin espoused to an Husband. Obs. (5.) The Message it self; Hail
thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee, Blessed art thou among
Women. Where Note, that the Angel Salutes the Virgin as a Saint, he does not
pray to her as a Goddess. The Church of Rome Idolatrously use these words, as a
Prayer to the Holy Virgin, (saying Ten Ave Marys for one Pater Noster) whereas
they are only a Salutation: declaring that she, above all Women, had the honor
freely conferred by God upon her, to be the mother of the Messiah. The Original
word signifies, not full of Grace, but freely Beloved: Compare Mary with other
Renowned Women, and what had she (besides this favor) more then they? Had she
the Spirit of Prophecy? so had they; had she the Spirit of Sanctification? so
had they: And she had no more immunity and freedom from Sin and Death then
they. Accordingly says the Angel, Blessed art thou among Women: He does not
say, Blessed art Thou above Women: Let the Church of Rome be as copious as they
will in the Commendation of the Mother, so they do not derogate from the Glory
of the Son: But how senseless are they, (1.) in turning a Salutation into a
Prayer, (2.) in making use of these words upon every occasion, which were
spoken by an Angel upon a special occasion. (3.) In applying these words to her
now in Heaven, which suited with her only when she was here on Earth, saying,
full of Grace, to her who is full of Glory; and the Lord is with Thee, to her
that is with the Lord. Obs. (6.) The effect which the Sight and Salutation of
the Angel had upon the Holy Virgin; she was afraid. If Zachary before her were
amazed at the sight of the Angel, much more the Virgin, her Sex subjecting her
to fear. All passions, but particularly the passion of fear, disquiets the
Heart, and makes it unfit to receive the Messages of God. Therefore the Angel
instantly says unto her, fear not, let Joy enter into thy Heart, out of whose
Womb shall come Salvation. Thus the fears of holy Persons do end in Comfort:
Joy was the Errand which the Angel came upon, and not Terror; what little
cause had she to fear the presence of an Angel, who was so highly favored of
him at whom the Angels tremble? But we see the holiest Person on Earth, cannot
bear the presence of an Holy Angel, much less the presence of an Holy God; nor
stand before the manifestations of his Favors: Lord! How unable then will the
wicked be at the Great day, to stand before the manifestation of thy Fury. If
the sight of an Holy Angel now, makes the best of Saints to quake and tremble,
What will the sight of an infinitely Holy and Just God then do? when the wicked
shall be slain by the brightness of his presence. Obs. Lastly, The Character
which the Angel gives of the person that should be Born of the Blessed Virgin,
He shall be Great, and called the Son of the Highest. Great, in respect of his
Person. Great, in respect of his Offices. Great, in respect of his Kingdom. For
God would settle upon him a Spiritual Kingdom, (of which David's Earthly one
was a Type) which shall never be abolished, Though the Administration of it by
the Word and Sacraments shall cease at the day of Judgment, when he shall
deliver up the Kingdom, (in that respect) to his Father. All other Kingdoms
have had, or shall have their Periods, but the Gospel Church, which is Christ's
Kingdom, shall continue, till his Kingdom of Glory be Revealed.

34 Then said Mary to the Angel: How shall this be, seeing I know not a man? 35
And the Angel said unto her, the Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power
of the highest shall over-shadow thee: Therefore also that holy thing which
shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. 36 And behold, thy
cousin Elizabeth, she has also conceived a Son in her old age: and this is the
sixth month with her which is called Barren. 37 For with God nothing shall be
unpossible. 38 And Mary said, Behold, the handmaid of the Lord: be it unto me
according to thy word: and the Angel departed from her.

Observe here (1.) The Virgins question, How shall this be? This question did
not import her denial of the possibility of the thing, but her wonder at the
strangeness of the thing; it proceeded rather from a desire of information,
than from a doubt of Infidelity. Therefore she does not say, this cannot be,
nor how can this be? but how shall this be? She does not distrust, but demand,
how her Virginity should become fruitful, and how she, being a Virgin, could
bring forth a Son? Obs. (2.) The Angels Reply to the Virgins question, The Holy
Ghost shall come upon thee. Where Note, the Angel declares the Author, who, but
not the manner how: The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, but in what way, and
after what manner is not declared: No Mother knows the manner of her Natural
Conception; What presumption had it then been for the Mother of the Messiah, to
have inquired how the Son of God could take Flesh and Blood of his Creature. It
is for none but the Almighty to know those Works which do immediately concern
himself. Obs. (3.) The Holy and Immaculate Conception of our Blessed Redeemer:
The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most High shall
over-shadow thee, wherefore that Holy thing that shall be born of thee, That
is, the Holy Ghost shall prepare and sanctify so much of thy Flesh, Blood, or
Seed, as shall constitute the Body of Christ. For though it was the work of the
whole Trinity, yet it is ascribed particularly to the Holy Ghost,
Sanctification being his peculiar work. And the Title and Epithet of That Holy
Thing, shows the purity and immaculateness of Christ's Humane Nature, and
that none was ever Born thus Holy and Immaculate but Christ only; because none
had ever such a way and means of Conception, but only he, Therefore that Holy
thing shall be called the Son of God, not constituted and made, but evidenced
and declared. Christ was God before he assumed Flesh, even from Eternity; but
but his taking Flesh in this manner evidences him to be the Son of God. Obs.
(4.) The Argument used by the Angel to confirm Many in the Belief of what he
had told her, namely, the wonderful Conception of her Cousin Elizabeth in her
old Age; who was now six Months gone with Child. Where Observe (1.) What an
exact Knowledge God has, and what a particular Notice he takes of all the
Children of men, he knows not only our selves, but our Relations also; Behold
thy Cousin Elizabeth; the knowledge which God has of every Person, and every
Action, is a clear and distinct Knowledge. Note (2.) How the Angel strengthens
her Faith, by a Consideration drawn from the Almighty power of God; With God
nothing shall be unpossible; be it never so strange and difficult, there is no
such way to overcome difficulties, as by strengthening our Faith in the Almighty
power of God. Faith will enable us to assent to Truths, though seemingly
incredible, and to believe the possibility of things though appearingly
impossible. Obs. Lastly, how the Virgin expresses her Faith and Obedience, her
Submission, and entire Resignation to the Divine pleasure, to be disposed of by
God as he thought fit; Behold the Handmaid of the Lord, be it unto me according
to thy word. We hear of no more Objections or Interrogations, but an humble and
submissive Silence. Learn hence, that a Gracious Heart, when once it
understands the pleasure of God, argues no farther, but quietly Rests in a
Believing Expectation of what God will do. All disputations with God, after his
Will is made known and understood, arise from Infidelity and Unbelief. The
Virgin having thus Consented, instantly Conceived by the Over-shadowing Power
of the Holy Ghost.

39 And Mary arose in those days, and went into the Hill-country with haste,
into a City of Judah. 40 And entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted
Elizabeth. 41 And it came to pass, that when Elizabeth heard the Salutation of
Mary, the babe leaped in her womb: and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy
Ghost. 42 And she spoke out with aloud voice, and said, Blessed art thou among
women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. 43 And whence is this to me, that
the mother of my Lord should come to me? 44 For lo: as soon as the voice of thy
Salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy. 45 And
blessed is she that believed, for there shall be a performance of those things
which were told her from the Lord.

Observe here (1.) The Visit made by the Virgin Mary to her Cousin Elizabeth.
The Holy Virgin had understood by the Angel, that Elizabeth was no less akin to
her in Condition, than in Relation; being both Fruitful in Conception; she
hastens into the Hill-country to Visit that Holy Matron: The Two Wonders of the
World were now met under one Roof, to Congratulate their mutual Happiness; only
the meeting of the Saints in Heaven can parallel the meeting of these two
Saints on Earth. Obs. (2.) The design and intention of this Visit, which was
partly to Communicate their Joys each to other, and partly to strengthen the
Faith of each other: Such a Soul as has Christ Spiritually Conceived in it, is
restless, and cannot be quiet till it has imparted its joy. Obs. (3.) The
effect of the Virgins Salutation; She had no sooner Saluted Elizabeth, but the
babe in Elizabeth's womb leaped for joy, doing homage, and paying adoration to
his Lord, who was then in presence. If Elizabeth and her holy Babe thus
rejoiced when Christ came under their Roof, how should our Hearts leap within
us, when the Son of God vouchsafes to come into the Secret of our Souls, not to
visit us for an hour, but to dwell with us, yea to dwell in us, and that for
ever. Obs. (4.) How Elizabeth by an extraordinary Spirit of Prophecy, confirms
what the Angel before had told the Holy Virgin. Blessed (says she) art thou
among Women, and Blessed is the Fruit of thy Womb; and what an honor is this,
that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? Where Note, How Elizabeth
acknowledges the Incarnation of Christ, and the Union of the Divine and Humane
Nature in the person of the Mediator. She acknowledges Christ her Lord, and
Mary to be the Mother of the Son of God. Obs. Lastly, How the Virgin is
pronounced Blessed, not so much for carrying Christ in her Womb by sense, as
for bearing him in her Heart by Faith; Blessed is she that believed. Mary was
not so Blessed in bringing forth Christ, as in Believing in him; yet the
Believing here mentioned, I take to be her firm assent to the Message which was
brought her by the Angel; as if Elizabeth had said, Dumbness was inflicted on
my Husband for his Unbelief of what the Angel said, but Blessed art thou that
did believe the Angel: My Husband a Man, an aged Man, a learned and eminent
Man, a Priest of the most High God; and the Message to him of more appearing
possibility, yet he disbelieved; But thou a Woman, a mean, unlearned Woman, of
a private Condition, and the Message brought most incredible, both to Nature
and Reason, and yet is it believed by thee? Blessed therefore is she that
believed; and know, that as a Reward for thy Faith, all things shall certainly
be performed that were foretold thee from the Lord: Learn hence (1.) It is the
Property of God to do Great and Wonderful things. Our Faith must be Great, and
our Expectation great; great Expectations from God, Honor the greatness of
God. (3.) If our Faith be Great, God's performances will be gracious and full.
Blessed is she that believed, for there shall be a performance of those things
which were told her from the Lord.

46 And Mary said, My soul does magnify the Lord. 47 And my spirit has
rejoiced in God my Savior. 48 For he has regarded the low estate of his
hand-maiden, for behold from henceforth all Generations shall call me Blessed.
49 For he that is mighty has done to me great things, and holy is his name. 50
And his mercy is on them that fear him throughout all generations. 51 He has
showed strength with his arm, he has scattered the proud in the imagination of
their hearts. 52 He has put down the mighty from their Seats, and exalted them
of low degree. 53 He has filled the hungry with good things, and the rich he
has sent empty away. 54 He has helped his servant Israel, in remembrance of
his mercy. 55 As he spoke to our Forefathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for
ever.

This is the first Canticle, or Song of praise Recorded in the New Testament,
composed by the Blessed Virgin with unspeakable Joy, for designing her to be
the Instrument of the Conception and Birth of the Savior of the World: Where
Observe (1.) The manner of her Praise, her Soul and Spirit bear their part in
the work of Thanksgiving, My Soul does magnify, my Spirit has rejoiced. As the
sweetest Music is made in the Belly of the Instrument, so the most delightful
praise arises from the bottom of the Heart. Obs. (2.) The object of her praise;
she does not magnify her self, but the Lord; yea, she does not Rejoice so much
in her Son, as in her Savior. Where Note (1.) That she does implicitly own and
confess her self a Sinner; for none need a Savior but a Sinner: And (2.) by
rejoicing in Christ as her Savior, she declares how she valued her self,
rather by her spiritual Relation to Christ as his Member, than by her natural
Relation to him as his Mother; according to that of St. Austin, Beatior Fuit
Maria percipiendo Christi fidem: quam concipiendo Carnem: She might have been
miserable, notwithstanding she bore him as her Son, had she not Believed in him
as her Savior: therefore she sings, my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.
Obs. (3.) How she admires and magnifies God's peculiar favor toward her self,
in casting an eye upon her Poverty and lowly Condition; that she a poor,
obscure Maid, unknown to the World, should be looked upon with an eye of Regard,
by him that dwells in the highest Heavens. Where Note, That as God magnified
her, she magnified him, ascribing all Honor and Glory to him that had thus
dignified and exalted her, He that is mighty has done for me great things, and
glorified be his name. Obs. (4.) She thankfully takes notice, that it was not
only an high Honor, but a lasting Honor, which was conferred upon her, All
Generations shall call me Blessed. She beholds an infinite lasting Honor
prepared for her, as being the Mother of an Universal and Everlasting Blessing,
which all former Ages had desired, and all succeeding Ages should rejoice in,
and proclaim her Happy for being the Instrument of. Obs. (5.) How the Holy
Virgin passes from the Consideration of her Personal Privileges to the
universal Goodness of God; showing us, that the Mercies and favors of God were
not confined and limited to her self, but his mercy is on all them that fear
him throughout all Generations. She declares the General Providence of God
toward all Persons, his mercy to the pious; his mercy is on all them that fear
him; his justice on the proud; he has put down the mighty from their Seat, and
scattered the proud in the imagination of their Hearts; his Bounty to the poor,
he fills the hungry with good things. Learn hence, the excellency and
advantageous usefulness of the Grace of Humility, how good it is to be meek and
lowly in Heart? This will render us lovely in God's Eye; and though the World
trample upon us, he will exalt us to the admiration of our selves, and the envy
of our despisers. Obs. Lastly, How she magnifies the special Grace of God in
our Redemption, he has helped his Servant Israel, that is, Blessed them with a
Savior, who lived in the Faith, Hope, and Expectation of the promised Messiah;
and this Blessing she declares was (1.) the Result of Great Mercy, he
remembering his mercy has helped his Servant Israel, (2.) The effect of his
Truth and Faithfulness in his Promises; as he promised to our Forefathers
Abraham and his Seed for ever. Learn thence, that the appearance of the
promised Messiah in the Fullness of time; in order to the Redemption and
Salvation of a lost World, it was the Fruit of God's tender Love, and the
effect of his Faithfulness in the promises made of Old to his Church and
Children, he has helped his Servant Israel, in remembrance of his Mercy, as he
spoke to our Forefathers, to Abraham, and to his Seed for ever.

56 And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her own house.
57 Now Elizabeth's full time came that she should be delivered, and she brought
forth her Son. 58 And her neighbors, and her cousins heard, how the Lord had
showed great mercy upon her, and they rejoiced with her.

Two things are here Observable (1.) The civil courtesy of the Virgin Mary
toward her Cousin Elizabeth. She stays with her three Months, probably till
she was Delivered and brought to Bed, not leaving her just at the time of her
Travel, for the Angel told Mary, v. 36. That it was then the sixth Month with
Elizabeth, after which Mary stays with her three Months, which made up the full
time. To visit and accompany our Friends in the time of their Distress, is not
only an act of Civil Courtesy, but of Religion and Piety; not a Matter of
Indifferency but of Duty. James 1.27. Pure Religion and undefiled is this, to
visit in affliction, that is, this is an eminent act and exercise of Religion,
the Evidence and fruit of Sincere Religion; and the Virgins doing this, was an
act and instance of her Piety, as well as of her civil Courtesy. Obs. (2.) The
Religious joy, and Spiritual rejoicing, which the Neighbors and Kindred
express at the lying in of Elizabeth: they did not meet together upon that
great occasion only to eat and drink, and make merry, but they rejoiced that
the Lord had shown great mercy upon her; oh how rarely is this Example followed
in our Age! At the Delivery of the Mother, and at the Birth of the Child, how
little is God taken Notice of? How little is his power magnified, and his
Goodness Celebrated in opening the Womb, in giving strength to bring forth? And
how rarely is this the Subject of Discourse at the Woman's Labors; verily if
the mercy of a Child, and the safe Delivery of the Mother, be not the first and
principal things taken notice of at such Rejoicing Meetings, they look more
like Pagan then Christian Rejoycings.

59 And it came to pass, that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the
child, and they called him Zacharias, after the name of his father. 60 And his
mother answered and said, not so, but he shall be called John. 61 And they said
unto her, there is none of thy kindred that is called by this name. 62 And they
made signs to his Father, how he would have him called, and he asked for a
writing Table, and wrote, saying, his name is John, and they marvelled all. 64
And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue loosed, and he spoke and
praised God. 65 And fear came on all them that dwelt round about, and all these
sayings were noised abroad, throughout all the Hill Country of Judea. 66 And
all they that had heard them, laid them up in their hearts, saying what manner
of child shall this be? and the hand of the Lord was with him.

Observe here (1.) The Circumcision of the Child at eight days old, according
to the Commandment, Genesis 17. where Note, First, the Act Circumcising, Secondly,
the Time, at eight days old. God Commanded every Male Child to be Circumcised,
because the Males by the Foreskin propagate Sin, and convey Original Impurity.
By this Ordinance God gave his People to understand the exceeding filthiness of
Sin, and that Man brings something into the World with him, which ought
presently to be cut off. Note also, the time of Circumcising the Child, at
eight days old, not before, least the Child should be too weak to bear the
pain; and must not be deferred longer, least God interprets the delay to be a
Contempt of the Ordinance. Hence by the way we may Learn, that God did not tie
Salvation to the outward Sacrament, for if the Child had perished, that dyed
uncircumcised, it had been an hard thing to defer Circumcision eight Hours.
It Is not the want, but the Contempt and Neglect of the Sacraments that damns.
It came to pass on the eighth day they came to circumcise the Child; we find in
Scripture the Ordinance appointed, and the time limited, but neither the person
nor the place declared; Moses's Wife circumcised the Child, and that in an Inn,
Ex. 4. A Duty is sometimes positively injoined in the Scriptures, when the
Circumstances belonging to the Duty are undetermined. Thus the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper is appointed by Christ, but the time, the place, the gesture, not
positively commanded, but to be prudentially determined, Obs. (2.) The Name is
given, or at least declared at the time of the Child's Circumcising, and that
by its Parents, His Mother said he, shall be called John. But how did his
Mother know That, when her Husband was dumb? Answ. It Is like her Husband
Zachary had by Writing informed his Wife concerning the whole Vision, and what
Name was imposed upon him by the Angel; therefore she says he shall be called
John, and Zachary ratifies it, his name is John. The Nomination was originally
from the Angel, the Imposition of the Name is now at Circumcision from the
Parents. Obs. (3.) How Ancient a Custom it has been to give Names to Children
according to the Names of their Fathers or Kindred. There is none of thy
Kindred of this name, say they: The Jews made it a part of Religion, to give
suitable Names to their Children, and significant Names. Accordingly they
either gave them Names to put them in remembrance of God's Mercy to them, or of
their Duty to him. Thus Zachary signifies the Remembrance of God; which name
points at God's Mercy in remembering him, and his Duty in remembering God. Well
then, is it usual and useful for Parents to give significant Names to their
Children? then let Children have a Holy Ambition to make good the Signification
of their Names. Thus John signifies the Grace of God; but how will that
Gracious Name rise up in Judgment against that Child that is Graceless? Obs.
(4.) How Zachary's Speech is immediately restored to him upon the naming of his
Child. The Angel, v. 20. told him, he should be dumb till the things he told
him should be performed; and now that they were performed, his Tongue is
loosed, and he praises God, in a most Thankful manner. Obs. (5.) The effect
which all this had upon the Neighborhood; fear came upon all that dwelt round
about them; that is, an awful and Religious fear of God, occasioned by these
miraculous operations; and they laid up these sayings in their hearts, that is,
considered of them, and pondered upon them: It argues a very vain Spirit and
temper of Mind, when we pass over the Observation of God's wonderful Acts with
a slight Regard. The true Reason why we do so little admire the wonderful Works
of God, is because we consider so little of them. Obs. (6.) The special favor
vouchsafed by God to this Child John, The hand of the Lord was with him; that
is, God was in a special manner present with him, to direct and assist him, to
protect and prosper him. The hand of God in Scripture signifies the help of
God, the strength and assistance of God. The hand of Man is a weak and impotent
hand, a short and ineffectual hand, but the hand of God is a strong hand, an
Almighty hand, able to assist and help, able to protect and preserve: The hand
of the Lord was with him; that is, the heart of God, and the help of God, the
Love and Favor of God to support him, and the Power and Providence of God to
protect and preserve him. Lord, let our Hearts be with thee, and then thy
Heart, and thy helping hand will be with us.

67 And his Father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied,
saying, 68 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed
his people. 69 And has raised up an horn of Salvation for us in the house of
his servant David. 70 As he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have
been since the world began. 71 That we should be saved from our Enemies, and
from the hand of all that hate us. 72 To perform the mercy promised to our
forefathers, and to remember his holy Covenant. 73 The Oath which he swear to
our father Abraham. 74 That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out
of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear. 75 In holiness and
righteousness before him all the days of our life. 76 And thou child shall be
called the prophet of the Highest, for thou shall go before the face of the
Lord, to prepare his way. 77 To give knowledge of Salvation unto his people, by
the remission of their sins. 78 Through the tender mercies of our God, whereby
the dayspring from on high has visited us. 79 To give light to them that sit
in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and to guide our feet in the way of
peace.

Here observe (1.) That no sooner was Zachary recovered and restored to his
Speech, but he sings the Praises of his Redeemer, and offers up a Thanksgiving
to God: The best Return we can make to God for the use of our Tongue, for the
giving or restoring of our Speech, is to publish our Creator's Praise, to plead
his Cause, and vindicate his Honor. Obs. (2.) What it is that Zachary makes
the subject matter of his Song? What is the particular and special Mercy which
he praises and blesses God for? It is not for his own particular and private
Mercy, namely, the Recovery of his Speech, though undoubtedly he was very
thankful to God for that Mercy, but he Blesses and praises God for Catholic
and Universal Mercies bestowed upon his Church and People: He does not say,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel that has visited me in Mercy, that has once
more loosed my Tongue, and restored my Speech: but Blessed be God that has
visited and redeemed his people. Whence Learn, that it is both the Duty and
Disposition of a gracious Soul to abound in Praise and Thankfulness to God,
more for Catholic and Universal Mercies toward the Church of God, then for
any particular and private Mercies, how great soever toward himself. Blessed
be God for visiting and redeeming his people. Obs. (3.) In this Evangelical
Hymn, there is a Prophetical Prediction, both concerning Christ, and concerning
John. Concerning Christ he declares, that God the Father had sent him of his
free mercy and rich Grace, yet in performance of his Truth and Faithfulness,
and according to his promise and Oath which he had made to Abraham, and the
Fathers of the Old Testament, Where Note (1.) he blesses God for the
Comprehensive blessing of the Messiah, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel who
has visited his people; namely, in his Son's Incarnation. The Lord Jesus
Christ in the Fullness of Time made such a visit to this sinful World, as Men
and Angels admired at, and will admire to all Eternity. Note (2.) The special
fruit and benefit of this gracious and merciful Visitation, and that was the
Redemption of a lost World; he has visited and redeemed his People. This
implies that miserable Thraldom and Bondage which we were under to Sin and
Satan, and expresses the stupendous Love of Christ, in buying our Lives with
his dearest Blood; and both by price and power rescuing us out of the hands of
our Spiritual Enemies. Note (3.) The Character given of This Savior and
Redeemer, he is an Horn of Salvation; that is, a Royal and Glorious, a Strong
and powerful Savior to his Church and people. The Horn in Scripture signifies
Glory and Dignity, Strength and Power; as the Beauty, so the Strength of the
Beast lies in its Horn. Now Christ being styled an Horn of Salvation, intimates
that he himself is a Royal and Princely Savior, and that the Salvation which
he brings is great and plentiful, glorious and powerful; God has raised up an
horn of Salvation for us in the house of his Servant David. Note (4.) The
Nature and Quality of that Salvation and Deliverance which the Son of God came
to accomplish for us. Not a Temporal Deliverance, as the Jews expected from the
power of the Romans, but Spiritual, from the hands of Sin and Satan, Death and
Hell; his Design was to purchase a Spiritual Freedom and Liberty for us, that
we might be enabled to serve him without fear; that is, without the servile and
offending fear of a Slave, but with the Dutiful and ingenuous fear of a Child;
and this in holiness and Righteousness; that is, in the Duties of the First and
Second Table, all the days of our Life. Learn hence, That Believers who were
Slaves of Satan, are by Christ made God's free Men. 2dly, That as such they owe
God a Service, a willing, cheerful, and delightful Service, without fear; and a
constant persevering Service all the days of their Life, that we being
delivered out of the hands of, etc. Note (5.) The Source and Fountain from
whence this Glorious Savior, and Gracious Salvation did arise and spring,
namely, from the mercy and faithfulness of God; To perform the mercy promised
to our Forefathers, and to remember his holy Covenant, the Oath which he swear
to our Father Abraham. Learn hence, That the Lord Jesus Christ, the Mercy of
Mercies, was graciously promised, and faithfully performed by God to his Church
and People. Christ was a free and full Mercy, a suitable, a seasonable, and a
satisfying Mercy; an incomparable, unsearchable, and everlasting Mercy, which
God graciously promised in the beginning of Time, and faithfully performed in
the fullness of Time. Thus far this Hymn of Zachary respects the Messiah. Obs.
(4.) How he next turns himself to his Child, and Prophecies concerning him; And
thou Child shall be called the Prophet of the Highest, etc. Where Note (1.) The
Nature of his Office, thou shall be a Prophet, not a common and ordinary one,
but a Prophet of the highest Rank; the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. A
Prophet thou shall be, and more then a Prophet. Note (2.) As the nature of his
Office, so the quality of his Work, Thou shall go before the face of the Lord
to prepare his way: Thou shall be an Herald and Harbinger to the most High;
thou shall go before the Face of the Messiah, and by thy severe Reproofs, and
powerful Exhortations, shall prepare his way before him, and make men fit and
ready to receive this mighty Savior. Thou Child shall be as the Morning Star,
to foretell the Glorious arising of this Sun of Righteousness. Learn hence (1.)
That it is the highest Honor and Dignity to serve Christ in the quality and
relation of a Prophet. (2.) That it is the Office and Duty of the Prophets of
Christ, to prepare and make fit the Hearts of men to receive and embrace him.
Obs. (5.) That Zachary having spoken a few Words concerning his Son, he returns
instantly to Celebrate the Praises of our Savior, comparing him to the Rising
Sun, which shined forth in the Brightness of his Gospel, to enlighten the dark
corners of the World, through the tender mercies of our God, whereby the
dayspring from on high has visited us, to give light to them that sit in
darkness. Learn here (1.) That Jesus Christ is that true Son of Righteousness,
which in the fullness of Time did spring from on high, to visit a lost and
undone World. (2.) That the great Errand of Christ's coming into the World, and
the particular End of his Appearing in our Flesh, it was to give light to them
that sit in darkness. (3.) That it was nothing less than infinite Mercy and
bowels of Compassion in God and Christ, which inclined him to come from on high
to visit them that sit in Darkness; Through the tender Bowels of Mercy in our
God, whereby his own and only Son sprung from on high to visit us here below,
who sat in darkness and the shadow of Death; and to guide our Feet into the way
that leads to everlasting peace.

80 And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts,
till the day of his showing unto Israel.

Here we have a short Account of John's private Life before he entered upon his
public Ministry, which was at Thirty Years of Age; He grew, that is, in Bodily
stature, and waxed strong in Spirit, that is, in the Gifts and Graces of the
Holy Spirit, which increased with his Age, and showed themselves in him every
day more and more; and he was in the Deserts, that is, in the mountainous
Country of Judea where he was Born, till the time of his preaching to, and
amongst the Jews; not that he lived like an Hermit, Recluse from all Society
with men, but contented himself to continue in an obscure privacy, 'till called
forth to promulge and preach the Gospel; and when that time was come, John
leaves the Hill-country, and enters with Resolution and unwearied diligence
upon his public Ministry: Teaching us by his Example, That when we are fit and
ripe for public Service, we should no less willingly leave our Obscurity, then
we took the benefit of it for our Preparation. John abode in the Deserts till
his showing unto Israel; that is, till the time of his setting forth to execute
his Office among the Jews.

CHAP. II.
1 AND it came to pass in those days, that there went out a Decree from Caesar
Augustus, that all the world should be taxed. 2. (And this taxing was first
made when Cyrenius was Governor of Syria). 3 And all went to be taxed, every
one into his own city. 4 And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city
of Nazarerh into Judea: unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem,
because he was of the house and lineage of David. 5 To be taxed with Mary his
espoused Wife, being great with child. 6 And so it was, that while they were
there, the days were accomplished, that she should be delivered. 7 And she
brought forth her first born Son, and wrapped him in swaddling Clothes, and laid
him in a Manger, because there was no room for them in the Inn.

The Conclusion of the former Chapter acquainted us with the Birth of John the
Baptist; the beginning of this Chapter relates the Birth of our Savior Jesus
Christ, and the remarkable Circumstances which did attend it. And here we have
Observable (1.) The place where he was Born, not at Nazareth, but at Bethlehem,
according to the prediction of the Prophet Micah, Chapter 5.2. And thou Bethlehem
in the Land of Judah, art not the least among the Princes of Judah, for out of
thee shall come a Governor that shall rule my people Israel. We may suppose
that the Blessed Virgin little thought of changing her place, but to have been
delivered of her Holy Burden at Nazareth, where it was Conceived; her House at
Nazareth was honored by the presence of the Angel; yea, by the Over-shadowing
of the Holy Ghost: That house therefore we may suppose was most Satisfactory to
the Virgins desires. But he that made choice of the Womb where his Son should
be Conceived, it was fit he should also choose the place where his Son should
be Born. And this place many hundred Year^ before the Nativity was foretold
should be Bethlehem. Obs. (2.) How remarkable the Providence of God was in
bringing the Virgin up from Nazareth to Bethlehem, that Christ (is it was
Prophesied of him) might be Born there. Augustus the Roman Emperor, to whom
the Nation of the Jews was now become Tributary, puts forth a Decree, that all
the Roman Empire should have their Names and Families Enrolled, in order to
their being Taxed. This Edict required that every Family should repair to that
City to which they did belong, to be Enrolled and Taxed there. Accordingly
Joseph and Mary, being of the House and Lineage of David, have recourse to
Bethlehem the City of David, where according to the Prophecy, the Messiah was
Born. Here Note, How the Wisdom of God over rules the Actions of Men, for
higher and nobler Ends then what they aimed at. The Emperor's aim by this Edict
was to fill his Coffers, God's End was to fulfill his Prophecies. Obs. (3.) How
readily Joseph and Mary yield Obedience to the Edict and Decree of this Heathen
Emperor. It was no less then four days Journey from Nazareth to Bethlehem, how
just an Excuse might the Virgin have pleaded for her absence; What Woman ever
undertook so hazardous a Journey, that was so near her Delivery. And Joseph no
doubt was sufficiently unwilling to draw her forth into so manifest a hazard.
But as the Emperor's Command was peremptory, so their Obedience was exemplary.
We must not plead difficulty for withdrawing our Obedience to Supreme Commands.
How did our Blessed Savior, even in the Womb of his Mother, yield Homage to
civil Rulers and Governors. The first Lesson which Christ's example taught the
World, was Loyalty and Obedience to the Supreme Magistrate. Obs. (4.) After
many weary steps, the Holy Virgin comes to Bethlehem, where every House is
taken up, by reason of the great confluence of people that came to be Taxed;
and there is no room for Christ but in a Stable: The Stable is our Lord's
Palace, the Manger is his cradle. Oh how can we be abased low enough for him,
that thus neglected himself for us; What an early indication was this, that our
Lord's Kingdom was not of this World. Yet some observe a Mystery in all this:
an Inn is Domus publici Juris, not a private House, but open and free for all
Passengers, and the Stable is the commonest place in the Inn; to mind us, that
he who was Born there, should be a common Savior to High and Low, Noble and
Base, rich and poor, Jew and Gentile, called therefore so often the Son of Man;
the Design of his Birth being the Benefit of Mankind.

8 And there were in the same country Shepherds abiding in the Field: keeping
watch over their Flocks by night. 9 And lo, the Angel of the Lord came upon
them; and the Glory of the Lord shone round about them, and they were sore
afraid. 10 And the Angel said unto them, fear not, for behold I bring you good
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. 11 For unto you is born
this day in the city of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. 12 And this
shall be a sign unto you: ye shall find a babe wrapped in swaddling clothes,
lying in a Manger.

Here we have the promulgation, and first publishing of our Savior's Birth to
the World. The Angel said unto the Shepherd, I bring you glad Tidings, a
Savior is Born. Where Obs. (1.) the Messengers employed by God to publish the
joyful News of a Savior's Birth; the Holy Angels, Heavenly Messengers employed
about an Heavenly Work: It is worth our Notice, how Serviceable the Angels were
to Christ, upon all occasions, when he was here upon Earth; an Angel declares
his Conception, an Host of Angels publish his Birth. In his Temptation, an
Angel strengthened him, in his Agony an Angel Comforts him: at his Resurrection
an Angel rolls away a Stone from the door of the Sepulcher. At his Ascension
the Angels attend him up to Heaven, and at his Second coming to judge the
World, he shall be Revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels. And great
Reason there is that the Angels should be thus officious in their Attendances
upon Christ, who is an Head of Confirmation to them, as he was an Head of
Redemption to fallen Man. Obs. (2.) The Persons to whom this joyful Message of
a Savior's Birth is first brought, and they are the Shepherds, the Angel said
unto the Shepherds fear not, (1.) Because Christ the great Shepherd of his
Church was now come into the World; (2.) Because he was of old promised unto
Shepherds, the old Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, who by their
occupation were Shepherds. Obs. (3.) The time when these Shepherds had the
Honor of this Revelation; it was not when they were asleep on their Beds of
Idleness and Sloth, but when they were lying abroad, and watching their Flocks.
The Blessings of Heaven usually meet us in the way of an honest and industrious
Diligence; whereas the idle are fit for nothing but Temptation to work upon. If
these Shepherds had been snorting in their Beds, they had no more seen Angels,
nor yet heard the News of a Savior, then their Neighbors. Obs. (4.) The
nature and quality of the message which the Angel brought, it was a message of
joy, a Message of Great joy, a message of great joy unto all people. For here
was Born a Son, that Son a Prince, that Prince a Savior, that Savior not a
particular Savior of the Jews only, but an universal Savior, whose Salvation
is to the ends of the Earth. Well might the Angel call it a Message or glad
Tidings of Great Joy unto all People. Obs. (5.) The ground and occasion of this
joy, the foundation of all this good News which was proclaimed in the ears of a
lost World, and that was the Birth of a Savior: Unto you is born this day in
the City of David, a Savior which is Christ the Lord. Hence Learn (1.) That
the Incarnation and Birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, and his Manifestation in
our Flesh and Nature, was and is matter of exceeding joy and rejoicing unto all
People. (2.) That the Great End and Design of our Lord's Incarnation and Coming
into the World, it was to be the Savior of lost Sinners; unto you is born a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

13 And suddenly there was with the Angels, a multitude of the heavenly host
praising God: and saying. 14 Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace,
good will toward Men.

Although the Birth of our Blessed Savior was published by one Angel, yet is
it Celebrated by an Host of Angels, the whole Quire of Angels chaunt forth the
Praises of Almighty God, upon this great and joyful Occasion. Here Observe (1.)
the Singers, (2.) the Song it self. The Singers of this Heavenly Anthem are the
holy Angels, called an Host, partly, for their number, partly for their Order
where Learn, (1.) The goodness and sweet disposition of these Blessed Spirits,
in whose Bosoms that Cankered passion of Envy has no place; if it had, there
was never such an occasion to stir it up, as now: But Heaven admits of no such
Passion; Envy is a Native of Hell, it is the smoke of the Bottomless Pit, the
character and temper of the Apostate spirits; these grieve at the Happiness of
Man, as much as the Angels rejoice. O ye Blessed Angels, what did these Tidings
concern you, that ruined Mankind should be taken again into favor; whereas
those of your own Host, which fell likewise, remained still in that gulf of
Perdition into which their Sin had plunged them, without either hope of Mercy,
or possibility of Recovery. The less we repine at the Good, and the more we
rejoice at the Happiness of others, the more like we are to the Holy Angels;
yea, the more we resemble God himself. Learn (2.) Did the Angels thus joy and
rejoice for us? then what joy ought we to express for our selves? Had we the
Tongue of Angels, we could not sufficiently chaunt forth the Praises of our
Redeemer. Eternity it self, it will be too short to spend in the Rapturous
Contemplation of Redeeming Mercy. Obs. (2.) The Anthem, or Song it self, which
begins with a Doxology, Glory be to God in the Highest; that is, let God in the
highest Heavens be glorified by the Angels that dwell on high. The Angelical
Quire excite themselves, and all the Host of Angels, to give glory to God for
these wonderful Tidings; as if they had said, let the Power, the Wisdom, the
Goodness and Mercy of God, be acknowledged and revered by all the Host of
Heaven, for ever and ever. Next to the Doxology follows a Gratulation: Glory be
to God in the Highest, for there is peace on earth, and good will toward men.
The Birth of Christ has brought a peace of Reconciliation betwixt GOD and Man
upon Earth; and also a peace of amity and concord betwixt man and man, and is
therefore to be Celebrated with Acclamations of joy.

15 And it came to pass, as the Angels were gone away from them into Heaven,
the Shepherds said one to another, let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see
this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord has made known unto us. 16
And they came with haste, and found Mary and Joseph, and the babe lying in a
manger. 17 And when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying, which
was told them concerning this child. 18 And all they that heard it, wondered at
those things which were told them by the Shepherds. 19 But Mary kept all these
things, and pondered them in her heart.

Several particulars are here observeable, as (1.) That the Shepherds no sooner
hear the News of a Savior, but they run to Bethlehem to seek him: And though it
was at Midnight, yet they delayed not to go. Those that lest their Beds to
attend their Flocks: now leave their Flocks to enquire after their Savior.
Learn thence, That a gracious Soul no sooner hears where Christ is, but
instantly makes out after him, and judges no earthly Comfort too dear to be
left and forsaken for him. These Shepherds show, That they preferred their
Savior before their Sheep Obs. (2.) These Shepherds having found Christ
themselves do make him known to others, v. 17. When they had seen it, they made
known abroad the saying which was told them concerning this child. Learn, That
such as have found Christ to their comfort, and tasted that the Lord is
Gracious themselves, cannot but recommend him to the love and admiration of
others. Obs. (3.) What effect this relation had upon the generality of people
that heard it: It wrought in them amazement and astonishment, but not Faith:
The people wondered, but not Believed. It Is not the hearing of Christ with the
hearing of the Ear, nor the seeing of Christ with the sight of the outward Eye;
neither the hearing of his Doctrine, nor the sight of his Miracles, will work
divine Faith in the Soul, without the concurring Operation of the holy Spirit,
the one may make us marvel, but the other makes us Believe; All that heard it,
wondered at these things. Lastly, Note, The effect which these things had upon
Mary, quite different from what they had upon the common people; they wondered,
she pondered; the things that affected their Heads, influenced her Heart, she
kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.

21 And when eight days were accomplished for the Circumcision of the child,
his name was called Jesus, which was so named of the Angel, before he was
conceived in the womb.

Two things are here Observable; our Savior's Circumcision, and the name given
him at his Circumcision. There was no impurity in the Son of God, and yet is he
Circumcised, and Baptized also, though he had neither filth nor foreskin, which
wanted either the Circumcising Knife, or the Baptismal Water, yet he
condescends to be both Circumcised and Baptized; thereby showing, that as he
was made of a Woman, so he would be made under the Law, which he punctually
observed to a tittle. And accordingly he was not only Circumcised, but
Circumcised the eighth day, as the ceremonial Law required: and thus our Lord
fulfilled all Righteousness, St. Matthew. 3.15. Obs. (2.) The Name given at our
Savior's Circumcision; his name was called Jesus; that is, a Savior, he being
to save his people from their sins, St. Matthew. 1.21. The great End of Christ's
coming into the World, was to save Persons from the punishment and power of
their Sins. Had not he saved us from our Sins, we must have dyed in our Sins,
and dyed for our Sins, and that Eternally. Never let us then sit down
desponding, either under the Guilt, or under the power of our Sins, and
conclude, that they are either so great, that they cannot be forgiven, or so
strong, that they can never be overcome.

22 And when the days of her purification, according to the law of Moses, were
accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem to present him to the Lord. 23 As
it is written in the Law of the Lord, every male that opens the womb, shall
be called Holy to the Lord. 24 And to offer a Sacrifice according to that which
is said in the Law of the Lord; a pair of Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons.

A Twofold Act of Obedience does the holy Virgin here perform to two Ceremonial
Laws: The one concerning the purification of Women after Childbirth, the other
concerning the presenting of the Male Child before the Lord. The Law concerning
the purification of Women, we have Recorded, Levit. 12. where the time
mentioned for the Woman's Purification is set down; namely, after a Male Child
forty days, after a Female, Fourscore days; after which time she was to bring a
Lamb of a year old, for a Burnt-offering, in case she was a person of ability;
or a pair of Turtle-Doves, or two young Pigeons, in case of extreme poverty.
Now as to the Virgins Purification, Observe (1.) That no sooner was she able
and allowed to walk, but she Travels to the Temple. Where Note, That she
visited God's House at Jerusalem, before her own house at Nazareth. Learn
thence, that such Women whom God has blessed with safety of Deliverance, if they
make not their first visit to the Temple of God, to offer up their Praises of
Thanksgivings there, they are Strangers to the Virgins Piety and Devotion. Obs.
(2.) Another Act of Mary's Obedience to the Ceremonial Law, she presented her
Child at Jerusalem to the Lord. But how durst the Blessed Virgin carry her holy
Babe to Jerusalem into Herod's mouth? It was but a little before that Herod
sought the young Child's Life to destroy it; yet the Virgin sticks not, in
Obedience to the command of God, to carry him to Jerusalem. Learn hence, That
the apprehension of no dangers, either imminent or approaching, either at hand,
or afar off, ought to hinder us from performing our Duty to Almighty God: we
ought not to neglect a certain Duty, to escape an uncertain Danger. Observe
further, as the Obedience, so the Humility of the Holy Virgin, in submitting to
the Law for purifying of Uncleanness: For thus she might have pleaded; What
need have I of purging, who did not conceive in Sin? Other Births are from men,
but mine is from the Holy Ghost, who is purity it self. Other Women's Children
are under the Law, mine is above the Law; but like the Mother of him, whom it
behoved to fulfill all Righteousness, she dutifully fulfils the Law of God
without quarrelling or disputing. Observe Lastly, as the exemplary Humility, so
the great poverty of the Holy Virgin: she has not a Lamb, but comes with her
two Doves to God. Her Offering declares her Penury. The Best are sometimes the
poorest, seldom the wealthiest: yet none are so poor but God expects an
Offering from them, he looks for somewhat from every one, not from every one
alike. The Providence of God it is, that makes difference in persons abilities,
but his pleasure will make no difference in the Acceptance. Where there is a
willing mind it shall be accepted according to what a person has, 2 Cor. 8.12.

25 And behold there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon, and the same
was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel, and the holy Ghost
was upon him. 26 And it was revealed unto him by the holy Ghost, that he should
not see Death before he had seen the Lord's Christ. 27 And he came by the
Spirit into the Temple; and when the parents brought in the child Jesus, to do
for him after the custom of the law. 28 Then took he him up in his arms, and
Blessed God, and said.

No sooner was our Savior brought into the Temple, and presented to the Lord
by his holy Parents, but in springs old Simeon, a pious and devout Man, who had
a Revelation from God, that he should not dye until he had with his bodily Eye
seen the promised Messiah. Accordingly, he takes up the Child Jesus in his
arms, but hugs him faster by his Faith then by his feeble Arms; and with
Ravishment of heart praises God for the Sight of his Savior, whom he calls the
Consolation of Israel; that is, the Messiah, whom the Israel of God had long
looked and waited for, and now took Comfort and Consolation in. Note here (1.)
How God always performs his Promises to his Children, with wonderful advantage.
Simeon had a Revelation that he should not Dye until he had seen Christ; now he
not only sees him, but feels him too; he not only has him in his Eye, but holds
him in his hands. Though God stays long before he fulfils his Promises, he
certainly comes at last, with a double Reward for our expectation. Note (2.)
That the Coming of the Messiah in the fullness of Time, and his appearing in our
Flesh and Nature, was and is matter of unspeakable Consolation to the Israel of
God. And now that he is come, let us live by Faith upon him, as the Foundation
of all Comfort and Consolation both in Life and Death. Alas! what are all other
Consolations besides this, and without this: They are impotent and insufficient
Consolations, they are dying and perishing Consolations; nay they are sometimes
afflictive and distressing Consolations. The Bitterness accompanying them, is
sometimes more than the Sweetness that is tasted in them; but in Christ, who is
the Consolation of Israel, there is light without darkness, joy without sorrow,
all Consolation, without any mixture of discomfort.

29 And he said, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according
to thy word, 30 For mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. 31 Which thou have
prepared before the face of all people. 32 A light to lighten the Gentiles, and
the glory of thy people Israel. 33 And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those
things which were spoken of him.

These words are a sweet Canticle, or Swan-like Song of old Simeon, a little
before his Dissolution. He had seen the Messiah before by Faith, now by sight,
and wishes to have his Eyes closed, that he might see nothing after this
desirable sight. It is said of some Turks, that after they have seen Mahomet's
Tomb, they put out their Eyes, that they may never defile them after they have
seen so glorious an Object: Thus old Simeon desires to see no more of this
World, after he had seen Christ the Savior of the World; but sues for his
Dismission, Lord, let thy servant depart. Note here (1.) That a good Man having
served his Generation, and God in his Generation faithfully, is weary of the
World, and willing to be dismissed from it. (2.) That the Death of a good man is
nothing else but a quiet and peaceable departure; it is a departure in peace, to
the God of peace. (3.) That it is only a spiritual sight of Christ by Faith
that can welcome the approach of Death, and render it an object desirable to
the Christian's choice; he only that can say, My eyes have seen thy Salvation,
will be able to say, Lord let thy Servant d^part. Observe farther, Holy Simeon
having declared the Faithfulness of God to himself in the Gift of Christ: Next
he celebrates the Mercy of God in bestowing this invaluable Gift of a Savior
upon the whole World. The world consists of Jews and Gentiles, Christ is a
light to the one, and the glory of the other: a light to the blind and dark
Gentiles, and the Glory of the Renowned Church of the Jews. The Messiah being
promised to them, born and bred up with them, living amongst them, preaching
his Doctrine to them, and working his Miracles before them: and thus was Christ
the Glory of his people Israel.

34 And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold, this child
is set for the fall, and rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign which
shall be spoken against. 35 Yea a sword shall pass through thine own Soul also,
that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.

Two things are here observed, Simeon's Blessing, and Simeons Prediction; he
blessed them, that is, the Parents and the Child Jesus, not Authoritatively,
but Prophetically, declaring how God would bless them; his Prediction is
Twofold, (1.) concerning Christ, (2.) concerning his Mother; concerning Christ
Simeon declares, that he should be for the rise of many in Israel; namely, all
such as should embrace and obey his Doctrine, and imitate and follow his
example; and for the fall of others; that is, shall bring punishment and ruin
upon all obdurate and impenitent Sinners; and a Sign to be spoken against; that
is, he shall be as a mark for obstinate Sinners to set themselves against.
Christ himself when here in the World, was a stone of stumbling, and a Rock of
offense to the men of the World, enduring the contradiction of Sinners against
himself, both the virulence of their Tongues, and the violence of their hands.
(2.) Concerning the Mother of Christ, Simeon declares, that the sight of her
Son's bitter Sufferings, would like a Sword pierce through he^ Heart; for though
he might be born, yet should he not dy^ without the pains of his Mother; as if
the Throws suffered by other Women at the Birth, were reserved for her to
endure at the death of her Son. The Sufferings of the Holy Jesus on the Cross,
were as a Sword or dagger at the Heart of the Holy Virgin, and she Suffered
with him, both as a tender Mother, and as a Sympathizing Member of his Body.

36 And there was one Anna a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe
of Asser, she was of a great Age, and had lived with an husband seven years
from her Virginity. 37 And she was a widow of about fourscore and four years,
which departed not from the Temple, but served God with fastings and prayers,
night and day. 38 And she coming in at that instant gave thanks likewise unto
the Lord, and spoke of him to all them that looked for redemption in Israel.

Simeon is seconded by Anna a Prophetess, she also declares that the child
Jesus was the promised and expected Messiah; and thus Christ was proclaimed in
the Temple, by two Heralds of different Sexes. Concerning this Aged Woman Anna,
it is said, that she departed not from the Temple, night nor day; not that she
lived and lodged there, but by her never departing from, understand her daily
repairing to the Temple; that which is often done, is said in Scripture to be
always done; we are said to do a thing continually, when we do it seasonably:
Thus we pray continually, when we pray as often as duty requires us to pray.
Learn hence, That such duties as a Christian performs out of Conscience, he
will perform with Constancy and Perseverance: Nature will have her good Moods,
but Grace is steady. The devotions of a pious Soul, like Anna's, are as
constant, but more frequent then the returns of day and night.

39 And when they had performed all things according to the Law of the Lord
they returned into Galilee, to their own city Nazareth. 40 And the child grew,
and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and the Grace of God was upon
him.

Here we see the truth and reality of Christ's Humane Nature, he grew as we do,
from Infancy to Childhood, from Childhood, to Youth and Manhood. To his divine
Nature no accession or addition could be made; for that which is infinite
cannot increase. The deity was infinite in Christ, so was not the Humanity, but
capable of additions; and accordingly as Christ gr^w up, the Stature of his
Body, and the faculties of his mind increased, through the Grace and Power of
God's Spirit upon him.

41 Now his parents went to Jerusalem every Year at the feast of the passover.
42 And when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem, after the
custom of the feast.

Observe here the persons making this yearly Journey to Jerusalem, our
Savior's Parents and himself, (1.) Joseph, who is called Christ's Father; not
that he was his natural Father, for Christ had no Father upon Earth; but Joseph
was his Reputed and supposed Father, his nursing Father, who by the appointment
of God took a Fatherly care of him; and and his Father in Law, being Husband to
Mary. (2.) Mary the Mother of Christ went up to Jerusalem, with her Husband and
her Son: God commanded only the Males to go up to Jerusalem; the weaker Sex
were excused; but the Holy Virgin well knowing the spiritual profit of that
long Journey, would not stay at home. Such as will go no farther than they are
dragged in Religious Exercises, are Strangers to the Virgins Piety and
devotion. But (3.) the child Jesus in his Minority goes up with his Parents to
this holy Solemnity, thereby no doubt intending our instruction, when we are
young to give God an early possession of our Souls, to consecrate the Virgin
Operations of our minds to him; and in our Youth to keep close to the Worship
and Service of God, when we are so importunately courted by the World. Ob^erve
farther, This holy Family came not to look at the Feast and be gone, but they
duly stayed out all the appointed time. ^^seph's Calling, and the Virgins
Household Business could neither keep them at home, nor hasten them home before
the public Duties in the Temple were dispatched and ended. All worldly Business
must give place to Divine Offices; and we must attend God's service to the end,
except we will depart unblest.

43 And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the child Jesus
tarried behind in Jerusalem; and Joseph and his mother knew not of it. 44 But
supposing him to have been in the company, went a days journey, and they sought
him amongst their kinsfolk and acquaintance. 45 And when they found him not,
they turned back to Jerusalem, seeking him.

The Service of the Temple being ended, they return home to Nazareth; Religious
Duties are not to be attended to the prejudice and neglect of our particular
Callings. God calls us as well from his House, as to his House. They are much
mistaken, who think God is pleased with nothing but Devotion; he that says, be
fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord, says also, be not slothful in business.
Piety and Industry must keep pace with one another; God is as well pleased with
our Return to Nazareth, as with our going up to Jerusalem. Observe further,
though Joseph and Mary returned home, the Child Jesus, unknown to them, stays
behind. Their back was no sooner turned upon the Temple, but his Face was
toward it; Christ had Business in that place which his Parents knew not of.
They missing him, seek him in the company, concluding him with their Kinsfolk
and Acquaintance; from whence we may gather, that the Parents of Christ knew
him to be of a sweet and sociable, of a free and Conversative, not of a sullen
and morose Disposition. They did not suspect him to be wandered into Fields or
Deserts; but when they mist him, sought him among their Kinsfolk: had he not
wonted to converse formerly with them, he had not now been sought amongst them.
Our Blessed Savior when on Earth, did not take pleasure in a wild retiredness,
in a froward austerity, but in a mild affability and amiable Conversation, and
herein also his Example is very instructive to us.

46 And it came to pass, that after three days they found him in the temple,
sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them, and asking them
questions. 47 And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and
answers.

At Twelve years old our Savior disputes in the Temple with the Doctors of the
Law: Never had those great Rabbis heard the voice of such a Tutor. Thus in our
Savior's Nonage, he gives us a proof of his Proficiency, even as the Springs
shows us what we may hope for of the Tree in Summer. Our Savior discovered his
Accomplishments by degrees; had his Perfections appeared all at once, they had
rather dazzled, then delighted the eyes of the Beholders; even as the Sun would
confound all eyes, should it appear at its first Rising in its full strength.
Christ could now have taught all those great Rabbis the deep Mysteries of God,
but being not yet called by his Father to be a public Teacher, he contents
himself to hear with Diligence, and to ask with Modesty. Learn hence, That
Parts and Abilities for the Ministerial Function, are not sufficient to warrant
our Undertaking of it without a regular Call. Christ himself would not run, no
not of his Heavenly Fathers Errand before he was sent, much less should we.

48 And when they saw him, they were amazed, and his mother said unto him, son,
why have thou thus dealt with us? Behold thy father and I have sought thee
sorrowing.

Without doubt it was impossible to express the sorrow of the holy Virgin's
Soul, when all the search of three days could bring them no tidings of their
Holy Child. How did she blame her Eyes for once looking off this Object of her
Love, and spend both days and nights in a passionate bemoaning of her Loss. O
Blessed Savior, who can miss Thee, and not mourn for Thee? Never any Soul
conceived Thee by Faith, but was apprehensive of thy worth, and sensible of thy
want: What Comforts are we capable of, while we want Thee? and what relish can
we taste in any earthly Delight without Thee?

49 And he said unto them, how is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must
be about my fathers business.

Observe here, That Christ blames not his Parents for their sollicitous care of
him; but shows them how able he was to live without any dependency upon them
and their care; and also to let them understand, that higher respects had
called him away; that as he had meat to eat, so had he work to do, which they
knew not of. For, says he, Wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers
Business? as if he had said, Although I owe respect to you as my natural Parent,
yet my Duty to my Heavenly Father must be preferred. I am about his work,
promoting his Glory, and propagating his Truth. We have also a Father in
Heaven, oh how good is it to steal away from our earthly Distractions, that we
may employ our selves immediately in his Service; that when the World makes
inquiry after us, we may say as our Savior did before us, wist ye not that I
must be about my fathers business?

50 And they understood not the saying, which he spoke unto them. 51 And he
went down with them, and went to Nazareth, and was subject unto them; but his
mother kept all these sayings in her heart. 52 And Jesus increased in wisdom
and stature, and in favor with God and man.

The most material passage of our Savior's Life, for the first twelve years,
is here Recorded; namely, his disputing with the Doctors in the Temple; how he
spent the next eighteen years, namely, till he was Thirty, the Scripture does
not mention. It is here said, that he lived with, and was Subject to his
Parents; obeying their commands, and as it is believed, following their
employments, working upon the Trade of a Carpenter, as was observed Mark 6.3.
doubtless he did not live an idle Life; and why should he that did not abhor
the Virgins Womb, a Stable and a Manger, be supposed to abhor the works of an
honest Vocation. Observe farther, What a singular pattern is here for Children
to imitate and follow in their Subjection to their Parents: If the greatest and
highest of mortals think themselves above their Parents commands, our Savior
did not so, he paid Homage to the Womb that bare him, and to his supposed
Father that provided for him. Let a person be never so high above others, he is
still below and inferior to his Parents. Jesus dwelt with his Parents, and was
subject to them. Obs. Lastly, a farther Evidence of our Savior's Humanity,
with respect to his Humane Nature, which consisted of Body and Soul, he did
Grow and improve, his Body in Stature, his Soul in Wisdom; and he became every
day a more eminent and illustrious Person in the eyes of all, being highly in
favor both with God and man.

CHAP. III.
1 NOW in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate
being Governor of Judea, and Herod being Tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother
Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, and of the Region of Trachonites, and Lysanias as
the Tetrarch of Abilene. Annas and Caiaphas being the Highpriests, the word of
God came to John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness.

The two foregoing Chapters gave us an Account of the Birth of our Savior
Christ, and of John the Baptist. The Evangelist ^ow leaving the History of our
blessed Savior for eighteen years, namely, till he was thirty years old (the
Holy Ghost having thought sit to conceal that part of our Savior's private
Life from our knowledge) he begins this chapter with a relation of the
Baptist's Ministry, acquainting us with the time when, and the place where, and
the Doctrine which the Baptist taught. Obs. (1.) The time described when St.
John began his public Ministry; namely, when Tiberius was Emperor, and Annas
and Caiphas Highpriests; (1.) in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, when the Jews
were entirely under the power of the Romans, who set four Governors over them
called Tetrarchs, so named from their ruling over a fourth part of the Kingdom.
From hence the Jews might have observed, had not prejudice blinded their Eyes,
that the Scepter being thus departed from Judah, according to Jacob's Prophecy,
Genesis 49. Shilo, or the Messiah was now come. Again, the time when St. John
began his Ministry was, when Annas and Caiphas were Highpriests, under the Law
there were three sorts of Ministers that attended the Service of the Temple;
namely, Priests, Levites, and Nethenims: over these the High Priest was chief,
who, by God's command, was to be the first born of Aaron's Family. But how came
two Highpriests here, seeing God never appointed but one at a time? In answer
to this, say some, the power and covetousness of the Romans put in Highpriests
at pleasure to officiate for gain; say others, the High Priest was allowed his
Assistant or Deputy, who in case of his pollution or sickness did officiate in
his place. But that which we may profitably observe from hence is this, The
exactness and faithfulness of this Historian St. Luke, in relating the
Circumstances of our Savior's Nativity, and the Baptists Ministry, that the
Truth might evidently appear he is exact in Recording the Time.

3 And he came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the baptism of
Repentance for the remission of sins. 4 As it is written in the book of the
words of Isaiah the prophet saying, the voice of one crying in the wilderness,
prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. 5 Every valley shall
be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be laid low, and the crooked shall
be made straight, and the rough way shall be made smooth. 6 And all flesh shall
see the salvation of God.

Observe here (1.) The place where the Baptist exercised his Ministry in the
Wilderness of Judea, where were some Cities and Villages, though thinly
inhabited. Note here, the great Humility of the Baptist in preaching in an
obscure place, and to a small handful of people: Jerusalem some might think a
fitter place for so celebrated a Preacher, but God had called him to preach in
the Wilderness, and there he opens his Commission. Learn hence, that the most
eminent of God's Ministers must be content to execute their office, and
exercise their Ministry where God calls them, be the place never so mean and
obscure, and the people never so rude and barbarous. In the place where God by
his Providence fixes us, we must abide, till he that called us thither, removes
us thence. And this was the Baptist's case here. He leaves the Wilderness at
God's command, and comes to more Inhabited places; he came into the Country
about Jordan, preaching. It is not only lawful, but a necessary Duty for the
Ministers of God, to remove from one Place and People to another; provided
their Call be clear, their way plain, the good of Souls their Motive, and the
Glory of God their end. Obs. (2.) The Doctrine which the Baptist preached,
namely, the Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of Sins; that is, the
Doctrine of Baptism, which seals Remission of Sins to the party Baptized.
Learn hence that the preaching of the Doctrine of Repentance, is the
indispensable Duty of every Gospel-Minister; John the Baptist preached it, our
Savior preached it, his Apostles preached it; they went out every where
preaching, that men should Repent: Till we are in a State of Sinless
Perfection, the Doctrine of Repentance must be preached unto us, and practiced
by us. Obs. (3.) The Motive and Inducement which prompted the Baptist to his
Duty, which was to fulfill the Prophecies that went before of him, as it is
written in the Book of the Prophets, The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight; every valley shall be
filled, etc. Where Note, (1.) The title given to John the Baptist; a Voice, a
crying voice. This implies both his vehemence and earnestness, and also his
freedom and boldness in delivering of his Message; when a minister's own Heart
is warmly affected with what he preach, he may hope to affect the Hearts of
others. Note (2) The Sum and Substance of what he cried, Prepare ye the way of
the Lord, etc. that is, make your selves ready to receive the Messiah, to
embrace and entertain his Doctrine. As loyal Subjects when their Prince is
coming near their City, they remove every thing out of the way that may hinder
his Progress; all Annoyances, and all Impediments. In like manner the
preparatory Work of the Gospel upon the Hearts of Sinners, lies in pulling down
Mountains, and filling up Valleys; that is, in humbling the proud Hearts of
Sinners puffed up (as the Pharisees were) with a conceit of their own
Righteousness, who would be their own Saviors, and not beholding to Christ and
his free Grace for Salvation. Learn hence (1.) That man's heart is naturally
very unfit to receive and entertain the Lord Jesus Christ, and his Holy
Doctrine; we have naturally no sitness, no inclination, nor disposition to
believe in him, or submit unto him. (2.) That if ever we desire to entertain
Christ in our Hearts, we must first prepare and make ready our Hearts for the
receiving and embracing of him. For though the preparation of the heart be from
the Lord, yet he requires the exercise of our Faculties, and the use of our
Endeavors, he prepares our hearts by enabling us to prepare our own Hearts, by
getting a sight of the Evil of Sin, and a sense of our Misery without Christ;
an hungring desire after him, and a lively Faith in him. God does not work upon
Man, as Masons work upon Stone; what he does in us and for us, he does it by
us, he works by setting us to work; therefore says the Holy Baptist, Prepare ye
the way of the Lord, make, etc. The Act of Endeavor is ours, the Aid and
Assistance is God's. Obs. Lastly, The encouragement which the Baptist gives to
Persons to prepare the way of the Lord; for (says he) all flesh shall see the
Salvation of God; that is, now is the time that all Persons, Jew and Gentiles,
may see the Author of Salvation, whom God has promised to the World, and may by
Faith be made partakers of that Salvation which the Messiah shall purchase for
them, and in his Gospel tender to them. The great End of Christ's coming into
the World, was to purchase Salvation for all Flesh willing to be Saved by him.

7 Then said he to the multitude, that came forth to be baptized of him; O
generation of Vipers, who has warned you to flee from the wrath to come. 8
Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of Repentance; and begin not to say within
your selves, we have Abraham to our father; for I say unto you, that God is
able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham.

St. Matthew. Chapter 3.7, 8. says, that the Baptist spoke these words to the
Pharisees and Sadduces, whom he gives first a quick and cutting compellation,
oh Generation of Vipers, then a sharp and severe Reprehension, who has warned
you to flee from the wrath to come? And last of all, a seasonable Exhortation,
bring forth therefore fruits meet for Repentance. As if he had said, O ye
Pharisees and worst of Men, I perceive by your coming hither, some body has
Alarmed you with the Notices of that dreadful Vengeance that is coming upon
this Generation, to prevent which you pretend Repentance of your Sins, but let
me see by your Actions, that you are not only demure but sincere Penitents; let
me see the Fruits of your Repentance in the daily Course of your Conversations.
Learn here (1.) That the Condition of proud Pharisees pretending and false
hearted Hypocrites, though very dangerous, yet is not hopeless and desperate, and
their Salvation, though the worst of Men, must not be despaired of. St. John
reproves them for their Sin, but yet encourages their Repentance. (2.) That
sincere Repentance is not a barren thing, but does constantly bring forth
Fruits answerable to its Nature; as Faith without Works, so Repentance without
Fruits is dead also. The genuine Fruits of Repentance, are humility of Heart,
and holiness of Life. Obs. Lastly, The cautionary Direction which he gives to
these Hypocrites, not to rest in their external Privileges; Think not to say
within your selves we have Abraham to our Father; glory not in this, that you
are the only visible Church that God has upon Earth; for God can out of the
obdurate Gentile World raise up a People to himself, take them into Covenant
with himself, and cast you out. Learn hence (1.) That men are exceeding apt to
boast of, and glory in their external Privileges, and to place Religion most
in those things wherein God places it least. How did the Jews Glory in their
fleshly descent from Abraham, as if God were tied to Abraham's Line, and could
have no People, if he had not them for his People. (2.) That it is a vain thing
to expect exemption from the Judgments of God, because of outward Privileges
enjoyed by God. If we be not born again of the Spirit, it will avail us nothing
to be Born of Abraham's Flesh: If Abraham's Faith be not found in our Hearts,
it will be no advantage to us, that Abraham's Blood is running in their Veins;
Think not to say, we have Abraham to our Father.

9 And now also the Ax is laid unto the root of the trees, every tree therefore
which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the fire.

St. John having preached the Doctrine of Repentance in the foregoing Verses, he
backs it with a powerful Argument in this Verse, drawn from the certainty and
severity of that Judgment which would come upon them, if they continued in
their sins; Now is the Ax laid to the root of the Tree. Learn (1.) That it is
not unsuitable for Gospel-preachers, to press Repentance and Holiness of Life
upon their Hearers, from Arguments of Terror; John does it here, and Christ
elsewhere. (2.) That those whose Hearts are not pierced with the Sword of God's
Word, shall certainly be cut down and destroyed by the Ax of his Judgments.
Observe further, that forasmuch as the sin here specified is a Sin of Omission,
every Tree which brings not forth good fruit, as well as that which brings
forth evil Fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. We learn that Sins of
Omission are certainly damning, as well as Sins of Commission. The neglects of
Duty are as dangerous and damnable as the Acts of Sin. Such Trees as stand in
God's Orchard the Church, and bring forth no good Fruit, are marked out as Fuel
for the Devil's Fire.

10 And the people asked him, saying, What shall we do then. 11 He answers
and says unto them, he that has two coats, let him impart to him that has
none, and he that has meat let him do likewise.

The Baptist having pressed his Hearers to bring forth Fruits meet for
Repentance, here they inquire of him what Fruits they should bring forth; he
tells them first, the fruits of Charity and Mercy, he that has two Coats, let
him give to him that has none. This is not to be understood strictly, as if
the Command required us to give the Clothes off our Back, to every one that
wanted them: But it directs those that have the things of this Life in
abundance, to distribute and communicate to those that are in want. Learn
hence, that an extensive Liberality, and diffusive Charity in distributing such
things as we can well spare, toward the Relief of others Necessities, is an
excellent fruit of Repentance, and a good proof and evidence of the truth and
sincerity of it; Let him that has two Coats, impart to him that has none.

12 Then came also Publicans to be baptized, and said unto him, master, What
shall we do? 13 And he he said unto them, exact no more then that which is
appointed you.

The Publicans were Persons employed by the Romans to gather the Tax or Tribute
among the Jews, who were now Tributaries to the Romans, and paid them a public
Revenue. These Publicans were great Oppressers, exacting more then was the
Emperor's due, therefore we find Publicans and Sinners so often joined together
in the Gospel. These men inquiring what Fruits of Repentance they should bring
forth, St. John directs them to acts of Justice, ^xact not. Where Note (1.)
That acts of Justice and Righteousness, as well as of Charity and Mercy, are
real Fruits of sincere Repentance. Obs. (2.) John does not condemn the Office,
but caution the Officer. If Magistrates may impose Taxes, they may doubtless
appoint Officers to Collect those Taxes: Christian Charity then must always
teach us to distinguish betwixt Calling and the Crime. We must not Censure any
Officer, either in Church or State, for the sake of their Maladministration,
who are employed in that Office.

14 And the Soldiers also demanded of him, saying, and what shall we do? and he
said unto them, do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be
content with your Wages.

Observe here what a general Resort there was of all sorts of Persons to John's
Ministry, Pharisees, Sadduces, Publicans, Soldiers; these last here inquire of
him, what they should do, to gain Acceptance with God? he answers, do no
violence, defraud no man of his own by false Accusation, but be content with
the Allowance assigned for your Maintenance. Where it is (1.) strongly
supposed, that Soldiers are insolent Oppressors, making no conscience of
injustice, false Accusation, and violent Oppression: yet (2.) the Office and
Employment of a Soldier is not condemned, but regulated; he does not bid them
cast away their Arms, abandon War, appear no more as Military Men in the Field,
but manage their Employment inoffensively. Whence we Learn, That in some Cases,
and under some Circumstances, for Christians to make War is both lawful and
necessary. To make a War Lawful, there is required a lawful Authority, a
righteous Cause, an honorable Aim and Intention, and a just and righteous
manner of Prosecution, without Vanity and Ostentation, without Cruelty and
Oppression; Courage and Compassion on the one hand, and Cowardice and Cruelty
on the other hand, do frequently accompany one another.

15 And as the people were in expectation, and all men mused in their hearts of
John, whether he were the Christ, or not. 16 John answered, saying, unto them
all, I indeed baptize you with water, but one mightier then I comes, the
latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unlose, he shall baptize you with the
holy Ghost and with fire. 17 whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly
purge his floor, and gather his Wheat into his Garner, but the chaff he will
burn with Fire unquenchable.

Observe here (1.) How the extraordinariness of John the Baptists Person, the
earnestness of his Preaching, the Acceptableness of his Doctrine, and the
Exemplariness of his Conversation, drew all Persons to an Admiration of him,
insomuch that they began to think within themselves, whether he were not the
Messiah himself. He plainly tells them he was not, but only his Servant, his
Harbinger, and Forerunner. Obs. (2.) The high Opinion which John had of
Christ, he is mightier than I; that is, a Person of greater Authority, Dignity,
and Excellency than my self: From whence may be gathered, that though Christ was
man, he was more then Man, even very God, equal with the Father; for John
himself was the greatest of them that were born of Women. Matthew. 11.11. yet
says John, Christ is mightier then I. How so? but in regard of the Dignity of
his Person, being both God and Man, he that comes after me is mightier then I.
Obs. (3.) The humble and low Estimation that the Holy Baptist had of himself,
his Shoe-latchet I am not worthy to unlose; a Proverbial Speech, implying that
he was unworthy to do the lowest Offices, and meanest Services for Christ:
Lord, how well does humility of Mind, an humble Apprehension, and a low opinion
of themselves, become the Messengers and Ministers of Christ. John was a Man of
eminent Abilities, yet of exemplary Humility; he thought himself unworthy to
unlose Christ's Shoe. Obs. (4.) John does not only declare the Dignity of
Christ's Person, but the Excellency of his Office; He shall baptize you with
the Holy Ghost, and with fire; as if he had said, I only wash the Body with
water, but Christ cleanses the Soul by the operation of his Holy Spirit, which
is as fire in the effects of it, purifying the hearts of his People from Sin,
and consuming their Lusts and Corruptions; yet at the same time having fiery
Indignation, and flaming Judgments, to destroy and burn up impenitent Sinners
like dry Stubble. Observable it is in Scripture, that Christ is represented by
one and the same Metaphor of fire, in a way of Comfort to his Children, and in
a way of Terror to his Enemies, he is a fire unto Both. He sits in the hearts
of his people as a Refiners fire; he is amongst his Enemies as a Consuming
fire; a fire for his Church to take Comfort in, a fire for his Enemies to
perish by. Observe Lastly, how the Holy Baptist compares our Savior to an
Husbandman, and the Jewish Church to a Barn floor; the office of the Husbandman
is to thresh, fan and winnow his Corn, separating it from the Chaff, preserving
the one and consuming the other. Observe (1.) That the Church is Christ's
floor, (2.) That this Floor Christ will purge, and that thoroughly. (3.) That
the Word of Christ is the Fan in his hand, by and with which he will thoroughly
purge his Floor. The Church is compared to a Floor upon the account of that
Mixture which is in the Church. In a Floor, there is Straw, as well as Grain,
Chaff as well as Corn, Tares as well as Wheat, Cockel and Darnel as well as
good Seed: Thus in the Church there has been, there is, and ever will be, a
mixture of good and bad, Saints and Sinners, Hypocrites and Sincere Christians;
but this floor Christ will purge, purge it but not break it up; purge out its
Corruptions, but not destroy its Essence and existence: And the Fan in Christ's
hand, with which he will purge his Floor, is his Holy word, accompanied with
the wing of Discipline. The Fan detects and discovers the Chaff, and the Wing
dissipates and scatters it, and by the help of both the Floor is purged; his
Fan is in hand, and he will thoroughly purge, etc.

18 And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the people. 19
But Herod the Tetrarch being reproved by him for Herodias his brother Philips
wife, and for all the evils which Herod had done. 20 Added yet this above all,
that he shut up John in prison.

Observe here, (1.) In John the Baptist the character of a zealous and faithful
Minister of the Gospel, he is one that deals plainly, and durst tell the
Greatest Persons of their Faults. Herod, though a King, is reproved by him for
his Adultery and Incest. The Crown and Scepter of Herod could not daunt the
faithful Messenger of God. There ought to meet in the Ministers of Christ both
courage and impartiality; courage in fearing no faces, and impartiality in
sparing no sins. Obs. (2.) Who it was that Imprisoned and Beheaded the Holy
Baptist; Herod a King: How sad is it, when Kings who should be nursing Fathers
to the Church, do prove the bloody Butchers of the Prophets of God. The
severest Persecutions which the Ministers of God have fallen under, have been
occasioned by their telling great Men of their Crimes; Men in power are
impatient of Reproof, and imagine that their Authority gives them a License to
transgress. Obs. (3.) The heinous aggravations of this Sin in Herod, He added
this to all his other Sins, that he shut up John in prison. This evidenced him
incorrigible and unreclaimable. John had preached before Herod, and Herod had
heard John with some Delight, but he had a darling lust which occasioned his
Destruction. Learn thence, that Hypocrites may hear the word with some
pleasure, and do many things with some delight, but they have always some
beloved Lust that must be spared, they will neither part with it, nor bear
Reproof for it. Herod sticks not to cut off that Head, whose Tongue was so bold
to reprove him for his Lusts.

21 Now when all the people were Baptized, it came to pass that Jesus also
being Baptized and praying, the heavens were opened.

Obs. (1.) The great Condescension of Christ in seeking and submitting to the
Baptism of John. Christ, though John's Lord and Master, yet yields to be Baptized
of his Servant and Messenger. Obs. (2.) The Reasons why Christ would be
Baptized, (1.) That by this Rite he might enter himself into the Society of
Christians, as he had before by Circumcision entered into the Society of the
Jews. (2.) That he might by his own Baptism sanctify the Ordinance of baptism
unto us. (3.) That thereby he might fulfill the Righteousness of the Ceremonial
Law, which required the washing of the Priests in Water, before they entered
upon their Office, as appears, Exodus 29.4. Obs. (3.) How the Duty of Prayer
accompanies the Ordinance of Baptism; Jesus being Baptized and Praying:
Teaching us by his example to Sanctify every Ordinance and every Action with
Prayer; Christ when he was Baptized, he Prayed, when he was Tempted he Prayed,
when he brake Bread he Prayed, when he wrought Miracles he Prayed, in his Agony
in the Garden he prayed, when he Suffered on the Cross he Prayed; what was the
subject matter of our Lord's Prayer at this time is not expressed, but by what
followed, namely, the Heavens opening, and the Holy Ghost descending, it is
probably conjectured, that he prayed for some Testimony to be given from Heaven
concerning himself; for it immediately follows,

22 And the Holy Ghost descended in a Bodily shape, like a dove upon him, and a
voice came from Heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well
pleased.

Observe here, the solemn investing of Christ into his Office as Mediator, is
attended with a threefold Miracle, namely, the opening of the Heavens, the
Descending of the Holy Ghost, and God the Father's voice concerning his Son;
the Heavens were opened, to show, that Heaven which was closed and shut against
us for our Sins, is now opened to us, by Christ's Undertaking for us: Next, the
Holy Ghost descends like a Dove upon our Savior; here we have a proof and
evidence of the Blessed Trinity; the Father speaks from Heaven, the Son comes
out of the Water, and the Holy Ghost descends in the likeness of a Dove. But
why did the Holy Ghost now descend upon Christ? first for the Designation of
his Person, to show that he was the Person set apart for the Work and Office of
a Mediator. Secondly, for the Unction and Sanctification of his Person for the
performance of that Office: Now was he anointed to be the King, Priest and
Prophet of his Church. Lastly, we have here the voice of God the Father,
pronouncing (1.) The nearness of Christ's Relation; This is my Son; (2.) The
endearedness of his Person; This is my Beloved Son; (3.) The fruit and benefit
of this near Relation unto us, In thee I am well pleased. Hence Learn, (1.)
That there is no possibility for any Person to please God out of Christ;
neither our Persons, nor our Performances can find Acceptance with God, but
only in and through him, and for his sake. (2.) That the Lord Jesus Christ is
the ground and cause of all that Love and Good Will which God the Father
shows to the Sons of Men. In Christ, God is well pleased with us as a
Reconciled Father, out of him a consuming Fire; Thou art my beloved Son, in
thee I am well pleased.

23 And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being, (as was
supposed) the son of Joseph, which was the son of Eli.

At Thirty years of Age, the Priests under the Law, entered upon their public
Office; accordingly Christ stays the full time prescribed by the Law, before he
undertakes his public Ministry; and he gives the reason for it, Mat. 3.15.
that he might fulfill all Rightousness; that is, the Righteousness of the
ceremonial Law, which required Persons to be of that Age before they entered
that Office; and also enjoined them to be Baptized or washed in Water, when they
undertook their Office. See Exodus 29.4. Learn hence, that whatever the Law
required in order to perfect Righteousness; That Christ fulfilled in most
absolute Perfection, both in his own Person, and also in the name of all
Believers. Observe farther the Title given to Joseph here; he is called the
supposed Father of Christ. Joseph was not his natural Father, (though so supposed
by the Jews) but he was his Legal Father, being Married to the Virgin when our
Savior was Born; and he was his nursing Father that took care of him, and
provided for him, though Christ sometimes showed both his Parents, that if he
pleased he could live without any dependence upon their care. See Luke 2.49.

24 Which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi, which was the son
of Melchi, which was the son of Janna, which was the son of Joseph. 25 Which
was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of Amos, which was the son of
Naum, which was the son of Esly, which was the son of Nagge. 26 Which was the
son of Maath, which was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of Semei,
which was the son of Joseph, which was the son of Judah. 27 Which was the son
of Joanna, which was the son of Resa, which was the son of Zorobabel, which was
the son of Salathiel, which was the son of Neri. 28 Which was the son of
Melchi, which was the son of Addi, which was the son of Cosam, which was the
son of Elmodam, which was the son of Er. 29 Which was the son of Jose, which
was the son of Eliezer, which was the son of Jorim, which was the son of
Matthat, which was the son of Levi. 30 Which was the son of Simeon, which was
the son of Juda, which was the son of Joseph which was the son of Jonan, which
was the son of Eliakin. 31 Which was the son of Melea, which was the son of
Menan, which was the son of Mattatha, which was the son of Nathan, which was
the son of David. 32 Which was the son of Jesse, which was the son of Obed,
which was the son of Booz, which was the son of Salmon, which was the son of
Naasson. 33 Which was the son of Aminadab, which was the son of Aram, which was
the son of Esrom, which was the son of Phares, which was the son of Juda. 34
Which was the son of Jacob, which was the son of Isaac, which was the son of
Abraham, which was the son of Thara, which was the son of Nachor. 35 Which was
the son of Saruch, which was the son of Ragau, which was the son of Phaleg,
which was the son of Heber, which was the son of Sala. 36 Which was the son of
Cainan, which was the son of Arphaxad, which was the son of Sem, which was the
son of Noah, which was the son of Lamech. 37 Which was the son of Mathusala,
which was the son of Enoch, which was the son of Jared, which was the son of
Maleleel, which was the son of Cainan. 38 Which was the son of Enos, which was
the son of Seth, which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God.

We find the Genealogy of our Blessed Savior Recorded by two Evangelists, St.
Matthew and St. Luke: his Pedigree is set forth by St. Matthew from his Father
Joseph, by St. Luke from his Mother Mary; the design of both is to prove him
lineally descended from Abraham and David, and consequently the true and
promised Messiah; St. Matthew intending his History primarily for the Jews,
proves him to be the Son of Abraham and David, for their comfort: St. Luke
designing the information and comfort of the Gentiles, derives our Lord's
Pedigree from Adam, the common Parent of mankind, to assure the Gentiles of
their possibility of an Interest in Christ, they being Sons of Adam. Neither of
these Evangelists are strict and accurate in enumerating every individual
person; which should Teach us not to be overcurious in scanning the parts of
this Genealogy, much less captiously to object against it, because of some
seeming contradictions in it. For if the Evangelists were not nice and critical
in composing this Genealogy, why should we be so in examining of it? Let us
rather attend the design of the Holy Ghost in Writing of it, which was Twofold,
(1.) for the honor of our Savior, as Man, showing who were his Noble and
Royal Progenitors, according to the Flesh. (2.) For the confirmation of our
Faith, touching the Reality of our Savior's Incarnation; the Scripture making
mention of all his Progenitors from the first man Adam, to his Reputed Father
Joseph; we cannot reasonably doubt either of the truth of his humane Nature, or
of the certainty of his being the promised Messiah. Hence we may Learn, That
the wisdom of God has taken all necessary care, and used all needful Means for
satisfying the minds of all unprejudiced Persons, touching the Reality of
Christ's humane Nature, and the certainty of his being the promised Messiah;
for both these Ends is our Savior's Genealogy, Descent and Pedigree, Recorded
in Holy Scripture.

CHAP. IV.
1 AND Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan, and was led by
the Spirit into the wilderness.

At the 22 Verse of the foregoing Chapter, we find the Holy Ghost descending in
a bodily Shape, like a Dove upon our Savior; in this verse we find the
extraordinary effects and fruits of the Holy Ghost's Descent upon our Savior,
he was filled with all the Gifts and Graces of the Blessed Spirit, to fit and
furnish him for that ministerial Service which he was now entering upon. But
observable it is, that before our Savior undertook the ministerial Office, he
is led by the Spirit into the Wilderness, and there furiously assaulted with
Satan's Temptations; Temptation, Meditation and Prayer, says Luther, make a
Minister; great Temptations from Satan, do fit us for greater Services for God.
And whereas it is said, that Christ was led by the Spirit into the Wilderness,
to be tempted of the Devil; by the Spirit we must understand the Holy Spirit of
God; for the Devil (I think) is never called the Spirit, but has always a brand
of Reproach annexed, as the evil Spirit, the unclean Spirit, and the like: By
his being led by the Spirit, (St. Mark says, he was drove by the Spirit) we
must not understand any violent motion, but a potent and efficacious
persuasion, he was carried by a strong impulse of the Spirit of God, or as the
Learned Lightfoot thinks, Christ was bodily caught up by the Holy Spirit into
the Air, and carried from Jordan, where he was Baptized into the Wilderness,
where he was tempted. God had put Great honor upon Christ at his Baptism,
declaring him to be his well-beloved Son, in whom he was pleased; and the next
News we hear, is the Devil's assaulting him with his Temptations. Learn thence,
that the more any are beloved of God, and dignified with more eminent
Testimonies of his Favor, so much the more is the Devil enraged, and
maliciously bent against them.

2 Being forty days tempted of the Devil, and in those days he did eat nothing,
and when they were ended, he afterward hungered.

Obs. here how the Divine Power upheld Christ's humane Nature without Food;
What Moses did at the giving of the Law, Christ does at the beginning of the
Gospel; namely, Fast forty days, and forty nights: Christ hereby intended our
Admiration, rather than our imitation; or if our Imitation, of the Action only,
not of the Time. From this Example of Christ we Learn, that it is our Duty by
fasting and Prayer, to prepare our selves for a Conflict with our Spiritual
Enemies, as Christ prepared himself by fasting to grapple with the Tempter, so
should we.

3 And the Devil said unto him, if thou be the son of God, command this stone,
that it be made Bread.

Obs. here (1.) The occasion of the Temptation, and (2.) the Temptation it
self; The occasion of the Temptation was our Savior's hunger and want of
Bread. Learn thence, That when God suffers any of his Children to fall into
want, and to be straightned for outward things, Satan takes a mighty advantage
thereupon, to tempt and assault them. Obs. (2.) What Sin it is he tempts our
Savior to, it is the sin of Distrust, to call in question his Sonship; if thou
be the Son of God, and then to distrust God's Providence and care, command that
these Stones be made Bread: It is the grand policy of Satan, first to tempt the
Children of God to doubt of their Adoption, next to distrust God's fatherly
care and provision, and last of all to use unwarrantable means to help
themselves. Thus Satan dealt with Christ, and thus he deals with Christians;
for to work a Miracle at Satan's Direction, was not a lawful means of providing
food for himself.

4 And Jesus answered him, saying, It is written that man shall not live by
bread alone, but by every word of God.

Note first, That though the Devil abused Scripture, yet Christ uses it. Good
things are never the worse for being abused by Satan, and his Instruments. Note
Secondly, the weapon which our Savior made use of to vanquish Satan; it was
the word of God: it is written, says Christ. Learn thence, That the Scripture,
or the written word of God is the only sure Weapon wherewith to vanquish Satan,
and beat back all his fiery Temptations. The Scripture is God's Armory, out of
which all our Weapons of War must be taken for managing our Conflict with Sin
and Satan.

5 And the Devil taking him up into an high mountain, shows him all the
Kingdoms of the world in a moment of time. 6 And the Devil said unto him, all
this power will I give thee, and the glory of them, for this is delivered unto
me, and to whomsoever I will I give it. 7 If thou therefore wilt worship me,
all shall be thine. 8 And Jesus answered and said unto him, Get thee behind me
Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve.

The next Sin which Satan tempts our Savior to, is the Sin of Idolatry, even
to worship the Devil himself; Oh thou impudent and foul Spirit, to desire thy
Creator to Worship thee, an Apostate Creature: Doubtless there is no sin so
black and foul, so horrid and monstrous, but the Christian may be tempted to
it, when Christ himself was tempted to Worship the Tempter, even the Devil
himself; St. Matthew reads it, If thou will Worship me, St. Luke, If thou will
worship before me; from whence we may gather, that if to worship before the
Devil, be to worship the Devil, then to worship before an Image, is to worship
the Image. Obs. (2.) the Bait which Satan makes use of to allure our Savior to
the sin of Idolatry, representing to his eye and view all the glories of the
World in a most inviting manner, and that in a moment of time, that so he might
affect him the more, and prevail the sooner. Learn thence, That the Pomp and
Grandeur of the World is made use of by Satan, as a dangerous Snare to draw Men
into a compliance with him in his Temptations unto sin, He showed him all the
Kingdoms of the world, and the Glory of them. Observe (3.) What an impudent
Liar and proud Boaster the Devil is, he was a Liar from the beginning; All this
will I give thee, for it was delivered unto me, an impudent untruth, for the
Dominion over the things of the World was never given to the Angels; neither
has the Devil any power over the Creatures, but by permission from God. The
Devil is a most impudent Liar, he told the first Lie, and by long Practice is
become a perfect Master in the Art of Lying. Observe also, the Devil's Boasting
as well as Lying, All this, will I give thee, when he had not one foot of
Ground to dispose of. Great Boasters are for the most part great Liars, and
such Boasters and Liars are like the Devil. Observe (4.) How our Savior
declares the true and only Object of Religious Worship, namely, God himself;
thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Religious
Worship is to be given to none of the Creatures, neither to Angels nor Men, how
excellent soever, but to God alone: We read but of two Creatures that ever
desired in Scripture to be Worshipped with Divine Worship, namely, the Devil
and Antichrist; but the command is peremptory, Thou shall worship the Lord, and
him only.

9 And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him upon a pinnacle of the temple,
and said unto him; If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down from hence: 10
For it is written, He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee. 11
And in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot
against a stone. 12 And Jesus answering said unto him, it is said, thou shall
not tempt the Lord thy God. 13 And when the Devil had ended all the temptation,
he departed from him for a Season.

Observe here (1.) The power which Satan, by God's permission, had over the
Body of our Blessed Savior; He took him up, and he carried his Body through
the Air, from the Wilderness to Jerusalem, and there sets him upon one of the
Pinacles of the Temple. Learn hence (1.) That Satan by God's permission may
have a power over the Bodies of Men, yea, over the Bodies of the best of Men.
(2.) That this exercise of Satan's power over the Bodies of Men, is no Argument
that such Persons do not belong to God. Our Savior himself, who was dear to
God, is yet left for a time in Satan's hands. But though Satan had a power to set
him upon the Pinnacle of the Temple, yet he had no power to cast him down; though
Satan's Malice be infinite, his power is limited and bounded; he cannot do all
the mischief he would, and he shall not do all he can. Obs. (2.) The Sin which
Satan tempts Christ to, the sin of Self-murder, Cast thy self down. Learn,
that Self-murder is a sin which Christ himself was, and the Best of his
Children may be solicited and tempted to; yet though Satan solicited Christ to
the sin, he could not compel him to comply with the Temptation. Thence Note,
That how much earnestness and importunity soever Satan uses in pressing his
Temptation, he can only persuade, he cannot compel; he may entice, but cannot
enforce. Observe (3.) The Argument which Satan uses to persuade Christ to the
sin of Self-murder, it is a Scripture-Argument; he quotes a Promise, He shall
give his Angels charge over thee; What a wonder is here, to see the Devil with
a Bible under his Arm, and with a Text of Scripture in his Mouth? Christ had
alleged Scripture before to Satan; here Satan Retorts Scripture back again to
Christ: It is written, says Christ, it is written says Satan. Learn, That Satan
knows how to abuse the most excellent and comfortable Scriptures, to the most
horrid and prodigious Ends and Purposes; He that had Profanely touched the
Sacred Body of Christ with his hand, sticks not presumptuously to handle the
Holy Scriptures with his Tongue. Obs. (4.) The Text of Scripture which Satan
makes use of, Psalm. 91.11, 12. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to
keep thee; where the Doctrine is good, but the Application bad: The Doctrine is
true, that God is pleased to employ his Angels for the good of his Servants,
and particularly for their preservation in times of Danger. But see how falsely
the Devil perverts, misapplies, and wrests that Sacred Scripture: When God
promises that his Angels shall keep us, it is in all his ways, not in our own
crooked paths. Learn, That although the Children of God have the promise of the
Guardianship of his Holy Angels, yet then only may they expect their
Protection, when walking in the way of their Duty: He shall give his Angels
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. Observe Lastly, The issue of
this Combat, Satan is vanquished and departs from our Savior. St. Matthew
says, the Devil left him, and Angels came and ministered unto him; Satan is
Conquered and qu^^s the Field. Teaching us, That nothing like a vigorous
resistance of Temptations, causes the Tempter to flee from us. Satan is both a
Cowardly Enemy, and a Conquered Enemy, resist him and he will run.

14 And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee: and there went
out a fame of him through all the Region round about, 15 And he taught in their
Synagogues, being glorified of all. 16 And he came to Nazareth, where he had
been brought up, and as his custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the
Sabbath Day, and stood up for to read. 17 And there was delivered unto him the
Book of the Prophet Esaias, and when he had opened the Book, he found the place
where it was written. 18 The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor; he has sent me to heal the
broken hearted: to preach deliverance to the Captives, and Recovering of sight
to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised. 19 To preach the
acceptable year of the Lord. 20 And he closed the Book, and gave it again to
the Minister, and sat down, and the eyes of all them that were in the
Synagogue were fastened upon him. 21 And he began to say unto them, This day is
this Scripture fulfilled in your ears.

Our Blessed Savior being thus fitted and prepared by his Baptism and
Temptations for the Execution of his Ministerial Office, he now enters upon the
great work of Preaching the Gospel, and St. Luke here declares the first place
he preached at, namely, Nazareth, and the first Text he preached upon. Isa. 61.1.
Observe (1.) The place which our Savior preached at; he bestowed his first
Sermon upon Nazareth, the place of his Conception and Education: For though
Christ was Born at Bethlehem, yet he was bred and brought up at Nazareth; there
he had his poor, but painful Education, working on his Father's Trade, that of
a Carpenter; This prejudiced the Jews against him, who looked for a Scepter, not
an Ax, in the hand of him that was born King of the Jews. Our Savior's short
and secret abode at Bethlehem, and his long and public living at Nazareth,
occasioned him to be called Jesus of Nazareth: Yet some conceive it was a
Nickname fastened by the Devil upon our Savior, that he might disguise the
place of Christ's Nativity, and leave the Jews at the greater loss concerning
their Messiah. Sure it is, that this Name Jesus of Nazareth, stuck upon our
Savior all his Life; and at his Death was fixed by Pilate on his Cross. Yea,
after his Ascension, such as believed on him were called The Sect of the
Nazareens, or the followers of Jesus of Nazareth. Observe (2.) The Text which
our Savior preached upon at Nazareth; he takes it out of the Prophet Esaias,
Chapter 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, and he has Anointed me to preach
the Gospel to the poor; that is, God the Father has poured forth his Holy
Spirit without measure upon me, in all the Gifts and Graces of it, to sit and
furnish me for the work of a Mediator; and particularly, to preach the Gospel
to the poor in Spirit, and to such as are poor in outward Condition also, if
meekned and humbled with the sight and sense of their sins; To bind up the
broken hearted, that is, to comfort them with the glad tidings of the Gospel,
To preach Deliverance to the Captives; to let such Sinners know, who were
slaves to sin and Satan, that a Deliverer is come, if they be willing to be
Delivered by him, To preach the acceptable year of the Lord, or to proclaim a
Spiritual Jubilee, in which God proffers pardon of Sin and Reconciliation with
himself upon the Terms of the Gospel; Learn hence, (1.) That God stirs up
none to take upon them the Office of the Ministry, whom he has not fitted and
furnished with Gifts for the Regular discharge of it. (2.) That Christ himself
did not undertake the Office of a Mediator, but by the Ordination of God the
Holy Spirit, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, and he has sent me to preach
the Gospel. (3.) That no Creature, Angel or Man, could perform the Office of a
Mediator, but only Christ, who was Consecrated to that Office by an Anointing
from the Holy Spirit without measure; The Spirit of the Lord has anointed me.
(4.) That the preaching of the Gospel is the great Ordinance, which Christ
himself made use of, and recommended to his Apostles and Ministers, for
inlightning blind Sinners, for comforting broken hearts, and for Delivering
Captive Souls from the slavery and dominion of sin and Satan; He has sent me
to preach the Gospel to the poor, to heal the brokenhearted, to publish
Deliverance to the Captives, and Recovering of Sight to the blind. What Enemies
then are they to the Souls of Men, who have low and mean thoughts of this high
and honorable Ordinance of God, the preaching of the Everlasting Gospel, which
is the power of God unto Salvation? Observe (3.) The Behavior of our Savior's
Auditors, (the Men of Nazareth) under his Preaching; their Eyes were fixed, and
their minds intent upon him, and upon what was spoken by him, The Eyes of all
that were in the Synag^gue were fastened upon him; not closed with sleep, nor
gazing about upon others, but fixed upon Christ the Preacher; fixing of the
Eye, is a great help to the attention of the ear, and the intention of the
mind: a fastened eye is a means to help us to a fixed heart; as a wandering eye
is both a sign and a cause of a wandering Heart. O that our Hearers would
imitate our Savior's Hearers under the Word: They fastened their Eyes upon him,
as if they meant to hear with their eyes as well as with their Ears: And yet we
have cause to suspect, that Curiosity rather than Piety caused this their
Attention, seeing as you will find, v. 29. That these very Persons, who out of
Novelty were ready to eat his words, soon after, out of Cruelty were ready to
devour the speaker; for they thrust him out of the city, led him to the Brow of
the Hill, and would have cast him down headlong: Oh blessed Savior! What
wonder is it, that the Persons of thy Ministers are despised, and their
Doctrine neglected, when thou thy self, the first Preacher of the Gospel, and
for thy first Sermon at Nazareth were thus ignominiously treated.

22 And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which
proceeded out of his mouth: and they said, is not this Joseph's son? 23 And he
said unto them, ye will surely say unto me this Proverb, Physician heal thy
self: Whatsoever we have heard done in Capernaum, do also here in thy country.
24 And he said, verily I say unto you, no Prophet is accepted in his own
country.

Observe here (1.) The effect of our Savior's Ministry at Nazareth, it created
wonder, but did not produce Faith; they marvelled, but not believed; they
admire the Wisdom of his Discourses, but will not own him to be the promised
Messiah, because of the Poverty and Meanness of his Condition; Is not this
Joseph's Son? They expect the son of a Prince, not the son of a Carpenter to be
their Messiah. Thence Note, That the Poverty and Meaness of Christ's Condition,
was that which Multitudes stumbled at, and which kept many, yea most from
Believing on him. None but a Spiritual Eye can discern Beauty in an humbled and
abased Savior. Obs. (2.) Our Savior wonders not, that so few of his Country
men, amongst whom he had been bred and brought up, and with whom he had lived
most part of his time, did despise his Person, and reject his Doctrine: He
tells them, No Prophet has honor in his own Country; that is, very seldom has;
Teaching us, that usually the Ministers of God are most despised, where they
are most familiarly known; sometimes the remembrance of their mean Original and
Extraction, sometimes the poverty of their Parents, sometimes the Indecencies
of their Childhood, sometimes the follies of their youth, sometimes the faults
of their Family and Relations, are ripped up, and made occasions of Contempt; and
therefore that Prophet that comes from afar, and has not been much known gains
the greatest Reputation amongst a people, who being ignorant of his Extraction,
look upon his Breeding as well as his Calling to be Divine. This good use ought
to be made of our Savior's Observation, that his Ministers be very wise and
discreet in Conversation with their People, not making themselves cheap and
common in every Company, nor light and vain in any Company: for such
Familiarity will breed contempt, both of their Persons and their Doctrine. But
our Duty is, by strictness and gravity of deportment, to keep up an awe and
esteem in the Consciences of our People; always tempering our Gravity with
Courtesy, and a Condescending Affability, that Minister which prostitutes his
Authority, frustrates the end of his Ministry, and is the occasion of his own
Contempt.

25 But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias,
when the heavens were shut up three years and six months, when great Famine was
throughout all the Land. 26 But unto none of them was Elias sent, save unto
Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow. 27 And many Lepers
were in Israel in the time of Elizeas the Prophet, and none of them was
cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian.

Here our Savior by a double instance, confirms what he had last told his
Countrymen at Nazareth, namely, that Prophets are most despised by their own
Country men and Acquaintance, and that Strangers oft-times have more Advantage
by a Prophet than his own People. The first instance of this which our Savior
gives them is in the days of Elias, though there were many Widows then in his own
Nation, yet none of them were qualified to receive his Miracles, but a
Stranger, a Widow of Sareptha. The second instance was in the days of Elisha;
when though there were many Lepers in and about his Neighborhood, yet they being
his Countrymen despised him; and none were qualified for a Cure but Naaman the
Syrian, a man of another Country. Thus the Prophets of God, like some
Fishermen, catch least in their own Pond, and do more good by their Ministry
among strangers, then amongst their own Countrymen, Kinsfolk, and near
Relations; No Prophet is accepted in his own Country.

28 And all they in the Synagogue, when they heard these things were filled
with wrath. 29 And rose up and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the
Brow of the Hill, whereon their city was built; that they might cast him down
headlong. 30 But he passing through the midst of them, went his way.

Observe here (1.) The horrid Impiety of the People of Nazareth, in thrusting
their Savior out of their City, and their barbarous and bloody Cruelty in
bringing him to the Brow of the Hill, with full intent to cast him down
headlong. But Christ was to dye a clean contrary way, not by throwing down, but
by lifting up. Oh ungrateful and unhappy Nazareth, is this the Return you make
that Divine Guest, which for Thirty Years had sojourned in your Coasts? No
wonder that the ablest Preaching, and most exemplary Living of the Holiest and
best of Christ's Ministers obtain no greater success at this day amongst a
people; when the presence of Christ at Nazareth, for thirty Years together, had
no better influence upon the Minds and Manners of that People; but instead of
Receiving his Message, they rage at the Messenger: Neither let any of the
Ministers of Christ think it strange, that they are ignominiously despised,
when our Master before us, was in danger of being barbarously Murdered, and
that for his plain Preaching to his own People, the Men of Nazareth. But Obs.
(2.) The miraculous escape of our Blessed Lord from the murdering hands of the
wicked Nazarites; he passing through the midst of them went his way: How and
after what manner he escaped, is not declared, and therefore cannot without
presumption be determined. Although the Rhemists to make way for their Doctrine
of Transubstantiation positively affirm, that contrary to the nature of a Body,
he penetrated thorough the Breasts of the People. But whether he struck them
with Blindness that they did not see, or smote them with fear that they durst
not hold him; or whether by a greater strength then theirs (which his Godhead
could easily supply his Humane Nature with) he escaped from them, it is neither
prudent to inquire, nor possible to determine; we know it was an easy thing for
him, who was God as well as Man, to quit himself of any Mortal Enemies; and at
the same time, when he rescued himself, could have ruined them, by frowning
them into Hell, or looking them into nothing.

31 And came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught them on the
Sabbath Days. 32 And they were astonished at his Doctrine, for his word was
with power. 33 And in the Synagogue there was a man which had a Spirit of an
unclean Devil, and he cried out with a loud voice. 34. Saying, let us alone,
What have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy
us? I know thee who thou art, the holy one of God. 35 And Jesus rebuked him,
saying, hold thy peace, and come out of him: and when the Devil had thrown him
in the midst, he came out of him, and hurt him not. 36 And they were all
amazed, and spoke among themselves, saying, what a word is this? for with
Authority and power, he commands the unclean spirits, and they come out. 37
And the same of him went out into every place of the Country round about.

Our Blessed Savior being driven out of Nazareth by the fury of his
Countrymen, departs to Capernaum, where he enters into their Synagogues, and
taught. Who can declare the pains that our Savior took, and the hazards which
he ran in preaching the Everlasting Gospel to lost Sinners; But observe the
smalness of his Success; the People were astonished, but not believed; his
Doctrine produced Admiration, but not faith; his Auditors were Admirers, but
not Believers, the People were astonished at his Doctrine; the reason of which
Astonishment is added, for his word was with power; that is, there was Majesty
in his Person, Spirituality in his Preaching, and powerful Miracles
accompanying both, and confirming Both, of which the Evangelist here gives us
an account, namely, the casting out of a Devil in one possessed, v. 33. There
was a man which had a Spirit of an unclean Devil, and he cried out; that is,
the Devil that unclean Spirit did enter into him and bodily possess him.
Amongst many other Calamities which sin has brought upon our Bodies, this is
one, to be Bodily possessed by Satan. The Devil has an inveterate Malice against
Mankind, seeking to ruin our Souls by his Suggestions and Temptations; and to
destroy our Bodies by some means or other. Oh how much is it our Interest as
well as our Duty, by Prayer to put our selves, morning and evening under the
Divine care and Protection, that we may be preserved from the power and malice
of Evil Spirits. Obs. (2.) The Title here given to the Devil, he is called the
Unclean Spirit. The Devils, those wicked Spirits of Hell, are most impure and
filthy Creatures; impure by reason of their original Apostasy, impure by means
of their actual and daily Sins; such are Murder, Malice, Lying and the like, by
which they continually pollute themselves; and impure, by means of their
continual desire and endeavors to pollute Mankind with the Contagion of their
own sins. Lord! how foul is the nature of Sin, which makes the Devil such a
foul and filthy, such an impure and unclean Creature. Obs. (3.) The Substance
of the Devil's outcry, Let us alone, What have we to do with thee? art thou
come to destroy us? that is, to restrain us from the exercise of our power; the
Devil thinks himself destroyed, when he is restrained from doing Mischief. Obs.
(4.) The Title given by the Devil to our Savior, he styles him, The Holy one
of God: How comes this Acknowledgment out of the Devil's Mouth? could an
Apostle make a Profession beyond this: but how comes Satan to make it? for no
good end, and with no good intention we may be sure, for the Devil never speaks
Truth for Truth-sake, but for advantage-sake: probably (1.) he might make this
Profession, that so he might bring the Truth professed into question: hoping that
a Truth which received Testimony from the Father of Lies, would be suspected:
or (2.) it might perhaps be done to make the People believe that our Savior
had some familiarity with Satan, and did work Miracles by his help, because he
did confess him, and seem to put honor upon him: Hence we may Learn, That it
is possible, for a Person to own and acknowledge Christ to be the True and Only
Savior, and yet to miss of Salvation by him: If a Speculative Knowledge, and a
verbal Profession of Christ were sufficient to Salvation, the Devil himself
would not miss of Happiness. Obs. (5.) How our Savior rebukes the Devil for
this Confession, and commands him Silence: Jesus rebuked him saying, hold thy
peace. But why was this Rebuke given the Devil, and his Mouth stopped when he
spoke the Truth? Answer (1.) Because Christ knew that the Devil confessed this
Truth on purpose to Disgrace the Truth. (2.) Because the Devil was no fit
Person to make this Profession: a Testimony of Truth from the father of Lies,
is enough to render Truth it self suspected. Yet the Devil's Evidence that
Christ was the Holy One of God, will rise up in Judgment against the wicked
Pharisees, who shut their Eyes against the Miracles, and stopped their Ears
against the Doctrine of the Holy One of God. Observe lastly, How the unclean
Spirit obeys the voice of Christ, but with great Reluctance and Regret; when
the unclean Spirit had thrown him in the midst, he came out. Where Observe, The
Devil's spite at parting, he tares the Man, throws him violently from place to
place, showing, how loath he was to be dispossessed. Where Satan has once gotten
an hold, and settled himself for a time, how unwilling is he to be cast out of
Possession. Yea, it is a Torment and vexation to him to be cast out. It is much
easier to keep Satan out, then to cast him out. Satan may possess the Body by
God's Permission, but he cannot possess our Hearts without our own Consent and
Approbation; it will be our Wisdom to deny him Entrance into our Souls at
first, by Rejecting his wicked Motions and Suggestions; for when once entered,
he will like the strong Man Armed, keep the House, till a stronger then he
casts him out.

38 And he arose out of the Synagogue, and entered into Simons house, and Simons
wives mother lay sick of a fever, and they besought him for her. 39 And he
stood over her and rebuked the fever, and it left her, and immediately she
arose and ministered unto them.

Here Observe (1.) That St. Peter, a Disciple, yea, an Apostle, was a Married
Person: Neither the Prophets of the Old Testament, nor the Apostles of the New,
did abhor the Marriage Bed, nor judge themselves too pure for an Institution of
their Maker. The Church of Rome, by denying the Lawfulness of Priest's
Marriage, makes her self wiser then God, who says, Heb. 13.4. Marriage is
Honorable amongst All men. Observe (2.) Peter, tho a Good Man, and his Wifes
Mother, probably a Gracious Woman, yet is his Family visited with Sickness.
Strength of Grace, and Dearness of Respect even from Christ himself, cannot
prevail against Diseases. God's own Children are visited with Bodily Sickness,
as well as others. Observe (3.) The Divine Power of Christ manifested in this
miraculous Cure; He stood over her, says St. Luke, he took her by the hand and
lift her up, says St. Mark: Here was an ordinary Distemper cured after an
extraordinary manner, by a touch of Christ's hand, in an instant; Immediately
the Fever left her, and she arose and ministered unto them. That she could
arise, argued her Cure Miraculous; that she could and did arise, and administer
to Christ and his Disciples, argued her Thankfulness. After Christ had healed
any of us, it ought to be our first care to Administer unto him; that is, to
employ our Recovered Strength in the Service of Christ, and to improve our
Restored Health to the Honor and Glory of Christ.

40 Now when the sun was setting, all they that had any sick with diverse
diseases, brought them unto him: and he laid his hands on every one of them,
and healed them. 41 And Devils also came out of many, crying out and saying,
Thou art Christ the son of God: and he rebuked them, and suffered them not to
speak, for they knew that he was Christ.

The Evangelist here declares sundry other Cures wrought by our Savior, he
healed the Sick, and dispossessed the Devils. In our Savior's time we read of
many possessed with Devils, and but of few, either before or afterward.
Probably (1.) Because Satan perceiving the Messiah to be come in the Flesh to
destroy his Kingdom, did rage the more, and discover greater Malice and Enmity
against Mankind. (2.) Perhaps Almighty God suffered Satan at that time to
possess so many, that Christ might have occasion to manifest his Divine Power,
by casting Satan out. And accordingly we find our Savior dispossessing all
that were possessed by Satan. It is added, That he suffered not the Devils to
speak, because they knew him; that is, Christ would not be made known to be the
Son of God by the Preaching of the Devil, lest the World should from thence
take occasion to think, that our Savior held a Correspondency with those
wicked Spirits, and that the Miracles which he wrought were performed by the
Devil's Assistance, as being one in Combination with him. Possibly from the
Devil's owning Christ to be the Holy one of God, the Pharisees concluded that
there was a compact and agreement betwixt them: and thereupon their Affirmation
was Grounded, he casts out Devils, by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils.

42 And when it was day he departed, and went into a desert place; and the
people sought him and came unto him, and stayed him that he should not depart
from them. 43 And he said unto them I must preach the kingdom of God unto other
cities also, for therefore am I sent. 44 And he preached in the Synagogues of
Galilee.

Observe here (1.) The great work and business of our Savior's Life to preach
the Gospel, I must preach the Kingdom of God, for therefore came I forth.
Preaching was Christ's great work, it is undoubtedly his Ministers. Christ
omitted some Opportunities of working Miracles, that he might preach to other
Cities. This was his great Work. Obs. (2.) It being Christ's great Design to
plant and propagate the Gospel: he would not confine his Ministry to one
particular place, no not to the great City of Capernaum, but resolves to preach
the word in smaller Towns and Villages, leaving his Ministers herein an
Instructive Example, to be as willing to Preach the Gospel in the smallest
Villages, as in the largest and most populous Cities, if God calls us
thereunto. Let the place be never so obscure and mean, and the Congregation
never so small and little, and, if God sends us thither, the greatest of us
must not think it beneath us, to go and instruct an handful of People.

CHAP. V.
1 AND it came to pass, that as the people pressed upon him to hear the word of
God, he stood by the Lake of Genesareth. 2 And saw two ships standing by the
Lake: but the fishermen were gone out of them; and were washing their Nets. 3
And he entered into one of the Ships which was Simons, and prayed him that he
would thrust out a little from the Land; and he sat down, and taught the people
out of the ship.

Here Observe (1.) That our Savior used the Sea as well as the Land in his
passage from place to place, to preach the Gospel; and the reasons why he did
so, might probably be these, (1.) to show Natures intent in making of the Sea,
namely, to be Sailed upon, as the Land to be walked upon. (2.) That Christ
might take occasion to manifest his Deity, in working Miracles upon the Sea;
namely, by calming of the Waves, and stilling of the Winds. (3.) It might be to
comfort Seafaring men in their Distresses, and to encourage them to pray to
such a Savior as had an experimental Knowledge of the Dangers of the Sea; it
were well if Sailers would consider this, and instead of inuring themselves to
the Language of Hell, when they go down into the deeps, would direct their
Prayer unto Christ, and look up to him; who now in Heaven has the remembrance
of what he himself endured and underwent here on Earth, and on the Sea. Obs.
(2.) The circumstance of time when Christ used to put forth to Sea; it was
usually after he had wrought some extraordinary Miracle, which set them on
admiring and commending of him; as after he had fed so many thousands with a
few Barley-Loaves and Fishes, presently he put forth to Sea, shunning thereby
all popularity and vainglorious Applause from the Multitude, which he was
never ambitious of, but industriously avoided. Obs. (3.) That after our
Savior's Resurrection, we never find him Sailing any more upon the Seas. For
such a Fluctuating and Turbulent Condition, which necessarily attends
Sea-Voyages, was utterly inconsistent with the constancy, stability and
perpetuity of Christ's estate when Risen from the Grave. The firm Land better
agreeing with his fixed State; he keeps upon it, till his Ascension into
Heaven. Obs. (4.) That Christ scruples not to preach to the People in, and out
of the Ship, he sat down, and taught the people out of the Ship: Sometimes we
find our Holy Lord preaching upon a Mountain, sometimes in a Ship, sometimes in
an House, as often as may be in the Synagogue: He that laid hold on all Seasons
for Preaching the Gospel, never scrupled any place which convenience offered to
preach in; well knowing, that it is the Ordinance that Sanctifies the place,
and not the Place the Ordinance.

4 Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon, launch out into the deep,
and let down your Nets for a Draught. 5 And Simon answering said unto him,
Master, we have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing, nevertheless at
thy word, I will let down the Net. 6 And when they had this done, they enclosed
a great multitude of Fishes, and their Net brake. 7 And they beckned unto their
partners which were in the other ship, that they should come, and help them,
and they came, and filled both the ships, so that they began to sink. 8 When
Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus feet, saying, depart from me, for I
am a sinful Man, O Lord. 9 For he was astonished, and all that were with him,
at the draught of the Fishes which they had taken. 10 And so was also James and
John sons of Zebedee, which were partners with Simon. And Jesus said unto
Simon, fear not, from henceforth thou shall catch men. 11 And when they had
brought their ships to land, they forsook all and followed him.

Observe here (1.) Our Savior having delivered his Doctrine to the People,
confirms his Doctrine with a Miracle, and with such a Miracle as did at once
instruct and encourage his Apostles; the miraculous number of Fish which they
caught, did presage and prefigure their miraculous Success in preaching,
planting, and propagating of the Gospel. Obs. (2.) our Savior's Command to
Peter, and his ready Compliance with Christ's Command; Let down your Net for a
Draught, says Christ: We have toiled all night, says St. Peter, and caught
nothing, nevertheless at thy word, we will let down the Net. This Mystically
represents to us, (1.) That that the Fishers of men may Labor all Night, and
all day too, and catch nothing. This is sometimes the Fisher-mens fault, but
oftener the Fishes. It Is the Fisher's fault that nothing is taken, if he does
only play upon the Sands, and not launch out into the Deep; deliver some
Superficial and less necessary Truths, without opening to the people the great
Mysteries of Godliness. If they Fish with brokeh Nets, either deliver unsound
Doctrine, or lead unexemplary Lives, if they do not cast the Net on the right
side of the Ship, that is, rightly divide the word, as Workmen that need not to
be ashamed. And if they do not fish at Christ's Command, but run a fishing
unsent, it is then no wonder, that they Labor all their days and catch
nothing. But very often is it the Fishes Fault, rather than the Fisher-mans.
Worldly men are crafty and cunning, they will not come near the Net. Hypocrites
are slippery like Eels, the Fisherman cannot long hold them, but they dart into
their holes; priding themselves in their external Performances, and satisfying
themselves with a round of Duties. The great men of the World break through the
Net, the Divine Commands cannot bind them, Jer. 5.5. I will go to the great
men, and speak to them, but they have broken the yoke, and burst the bonds.
Obs. (3.) The miraculous Success which St. Peter had, when at Christ's Command
he let down the Net; They enclosed such a multitude of Fishes that their Net
brake. Two things our Savior aimed at in this Miracle, (1.) To manifest to his
Disciples the power of his Godhead, that they might not be offended at the
poverty and meanness of his Manhood. (2.) To assure them of the great Success
which his Apostles and their Successors might expect in planting and
propagating of the Gospel. If the Ministers of Christ, whom he calls Fishers of
Men, be Faithful in the cast, his Power shall be magnified in the Draught. Some
of our Fish will cleave Eternally to the Rocks, others play upon the Sands,
more will wallow in the Mud, and continue all their days in the filth of sin,
if our Master, at whose Command we let down the Net, does not enclose them in
it, as well as assist us in the casting of it. Observe (4.) What influence the
sight of this Miracle had upon St. Peter, it occasioned fear, and amazement,
and caused him to adore Christ, and declare himself unworthy of his presence.
Depart from me, for I am a sinful Man, O Lord; not that the good man was weary
of Christ's Presence, but acknowledged himself unworthy of it. It Is a great
Discovery of our Holiness to revere God and fear before him, when he does
wonderful things before us, though they be wonders of Love and Mercy; here was a
wonderful appearance of Christ's Power and Mercy to St. Peter. But it affects
him with reverential fear and awful Astonishment. Observe (5.) How St. Peter
and the rest of the Apostles at Christ's Call, forsook all and followed him;
they left Father and Friends, Ship and Nets, and followed Jesus; whom Christ
Calls, he calls effectually; he draws whom, he calls, and works their Hearts to
a ready Compliance with their Duty. And although when they were first called to
be Disciples, they followed their Trades of Fishing for a time, yet upon their
second call to the Apostleship, they left off their Trade, and forsook all to
follow the Ministry. Teaching the Ministers of the Gospel, that it is their
Duty to give themselves wholly up to their great Work, and not to incumber
themselves with secular Affairs and worldly Business: nothing but an
indispensible Necessity in providing for a Family, can excuse a Ministers
incumbring himself with Worldly Concerns and Business: They forsook all, and
followed Jesus.

12 And it came to pass, when he was in a certain place, behold a man full of
Leprosy, who seeing Jesus, fell on his face and besought him, saying, Lord, if
thou will thou can make me clean. 13 And he put forth his hand and touched
him, saying, I will, be thou clean, and immediately the Leprosy departed from
him. 14 And he charged him to tell no man, but go and show thy self to the
Priest, and offer for thy cleansing, according as Moses commanded, for a
Testimony unto them. 15 But so much the more went there a fame abroad of him,
and great multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by him of their
Infirmities.

Observe here (1.) the Petitioner, that in a very humble and submissive manner
sues unto Christ for Cure and Healing, A Leper fell on his Face, and besought
him, saying, Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean: he does not question
Christ's Power, but distrusts his willingness to help and heal him. Christ's
Divine Power must be fully assented to, and firmly Believed by all those that
expect benefit by him, and healing from him. Obs. (2.) The great readiness of
Christ to help and heal this distressed Person; Jesus touching him, saying, I
will, be thou clean. By the Ceremonial Law, the Leper was forbidden to be
touched, therefore Christ's touching this Leper, shows himself to be above the
Law; that he was the Lord of it, and might dispense with it; and his healing
this Leper by the word of his Mouth, and the touch of his Hand, showed him to
be truly and really God; for Leprosy among the Jews was accounted an incurable
Distemper, called the Finger of God; a Disease of his sending, and of his
removing. Our Savior therefore, as a proof of his being the Messiah, tells
John's Disciples, Matthew. 11.5. That the Lepers were cleansed, and the Dead
raised by him; which two being joined together do imply, that the cleansing of
the Lepers is as much an act of Divine Power, as the raising of the Dead; and
accordingly, 2 Kings 5.8. it is said, Am I God that this man sends unto me to
cure a person of his Leprosy. Obs. (3.) The certainty and suddenness of the
Cure, was a farther proof of Christ's Divine Power, Immediately the Leprosy
departed. Christ not only Cured him immediately, but instantaneously; not only
without Means, but without the ordinary time required for such a Cure. Thus
Christ showed both Power and will to Cure him Miraculously, who Believed his
Power, but questioned his willingness. Obs. (4.) A Twofold Charge and Command
given by Christ to the Leper, (1.) To tell it to no Man: where the great
Modesty, Piety and Humility of Our Savior is discovered, together with the
prudent care he took of his own Safety; his modesty in concealing his own
Praises, his Humility in shunning all vainglorious Applause and Commendation;
his Piety in referring all the Honor and Glory to God his Father; and the Care
of his own Safety appeared, lest the publishing of his Miracles should create
untimely Danger from the Pharisees. (2.) The next part of the Charge given to
the Recovered Leper, is to go and show himself to the Priest, and to offer the
Gift which Moses Commanded for a Testimony unto them; that is, to testify to
the Jews, that he did not oppose the Ceremonial Law which required a
Thank-offering at his Hand; and also that the Miracle might testify, that he
was the true and promised Messiah. Learn hence, that our Blessed Savior would
have the Ceremonial Law punctually observed, so long as the time for its
continuance did endure; though he came to destroy that Law, yet whilst it stood,
he would have it exactly observed.

16 And he withdrew himself into the Wilderness, and prayed.

The Duty of private and solitary Prayer is not more strictly injoined by our
Savior's Command, then it is recommended to us by his Example. Observe (1.)
The Duty which our Holy Lord performed, Prayer; we have much more business with
God in Prayer, than Christ had; he had no sins to be humbled for, nor beg
pardon of; no need to pray for any sanctifying habits of Grace, the Holy Spirit
being given to him without measure; yet did our Holy Lord spend much of his
time in Prayer; he took delight in paying this Homage to his Heavenly Father.
Obs. (2.) What kind of Prayer our Lord did eminently delight in, it was
solitary and private Prayer. He often went alone, even out of the Hearing of
his own Disciples. The Company of our Best friends is not always seasonable nor
acceptable. There are Times and Seasons when a Christian would not be willing
that his Dearest Relations upon Earth should hear that Intercourse which passes
betwixt him and his God. Observe (3.) The place our Lord withdraws to for
private Prayer; it is the desert; he withdrew into the Wilderness and Prayed,
both to avoid Ostentation, and also to enjoy Communion with his Father. The
modest Bridegroom of his Church, says St. Bernard, will not impart himself so
freely to his Spouse before Company, St. Mark 1.35. adds, That our Savior rose
up a great while before day, and went into this desert place to pray; Teaching
us, that the Morning is the fit Season, yea, the best of Seasons for private
Duties; now are our Spirits freshest, and our minds freest, before the
Distractions of the day break in upon us: It is certainly much better to go
from Prayer to business, then from business to Prayer. Note lastly, that our
Blessed Savior had no idle hours here in the World, his time did not lie upon
his hand as ours do; he was always either Preaching or Praying, or working
Miracles; either paying Homage to God, or doing good to man. Lord! help us to
imitate this thy instructive Example, by embracing all opportunities of
Glorifying God, and doing good to one another.

17 And it came to pass on a certain day, as he was teaching, that there were
Pharisees and Doctors of the Law sitting by, which were come out of every Town
of Galilee, and Judea, and Jerusalem: and the power of the Lord was present to
heal them. 18 And behold men brought in a Bed, a man which was taken with the
palsy, and they sought means to bring him in, and to lay him before them. 19
And when they could not find by what way they might bring him in, because of
the multitude, they went upon the housetop, and let him down through the
Tiling, with his Couch, into the midst, before Jesus. 20 And when he saw their
faith, he said unto him, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee. 21 And the Scribes
and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is this which speaks
Blasphemies? who can forgive Sins, but God alone? 22 But when Jesus perceived
their thoughts, he answering, said unto them, what reason ye in your hearts? 23
Whither is easier to say, Thy sins be forgiven thee? or to say, Rise up and
walk? 24 But that ye may know, that the son of man has power on earth to
forgive Sins, (he said unto the sick of the Palsy) I say unto thee Arise, and
take up thy Couch, and go into thy house. 25 And immediately he rose up, before
them, and took up that whereon he lay, and departed to his own house,
glorifying God. 26 And they were all amazed, and they glorified God and were
filled with fear, saying, We have seen strange things this day.

As the great End of our Saviors Miracles was to confirm his Doctrine, so
commonly after his Preaching he wrought his Miracles: The Scribes and
Pharisees, though they had no love for our Savior's person, nor value for his
Ministry, yet they frequently accompanied him wherever he went, partly to cavil
at his Doctrine, and partly out of Curiosity to see his Miracles; but Observe
the gracious Condescension of our Savior, although he well knew that the
Pharisees at this time attended upon him with no good intention, yet he puts
forth his Divine Power in working Miracles before them; the power of the Lord
was present to heal; Not that Christ's Power was at any time absent, but it is
said now to be present, because it was now exerted and put forth at his Will
and Pleasure. And accordingly at this time, before the Pharisees Eyes, he
Miraculously Cures a Person sick of the Palsy, as the Paragraph before us does
inform us. Wherein Observe (1.) The Diseased and Distressed Person, one sick of
the Palsy, which being a Resolution and weakness of the Nerves, enfeebles the
Joints, and confines a Person to his Bed or Couch. As a Demonstration of
Christ's Divine Power, he was pleased to single out the Palsy and Leprosy,
incurable Diseases to work a Cure upon. Now this Person was so great a Cripple,
by reason of the Palsy, that he could not go, nor be led, but was carried in
his Bed or Couch. Observe (2.) As the grievousness of the Disease, so the
greatness of the Peoples Faith. The Man and his friends had a firm and full
persuasion that Christ was clothed with a Divine Power, and able to help him;
and they hope in his Goodness, that he was willing as well as able. And
accordingly the Roof of the Jewish Houses being flat they uncover some part of
it, and let the Bed down, with the sick Man in it, and lay him at the foot of
Christ, in hopes of help and healing. Observe (3.) That no sooner did they
exercise their Faith in Believing, but Christ exerts his Divine Power in
healing; yet the Object of their Faith, probably was not Christ's Divine Power
as God, but they look upon him as an extraordinary Prophet, to whom God had
Communicated such a Divine power as Elijah and Elisha had before him. Yet see
the mavelous efficacy even of this Faith, which obtained not only what was
desired, but more then was expected. They desired only the healing of the Body,
but Christ heals Body and Soul too; saying, Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven thee; Thereby our Savior signifies to them, that sin is the
meritorious Cause of Sickness, and consequently that in Sickness the best way
to find ease and deliverance from pain, is first to seek for pardon; for the
sense of pardon will in some degree take away the sense of pain. Obs. (4.) The
Exception which the Pharisees take against our Savior for pronouncing that
this Man's Sins were forgiven him; they charge him with Blasphemy, urging that
it is God's peculiar Prerogative to pardon sin; indeed their proposition was
true, but their application was false. Nothing more true, then that it is the
highest Blasphemy for any mere Man to arrogate and assume to himself the
incommunicable property of God, absolutely and authoritatively to forgive sin.
But then their denying this power to Christ of Forgiving sins, which he had as
God from all Eternity, and as Mediator, GOD and Man in one Person, when here on
Earth; this was Blasphemy in them; but the assuming and challenging of it none
in him. Observe (5.) To Cure, if possible, the obstinacy and blindness of the
Pharisees, our Savior gives them a Twofold Demonstration of his Godhead, (1.)
By letting them understand, that he knew their thoughts; Jesus perceived their
thoughts, v. 22. to know the thoughts, to search the Hearts, and understand the
reasonings of Men, is not in the power of Angels or Men, but the Prerogative of
God only. (2.) By assuming to himself a power to forgive Sins, for our Savior
here, by taking upon him to forgive sins in his own name, and by his own
Authority, does give the World an undeniable proof, and convincing Evidence of
his Godhead; For who can forgive Sins, but God only. Observe (6.) The effect
which this Miracle had upon the minds of the people, they marvelled and were
amazed, were filled with fear, but not with Faith; Astonished, but not
Believed. Learn hence, That the sight of Christ's own Miracles is not
sufficient to work Faith in the Soul, without the efficacious Grace of God; the
one may make us marvel, the other must make us believe.

27 And after those things, he went forth, and saw a publican named Levi,
sitting at the receipt of custom, and he said unto him, follow me. 28 And he
left all, rose up, and followed him. 29 And Levi made him a great feast in his
own house, and there was a great company of Publicans, and of others that sat
down with them. 30 But the Scribes and Pharisees murmured against his Disciples
saying, Why do ye eat and drink with Publicans and Sinners? 31 And Jesus
answering, said unto them, they that are whole need not a Physician, but they
that are sick. 32 I came not to call the Righteous, but sinners to Repentance.

The number of our Lord's Disciples not being filled up, Observe (1.) What a
free and gracious, what an unexpected and undeserved Choice Christ makes. Levi,
that is, Matthew, (for he had both Names) a grinding Publican, who gathered the
Tax for the Roman Emperor, and was probably Guilty as others were, of the sins
of Covetousness and Extortion, yet is he called to follow Christ as a special
Disciple. Learn hence, that such is the freeness of Divine Grace, That it
sometimes calls and Converts Sinners unto Christ, when they think not of him,
nor seek unto him. Little did Levi now think of a Savior, much less seek after
him, yet is he here called by him, and that with an efficacious Call; Matthew,
a Publican, Zacheus, an Extortioner, Saul, a Persecutor, all these are
effectually called by Christ, as instances and evidences of the mighty power of
Converting Grace. Observe (2.) Levi or Matthew's ready Compliance with Christ's
Call, He presently arose and followed him; when the inward call of the Holy
Spirit accompanies the outward call of the word, the Soul readily complies and
yields Obedience to the voice of Christ. Our Savior (says the pious Bishop
Hall) speaks by his word to our Ears, and we hear not, we stir not; but when he
speaks by his Spirit efficaciously to our Hearts, Satan cannot hold us down,
the world shall not keep us back; but we shall with Levi, instantly arise and
follow our Savior. Observe (3.) Levi, to show his Thankfulness to Christ,
makes him a great Feast; Christ invited Levi to a Discipleship, Levi invites
Christ to a Dinner, The Servant invites his Master, a Sinner invites his
Savior; a better Guest he could not invite, Christ always comes with his cost
with him; we do not find, that when Christ was invited to any Table, that he
ever refused to go; if a Publican, if a Pharisee invited him, he constantly
went; not so much for the pleasure of eating, as for the opportunity of
Conversing, and doing good, Christ Feasts us when we feed him; Levi to give
Christ a pledge and specimen of his Love, makes him a Feast. Learn thence, That
new Converts are full of affection toward Christ, and very expressive of their
Love unto him. Levi's heart being touch with a sense of Christ's rich Love,
makes him a Royal Feast. Observe (4) The cavil and exception which the Scribes
and Pharisees made at our Lord's free Conversation. They censure him for
conversing with sinners; malice will never want matter of Accusation. Our
Savior justifies himself, telling them he conversed with sinners as their
Physician, not as their Companion; They that are whole need not the Physician,
but they that are sick: as if our Lord had said, with whom should a Physician
converse, but with his sick Patients? and is he to be accused for that? now
this is my case. I am come into the World to do the office of a kind Physician
unto Men; surely then I am to take all opportunities of conversing with them,
that I may help and heal them, for they that are sick need the Physician; but
as for you Scribes and Pharisees, who are well and whole in your own Opinion
and conceit, I have no hopes of doing good upon you; for such as think
themselves whole, desire not the Physicians help. Now from this Assertion of
our Savior, The whole need not the Physician, but the sick, these Truths are
suggested to us, (1.) That sin is the Souls malady, its Spiritual disease and
sickness; (2.) That Christ is the Physician appointed by God for the cure and
healing of this Disease: (3.) That there are multitudes of sinners spiritually
sick, who yet think themselves sound and whole. (4.) That such, and only such
as find themselves sin-sick, and spiritually diseased, are subjects capable of
Christ's healing; They that are whole need not the Physician, but they that are
sick. I came not (says Christ) to call the (Opinionatively) Righteous, but the
(Sensible) Sinner to Repentance.

33 And they said unto him, why do the disciples of John fast often, and make
prayers, and likewise the Disciples of the Pharisees? but thine eat and drink.
34 And he said unto them, can ye make the children of the Bride-chamber fast
while the Bridegroom is with them? 35 But the days will come when the
Bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those
days. 36 And he spoke also a parable unto them; No man puts a piece of a new
garment, upon an old, if otherwise, then both the new makes a rent, and the
piece that was taken out of the new, agrees not with the old. 37 And no man
puts new wine into old Bottles: else the new wine will burst the bottles and
be spilled, and the bottles shall perish. 38 But new wine must be put into new
bottles, and both are preserved. 39 No man also having drunk old wine,
straightway desires new, for he says the old is better.

An Objection is here made against the Disciples of our Savior, that they did
not fast so much, and so often as John Baptist's Disciples did. John's
Disciples imitated their Master, who was a Man of an austere Life; Christ's
Disciples imitated him who was of a more free Conversation. Observe therefore
our Savior's Defense which he makes for the not fasting of his Disciples; he
declares, that at present it was neither suitable nor tolerable, not suitable,
in regard of Christ's Bodily Presence with them, who being their Bridegroom,
and his Disciples children of the Bride-chamber, it was now a day of Joy and
Rejoicing to them, and mourning and fasting would be very improper for them.
But when the Bridegroom shall be taken away, that is, Christ's bodily Presence
removed, then there will be cause enough for the Disciples to fast, and mourn.
Learn hence, (1.) That Jesus Christ is the Bridegroom of his Spouse the Church.
(2.) That this Bridegroom was to be taken away. (3.) That because of the
Bridegroom's Removal, the Church did, shall, and must fast; The days will come
when the Bridegroom shall be taken away, and then shall they fast. Again our
Savior declares, that this Discipline of fasting was not at present tolerable
for his Disciples, for they were at present but raw, green and tender, unable
to bear the Severities, and rigours of Religion, any more then an old garment
can bear a piece of new cloth to be set into it, or any more than old Bottles
can bear new Wine to be put into them. The sense of our Savior's words seems
to be this, My Disciples at present, are tender and weak, newly called and
converted, they cannot therefore at present undergo the austerities of
Religion, fastings, weepings, and watchings; but e're long I shall leave them,
and go to Heaven, from whence I will send down my Holy Spirit upon them, which
shall enable them to all the Duties that the Gospel enjoins. The Lesson of
Instruction which we may profitably gather from hence, is this, That it is
hurtful and dangerous for young converts, for weak Christians, to be put upon
the severer Exercises of Religion, or to be urged to the performance of such
Duties as are above their strength, but they ought to be treated with that
tenderness which becomes the mild and gentle dispensation of the Gospel. Our
Savior (says one) does here commend prudence to his Ministers, in treating
their people according to their strength, and putting them upon Duties
according to their Time and Standing: we must consult what Progress our People
have made in Christianity, and manage accordingly.

CHAP. VI.
1 AND it came to pass on the second Sabbath after the First, that he went
through the Cornfieldsd, and his Disciples plucked the ears of Corn, and did eat,
rubbing them in their hands. 2 And certain of the Pharisees said unto them, Why
do ye that which is not lawful to do on the Sabbath Day? 3 And Jesus answering,
said unto them, Have ye not read so much as this, what David did when himself
was an hungered, and they which were with him? 4 How he went into the House of
God, and did take and eat the Shewbread, and gave also to them that were with
him; which is not lawful to eat, but for the Priests alone. 5 And he said unto
them, that the Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath.

In the former part of this chapter we find our blessed Savior defending his
Disciples from the clamorous accusations of the Pharisees for breaking the
Sabbath Day, because they plucked the ears of Corn, and rubbed them in their
hands, in order to the satisfying of their Hunger. Where Note, (1.) The great
Poverty, the low estate and condition of Christ's own Disciples in the World.
They wanted Bread, and are forced to pluck the ears of Corn, to satisfy their
hunger: God may, and sometimes does suffer his dearest children to fall into
streights, and to taste of want, for the Trial of their Faith and Dependence
upon his power and Goodness. Note (2.) How the hypocritical Pharisees blame
this Action of the Disciples, namely, their plucking of the Ears of Corn, yet
did they not charge them with Theft for so doing; because to take in our great
Necessity so much of our Neighbor's Goods, as we may reasonably suppose, that
if he were present and knew our Circumstances he would not deny us, is not
Theft. But it was the servile Labors on the Sabbath, in gathering the Ears of
Corn, which the Pharisees Scruple and Object against. Where Note, How
Hypocrites expend their Zeal in and upon the lesser things of the Law, whilst
they neglect the greater; placing all Holiness in the observation of outward
Ceremonies, whilst they neglect moral Duties. Note (3.) The Argument with which
our Savior defends this action of his Disciples, it is taken from the example
of David: Necessity freed him from fault and blame in eating the Consecrated
Bread, which none but the Priests might lawfully eat: For in cases of
Necessity, a Ceremonial Precept must give place to a moral Duty. Works of
mercy, for the preserving our Lives, and the better fitting us for
Sabbath-services, are certainly lawful on the Sabbath Day. Note Lastly, The
Argument which our Savior uses to prove the Sabbath's Observation may be
dispensed with, in a case of absolute Necessity; and that is drawn from that
Authority which Christ the Institutor and Lord of the Sabbath had over it; The
Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath, that is, he has Authority and Power, as
God, and as Mediator, to institute and appoint a Sabbath, to alter and change
it, to dispense with the breach of it, upon a just and great occasion; and
consequently acts of Mercy, which tend to fit us for works of Piety not only
may, but ought to be done upon the Sabbath Day. This Action of the Disciples
being of that Nature, is without just cause, censured and condemned by the
Pharisees; a sort of Men who were resolved to cavil at, and quarrel with,
whatever our Savior or his Disciples either did or said.

6 And it came to pass on another Sabbath, that he entered into the Synagogue
and taught, and there was a man whose right hand was withered. 7 And the
Scribes and Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal on the Sabbath Day,
that they might find an accusation against him. 8 But he knew their thoughts,
and said to the man which had the withered hand, rise up, and stand forth in
the midst; and he arose and stood forth. 9 Then said Jesus unto them, I will
ask you one thing; Is it lawful on the Sabbath Day to do good, or to do evil?
to save life, or to destroy it? 10 And looking round about them all, he said
unto the man, stretch forth thy hand, and he did so, and his hand was restored
whole as the other. 11 And they were filled with madness, and communed one with
another, what they might do to Jesus.

Observe here (1.) The miraculous cure which our Savior wrought upon the man
which had the withered hand, and (2.) The effect which this Miracle had upon
the wicked Pharisees; in the former Note, the place where our Savior wrought
this Miracle, in the Synagogue, the Time when, on the Sabbath Day, the manner
how, by speaking of a word, the persons before whom, namely, the envious and
malicious Pharisees. These men were always slandering Christ's Doctrine, and
cavilling at his Miracles, yet does our Holy Lord go on with his Work before
their Faces without Discouragement. Learn thence, That the unjust censures and
malicious cavils of wicked men against us, for well-doing, must not discourage
us from doing our Duty, either toward God, or toward our Neighbor. Although
the Pharisees watched our Savior wherever he went, and when they could find no
occasion of quarrel, would invent and make one, yet such was our Lord's courage
and resolution, that he bids the man which had the withered hand stand forth,
to show that he was resolved to heal him, notwithstanding their malicious
Purpose to accuse him for it as a Breaker of the Sabbath. Opposition met with
in doing our Duty, must not discourage us from doing good, if we will follow
the example of our Blessed Redeemer. Observe (2.) The influence and effect
which this miracle had upon the wicked Pharisees; they were filled with madness
and took counsel to kill him: instead of being convinced by this Miracle, they
conspire against him for it. The Enemies of Christ and his Holy Religion, when
Arguments fail, fall to Violence. It is a certain Sign of a weak cause, that
must be supported by Passion, which is all Tongue, and no Ear.

12 And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a mountain to
pray, and continued all night in prayer to God.

Observe here (1.) The Duty which our Holy Lord performed, the Duty of Prayer.
We have much more Business with God in Prayer, then Christ had; he had no sins
to confess, no want of Grace to make known, yet did our Lord spend much time,
even a whole Night in this Duty! Lord, what delight did thou take in paying
this Homage to thy Heavenly Father? Oh how does thy zeal and forwardness
condemn our remisness and luke-warmness. Observe (2.) It was solitary Prayer
that our Lord did so exceedingly delight in; He went into the mountain alone to
pray, not suffering his very Disciples to be with him. There are Times and
Seasons when a Christian would not be willing that his dearest Relations upon
earth should hear that intercourse which passes betwixt him and his God.
Observe (3.) The place which our Lord withdraws to for privacy in Prayer, He
went into a Mountain, as a place of Retiredness, God delights to meet his
children alone The modest Bridegroom of the Church, says St. Bernard, will not
impart himself to his Spouse before Company. Observe (4.) The Time when Christ
retired into this Mountain to pray, and spent a whole Night in Prayer to God.
If we look back to the former part of the chapter, we shall find, that it was
at a time when the Pharisees were filled with rage and madness against him, and
conspired to take away his Life. Thence Learn, That it is our duty at such
times especially when Enemi^s lie in wait to do us hurt, to give our selves
much unto Prayer. Again, if we look forward, the next Verse tells us, that our
Savior was now about to send forth his Twelve Apostles to preach and propagate
the Gospel. Christ thought so great a work was not to be done without solemn
and extraordinary Prayer. Accordingly he spends an whole Night in Prayer to God
upon that occasion; leaving herein a most instructive Example to his Church, to
continue in Prayer at all times; but then especially to abound in it, when
Persons are to be set apart for the momentous work of the Ministry, that they
may enterprise it with extraordinary dread and caution, not with aspiring, but
tremendous Thoughts, for who is sufficient for these things.

13 And when it was day, he called unto him his Disciples, and of them he chose
twelve, whom also he named Apostles. 14 Simon, whom he also named Peter, and
Andrew his Brother, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew. 15 Matthew and
Thomas, James the son of Alpheus, and Simon called Zelotes. 16 And Judas the
brother of James, and Judas Iscariot, which was also the Traitor.

As the Jewish Church arose from Twelve Patriarchs, so the Christian Church
became planted by Twelve Apostles. The Person sending them forth was Christ;
none may undertake the work and calling of the Ministry but those whom Christ
appoints and calls, not immediately by himself, but mediately by the Governors
of his Church; The Persons Commissioned were Disciples before they were
Apostles; to Teach us, That Christ will have such as preach the Gospel, to be
Disciples before they are Ministers, Trained up in the Faith and Doctrine of
the Gospel, before they undertake a public charge. Observe next, how carefully
the names of the Twelve Apostles, those Laborious persons in the service of
Souls are Recorded, and transmitted with honor to Posterity. God will signally
honor those who singularly honor him, and are the special Instruments of his
Glory. Of the Twelve Apostles, Peter is named first, and Judas last; Peter is
first named, because probably elder then the rest, or because for order-sake he
might speak before the rest; from whence may be inferred a Primacy, but no
Supremacy; a priority of Order, but no Superiority of Degree; as the Foreman
of a Grand Jury has a precedence, but no preheminency, he is first in order
before the rest, but has no Authority over the rest; neither did St. Peter ever
assume to himself a power of deciding Controversies; but we find St. James in
that first General Council mentioned Acts 15.13. speaking somewhat
definitively, Thus I judge or determine the matter, and yet St. Peter was then
and there present. Had the champions of the Church of Rome such a passage in
all the Scripture for St. Peter's Authority, it would make a louder noise then
Pasce Oves, Feed my Sheep, St. John 21.16. Again, as St. Peter is named first,
so Judas is mentioned last, with a Brand of Infamy upon him; the Traditor, the
Person that Betrayed his Lord and Master: From whence we may gather, that though
the Truth of Grace be absolutely necessary to a Ministers Salvation, yet the
want of it does not disanul his Office, nor hinder the lawfulness of his
ministry. Judas, though a Traitor was yet a lawful Minister; an Heart-hypocrite
is no hypocrite, in foro Ecclesiae, before the Church, though he shall be damned
for his Hypocrisy before God.

17 And he came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the company of his
Disciples, and a great multitude of people, out of all Judea, and Jerusalem,
and from the coast of Tire and Sidon which came to hear him, and to be healed
of their Diseases. 18 And they that were vexed with unclean Spirits, and they
were healed. 19 And the whole multitude sought to touch him; for there went
virtue out of him, and he healed them all.

Observe here (1.) The great zeal and forwardness of the People in attending
upon our Savior's Ministry; he had newly begun to preach in this place, and
the people flock after him from all parts, from Judea, from Jerusalem, from
Tire and Sidon, to hear his Doctrine and see his Miracles. When our Savior
first began to Preach, the people came unto him from every quarter. His
Ministers find it thus, at our first coming among a people, our Labors are
most acceptable, and they do most good. Our peoples affections are then
warmest, and perhaps our own too. Obs. (2.) What sort of People they were who
attended thus zealously on our Savior's Ministry, they were the common and
ordinary People; the poor received the Gospel; the learned Scribes, the knowing
Pharisees, those wise men after the Flesh, the Mighty, the Noble, the great and
Honorable, these despised our Savior's Person, slighted his Ministry, yea
sought to take away his Life. Thus from the first Plantation of the Gospel to
this day, the poo^^r and meaner sort of People have entertained the glad
Tidings of Salvation; it is a sad, but a certain Truth, that Heaven is a place
where few (comparatively, but very few) of the great Men of the World are like
to come. Their Temptations are many, their Corruptions strong, and their great
Estates, through their own abuse, become fuel to to their Lusts: Lord! how rare
is it to find those that are Eminently Great, Exemplary Good. Observe (3.) The
Nature of our Savior's Miracles; Moses's Miracles were as great Judgments as
Wonders, but Christ's Miracles were as great Mercies as Wonders, they were
salubrious and healing, there went Virtue out of him, and he healed them all.
Christ's Miracles were like the Author of them, full of Goodness, yet would not
the obstinate pharisees be convinced, either by the Goodness that was in them,
or by that omnipotent power which wrought them: All our Savior's Miracles were
wonderful, but Wonders of Love and Mercy.

20 And he lifted up his eyes on his Disciples, and said, Blessed be ye poor,
for yours is the kingdom of God.

As our Savior's Condition in this World was very poor, so was his Disciples
condition also; therefore to relieve them against their poverty and low estate
in the World, he thus bespeaks them, Blessed be ye poor, you that believe in
me, and follow me, are in a happier condition, then those that are rich, and
received their consolation, for yours is the kingdom of Heaven. Christ was the
poor man's preacher, and the poor man's comforter; yet a bare outward Poverty,
or an avowed voluntary Poverty, will entitle none to the Blessing. It Is not a
Poverty of Possession, but a poverty of Spirit, that makes us members of the
Kingdom of Grace, and heirs of the Kingdom of Glory.

21 Blessed are ye that hunger now, for ye shall be filled.

Hunger and Thirst are not Blessings in themselves, nor yet are they curses in
themselves, sanctified hunger is a far greater Blessing, then surfeiting
Fullness. St. Matthew therefore adds, Chapter 5. v. 6. Blessed are they that hunger
and thirst after Righteousness. Learn thence (1.) That such as spiritually
hunger and thirst after Christ, and his Righteousness, are certainly in an
Happy and Blessed Condition. (2.) That the Happiness of those who do hunger and
thirst after Righteousness, consists in being filled.

21 Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh.

As if Christ had said, you my Disciples that are now in a sad, mournful, and
afflicted State are Blessed, for there will come a time when ye shall be
Comforted, a time when God shall wipe away all Tears from your Eyes; yet must
we not think, that we have nothing to do but to mourn, there is a time to
Rejoice, as well as to Mourn, nor that bare Mourning and Weeping is in it self,
and for its own sake acceptable unto God. But when we mourn rationally for our
own Sins, and the sins of others, God will comfort us in this World by his Word
and Spirit, and in the World to come with the sight of himself.

22 Blessed are ye when Men shall hate you, and when they shall separate you
from their Company, and shall Reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for
the Son of man's sake. 23 Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy; for behold
your reward is great in Heaven; for in like manner did their fathers unto the
prophets.

Observe here (1.) The Sufferers described, the Disciples, and their Sufferings
foretold, ye shall be hated, separated, and reproached. Hatred of Christ's
Disciples is the bitter Root from which Persecution grows; where there is
Hatred in the Heart, no wonder that Reviling is in the Lips. Those that are
Hated, are sure to be reproached, Excommunicated from the Church of Christ,
having their names cast out, or blotted out of the Rolls of the Church. Obs.
(2.) For what cause they suffer all this, For the Son of man's sake, for their
respect to Christ and his Holy Religion, for their regard to his Worship and
holy Institutions. Learn hence, That such Disciples as will cordially embrace,
and steadfastly hold fast the Faith delivered by our Savior, must expect and
prepare for hatred and persecution, to be separated from civil Society,
excommunicated from Church Fellowship, and all this by them who shall call
themselves the Guides and Governors of an Infallible Church.

24 But woe unto you that are rich, for ye have received your Consolation. 25 Woe
unto you that are full, for ye shall hunger; woe unto you that laugh now, for
you shall mourn and weep. 26 Woe unto you when all Men shall speak well of you,
for so did their fathers to the false prophets.

Observe here, (1.) that though St. Luke omits diverse of the Beatitudes mentioned
by St. Matthew; chapter 5. yet he recites the Woes which St. Matthew omitteth. If
we will understand our Savior's Doctrine fully, we must consult all the
Evangelists thoroughly. Observe (2.) These Woes are not to be understood
absolutely, but restrainedly, the Woe does not belong to Men, because they are
Rich, because they are full, because they do laugh; but because they place
their happiness in these things, take up with them for their portion, rejoice
in them as their chief Good. Valluing themselves by what they have in hand, not
by what they have in hope: He that is Rich and Righteous, he that is Great and
Gracious; he that has his hands full of this World, and his heart empty of
pride and vain Confidences, he that laughs when God smiles, he that expresses
himself joyfully, when God expresses himself Graciously; such a man is rich in
Grace, who is thus gracious in the midst of Riches; for to be Rich and Holy,
argues much Riches of Holiness.

26 Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you, for so did their fathers
to the false prophets.

Our Savior's design in these Words, is not to condemn any of his Disciples or
Ministers, who have, by doing their Duty, gained a fair Reputation amongst the
men of the World; but to let us understand how rarely and seldom it is
attained; for usually the best men are worst spoken of; neither the Prophets of
the Old Testament, nor John Baptist the Prophet of the New Testament, nor
Christ himself, nor his Apostles, did ever gain either the good Will, or the
good Word of the Men of that Generation in which they Lived. The Applause of
the Multitude (that contingent Judge of Good and Evil) rather attends the vain
then the virtuous. None have ever been so much reproached by man as the
Faithful Ministers of God, who have learnt to take pleasure in Reproaches: For
though Grace does not bid us invite Reproaches, yet it teaches us to bid them
welcome. The World has all along taken effectual care, by their cruel mockings,
bitter Reproaches, sharp invectives, to free the Ministers of God in all Ages
from the danger of our Savior's Woe here denounced; Woe unto you when all men
shall speak well of you.

27 But I say unto you, love your Enemies, do good to them that hate you. 28
Bless them that curse you, and pray for them which despightfully use. 29. And
unto him smites thee on the one cheek, offer also the other; and him that
takes away thy cloak, forbid not to take thy coat also.

Observe here (1.) The Noble Spirit of Christianity, and the large extent of
Christian Charity; the Jewish kindness was limited and confined, to those of
their own Religion, Kindred and Nation, their Charity began and ended at home;
but our Savior obliges his Followers to the exercise of a more extensive
Charity, even to all Mankind, even the worst of men, our Enemies that seek our
Destruction. Christianity is so far from allowing us to persecute them that
hate us, that it commands us to Love them that Persecute us. Observe (2.) The
Nature and quality of the Duty enjoined, Love your Enemies, there the inward
affection is required, Bless them that curse you; there outward civility and
affability is required; Do good to them that hate you; here real acts of
kindness and beneficence are required to be done to the worst of Enemies, though
they be guilty of the worst of Crimes, calumly and cruelty, striking both at
our Reputation, and our Life. Learn, That Christianity obliges us to bear a
sincere Love to our most malicious Enemies, to be ready at all times to pray
for them, and upon all occasions to do good unto them; Thus to do, is an
imitation of God our Maker, of Christ our Master: It Is for the good of this
lower World, and the way to a Better; it is the Ornament of our Religion, the
perfection of our Nature, and an high degree and pitch of Virtue. To which may
be added the next Duty, not to revenge injuries; where private Revenge is the
thing forbidden; and we are directed, rather to suffer a double Wrong, then to
seek a private Revenge: Christianity obliges us to bear many injuries
patiently, rather then to Revenge one privately; we must leave the matter to
God, and the Magistrate. The truth is, Revenge is a very troublesome and
vexatious passion, the man's Soul swells and boils, and is in pain and anguish,
and has no ease. Besides, by our Revenging of one injury, we necessarily draw
on another, and so bring on a perpetual Circulation of Injuries and Revenges;
whereas forgiveness prevents vexation to others, and disquietment to our selves.

30 Give to every one that asks of thee, and of him that takes away thy
goods, ask them not again.

These, and the like Precepts of our Savior are not to be taken strictly but
restrainedly; we are thereby obliged to Charity according to others
Necessities, and our own Abilities, but not bound to give to every one that has
the Confidence to ask for what we have. Indeed every Man that really wants is
the proper Object of our Christian Charity; and we must with a compassionate
Heart and open Hand relieve him, according to his Necessity, but answerably to
our Ability. Nor must the second part of the Verse be understood as forbidding
Christians to seek the Recovery of their just Rights, by pursuing Thieves, and
following the Law upon Oppressors; but requiring us to forbear all Acts of
private Revenge, as directly contrary to the Spirit and Temper of Christianity,
as Jealousy is the Rage of a Man, so Revenge is the Rage of the Devil; it is the
very Soul and Spirit of the Apostate Nature.

31 And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise.

Here our Savior lays down a most excellent Rule of Life, for all his
Disciples and Followers to walk by, namely, always to do as we would be done
by. The Golden Rule of Justice and Equity in all our Dealings with Men, is
this, To do as we would be done unto. It is a full Rule, a clear Rule, a most
just and equitable Rule, which the Light of Nature, and the Law of Christ binds
upon us. St. Matthew, Chapter 7.12. adds, that this is the Law and the Prophets,
that is, the Sum of the Old Testament, and the Substance of the Second Table.
The whole of the Law is this, to Love GOD above our selves, and to Love our
Neighbor as our selves.

32 For if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? sinners also love
those that love them. 33 And if ye do good to them which do good to you, what
thank have ye? for sinners also do even the same. 34 And if ye lend to them of
whom ye hope to receive, what thank have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners,
to receive as much again. 35 But love your enemies, and do good, and lend,
hoping for nothing again, and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the
children of the Highest; for he is kind unto the unthankful, and to the evil.
36 Be ye therefore merciful, as your father also is merciful.

The Design of our Blessed Savior in all and every of these Precepts, is to
recommend unto us, all sorts and kinds of mercy and charity; namely, charity in
giving, charity in forgiving, charity in lending; it is sometimes our Duty (if
we have ability) to Lend to such poor Persons as we cannot expect will ever be
in a Capacity, either to repay, or to requite us. This is to imitate the Divine
Bounty, which does Good to all, even to the unthankful, and to the unholy. Love
for Love, is justice; Love for no Love, is favor and kindness; but Love and
Charity, mercy and compassion to all Persons, even the undeserving and
ill-deserving, this is Divine Goodness, a Christ-like Temper which will render
us illustrious on Earth, and glorious in Heaven. St. Luke says here, Be ye
merciful, as your Father it merciful. St. Matthew says, Chapter 5. last, Be ye
perfect as your father in Heaven is perfect, implying, that love and mercy,
charity and compassion, is the perfection of a Christians Grace; he that is
made perfect in Love, is perfect in all Divine Graces in the Account of God.
Perfection in all Graces, but especially in Love and Charity, ought to be our
Aim in this Life, and shall be our attainment in the next.

37 Judge not, and ye shall not be judged, condemn not, and ye shall not be
condemned, forgive and ye shall be forgiven.

This Prohibition, Judge not, is not to be understood of our selves, but our
Neighbors. Self-judging is a great and necessary Duty; rash judging of others,
is an heinous and grievous sin, which exposes to the Righteous judgment of God:
it is private judging, and private condemning of Persons which Christ forbids;
it follows, Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven; not that a bare forgiving of
others, is all that God requires in order to our forgiveness. But it is one
part of that Obedience which we owe to God, without which it is in vain to
expect forgiveness from God; Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven.

38 Give and it shall be given unto you, good measure, pressed down and shaken
together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom, for with the same
measure that ye meet withal, it shall be measured to you again.

I think there is not any one Text of Scripture that declares the Bounty of God
more fully in Rewarding Acts of Charity and Mercy, then this before us. Oh how
liberal a Paymaster is God? How sure and bountiful are the returns he makes to
us for the relief given to him in his Members; he promises us here (1.) not
bare measure, but good measure, (2.) pressed down, shaken together, and running
over; nothing adds more to the Measure then the shaking of the Bushel, the
crowding and pressing of the Corn, and heaping till the measure runs over;
now a measure will run over, as long as you will pour. Learn hence, That
Charities done in Faith, in Obedience to God, and with an eye to the Glory of
God, will produce a certain and plentiful Increase; Liberality is the way to
Riches; Giving is the best and surest way of Thriving; a little Charity from
us, if we have but a little, is looked upon by God as a great deal. But it is
the greatest imprudence, as well as impiety, to do but a little when we have
ability to do much, for he that sows bountifully shall reap bountifully, good
measure, pressed down, and running over.

39 And he spoke a parable unto them, can the blind lead the blind, shall they
not both fall into the Ditch?

Our Savior doubtless applied these words to the Scribes and Pharisees; the
Jewish Leaders, their Doctors and Teachers, who being ignorant of the spiritual
sense of the Law, (Interpreting it only to the restraining of the outward Man)
they were very unfit to instruct and lead others; for where one blind man leads
another, both are in danger of the Ditch, that is, to run into Ruin and
Destruction. Learn (1.) That ignorant, erroneous, or unfaithful Ministers, are
the greatest plague, and soarest punishment that can befall a people. (2.) That
Christ having forewarned us of such Guides, to follow them will be an
inexcusable sin and folly, and never free us from the danger of Destruction,
but rather be an aggravation of our Condemnation: If the blind follow the
blind, both will inevitably, yet inexcusably fall into the Ditch.

40 The Disciple is not above his Master but every one that is perfect shall be
as his master.

The Application of these words no doubt our Savior intended to his own
Disciples, partly to comfort them under Sufferings, and partly to encourage
them to Obedience: Did they suffer hard things from an unkind World? the
remembrance of what their Master suffered before them may support them, did
they meet with hard and difficult Duties, such as loving Enemies, doing good to
them that hate and persecute them? Their Lord's Example may encourage and
instruct them, who loved them when they were Enemies, who prayed for his
Murderers, and offered up his Blood to God on the behalf of them that shed it.
Learn hence, That the Perfection of a Christian in this World, consists in
his imitation of Christ Jesus in being as our Master, in coming as near to his
Example as it is possible for persons clothed with Flesh and Blood to arrive
at, Every one that is perfect must be as his master.

41 And why beholdest thou the mote which is in thy Brothers eye? but
perceivest not the Beam which is in thine own eye. 42 Either how can thou say
to thy Brother, Brother let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye? when
thou thy self beholdest not the Beam that is in thine own eye. Thou hypocrite,
cast out first the Beam out of thine own eye, and then shall thou see clearly
to pull out the mote that is in thy Brothers eye.

By the Mote in our Brother's eye, is meant some small and little sins
discerned, or some sin suspected. By the Beam in our own Eye, some greater sin
undiscerned: Now says our Savior, there is no greater sign of Hypocrisy then
to be curious in spying out the smaller faults of others, and at the same time
indulge greater in our selves. Learn hence, That there is no such way to teach
us Charity in judging of Others, as to exercise severity in judging of our
selves. (2.) That those who desire others should look upon their failings with
a Compassionate Eye, must not look upon the Failings of others with a
censorious Eye; for with what measure we meet, it shall be measured to us again.

43 For a good Tree brings not forth corrupt fruit, neither does a corrupt
Tree bring forth good fruit. 44 For every Tree is known by his own Fruit; for
of thorns men do not gather Figs, nor of a Bramble-bush do they gather Grapes.
45 A good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth that which
is good; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth
that which is evil, for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

Our Savior here and elsewhere frequently compares Persons to Trees; the Heart
of Man is as the Root, the Actions as the Fruit; as the root is the principle
from which the Fruit springs, so the heart of man is the Principle from which
all humane Actions flow; an holy Heart will be accompanied with an Holy Life;
where there is a vital principle of Grace within, there will be the actings of
Grace without: a good Conscience will be accompanied with a good Conversation.
Observe farther, a double Treasure discovered in the heart of Man, (1.) an Evil
Treasure of sin and corruption, from whence flow evil Things; but why should
sin be called a Treasure? not for the preciousness of it, but for the abundance
of it; a little does not make a Treasure; and also for the continuance of it:
for though sin be perpetually overflowing in the Life, yet does the Heart
continue full. The Treasure of Original Corruption in man's Heart and Nature,
though by sanctifying Grace it be drawn low, yet it is never in this Life drawn
dry. (2.) Here is a good Treasure of Grace discovered in a sanctified and
renewed Man, which is the source and spring from whence all gracious Actions do
proceed and flow, namely, a sanctified and renewed Heart and Nature. When once
the Will of Man is made conformable to the Will of God, it does will and
desire, choose and embrace, take pleasure and delight in what God approves,
commands, and Loves; and it will lay an injunction upon all the Members of the
Body to act Conformably thereunto.

46 And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? 47
Whosoever comes to me, and hears my sayings, and does them, I will show you
to whom he is like. 48 He is like a man which built an house, and dug deep,
and laid the foundation on a rock, and when the flood arose, the stream beat
vehemently upon that house, and could not shake it, for it was founded upon a
rock. 49 But he that hears and does not, is like a man, that without a
foundation, built an house upon the earth, against which the stream did beat
vehemently, and immediately it fell, and the ruin of that house was great.

Our Savior here concludes his Sermon with an Elegant Similitude; He compares
the Faithful doer of the Word to a wise Builder, which founded his House upon a
Rock. Others he resembles to a foolish Builder, that built his house upon the
Sand; the house is the hope of Heaven and Eternal Life, the Rock is Christ, the
building upon the Sand, is resting upon the bare performance of outward Duties;
the Rain, the Winds, and the Floods, are all kinds of afflicting Evils,
Sufferings and Persecutions that may befall us. The Sum is, men's hopes of
Salvation built upon any other besides Christ, or built upon Christ without a
sincere and uniform Obedience to him, are vain hopes, deceitful hopes; for when
the Storm arises, when affliction or Persecution comes, their Confidence will
fail them, their Foundation will be shaken. Learn (1.) That the Obedient
Believer is the only wise Man; that builds his hopes of Heaven upon a sure and
abiding Foundation; Christ is the Rock that he builds upon, and one Christ is
before a thousand Creatures; one Rock better than millions of Sands to build
upon. (2.) That such Professors as rest in the bare performance of outward
Duties, are foolish Builders, their Foundation is weak and sandy, and all their
hopes of Salvation vain and deceitful. Lord, how does the Carnal World build
all their hopes upon the Sand, on the wisdom of the Flesh, on their Policies,
Counsels, Friends and Riches, They bottom their very Souls upon Fancies,
Presumptions, Delusions and vain hopes; they expect to be Happy without being
Holy, which is to expect to be easy without being Healthy. Woe to that Man whose
Portion lies in the Creatures hands, who builds all his hopes upon this Earth,
for when the Earth is shaken his hopes are shaken, his heart is shaken, and he
is even at his Wits ends: Whereas the Christian that builds upon the Rock, he
stands firm and sure; for if ever the Christian falls Christ must fall with
him; he shall never be disappointed of his hopes, unless Faithfulness can
disappoint; he shall never be deceived, unless Truth it self can deceive. If it
be impossible for God to Lie, then it is impossible for the Obedient, Holy, and
circumspect Christian finally to miscarry.

CHAP. VII.
The former part of this Chapter relates to us a double Miracle wrought by our
Blessed Savior, the one in raising the Centurion's Servant from his bed, the
other in raising the Widows Son from his Biere; both of them eminent acts and
instances of his divine and Almighty Power. The History of the former stands
thus.

1 NOW when Jesus had ended all his sayings in the audience of the people, he
entered into Capernaum. 2 And a certain Centurions Servant, who was dear unto
him, was sick and ready to dye. 3 And when he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him
the Elders of the Jews, beseeching him that he would come and heal his servant.
4 And when they came to Jesus, they besought him instantly, saying, that he was
worthy for whom he should do this. 5 For he loves our Nation, and he has
built us a Synagogue. 6 Then Jesus went with them, and when he was now not far
from the house, the Centurion sent friends unto him, saying unto him, Lord,
trouble not thy self, for I am not worthy that thou should enter under my
Roof. 7 Wherefore neither thought I my self worthy to come unto thee, but say
in a word and my Servant shall be healed, 8 For I also am a man set under
authority, having under me Soldiers, and I say unto one go, and he goes, and
to another come, and he comes, and to my servant do this, and he does it. 9
When Jesus heard these things he marvelled at him, and turned him about, and
said unto the people that followed him: I say unto you I have not found so
great faith, no not in Israel. 10 And they that were sent returning to the
house found the servant whole that had been sick.

In our Savior's miraculous Cure of the Centurions Servant, we have several
particulars very Observable, as (1.) the person applying himself to our Blessed
Savior for help and healing; he was a Gentile, an Heathen, a Roman Soldier, an
Officer and Commander; yet he believes in, and relies upon the Power of Christ.
Note, That such is the freeness of Divine Grace, that it extends it self to all
Sorts and Ranks, to all Orders and Degrees of Men without Exception; Even the
bloody Trade of War yields worthy Clyents to Christ; he does not so much Regard
what we are, and whence we are, as what we be, and with what Dispositions and
Desires, with what Purposes and Inclinations we come unto him. Observe (2.) The
Person whom the Centurion came to Christ for; not for himself, not for his son,
but for his servant; his servant was sick: He does not drive him out of Doors,
nor stand gazing by his Bedside, but looks out for help and relief for him; a
worthy Example of Humanity. Some Masters have not so much regard to their sick
Servants, as they have to their Oxen and their Swine. Bu the is not worthy of a
good Servant, that in a time of sickness is not willing to serve his Servant.
Observe (3.) Unto whom the Centurion seeks, and with what zeal and application;
he seeks not to Wizards and Conjurers, but to the Physician for his sick
Servant, yea to Christ the chief Physician; and this not with a formal Relation
in his Mouth, but with a vehement aggravation of his Disease, My Servant lies
sick of the Palsy grievously tormented, St. Matthew. 8.6. where the Master's
condolency, and tender sympathy with his afflicted Servant, is both matter of
Commendation and Imitation. Observe (4.) The happy mixture of Humility and
Faith, which was found in this Centurion. See his wonderful Humility in not
thinking himself worthy to come into Christ's presence, or that Christ should
come under his Roof. The best Men have always the lowest Thoughts of
themselves; when we esteem our selves unworthy of any favors, Christ accounts
us worthy of all. See also his Faith in Christ's Divine Power, he believed that
Christ was able at a Distance, and by a single word to command off the
Distemper of his Servant; he tells him, that Diseases were as much at Christ's
command, as his Servants were at his command. Humility we see is both the fruit
of Faith, and the companion of Faith. An humble Soul has evermore an high
Esteem of Christ's Power, and a low esteem of it self. Observe (5.) How our
Blessed Savior exceeds not only the Centurion's Desires, but his Expectations
also, St. Matthew. 8.7. Jesus says unto him, I will come and heal him. Oh
wonderful Condescension! In St. John 4.47. We read of a certain Nobleman and
Ruler that twice entreated our Savior to come to his house, and heal his Son,
but our Lord refused. Here the Centurion does but barely tell Christ of his
poor Servants sickness and Christ, both unasked and undesired, says, I will
come and heal him: Oh how far was Christ from seeming in the least to honor
Riches and despise Poverty; he that came in the form of a Servant, goes down to
visit a sick Servant upon his poor Pallet-Bed, who did not come near the rich
Couch of the Ruler's Son. Observe (6.) The Notice and Observation which our
Savior takes of the Centurion's Faith; he wondered at it from him; Admiration
agreed not to Christ as God, but as Man it did: Christ wrought this Faith as
God, and wondered at it as Man: What can be more wonderful, then to see Christ
wonder? We find not our Savior wondering at Worldly pomp and greatness; when
the Disciples wondered at the Magnificence and Stately Buildings of the Temple,
Christ rather rebuked them then wondered with them. But when he sees the
gracious acts and exercise of Faith, he is ravished with wonder. Let it teach
us to place our Admiration where Christ fixes his; let us be more affected with
the least measures of Grace in a go^d man, then with all the Gaieties and
Glories of a great Man; let us not Envy the one, but admire and imitate the
other. Obs. Lastly, Christ does not only admire the Centurion's Faith, but
publishes it, Verily I have not found so great Faith, no not in Israel; that
is, amongst the generality of the Jewish Nation. For as to particular Persons,
several had showed a greater Faith then this, as Joseph and Mary: This
Expression lets us know, that where the Means of Faith are but small, the Noble
Acts and Exercise of Faith are wonderful, and Soul-amazing.

11 And it came to pass the day after, that he went into a city called Nain,
and many of his Disciples went with him, and much people. 12 Now when he came
nigh to the gates of the city, behold there was a dead man carried out, the
only son of his mother, and she was a widow, and much people of the city was
with her. 13 And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said,
Weep not. 14 And he came and touched the Biere, and they that bare him, stood
still; and he said, Young man, I say unto thee arise. 15 And he that was Dead,
sat up, and began to speak, and he delivered him to his mother. 16 And there
came a fear on all, and they glorified God, saying, That a great prophet is
risen up amongst us, and that God has visited his people. 17 And the rumor of
him went forth throughout all Judea, and throughout all the Region round about.

There were three persons raised from Death to Life by the powerful word of
Christ's Mouth; namely, Jairus his Daughter, mentioned by St. Matthew; Lazarus,
Recorded by St. John; and here the Widows Son, only taken notice of by St.
Luke. The place where this Miracle was wrought was the City of Nain; out of
their Cities, and not within them the Jews were wont to Bury their Dead. Our
Savior at the Gate of this City meets with the sad pomp of a Funeral; a
sorrowful Widow attended with her mournful Neighbors, following her only Son
to the Grave. Where Note (1.) The doleful and distressed Condition of the
Widow; there were many Heart-piercing Circumstances in her Affliction; (1.) It
was the death of a Son; to bury a child rends the Heart of a Parent, for what
are Children but the Parent multiplied? but to lay a Son in the Grave, which
continues the Name, and supports the Family, is a sore affliction. (2.) This
Son was a young Man, in the strength and flower of his Age, not carried from
the Cradle to the Coffin: had he died an Infant, he had not been so much
lamented; but then, when the Mothers Expectations were highest, and the
endearments greatest, even in the flower of his Age he is cut off. (3.) He was
not only a Son, but an only Son; one in whom all his Mothers hopes and comforts
were bound up. The Death of one out of many is much more tolerable, then of all
in one. The Loss of that one admits of no Consolation. (4.) Still to heighten
the affliction, it is added, that she was a Widow, she wanted the Counsel and
Support of a loving Yoke Fellow. Had the Root been left entire, she might
better have spared the Branch; now both are cut down, and she has none left to
comfort her in her comfortless State of Widowhood. In this Distressed
condition, Christ the God of Comfort meets her, pities her, relieves her.
Observe (2.) The compassion of Christ toward this Distressed Widow, He saw
her, and had compassion on her. Christ saw her, she did not speak to him; no
Tears, no Prayers can move Christ so much as our Afflictions and his own
Compassions: Christ's Heart pitied her, his Tongue said to her, Weep not, his
Feet went to the Biere, his Hand touched the Coffin, and the Power of his
Godhead raised the Dead. But how strange does Christ's Counsel seem, to bid a
Mother not weep for such a Loss, was to persuade her to be miserable, and not
feel it; to feel it, and not regard it; to regard it, and yet conceal and hide
it: It is not the decent expression of our Sorrow then which Christ condemns,
but the undue excess, and extravagancies of it which our Savior blames. And
the Lesson of Instruction which we Learn from hence, is this, That Christian's
ought to moderate their Sorrow for their dead Relations, how many afflicting
circumstances and aggravations soever do meet together in their Death; here was
a Child, that Child a Son, that Son an only Son, that only Son carried to the
Grave in the flower of his Age; yet Christ says to the pensive Mother, a
sorrowful Widow, Weep not. Observe (3.) The power of Christ, in raising the
Widows Son to Life. The Lord of Life Arrests the Sergeant Death, and Rescues
the Prisoner out of his hand: Christ says not, In the Name of God, young man,
arise, but I say unto thee, Arise. Christ had a power in himself, and of
himself, to command the Dead to arise, and the same powerful Voice which Raised
this young Man, shall in the last Day, Raise up our vanished Bodies? For is it
not as easy for Omnipotency to say, let them be Repaired, as to say at first,
let them be made? Observe (4.) The Reality of the Miracle, he sits up, he
begins to speak, and is delivered to his Mother: Death has no power to hold
that man down, whom the Son of God bids rise up; immediately he that was dead
sat up; and the same power which raised One Man, can raise a Thousand, a
Million, a World; no Power can raise one Man, but an Almighty Power, and that
which is Almighty can raise all Men. It was not so much for the Child's sake,
as the Mothers sake that the Son was Raised; it was an injury to the Son, though
a kindness to the Mother, for he must twice pass through the Gates of Death, to
others once; it returned him from Rest to Labor, from the peaceful Harbor,
back again to the Tempestuous Ocean. Observe Lastly, What effect this Miracle
had upon the Multitude, seeing the Divine Power thus manifestly exerted, they
are filled with Astonishment and Amazement, they look upon our Savior with
awful and admiring Looks, They glorify and praise God for sending a great
Prophet amongst them, accounting it a great act of Favor that God had in this
wonderful manner visited his People; yet a Prophet was the highest Name they
could find for him, whom they saw like themselves in shape, but above
themselves in power, a Great Prophet is risen up amongst us, and God has
visited his people.

18 And the Disciples of John showed him of all these things. 19 And John
calling unto him two of his Disciples, sent them unto Jesus, saying, Art thou
he that should come, or look we for another? 20 When the men were come unto
him, they said, John Baptist has sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou he that
should come, or look we for another? 21 And in that same hour he cured many of
their infirmities and plagues, and of evil Spirits, and unto many that were
blind he gave sight. 22 Then Jesus answering said unto them, Go your way and
tell John what things ye have seen and heard; how that the Blind see, the Lame
walk, the Lepers are cleansed, the Deaf hear, the Dead are raised, to the poor
the Gospel is preached. 23 And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in
me.

About the time of our Savior's appearing in the World, there was a general
Expectation of a great Prince that should come out of Judea, and govern all
Nations: This Prince the Jews called the Messiah, or the anointed, and waited
for his Appearance. Accordingly, when John the Baptist appeared in the quality
of an extraordinary Prophet, the Jews sent to know of him, whether he was the
Messiah or not, John 1.19. he answered that he was not, but only the Harbinger
and Forerunner of the Messiah: So that it is very evident, that it was not for
John's own information that he sent two of his Disciples to Christ, to know
whether he was the Messiah or not; for John was assured of it himself, by a
voice from Heaven at our Savior's Baptism, Matthew. 3. last; but it was for his
Disciples Satisfaction, that he sent them to Jesus; because John's Disciples
were unwilling to acknowledge Christ to be the Messiah, out of a great Zeal for
the honor of him their Master; they were not willing to own any Person greater
then John their Master, lest such an Acknowledgment should Eclipse and cloud
him; from whence we may Note, how the Judgments of the Best Men, are very apt
to be Biased and Perverted by Faction or Interest; no doubt John's Disciples
were good Men, and no doubt their Master had often told them as he did others,
that he was not the Messiah, yet they will not believe their own Master, when
they apprehend him to speak against their own Interest; for they knew, that
they must Rise and Fall in their Reputation and Esteem, as their Master did;
therefore that John's Disciples might receive full satisfaction from Christ, he
sends two of his Disciples to him, to hear his Doctrine, and see his Miracles;
for John perceiving his Disciples to be ill-affected toward our Savior, and
hearing them speak with some Envy of his Miracles, he sent them to him, that
being Eyewitnesses of what he did, they might be convinced who he was. Observe
next, the way and means which our Savior takes to convince and satisfy John's
Disciples that he was the true Messiah; he appeals to the Miracles wrought by
himself, and submits those Miracles to the Judgment and Examination of their
Senses; Go and show John the Miracles which you hear and see; the Blind receive
their sight, the lame walk, the deaf hear; Christ was all this in a Literal and
Spiritual Sense also; he was an Eye of Understanding to the Ignorant, a Foot of
Power to the weak, he opened an Ear in Deaf Hearts, to receive the word of
Life; and the poor receive and embrace the Gospel. Miracles are the highest
Attestation, and the greatest external Confirmation and Evidence that can be
given to the Truth and Divinity of any Doctrine. Now our Savior's Miracles for
their Nature, they were Divine and God-like, they were healing and beneficial
to Mankind, freeing Men from the greatest Calamities of Humane Life, for their
number they were many, for their manner of their Operation, they were publicly
wrought in the Sight and View of Multitudes of people, to free them from all
suspicion of fraud and Imposture; he wrought them before his Enemies, as well
as in the presence of his Friends and Followers, and this not done once or
twice, or in one place, but at several times, and in several places wherever he
came, and this for a long time, even for three years and an half; so that our
Blessed Savior had all the Attestation that Miracles can give, to Evidence
himself the true and promised Messiah.

22 To the poor the Gospel is preached.

The poor Hear and Receive the Gospel, See on Matthew. 11.5. Note, that all along
in our Savior's time and since, the poor of the World have been more disposed
to hear and embrace the Gospel then other men, and the Reasons of it are these;
(1.) Because the poor have no Worldly Interest to Engage them to reject Christ
and his Gospel; the High Priests, the Scribes and Pharisees had a plain Worldly
Interest to engage them to oppose Christ and his Doctrine. But the Poor were
free from these Encumbrances and Temptations. They had nothing to loose,
therefore our Savior's Doctrine went down more easily with them, because it
did not Contradict their Interests, as it did the Interest of those who had
great Possessions. (2.) Those that are poor and enjoy little of the good things
of this Life, are willing to entertain the glad Tidings of Happiness in another
Life. Such as are in a State of misery here, are glad to understand that it
shall be well with them hereafter, and are willing to listen to the good News
of a future Happiness; whereas the Rich who have had their Consolation here,
are not much concerned what will become of them hereafter.

23 And Blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.

No doubt our Savior uttered these words with particular Respect and Reference
to John's Disciples, who out of an extraordinary Zeal for the honor of their
Master were prejudiced against our Savior; but the general import of the wordS
does show, that there are many to whom Christ is a Rock of Offense; the Jews
were offended at the Meaness of his Extraction, at the poverty of his Parents,
at the lowness of his Breeding, at his Suffering Condition; from their
Traditions they expected the Messiah should be a Temporal Prince; whereas the
Prophets declared he should be a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs; be
despised, and put to Death. Thus at this day, many are offended at Christ: Some
are offended at the asserted Divinity of his Person, and the meritoriousness of
his Satisfaction. Some are offended at the Sublimity of his Doctrine, others at
the Sanctity and strictness of his Laws; some are offended at the free
Dispensation of his Grace; others, that the Terms of Christianity are very
hard, and lay too great a Restraint upon humane Nature; But blessed is he (says
Christ) that shall not be offended in me; intimating, that such, as instead of
being offended at Christ, do believe in him, and ground their Expectations of
Heaven and Salvation wholly upon him, are in a happy and blessed Condition;
Blessed is he that shall not he offended in me.

24 And when the Messengers of John were departed, Jesus began to speak unto
the people concerning John. What went ye out into the Wilderness to see? a Reed
shaken with the wind? 25 But what went ye our for to see? a man clothed in
soft Raiment? Behold, they which are gorgeously apparelled, and live delicately
are in King's Courts. 26 But what went ye out for to see? a Prophet? yea, I say
unto you, and much more than a Prophet. 27 This is he of whom it is written,
Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before
thee.

Our Savior having given (as we may suppose) full Satisfaction to John's
Disciples, and sent them away, he enters upon a large Commendation of John
himself: Where we have Observable (1.) The Persons whom he commended John
before, not his own Disciples, but before the Multitude: for John's Disciples
had too high an Opinion of their Master already, insomuch that they envied our
Savior for over-shadowing their Master, John 7.26. Behold Christ baptizeth,
and all men come unto him. It was a great Eyesore to John's Disciples, that
Christ had more hearers and followers then their Master; therefore not before
John's Disciples, but before the Multitude is John commended; for as John's
Disciples had too high, so the Multitude had too low an Opinion of John;
possibly because of his Imprisonment and Sufferings: There was a time when the
people had high Thoughts of John's Person and Ministry, but being now clouded
with Sufferings, they disesteem and under-value him. Learn hence how vain it is
for any men, but especially for the Ministers of the Gospel, to value
themselves by popular applause: The People contemn to day, whom they admired
yesterday; he who to day is cried up, to morrow is trodden down; the Word and
Ministers are the same, but this proceeds from the fickleness and inconstancy
of the People; nothing is so mutable as the mind of Man; nothing so variable as
the Opinion of the Multitude. Observe (2.) The Time when our Savior thus
commended John; when he was cast into Prison by Herod; not when he was in
Prosperity, when the People flocked after him, when he preached at Court, and
was reverenced by Herod, but when the giddy Maltitude had forsaken him; when he
was disgraced at Court, and had preached himself into a Prison: Now it is that
Christ proclaims his worth, maintains his honor, and tells the People, that
the World was not worthy of such a Preacher. Learn thence, That Christ will
ever-more stand by, and stick fast unto his Faithful Ministers, when all the
World forsakes them: Let the World slight and despise them at their pleasure,
yet Christ will maintain their Honor, and support their Cause, as they bear a
faithful Witness to Christ, so Christ will bear witness to their faithfulness
for him. Observe (3.) The Commendation it self. Our Savior commends John for
four Things, for his Constancy, for his Sobriety, for his Humility, for his
Gospel Ministry, (1.) for his Constancy, he was not a Reed shaken with the
Wind; that is, a Man of an unstable and unsettled Judgment, but fixed and
steady. (2.) For his Sobriety, Austerity, and high Degrees of Mortification and
Self-denial; he was no delicate, voluptuous Person, but grave, sober, and
severe; he was mortified to the Glory and Honor, to the Ease and Pleasures of
the World: John wrought no Miracles, but his Conversation was almost
Miraculous, and as effectual as Miracles to prevail upon the People. (3.) For
his Humility; John might once have been what he would, the People were ready to
cry him up for the Messiah, the Christ of God, but John's humble and lowly
Spirit refuses all; He confessed, and denied not, saying, I am not the Christ,
but a poor Minister of his, willing, but not worthy, to do him the meanest
Service. This will commend our Ministry to the Consciences of our People, when
we seek not our own Glory but the Glory of Christ. (4.) Our Savior commends
John for his clear Preaching the Gospel, and for his making known the Coming of
the Messiah to the People, He was more than a Prophet, because he pointed out
Christ more clearly and fully then any of the Prophets before him: The Ancient
Prophets beheld Christ a far off, but John saw him face to face. They
Prophesied of him, he pointed at him; saying, This is he; The clearer any
Ministry is in Discovering of Christ, the more excellent and useful it is.

28 For I say unto you, that amongst those that are born of women there is not
a greater Prophet then John the Baptist; but he that is least in the kingdom of
God is greater then he.

Our Savior having highly commended John in the former Verses, here he sets
Bounds to the Honor of his Ministry; adding, that though John was greater then
all the Prophets that went before him, seeing more of Christ then all them, yet
he saw less then those that come after him. The meanest Gospel-minister that
Preaches Christ as come, is to be preferred before all the old Prophets, who
Prophesied of Christ to come. That Minister who sets forth the Life, Death,
Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ, is greater in the Kingdom of Heaven,
that is, has an higher Office in the Church, and a more excellent Ministry,
then all the Prophets, yea, then John himself. The excellency of a Ministry
consists in the Light and clearness of it; Now though John's Light did exceed all
that went before him, yet it fell short of them that came after him; and thus
he that was least in the Kingdom of Grace on Earth, much more he that is least
in the Kingdom of Glory in Heaven, was greater then John.

29 And all the people that heard him, and the Publicans justified God, being
baptized with the Baptism of John. 30 But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected
the counsel of God against themselves, being not baptized of him.

These words are our Savior's farther Commendation of John the Baptist; he
tells us, that John had two sorts of Hearers; (1.) the common People and
Publicans; (2.) The Pharisees and Lawyers, and declares that different effect
which John's Ministry had upon these two different sorts of Persons. As to the
former, the common People and the Publicans, the common People were accounted
by the Jewish Doctors, as the Dregs of Mankind, an ignorant and rude Mob; the
Publicans were esteemed notoriously wicked, guilty of great Injustice,
Oppression, and Extortion; yet these vile Persons were converted sooner then
the Knowing Men of the Time, the Self-justifying Pharisees and Lawyers; for it
is said, The Publicans were baptized of John and justified God; that is, they
looked upon John as a Prophet sent of God, they owned his Ministry, received
his Message, and submitted to his Baptism. Those which believe the Message that
God sends, and obey it, they justify God: They that do not believe and obey,
accuse and condemn God. But of the others it is said, namely, of the Pharisees
and Lawyers, That they rejected the Counsel of God against themselves; that is,
the revealed Will of God, refusing to be Baptized of him; this rejecting the
Counsel of God we are guilty of, when we have low and undervaluing thoughts of
Christ and his Gospel, when we are ashamed in times of Persecution to own and
profess him, when we stop our Ears to the voice of his Ministers and
Messengers, when we submit not our selves to the reasonable Laws and Commands
of Christ; and this Rejection of Christ at the Great Day, will render our
Condition worse then the Condition of Heathens, that never heard of a Savior,
then the Condition of Jews which Crucified their Savior, yea then the
Condition of Devils for whom a Savior was never intended: Lord! Where shall we
appear, if we either Reject or Neglect thy great Salvation.

31 And the Lord said, whereunto shall I liken the men of this generation? and
to what are they like? 32 They are like unto children sitting in the
marketplace, and calling one to another, and saying, we have piped unto you,
and ye have not danced, we have mourned to you, and ye have not wept. 33 For
John the Baptist came neither eating bread, nor drining wine, and ye say he
has a Devil. 34 The Son of man is come eating and drinking, and ye say behold
a gluttonous man, and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners. 35 But
wisdom is justified all of her children.

Our Blessed Savior in these words, describes the perverse Humor of the
Pharisees, whom nothing could allure to the embracing of the Gospel, neither
John's Ministry nor Christ's. This our Savior sets forth two ways,
allegorically and properly; by way of Allegory he compares them to sullen
Children, whom nothing would please, neither Mirth nor Mourning; if their
fellows piped before them, they would not Dance; if they sang mournful Songs to
them they would not lament; that is, the Pharisees were of such a censorious
and capricious humor, that God himself could not please them; although he used
variety of Means and Methods in order to that end. Next our Lord plainly
interprets this Allegory, by telling them that John came to them, neither
eating nor drinking; that is, not so freely and plentifully as other Men, being
a very austere and mortified man, both in his Diet and Habit, all which was
designed by God to bring the Pharisees to Repentance and Amendment of Life. But
instead of this they Censure him for having a Devil, because he delighted in
Solitude, and was not so free in Conversation as some Men; according to the
ancient Observation, that he that delights in Solitude, is either an Angel or
a Devil, either a wild Beast, or a God. John being thus rejected, Christ
himself comes to them, who being of a free and familiar Conversation, not
shunning the Society of the worst of men, no not of the Pharisees themselves,
but complying with their Customs, and accompanying them innocently at their
Feasts, yet the freedom of our Savior's Conversation displeased them, as much
as John's reservedness of Temper; for they cry, Behold a man gluttonous, a
friend of Publicans and Sinners; Christ's Affability toward Sinners they
account an Approbation of their Sins, and his Sociable Disposition, Looseness
and Luxury. Learn hence, That the Faithful and Zealous Ministers of Christ, let
their Temper and Converse be what it will, cannot please the Enemies of
Religion, and the haters of the Power of Godliness; neither John's Austerity,
nor Christ's familiarity could gain upon the Pharisees: It is the Duty of the
Minister's of God, in the course of their Ministry to seek to please all Men
for their good: But after all our endeavors to please all, if we strenuously
oppose the Errors and Vices of the Times, we shall please but very few. But if
God and Conscience be of the number of those few, we are Safe and Happy.
Observe (2.) that it has been the old Policy of the Devil, that he might hinder
the Success of the Gospel, to fill the minds of Persons with an invincible
Prejudice against the Ministers and Dispensers of the Gospel. Here the
Pharisees are prejudiced unreasonably, both against John, and against Christ,
that the Success of both their Ministry might be frustrated and disappointed.
Observe (3.) That after all the scandalous Reproaches cast upon the Christian
Religion, and the Ministers and Professors of it, such as are Wisdoms Children,
wise and good men, will justify Religion, that is, approve it in their
judgments, honor it in their Discourses, and adorn it in their Lives; Wisdom
is justified of all her Children.

36 And one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him: and he
went into the Pharisees house and sat down to meat. 37 And behold a woman in
the city which was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat at meat in the
Pharisees house, brought an Alablaster Box of Ointment. 38 And stood at his
feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with Tears, and did wipe
them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with
the Ointment.

Observe here (1.) The Pharisees Civility and our Savior's Courtesy, the
Pharisee invites Christ to eat with him, Christ readily accepts the invitation,
never refusing any opportunity for doing good. There is a Duty of Civil
Courtesy which we owe to the worst of Men, none are so bad, but we may soberly
eat and drink with them; only let us take care, that if our Converse do not
make them better, their Example may not make us worse. Observe (2.) What an
opportunity our Savior lays hold upon in the Pharisees House of doing good to
a sinful Woman; who coming to Christ bowed down in a sorrowful sight and sense
of her Sins, finds an hearty welcome to him, and is dismissed with comfort from
him. The History runs thus; Behold a Woman in the City which was a sinner, that
is, a Gentile, say some, a remarkable, notorious, and infamous Sinner, say
others; probably a lewd, unclean woman, she is led in with a note of
Admiration, Behold a Woman that was a Sinner. Learn, That to see a sensual and
notorious Sinner, out of true remorse of Conscience, to seek unto a Savior, is
a rare and wonderful sight. Observe farther, it is not said, Behold, a Woman
that had sinned, but Behold a Woman that was a Sinner: One Action does not
denominate a Person a Sinner, but an habit and trade of sin. Again, it is said,
Behold a Woman in the City, the Place where she acted her Lewdness in, added to
the heinousness of her Sin, it was in the City; the more public the Offense,
the greater the Scandal. Sin is Sin, though in the Desert, where no Eye sees it,
but the offense is aggravated by the number and multitude of Beholders: yet
observable it is, that there is no mention made, either of the Woman's Name, or
of the Cities Name; and it is both Presumption and Injuriousness for any to
Name her, whose Name God has been pleased to conceal; for this is not the same
Woman that Anointed Christ's Feet, Matthew. 26. Mark 14. and John 12. that was in
Bethany, this in Galilee, that in the House of Simon the Leper, this of Simon
the Pharisee. Observe (3) The Behavior and Demeanor of this poor Woman, she
appears in the posture of a Penitent; she stood at Christ's feet behind him,
weeping. Where Note (1.) The great change wrought in this sinful Woman, and the
evident effects of it; her Eyes, which had been formerly Lamps of Fire by Lust,
are now an holy Fountain of penitential Tears; her Hair, which she had used as
a Net to catch her fond and foolish Lovers, does now become a Towel for her
Savior's Feet. Verily such an Heart as has once felt the sting and smart of
Sin, will make plentiful Expressions of the greatness of its Sorrow. Again, she
stands behind Christ and weeps; this proceeded, no doubt, from an holy
Bashfulness; she that was wont to look boldly upon the Face of her Lovers,
dares not now behold the Face of our Savior; she that was wont to send her
alluring Beams forth into the Eyes of her wanton Lovers, now casts her dejected
Eyes down upon the Earth; and behold the plenty of her Tears; they flow in such
abundance, that she washes Christ's feet with them; she began to wash his Feet,
says the Text, but we read not when she ended; never were our Savior's Feet
bedewed with more precious Liquor then this of Remorseful Tears. Thus does an
Holy Penitent account no office too mean that is done to the Honor of its
Savior.

39 Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he spoke within himself,
saying, This man if he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of
woman this is, that touches him, for she is a sinner. 40 And Jesus answering
said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee, and he says, Master
say on. 41 There was a certain creditor which had two debtors, the one ought
five hundred pence, and the other fifty. 42 And when they had nothing to pay,
he frankly forgave them both: Tell me therefore, which of them will love him
most? 43 Simon answered and said, I suppose that he to whom he forgave most;
and he said unto him, thou have rightly judged.

Observe here (1.) How unreasonably the Pharisee was offended with Christ for
permitting this poor Woman to come near him, and touch him. Admit she had been
the greatest of Sinners, might not such come to Christ, when he was come from
Heaven to them? Oh Blessed Savior! there is Merit enough in thy Blood and
Mercy, enough in thy Bowels to justify and save the vilest Sinners, which by
Repentance and Faith do make a timely Application to thee. Observe (2.) The
Parable which Christ makes use of for the Pharisees Conviction, and the Woman's
Comfort; namely, the Parable of two Debtors, one of whom owed a greater Sum,
and the other a less, who both having nothing to pay, were both freely
forgiven; and both upon their Forgiveness loved their Creditor much, but he
most, to whom most was given. Now from this Parable we gather these Lessons of
Instruction; (1.) That great is the Debt which all Mankind has Contracted, and
lies under to the justice of God; It Is here expressed by Five hundred pence. Our
Debt is infinite, and had not miraculous Mercy interposed, Divine Justice could
never have been satisfied, but by undergoing an infinite punishment. (2.) That
yet all Sinners stand not alike indebted to the Justice of God, some owe more
and others less; all are Guilty, but not all alike; Some owe Five hundred
Talents, others Fifty Pence. (3.) That be Men's Debts greater or less, their
Sins more or fewer, it is utterly impossible for any Person of himself to clear
his Debt, and make Satisfaction, but they that owe least stand in need of mercy
and forgiveness; He forgave them both. (4.) That the forgiveness that is in God
is a free, gratuitous, and gracious Forgiveness, he frankly forgave them both.
Gracious art thou, oh Lord, in thy doings toward thy children, and thy tender
mercy is over all thy works.

44 And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, see thou this woman: I
entered into thy House, and thou gave me no water for my feet, but she has
washed my feet with Tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head. 45 Thou
gave me no kiss, but this woman, since the time I came in, has not ceased to
kiss my feet. 46 Mine head with Oil thou did not anoint, but this woman has
anointed my feet with Ointment. 47 Wherefore I say unto her, her sins which are
many are forgiven, for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same
loves little. 48 And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven. 49 And they that
sat at meat with him, began to say within themselves, who is this that
forgiveth sins also. 50 And he said unto the woman, thy faith has saved thee,
go in peace.

Observe here, (1.) How our Savior Recounts and Sums up the several particular
instances of this Woman's Love and Respect toward himself; she washed, wiped,
kissed, and anointed his Feet, according to the Custom of those Eastern
Countries. Love will creep where it cannot go, it will stoop to the meanest
Offices, and is ambitious of the highest Services, for and toward the Person
we sincerely Love. Observe (2.) The words of Comfort, given by our Savior to
this poor Woman; Thy Sins, which are many, are forgiven thee. Thence Learn,
That the pardoning Mercy of God is boundless and unlimited; it is not limited
to any sort of Sins or Sinners, it is not limited to any degree of Sins or
Sinners; Thy Sins that are many are forgiven thee, and thy Sins which are
heinous are forgiven also. Observe (3.) What is the effect and fruit of great
pardoning Mercy, it is great Love; her Sins which are many are forgiven, for
she loved much: Her Love to Christ was the effect of his pardoning Love to her,
and not the Cause of it: She did not first Love much, and then Christ forgave
her, but Christ first forgave her, and then she loved much. Her Love was a Love
of Gratitude, because she was pardoned, and not a Love of Merit to Purchase and
procure her Pardon. The Papists interpret this Word (For) as if it were the
Antecedent Cause of her Forgiveness; whereas it is a consequential Sign and
Evidence, that the free Grace and Mercy of Christ had forgiven her; her many
and great Sins were forgiven her, and therefore she Loved much. The Debt is not
Forgiven because the Debtor Loves his Creditor, but the Debtor therefore Loves
because the Debt is Forgiven: Forgiveness goes before, and Love follows after.
Hence Learn, That much Love will follow great Forgiveness. Love will work in
the heart toward God, in some proportion to that Love which we have
Experienced from God. Observe Lastly, The very Gracious Dismission which this
Woman meets with from our, Blessed Savior: What could she desire that is not
here granted to her? Here is Remission, Safety, Faith, and Peace; all these
here meet to make a Contrite Soul Happy: Remission is the Ground of her Safety,
Faith the Ground of her Peace, Peace the fruit of her Faith, and Salvation the
Issue of her Remission: Oh Woman! Great was thy Sin, Great was Christ's
pardoning Grace, and Great was thy Joy and Comfort: Thy Sins are forgiven thee,
thy Faith has saved thee, go in peace.

CHAP. VIII.
1 AND it came to pass afterward, that he went throughout every city and
village, preaching, and showing the glad tidings of the Kingdom of God, and the
Twelve were with him.

Observe here, the great work and business, which not only the Apostles, but
Christ himself was engaged in, and employed about, namely, preaching the
Gospel, those glad Tidings of Salvation to a lost World. Where Note, That
Christ himself labored in this Work of public Preaching; he did not send
forth his Apostles as his Curates to work and sweat in the Vineyard, whilst he
himself took his ease at home; but he accompanies them himself, yea, he goes
before them himself, in this great and excellent Work; Jesus went preaching the
glad tidings of the Gospel, and the twelve were with him. Learn thence, That
Preaching of the Gospel is a great and necessary Work, incumbent upon all the
Ministers of Christ, let their Dignity and Pre-eminence in the Church be what
it will. Surely none of the Servants are above their Lord and Master, did he
Labor in the Word and Doctrine? well may they. Observe (2.) The places where
Christ and his Apostles preached, not only in the populous Cities, but in the
poor Country Villages; They went through every city and village, preaching the
Gospel. Some will preach the Gospel, provided they may preach at Court, or in
the capital Cities of the Nation, but the poor Country Villages are overlooked
by them. Our Savior and his Apostles were not of this mind; it is true, they
were Itinerary Preachers, we are settled, but be the place never so mean and
obscure, and the People never so rude and barbarous, we must not think it
beneath the greatest of us to exercise our Ministry there, if God calls us
thither, Christ went through the villages as well as cities, Preaching.

2 And certain women which had been healed of evil Spirits, and infirmities,
Mary, called Magdalene, out of whom went seven Devils. 3 And Joanna the wife of
Chuza Herod's Steward, and Susanna, and many others, which ministered unto him
of their Substance.

Amongst the number of those that did Accompany our Savior and his Apostles,
mention is here made of certain Women who had been healed by Christ of Evil
Spirits and Infirmities, that is, of Spiritual and Corporeal Diseases, for the
Jews were wont to call Vices and evil Habits, by the Name of Devils, as the
Devil of Pride, the Devil of Malice, etc. Now as concerning these Women's
following of Christ, and administering to him, several Circumstances are
Observable, as (1.) That Women did make up a considerable number of Christ's
Followers, ay and of his Apostles Followers too, the Devout Women not a few,
Acts 17.4. And verily it is no Disgrace or Shame, but matter of Glory and cause
of Thankfulness, if our Ministry be attended by, and Blessed unto the weaker Sex.
I believe in many of our Congregations, and at most of our Communions, are
found two Women for one Man; God grant them Knowledge answerable to their Zeal,
and Obedience proportionable to their Devotion. Observe (2.) One of these Women
that followed Christ, was Joanna the Wife of Herod's Steward: What one of
Herod's Family transplanted into Christ's Household? oh the freeness of the
Grace of God. Even in the worst Societies and Places, God has a number to stand
up for his Name and bear witness to his Truth; we read of a Joseph in Pharaoh's
Court; of an Obadiah in Ahab's Court; of a Daniel in Nebuchadnezar's Court; of
a Church in Nero's House; and of a Joanna here in bloody Herod's Family, who
had put John the Baptist to Death. Observe (3.) The Holy courage and resolution
of our Savior's Female Followers; no doubt they met with Taunts and Jears,
with Scofs and Scorns enough, and perhaps from their Husbands too, for
following the Carpenters Son, and a few Fishermen; but this does not damp but
inflame their Zeal: The Holy Gospel acquaints us with several instances of
Masculine Courage, and manly Resolutions in the Women that followed Christ, as
his Female Disciples; at our Savior's Trial, the Women cleave to him, when his
Disciples fled from him; they accompanied him to his Cross, they assisted at
his Funeral, they attended his Hearse to the Grave, they watched his Sepulcher,
fearing neither the Darkness of the Night, nor the rudeness of the Soldiers.
These feeble Women had more courage then all the Apostles. Learn that Courage
is the special and peculiar Gift of God, and where he gives Courage, it is not
in Man to make afraid. Observe (4.) The pious and charitable care of these Holy
Women, to supply the Wants and outward Necessities of our Savior, they
administered to him of their Substance. Where Note, (1.) The great Poverty of
Christ, he lived upon the Basket; he would not honor the World so far, as to
have any part of it in his own hand, but was beholding to others for what he
eat and drank; yet must we not suppose that either Christ or his Apostles were
common Beggars, but it is probable there was a Bag or common Purse amongst
them, which upon occasion supplied their Necessities; and there were certain
(...), Sisters or Christian Women, as the Learned Dr. Hammond observes, who
accompanied Christ and his Apostles in their Travels, and provided Necessaries
for them, when they went up and down Preaching the Gospel. Note also (2.) The
condescending Grace and Humility of Christ, he was not ash^med either of these
Women's following of him, or administering to him, because of their former
vicious Course of Life; it is not what we formerly were, but what now we are
that Christ considers: it is a Glory to him, to have great and notorious
Sinners brought to a closure and compliance with him. The Reproach is not that
they have been Sinners, for Christ did not give himself for a people that were
pure and holy, without spot or wrinkle, but to make them so by his Word and
Spirit, Ephesians. 5.26. Christ is only ashamed of those that eat of his Bread, and
lift up the Heel against him.

4 And when much people were gathered together, and were come to him out of
every quarter, he spoke by a Parable. 5 A sower went out to sow his Seed, and
as he sowed, some fell by the ways side, and it was trodden down, and the Fowls
of the air devoured it. 6 And some fell upon a Rock, and as soon as it was
sprung up it withered away, because it lacked moisture. 7 And some fell among
Thorns, and the Thorns sprang up and choked it. 8 And others fell upon good
ground, and sprang up and bear fruit a^ hundred f^^d; and when he had said
these thi^^^, be cried, he that has ears to hear, let him hear 9 And his
Disciples asked him saying, What might this Parable be? 10 And he said, unto
you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God; but to others in
Parables, that seeing they might not see, and hearing they might not understand.

The Design and Scope of this Parable is to show what are the Causes of Men's
improving or not improving under the Hearing of the Word; and to let us know
that there are three sorts of bad Hearers, and but one good one. The c^reless
and inconsiderate Hearer is like the Highway Ground, where the Seed is trodden
down and trampled upon. Hard-hearted Sinners, whom the mollifying word does not
soften; These are like Stony-ground, where the Seed takes no Root, the word
makes no impression. Those whose heads and Hearts are stuffed with the Cares of
this World, are like the Thorny-ground, in which the Seed is choked, which
should fructify to an holy immortality: This is the Scope of the Parable. Now
from the Subject Matter of it, Learn (1.) That by the Sower you are to
understand Christ, and his Apostles, and their Successors, the Ministers of the
Gospel. Christ the principal Sower, they the Subordinate Seeds-men. Christ Sows
his own Field, they Sow his Field, he sows his own Seed, they his Seed: Woe unto
us if we sow our own Seed and not Christ's. Learn (2.) The Seed sown is the Word
of God: Fabulous Legends, and unwritten Traditions which the Seeds-men of the
Church of Rome Sow, these are not Seed but Chaff; or if Seed (for they fructify
too fast in the minds of their People) their own, not Christ's. Our Lord's
Field must be all Sown with his own Seed, with no mixed Grain. Learn then, That
the Word Preached is like the Seed Sown in the Furrows of the Field. Seed has a
fructifying, growing, and increasing Nature; it has in it an active Principle,
and will spring up, if not killed by Accidental Injuries; such a quickening
Power has the Word of God to regenerate and make alive dead Souls, if we suffer
it to take Rooting in our Hearts; yet is not this Seed alike fruitful in every
Soil, all Ground is not alike, neither does the Word fructify alike in the
Souls of Men; there is a difference both from the Nature of the Soil, and the
influence of the Spirit; for though no Ground is naturally good, yet some is
worse then other; nay even the best Ground does not bring forth Increase alike:
Some good Ground brings forth an hundred fold, others but sixty, and some but
Thirty: in like manner a Christian may be a profitable Hearer of the Word,
although he does not bring forth so great a Proportion of Fruit as others,
provided he bring forth as much as he can.

9 And his Disciples asked him, saying, What might this Parable be? 10 And he
said, To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but to
others in Parables, that seeing they might not see, and hearing they might not
understand.

Here we have the Disciples Question, and our Savior's Reply; their enquiry
is, concerning the sense and signification of the Parable, they own their
Ignorance, and desire better information: It is no shame for the Best of
Ministers, yea, for the best of Men, to acknowledge their own ignorance in the
Mysteries of Religion; and to attend upon the means of instruction, in order to
their farther Information. In our Savior's Answer, To you it is given to know
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, etc. Observe (1.) That the Doctrine of the
Gospel are great Mysteries; (2.) That it is an invaluable Privilege, rightly
to understand and know Gospel-Mysteries. (3.) That this Privilege all are not
sharers in and Partakers of, but only those to whom it is given. (4.) That it
is a Righteous thing with God to give such Persons over to farther Blindness
and ignorance in Spiritual Things, who wilfully reject the Truth, and shut
their eyes against the evidence of it. The Pharisees had all along shut their
Eyes and said, they would not see; and now Christ closes their Eyes Judicially,
and says they shall not see.

11 Now the Parable is this, the seed is the word of God. 12 Those by the
way-side are they that hear, then comes the Devil, and takes the word out of
their hearts, lest they should believe and be saved. 13 They on the Rock are
they which hear, and receive the word with joy, and these have no root, which
for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away. 14 And that which
fell among Thorns, are they which when they hear the word go forth, and are
choked with cares, and riches, and pleasures of this Life, and bring no fruit
to perfection. 15 But that on the good ground, are they which in an honest and
good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.

Here our Savior applies himself to interpret and explain the foregoing
Parable to his Disciples, he tells them, The Seed is the Word, the Sower is the
Preacher, the Soil, or ground, is the Heart and Soul of Man; some Hearers he
compares to the highway Ground, in which the Seed lies uncovered for want of
the Harrow of Meditation, others to st^ny Ground, in which the Word has no
Root; no Root in their Understandings, no Root in their Memories, in their
Wills, or in their Affections, but they are instantly offended, either at the
depth and profoundness of the Word, or at the sanctity and strictness of the
Word, or else at the plainness and simplicity of it. Again, some Hearers our
Lord compares to Thorny-ground. Worldly desires, and inordinate cares for the
things of this Life, choke the Word, as Thorns over-shadow the Corn, draw away
the Heart of the Earth from it, hinder the influences of the Sun from
cherishing it; the like ill effects have Worldly Affections and desires in the
Soul of Man, rendering the Seed of the Word unfruitful. But the good Christian
hears the Word attentively, keeps it retentively, believes it steadfastly,
applies it particularly, practices it universally, and brings forth Fruit
perseveringly.

Learn hence, (1.) That no Hearers are in Christ's Account good Hearers of the
Word, but such as bring forth Fruit answerably to their Hearing. (2.) That a
Person may be a good hearer of the Word in Christ's Account, if he bring forth
the best Fruit he can, though not in so great a Proportion as others do; as some
Ground brings forth Thirty, some sixty, some an hundred fold; in like manner do
all the sincere Hearers of the Word; they all bring forth fruit, though not all
alike; all in sincerity, though not all Equally, and none to Perfection.

16 No man when he has lighted a Candle, covers it with a Vessel, or puts
it under a bed; but sets it on a Candlestick, that they which enter in may
see the light. 17 For nothing is secret that shall not be made manifest,
neither any thing hid, that shall not be made known, and come abroad. 18 Take
heed therefore how you hear, for whosoever has, to him shall be given, and
whosoever has not from him shall be taken, even that which he seems to have.

In these words Christ declares his End and Design in Revealing unto his
Disciples the foregoing Parable, and why he communicated to them the Light of
Scripture, Knowledge and Gospel Mysteries, namely, that they may communicate it
to others, and not keep it close unto themselves, even as the Candle in an
house diffuses and disperses its light to all that come within the reach of it.
Such as are enlightened by God in any measure with the Knowledge and
Understanding of his Word, ought not to conceal and hide this Knowledge within
themselves, but Communicate it to others, and improve it for the good and
benefit of others. Observe also the Argument which our Savior makes use of to
quicken his Disciples to communicate their Knowledge, and improve the Grace
they had received for the good and advantage of others; To him that has shall
be given, that is, such as improve their spiritual Gifts, shall have them
increased, such as improve them not shall have them blasted. Learn hence, that
there is no such way to thrive in Grace, and increase in Gifts as to exercise
and improve them; he that hides his Talent, forfeits it, is in danger of
loosing it, and also of being punished for not improving of it. Observe Lastly,
How our Lord shuts up this Parable of the Sower and the Seed, with a cautionary
direction to all his Auditors, to take heed how they hear the Word; Take heed
therefore how you hear; Such as would profit by hearing the Word, must
diligently attend to the matter of the Doctrine which they hear, and also to
the manner how they hear; such is the majesty and authority of the person that
speaks to us in the Word, such is the sublimity and spirituality of the matter,
and so great is our danger if we miscarry under the Word, that it nearly
concerns us to take heed both what we hear, whom we hear, and how we hear.

19 Then came to him, his mother and his Brethren, and could not come at him
for the press. 20 And it was told him by certain which said, thy mother and thy
brethren stand without, desiring to see thee. 21 And he answered and said unto
them, My mother and my brethren are these, which hear the word of God, and do
it.

Two things are here Observable (1.) The Truth and Verity of Christ's Humane
Nature; He had affinity and consanguinity with men, persons near in Blood to
him by the Mothers side, called here his Kinsmen. Observe (2.) That Christ's
Spiritual Kindred were much dearer to him, then his natural. Alliance by Faith
is more valued by Christ then alliance by Blood; to bear Christ in the heart,
is a greater honor then to carry him in the Womb. Blessed be God, this great
and gracious Privilege is not denied us even now. Although we cannot see Christ,
yet love him we may; his bodily Presence cannot be enjoyed by us, but his
spiritual Presence is not denied to us: Though Christ be not ours in House, in
Arms, in Affinity and Consanguinity, yet in Heart, in Faith, in Love and
Service, he is or may be ours. Verily, spiritual Regeneration brings men into
a more honorable Relation to Christ, then natural Generation ever did. Oh how
dear are Obedient Christians to Christ! he prefers them in esteem before those
of his own Flesh and Blood; My brethren are these, which hear the word of God
and do it.

22 Now it came to pass on a certain day, that he went into a ship with his
Disciples, and he said unto them let us go over unto the other side of the
Lake, and they lanched forth. 23 But as they sailed he fell asleep; and there
came down a storm of wind on the Lake, and they were filled with water, and
were in jeopardy. 24 And they came to him and awoke him, saying, Master,
Master, we perish: Then he arose, and rebuked the wind, and the raging of the
water, and they ceased, and there was a calm. 25 And he said unto them, where
is your Faith? and they being afraid, wondered, saying one to another, what
manner of man is this, for he commands even the winds and waters, and they
obey him.

Here Observe (1.) Our Savior and his Disciples no sooner put forth to Sea,
but difficulty attends them, and danger over-takes them: a Tempest arose, and
that Ship was covered with Waves which Christ himself was in with his
Disciples. Learn thence, That the presence of Christ it self does not exempt
his Disciples and Followers from trouble and danger; Here is a great Tempest
about the Disciples Ears, though Christ himself was in their Company. Observe
(2.) The Posture our Savior was in, when this Tempest arose; being wearied
with the Labors of the day, he was laid down to sleep; thereby showing himself
to be truly and really Man; and that he not only took upon him the humane
Nature, but the infirmities of that Nature also; he was subject to pain and
weariness, to hunger and Thirst. Obs. (3.) The Disciples application made to
Christ; they awake him with a sad outcry, Master, Master, we perish; here was
Faith mixed with Humane frailty. They believed that he could save them, but
being asleep they concluded he must be awaked before he could save them:
Whereas, though his Humane nature was asleep, yet his Divine Nature neither
slumbered nor slept. Learn hence, That the prevalency of Fear in a time of
great and imminent Danger, though it may evidence weakness of Faith, yet is it no
Evidence of a total want of Faith; in the midst of the Disciples fears, they
believed Christ's Power and Ability to save them; Master, save us, we perish.
Obs. (4.) A double rebuke given by our Savior (1.) to the Winds, (2.) to the
fears of his Disciples; Christ rebuked the Winds, and instantly they were calm;
when the Sea was as furious as a Mad Man, Christ with a single Word calms it.
Learn thence, That the most raging Winds and outrageous Seas cannot stand
before the Rebukes of Christ; Christ as God lays a Law upon the most Lawless
Creatures, even when they seem to act most Lawlesly. Observe farther, Christ
Rebukes his Disciples fears, and their want of Faith, Why are ye fearful? where
is your faith? No sooner was the storm up, but their fears were up, and their
faith was down. They forgot that the Lord High Admiral of the Ocean was now on
Board their Ship, and were as much over-set with their Boisterous Passions, as
the Ship was with tempestuous Winds: and accordingly Christ rebukes the Tempest
within, before he calms the Storm without; first he quickens their Faith, then
he quiets the Seas. Note from hence, that great Faith in the Habit may appear
but little in Act and Exercise. The Disciples Faith in forsaking all and
following Christ was great Faith; but in this present Act, their Faith was
weak, through the prevalency of their fear: Oh the imperfect composition of the
best of Saints, faith and fear will take their turns, and act their several
parts whilst we are here; ere long our fears will be vanquished, and our faith
swallowed up in Vision, our hope in fruition. Then shall we obey with vigor,
praise with cheerfulness, Love without measure, fear without Torment, Trust
without Despondency. Lord strengthen our Faith in the Belief of this desirable
Happiness, and set our Souls a longing for the full fruition, and final
enjoyment of it.

26 And they arrived at the Country of the Gadarens, which is over against
Galilee. 27 And when he went forth to Land, there met him out of the city, a
certain man which had Devils long time, and wore no clothes, neither abode in
any house, but in the Tombs. 28 When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down
before him, and with a loud voice said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus,
thou son of God most high? I beseech thee torment me not. 29 For he had
commanded the unclean Spirit to come out of the man; for oftentimes it had
caught him, and he was kept bound with chains, and in fetters, and he brake the
bands, and was driven of the Devil into the Wilderness. 30 And Jesus asked him,
saying, What is thy name? and he said Legion, because many Devils were entered
into him. 31 And they besought him that he would not command them to go out
into the deep. 32 And there was there an herd of many Swine, feeding on the
mountain, and they besought him, that he would suffer them to enter into them,
and he suffered them. 33 Then went the Devils out of the man, and entered into
the Swine; and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the Lake, and
were choked. 34 When they that fed them, saw what was done, they fled and went
and told it in the city, and in the country. 35 Then they went out to see what
was done, and came to Jesus, and found the man out of whom the Devils were
departed, sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed and in his right mind, and
they were afraid. 36 They also which saw it told them by what means he that was
possessed of the Devils was healed. 37 Then the whole multitude of the
Gadarenes round about besought him to depart from them; for they were taken
with great fear, and he went up into the Ship and returned back again. 38 Now
the man out of whom the Devils were departed, besought him that he might be
with him. 39 But Jesus sent him away, saying, Return to thine house, and show
how great things God has done for thee: and he went his way and published
throughout the whole city how great things Jesus had done unto him. 40 And it
came to pass when Jesus was returned, the people gladly received him, for they
were all waiting for him.

This piece of History gives us a very sad Relation of a Person that was
possessed with a Legion of Devils; we read of few, if any in the Old Testament
that were thus possessed, but of many in the New. Our Savior came into the world
to destroy the Works of the Devil; therefore he suffered Satan to enter some
Humane Bodies, to show his Divine Power in casting him out. Observe here (1.)
That the Evil Angels by their Fall, lost their Purity but not their Power; for
with God's permission they have Power not only to enter Men's Bodies, and to
possess them, but also to distemper their minds, and to drive them to Frenzy
and Madness; such was the deplorable Case here. Note (2.) That the reason why
the Evil Angels do no oftener exert their Power in doing mischief to the Bodies
and Lives of Men, is from the restraining Power of God; the Devil cannot do all
the mischief he would, and he shall not do all he can. Observe (3.) The place
where these Evil Spirits delighted to make their abode, amongst the T^mbs or
Graves, places desolate, forlorn and solitary, which are apt to breed horror of
mind, and to give advantage to Temptation; from whence I gather, That it is
very dangerous and unsafe for Persons, especially in whom Melancholy prevails,
to give themselves too much to solitariness, to frequent desolate places, and
to affect being much alone; for it gives advantage to Satan, to set upon them
with powerful Temptations. It is much better to frequent Humane Society,
especially to delight in the Communion of the Saints, by means whereof we may
be more and more strengthened against Satan's Temptations. Obs. (4.) How the
Devils own Christ to be the Son of God, and pay unwillingly, Worship and Homage
to him, yielding Subjection to him as his slaves and vassals, not a free and
voluntary Service, They cried out, and fell down before him, saying, What have
we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? where, by calling him Jesus, they
own him to be a Savior, but none of their Savior, What have we to do with
thee, Jesus? Oh what an uncomfortable Expression is this? to own Christ to be a
Savior, and at the same time to know and declare, that he is none of our
Savior; Quid est Deus, si non sit meus, What is God, if he be not my God? What
comfort in a Savior, if he be not my Savior? Observe (5.) What a multitude of
Evil Spirits do enter into one Man, oh the extreme malice and enmity of the
Devil against Mankind, in that so many Evil Spirits should at once afflict and
torment a single Person, even a Legion, many thousands of them. Note likewise,
the unity and agreement which is amongst these Evil Spirits in doing mischief,
though there was a multitude of them in this one Person, yet have they all but
one Name; we see the very Devils have a sort of unity amongst themselves, and
in their malicious and mischievous Designs against Mankind, they are as one. Oh
how happy were it if good Men were as united in their Designs and endeavors,
for the Glory of God, and the good of one another, as Devils conspire and
contrive against them. Observe (6.) The request which the Devils make to
Christ, we beseech thee torment us not. From whence we may gather, (1.) That
there are Torments appointed to the Spiritual Nature of Evil Angels; (2.) That
the Evil Angels or Devils are not so full of Torment as they shall be, although
they are as full of sin and discontent as they can be; there will be a time
when their Torments shall be increased; therefore they pray, Torment us not
before the time; that is, do not increase our Torments before the appointed
time of their Increase. Observe (7.) The Devils Request for Permission and
Leave to go into the Herd of Swine. Where Note (1.) The Devils malice, he will
hurt the poor Beasts rather then not hurt at all; (2.) his powerful Restraint,
he cannot hurt a poor Pig without a Permission, Suffer us to enter, Satan's
malice indeed is infinite, but his power is bounded: it is potestas sub
potestate, a power under a power; if he could not hurt the Swine, much less can
he afflict the children of Men without Leave. Obs. (8.) How Satan's request is
yielded to by our Savior, He suffered them to go into the Swine, not to
gratify their desire in doing mischief, but first hereby Christ showed his
Power over the Devils, that they could not Act without his Permission and
Leave; next to show how great the malice and power of the Devil is, if not
restrained; and Lastly, That the Miracle of casting out so many Devils might
appear to be the greater. Learn hence, That sometimes Almighty God for wise
Ends, and just Causes, does suffer the Devil to enjoy his Desire, in doing
mischief unto the Creatures; Jesus said unto them go. Observe (9.) What a bad
effect this Miracle had upon the Minds of the Gadarens, instead of Believing
and owning Christ's Divine Power, the loss of their Swine enrages them, and
makes them desire Christ's departure from them. Learn, That Carnal Hearts
prefer their Swine before their Savior, and had rather lose Christ's Presence
then their Worldly Profit; They besought him to depart from them: Sad is the
condition of those from whom Christ departs, more sad the Condition of such who
say unto Christ depart, but most sad the condition of them who beseech and
entreat Christ to depart from them; thus did the Gadarens here, and we do not
read that ever Christ returned more to them. Observe (10.) How desirous the
possessed Man was to continue with Christ after he was come to himself, He
prayed that he might be with him: This he might desire, partly to testify his
Thankfulness to Christ, partly out of fear of being Repossessed again by Satan,
or perhaps to have the opportunity of hearing Christ's Doctrine, and seeing his
Miracles; for such as have once tasted that the Lord is Gracious, and
experienced the pleasure and profit of Christ's Company, are very desirous of
the continuance of it, and exceeding loath to part with it. However our Savior
at this time did not think fit to suffer him, knowing that more Glory would
redound to God by publishing this Miracle to his Friends. Christ expects after
eminent Deliverances wrought for us, that we should be the publishers of his
Praises, and declare to all, far and near, the great and wonderful things which
he has done for us.

41 And behold there came a man named Jairus: and he was a Ruler of the
Synagogue, and he fell down at Jesus Feet, and besought him that he would come
into his house. 42 For he had one only Daughter, about twelve years of Age, and
she lay a dying, but as he went the People thronged him.

Obs. here (1.) The Person described who came to Christ, on behalf of his sick
Daughter, by his Name Jairus, by his office, a Ruler of the Synagogue, by his
Gesture, he fell down at Jesus Feet, this Gesture of his, was not only a Sign
of tender affection in him toward his Daughter, but also an evidence of his
Faith in our Blessed Savior: He believed him either to be God, or an
extraordinary Man, who had a miraculous power of healing. Observe (2.) How
readily Christ complies with Jairus his Request, Jesus went with him. Although
his Faith was but weak, yet our Savior does not reject him, or deny his Suit:
Oh how ready should we be to go to Christ in all our Distresses, who is so
ready to hear, and so forward to help us, if we seek him in Sincerity, tho our
Faith be weak and feeble Observe (3.) The great Humility of our Blessed
Savior, in suffering himself to be thronged by poor People, much people
followed him and thronged him. Oh humble and lowly Savior! how free was thy
Conversation from Pride and Haughtiness, how willing to converse with the
meanest of the People for their advantage! Christ did not only suffer them to
come near him, but even to throng him: Let not then the greatest Persons upon
Earth, despise or disdain the poorest of the People; but look upon some with an
eye of favor, upon others with an eye of pity, upon none with an eye of
Contempt.

43 And a woman having an issue of Blood twelve years, which had spent all her
Living upon Physicians, neither could be healed of any. 44 Came behind him, and
touched the Border of his Garment, and immediately her Issue of blood stenched.
45 And Jesus said, who touched me? when all denied; Peter and they that were
with him said, Master, the multitude throng thee, and press thee, and say
thou, who touched me? 46 And Jesus said, some body has touched me, for I
perceive that virtue is gone out of me. 47 And when the Woman saw that she was
not hid, she came trembling, and falling down before him; she declared unto him
before all the people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was
healed immediately. 48 And he said unto her, Daughter, be of good comfort, thy
Faith has made thee whole, go in peace.

As our Savior was on his way to Jairus his House, a Diseased Woman comes
behind him, touches his Clothes, and is presently healed. The virtue lay not
in her Finger, but in her Faith; or rather in Christ which her Faith
instrumentally drew forth. Observe (1.) The Diseased Woman, one with a bloody
Flux; let Women here take Notice of the Miseries which the sin of the first
Woman brought upon all Women; amongst which this is one, that it has made their
Bodies subject to preternatural Issues and Fluxes of Blood. Observe (2.) The
long continuance of this Disease, Twelve years; it pleases God to lay long and
tedious Afflictions upon some of his Children in this Life, and particularly to
keep some of them a very long time under Bodily Weakness, to manifest his Power
in supporting them, and to magnify his Mercy in Delivering them. Observe (3.)
This poor Woman was found in the use of Means; she sought to Physicians for
help, and is not blamed for so doing, although she spent all she had upon them.
The use and help of Physic is by no means to be neglected by us in times of
sickness, especially in dangerous Diseases of the Body; to trust to means, is
to neglect God, and to neglect the means, is to tempt God. The health of our
Bodies ought to be dear unto us, and all lawful means used both to preserve it,
to recover it, and to confirm it. Observe (4.) The actings of this poor Woman's
Faith; her Disease was unclean by the Ceremonial Law, and she to be separated
from Society. Accordingly she is ashamed to appear before Christ, but comes
behind him to touch his Clothes, being firmly persuaded that Christ had a power
Communicated to him miraculously to Cure incurable Diseases; and see how our
Savior encouraged her Faith, he says, This thy faith has made thee whole.
Learn hence, That Faith oft-times meets with a better welcome from Christ, then
it did or could expect; this poor Woman came to Christ Trembling, but went away
Triumphing. Observe (5.) Christ would have this Miracle Discovered, he
therefore says, Who touches me? for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me.
Christ says this, first in Reference to himself, to manifest his Divine Power,
that by the touch of his Clothes he could cure such an incurable Disease;
secondly, in Relation to the Woman, that she might have opportunity to give God
the Praise and Glory for the Cure; and thirdly, with respect to Jairus, that
his Faith might be strengthened in Belief of Christ's Power to raise his
Daughter.

49 While he yet spoke there came one from the Ruler of the Synagogues house,
saying to him, thy Daughter is Dead, trouble not the Master. 50 But when Jesus
heard it, he answered him, saying, fear not, believe only, and she shall be
made whole. 51 And when he came into the house, he suffered no man to go in,
save Peter, James, and John, and the Father and Mother of the Maiden. 52 And
all wept and bewailed her; But he said, weep not, she is not dead but sleeps.
53 And they laughed him to Scorn, knowing that she was dead. 54 And he put them
all out, and took her by the hand, and called, saying, Maid Arise. 55 And her
Spirit came again; and she arose straitway, and he commanded to give her Meat.
56 And her parents were astonished; But he charged them, that they should tell
no man what was done.

Observe here (1.) the doleful News brought to Jairus his Ear, Thy Daughter is
dead. The Lord does sometimes suffer the Faith and Patience of his Children to
be greatly exercised and tried. The Loss of dear Relations, particularly of
Children, especially of an only Child, is one of the greatest Sorrows of humane
Life; a Trial which has often shockt an ordinary Patience and constancy of
mind. Observe (2.) Our Savior's seasonable Word of Advice and Comfort, fear
not, only believe. Christ stands ready to comfort Believers in the Hour of
their greatest Trials and Temptations. Observe (3.) Christ's Application of
himself in order to the raising unto Life Jairus his dead Daughter. And here
(1.) he goes into the house only with three of his Disciples, and the Father
and Mother of the Maid, which were sufficient to bear Witness to the Truth of
the Miracle. Our Savior to avoid all show of vain Glory, would not work this
Miracle publicly, before all the People. (2.) Our Savior rebukes them for the
show they made of immoderate Grief and Sorrow for the dead Damsel; they wept
and wailed greatly, with Minstrels making a noise, say the other Evangelists;
according to the Custom of the Heathens, who by a mournful sort of Music did
seek to stir up the passion of Grief at their Funerals. To mourn immoderately
for the Dead is an Heathenish Custom and Practice; it is hurtful to the Living,
it is dishonorable to the Dead, nor is it an Argument of more Love, but an
Evidence of less Grace. (3.) Christ adds a Reason for this Rebuke given by him,
for the Damsel is not dead, but sleeps; Vobis mortua, mihi dormit, She is
dead to you, but asleep to me; not so dead as to be beyond my Power to raise
her to Life. Souls Departed are under the Conduct of Angels to their several
Regions of Bliss or Misery; It is very probable, That the Soul of this Damsel
was under the Guard of Angels, near her Dead Body, waiting the pleasure of God
in order to its Disposal, either to restore it again to the Body, or to
translate it to its Eternal Mansion. Observe farther, the Nature of Death in
General, and of the Saints Death in particular; it is a Sleep. Sleep is a state
of Rest, sleep is a sudden surprisal, in sleep there is an insensible passage
of our Time; the person sleeping shall certainly Awake. Oh how much is it our
Wisdom to prepare for the Bed of the Grave; and so to live, that when we lie
down in it, there may be nothing to disturb our Rest. Observe farther, with
what facility and ease our Savior Raises the dead Damsel? with a word
speaking; and St. Mark tells us what the word was, Talitha Cumi, Syriack words,
to show the Truth of the Miracle; not like a Conjurer, muttering a Charm in an
unknown Tongue. The Miracles which Christ wrought were real Miracles, and
carried their own Evidence along with them. Observe Lastly, The charge given by
our Savior not to publish this Miracle; he charged them to tell no Man what
was done, that is, Divulge it not imprudently to such of the Scribes and
Pharisees as would not be convinced by it, but only cavil at it, and be the
more enraged against him for it, and seek his Death before his appointed time
was come. Again, tell it to no man unseasonably, and all at once, but gradually
and by degrees: For it was the Will of God, that the Divine Glory of Christ
should not be manifested to the World all at once, and on the sudden, but by
little and little, during his estate of Humiliation; for his Resurrection was
the time appointed by God for the full manifestation of Christ's Godhead, Romans
1.4. Declared to be the Son of God with power, by the Resurrection from the
Dead.

CHAP. IX.
1 THen he called his twelve Disciples together, and gave them power and
authority over all Devils, and to cure Diseases. 2 And he sent them to preach
the kingdom of God, and to heal the sick. 3 And said unto them, take nothing
for your journey, neither Staves nor Scrip, neither Bread nor Money, neither
have two Coats a piece. 4 And whatsoever house ye enter into, there abide, and
thence depart. 5 And whosoever will not receive you, when ye go out of that
city, shake off the very dust from your feet, for a Testimony against them. 6
And they departed, and went through the Towns preaching the Gospel, and healing
every where.

We heard before, Chapter 6.13. of our Savior's choosing his Twelve Apostles, and
their several Names; they were first chosen Disciples, to be with Christ, to
learn of him, and be instructed by him, and to be Witnesses of what he said and
did: Now after some time thus spent in preparing and fitting them for public
Service, our Savior sends them forth to preach the Gospel, and gives them a
power to confirm their Doctrine by Miracles. Observe here (1.) The Person that
sends the Apostles forth to preach the Gospel, it is Christ himself. Learn
thence, that none ought to take upon them the Office of Preaching, or any other
Ministerial Function in the Church, till thereunto called by Christ
him-himself. The Apostles were called by Christ, and immediately sent forth by
himself. The Ministers of the Gospel now are called mediately, and receive
Authority from Christ, by the hand of the Governors of the Church. Observe
(2.) The Power given to the Apostles by our Savior to Work Miracles, for
confirming that Doctrine which they preached, He gave them power over unclean
Spirits, etc. Now this miraculous Power given to the Apostles was necessary,
partly to procure Reverence to their Persons, being poor and unlearned Men; but
principally to gain Credit and Authority to their Doctrine; for the Doctrine of
Faith in the Messiah as now come, and exhibited in the Flesh, being a strange
and new Doctrine to the Jews, the truth and certainty of it was to be
extraordinarily ratified by Miracles, which are the Broad Seal of Heaven, to
testify that such a Doctrine comes from God. Obs. (3.) The charge here given by
Christ to his Apostles at the time of their sending forth, and this is
Threefold. First, touching their preparation for their Journey, he forbids them
to take much care, or to spend much time in furnishing themselves with
Victuals, Money, or Clothes; because they were to finish their Journey
speedily, and to return again to Christ their Master. This command of our
Savior to his Apostles, not to incumber themselves when going forth to preach
the Gospel, Teaches his Ministers their Duty, to free themselves as much as
possibly they can, from Worldly encumbrances, which may hinder them in their
ministerial Services, 2 Timothy 2.4. No man that warreth, entangleth himself with
the affairs of this Life. Secondly, touching their Lodging in their Journey,
Christ advises them not to change it, during their stay in one place: But into
whatsoever house they entered, they should there continue, till they departed
out of that place, that so they might avoid all show of lightness and
inconstancy, and testify all gravity and stayedness in their behavior; this
being a special means to gain reverence to their Persons, and Authority to
their Doctrine. Thirdly, Christ gives a special Charge to his Apostles
concerning their Carriage toward such as should refuse to give entertainment
to them and their Doctrine, they were to denounce the Judgments of God against
such Contemners, by shaking off the dust of their feet for a Testimony against
them; This Action was Emblematical, signifying that Almighty God would in like
manner shake them off, as the vilest Dust, for wherever the Word is Preached,
it is for a Testimony, either a Testimony for, or against a people; for if the
dust of a Ministers feet whilst alive, and the ashes of his Grave when dead, do
bear Witness against the Despisers of the Gospel, their Sermons much more.

7 Now Herod the Tetrarch heard of all that was done by him, and he was
perplexed, because that it was said of some that John was risen from the Dead.
8 And of some, that Elias had appeared, and of others, that one of the old
Prophets was risen again. 9 And Herod said, John have I beheaded, but who is
this of whom I hear such things? and he desired to see him.

The History of the Holy Baptist's Beheading by Herod, is briefly here hinted
at by St. Luke, but not largely set forth by him, as we find it by St. Matthew,
chapter 14. and St. Mark, chapter 6. See the Notes there. That which St. Luke takes
particular notice of, is, that great perplexity of mind, which Herod's guilty
Conscience did occasion; he had murdered John, and now is afraid his Ghost
haunted him: Herod was perplexed. Learn hence, That Guilt is naturally
troublesome and uneasy, it disturbs the peace and serenity of the mind, and
fills the Soul with Storms and Thunder. Guilt is always full of fear, every
thing affrights the Guilty, a bad man is a terror to himself, and needs no
farther Disquietment, then what his own Guilty Conscience does occasion him.

10 And the Apostles when they were returned, told him all they had done; and
he took them, and went aside privately into a desert-place, belonging to a city
called Bethsaida. 11 And the people when they knew it followed him, and he
received them, and spoke unto them of the kingdom of God, and healed them that
had need of healing.

St. Luke here gives a short account of several material passages; as (1.)
concerning the Apostles return to Christ after their first mission and sending
forth; they acquaint their Master, how they had executed their Office, and
discharged the Trust he had reposed in them. (2.) He withdraws privately into a
desert place, from the multitude, that he might enjoy himself and his
Disciples; but there the people find him out, and flock after him; and Christ
whose Meat it was by day, and sleep by Night to do good, embraces the
opportunity, bestowing upon their Souls instruction, Reproof and Counsel, upon
their Bodies health and healing, teaching us by his example to mix Spiritual
Alms with Bodily Relief, we must be in fee with the Body sometimes, that we may
come at the Soul. Happy is that Christian whom God has made both able and
willing to intermix Spiritual Alms with Corporal, and knows how to feed two at
once, Soul and Body both. This is the Duty of all, but especially of Spiritual
Persons, the Lord give us Wisdom and Grace to manage it to advantage.

12 And when the day began to wear away, then came the Twelve, and said unto
him, send the multitude away, that they may go into the Towns and Country round
about, and lodge and get Victuals, for we are here in a desert-place. 13 But he
said unto them, give ye them to eat; and they said, we have no more but five
Loaves and two Fishes, except we should go, and buy meat for all this people.
14 For they were about five thousand men, and he said to his Disciples, make
them sit down by fifties in a Company. 15 And they did so, and made them all
sit down. 16 Then he took the five Loaves and the two fishes, and looking up to
Heaven he blessed them, and brake, and gave to the Disciples to set before the
Multitude. 17 And they did eat, and were all filled; and there was taken up of
Fragments that remained to them, Twelve Baskets full.

This Miracle of our Savior's feeding five Thousand, with five Loaves and two
Fishes, is Recorded by all the Evangelists, and in the History of it we have
these Observable particulars, (1.) The seasonable expression of the Disciples
pity toward the Multitude, who had long fasted, and wanted now the ordinary
comforts and supports of Life; it well becomes the Ministers of Christ to have
respect to the bodily wants, as well as to the Spiritual Necessities of their
people. Observe (2.) The motion which the Disciples make to Christ on the
Behalf of the multitude, Send them away, that they may go into the Towns and
Country, and get Victuals: Here was a strong Charity, but a weak Faith; a
strong Charity in desiring the Peoples Relief, but a weak Faith in supposing
that they could no other way be relieved, but by sending them away; forgetting
that Christ who had healed the multitude Miraculously, could also feed them
miraculously whenever he pleased; all things being equally easy to an Almighty
Power. Observe (3.) Our Savior's strange Reply to the Disciples Request, They
need not depart, give ye them to eat; need not depart? why? the People must
either feed or famish, Victuals they must have, and a dry Desert will afford
none, yet says Christ to his Disciples, Give ye them to eat. Alas! poor
Disciples they had nothing for themselves to eat, how then should they give the
Multitude to eat; when Christ requires of us what we of our selves are unable
to perform, it is to discover to us our own impotency and weakness, to provoke
us to look up to him, and to depend by Faith on his Almighty Power. Obs. (4.)
What a poor and slender Provision the Lord of the whole Earth has for himself
and his Family, Five Barley-loaves, and two Fishes; teaching us, that these
Bodies of ours must be fed, but not pampered: Our Belly must not be our Master,
much less our God. The end of Food is to sustain Nature, we must not stifle her
with a Gluttonous variety. And as the quality of the Victuals was plain, so the
quantity of it was small, Five Loaves and two Fishes; well might the Disciples
say, What are these among so many? The eye of Sense and Reason sees an utter
impossibility of those effects which Faith can easily apprehend, and a Divine
Power more easily produce. Observe. (5.) How Christ the great Master of the
Feast does marshal his Guests, He commands them all to sit down by fifties in a
Company. None of them reply, sit down, but to what? Here are the mouths, but
where is the meat? we may soon be set, but whence shall we be served? not a word
like this, but they obey and expect. Lord! how easy is it to trust thy
Providence, and rely upon thy Power, when there is Corn in the Barn, Bread in
the Cup-board, Money in the Purse. But when our stores are empty, when we have
nothing in hand, then to depend upon an Invisible Bounty, is a Noble Act of
Faith indeed. Observe (6.) The Actions performed by our Blessed Savior, he
Blessed, and Brake, and gave the Loaves to his Disciples, and they to the
multitude. (1.) He Blessed them, teaching us, by his Example, never to use or
receive the good Creatures of God, without Prayer and Praise; never to sit down
to our Food, as a Beast to his Fodder. (2.) Christ Brake the Loaves; he could
have multiplied them whole, why then would he rather do it in the breaking?
perhaps to teach us, that we may rather expect his Blessing in the Distribution
of his Bounty, then in the Reservation of it. Scattering is the way to
increasing, Liberality is the way to Riches. (3.) Christ gave the Loaves thus
broken to the Disciples, that they might distribute to the Multitude; but why
did Christ distribute by the Disciples hands? doubtless to gain respect to his
Disciples from the People; and the same course does our Lord take in spiritual
Distributions: He that could feed the World by his own immediate hand, chooses
rather by the hand of his Ministers to divide the Bread of Life amongst his
People. Observe (7.) The certainty and greatness of the Miracle, They did all
eat, and were filled; They did all eat, not a crum or a bit, but to satiety and
fullness, all that were hungry did eat, and all that did eat were satisfied; and
yet Twelve Baskets of fragments remain; more is left then was at first set on.
It Is hard to say which was the greatest Miracle, the miraculous eating, or
miraculous Leaving. If we consider what they left, we may wonder that they eat
any thing; if what they eat, that they left any thing. Observe Lastly, These
Fragments, though of Barley-Loaves and Fish-bones, must not be lost, but at our
Savior's Command gathered up; the Great Housekeeper of the World will not
allow the loss of his Orts. Lord! how tremendous will their Accounts be, who
having large and plentiful Estates, do consume them upon their Lusts; How will
they wish they had been born to poverty and Want, when they appear to make up
their accounts before God.

18 And it came to pass as he was alone, praying, his Disciples were with him,
and he asked them, saying, whom say the people that I am. 19 They answering
said, John the Baptist; but some say Elias, and others say, that one of the old
Prophets is risen again. 20 He said unto them, But whom say ye that I am? Peter
answering said, The Christ of God. 21 And he straightly charged them, and
commanded them to tell no man that saying. 22 For the Son of man must suffer
many things, and be rejected of the Elders, and chief Priests, and Scribes, and
be slain, and be raised the third day.

These Verses relate to us a private Conference which our Savior had with his
Disciples, touching their own and others Opinion concerning himself. Where
Observe (1.) Our Savior's inquiry, What the generality of the People thought
and said of him, Whom do men say that I am? not as if Christ were ignorant, or
did vain-gloriously inquire after the Opinion of the Multitude. But his
intention and design was to settle and more firmly establish his Disciples in
the Belief of his being the True and Promised Messiah. The Disciples tell him,
some took him to be John the Baptist, some Elias, some one of the Prophets.
It Is no new thing it seems, to find Diversity of Judgments and Opinions,
concerning Christ and the affairs of his Kingdom. Observe (2.) Peter as the
Mouth of all the Apostles, and in their Names makes a full and open Confession
of Christ, acknowledging him to be the True and Promised Messiah; Thou art the
Christ of God. Learn thence, That the vail of Christ's Humane Nature, did not
keep the Eye of his Disciples Faith from discerning him to be Truly and Really
God. Thou art the Christ of God. Observe (3.) The Charge and special Injunction
given by Christ, To tell no man of him; that is, not commonly to Publish, and
openly to declare him to be the Son of God; because being in his State of
Humiliation, the Glory of his Divinity was to be concealed till his
Resurrection; He was then declared to be the Son of God with power, Romans 1.4.
Observe Lastly, The great Wisdom of our Savior in acquainting his Disciples
with the near approach of his Death and Sufferings; The Son of Man must suffer
many things, etc. This our Savior did (1.) To prevent that Scandal and Offense
which otherwise they might have taken at his Sufferings. (2.) The better to fit
and prepare them to bear that great Trial when it did come. (3.) To correct the
Error which they had entertained concerning the Temporal Kingdom of the
Messiah, and that he was to be a great and mighty Prince here upon Earth, for
these Reasons did Christ frequently acquaint his Disciples with his Sufferings.

23 And he said to them all, if any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. 24 For whosoever will save his
Life shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his Life for my sake, the same
shall find it.

Observe here (1.) How our Savior recommends his Religion to every Persons
Election and Choice, not compelling any one by force and Violence to embrace or
entertain it: If any man will be my Disciple, that is, if any Man chooses and
resolves to be a Christian. Observe (2.) Our Savior's Terms propounded,
namely, Self-denial, Gospel-suffering, and Gospel-service. (1.) Self-denial,
Let him deny himself; by which we are not to understand either the denying of
our Senses in matters of Faith, or the Renouncing of our Reason in matters of
Religion; but a willingness to part with all our Earthly Comforts and Temporal
Enjoyments for the sake of Christ, when called thereunto. (2.)
Gospel-suffering, He must take up his Cross daily; an allusion to a Roman
Custom, when a Malefactor was to be Crucified, he took his Cross up upon his
Shoulder, and carried it to the place of Execution. Here Note, That not the
making of the Cross, but patient bearing of it, when God has made it, and laid
it upon our Shoulder, is the Duty enjoined; Let him take up his Cross. (3.)
Gospel-service, Let him follow me, says Christ, that is, obey my Commands, and
imitate my Example, he must set my Life and Doctrine continually before him,
and be daily Correcting and Reforming of his Life by that Rule and Pattern.
Observe (3.) The Arguments urged by our Savior to induce Men to a willingness
to lay down their Lives for the sake of Christ and his Holy Religion; He that
will save his Life shall lose it, and he that is willing to lose his Life for
the sake of the Gospel, he shall find it; intimating to us, (1.) That the Love
of this Temporal Life is a great Temptation to men to deny Christ, and to
renounce his Holy Religion. (2.) That the surest way to attain Eternal Life, is
cheerfully to lay down our Temporal Life, when the Glory of Christ, and the
Honor of Religion requires it at our hands.

25 For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and lose himself.

Here our Savior goes on to show the Folly of those that for saving their
Temporal Lives, will expose their Eternal Life, or the Life of their Souls to
hazard and danger; yea sometimes by refusing to lay down our Temporal Life for
Christ, we lose that also; which renders it the greatest folly in the World to
refuse to part with any enjoyment, even Life it self, at the Call and Command
of Christ.

26 For whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shall the Son
of man be ashamed, when he shall come in his own Glory, and in his Fathers, and
of the Holy Angels.

That is, whosoever shall deny and disown me, either in my Person, in my
Doctrine, or my Members, for any fear or favor of Man, he shall with shame be
disowned by me, and rejected of me, at the Great Day. There are two Passions
which cause Men to disown Christ in the day of Temptation, namely, fear and
shame. Many good Men have been overcome by the former, as St. Peter, and
others; but we find not any good Man in Scripture guilty of the latter, namely,
that denied Christ out of shame; this argues a rotten, unsound, and corrupt
Heart: If any Man thinks it beneath his Honor and Quality to own the opposed
Truths, and despised Members of Christ, Christ will think it beneath him to own
such Persons at the Great Day. Learn hence, (1.) That such as are ashamed of
Christ's Doctrine, or Members, are in God's Account ashamed of Christ himself.
(2.) That such as either for fear dare not, or for shame will not, own the
Doctrine and Members of Christ now, shall certainly find Christ ashamed to own
and confess them at the Great Day.

27 But I tell you of a truth, there be some standing here, which shall not
taste of Death, till they see the Kingdom of God.

There is a Threefold sense and interpretation of these Words given by
Expositors; (1.) Some refer the Words to the Times of the Gospel after Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension, when the Gospel was Propagated far and near, and
the Kingdom of God came with Power. Learn thence, That where the Gospel is
powerfully preached, and cheerfully obeyed, there Christ comes most gloriously
in his Kingdom. (2.) Others understand these Words of Christ's Coming and
Exercising his Kingly Power in the Destruction of Jerusalem, which some of the
Apostles then standing by Lived to see. (3.) Others (as most agreeable to the
Context) understand the words with Reference to our Savior's Transfiguration;
as if he had said, Some of you, meaning Peter, James, and John, shall shortly
see me upon Mount Tabor, and that in such splendor and Glory, as shall be a
Preludium, a shadow and Representation of that Glory which I shall appear in,
when I shall come with Power to judge the World at the great Day. And whereas
our Savior says not, there are some standing here which shall not dye, but
which shall not taste of Death, till they had seen this glorious sight; This
implies two things, (1.) That after they had seen this Transfiguration, they
must taste of Death as well as others; (2.) That they should but taste of it,
and no more. From whence Learn, (1.) That the most Renowned Servants of Christ,
for Faith, Holiness, and Service, must at length, in God's appointed time,
taste and have experience of Death as well as others. (2.) That although they
must taste, yet they shall but taste of Death, they shall not drink off the
Dregs of that bitter cup, though they fall by the hand of Death, yet shall they
not be hurt by it, but in the very fall be victorious over it.

28 And it came to pass about eight days after these sayings, he took Peter,
and John, and James, and went up into a mountain to pray. 29 And as he prayed,
the fashion of his countenance was altered, and his Raiment was white as Snow,
and glistering. 30 And behold there talked with him two men, which were Moses
and Elias. 31 Who appeared in Glory, and spoke of his Decease which he should
accomplish at Jerusalem. 32 But Peter, and they that were with him, were heavy
with sleep; and when they were awake, they saw his Glory, and the two men that
stood with him. 33 And it came to pass as they departed from him, Peter said
unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here, let us make three
Tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moses, and one for Elias, not knowing what
he said. 34 While he thus spoke, there came a cloud and over-shadowed them; and
they feared as they entered into the cloud. 35 And there came a Voice out of
the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son, hear him. 36 And when the voice was
past, Jesus was found alone; and and they kept it close, and told no man in
those days, any of those things which they had seen.

Here we have Recorded the History of our Holy Savior's Transfiguration; when
he laid, as it were, the Garments of our frail Humanity aside for a little
Season; and put on the Robes of his Divine Glory, to Demonstrate and Testify
the Truth of his Divinity; for this Divine Glory was an Evidence of his Divine
Nature, and also an Emblem of that Glory which he and his Disciples, and all
his Faithful Servants and Followers, shall enjoy together in Heaven. Observe
then (1.) The design of our Savior in this his Transfiguration, namely, to
confirm his Disciples Faith in the Truth of his Divine Nature; he was therefore
pleased to suffer the Rays of his Divinity to dart forth before their Eyes, so
far as they were able to bear it; his Face shined with a pleasing Brightness,
and his Raiment with such a Glorious Luster, as did at once both delight and
dazzle the Eyes of his Disciples. Observe (2.) The choice which our Savior
makes of the Witnesses of his Transfiguration, his three Disciples, Peter,
James, and John; But why Disciples? why three Disciples? and why these three?
(1.) Why Disciples? Because this Transfiguration was a Type of Heaven; Christ
vouchsafes therefore the Earnest and First Fruits of that Glory only to Saints
upon Earth, on whom he intended to bestow the full Crop in due time. (2.) Why
three Disciples? Because three were sufficient to Witness the Truth of this
Miracle; Judas was unworthy of this Favor, yet lest he should murmr or be
discontented, others are left out as well as he. (3.) But why these three
rather then others? probably, (1.) Because these three were more eminent for
great Zeal and Love toward Christ; now the most eminent Manifestations of
Glory are made to those that are most excelling in Grace. (2.) Because these
three Disciples were to be Witnesses of Christ's Agony and Passion, to prepare
them for which, they are here made Witnesses of his Transfiguration. This
Glorious Vision upon Mount Tabor, fitted them to abide the Terror of Mount
Calvary. Observe (3.) The Glorious Attendants upon our Savior at his
Transfiguration; they were Two, those Two, Two Men, those Two Men Moses and
Elias. This being but a Glimpse of Heavens Glory, and not a full Manifestation
of it, only Two of the Glorified Saints attended it, and these two Attendants
are not two Angels, but two Men; because Men were more nearly concerned then
Angels in what was done, But why Moses and Elias, rather then any other Men?
(1.) Because Moses was the giver of the Law, and Elias the chief of the
Prophets; now both these attending upon Christ, did show the Consent of the Law
and the Prophets with Christ, and their accomplishment and fulfilling in him.
(2.) Because these two Men were the most Laborious Servants of Christ; both
adventured their Lives in God's Cause, and therefore were highly honored by
him; for those that honor him he will honor. Observe (4.) The Carriage and
Behavior of the Disciples upon this great occasion, (1.) They supplicate
Jesus, they do not pray to Moses or Elias, but to Christ, Master, it is good
being here: Oh what a ravishing Comfort and Satisfaction is the Communion and
Fellowship of the Saints; but the Presence of Christ amongst them, renders
their Joys Transporting. (2.) They proffer their Service to farther the
Continuance of what they did enjoy; Let us make three Tabernacles; Saints will
stick at no cost or pains for the Enjoyment of Christ's Presence and his
Peoples Company. Learn hence, That a Glimpse of Heavens Glory, is sufficient to
wrap a Soul into Ecstasy, and to make it out of Love with Worldly Company. (2.)
That we are apt to desire more of Heaven upon Earth then God will allow us; we
would have the Heavenly Glory come down to us, but are not willing by Death to
go up to that. Obs. (5.) How a Cloud was put before the Disciples Eyes, when
the Divine Glory was manifested to them; partly to allay the Luster and
Resplendency of that Glory, which they were swallowed up with; the Glory of
Heaven is insupportable in this imperfect State, we cannot bear it unvailed;
and partly did this Cloud come to hinder their looking and prying farther into
this Glory: we must be content to behold God through a Cloud darkly here, e're
long we shall see him Face to Face. Observe (6.) The Testimony given out of the
Cloud by God the Father, concerning Jesus Christ his Son; This is my beloved
Son, hear him. Where Note (1.) The Dignity of his Person, he is my Son, for
Nature Co-essential, and for Time Coeternal with his Father. (2.) The
endearedness of his Relation, He is my beloved Son, because of his Conformity
to me, and Compliance with me; Likeness is the Cause of Love, and an Union and
Harmony of Wills causes a mutual endearing of Affections. (3.) The Authority of
his Doctrine, Hear ye him; Not Moses and Elias who were Servants, but Christ my
Son, whom I have authorized and appointed to be the great Prophet and Teacher
of my Church; therefore Adore him as my Son, believe in him as your Savior,
and hear him as your Lawgiver. The Obedient Ear honors Christ more, then
either the gazing Eye, the adoring Knee, or the applauding Tongue.

37 And it came to pass, that on the next day, when they were come down from
the Hill much people met him. 38 And behold, a man of the company cried out,
saying, Master, I beseech thee look upon my Son, for he is mine only child. 39
And lo, a Spirit takes him, and he suddenly cries out, and it teareth him,
that he foameth again, and bruising him, hardly departs from him. 40 And I
besought thy Disciples to cast him out, and they could not. 41 And Jesus
answering said, oh faithless and perverse Generation, how long shall I be with
you, and suffer you? Bring thy Son hither. 42 And as he was yet a coming, the
Devil threw him down, and tare him, and Jesus rebuked the unclean Spirit, and
healed the child, and delivered him to his Father.

Observe here (1.) The Person brought to Christ for help and healing, one
Bodily possessed by Satan, who Rent and Tore him, but rather to Torment than to
Dispatch him: Oh how does Satan delight to do hurt to the Bodies, as well as
the Souls of Mankind! Lord! abate his Power, since his Malice will not be
abated. Observe (2.) The Person who represented his sad Condition to our
Savior; his Compassionate Father, who kneeled down, and cried out. Need will
make a Person both humble and Eloquent; every one has a Tongue to speak for
himself, happy he that keeps a Tongue for others. Observe (3.) The Physicians
which this Distressed Person is brought unto, first to the Disciples, and then
to Jesus: We never apply our selves importunately to the God of power, till we
despair of the Creatures help. But what hindered the Disciples that they could
not cast this Evil Spirit out? why it was their unbelief; oh faithless
Generation. Learn thence, That the great Obstacle and Obstruction of all
Blessings both Spiritual and Temporal, coming to us, is our wretched Infidelity
and Unbelief. Observe (4.) The Sovereign Power, and absolute Authority which
Christ had when on Earth, over the Devil and his Angels; Jesus rebuked him,
cast him out, and charged him to return no more into him. This was a Proof and
Demonstration of the Godhead of our Savior, that in his own Name, that is, by
his own Power and Authority, he did and could cast the Devils out.

43 And they were all amazed at the mighty power of God; But while they
wondered every one at all things which Jesus did, he says unto his Disciples.
44 Let these sayings sink down into your ears; for the Son of man shall be
delivered into the hands of men. 45 But they understood not this saying, and it
was hid from them, that they perceived it not; and they feared to ask him of
that saying.

Observable it is, how frequently our Savior forewarned his Disciples of his
approaching Sufferings, and as the time of his Sufferings drew nearer, he did
more frequently warn them of his Death. But all was little enough to arm them
against the Scandal of the Cross; and to Reconcile them to the thoughts of his
Suffering Condition; how an ordinary Prophet should be Delivered into the hands
of Men, they could easily understand, but how the Messiah should be so treated
they could not apprehend; for the Disciples had taken up the Common Opinion,
That the Messiah was to be a Temporal Prince, and should Conquer and Reign here
upon Earth, and how to Reconcile this with being killed, they could no ways
apprehend; and they were afraid to be too particular in their Enquiries about
it. Now from Christ's so frequent warning his Disciples of his approaching
Sufferings we may gather, That we can never hear, either too often or too much,
of the Doctrine of the Cross, nor be too frequently instructed in our Duty to
prepare for a Suffering State; as Christ went from his Cross to the Crown, from
a State of Abasement to a State of Exaltation, so must all his Disciples and
Followers likewise.

46 Then there arose a Reasoning among them, which of them should be the
greatest. 47 And Jesus perceiving the thoughts of their Heart, took a child and
set him by him. 48 And said unto them, whosoever shall receive this child in my
name, receives me, and whosoever shall receive me, receives him that sent me;
for he that is least among you all, the same shall be great.

It may justly seem a wonder, that when our Blessed Savior Discoursed so
frequently with his Disciples about his Sufferings, that they should at the
same time be disputing amongst themselves about precedence and preheminency,
which of them should be the greatest, the first in place, and the highest in
Dignity and Honor: But from this Instance we may Learn, That the Holiest and
Best of Men are too prone to Ambition, ready to catch at the Bait of Honor, to
affect a Precedence before, and Superiority over others; Here the Apostles
themselves were touched with the Itch of Ambition; to cure this, our Savior
sets before them a little Child, as the proper Emblem of Humility; showing that
they ought to be as free from Pride and Ambition as a young Child, which
affects nothing of Precedence. Such as are of highest Eminency in the Church
ought to be singularly adorned with the Grace of Humility, looking upon
themselves as lying under the greatest Obligations to be most Eminently useful
and serviceable for the Churches good.

49 And John answered, and said, Master, we saw one casting out Devils in thy
name, and we forbad him, because he follows not with us. 50 And Jesus said
unto him, forbid him not, for he that is not against us, is for us.

Observe here (1.) St. John's Relation of a matter of Fact to our Savior,
namely, his Forbidding one to cast out Devils in Christ's Name, that did not
follow Christ as they did; for though only the Disciples which followed Christ
had a Commission to work Miracles; yet were there others, no Enemies to Christ,
who in imitation of the Disciples, did attempt to do the like; and God was
pleased for the Honor of his Son, in whose Name they cast out Devils, to give
them sometimes Success. Observe (2.) The Action of the Disciples toward this
Person, we forbad him, because he followed not with us; where is Observable
their Rashness in Forbidding him of their own Heads, before they had consulted
Christ about it, and their Envy and Emulation, in that they were grieved and
discontented that good was done, because they did not do it; it is as hard a
matter to look upon the Gifts of others without Envy, as it is to look upon our
own without Pride. Observe (3.) Our Savior's Reply, forbid him not: Because
Our Savior knew that this Action of casting out Devils in his Name, would some
ways Redound to his Glory, although he undertook the matter without Direction
from Christ: We ought not to censure and condemn those which do that which is
good in it self, though they fail in the manner of their doing of it.

51 And it came to pass when the time was come, that he should be received up,
he steadfastly set his Face to go to Jerusalem.

The time now drew on, wherein our Savior was to be Received up into Heaven;
and accordingly he sets his Face to go to Jerusalem, that he might there
Suffer, and from thence Ascend. Now here we have Observable (1.) That although
Jerusalem was the Nest of his Enemies, the Stage upon which his Bloody
Sufferings were to be Acted, the fatal place of his Death, yet nothing
terrified with Danger, he sets his Face for Jerusalem, that is, come what will,
he will go with an invincible Courage and Resolution. Learn thence, That although
Christ had a perfect and exact Knowledge of all the Bitter Sufferings he was to
undergo for, and on behalf of his Members, yet did it not in the least
dishearten him in, or discourage him from, that Great and Glorious Undertaking.
Observe (2.) That though Christ was first to Suffer, before he did Ascend, and to
be lifted up upon the Cross, before received up into Heaven, yet is there no
mention of his Death here, but of his Ascension only; as if all thoughts of
Death were swallowed up in his Victory over Death; teaching us by his Example,
to overlook our Suffering and Death, as not worthy to be named or mentioned
with that Glory which we are received into, after Death. The Evangelist does
not say the time was come when he should Suffer, but when he should be Received
up.

52 And sent Messengers before his Face, and they went, and entered into a
Village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him. 53 And they did not receive
him, because his Face was as tho he would go to Jerusalem.

Our Savior was now going from Galilee to Jerusalem, and being to pass through a
Village of Samaria, he sent Messengers before him to prepare Entertainment for
him. The Son of God, who was Heir of all things, sends to, and sues for a
Lodging in a Samaritan Cottage. Oh Blessed Savior, how can we be abased enough
for thee, who thus neglected thy self for us: It was thy pleasure to appear,
not in the Figure of a Prince, but in the Form of a Servant, yet the people in
the Samaritan Village would not receive him: Strange! to hear the Son of God
Sue for a Lodging and be denied; but the Reason was, the difference of Religion
which was between the Jews and the Samaritans: the Jews Worshipped at the
Temple in Jerusalem, the Samaritans at a Temple of their own, built upon Mount
Gerizim. Upon the Building of this new Temple, there arose so great a Fewd
between the Jews and the Samaritans, and in process of time, such an implacable
Hatred, that they would not show common Civility to one another. A Samaritan's
Bread to a Jew was no better then Swines Flesh; they would rather thirst then
drink a Draught of Samaritan-Water. Hence we Learn, That no Enmity is so
desperate as that which arises from matters of Religion.

54 And when his Disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord, Will thou
that we command Fire to come down from Heaven, and consume them, as Elias did?

Here Observe, (1.) The Crime which these Men were guilty of; no affront must
be accounted little, no indignity light, that is offered to the Son of God. But
these Samaritans did not Revile Christ, nor any of his Retinue, that we read
of; they did not violently assault him, they did not follow him with Stones in
their Hands, or Blasphemies in their Mouths, but the wrong and injury was only
Negative, They received him not: They denied him a Night's Lodging, and this
not out of any dislike of his Person, but from an antipathy against his Nation.
Observe (2.) The Carriage of the Disciples upon this occasion; it was thus far
commendable, that from the endeared Love which they bare to their Master, they
did highly resent the churlish Denial of an act of Kindness toward him. A
gracious Heart is Holily impatient at the sight of any indignity offered to
Christ: But their fault was, That they were too far Transported with Passion
and Revenge, even to desire the Death and Destruction of the uncivil
Samaritans; Will thou that we command Fire to come down from Heaven and consume
them? They do not say, Master, will it please thee, who art Lord of the
Creatures, to command Fire to come down? Nor did they say, if it be thy
pleasure, command us to call down Fire; but will thou that we command Fire?
this savours too much of Pride, Cruelty and Revenge, so dangerous is a
misguided Zeal.

55 But he turned and rebuked them, saying, ye know not what manner of Spirit
ye are of. 56 For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's Lives, but to save
them.

Here we have our Savior's Censure of the rash and hot Motion of his
Disciples, which proceeded, (1.) from ignorance of themselves, Ye know not what
Spirits ye are of; ye are not now under the rough and sower Dispensation of the
Law, but under the calm and gentle Institution of the Gospel, which designs
universal Love, Peace, and good Will to all Mankind. Hence Learn first, That a
cruel and revengeful Spirit is directly contrary to the Design and Temper of
Christianity. Secondly, That no difference in Religion, no pretense of Zeal for
God can warrant and justify such a Spirit and Temper. Again, This rashness in
the Disciples proceeded from their ignorance of Christ their Lord and Master,
as well as of themselves; The Son of man did not come to destroy men's lives,
but to save them; that is, the proper intent and design of my Coming, was to
save and not destroy; though the accidental event of it may be otherwise, through
the malice and perverseness of men. Learn, That it was the Design of Christ,
and his Holy Religion, to discountenance all fierceness, rage and cruelty in
Men, one toward another; and to inspire them universally with a Spirit of Love
and Unity. Christ is so far from allowing us to persecute them that hate us,
that he forbids us to hate them that persecute us.

57 And it came to pass, that as they went in the way, a certain man said to
him, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go. 58 And Jesus said unto
him, Foxes have holes, and Birds of the air have nests, but the son of man has
not where to lay his head.

Observe here (1.) A Person resolving to follow Christ, a good Resolution if
made deliberately and wisely, not for sinister Ends, or secular Advantages,
which it is to be feared was the Case here, by our Savior's Answer, For, says
he, Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air Nests, but the Son of Man has
not where to lay his head; as if Christ had said, My Condition in the World is
very poor, I have no house of Residence that I call my own; the Birds of the
Air have their fixed Nests, and the Beasts of the Earth have their Dens and
Holes, but I have no fixed Habitation; therefore if you think to follow me, for
the sake of Wordly Advantage, you will find your self greatly disappointed.
Learn hence, That such Men will find themselves miserably mistaken, and greatly
disappointed, who expect to gain any thing by following of Christ, but their
Souls Salvation.

59 And he said to another, follow me, but he said, Lord, suffer me first to go
and bury my father. 60 Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their dead; but
go thou and preach the Kingdom of God.

We are not to suppose by this Prohibition, that Christ disallows or
disapproves of any civil office from one Person to another, much less of a
Child to a Parent, either Living or Dying; but he lets us know, (1.) That no
Office of Love and Service to Man, must be preferred before our Duty to God, to
whom we owe our first and chief Obedience. (2.) That lawful and decent Offices
become sinful, when they hinder greater Duties. (3.) That such as are called by
Christ to preach the Gospel, must mind that alone, and leave inferior Duties
to inferior Persons; as if Christ had said, others will serve well enough to
bury the Dead, but thou that art called to Minister unto God, must do that unto
which thou art called; under the Law, the Priests might not come near a dead
Corpse, nor meddle with the Interment of their own Parents, unto which our
Savior here probably alludes.

61 And another also said, Lord, I will follow thee, but let me first go bid
them farewell which are at home at my house. 62 And Jesus said unto him, No man
having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of
God.

Here we have another Person that promised to follow Christ, but desires leave
first to settle the affairs of his Family, and to take leave of his Friends;
our Savior tells him, if he would be one of his Ministers, he must be like a
Ploughman, who looks forward and not backward, otherwise he will never make his
Furrows right; they will either be too deep, or too narrow, he must mind his
Plough and nothing else. Thus must they that are called to the Work of the
Ministry, mind it wholly, attend to that alone, their whole time, their whole
strength, must be devoted to it: The things of the World are things behind
them, they must not look back upon them; nothing can justify a Minister
concerning himself with the encumbrances of Worldly Business, but only perfect
Necessity, for the Support of himself and his Family.

CHAP. X.
1 AFter these things the Lord appointed other seventy also, and sent them, Two
and Two before his face into every city and place, whither he himself would
come.

The Captain General of our Salvation, Christ Jesus, having called,
commissioned, and sent forth his Twelve Apostles, as great Commanders, to
subdue his Native Kingdom of Israel to himself, at the sixth Chapter of this
Gospel. In this Chapter he sends after them a Band of Seventy Auxiliary
Forces to Aid and Assist them; After these things the Lord appointed other
Seventy Disciples, and sent them two by two before his Face. Where Note, (1.)
The Person Commissioning and Sending them forth, Christ himself: Thence Learn,
That none ought to take upon them the Office of Preaching, or other Ministerial
Function in the Church, till thereunto called by Christ himself. The Twelve
Apostles, and Seventy Disciples, had an immediate Mission from Christ himself:
All his Ministers now are called mediately, and receive their Authority from
Christ, by the hands of the Governors of his Church. Note (2.) The manner of
their sending two by two in a company, partly to make their Message of more
Authority, partly to testify their mutual consent in the Doctrine they taught;
and partly to comfort and encourage, to help and strengthen, to assist and
support each other: In imitation of this Example, the Jesuits send forth their
Emissaries by pairs, Jesuitae semper sunt Bini, etc. Learn hence, That the
Ministers of the Gospel do stand in great need of the mutual help and comfort
of the united assistance and encouragement of each other, in the weighty Duties
of their Calling and Function. Our Savior in the next Verse compares his
Ministers to Harvest Laborers, who are to help and assist one another, the
strong endeavoring to strengthen the hands of the weak. But Lord! What Tears
are sufficient to bewail the want of Love and Unity, yea the prevalency of that
Envy and malignity which is found too often amongst the Ministers of the
Gospel? so that instead of going forth two by two, happy is he that is alone in
a place: Well might Melanchton bless God when he lay a dying, that he was going
to a place where he should be freed from the implacable hatred of Divines; this
is, and ought to be for a Lamentation.

2 Therefore said he unto them, the Harvest truly is great, but the Laborers
are few, pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth
Laborers into his Harvest.

Note here, (1.) That God's Church is an Harvest Field; (2.) That the Ministers
of God are Laborers in his Harvest, under God the Lord of the Harvest. (3.)
That to God alone does it belong to send forth Laborers into his Harvest, and
none must thrust themselves in, till God sends them forth, Pray ye the Lord of
the Harvest that he send forth Laborers. (4.) That the number of Faithful
Laborers, is comparatively small and few: the Scribes and Pharisees in the
Jewish Harvest-field, are many; yet says Christ, The Laborers are few. (5.)
That it is the Churches Duty to pray, and that earnestly and incessantly to God
the Lord of the Harvest, to increase the number of Faithful Laborers, and to
send forth more Laborers into his Harvest.

3 Go your ways, Behold, I send ye forth, as Lambs amongst Wolves. 4 Carry
neither Purse, nor Scrip, nor Shoes, nor Salute any man by the way.

Our Savior (1.) Arms his Disciples against the difficulties, dangers, and
discouragements which they might meet with in the Course of their Ministry, by
telling them, that he sent them forth as Lambs among Wolves; thereby
intimating, that the Enemies of the Gospel have as great an Inclination from
their malicious Nature, to devour and destroy the Ministers of Christ, as
Wolves have from their natural temper, to devour Lambs; Behold I send you forth
as Lambs among Wolves. (2.) Our Savior directs them in this their first
Expedition to preach the Gospel, to commit themselves to the gracious care and
good providence of God, both for Provision and Protection; carry neither purse,
nor scrip, nor staff, says St. Matthew; as if he had said, Trust God with the
care of your Lives, rely upon his Providence both for Protection and Provision;
yet must we take notice, that this was only a temporary command, given to the
Disciples for this particular Journey, which they were quickly to Dispatch; for
in the General, Christ allows his Ministers, as well as others, to exercise a
prudent and provident care for themselves and their Families. And as it is the
Ministers Duty to trust God in the use of prudential Means for their
Maintenance, so it is the Peoples Duty to take care for their Ministers
comfortable Subsistence. The Workman is worthy of his meat, says our Savior;
that is, of all necessary Supplies; he is worthy of a comfortable Subsistence,
and where it may be had, of an honorable maintenance.

5 And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, peace be to this house. 6 And
if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it, if not, it shall
turn to you again.

Here our Blessed Savior directs his Disciples how to manage themselves in the
executing of their Office, Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, peace be
to this house, they must wish peace to the Sons of peace, yea to the Enemies of
peace also; and as their peace shall rest upon the one, so shall it return from
the other; Peace be to this house, is a fit Salutation for them to use, who
were the Disciples and Ambassadors of the Prince of Peace; and very agreeable
to the Gospel they were to Preach, which was a Gospel of Peace; and it was a
Prayer as well as a Salutation; the Disciples were to speak it, not from the
Lip only, but from the Heart also. Peace is the Music which both Angels and
Men are delighted with, and the Christian Religion is the greatest Promoter and
Preserver of it; That commands us to pray for peace, to follow after peace, to
part with our Coat and Cloak; that is, with our civil Rights, for peace, and if
it be possible, to live peaceably with all men. Observe (2.) As the injunction
given by our Savior to his Disciples, to deliver a message of Peace; first
say, Peace be to this house; so the prediction of what should befall them in the
Delivery of this their Message: their Salutation, though it be Peace, yet will
not find a welcome and entertainment with all Persons, but only with the Sons
of Peace, If the Sons of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it. Observe
(3.) An Encouragement not to be afraid of delivering their Message, though it
wanted Success; If your peace rest not, it shall return to you again. Learn,
(1.) That as there was at the first preaching of the Gospel, so there is, and
always will be, some that are Sons of Peace, and others that are Enemies unto
Peace. (2.) That this Peace will rest on none, but those that are fit to
receive it. (3.) That though it does not rest, yet it shall not be lost, but
return again to those that publish it. Ministers can but say, Peace be to this
House, they cannot make it rest there; we can offer Terms of Peace to a lost
World, but cannot compel men to accept them, and if they finally refuse them,
We shall be a sweet Savor unto God, as well in them that perish, as in them
that are saved.

7 And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as they give,
for the Labourer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house to house. 8 And into
whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such things as are set
before you. 9 And heal the sick that are therein, and say unto them, the
Kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. 10 But into whatsoever city ye enter, and
they receive you not, go your ways out into the streets of the same, and say.
11 Even the very dust of your city which cleaves on us, we do wipe off against
you; notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is come nigh
unto you. 12 But I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable in that day, for
Sodom, than for that city.

Here our Savior gives his Disciples sundry directions, how to manage
themselves in this Expedition for Preaching the Gospel; he enjoins them (1.) To
observe the Rules of Decency, in going from place to place, having entered an
house to continue there, not changing their Lodging and going from house to
house, thereby avoiding all show of Lightness and Inconstancy, and testifying
all gravity and stayedness in their Behavior; this being a special means to
win Authority to their Persons and Ministry. (2.) He gives them a power to work
Miracles, for the confirming of the Doctrine which they Preached; Heal the Sick
that are therein. This was necessary, partly to procure Reverence to their
Persons, being poor and unlearned Men, and partly to gain credit and Authority
to their Doctrine; for the Doctrine of Faith in the Messiah, as now come and
exhibited in the Flesh, being a strange and new Doctrine to the Jews, the Truth
and Certainty of it was to be extraordinarily ratified and confirmed, by
working Miracles; one sort of which was healing of Diseases in an extraordinary
manner. Obs. (3.) How Christ encourages his Disciples against the want of
Success; he bids them denounce the Judgments of God against such contemners of
their Doctrine, by shaking off the dust of their feet, which Action was
Emblematical, and signified that God, in like manner would shake off them, and
esteem them no better then the vilest Dust. Learn hence, That those which
despise the Message that the Ministers of the Gospel bring, shall hereafter
find, the Dust of their Feet, and the Ashes of their Graves to give a judicial
Testimony against them, in the Day of Christ: Where ever the Word is Preached,
it is for a Testimony, either a Testimony for, or against a People. For if the
Dust of a Minister's Feet, bear Witness against a People, their Sermons much
more. Observe Lastly, The dreadful Judgment denounced by our Savior against
the Contemners of his Disciples Doctrine; Verily it shall be more tolerable for
Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment, then for that City. Where Note (1.)
That there shall be a Day of Judgment, (2.) That in the day of Judgment some
Sinners shall fare worse then others. (3.) That of all Sinners, the Condition
of such shall be saddest at the day of Judgment, who living under the Gospel,
dye after all in their impenitency and infidelity; It shall be more tolerable
for Sodom and Gomorrah, then for that City.

13 Woe unto thee Corazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida; for if the mighty works had
been done in Tire and Sidon, which were done in you, they had a great while ago
repented, sitting in Sackcloth and ashes. 14 But it shall be more tolerable
for Tire and Sidon at the day of Judgment, then for you. 15 And thou Capernaum
which art exalted to Heaven, shall be brought down to Hell.

These Cities in Galilee, Corazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, having been the
places where Christ preached and wrought his Miracles, they have a Woe denounced
here against them, for their contempt of Christ, and the offers of his Grace,
Woe unto thee Corazin, etc. The higher a People rise under the Means, the lower
they fall, if they miscarry. They that have been nearest to Conversion, being
not Converted, shall have the greatest Condemnation, when they are judged:
Capernaum's Sentence will exceed Sodoms for Severity, because she exceeded
Sodom in the enjoyment of Means and Mercy. Observe here, (1.) Capernaums
Privilege enjoined, She was lifted up to heaven, that is, enjoyed Privileges
above all other Places, namely, the Presence, Preaching, and Miracles of our
Savior. Observe (2.) Capernaums doom denounced, Thou shall be thrust down to
Hell; that is, thy condition shall be sadder, then those that never heard of a
Savior, even Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah; those rude and barbarous
Nations, out of the Pale of the Church, shall be in an easier state and
condition, then those that have enjoyed Gospel Ordinances and
Church Priviledges, but not improved them. Learn hence, (1.) That
Gospel Ordinances enjoyed, are a mighty Honor and Advancement to the poorest
Persons and obscurest Places; Thou Capernaum art exalted to Heaven. (2.) That
Gospel Ordinances, and Church Priviledges enjoyed, but not improved, provoke
Almighty God to inflict the soarest of Judgments upon a People; Thou that art
exalted to Heaven, shall be thrust down to Hell.

16 He that hears you, hears me, and he that despises you, despises me,
and he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

Here our Savior encourages his Ministers to Faithfulness in their Office, by
assuring them that he should reckon and esteem all the kindness shown to them,
as done unto himself; He that receives you, receives me; he that despises
you, despises me. Where Note, That all the Offices of Love, and Respect, of
Kindness and Charity, which we show to the Ministers or Members of Christ, for
his sake, Christ reckons it as done unto himself.

17 And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the Devils are
Subject unto us, through thy Name. 18 And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as
Lightning fall from Heaven.

Obs. here, (1.) The Seventy Disciples return to give Christ an account of the
Success of their Expedition; they return as Victors with joy and triumph,
showing Christ the Trophies of their Conquest; Lord, the Devils are subject
unto us, through thy Name; the Weapons of their warfare were not carnal, but
Spiritual and Mighty, through Christ; the Powers of Darkness cannot stand, but
must fall before the power of Christ; the Devils are no match for Christ, no
nor for the meanest of the Ministers of Christ, who go forth in his Name, armed
with his Authority and Power. Observe (2.) our Savior's Reply to the Seventy
Disciples upon this occasion, I beheld Satan as Lightning fall from Heaven; a
Twofold Interpretation is given of which words, (1.) Some look upon them as a
Secret Rebuke given by our Savior to the Seventy, for that excess of joy, and
mixture of vainglory which was found with them, upon the account of those
extraordinary Gifts and Abilities of casting out Devils, and healing Diseases
which were conferred upon them; I beheld Satan, says Christ, falling like
Lightning from Heaven; as if Christ had said, Take heed of being puffed up with
Pride, upon the account of those Endowments which I have bestowed upon you;
Remember Lucifer, the Prince of Pride, how he fell from Heaven by his
Arrogance, and Labor you to ascend thither by Humility: The words in this
sense, afford this Instruction, That those whom Christ has bestowed the
greatest measure of Spiritual Graces, Ministerial Gifts, and Temporal Blessings
upon, ought, to be very watchful against that hateful Sin of Pride, which has
ruined and destroyed so many Thousands of Angels and Men. (2.) Some understand
this Fall of Satan, not Literally, but Figuratively and Mystically, of his
Ruin by the Power and Preaching of the Gospel; as if Christ had said, I know
that this is no vain boast of yours, no vaunt nor brag of your Valor, that
Devils are conquered by your Courage, for when I first sent you forth to preach
the Gospel, and armed you with Divine Power, I easily foresaw that the Devils
Kingdom would shake about his Ears, and that his Power would be ruined by the
Power of the Gospel, and that wherever you Preached, Satan's Strength and Power
should vanish like a Flash of Lightning suddenly, and irrevocably. Learn hence,
That the powerful and efficacious Preaching of the Gospel, is the special means
ordained and appointed by Christ for the Ruin and Subversion of Satan's Kingdom
in the World; as the Gospel is the power of God unto Salvation, to them that
believe and obey it, so it is the Power of God unto Destruction, to Satan, and
all that fight under his Banner against it.

19 Behold, I give you power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and over all
the power of the Enemy, and nothing shall by any means hurt you.

Our Lord finding that his Seventy Ambassadors had managed their former
Commission so well, he here enlarges it, adding thereunto a promise of Divine
Protection, Behold, I give you power to tread on Serpents, and nothing shall
hurt you; as if Christ had said, Go forth again in this Armor of Power, with
which I have girt you, and I warrant you Sword-free and Shot-free, nothing
shall by any means hurt you, neither Strength nor Stratagem shall overcome you;
neither the Power, the Presence, nor Protection of God shall be wanting to any
of Christ's Ministers or Members, who go forth in his Strength against the
Spiritual Enemies of their Salvation; As we have a Promise of Power in this
Text, to enable us to resist the Devil, so we have a Promise of Success
elsewhere upon our Resisting of him; Resist the Devil, and he will flee from
you, St. James 4.7.

20 Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the Spirits are Subject unto you;
but rather rejoice, because your Names are written in Heaven.

In these words of our Savior, there is something Corrective, and something
Directive; the corrective part lies in the first words, wherein Christ checks
the suspected excesses of their joy, for Victories gained over Evil Spirits; in
this Rejoice not; that is, let not your Hearts too much overflow with joy upon
this occasion; the Negation is not absolute, but comparative only; Christ does
not forbid, but only qualify and moderate their joy: That the Spirits are
subject to you; that is, the Devils. Where Note, (1.) That though the Evil Angels
by their Fall have lost their happy Condition, yet not their original
Constitution; their Honor, but not their Nature, they are Spirits still. (2.)
The Subjection of those Evil Spirits to the Power of Christ is not a free and
professed, but an involuntary and imposed Subjection; like that of a slave to
his Lord, whether he will or no. Learn hence, (1.) That Evil Spirits are
Subject to the Power of Christ, not only to his personal, but to his
Ministerial Power. (2.) That it is matter of great joy to see Evil Spirits
brought into Subjection by the Power of Christ; to see the Evil Spirit of Pride
and Contention, of Envy and Malice, of Error and Falsehood, of Jealousy and
Self-love, of Animosity and Division, not only chained but changed; to see not
only an unwilling Subjection, but a Subjection of the Will given to Christ, is
matter of great Joy, and unspeakable Rejoicing: The Directive part of our
Savior's Words, lies in the latter part of the Verse; But rather rejoice that
your Names are written in Heaven; There are no literal Records in the Court of
Heaven, no Pen or Ink, Paper or Parchment; but to be written in Heaven, is to
have a Title to Eternal Life, and to be made meet for the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light. Learn, (1.) That God has in Heaven a Book of Life; a Book
written with the Golden Rays and Beams of his own Eternal Love. Observe (2.)
That there are Names written in this Book, (3.) That Persons may know that
their Names are written in that Book, otherwise they could not rejoice; for no
Man can rejoice in an unknown good. (4.) That it is greater matter of Joy and
Rejoicing, to know that our Names are written in Heaven, then to have a Power
to cast out Devils here on Earth. A Man may have Power to cast forth Devils out
of others, and yet at the same time, the Devil may have Power in and over
himself; Therefore in this rejoice not, that the Devils are subject unto you;
But rather rejoice, that your Names are written in Heaven: If you say, With
what spectacles shall we read that at such a Distance? Who will ascend up into
Heaven, to see whether his Name be written there? Or who can send a Messenger
thither to search the Records? I Answer, Turn thine Eyes inward; if the Name of
God be written in thy Heart, thy Name is certainly written in Heaven; if you in
your daily Actions write out a Copy of God's Book, (the Blessed Bible) here
below; assure your selves, the hand of God has written your Names in his Book
above; that is, you shall certainly be saved.

21 In that Hour Jesus rejoiced in Spirit and said, I thank thee, O Father,
Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes, even so father, for so it seemed
good in thy sight. 22 All things are delivered to me of my father, and no man
knows who the Son is, but the Father, and who the Father is, but the Son, and
he to whom the Son will reveal him.

Here we find our Savior glorifying his Father, and magnifying himself: (1.)
He glorifies his Father for the wise and free Dispensation of his Gospel Grace
to the meanest and most ignorant Persons, whilst the Great and Learned Men of
the World undervalued and despised it; I thank thee, Father, that thou have
revealed these things to Babes. Learn hence, (1.) That till God reveals
himself, his Nature and Will, no Man can know either what he is, or what he
requires, Thou have revealed. (2.) That the wise and knowing Men of the World
have in all Ages despised the Mysteries of the Gospel, and have therefore been
judicially blinded by God; Thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent: When Men shut their Eyes against the clearest Light, and say, they
will not see, God closes their Eyes, and says they shall not see. (3.) That the
most ignorant, if humble, and desirous of spiritual Illumination, are in the
readiest disposition to receive and embrace the Gospel Revelation; Thou have
revealed them unto Babes. (4.) That this is not more pleasing to Christ then it
is the pleasure of his Father, even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy
sight. Observe (2.) our Savior magnifies himself, (1.) His Authority and
Commission; All things are delivered unto me; that is, all Power is committed
to me as Mediator from God the Father. (2.) His Office, to reveal his Father's
Will to a lost World; No man knows the Father but the Son, or the Son but the
Father; That is, no Man knows their Essence and Nature, their Will and
Pleasure, their Counsel and Consent, their mutual Compact and Agreement betwixt
themselves for saving a lost World, but only themselves, and those to whom they
reveal it. Learn thence, That all saving Knowledge of God is in, by, and through
Christ, he as the great Prophet of his Church, reveals unto us the Mind and
Will of God for our Salvation; None knows, but he to whom the Son reveals.

23 And he turned him to his Disciples, and said privately, Blessed are the
eyes which see the things that ye see. 24 For I tell you, that many Prophets
and Kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen
them, and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.

From the very first giving out of the Promise of Christ to Adam after the
Fall, Genesis 3.15. There was in all good Men a longing Desire and Expectation to
see that Person, who should be so great a Blessing to Mankind; Prophets and
Kings desired to see the promised Messiah. Now says our Savior to his
Disciples; Blessed are you, for you have seen with the Eyes of your Body, what
others only saw with the Eyes of their Mind; with your Bodily Eye you have seen
the Promised Messiah coming in the Flesh, and also the Miracles to confirm you
that I am He, have been wrought before your Eyes, therefore Blessed are the
eyes of your Body, which have beheld me corporally, and blessed also are the
eyes of your Mind, which have beheld me Spiritually. A sight of Christ by a
Believing eye, much more by a glorified eye, is a blessed Sight. Blessed are
those eyes which see Christ in his Dispensations of Grace here, they shall
certainly see him in his manifestations of Glory hereafter.

25 And behold a certain Lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying, Master, What
shall I do to inherit eternal Life? 26 He said unto him, What is written in the
Law? How read thou? 27 And he answering said, Thou shall Love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and
with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self. 28 And he said unto him, Thou
have answered right, this do and thou shall live.

Here we have a Lawyer, that is, an Interpreter and Expounder of the Law of
Moses, tempting our Savior; that is, making trial of him; whether he would
deliver any Doctrine contrary to the Law of Moses; he propounds therefore a
question; What he should do to inherit eternal Life? Where Note (1.) He
Believed the certainty of a future State, (2.) he professes his desire of an
Eternal Happiness in that State, (3.) He declares his Readiness to do
something, in order to the obtaining of that Happiness. Hence Learn, That all
Religion, both N^tural and Revealed, teaches Men that good Works are necessary
to Salvation; or that something must be done by them, who desire to enter into
Life; What shall I do to inherit eternal Life? It is not talking well, and
professing well, but doing well, that entitles us to Heaven and Eternal
Salvation, and this the very Light of Nature teaches. Observe (2.) Our
Savior's Answer, What is written in the Law? how read thou? intimating to
us, that the Word and Law of God, is the Rule and measure of our Duty; our
Guide to direct us in the way to Eternal Life: The Man Replies, That the Law of
God requires, That we love God with all our heart, soul, and strength; and our
Neighbor as our selves. Where Note, (1.) That the fervor of all our
Affections, and particularly the Supremacy of our Love is Required by God as
his Right and Due. Love must pass through and possess all the Powers and
Faculties of our Souls. The Mind must meditate upon God, the Will must choose
and embrace him, the affections must take complacency and delight in him; the
measure of Loving God, is to Love him without Measure. Note, (2.) that the best
Evidence of our sincere Love to God, is the unfeigned Love of our Neighbor;
Love to Man, is both a Fruit and Testimony of our Love to God. For he that
Loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he Love God whom he has not
seen. Note, (3.) That as it is every Man's Duty to Love himself, so is he to
Love his Neighbor as himself; not as he does Love himself, but as he ought to
Love himself, not with the same measure and degree of Love, but in the same
manner and kind of Love that we Love our selves. Do we Love our selves freely
and readily, sincerely and unfeignedly, tenderly and compassionately,
constantly and perseveringly? so should we Love our Neighbor also: Though we are
not required to Love our Neighbor, as much as we Love our selves, yet are we
commanded, to Love him like as we Love ourselves. Observe Lastly, Our Lord's
Reply, Thou have an^^^^ right, This do, and thou shall live. Where Note, That
Christ intimates to him, that the Law considered in it self could give Life;
but then a Person must keep it perfectly and exactly, without the least
Deficiency, which is impossible to Man in his Fallen State; for the Law is not
weak to us, but we are weak to that, Romans 8.3. the Law becomes weak through the
weakness of our Flesh: Such as seek Salvation by the Works of the Law, must
keep the Law perfectly and exactly; which being impossible in our fallen
estate, Christ has obtained of his Father, that for his sake, our sincere, though
imperfect Obedience shall find Acceptance with God, and be available to our
Salvation.

29 But he willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my
Neighbor? 30 And Jesus answering, said, a certain man went down from Jerusalem
to Jericho, and fell among Thieves, which stripped him of his Raiment, and
wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead. 31 And by chance there came
down a certain Priest that way, and when he saw him, he passed by on the other
side. 32 And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked on
him, and passed by on the other side. 33 But a certain Samaritan, as he
journeyed, came where he was, and when he saw him, he had compassion on him. 34
And went to him, and bound up his Wounds, pouring in Oil and Wine, and set him
on his own Beast, and brought him to an Inn, and took care of him. 35 And on
the morrow, when he departed, he took out two pence, and gave them to the Host;
and said unto him, Take care of him, and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I
come again, I will repay thee. 36 Which now of these three think thou, was
neighbor unto him that fell among the Thieves? 37 And he said, he that showed
mercy on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go and do thou likewise.

The Design of our Savior in this Parable is to convince the Lawyer, who put
that question to him, Who is my Neighbor? v. 29. That every one is, and ought
to be accounted our Neighbor, to whom God affords us opportunity of doing
good, contrary to the strait Notion of the Pharisees, that by the Word
Neighbor, understood Friends and Kinsfolk, Brethren by Blood, Neighbors by
Habitation, and Persons of the same Religion. Our Savior by this Parable
taught him, that even Strangers and professed Enemies, every one that needs
our help and relief, is to be accounted our Neighbor; to convince him hereof,
Christ propounds this parable of a Jew that fell among Thieves, who was
neglected by his own Countrymen, but relieved by a Samaritan, who though a
professed Enemy upon the score of Religion, yet was so exceeding kind and
charitable, that he became Physician, Surgeon, and Host, and a real Neighbor
to the unknown Traveller, Wounded by Thieves, in his Journey to Jericho. From
the whole Learn (1.) That every Person in Misery is the object of our Mercy,
our Neighbor, and capable of our Charity. (2.) That no difference in Religion*
much less in some doubtful Opinions, will excuse us from exercising Acts of
Charity and Compassion toward such as are really in Want, and need our
Assistance; our Holy and merciful Religion makes all Persons the Objects of our
compassion who are indigent and helpless; though they be Strangers and
Foreigners, Heathens or Heretics, Friends or Enemies; yea, be they good or
bad, holy or wicked, as we have opportunity we must do good unto all, and
imitate the example of our merciful God, who is kind to the unthankful, and to
the Evil. (3.) That real Charity is an Active, operative thing, it consists not
in good Words given to the Distressed, nor in a compassionate beholding of
them, nor in a pitiful mourning over them, but in positive Acts of kindness
toward them. The Samaritan here is an example of a real and thorough Charity;
he turns his Face toward the forlorn Man, his Feet hasten to him, his hand
pours in Wine and Oil into his Wounds, after which he sets him upon his own
Beast, brings him to the Inn, stays with him all Night, and the next day,
because his Recovery would be a Work of Time and Expense, he leaves him, but
first leaves Money with the Host, and a special charge to take care of him;
with a punctual promise, that whatever was expended more should be Repaid.
Behold here an instance and pattern of a complete Charity, managed with as much
Discretion as Compassion; well might our Lord say to this Person, and in him to
every one of us, Go and do thou likewise.

38 Now it came to pass as they went, that he entered into a certain Village,
and a certain Woman named Martha received him into her house.

Observe here (1.) the great Work and Business of our Savior's Life, it was to
go about Preaching the Gospel. (2.) The Nature of the place which Christ at
this time preached in, it was a poor Village, Bethany, as some think; Christ
did not only take care of populous Cities, and great Towns, but private
Villages and obscure places, enjoyed also the blessing of his Ministry. Our
Savior's Example herein is instructive to his Ministers, not to affect great
Auditories, and to Preach only in populous Cities, but to scatter the Seed of
the Word in Country Villages, where are like precious Souls to be taken care
of, and provided for; as Christ was sent himself, so he sends his Ministers to
preach the Gospel to the poor. Observe (3.) The party that entertained him in
the Village, Martha received him into her house; Martha is named because she
was probably the Owner of the House: Though Christ had no house of his own, yet
he had as many as he pleased at his Command; for wherever he had an Heart, he
was sure to have an House; Martha received him into her house.

39 And she had a Sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus feet, and heard
his words.

Observe (1.) Both these Sisters were Holy and Devout Women, both had an Honor
and Reverence for Christ, and both are forward to entertain him; these were
Sisters by Grace as well as by Nature; yea they both for a time attended upon
Christ's Preaching. Mary (also) sat at Jesus Feet, implying, that Martha sat
there too, till Household occasions called her away: Oh how happy is that Family
where all Parties are agreed to receive and entertain the Lord Jesus Christ.
Observe (2.) No sooner is Christ entered into Martha's House, but he falls a
Preaching, whilst they provide Bodily Food for him, he prepares spiritual Bread
for them; oh that in our place and measure we might all imitate Christ in this:
Can we come into any House or Company, and find nothing to say or do for God.
Observe (3.) The Holy and Humble Deportment of Mary upon this occasion, she
sat at Jesus Feet, and heard his words. When Christ was speaking Mary was
hearing, and little things could not take her off. Lord! how carefully should
we take the present opportunity for our Souls, to hear and learn of thee as
Mary did: She was not sure of another opportunity, therefore hears humbly,
attentively, affectionately, as if it were her last hearing Season.

40 But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to him, and said,
Lord, do thou not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Bid her
therefore that she help me.

Observe here, (1.) Martha's Behavior, She was cumbered about much serving,
that is, much taken up with providing for the Entertainment of Christ and his
Friends, all which considered in it self was no miscarriage, but a token of
Martha's endeared respect to her best Friend. A Person that sincerely loves
Christ, as Martha did, thinks it can never show enough of respect unto him.
Martha having such a Guest to Honor her House, puts forth her self all she
can, yea, more then she was able, to give him Entertainment, She was cumbered
about much serving. Observe (2.) Martha's complaint to Christ, concerning her
Sisters not joining with her in the Work that lay so hard upon her; Lord, do
thou not care that my Sister has left me to serve alone? bid her therefore
that she help me; as if Martha had said, is it a fit thing that both thy self,
and all this Company, should be unprovided for; or is it reasonable, that the
whole Burden should lie upon me, whilst M^ry fits still, and does not touch
the least household Business with one of her Fingers. Lord! What infirmity and
weakness intermixes and mingles with the Virtues and Graces of the best of thy
Servants, especially when they give way to their distempered Passions. This
good Woman at this time, did not attend upon Christ's Preaching her self, but
interrupts him wit^ a ^rivolous Complaint about her Sister, Bid her that she
help me. But why did not Martha speak to her Sister her self, and whisper in
her Ear, and acquaint her how she wanted her help, but makes her mo^n to
Christ? Answer, It Is like she thought her Sister was so tied by the Ear with
those A^^mantine Chains of Christ's heavenly Doctrine, that until Christ was
silent, she had no Power to stir: doubtless she believed, that Mary would not
move, unless Christ spoke to her so to do. Obs. (3.) That all this while, Mary
speaks not one word for her self; no doubt it troubled her, good Woman, to hear
her Sister complain of her to Christ, and to find her self blamed for her
Piety, and implicitly condemned for l^^in^ hold upon such a sweet opportunity
of hearing the Beloved of her Soul, whose Lips dropped as the Honeycomb.
However, she speaks not a word in her own Vindication, but leaves her Answer to
her Savior. Learn thence, That when we are complained of for well-doing, it is
our Duty, and may be our Prudence, to Seal up our Lips in Silence, and to
expect our Vindication from above; Mary says nothing, but Christ speaks for her
in the next Verses.

41 And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, Thou art careful and
troubled about many things. 42 But one thing is needful, and Mary has chosen
that good part, which shall not be taken away from her.

As if Christ had said, Martha, Martha, I well know thou do all this in Love
to me, and it is no more then what is thy Duty in its proper Season, but thou
had now an opportunity to hear my Word, which thou can not have every da^;
and it would have pleased me better, to whom it is Meat and Drink to feed
Souls, if I had seen thee fitting with thy dear Sister at my Feet, and yielding
an a^tentive Regard to my Holy Doctrine, then to find thee performing a
necessary Civility to my Person. Thou have not made a bad Choice, but Mary has
made a Better; she has laid all aside to attend upon my Ministry, and the fruit
of it will continue with her to all Eternity; It is that good part which shall
never be taken away from her. Note here (1.) The unexpectedness of our
Savior's Answer to Martha, how contrary it was to her Expectation; she thought
that her Sister should have been sent away with a check, and her self with
thanks, but she is quite mistaken; for all her good cheer that she had provided
for Christ, he spares not to tell her of her fault, Martha, Martha, thou art
troubled about many things. Learn thence, That no Obligations to any particular
Person should so enthral us, but that our Tongues should be at Liberty to
reprove the Faults of our best Friends wherever we find them. Martha, though a
pious and good Woman, though a friendly and kind Woman, though a Woman greatly
Beloved of Christ, yet is she reproved by Christ. Note (2.) The Reproof given
to Martha, Thou art troubled about many things; where Christ condemns not her
Hospitality, but her solicitude and superfluity, her distraction and
perplexity; oh how prone are we to exceed in things Lawful and necessary, and
to go beyond our Bounds in them; when we are satisfied in the matter, we are
prone to exceed in the measure. Martha's Entertainment of Christ was a noble
Service, but she was too anxious and sollicitous about it; she was cumbered,
she was careful, she was troubled. Note (3.) Our Savior's Admonition, But one
thing is needful; that is, there is one thing which ought first and principally
to be regarded by us, and is of the greatest Concernment to us; namely, the
Business of Religion, and the Care of our Souls Salvation. Learn thence, That
the care of Religion, and our Souls Salvation, is the One Thing Necessary, and
that which every Man is concerned in the first place, and above all other
things to regard and mind. Note (4.) Our Savior's justification of Marys
choice, Mary has chosen that good part, Non Tu malam sed illa meliorem. Christ
did not tell Martha, she had chosen a Bad part, but her Sister had chosen the
Better. Martha's Entertainment of Christ was good, but Marys Attendance upon
Christ's Ministry was better, and more pleasing unto Christ. Christ was better
pleased to see Mary in the Chapel, than Martha in the Kitchen, though he does not
condemn the one, yet he extols the other; Mary has chosen the good part. Learn
hence, That Religion, and the Service of God must be the matter our Election
and Choice; we must choose the good part, and it being once chosen by us, it
shall never be taken away from us; One thing is needful, and Mary has chosen
the good part, which shall never be taken away from her.

CHAP. XI.
1 AND it came to pass, that as he was praying in a certain place, when he
ceased, one of his Disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John
also taught his Disciples.

The Learned Mr. Mede upon this place, apprehends that it was the custom of the
Jewish Doctors, to deliver some certain Form of Prayer to their Disciples to
use, at least that John Baptist had done so to his Disciples: Thereupon our
Savior's Disciples besought him, that he also would give them in like manner
some Form of his own composing, that they might pray with their Masters Spirit,
as John's Disciples did with his. Accordingly our Savior gives them here a
Form of his own, and commands them when they pray to use it. Indeed he had
given them this Prayer about a year and half before, in his Sermon upon the
Mount, Matthew. 6.9. After this manner pray ye; where it is probable, that the
Disciples looked upon it only as a pattern of Prayer, and not as a Form, for
had they thought that Christ had given them a Form of Prayer before, they had
not asked him for one now; Therefore says Christ, When ye pray, say: Certainly
this gives us to understand, that our Savior intended and commended it for a
set Form of Prayer unto his Church. Learn hence, That the Lords Prayer is both
a Pattern and Platform, according to which all our Prayers ought to be framed;
and also an exact Form of Prayer, which ought to be used by us in our Addresses
to the Throne of Grace: After this manner pray ye, says St. Matthew; When ye
pray, say, says St. Luke.

2 And he said unto them, When ye pray say.

Observe here the favor which Christ does us in prescribing a Form of Prayer
to us; a great Favor, no doubt, though the World grows weary of it; we know not
Alas! what to ask, but he himself teaches us, and frames our Supplication for
us, that it may be accepted. Should a King's Son draw a Petition for a poor
Subject, to be put up to his Father, what a ground of hope would there be, that
whatever is desired would be obtained; if any of us then think meanly of our
Lord's Prayer; oh how meanly may he think of us, and of our Prayers.

2 Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name, Thy Kingdom come, Thy
Will be done, As in Heaven, So in Earth. 3 Give us day by day our daily Bread.
4 And forgive us our sins, For we also forgive every one that is indebted to
us, And lead us not into Temptation, But deliver us from Evil.

The Sense and Signification of this Best of Prayers is this,

O thou our Father in Jesus Christ, who remainest in thy Throne in Heaven, and
art there perpetually praised, and perfectly obeyed, by Glorious Angels and
Glorified Saints, Grant that thy Name may be Glorified, thy Throne
Acknowledged, and thy Holy Will Obeyed here on Earth below, by us thy Sons and
Servants, as readily, as cheerfully, and sincerely, and in some degree of
Proportion to what is done in Heaven above. And because by reason of the
Frailty of our Natures, we cannot subsist without the Comforts and Supports of
Life, we crave our daily Bread at thy Bountiful hand; even such a proportion of
the good things of this Life, as thy Wisdom shall see convenient for us.

And knowing that thy Holiness and Justice does oblige thee to punish Sin, and
Sinners, we plead with thee for the sake of thy Son's Satisfaction, to forgive
us our daily Trespasses; for it is our desire and endeavor, heartily to
forgive those that have offended us; And seeing this wicked World wherein we
live is so full of Snares and Temptations of all sorts, we pray, that by the
Power of thy Grace, and the Concurrence of our own careful endeavors, we may
be kept from Satan's Temptations, from the World's Allurements, and from our own
Evil Inclinations; and be preserved unblamable to thine Everlasting Kingdom;
and in Testimony of our Desires and Assurance to be heard, we say Amen, so be
it, so let it be, even so oh Lord, let it be for ever.

Learn (1.) That God is the Father of all his People; as a Father, he knows all
his children, he loves them, and takes care of them: As his Children it is our
Duty to Honor him, to Obey him, to imitate him, to cast our care upon him, and
to long for the Enjoyment of him. (2.) From the Word Our, Learn, That it is our
Duty to pray for others, as well as for our selves; we cannot pray acceptably
for our selves, if we pray only for our selves. (3.) That the Hallowing,
Honoring and Sanctifying of God's Name, as it is the first thing we are to
pray for, so it ought to be preferred before all other things whatsoever; we
pray for it before we pray for our own Salvation; we say Hallowed be thy Name,
before we say, Forgive us our Debts. (4.) Learn, That Sins are Debts, and
Sinners indebted to Divine Justice. Sin, it is an infinite Debt, a multiplied
Debt, an inexcusable Debt, and if not discharged by our Surety, we must ly in
Prison to all Eternity, for Non-payment of this Debt. (5.) That God has made
our Forgiveness of others, the Condition of his Forgiving us: The word As, is
not a Note of Equality but of Similitude; we cannot equal God in Forgiving, but
we must imitate him. (6.) No sooner is Sin pardoned, but Satan will be busy
with his Temptation; forgive us our sins, and lead us not into Temptation. (7.)
That it is a greater Mercy to be Delivered from the Evil of Temptation, then
from Temptations to Evil. The Evil of Temptations is the Evil of Sin, but
Temptations to Evil is at most but the Evil of Punishment, Lead us not into
Temptation, but deliver us from Evil; Suffer us not to be led into Temptation,
or if so, leave us not when we are Tempted.

5 And he said unto them, which of you shall have a friend, and shall go unto
him at midnight, and say unto him, friend, lend me three loaves. 6 For a
friend of mine in his Journey, is come unto me, and I have nothing to set
before him. 7 And he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not, the door
is now shut, and my children are with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee. 8
I say unto you, though he will not rise and give him because he is his friend,
yet because of his importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he needs.

The design of our Blessed Savior in these, and the following Verses, is to
excite and stir up his Disciples to fervency, importunity, and constancy in the
Duty of Prayer, and to this purpose he makes use of a double Argument, the one
of a Friend, and the other of a Father. (1.) He lays before them the Parable of
a Friend, coming to his Friend at Midnight, and by his importunity obtaining
that of him which otherwise he must have gone without. From whence our Lord
leaves us to infer, that if an impudent and bold Beggar can obtain so much from
Man, what cannot an humble, earnest, and daily Petitioner obtain from God? What
Friend so faithful and helpful to his dearest Friend, as God is to us his
Children. From the whole Note, (1.) That a Man must be brought into a state of
Friendship and Reconciliation with God, if he hopes his Prayers shall be
accepted. (2.) That when any of the Friends of God are in Necessities and
Streights, he allows them the liberty at all hours to call upon him, and pray
unto him, at midnight as well as at Midday, God's ear is open to his Praying
Friends. (3.) That Almighty God takes pleasure in being urged in Prayer, by the
Holy importunity of his Friends; never is he better pleased, then when his
People, with Holy Jacob, Wrestle with him, and will not let him go till he has
blessed them. (4.) That such holy and humble importunity shall not only obtain
what we desired, but more then we expected; only three Loaves were desired
here, but because of importunity, he had as many as he needed; more is given in
the Concession, than was desired in the Supplication.

9 And I say unto you, ask and it shall be given you, seek and ye shall find,
knock and it shall be opened unto you. 10 For every one that asks, receives,
and he that seeks, finds, and to him that knocks, it shall be opened.

Our Savior here goes on, to urge us to importunity and constancy in Prayer,
he bids us ask, seek, and knock, and assures us we shall be accepted, heard,
and answered. Here Note (1.) That Man is a poor indigent Creature, full of
wants, but unable to supply them. (2.) As Man is an indigent and insufficient
Creature, so God is an All-sufficient Good, able to supply the Wants, and to
Relieve the Necessities of his Creatures. (3.) That All-mighty God stands ready
to supply all our Wants, not Temporal only, but Spiritual also, affording his
Grace, and the assistance of his holy Spirit to them that ask it. (4.) If
therefore we want the Grace of God, and the assistance of his Holy Spirit, it
is our own fault and not God's; it is either for want of seeking, or for want
of earnestness in asking, for our Savior expressly assures us, that God denies
it to none; but every one that asks receives.

11 If a Son shall ask Bread of any of you that is a Father, will he give him a
stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a Serpent? 12 Or if he
ask an egg, will he offer him a Scorpion? 13 If ye then being evil, know how to
give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Heavenly Father
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?

The Second Parable which our Savior makes use of, is that of a Father to his
Children. Christ represents the care and kindness of God toward us, by the
affections which Earthly Parents bear to their natural Children, who though they
be many times Evil themselves, yet are not wont to deny their Children
necessary good things when they dutifully and decently beg them at their hands;
If ye being evil -- how much more shall your heavenly Father give his holy
Spirit; that is, the continual presence and influence of his Holy Spirit, to
all the purposes of Guidance and Direction, of Grace and Assistance, of Comfort
and Support in our Christian Course. Learn hence, That the presence and
assistance of God's Holy Spirit to enable us to do what God requires, shall
never be wanting to those that desire it, and endeavor after it. But we must
always remember, That the Assistance of God's Holy Spirit, though it be offered
and tendered to us, yet it is not forced upon us; for if we beg the Holy
Spirit, and his assistance, but refuse to make use of it; or if we cry to him
for his help to mortify our Lusts, but do not put forth his own endeavors, we
forfeit the Divine Assistance, and God will certainly withdraw his Holy Spirit
from us.

14 And Jesus was casting out a Devil, and it was dumb; and it came to pass
when the Devil was gone out, that the dumb spoke, and the people wondered. 15
But some of them said he casts out Devils through Beelzebub the chief of the
Devils. 16 And other tempting him, sought of him a sight from Heaven. 17 But he
knowing their thoughts, said unto them, Every kingdom divided against it self
is brought to desolation, and a house divided against a house, falls. 18 If
Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand? because ye
say that I cast out Devils through Beelzebub. 19 And if I by Beelzebub cast out
Devils, by whom do your Sons cast them out? therefore shall they be your
judges. 20 But if I with the Finger of God cast out Devils, no doubt the
kingdom of God is come upon you.

A Relation is here given of a famous Miracle wrought by our Savior in casting
a Devil out of a possessed Man; it is called a dumb Devil, because of the
effect upon the poor possessed Person in restraining the use of his Tongue.
Learn here, (1.) That amongst the many Calamities which Sin has rendered humane
Nature liable and obnoxious to, this is one, to be bodily possessed by Satan.
(2.) That one Demonstration of Christ's Divine Power, and a convictive Evidence
of his being truly and really God, was his casting out Devils by the Word of
his Power. Observe (3.) What a sad and contrary effect this Miracle had upon
the wicked Pharisees through their own blindness, obstinacy, and malice;
instead of magnifying his Divine Power, they maliciously accuse him for holding
a correspondency with the Devil, and acting by a Power derived from him; as if
Satan should lend our Savior a power against himself, and that for the
Destruction of his own Kingdom. Lord! how dangerous is a wilful opposition
against the Truth, it provokes the Almighty to deliver Persons up to the most
unreasonable Infidelity, and obstinate Obduracy. Observe (4.) Our Savior
knowing their Thoughts, makes a just Apology for himself, by showing how
improbable and unlikely, how unreasonable and absurd it is once to imagine or
suppose, that Satan should cast out himself, and any ways seek to oppose or
destroy his own Kingdom; Now if I have received (says Christ) my power from
Satan, for casting out of Satan, then is the Devil like a Family divided within
it self, and divided like a Kingdom against it self, which can never stand bust
must be brought to Destruction. Observe Lastly, Our Savior tells the Pharisee,
that they might with as much reason attribute all other Miracles to the Power
of the Devil, as those wrought by himself; for there were certain Jews amongst
them that casts out Devils in the Name of the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob;
now our Savior asks them by what power these their Children cast them out?
They acknowledged that what they did was by the Power of God, and there was no
cause, but their malice, why they should not acknowledge, that what he did was
by the same Power? If I by Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your sons cast
them out? but if I with the finger of God cast them out, no doubt the kingdom
of God is come upon you; that is, the long expected Kingdom of the Messiah is
certainly come, and I having wrought these Miracles by my own Power, is a
Demonstrative proof that I am the promised Messiah.

21 When a strong man armed keeps his palace, his goods are in peace. 22 But
when a stronger then he shall come upon him, and overcome him, he takes from
him all his armor wherein he trusted, and divides his spoil. 23 He that is
not with me, is against me, and he that gathers not with me, scatters. 24
When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a man, he walks through dry places,
seeking rest and finding none; he says, I will return to my house whence I
came out. 25 And when he comes, he finds it empty, swept, and garnisht. 26
Then goes he and takes to him seven other Spirits, more wicked then himself,
and they enter in and dwell there; and the last state of that man is worse than
the first.

Our Savior having sufficiently shown, that he did not Work his Miracles by
the Power of the Devil, he next informs the Pharisees from whence he had that
Power, even from God himself; accordingly he compares Satan to a strong Man
armed with Weapons to defend his House, and himself clothed with Divine Power,
he compares him to one that is stronger th^n the strong Man; so that the
Argument runs thus, the Devil is very strong and powerful, and there is no
Power, but only God's that is stronger than his; if then, says Christ, I were
not assisted with a Divine Power, I could never cast out this strong Man, who
Reigns in the Bodies and Souls of Men, as in his house; for it must be a
stronger than the strong Man that shall bind Satan, and who is he but the God
of strength. Learn thence, That only Christ's Divine Power is superior to
Satan's strength; he only can vanquish and overruled him at his pleasure, and
drive him out of that Possession which he holds either in the Bodies or Souls
of Men: The strong man armed keeps the house, till a stronger than he comes
upon him, and over-comes him; When the unclean Spirit goes out of a man, he
walks through dry places, seeking rest, and finds none. Note here, (1.) That
Satan is an unclean Spirit, he has lost his Original Purity, his Holy Nature
in which he was Created, and is by sin become universally sinful and impure, no
means being allowed him by God, for the purging of his filthy and impure
Nature; yea, he is a perfect Enemy to Purity and Holiness; maligning all that
Love it, and would promote it. (2.) That Satan is a restless and unquiet
Spirit, being cast out of Heaven, he can rest no where; when he is either gone
out of a Man by Policy, or cast out by Power, he has no content or
satisfaction, till he returns into a filthy Heart, where he delights to be, as
the Swine in miry places. (3.) That wicked and profane sinners have this
unclean Spirit dwelling in them; their Hearts are Satan's House and Habitation,
and the Lusts of Pride and Unbelief, Malice and Revenge, Envy and Hypocrisy,
these are the Garnishings and Furniture of Satan's House: Man's Heart was God's
House by Creation, it is now Satan's by Usurpation and judiciary Tradition. (4.)
That Satan by the Preaching of the Gospel, may seem to go out of Persons, and
they become sober and civilized, yet may he return again to his old habitation,
and the latter end of that Man may be worse then the beginning.

27 And it came to pass as he spoke these things, a certain woman of the
company lift up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare
thee, and the paps which thou have sucked. 28 But he said, Yea rather Blessed
are they, that hear the word of God and keep it.

Observe here (1.) How ready we are to admire Persons for their external
Privileges, and the favors of Divine Providence, and to pronounce such
Blessed; Blessed is the Womb that bare thee. (2.) That Christ makes another
judgment of Persons, and pronounces them more blessed that bear him in their
hearts by Faith, then his own Mother who bare him in her Womb by sense. The
Blessedness of being an Obedient Believer, is far greater than that of being
the Mother of our Blessed Savior. Blessed be God this great and gracious
Privilege is not denied unto us now. Although we cannot see Christ, yet love him
we may; his bodily presence cannot be enjoyed by us, but his Spiritual,
Gracious Presence is not denied us: Though Christ be not ours in house, in arms,
by Affinity, by Consanguinity, yet in Heart, in Faith, in Love, in Service, he
is or may be ours; verily spiritual Regeneration, and an obediential doing of
God's Will, brings men into a more Honorable Relation to Christ, than
natural Generation ever did; Yea, rather blessed are they that hear the word of
God, and keep it.

29 And when the people were gathered thick together, he began to say this is
an evil generation; they seek a sign, and there shall no sign be given it; but
the sign of Jonas the Prophet. 30 For as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites,
so shall also the Son of man be to this generation. 31 The Queen of the South
shall rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation, and condemn
them; for she came from the utmost parts of the Earth, to hear the wisdom of
Solomon; and behold a greater than Solomon is here. 32 The men of Nineveh shall
rise up in judgment with this generation and shall condemn it, for they
repented at the preaching of Jonas, and behold a greater than Jonas is here.

The Sign which the Pharisees here desired of our Savior, was a Miracle
wrought by him: Now our Savior, though he was very ready to work Miracles, to
encourage and confirm his Hearers Faith, yet not to satisfy the unbelieving
Pharisees Curiosity: And accordingly he tells them, they should have no other
Sign than that of his Resurrection, which Jonas was a Type of. Next he
threatens them for their Obstinacy and Infidelity, which he aggravates from the
Example of the Queen of the South, and the Men of Nineveh. From hence Learn,
That the sins of infidelity and impenitency are exceedingly heightened, and
their guilt aggravated, from the Means afforded by God to bring Men to Faith
and Obedience. The sin of the Pharisees was infinitely greater in rejecting the
Evidence of Christ's Miracles, than the sin of the Ninevites would have been in
refusing to hearken to Jonas his Ministry; therefore the Ninevites shall
condemn the Pharisees.

33 No man when he has lighted a Candle, puts it in a secret place, neither
under a Bushel, but on a Candlestick, that they which come in may see the
Light. 34 The light of the body is the eye; therefore when thine eye is single,
thy whole body also is full of Light; but when thine eye is evil, thy body also
is full of darkness. 35 Take heed therefore that the light which is in thee, be
not darkness. 36 If thy whole body therefore shall be full of light, having no
part dark, the whole shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of a
candle does give thee light.

Our Savior in these words does these two things, (1.) he declares, that
although his Ministry had no effect upon the proud and obstinate Pharisees, yet
he would not hide the light which he came into the World to bring, nor conceal
that Heavenly Doctrine which his Father had committed to him to Communicate to
the Children of Men; teaching us, That such as are enlightened by God with the
Knowledge of his Word and Will, ought not to conceal and hide this Knowledge
within themselves, but communicate it to others, and improve it for the good
and benefit of others; No man that lights a Candle, puts it under a
Bushel. (2.) Our Savior here discovers the Reason why the Pharisees continued
blind under so clear a light as that of his Ministry; namely because the eye of
their Understanding was darkened, not so much with Ignorance as with Prejudice,
whereby they opposed Christ and his Holy Doctrine, for if the Mind be clearly
enlightened by the Word and Spirit of God, that Light will diffuse and spread it
self in the Soul, as the bright shining of a Candle does in the House,
enlightening all the inward Faculties, and directing all the outward Actions,
and communicating its Light also to the enlightening of others.

37 And as he spoke, a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with him, and he
went in and sat down to meat. 38 And when the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled
that he had not first washed before dinner. 39 And the Lord said unto him, now
do ye Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but your
inward part is full of ravening and wickedness. 40 Ye fools, did not he that
made that which is without, make that which is within also.

Observe here (1.) The free Conversation of our Blessed Savior, how readily he
complies with the Pharisees Invitation to dine with him; I do not find that
when Christ was invited to any Table, that ever he refused to go, if a
Pharisee, if a Publican invited him, he constantly went, not so much for the
pleasure of eating, as for the opportunity of Conversing and doing good; Christ
feasts us when we feed him: He says of himself, that he came eating and
drinking, that is, allowing himself a free though innocent Conversation, with all
sorts of Persons, that he might gain some. Observe (2.) The Exception which the
Pharisee takes at our Savior's not washing his hands before Dinner. This they
made (but without any warrant for it) a Religious Act; abounding in external
washings, but neglecting the inward Purgations of their Hearts and Consciences
from Sin and Uncleanness: Thus Pharisaical Hypocrisy puts God off with outward
cleansing, instead of inward Purity; regarding more the outward cleanness of
the hand, than the inward Purity of the Heart. Observe (3.) Our Blessed Savior
does not condemn any external Decency and cleanliness in Conversation; but his
design is to show the vanity of outward Purity, without inward Sanctity, and to
convince them of the Necessity of cleansing the Heart, in order to the
purifying and Reforming the Life. The Pharisee washed his hands clean, but left
his Soul full of uncleanness, not considering, that he that made the Soul as
well as the Body, requires that both should be kept pure, all the impiety of
men's Lives proceeding from the impurity of their Hearts and Natures.

41 But rather give alms of such things as you have, and behold all things are
clean unto you.

As if Christ had said, the way to purify your Meats, and Drinks, and Estates
from all pollution cleaving to them, and to have them Sanctified Blessings to
you, is, (in Conjunction with other Graces) by doing Works of Mercy, and by
liberal Almsgiving, according to your Ability. Learn, that Charity and
Almsgiving according to our ability and opportunity, is a special means to
sanctify our Estates to us, and to cause us holily and comfortably to enjoy
whatever we do possess; Give Alms of such things as you have, and behold all
things are clean unto you.

42 But Woe unto you Pharisees, for ye Tithe Mint, and Rue, and all manner of
Herbs, and pass over judgment, and the love of God, these ought ye to have
done, and not to leave the other undone.

Our Savior here denounces a Woe against the Pharisees, for their strict and
scrupulous observing the lesser things of the Law, as Tything Mint, and Rue,
whilst they were regardless of the principal and substantial Duties which they
owed both to GOD and Man. Learn hence, That although some Duties are of greater
moment and importance than others, yet a good Man will omit none, but make
Conscience of all, both great and small, in obedience to the Command of God:
there is no Duty so little as to be neglected, no Command so small as to be
disobeyed; but yet there is a difference in Duties, and our first regard ought
to be to the greater, then to the less. Christ does not condemn them for
Tything Mint, and Rue, but for passing over judgment, and the love of God.

43 Woe unto you Pharisees, for ye love the uppermost seats in the Synagogues,
and greetings in the Marketplace.

The next Woe denounced against the Pharisees, is for their Ambition, Pride, and
Popularity, affecting the uppermost Seats in the Synagogues, and Salutations in
the Markets, where their fault was, not in taking, but in affecting these
uppermost places: God is the God of Order, there may and ought to be a
precedence amongst Persons, honor is to be given to whom honor is due, and
that by God's Command. But Pride and Ambition are detestable Vices, especially
in such as are Preachers, and ought to be patterns of Humility.

44 Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye are as Graves which
appear not, and the men that walk over them are not aware of them.

Another Woe is here denounced against the Pharisees, for cheating and deceiving
the people with an outward show and appearance of Piety and Religion. They were
like Graves and Sepulchers grown over with Grass, which though they held dead
men's Bones, yet the putrefaction not outwardly appearing, Men walked unawares
over them, and so were polluted by them; intimating, that the inward Rottenness
and filthy Corruptions of the Pharisees not appearing unto Men, the people were
easily deceived by outward shows of Pharisaical Sanctity, and so fell into a
dangerous imitation of them. Learn thence, That the great design of Hypocrisy,
is to cheat the World with an empty show of Piety; the Hypocrites Ambition is
to be thought good, not to be so. Learn (2.) That nothing is more fatally
dangerous to the Souls of Men, and draws Persons to an admiration and imitation
of hypocritical Professors, like their outward shows of Sanctity, and their
extraordinary appearances of Devotion and Piety. This it was that gained the
Pharisees such a veneration and esteem among the people, that it became a
proverb amongst them, If but two men went to Heaven, the one must be a
Pharisee; but their counterfeit piety being double iniquity, they did receive
for it double Damnation.

45 Then answered one of the Lawyers, and said unto him, Master, thus saying,
thou reproachest us also. 46 And he said, Woe unto you also ye Lawyers, for ye
lade men with Burdens grievous to be born; and ye your selves touch not the
Burdens with one of your Fingers.

The former Woes were denounced by our Savior against the Pharisees, who had
their Name from an Hebrew word which signifies to separate, because they were
persons separated and set apart for studying the Law of God, and teaching it to
others. The next Woe is here denounced against the Lawyers, that is, the Scribes
of the Law, of which there were two sorts, the Civil Scribe, and the
Ecclesiastical Scribe; the Civil Scribe was a public Notary, or Register of
the Synagogue, employed in writing Bills of Divorce, and Sentences in the
Phylacteries. The Ecclesiastical Scribe was an expounder of the Scripture, an
interpreter of the Law, Men of great Learning and Knowledge, whose Decrees and
Interpretations the Pharisees strictly observed; this Lawyer here, insolently
calls our Savior's Reproof a Reproach; however, our Savior* who never feared
the Face, or regarded the person of any Man, gives them their portion, and lets
them know wherein they were faulty, as well as the Pharisees, and accordingly
pronounces a Woe unto them also, for a threefold Crime; (1.) For their laying
heavy Burdens upon others Shoulders, which they would not touch with one of
their own Fingers. These Burdens in general were a rigid exaction of Obedience
to the whole Ceremonial Law, and in particular the Burden of Traditions,
certain austerities and severities which they imposed upon the people, but
would not undergo any part of them themselves, in vain do we hope to oblige our
Hearers to follow those Rules of Life, which we refuse or neglect to put in
practice our selves.

47 Woe unto you, for ye build the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and your fathers
killed them. 48 Truly ye bear witness that ye allow the Deeds of your fathers;
for they indeed killed them, and ye build their Sepulchers. 49 Therefore also
said the wisdom of God, I will send them Prophets and Apostles, and some of
them they shall slay and Persecute. 50 That the blood of all the Prophets which
was shed from the foundation of the World, may be required of this Generation.
51 From the blood of Abel to the blood of Zacharias, which perished between the
Altar and the Temple; Verily I say unto you, it shall be required of this
Generation.

The second Crime which Christ reproves in these Men, is their grand Hypocrisy,
in pretending great honor to the Saints departed, building their Tombs, and
garnishing their Sepulchers, declaiming against their Fathers impiety, that had
they lived in their days, they would not have been partakers with them in their
sins. Now their Hypocris^ appeared in three Particulars; (1.) In that they
continued in their own wickedness, and yet commended the Saints departed; they
magnify the Saints, but multiply their sins, and instead of imitating their
Virtues, they content themselves with garnishing their Sepulchers. (2.) In
professing great Respect to the Dead Saints, and at the same time Persecuting
the Living: Palpable Hypocrisy! and yet as gross as it is, it prevails to this
day: The Church of Rome, who magnifies Martyrs, Canonizes Saints departed, have
yet added to their number, by shedding of their Blood. (3.) In taking false
measures of their Love to the Saints departed, from their Building their Tombs,
and garnishing their Sepulchers; whereas the best Evidence of our Love to them,
is the imitating their Virtues, and cherishing their Followers. It Is gross
Hypocrisy to pay respect to the Relics of Saints, and Veneration to their
Images, and at the same time to persecute and hate their Followers. From the
whole Note, (1.) That the World has all along Loved dead Saints better than
living ones, Mortui non mordent; the dead Saints Example, how bright soever, is
not so scorching and troublesome at a distance; and he himself stands no longer
in other Men's Light; whereas the Living Saints Example is a cutting Reproof to
Sin and Vice. Note (2.) That there is a certain Civility in humane Nature,
which leads Men to a just Commendation of the Dead, and to a due estimation of
their Worth. The Pharisees here, though they persecuted the Prophets whilst
alive, yet did they pretend to a mighty Veneration for their Piety and Virtue,
after they were dead, and thought no Honor too great to be done unto them.
Note (3.) That it is the greatest Hypocrisy imaginable to pretend to love
Goodness, and at the same time to hate and persecute good Men. These Pharisees
and Lawyers pretended high to Piety and Religion, and at the same time killed
the Prophets. Note (4.) That the highest Honor we can pay to the Saints
departed, is not by raising Monuments, and Building Tombs to their Memory, but
by a careful imitation of their Piety and Virtue, following the Holiness of
their Lives, and their Patience and Constancy at their Death. Lastly Learn,
That it is a Righteous thing with God to punish Children for the impiety of
their Parents, when they walk in their ungodly Parents Footsteps; upon you
shall come the Blood of all the Prophets, from the Blood of Abel to the Blood
of Zacharias; yet this must be understood of Temporal Evils, not of Eternal
Punishments; no Man for his Fathers Sins shall lie down in Everlasting
Burnings; as our Fathers Faith will not let us into Heaven, so neither will
their Impiety shut us into Hell: At the Day of Judgment every Man shall be
separately considered according to his own Deeds.

52 Woe unto you Lawyers, for ye have taken away the Key of Knowledge, ye
entered not in your selves, and them that were entering in, ye hindered.

The last Woe pronounced by our Savior against the Scribes and Pharisees, is
for perverting the Holy Scriptures, and keeping the true sense and knowledge of
them from the People; This St. Luke here calls, The taking away the Key of
Knowledge from Men; alluding to a custom among the Jews in Admission of their
Doctors: Those that had Authority given them to interpret the Law and the
Prophets, were solemnly admitted into that Office, by delivering to them a Key
and a Table Book, so that by the Key of Knowledge is meant the Interpretation
and Understanding of the Scriptures; and by taking away that Key, is signified
(1.) That they arrogated to themselves the sole Power of Understanding and
Interpreting the Holy Scriptures. (2.) That they kept the true knowledge of the
Scriptures from the People, especially the Prophecies which concerned the
Kingdom and Coming of the Messiah; and so they hindered Men from embracing our
Savior's Doctrine, who were otherwise well enough disposed for it. Learn,
First, That the written Word is the Key whereby an entrance into Heaven is
opened unto Men. (2.) That the use of this Key, or the Knowledge of the Word of
God, is absolutely and indispensably necessary, in order to Salvation. (3.)
That great is the Guilt, and inexcusable the Fault, of those who deny the
People the use of this Key, and deprive them of the Knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures, which alone can make them wise unto Salvation. (4.) That such as do
so, shut the Kingdom of Heaven against Men, endeavoring what in them lies, to
hinder their Salvation; Men may miscarry with their Knowledge, but they are
sure to perish for lack of Knowledge.

53 And as he said these things unto them, the Scribes and Pharisees began to
urge him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of many things. 54 Laying wait
for him, and seeking to catch something out of his mouth, that they might
accuse him.

Observe here (1.) How our Blessed Savior's Plain and Faithful dealing with
these Men does Enrage, instead of Reform them; they are filled with Anger and
Indignation. (2.) Their Wrath sets their Wits on Work to ensnare him. Lord!
When any of thy Faithful Ministers and Ambassadors meet with the like Usage and
Treatment from a wicked World; when any lie in wait to catch something out of
our Mouth, that therewith they may ensnare us, give us thy Prudence and thy
Patience, that we may cut off occasion from those that seek occasion against
us, and disappoint them of their purpose; or else furnish us with such measures
of Meekness and Patience, as becomes Persons of our Holy Character and
Profession; that we may Glory in Reproaches, in Persecutions and Distresses for
Christ's sake; and that the Spirit of Glory and of God may rest upon us.

CHAP. XII.
1 IN the mean time, when there were gathered together an innumerable multitude
of people, insomuch that they trod one upon another, he began to say unto his
Disciples, first of all, Beware ye of the Leaven of the Pharisees which is
Hypocrisy. 2 For there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, neither
hid that shall not be known. 3 Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness
shall be heard in the light, and that which ye have spoken in the ear in
closets, shall be proclaimed upon the house tops.

In this Chapter our Blessed Savior furnishes his Disciples with many
Instructions for the worthy discharge of their Function in Preaching the
Gospel; particularly he recommends unto them two gracious Qualifications,
namely, uprightness and sincerity, v. 1, 2, 3. Secondly Courage and
Magnanimity, v. 4, 5. (1.) He recommends unto them the Grace and Virtue of
Sincerity, Beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. Learn
thence, That hypocrisy is a dangerous Leaven, which Ministers and People are
chiefly and especially to beware of, and to preserve themselves from. Hypocrisy
is a Vice in a Vizor, the Face is Vice, the Vizor is Virtue, God is pretended,
self intended; Hypocrisy is resembled to Leaven; partly for its sowerness,
partly for its diffusiveness. Leaven is a piece of sower dow, that diffuses it
self into the whole Mass or Lump of Bread with which it is mixed. Thus
Hypocrisy spreads over all the Man, all his Duties, Parts, and Performances are
Leavened with it. Again, Leaven is of a swelling, as well as of a spreading
Nature; it puffs up the Dough, and so does Hypocrisy, the Heart. The Pharisees
were a sour and proud sort of People, they were all for pre-eminence, chief
places, chief Seats, chief Titles, to be called, Rabbi, Rabbi; in a word, as
Leaven is hardly discerned from good Dough, at first sight, so is Hypocrisy
hardly discerned and distinguished from Sincerity. The Pharisees outwardly
appeared righteous unto Men, but within were full of Hypocrisy and Iniquity.
Observe next, the Argument which Christ uses to dissuade Men from Hypocrisy,
There is nothing covered that shall not be revealed; as if he had said, the day
is coming, when a rotten and corrupt Heart shall no longer pass under the Vizor
and disguise of a demure Look. In the day of Judgment Hypocritical sinners
shall walk naked, GOD, Angels, and Men, shall see their Shame. Learn hence,
That God will certainly, e're long, wash off all the Varnish and Paint which
the Hypocrite has put upon the Face of his Profession, and lay him open to the
Terror of himself, and the Astonishment of the World.

4 And I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of them, that kill the Body,
and after that have no power, that they can do. 5 But I will forewarn you whom
you shall fear, fear him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into
Hell; yea, I say unto you, fear him.

The Second Duty which our Savior presses upon his Disciples, is that of Holy
Courage and Resolution: As if Christ had said, The Preaching of the Gospel will
stir up many Enemies against you, which will malign and oppose you, vex and
persecute you; but I say unto you, fear them not, who can only kill the Body,
but fear him, who if you fail in your Duty, can cast both Body and Soul into
Hell. Here Note (1.) an unwarrantable fear condemned, and that is the sinful,
servile, slavish fear of Man; Fear not them that can kill the Body. (2.) An
holy, awful, and prudential fear of the Omnipotent God commended; Fear him that
is able to kill both Body and Soul. (3.) The Persons whom this Duty of fear is
recommended to, and bound upon; Disciples, Ministers, and Ambassadors, all the
Friends of Christ. They not only may, but ought to fear him; not only for his
greatness and goodness, but upon the account of his punitive Justice, as being
able to cast both Soul and Body into Hell. Such a fear is not only Lawful, but
Lawdable, not only Commendable, but Commanded, and not misbecoming the Friends
of Christ. The Ministers of God may use Arguments from fear of Judgments, both
to dissuade from Sin, and to persuade to Duty. It is not unsuitable to the best
of Saints, to keep in Heavens way for fear of Hell, it is good to bid a Friend
fear, when that fear tends to his good.

6 Are not five Sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is
forgotten before God. 7 But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered,
fear not therefore, ye are of more value than many Sparrows.

Obs. here, (1.) The Doctrine which our Savior Preaches to his Disciples, and
that is the Doctrine of the Divine Providence, which concerns it self for the
meanest Creatures. Even the Birds of the Air, and the Hairs of our Heads, do
fall within the Compass of God's protecting Care. Observe (2.) Tha use which
our Savior makes of this Doctrine, namely, to fortify his Disciples Spirits
against all Distrustful fears, and distracting cares. Learn hence, (1.) That
the Consideration of the Divine Care, and Gracious Providence of God over us
and ours, ought to Antidote our Spirits against all distrustful fears
whatsoever. If an hair from the Head falls not to the ground without a
Providence, much less shall the Head it self: If the very excrements of the
Body (such are the Hair) be taken care of by God, surely the more Noble parts
of the Body, but especially the Noblest part of our Selves, our Souls, shall
fall under his particular Regard.

8 Also I say unto you, whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the
Son of man confess before the Angels of God. 9 But he that denies me before
men, shall be denied before the Angels of God.

Note here, (1.) That not to confess Christ, is in his account to deny him, and
to be ashamed of him. (2.) That whosoever shall deny o^ be ashamed of Christ,
either in his Person, in his Gospel, or in his Members, for any fear or favor
of Man, shall with shame be disowned, and eternally rejected by him, at the
dreadful Judgment of the great day. Christ may be denied three ways,
Doctrinally, by an erroneous and heretical Judgment; verbally, by oral
expressions; vitally, by a wi^ked and unholy Life; but woe to that Soul, that
denies Christ any of these ways.

10 And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it shall be
forgiven him: but unto him that blasphem^th against the Holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven.

Although never Man Preached or Lived as Christ did, yet there were those that
spoke against him; the Person of Jesus was contemned and reproached, for the
meanness of his Birth, for the poverty of his Condition, for the freedom of his
Conversation, but this sin did not exclude the hope of p^rdon; Whosoever shall
speak a word against the Son ^f Man, it shall be forgiven him; all the
Reproaches cast upon Christ, as Man, were pardonable, But whosoever speaks
against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be fsrgiven him; that is, whoever affirms
that Divine power by which I do all my Miracles to be the power of the Devil,
such Blasphemy will be unpardonable, because it is to resist the last Remedy,
and to oppose the best Means for Men's Conviction: For what could be done more
to convince Men that Christ was the True and Promised Messiah, then to work so
many Miracles before their Eyes to that purpose. Now these Miracles, though
evidently wrought by the power of God, the Pharisees ascribed to the Power of
the Devil, which our Savior calls Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, and a Sin
unpardonable.

11 And when they bring you into the Synagogues, and unto Magistrates and
Powers, take ye no thought how, or what ye shall answer, or what ye shall say.
12 For the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say.

Here our Savior acquaints his Apostles, that for Preaching his Doctrine, and
professing his Religion, they should be brought before all sorts of
Magistrates, and into all kinds of Courts; but advises them when they should be
so brought, not to be anxiously thoughtful, or sollicitously careful what they
should say; for it should be suggested to them by the Holy Ghost what they
should speak in that Hour. Thence Note, That though the Truth of Christ may be
opposed, yet the Defenders of it shall never be ashamed, for rather then they
shall want a Tongue to plead for it, God himself will prompt them by his Holy
Spirit, and furnish them with such Arguments to defend the Truth, as all their
Adversaries shall not be able to gainsay; In that hour the Holy Ghost shall
teach you what ye ought to say.

13 And one of the Company said unto him, Master, Speak to my brother that he
divide the Inheritance with me. 14 And he said unto him, Man, Who made me a
judge, or a divider over you?

Whilst our Savior was thus instructing his Disciples and the rest of his
Auditors, in things appertaining to the Kingdom of Heaven; one of the Company
being more intent, as it seems, upon his Temporal, then his Eternal Concerns,
desired him to speak to his Brother to divide the Inheritance with him. Christ
tells him, he would neither be judge nor arbitrator in any civil Affairs, or
secular Concerns. This Work, as if Christ had said, belongs to the civil
Magistrate, to divide Inheritances, and decide Controversies betwixt Man and
Man. But my work is of another Nature namely, to preach the Gospel to a lost
World, and to direct Men how to secure an Inheritance in Heaven, not to divide
Inheritances here on Earth. Teaching us, That matters of Civil Justice do not
belong to those whom Christ sends forth to preach the Gospel, that work alone
is sufficient for them: The proper Work of a Minister is work enough, one
branch of which is to manage a persuading task betwixt Neighbor and Neighbor,
to prevent Differences and to compose them; but as Christ's Commissioners, and
Ministers of the Gospel, they have no Authority to intermeddle in civil
Judgments; Who made me a judge over you? said our Great Master; that is, a
Judge in Civil Affairs.

15 And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of Covetousness, for a man's
Life consists not in the abundance of the things which he possesses.

Our Savior upon the occasion given him in the foregoing Verses, admonishes
all his Disciples and Followers to take heed and beware of the Sin of
Covetousness; assuring them, that neither the Comfort nor Continuance of Man's
Life does consist in an Abundance; for though something of this World's Goods is
necessary to the Comfort and Happiness of Life, yet abundance is not necessary.
Here Observe, (1.) The manner of our Lord's Caution; he doubles it, not saying
take heed alone, or beware only, but take heed and beware both; this argues
that there is a strong inclination in our Natures to this Sin; the great danger
we are in of falling into it, and of what fatal Consequence it is to them in
whom this Sin Reigns. Observe (2.) The matter of the Caution, or the Sin which
our Savior warns his Hearers against, and that is Covetousness; Take heed and
beware of Covetousness; where under the Name and Notion of Covetousness, our
Savior does not condemn a provident Care for the things of this Life, nor a
regular Industry and Diligence for obtaining of them, nor every degree of Love
and Affection to them; but by Covetousness is to be understood, an eager and
insatiable desire after the things of this Life, or using unjust ways and means
to get or increase an Estate; seeking the things of this Life, with the neglect
of things infinitely better, and placing their chief Happiness in Riches.
Observe (3.) The Reason of this Caution, Because man's Life consists not in
the abundance of the things which he possesses. Humane Life is sustained by a
little, therefore abundance is not necessary either to the Support or Comfort
of it: It Is not a great Estate and vast Possessions that makes a Man happy in
this World, but a mind suited to our Condition, whatever it be.

16 And Jesus spoke a Parable unto them, saying, the Ground of a certain rich
man brought forth plentifully. 17 And he thought within himself, saying, What
shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits? 18 And he said,
this will I do, I will pull down my Barns, and build greater, and there will I
bestow all my fruits and my goods. 19 And I will say to my Soul, Soul, thou
have goods, much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and
be merry. 20 But God said unto him, Thou fool, This Night shall thy Soul be
required of thee. Then whose shall those things be, which thou have provided?
21 So is he that lays up Treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God.

The Design and Scope of our Savior in this Parable, is to show Men the
vileness and vanity of the Sin of Covetousness, or an eager and insatiable
desire after the things of this World. When Men heap up Riches, and lay up
Treasures in this Life, taking no care to be Rich toward God in Faith and good
Works, our Savior illustrates this by the Parable of a Rich Man, whom God had
Blessed with great Plenty, yet his desire of more wealth was never satisfied,
but he is projecting how he may lay up Goods in store for many Years. Where
Note, (1.) That the Parable does not intimate any indirect and unjust ways of
Gain, which this Man used to increase his Estate, but condemns his insatiable
desire and Thirst after more. So that hence we may Learn, That an eager and
inordinate desire after the things of this World, though it be free from
injustice, and doing wrong to others, is one species or kind of the sin of
Covetousness. Observe (2.) How this rich Man looked no farther than himself,
not looking upon himself as God's Steward, but his own Carver, he cries out,
What shall I do, because I have no room where to lay my fruits? not considering
that the houses of the Poor should have been his Granaries; for the Abundance
of his Increase; Charity to the Necessitous is the best way of bestowing our
Abundance. God's extraordinary Bounty is to be laid out for the Relief of
others Necessities, not for the gratifying of our own Luxurious Desires. Obs.
(3.) The Brand of Infamy which the wise God fixes upon this Covetous Rich Man,
Thou fool, says God; Learn thence, That it is an act and instance of the most
egregious Folly imaginable, for Persons to spend their time and strength in
getting and laying up Treasure upon Earth; in the mean time neglecting to be
rich toward God in Faith and good Works, Thou fool. Observe (4.) The doleful
Tidings, and threatening News brought unto him, This Night shall thy soul be
required of thee. Learn hence, (1.) That all a Man's Wealth is not able to
preserve his Life, much less to save his Soul; and if Wealth cannot save a Man's
Life, why should men endanger their Lives, nay hazard their Souls to get or
increase Wealth. Learn, (2.) That God takes away Men's Lives many times when
they least suspect it, This night, says God; many Years, says he; God will not
have us think of Rest in a place of Disquiet, nor of Certainty in a Condition
of Inconstancy; we are Dependant Creatures, and our time is in God's Hand; This
night shall thy soul be taken away from thee. Learn (3.) That the Souls of
ungodly Men are taken from them by force and compulsion, Thy soul shall be
required of thee; good Men have the same reluctancies of Nature which others
have, yet they sweetly resign their Souls into the Hands of God, in a dying
Hour; whereas a wicked Man, though he sometimes dies by his own hand, yet never
dies with the consent of his own Will; he chooses rather to eat Dust (with the
Serpent) then to return to Dust. Observe (5) The Expostulatory Question, Whose
then shall these things be which thou have provided? intimating, (1.) That they
should not be his: A Man's Wealth lasts no longer than his Life, neither has he
any longer the comfort of it; lay up Gold, and it perishes with thee; but
Treasure up Grace, and it shall accompany thee; whose shall these things be,
not thine undoubtedly. (2.) As these things shall not be thine when thou art
gone, so thou know not whose they shall be after thou art gone; whether they
shall fall into the hand of a Child or a Stranger, of a wise Man or a Fool; the
Wealthiest Man cannot be certain who shall be his Heir, and whose his Goods
shall be. Observe Lastly, The Application which our Savior makes of this
Parable to his Disciples, So is every one that lays up Treasure for himself,
and is not rich toward God. Learn hence, That such as are not rich in Grace,
rich in good Works, shall find no benefit by, and take no comfort in all their
Worldly Riches in the time of their greatest need, at the hour of Death, and in
the Day of Judgment.

22 And he said unto his Disciples, therefore I say unto you; Take no thought
for your life, what shall ye eat, neither for the Body, what ye shall put on.
23 The Life is more than Meat, and the Body is more than Raiment. 24 Consider
the Ravens, for they neither sow, nor reap, which neither have storehouse, nor
barn, and God feeds them; how much more are ye better than the fowls. 25 And
which of you with taking thought, can add to his stature one cubit? 26 If ye
then be not able to do that thing which is least, why take ye thought for the
rest? 27 Consider the Lillies how they grow, they toil not, they spin not, and
yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his Glory was not arrayed like one of
these. 28 If then God so cloth the grass, which is to day in the field, and to
morrow is cast into the oven; How much more will he cloth you, O ye of little
Faith? 29 And seek not ye what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; neither be
ye of doubtful mind. 30 For all these things do the nations of the world seek
after: And your Father knows that ye have need of these things.

There is a Twofold sense and interpretation given of these Verses, (1.) Some
take them as spoken only to the Apostles, directing them absolutely to cast off
all care for the things of this Life, that so they might attend upon Christ's
Person, and wholly give up themselves to that Work to which he had called them:
and therefore St. Luke here takes notice, that after he had cautioned his
Hearers in general against Covetousness, he applies himself particularly to his
Disciples, and tells them, that he would have them so far from this sin of
Covetousness, that they should not use that ordinary care, and common Industry
about the things of this Life, which is not only Lawful, but Necessary for Men
in all ordinary Cases, v. 22. And he said to his Disciples, therefore I say
unto you, Take no thought for your Life, what ye shall eat or drink: but if we
understand the words in this sense, we must look upon it only as a Temporary
Command, given to the Apostles for that time only, like that in St. Matthew.
10.9. Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor brass in your purses, neither coat,
nor scrip, which no Man ever understood as a general Law to all Christians, but
as a particular Precept to the Apostles at that time. (2.) Others understand
these injunctions of our Savior, to be consistent with a prudent and provident
Care for the things of this Life, not forbidding a regular industry and
diligence for the obtaining of them; but condemning only an anxious, vexatious,
tormenting Care, and an over-sollicitous diligence for the things of this Life;
and taking our Savior's Words for a general and standing Rule to all
Christians, they only forbid distrustful Thoughtfulness, distracting Cares,
which drives a M^n's mind this way and that way (like Meteors or Clouds in the
Air, as the Word signifies) now against this vexatious care, and sollicitous
thoughtfulness our Savior propounds many weighty Arguments or Considerations;
Four especially. He tells us, such cares are needless, fruitless, heathenish,
and brutish, (1.) It Is needless, Your heavenly father knows that ye have need
of these things, and will certainly provide for you, and what need you take
care, and God too? cast your care upon him. (2) It Is fruitless, Which of you by
taking care can add one cubit to his stature? we may sooner by our carking care
add a Furlong to our grief, than a Cubit to our Comfort. All our own care
without God's help, will neither feed us when we are hungry, nor nourish us
when we are fed. (3.) It Is Heathenish, After all these things do the Gentiles
seek, Mat. 6.32. The Ends and Objects of a Christians Thoughts ought to be
higher and more sublime than that of Heathens. Lastly, It Is brutish, nay worse
than brutish. The Birds of the Air, the Beasts of the Field, the Ravens of the
Valley, are all fed and sustained by God, without any care of their own, much
more shall his Children. Has God a Breakfast ready for every little Bird that
comes chirping out of its Nest, and for every Beast of the Field, that comes
leaping out of its Den, and will he not much more provide for you? Surely that
God that feeds the Ravens when they cry, will not starve his Children when they
pray.

31 But rather seek ye the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added
to you.

As if Christ had said, let your first and chief care be to promote the Kingdom
of Grace in this World, and to secure the Kingdom of Glory in the next: and
then fear not the want of these outward Comforts, they shall be added in
measure, though not in excess, to satisfy, though not to satiate, for health, though
not for surfeit. Learn (1.) That Christians ought not to be so sollicitous
about the Necessaries and Conveniences of this Life, as about the Happiness of
the next, rather seek ye the kingdom of God. (2.) That Heaven, or the Kingdom
of God, must be sought in the first place; that is, with our principal care and
chief Endeavors. (3.) That Heaven being once secured by us, all Earthly things
shall be superadded to us, as God sees needful and convenient for us. But few
Men like our Savior's Method; they would seek the things of this World in the
first place, and get Heaven at last; they would be content to seek the World,
and to have Heaven thrown in without their seeking; but this will not be
granted; if we make Religion and the Salvation of our Souls, our first and
chief care, all other things shall be adaed to us, so far as the Wisdom of God
sees them fit and convenient for us.

32 Fear not little Flock, it is your fathers good pleasure to give you the
kingdom.

That is, fear not the want of any of these outward Comforts, and be not
over-sollicitous for them; for your father which has provided a Kingdom for you
hereafter, will not suffer you to want such things as are needful for you here.
Lea^^ (1.) That the Disciples of Christ are very subject to disquieting and
perplexing fears, but must by no means cherish, but oppose them; a fear of
present wants, a fear of future Sufferings, a fear of Death approaching, a fear
that they shall not find acceptance with God, a sear least they should fall
foully or finally from God; the fear of all these Evils does oft-times disturb
them, and discompose them. Learn (2.) That Jesus Christ is the great Shepherd
of his Church; the love and care, the compassion and tenderness, the prudence
and providence, the guidance and vigilance of a good Shepherd are found with
him. (3.) As Christ is the Churches Shepherd, so the Church is Christ's Flock,
though a little Flock, in opposition to the huge Herds and Droves of the Men of
the World. (4.) That God the Father has a Kingdom in store for his little
Flock, his Church and Children. (5.) That the good will and gracious pleasure
of God, is the Original, Spring, and Fontal Cause from whence all Divine
Favors do proceed and slow, It is your Father's good pleasure to give you a
kingd^m.

33 Sell that you have, and give alms, provide your selves Bags which wax not
old, a treasure in the Heavens that fails not, where no Thief approaches,
neither moth corrupts. 34 For where your Treasure is, there will your hearts
be also.

The next Duty which our Savior exhorts his Disciples to, is the Duty of
Almsgiving; that they should be so far from distrusting God's Provision for
themselves, that they should be always forward to a ready distribution toward
others, yea in cases of Necessity, to be willing to sell their Goods to relieve
others; yet this precept is not to be taken as if it concerned all Persons, at
all times, and in all places; but respects only cases of extreme Necessity; or
if it concerns all, it is only as to the readiness and preparation of the Mind,
that when Necessity calls for it, we be found willing to part with any thing we
have for the Relief of Christ in his Members. Observe also the Argument used to
excite to this Duty of Almsgiving; hereby we lay up our Treasure in a safe
hand, even in God's, who will reward us openly. The Bellies of the Poor are
bags that wax not old, what is lodged there is laid up securely out of the
reach of danger; we imitate the wise Merchant in Transmitting our Estates into
another World, by Bills of Exchange, where we are sure to receive our own with
Usury.

35 Let your Loins be girded about, and your Lights burning. 36 And ye your
selves like unto men that wait for their Lord, when he will return from the
wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto him immediately.

The next Duty Christ exhorts his Disciples to, is that of Watchfulness, with
Reference to his Second Coming, Let your Loins be girded, and your Lights
burning; the words may be understood two ways, spoken either in a martial
phrase, as to Soldiers, or in a Domestic as to Servants; if as to Soldiers,
then let your Loins be girded, and your Lights burning, is as much as that we
should be always ready for a March, having our Armor on, and our Match Light,
ready to give fire at the first Alarm of Temptation. If the words are spoken as
to Servants, then our Master bids us carefully expect his Second Coming, like a
Lord's returning from a wedding Supper, (which used to be Celebrated in the
Night) that they should not put off their Clothes, nor put out their Lights,
but stand ready to open, though he comes at Midnight; when Christ comes, that
Soul only shall have his Blessing, whom he finds watching.

37 Blessed are those Servants, whom the Lord when he comes shall find
watching, verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them sit
down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. 38 And if he shall come in
the second watch, or come in the third Watch, and find them so, Blessed are
those Servants. 39 And this know, that if the good man of the house had known
what hour the Thief would come, he would have watched, and not have suffered
his house to be broken up. 40 Be ye therefore ready also, for the Son of man
comes at an hour when ye think not.

Here our Savior makes use of several Arguments to enforce the Duty of
Watchfulness upon his Disciples; the first is drawn from the transcendent
Reward which Christ will bestow upon his watchful Servants, He will gird
himself, make them sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them; a very
high metaphorical Expression; as if a Master should be so transported with the
diligence and faithfulness of his Servant, as to vouchsafe not only to let him
sit down to meat in his presence, but to take the Napkin upon his Arm, and wait
upon him himself at his Table. Lord! how poor and inconsiderable is that
Service which the best of us do for thee, and yet thou speak of it, as if
thou were beholding to us for it. Thou do not only administer to us a Supper,
but thou Ministerest and waitest upon us at Supper, he will gird himself, and
serve them. The Second Argument to excite to watchfulness, is drawn from the
Benefit which we shall receive by watching in this Life; that let the Lord come
when he will, whether in the Second or Third Watch, they shall be found ready
and in a blessed Condition, who are found diligent in his Service, and waiting
for his Appearance. Note here, (1.) The Son of Man will certainly come at one
hour or other; (2.) at what Hour the Son of Man will come, cannot certainly be
known. (3.) That there is no hour wherein we can promise our selves, that the
Son of Man will not come. (4.) Very joyful will the Coming of the Son of Man
be, if we be found upon our watch, and ready for his coming, Be ye therefore
ready also, for the Son of Man comes at an hour when ye think not.

41 Then Peter said unto him, Lord, speak thou this Parable unto us, or even
unto all. 42 And the Lord said, Who then is that faithful and wise Steward,
whom his Lord shall make Ruler over his household, to give them their portion of
meat in due season? 43 Blessed is that Servant whom his Lord when he comes
shall find so doing. 44 Of a truth, I say unto you, that he will make him Ruler
over all that he has.

These words may be applied these two ways, first to all the Faithful Servants
of God in General; and then the Note is this, that for a Christian to spend and
end his days in the Service of Christ, and doing his Will, gives good assurance
of a happy and blessed Condition, Blessed is that Servant. Secondly, These
words may be applied to the Ministers of the Gospel in special, and then
Observe (1.) The Character and Duty of a Gospel-Minister, he is the Steward of
Christ's Household, to give them their Meat in due Season: (2.) A double
qualification requisite in such Stewards; namely, prudence and faithfulness,
who then is that faithful and wise Steward. Observe (3.) The Reward insured to
such Stewards, with whom are found these Qualifications; Blessed is that
Servant. Learn hence, (1.) That the Ministers of the Gospel are in a spiritual
sense Stewards of Christ's Household. (2.) That Faithfulness and prudence are
the indispensable Qualifications of Christ's Stewards. (3.) That where these
Qualifications are found, Christ will graciously and abundantly Reward them.
Our Faithfulness must respect God, our Selves, and our Flock; and includes
integrity of Heart, purity of intention, industry of Endeavor, and
impartiality in all our Administrations. Our prudence must appear in the choice
of suitable Subjects, in the choice of fit Language, in exciting our own
affections, in order to the moving of our Peoples. Ministerial Prudence also
must teach us, by the strictness and gravity of our Deportment, to maintain our
Authority, and keep up our esteem in the Consciences of our People, it will
also assist us to bear Reproach, and direct us to give Reproof, he that is
silent, cannot be innocent; reprove we must, or we cannot be Faithful, but
prudently, or we cannot be successful.

45 But, and if that servant say in his heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, and
shall begin to beat the men servants and maidens, and to eat and drink, and to
be drunken. 46 The Lord of that servant will come in a day when he looked not
for him, and at an hour when he is not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and
will appoint him his portion with unbelievers. 47 And that servant which knew
his Lord's will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will,
shall be beaten with many stripes. 48 But he that knew not, and did commit
things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes; for unto whomsoever
much is given, of him shall be much required, and to whom men have committed
much, of him they will ask the more.

Our Lord in these Verses describes a negligent and unfaithful Steward of his
Household, and then declares that dreadful Sentence of Wrath which hangs over
him. The unfaithful Steward, or negligent Minister of the Gospel is described,
(1.) by his infidelity; he believes not Christ's Coming to Judgment, though he
preaches it to others; he says in his heart, my Lord delayeth his coming. (2.)
He is described by his hatred, envy, and malignity, against his Fellow
Servants; that were more faithful than himself, He begins to smite them, at
least with the virulence of his Tongue, if not with the violence of his hand.
(3. He is farther described by his Associating with the wicked, and
strengthening their hands by his ill example, He eats and drinks with the
drunken; that is, as their Associate and Fellow Companion. Thus the negligent
Steward, and unfaithful Minister is described: Next his Sentence is declared,
(1.) Christ will surprise him in his sin and security, by coming in an hour
when he looked not for him. (2.) He will execute temporal Vengeance upon him, He
will cut him in pieces, as the Jews did their Sacrifices, dividing them into
two parts. Hence some Observe, That God seldom suffers slothful, sensual
Ministers to Live out half their days. (3.) Christ will punish them with
Eternal Destruction also, appoint them their portion with unbelievers: Teaching
us, That such Ministers as neglect the Service of God, and the Souls of their
People, as they are ranked amongst the worst sort of Sinners in this Life, so
shall they be punished with them in the severest manner in the next. When Satan
destroys the Souls of Men, he shall answer for it as a Murderer only; not as
an Officer that was entrusted with the Care of Souls. But if the Steward does
not provide, if the Shepherd does not feed, if the Watchman does not warn, they
shall answer, not only for the Souls that have miscarried, but for an Offic^
neglected, for a Tallent hidden, and for a Stewardship unfaithfully managed. Woe
unto us, if at the Great day we hear distressed Souls roaring out their
Complaints, and howling forth that doleful accusation against us, saying, Lord!
Our Stewards have defrauded us, our Watchmen have betrayed us, our Guides have
misled us.

48 For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required; and to
whom men have committed much, of him they will ask the more.

Here we Learn, (1.) That whatever we receive from God, is both a Gift and a
Talent. (2.) That every one has some Gift or Talent from God to be improved for
God. (3.) That God's Gifts or Talents are not given to all in the same measure.
(4.) That whether we receive little or much, all is in order to an Account.
(5.) That answerable to our present Talents will be our future Accounts: If thy
Gifts be mean, the less thou have to Account for; if greater then others, God
expects thou should do more good than others; For where much is given much
will be required.

49 I am come to send fire on the earth, and what will I if it be already
kindled? 50 But I have a Baptism to be Baptized with; and how am I straightened,
till it be accomplished? 51 Suppose ye, that I am come to give peace on the
earth: I tell you nay, but rather division. 52 For from henceforth there shall
be two in one house divided against three, and three against two. 53 The father
shall be divided against the son, and the son against the father, the mother
against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother, the mother-in-law
against the daughter-in-law, and the danghter-in-law against the mother-in-law.

Our Savior in these Verses declares what will be the accidental Event and
effect, but not the natural tendency of his Religion; so that we must
distinguish between the intentional Aim of Christ's Coming, and the Accidental
Event of it. Christ's intentional aim, was to plant, propagate, and promote
Peace in the World; but through the Lusts and Corruptions of Men's Natures, the
issue and event of his Coming is War and Division, not that these are the
genuine and natural Fruits of the Gospel, but occasional and accidental only.
Hence Learn, That the preaching of the Gospel, and setting up the Kingdom of
Christ, though it be not the Genuine and Natural Cause, yet is it the accidental
occasion of all that War and Tumult, of all that Dissension and Division, of
all that Distraction and Confusion which the World abounds with; I am come to
send fire on the earth. He is said to send the fire of Dissension, because he
foresaw this would be the certain Consequence, though not the proper and natural
Effect of the Preaching of the Gospel. There was another Fire of Christ's
sending, the Holy Spirit; this was a fire to warm, not to burn; or if so, not
men's Persons, but Corruptions; but that seems not to be intended in this place.

54 And he said also to the people, when ye see a cloud rise out of the West,
streightway ye say there comes a shower, and so it is. 55 And when ye see the
South wind blow, ye say there will be heat, and it comes to pass. 56 Ye
hypocrites ye can discern the Face of the Sky, and of the Earth, but how is it
that ye do not discern this time? 57 Yea, and why even of your selves judge ye
not what is right?

Our Savior in these words does at once upbraid the stupid ignorance of the
Jews in General, and the obstinate infidelity of the Pharisees in particular,
in that they could make a judgment of the Weather by the sight of the Sky, by
the appearance of the Heavens, and the motions of the Winds, but could not
discern this Time of the Messiah, though they had so many miraculous Signs and
Evidences of it, and for this he upbraids them with Hypocrisy; Ye hypocrites,
ye can discern the face of the sky, but ye do not discern this time. Learn
thence, That to pretend either more Ignorance, or greater uncertainty in
discerning the Signs of Gospel Times, (the time of our gracious Visitation)
than the Signs of the weather is great Hypocrisy; Ye hypocrites, can ye not
discern this time? Observe farther, That Christ does not here condemn the study
of Nature, or making Observation of the State of the Weather from the Face of
the Sky: For Almighty God by natural Signs, gives us warning of a Change in
Natural things, and in like manner by his Providential Dispensations, he gives
us warning of a Change in Civil things; He that is wise will observe both, and
by their Observation will come to understand the pleasure of the Lord.

58 When thou go with thine Adversary to the Magistrate, as thou art in the
way, give diligence, that thou may be delivered from him, lest he hale thee
to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and the Officer cast
thee into prison. 59 I tell thee, thou shall not depart thence, till thou have
paid the very last mite.

In these words our Savior advises Persons to use the same prudence in Divine
Matters, which they use in Worldly affairs, and the same endeavors to seek
Reconciliation with God, which they put forth in order to their being
reconciled unto men; for in such a Case, when they see an Action bringing
against them, wherein they are sure to be Cast, their best way is presently to
seek to reconcile their Adversary, and make their peace with him, that so they
may escape the Threatening Danger. In like manner should they do here, lay hold
upon the present opportunity of Mercy now offered to them; because it is a
fearful thing to dye without Reconciliation with God. Note here (1) That GOD
and Man were once Friends. (2.) That GOD and Man are now Adversaries. (3.) That
Man and not GOD is averse to Reconciliation and Agreement. (4.) That it is the
Wisdom, the Duty and Interest of fallen Man, speedily to accept of Terms of
Peace and Reconciliation with God. (5.) That an eternal Prison will be their
portion who dye in their Enmity against God.

CHAP. XIII.
1 THere were present at that Season, some that told him of the Galileans,
whose blood Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifices. 2 And Jesus answering
said unto them; suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the
Galileans, because they suffered such things? 3 I tell you, nay, but except ye
repent ye shall all likewise perish.

There were two eminent Sects amongst the Jews in our Savior's Time, namely
the Herodians and Galileans, the former stood stiffly for having Tribute paid to
the Roman Emperor, whose Subjects the Jews now were, but the Galileans (so
called probably from Judas of Galilee, mentioned Acts 5.37.) opposed this
Tribute, and often raised Rebellion against the Roman Power; Pilate takes the
opportunity when these Galileans were come up at the Passover, and Sacrificing
in the Temple, to fall upon them with his Soldiers, and barbarously mingled
their own blood with the blood of the Sacrifices, which they offered; neither
the Holiness of the place, (the Temple) nor the Sacredness of the Action,
(Sacrificing) could divert Pilate from this barbarous Impiety. Our Savior
understanding that some of his Hearers then present concluded these Persons to
be the greatest Sinners, because they were the greatest Sufferers, he corrects
their error-in this matter, and assures them, that the same or the like
Judgments did hang over all other Sinners, as well as these, if timely and
sincere Repentance prevented not. Learn hence, (1.) That a violent and sudden
Death is no argument of God's disfavour. (2.) That notwithstanding Persons are
exceeding prone to pass rash Censures, and an uncharitable Judgment upon such
as dye suddenly, especially if they dye violently. (3.) That none justly can
conclude such Persons to have been the greatest Sinners, who have been in this
World the most signal Sufferers. (4.) That the best use we can make of such
instances and examples of God's Severity, is to Examine our own lives, and by a
speedy Repentance to prevent our own perdition, I tell you nay, etc.

4 Or those eighteen upon whom the Towerin Siloam fell, and slew them, think
ye, that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in Jerusalem? 5 I tell you
nay* but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish?

Another instance our Savior gives of persons that fell by a sudden Death,
even eighteen that were slain by the fall of a Tower in Jerusalem; he takes
occasion from thence to caution the Jews, that they do not rigidly censure the
Sufferers, or conclude that those have wrought the most Sin, who are brought to
most shame; Oh how ready are we to judge of men's Eternal Condition by their
present Visitation; and to conclude them the greatest Offenders, upon whom God
inflicts the most visible Punishments. Our Savior forbids this, and advises
every one to look at home. Telling the whole Body of the Jews, that if they did
not Repent, they should all likewise perish, and that two ways, (1.)
Certitudine poenae, by as certain a punishment as these did; (2.) ye shall
likewise perish, Similitudine poenae, by the same kind of punishment, you shall
perish by the ruin of your whole City, as they did by the downfall of that
Tower; if a timely and sincere Repentance does not intervene. Learn hence, That
we must judge of Persons by their Conversation toward God, not by God's
Dispensations toward them; all things here fall alike to all, a sudden Death,
yea a violent Death, as it comes upon many men, so it may come upon the best of
Men, as well as others; think not, says Christ, that these eighteen were
sinners above all that dwelt in Jerusalem, because they suffered such things, I
tell you nay, but except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish; Teaching us,
that Repentance is the only way and means to prevent punishment here, and
perishing hereafter, Except ye repent ye shall perish.

6 He spoke also this parable: A certain man had a fig tree planted in his
Vineyard, and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none. 7 Then said he
to the dresser of the Vineyard, Behold, these three years I come seeking fruit
on this Fig Tree, and find none, cut it down, why cumbereth it the Ground.

Our Blessed Savior that he might excite the Jews to the practice of the last
mentioned Duty of Repentance, sets forth his Long-suffering with them, and
Forbearance toward them, by the Parable of a Fig Tree, whom the Master of the
Vineyard had long expected Fruit from, but found none. Where Note, (1.) The
great Care that God takes to make poor sinners Happy; he plants them in his
Church, as in a Vineyard, that by the Cultivating Care of his Ministers, and
the fructifying influences of his Spirit, they may be fruitful in good Works.
Note (2.) That God keeps an exact account or Reckoning, what means and
advantages every place and people have enjoyed; These three years have I come
seeking fruit, alluding to the three years of his own Ministry amongst them.
God keeps a Memorial how many years the Gospel has been amongst a People, how
many Ministers they have had, and how long with them, what pathetical
Exhortations, what pressing admonitions, what cutting Reproofs, all are upon
the file, and must be accounted for. Learn (3.) That God expects suitable and
proportionable Fruit from a People, according to the time of their standing in
his Vineyard, and answerable to the Cost and Culture which his Ministers have
expended upon them, and the pains they have taken with them. Note farther, (4.)
That although God does, and justly may expect Fruit from such as are planted in
his Vineyard, to wit the Christian Church, yet he expects it with much Patience
and Forbearance, waiting from year to year, to see if time will work amendment,
These three years I have come, seeking fruit, and found none. Lastly, If after
all the Cost that God has bestowed upon a People by his Ministers and
Ordinances, they continue unfruitful, there is nothing to be expected but
excision and final Destruction, cut it down, why cumbereth it the Ground.

8 And he answering said unto him, Lord, Let it alone this year also, till I
shall dig about it, and dung it. 9 And if it bear fruit, well; and if not, Then
after that thou shall cut it down.

Ob^erve here (1.) The Vine-dressers Petition and Request, Lord, let it alone
this year also. This points out unto us, the O^fice and Duty of the Ministers
of God, who are Laborers in his Vineyard, to be Intercessors with God, for
sparing a Barren and unfruitful People. Lord! spare them a little longer, Let
it alone this year also; if they cannot absolutely prevent Judgment coming upon
an unfruitful People, yet they endeavor to respite it, and delay its Coming
all they can. Observe (2.) The Condition upon which the Vine-dressers Petition
is Grounded, Till I shall dig about it, and dung it; Phrases which intimate to
us the nature and quality of the Ministerial Work and Service, signifying it to
be a very difficult and laborious Service. Digging is a painful Work, and a
spending Work, and such is our Ministerial Work, if followed as it ought to be.
We deal in Mysteries in the deep things of God, which are not received without
much digging. Observe (3.) A double supposition here made by the Vine-dresser,
first of future Fruitfulness, If it bear fruit, well: Secondly, of further
incorrigibleness; if not, after that thou shall cut it down. (1.) Here is a
Supposition of future Fruitfulness, If it bear fruit. well; that is, it will be
well for the Master of the Vineyard; herein is he glorified, when his Fig Trees
bear much Fruit; well, for the Dresser of the Vineyard; it rejoices the
Ministers of God, to see their People bring forth Fruit unto God; well, for the
Vineyard and the rest of the Trees that are in it: But more especially well,
for the Tree it self; thereby avoiding the punishment of Barrenness, and
procuring the Reward of Fruitfulness; Thus, If it bear fruit, well. (2.) Here
is a supposition of future incorrigibleness, After that thou shall cut it down;
that is, after thou have spared it, and I have pruned it; after thy patience
and my pains, after thou have forborne it, and I have manured it, dug and
dung'd it, if after all this, it bears no fruit, then I have not a word more to
say, Thou shall cut it down. Thou may cut it down, no Body will go about to
hinder thee, and thou will cut it down, there is no Body can hinder thee. From
hence Learn, That a Peoples continued unfruitfulness under the means of Grace,
does in time take off the Prayers and Intercessions of the Ministers of God for
them, and provokes God to bring his Judgments unavoidably and irrevocably upon
them, After that thou shall cut it down.

10 And he was teaching in one of the Synagogues on the Sabbath Day. 11 And
behold there was a woman which had a Spirit of Infirmity eighteen years, and
was bound together, and could in no wise lift up her self. 12 And when Jesus
saw her, he called her unto him and said unto her; woman, thou art loosed from
thy infirmity. 13 And he laid his hands upon her, and immediately she was made
straight, and glorified God. 14 And the Ruler of the Synagogue Answered with
indignation, because that Jesus had healed on the Sabbath Day, and said unto
the people, there are six days in which men ought to work, in them therefore
come and be healed, but not on the Sabbath Day. 15 The Lord then answered him
and said, Thou hypocrite, does not each one of you on the Sabbath Day, loose
his Ox or his Ass from the Stall, and lead him away to watering? 16 And ought
not this Woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound, lo! these
eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath Day? 17 And when he had
said these things, all his Adversaries were ashamed, and all the people
rejoiced, for all the glorious things that were done by him.

Observe here (1.) The afflicted Person, a Woman which had a sore Disease,
inflicted upon her by the Devil for Eighteen Years, which almost bowed her
together: There is nothing that the Devil more delights in, than in the
Miseries and Calamities of Mankind. Satan is not satisfied barely to infect the
Mind, and poison the Souls of Men, but he delights to afflict and hurt the
Body, where and when he can obtain leave. Observe (2.) Christ's Compassion
toward her, and his Miraculous healing of her, Jesus called her to him, and
with a word speaking healed her. Where Note, That the inveterateness of the
Disease, and the instantaneousness of the Cure, made the Miracle evident. She
that had been bowed down eighteen years, and in an instant is made straight,
and only by a word of Christ's Mouth: Such a miraculous Operation was an
evident Testimony of his Divine Mission, that he was the Son of God. Observe
(3.) How the Heart of the poor Woman is affected with Christ's hand; she
Glorified God; that is, she gave thanks to God, and attributed the Miracle to
him. As the chief End of all God's extraordinary Works, either of Power or
Mercy, is the exaltation of his own Glory; so the only way that we can set
forth his Glory, is by celebrating his Praises, and expressing our own
Thankfulness; He that offers me praise and thanks, glorifies me, Ps. 50. ult.
Observe (4.) The unreasonable anger, and unjust indignation which was found
with the Ruler of the Synagogue, against our Holy Lord, for working this
miraculous Cure on the Sabbath day: There is no Person so Holy, no action so
Innocent, but may fall under unjust Censure, especially where malice and
ignorance are combined; what a severe reflection does this man make upon our
Blessed Lord, for performing a work of Mercy on the Sabbath Day. Observe (5.)
Our Lord's Vindication of himself from Calumny and false Accusation; (1.) He
charges his Accuser with Hypocrisy, Thou hypocrite, does not each of you loose
his Ox or his Ass from the stall on the Sabbath Day, and water him? It is one
Note of an Hypocrite, to condemn that in another which he does himself; the
Jews held it lawful to loose and lead a Beast to watering on the Sabbath Day,
which was a work of Servile Labor, and yet would condemn Christ for healing a
poor Woman, only with a word speaking. (2.) Christ vindicates his own Action,
by comparing it with theirs, which they judged lawful on the Sabbath Day: was
their loosing and watering the Beast, a Work of Necessity? much more was his:
Was theirs a work of Mercy? his much more; their compassion was to a Bruit
Beast, his to a rational Creature, to a Woman; and that not to a stranger, an
Heathen Woman, but one of their own, a Jewish Woman, a Daughter of Abraham: Nay
farther Christ's Act was an Act of far greater Necessity, and more special
Mercy then theirs. The Beast might live a day without Water; the Beast might
not be sick, but this Woman was in sore distress, and had been so for eighteen
years; nay she was in the hands of the Enemy of Mankind, bound by Satan, Was it
not then a greater Act of Mercy, and Compassion to loose her, than to lead a
Beast. Observe (6.) What Effect Our Lord's Vindication of himself had upon the
Hearers of it, His adversaries were ashamed, the people rejoiced, v. 17. his
Accusers were ashamed, and probably convinced, perhaps silenced; but we read
not that they confessed their Error, or acknowledged their unjust Censure, or
craved Christ's pardon: When Persons judgments are under Conviction of an
error and mistake, it is very hard to bring themselves to confess and own
their mistake, because all men stand very much upon the Credit and Reputation
of their Understandings, and look upon it as a Reproach to own themselves
mistaken, though it is really otherwise: But though our Savior's Adversaries were
only ashamed, others Rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him.

18 Then said he, Unto what is the kingdom of God like? and whereunto shall I
resemble it? 19 It is like a grain of Mustard Seed, which a man took and cast
into his Garden; and it grew, and waxed a great Tree, and the fowls of the Air
lodged in the branches of it. 20 And again he said, Whereunto shall I liken the
kingdom of God? 21 It is like leaven which a woman took and hid in three
measures of meal, till the whole was leavened.

Our Savior's Design in both these Parables, is to keep his Disciples and
Followers from being offended at the small Beginnings of his Kingdom, and to
foretell the future great Success of the Gospel, notwithstanding the present
small appearance of the efficacy of it; to this purpose he compares the Kingdom
of God, that is, the Gospel Church, to a grain of Mustard Seed, which being one
of the least Seeds, yet in that Country grew into so large a Tree, that the
Birds did Roost and Lodge in the Boughs of it. He also likens it to Leaven,
which quickly diffuses it self through the whole Mass and Lump, instantly
turning a great heap of Meal into its own nature. Christ shows hereby of what a
spreading Nature the Doctrine of the Gospel would be, notwithstanding all the
Malice and Opposition of the wicked Men. Learn thence, That how small
Beginnings soever the Gospel had in its first plantation, yet by the
fructifying Blessing of God, and the influence of the Holy Spirit, it has had,
and shall have a wonderful increase.

22 And he went through the cities and villages, teaching and journeying
toward Jerusalem. 23 Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be
saved? And he said unto them. 24 Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for
many I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

Observe here (1.) The unwearied pains and diligence of our Holy Lord in
preaching and publishing the glad tidings of the Gospel to lost Sinners, He
went through cities and villages teaching; not in great and populous Cities
only, but in poor and obscure Villages also; not preaching by his exemplary
Life only, but by his Holy Doctrine likewise. Let such preachers who look upon
the work of Preaching, as the least part of their Business, consider the
indefatigable pains which our Lord took in that work; and how will his
diligence shame our negligence. Observe (2.) A curious question put to our
Savior, concerning the number of those that should be saved, whether they
should be few or many; Lord, are there few that be saved? Where Note, How
curiously inquisitive we naturally are after the Knowledge of things that do
not concern us, how forward to pry into unrevealed Secrets, and to search into
God's hidden Counsel; it concerns us rather to understand what sort of Persons
shall be saved, than how man shall be saved, and to make sure that we be of
that number. Observe (3.) Our Savior gives no direct Answer to the Curiosity
of this Inquirer, but turns his Speech from him to the People; Jesus said unto
them, strive to enter in at the strait gate, for, etc. Where Note (1.) The
Metaphor which Christ is pleased to set forth Heaven and the Happiness of a
future State by, he compares it to a straight gate; to a Gate, to denote the
possibility of entering; to a straight gate, to denote the difficulty of
Entrance; a Gate supposes the entrance possible, but a straight gate bespeaks
the Entrance difficult. (2.) Here is a Duty urged and enforced upon all those
that expect the Happiness of another Life, and desire to enter in at this
straight gate, and that is a diligent and industrious striving, Strive to enter
in at the straight gate. (3.) We have a forcible argument and motive to excite
and quicken to the practice of this Duty, drawn from the paucity, or small
number of those that shall obtain Salvation in a dying hour; Many will seek to
enter in, but shall not be able. Learn hence (1.) That Heaven or the Happiness
of a future State is attainable. (2.) That it is not attainable without Labor
and difficulty. (3.) That all those difficulties may be happily overcome by a
diligent and industrious striving.

25 When once the master of the house is risen up and has shut to the door,
and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord,
open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence you
are. 26 Then shall ye begin to say, we have eaten and drunk in thy presence,
and thou have taught in our streets. 27 But he shall say, I tell you, I know
you not whence you are; Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. 28 There
shall he weeping and gnashing of Teeth; when ye shall see Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob, and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and you your selves
thrust out. 29 And they shall come from the east, and from the west, and from
the the north, and from the south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of God. 30
And behold there are last that shall be first, and there are first that shall
be last.

Our Savior having exhorted all his Followers in the foregoing Verses to make
sure of Heaven and Salvation to themselves, whilst the door of Hope and
Salvation is open to them, by this Parable of a Master of a Family inviting
Guests to his Table, and waiting for their Coming, and at last shutting the
door against them, because they either denied or delayed Coming. Christ hereby
represented to the Jews, the great danger they were in if they neglected the
present Season of Grace and Salvation, which now they did enjoy; telling them
farther, how little it would profit them at the day of Judgment, to allege
that they had eaten and drunk in his presence, that they had heard him preach
in their streets, if they did not forsake their sins, and obey his Gospel.
Adding farther, that it would be an Heart-piercing sorrow, a Soul-rending grief
to them, at the Great Day, to see not only the Patriarchs, and Prophets, and
other Jews, but even the despised Gentiles from all Quarters and Nations, whom
they thought accursed, admitted into the Kingdom of Heaven, and themselves
eternally shut out; For the last shall be first, and the first last; that is,
the Gentiles who were afar off shall receive the Gospel, when you for rejecting
it shall be cast off. From the whole Note (1.) That there is a determinate time
when Souls must (if ever) accept of the offers of Grace and Salvation, which
are made unto them; now is the door open, and Persons invited in. (2.) That
e're long Jesus Christ, who now stands at every one of our doors, waiting for
our compliance with his Gospel-Terms, will wait no longer upon us, nor strive
any farther by the motions of his Spirit with us, when once the master of the
house is risen up, and shut to the door. (3.) That doleful is the condition of
such miserable Souls against whom the door is shut, the door of Repentance, the
door of hope, the door of Salvation; all shut, eternally shut, and that by him,
who shuts and none can open. (4.) That all would be saved at last; all will
cry for mercy when it is too late, even such as now sinfully undervalue, and
scornfully despise it; Ye shall stand without, and knock at the door, saying,
Lord, Lord, open to us. Note (5.) That it is no good plea for admittance into
Heaven, because we have been Church Members here on Earth; no outward
privileges, though Christ has taught in our Streets; no external Acts of
Communion, though we have eaten and drunk in his presence, and at his holy Table,
will justify our hopes of entering into Heaven when we dye, if we be workers of
iniquity whilst we live; Lord, we have eaten and drunk in thy presence, but he
shall say, I know you not, ye workers of iniquity. Note (6.) That as Hell will
be a second Heaven to the Glorified, so Heaven will be a second Hell to the
Damned. Hell will be a second Heaven to the Glorified, that is, it will add
exceedingly to the Happiness of the Saints in Heaven, to see and be sensible of
that misery which they escaped, and the damned endure; and on the other hand,
Heaven will be a second Hell to the Damned; that is, it will increase their
Torments, and add to the vexation of their Spirits, to see some in Heaven whom
they little expected to see there; some that never saw, nor heard, nor enjoyed
what they have done, Strangers, yea Heathens taken in, when the Children of the
Kingdom, that is, the Members of the visible Church are shut out; They shall
come from the East, from the West, from the North, and from the South, and sit
down in the Kingdom of God, but the children of the Kingdom shall be cast into
outer darkness.

31 The same day there came certain of the Pharisees, saying unto him, Get thee
out and depart hence, for Herod will kill thee. 32 And he said unto them, Go ye
and tell that Fox, Behold, I cast out Devils, and do cures to day, and to
morrow, and the third day, I shall be perfected. 33 Nevertheless I must walk to
day and to morrow, and the day following, for it cannot be that a Prophet
perish out of Jerusalem.

It may seem strange, that the Pharisees who had no kindness for our Savior,
should come here and acquaint him with a danger that he was in from Herod; Get
thee hence, for Herod will kill thee. It is probable they had a design to drive
him out of the Country, because his Reputation was so great among the People,
who were admirers of his Person, hearers of his Doctrine, and Witnesses of his
Miracles. But what intention soever they had in acquainting Christ with this
Danger, it is very evident that our Savior slighted it, by the Message which
he sent to Herod, Go and tell that Fox; Where we must not suppose, that our
Lord did fix this Name of Fox upon Herod as an opprobrious Title, thereby
reflecting the least dishonor upon him as a King; but it was to let him know,
that being about his Fathers Work, he feared neither his Power nor his Policy,
neither his Cruelty nor his Craft, and that nothing should take him off from
finishing the Work of Man's Redemption. Learn hence, That when God calls forth
any of his Servants to any special service for him, all the combined Power and
Policy of the Prince of Darkness, and his Instruments shall never be able to
hinder them, till they have finished their Course, and done the Service which
God designed; I must work to day, and to morrow, and the day following; as if
Christ had said, Let Herod know, that my time is not in his Hand, and as to
this matter, I am not under his Command or Power; e're long my work will be
finished, and then I shall be perfected.

34 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee: How often would I have gathered thy children together, as
an Hen does gather her Brood under her wings, and ye would not? 35 Behold your
house is left unto you desolate, and verily I say unto you, Ye shall not see
me, until the time come when ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the
name of the Lord.

Our Lord concludes this Chapter with a Compassionate Lamentation over
Jerusalem, the place where he was to suffer his Ingemination, or doubling of
the Word: Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, shows the vehemence of his affection toward
them, and the sincerity of his desires for their Salvation. Observe (1.) The
Kindness and Compassion of Christ to the Jews in general, and Jerusalem in
particular, set forth by a lively Metaphor and Similitude, namely, that of a
Hen gathering her Chickens under her Wings: As the Hen does tenderly cherish,
and carefully hide and cover her young from the Eye of the Destroyer, so would
Christ have shrouded and sheltered this People from all those Birds of Prey,
and particularly from the Roman Eagle, by whose Tallons they were at last
destroyed. Again, as the Hen continues her Call to her young ones from Morning
to Night, and holds out her Wings for shelter to them all the day long, so did
Christ wait for this Peoples Repentance and Conversion; for it was more than
Forty years after they had killed his Prophets, and murdered himself, before
they met with a final Overthrow. Observe (2.) The amazing obstinacy and
wilfulness of this People, in rejecting the Grace and Favor, the kindness and
condescension of the Lord Jesus Christ, I would have gathered you, but ye would
not. Observe (3.) The fatal issue of this obstinacy, Behold your house is left
unto you desolate; is left, that is certainly and suddenly will be left
desolate, (the present Tense being put for the paulo post futurum) which
denotes both the certainty and proximity of this Peoples Ruin. Learn (1.) that
the ruin and destruction of Sinners is wholly chargable upon themselves, that
is, on their own wilfulness and impenitency, on their own obstinacy and
obduracy, I would have gathered you, says Christ, but ye would not. Learn (2.)
How deplorably and inexcusably they will perish, who perish by their own
wilfulness and obduracy under the Gospel. (3.) That there is no desire like
unto God's desire of a Peoples Repentance, no longing like unto God's longing
for a Peoples Salvation; Oh Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee? when
shall it once be? Jerem. 13.27.

CHAP. XIV.
1 AND it came to pass as he went into the house of one of the chief Pharisees,
to eat Bread on the Sabbath Day, that they watched him. 2 And behold, there was
a certain man before him which had the Dropsy. 3 And Jesus answering, spoke
unto the Lawyers and Pharisees saying, Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath Day.
4 And they held their peace, and he took him, and healed him, and let him go. 5
And answered them saying, which of you shall have an Ass or an Ox fallen into a
Pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the Sabbath Day? and they could
not answer him again to these things.

Several particulars are here worthy of our Observation and Imitation. Note
(1.) The freedom of our Lord's Conversation with Men, he delighted in humane
Society, and was of a sociable Temper; we do not find, that whenever he was
invited to a Dinner that he disdained to go, not so much for the pleasure of
Eating, as for the opportunity of Conversing and doing good. Note (2.) The
House he goes into, and is entertained in, one of the chief Pharisees, who were
some of his chiefest Enemies; a great instance of our Lord's humanity,
humility, and self-denial, in that he refuses not the Conversation of those
whom he knew did not affect him; teaching us to Love our Enemies, and not to
shun Conversing with them, that thereby we may gain an opportunity of being
reconciled to them. Note (3.) The day when our Savior dined publicly at the
Pharisees House, among the Lawyers and Pharisees, it was on the Sabbath Day.
Learn thence, That it is not sinfully unlawful for us to entertain our Friends
and Neighbors with a plentiful Meal on the Lord's day; it must be
acknowledged, that Feasting upon any day is one of those Lawful things which is
difficultly managed without Sin, but more especially upon that day, that it
does not unfit us for the Duties of the Sabbath: However, our Lord's Example in
going to a public Dinner amongst Lawyers and Pharisees, evidently shows the
lawfulness of feasting on that day, provided we use the same moderation in
eating and drinking that he did, and improve the opportunity as a Season for
doing good, as he has taught us by his Example. Note (4.) How contrary to all
the Laws of Behavior, the Decency of Conversation, and the Rules of
Hospitality, the Pharisees watched him, making their Table a Snare to catch
him, hoping they might hear something from him, or see something in him, for
which they might accuse him; He entered into the house of the Pharisee to eat
Bread, and they watched him. Note (5.) Our Savior chose the Sabbath Day as the
fittest Season to work his miraculous Cures in; in the Pharisees House he heals
a Man that had the Dropsy on the Sabbath Day. Christ would not forbear doing
good, nor omit an opportunity of helping and healing the distressed, though he
knew his Enemies the Pharisees would carp and cavil at it, calumniate and
reproach him for it; it being the constant guise of Hypocrites, to prefer
Ceremonial and Ritual Observations, before Necessary and Moral Duties. Note
(6.) How our Savior defends the Lawfulness of his Act in Healing the diseased
Man, from their own Act in helping the Beast out of the Pit on the Sabbath Day;
as if Christ had said, Is it lawful for you on the Sabbath Day to help a Beast?
and is it sinful in me to heal a Man? Note Lastly, How the Reason and Force of
our Savior's Argument silenced the Pharisees, convinced them no doubt, but we
read nothing of their Conversion; the obstinate and malicious are much harder
to be wrought upon, than the Ignorant and Scandalous; it is easier to silence
such Men then to satisfy them, to stop their Mouths than to remove their
Prejudices; for Obstinacy will hold the Conclusion, though Reason cannot maintain
the Premises; They could not answer him again to these things.

7 And he put forth a Parable to those that were bidden, when he marked how
they chose out the chief Rooms, saying unto them. 8 When thou art bidden of any
man to a wedding, sit not down in the highest Room, lest a more honorable
person than thou be bidden of him. 9 And he that bade thee and him, come and
say to thee, Give this man place, and thou begin with shame to take the lowest
Room. 10 But when thou art bidden, go and sit down in the lowest Room, and when
he that bade thee comes, he may say unto thee, Friend, go up higher; then
shall thou have Worship in the presence of them that sit at meat with thee. 11
For whosoever exalts himself shall be abased, and he that humbles himself
shall be exalted.

It was observed before that our Blessed Savior Dined publicly on the Sabbath
day with several Pharisees and Lawyers; that which is here worthy of our Notice
is this, how holy and suitable our Lord's Discourse was to the Solemnity of
that day, may it be the matter of our imitation; it is not unlawful for Friends
to Dine together on the Lord's Day, provided their Discourse be suitable to the
Day, such was our Lord's here; for observing how the Company then at Table did
affect precedence and taking place one of another: he that before their Eyes
had Cured a Man of a Bodily Dropsy, attempts to Cure the Persons that Dined
with him of the Tympany of Pride. Where Note, That it is not the Taking, but
the Affecting the highest Places and uppermost Rooms, that our Savior
condemns: There may and ought to be a Precedence amongst Persons; it is
according to the Will of God, That Honor is given to whom Honor is due; and
that the more Honorable Persons should sit in the most Honorable Places; for
Grace gives a Man no exterior Preference: it makes a Man glorious indeed, but
it is glorious within. Note farther, the way and course, the method and means
which our Savior directs Persons to, in order to their attaining real Honor,
both from GOD and Men, namely, by being little in our own Eyes, and in
lowliness of mind, esteeming others better than our selves; as GOD will abase,
and Men will despise the proud and haughty; so GOD will exalt, and Men will
honor the humble Person; Whosoever exalts himself shall be abased, and he
that humbles himself shall be exalted.

12 Then said he also to him that bade, when thou make a Dinner or a Supper,
call not thy friends, nor thy brethren; neither thy kinsmen, nor thy rich
neighbors, lest they also bid thee again, and a recompense be made thee. 13
But when thou make a Feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, and the
blind. 14 And thou shall be blessed, for they cannot recompense thee, for thou
shall be recompensed at the Resurrection of the just.

Our Savior observing how the Pharisee that bade him to Dinner invited only
the Rich, over-looking and neglecting the Poor, he exhorts him and the Company,
that whenever they make Entertainments for the time to come, they should not
only invite their rich Neighbors and Friends, who can and will invite them
again, but remember the Poor. Here Note (1.) That Civil Courtesies, and
Hospitable Entertainments of Kindred and Friends, for maintaining and
preserving Love and Concord, is not only Lawful, but an expedient and necessary
Duty; Use hospitality to one another (says St. Peter) without grudging. (2.)
That although it be not lawful to invite and feast the Rich, yet is it most
acceptable to God, when we feed and refresh the Poor; When thou make a Feast,
call rather the poor, and thou shall be blessed. We must prefer the Duties of
Christian Charity before Acts of Common Civility; Blessed are those
Feast-makers, who make the Bowels of the Hungry to Bless them. (3.) That God
oft-times Rewards our Liberality to the poor very signally in this Life; but if
it be deferred, we shall not fail to receive it at the Resurrection of the
Just; The poor cannot recompense thee, but thou shall be recompensed at the
Resurrection of the just.

15 And when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these things, he said
unto him, Blessed is he that shall eat Bread in the kingdom of God. 16 Then
said he unto him, A certain man made a great Supper, and bade many. 17 And sent
his Servant at Supper-time to say to them that were bidden, Come, for all
things are now ready. 18 And they all, with one consent, began to make excuse:
The first said unto him, I have bought a piece of Ground, and I must needs go
and see it; I pray thee have me excused. 19 And another said, I have bought
five yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove them, I pray thee have me excused. 20 And
another said, I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come. 21 So that
the servant came and showed his Lord these things. Then the master of the house
being angry, said to his Servant, Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of
the City, and bring in hither the poor and the maimed, the halt and the blind.
22 And the servant said, Lord, it is done as thou have commanded, and yet there
is room. 23 And the Lord said unto the servant, go into the Highways and
Hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled. 24 For I say
unto you, None of those men which were bidden shall taste of my Supper.

One of them that sat at meat with our Savior in the Pharisees House, hearing
Christ speak of being Recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just, repeated
that known saying among the Rabbis, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the
kingdom of God; that is, who shall be partaker of the Joys of Heaven. Hereupon
Christ utters the Parable of the Marriage Supper, Recorded here by St. Luke
with small variation from what was delivered by St. Matthew, Chapter 22. The first
intention of our Savior in that Parable seems to be this, to set forth that
gracious offer of Mercy and Salvation which was made by the preaching of the
Gospel unto the Jews, and to declare God's purpose of Receiving the Gentiles
into the Fold of Christ, upon the Jews despising and rejecting that inestimable
Favor. But besides this, it has an aspect upon us Christians, who have
embraced the Doctrine of the Gospel. Here Note, (1.) That the Gospel for its
freeness and fullness, for its varieties and delicacies, is like a
Marriage-Supper; For (1.) it does create the same Relation between Christ and
Believers that Marriage does between Husband and Wife; (2.) it entitles to the
same Privileges that a Conjugal Relation does, to the same endearing Love and
Tenderness, to the same Care and Protection, to the same Honor, and to the
same Happiness; (3.) It obliges to the like Duties, namely, unspotted Love and
fidelity, cheerful obedience to his Commands, reverence to his Person,
submission to his Authority. (4.) It produces the same Effects; as the Effect
of Marriage is increase of Children, so the fruit of the Gospel, is bringing
many sons to God. Note (2.) That Gospel invitations are mightily disesteemed;
they made light of the invitation, and offered frivolous Excuses for their
refusal of it. Note (3.) That the preference which the World has in Men's
esteem, is the great Cause of the Gospel-Contempt; one had purchased a piece of
Ground, another had bought five yoke of Oxen. Note (4.) The deplorable sadness
of their Condition, who refuse upon any pretense whatever, to comply with the
Gospel-Tender of Reconciliation and Mercy: The King was wrath, pronounced them
unworthy of his Favor, and resolved they should not taste of his Supper, but
sends forth his Servants to invite others to the Supper. Note (5.) The Notion
under which the Gentiles are set forth unto us, such as were in Lanes, Streets,
and Highways; that is, a rude, rustic, barbarous People, whom the Jews
despised, yea, whom they held Accursed, yet even these are called and accepted,
whilst the Jews, the first intended Guests are excluded, by means of their own
Contempt. Note lastly, The means used to bring in the Gentiles to the
Gospel-Supper; Go and compel them to come in; not by Violence, but persuasion;
by Argumentation, not Compulsion; the plain and persuasive, the powerful and
efficacious Preaching of the Word, with the Motions and influences of the Holy
Spirit, are the Compulsion here intended; not external Force, not temporal
Punishments, not outward Violence; Non Religionis est cogere Religionem, says
Tertullian; No Man ought by Force and Violence to be compelled to the
Profession of the true Faith.

25 And there were great multitudes with him, and he turned and said unto them.
26 If any man come to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife, and
Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be
my Disciple. 27 And whosoever does not bare his cross and come after me, cannot
be my Disciple.

Our Savior by these Expressions does not condemn natural Love and Affection,
either to our Relations, or our own Lives, but only regulates and directs it,
showing that our first and chief Love must be bestowed upon himself; we may
have, and ought to cherish tender and relenting affections toward our near and
dear Relations: But then the Consideration of Christ's Truth and Religion must
take place of these; yea, of Life it self; and when they stand in Competition
with these, we are to regard them no more, then if they were the Objects of our
Hatred. Learn hence, (1.) That no Man can be a sincere Disciple of Christ, who
gives any Relation, or outward Enjoyment, a preference to Christ in his Heart
and Affections. Christ must be Loved above all, or we Love him not at all; less
Love he accounts and calls Hatred. (2.) That all the Disciples of Christ must
be ready and willing whenever called to it, to quit all their Temporal
Interests and Enjoyments, even Life it self, and submit to any Temporal
Inconveniences, even Death it self, and all this willingly and cheerfully,
rather than disown their Relation to Christ, and quit the Profession of his
Holy Religion; upon easier Terms than these, can none of us be the Disciples of
Jesus.

28 For which of you intending to build a Tower, sits not down first, and
counts the cost, whether he have sufficient to finish it? 29 Lest happily after
he has laid the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it,
begin to mock him. 30 saying, This man began to build, and was not able to
finish. 31 Or, What King comes to make War against another King, sits not
down first, and consulteth, whether he be able with ten thousand to meet him
that comes against him with twenty thousand? 32 Or else, while the other is
yet a great way off, he sends an Embassage, and desires Conditions of peace.
33 So likewise whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has, he
cannot be my Disciple.

Our Blessed Savior by these two Parables, advises all his Followers to sit
down and consider, to weigh well, and cast up before hand what it is like to
cost them, to go through with their Profession of Religion: This he tells us,
common Prudence will direct Men to do in other Cases; particularly when they
either go to Build or to fight; as a Man that intends to Build, will consult
whither he is able to defray the Charge; and a King that goes forth to War,
will consider what strength he has to make Opposition; in like manner should
Persons engage in Religion; not rashly, but advisedly, with Consideration and
Judgment; It is good to remember the Issues of Action before we Act, before we
engage in the spiritual Combat to consider the difficulty of the Battle; What
proud Leviathans we have to Conflict with, what mighty Giants to contend and
strive against, even the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. But then we must take
great care that our Deliberation and Consideration of Difficulties and Dangers
may not deter us from, but work in us a steady Resolution for the Combat,
looking up to Christ for his Auxiliary Aid and Strength, to render us
Victorious, who though of our selves we can do nothing, yet may do all things
through Christ that strengthens us. Learn from hence, That such as take up a
Profession of Christianity, without considering the dangers and difficulties,
the Trials and Troubles, the Afflictions and Temptations which may accompany
it, will never hold out in the spiritual Warfare, but either fall in it, or run
from it.

34 Salt is good, but if the Salt have lost his savor, wherewith shall it be
seasoned? 35 It is neither fit for the Land, nor yet for the Dunghill, but men
cast it out: he that has ears to hear let him hear.

Our Savior here compares his Disciples to Salt, thereby denoting their
Usefulness, Salt being one of the most useful things in Nature; and pointing
also out their Duty, which is to Season themselves and others with sound
Doctrine. But Hypocritical Professors are like unsavory Salt, they are neither
savory in themselves, nor serviceable to others; our Savior compares such
Christians who have no savor of Piety and Goodness upon their Spirits to Salt,
that having lost its Goodness, is neither fit for the Land, nor yet for the
Dunghill; that is, being of a brackish Nature, it is wholly unfit to manure the
Ground, and will rather occasion Barrenness then any Fruitfulness of Increase.
Learn hence, That sincere and serious Christians, are and will be as the Salt
of the Earth, that is, good and savory in themselves, and endeavoring by good
Exhortation and good Example to season others: But hypocritical Professors and
Apostatizing Christians will be cast out, and trampled upon as unsavory Salt.

CHAP. XV.
This Chapter consists of three Parables; the design and scope of them all is
this, to represent the great tenderness and compassion of God Almighty, toward
the vilest and worst of sinners upon their sincere Repentance, and how highly
pleasing it is to God when they do so; This is expressed by three Parables,
(1.) Of a man's seeking diligently a Sheep that he had lost, and having found
it, rejoicing greatly, and inviting his Neighbors to partake of his Joy. (2.)
Of a Woman having lost a piece of Silver, and seeking carefully till she had
found it; and then in like manner rejoicing with her Friends, for her good
Success. (3.) Of a prodigal Son, who having spent his Time and consumed his
Estate in Riot and Excess, at length returns to his Father's House, and is
joyfully Received.

1 THen drew near unto him all the Publicans and sinners, for to hear him. 2
And the Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying, This man receives sinners, and
eats with them.

The Publicans and Sinners, as they had done several times before, came to hear
our Savior's Instructions; he treated them very kindly, and conversed
familiarly with them; at this the Pharisees were displeased, and murmured,
censuring our Savior for too much Familiarity with those Men, whom they looked
upon as Scandalous to Converse with; not considering that he Conversed with
them as their Physician, not as their Companion, and therefore his proper Work
and Employment lay among his Patients; and that he might give all possible
Encouragement to the Repentance of the greatest Sinners, he sets forth at once
the tender care of God in Recovering such lost Sinners, and the inexpressible
Joy that is found in Heaven at the welcome News of their Recovery, for thus it
follows in the Parables.

3 And he spoke this Parable unto them, saying. 4 What man of you having an
hundred Sheep, if he lose one of them, does not leave the ninety and nine in
the Wilderness, and go after that which is lost until he find it. 5 And when he
has found it, he lays it on his shoulders rejoicing. 6 And when he comes
home, he calls together his Friends and Neighbors, saying unto them, Rejoice
with me, for I have found my sheep that was lost. 7 I say unto you, That
likewise joy shall be in Heaven over one sinner that Repents, more then over
ninety and nine just persons, that need no Repentance.

In this Parable Christ compares Sinners to Sheep going astray, and God the
Father to a tender and careful Shepherd, seeking his stray Sheep, wherein he
secretly Taxes the Pharisees for their Uncharitableness in censuring him for
Conversing with Publicans and Sinners, and for their Envy at the Recovery of
such Sinners by Repentance, assuring them, that they are far from the temper of
the Holy Angels, who Rejoice more at the News of one Notorious Sinners
Conversion, then for many Righteous Persons who went not astray; like as a
Father is touched with a more sensible Joy, for the Recovery of one Son who was
dangerously sick, then for the Health of all the rest who were in no such
Danger. From the whole Note, (1.) That the Creatures Aberration may serve for
our Instruction; the Sheeps straying away from us, should put us in mind of our
wandering away from God. (2.) That Christ the great Shepherd of his Church, with
vigilance and care, seeks up, and finds out his lost Sheep, and will never
give over his search, till he has found them. (3.) That the Recovery of one
lost Sinner by Repentance, is matter of exceeding Joy and Rejoicing to Christ
the great Shepherd, and to all the Blessed Company of Heaven; There is joy in
Heaven over one sinner that Repents, or changes the whole Course of his
Life, more then over Ninety and nine just Persons that need no such Repentance.

8 Either what Woman having ten pieces of Silver, if she lose one piece, does
not light a Candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently till she find it?
9 And when she has found it, she calls her Friends and her Neighbors
together, saying, Rejoice with me, for I have found the piece which I had lost.
10 Likewise I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God
over one sinner that Repents.

The scope of this Parable is the same with the former; (1.) To express the Joy
that is found with GOD and his Holy Angels, at the Recovery and Conversion of a
notorious Sinner. (2.) To justify Christ in Conversing with such Sinners in
order to their Repentance and Conversion, from the malicious Reflections of the
Pharisees made upon our Savior for so doing; the sense of the words seems to
be this, If you do all justify the diligence and care of a Woman, using all
possible means to recover the loss of a piece of Silver, that had Cesar's Image
upon it, why (might our Savior say) will you Pharisees Censure and Condemn me
for seeking to recover and save lost Sinners, that have the Image of an Holy
God instampt upon them? Learn hence, (1.) That the Conversion of a Sinner from
a Course and State of Sin and wickedness, is highly acceptable and pleasing
unto God. (2.) That it is reasonable to suppose, that the Holy Angels in Heaven
do conceive a new joy at the notice and news of a Sinners Repentance and
Conversion unto God; how the Angels come by this Knowledge, whether by virtue
of their Ministry here below, or whether God is pleased to reveal it to them
above, as a thing extremely welcome and delightful to good Spirits, it is
neither material to enquire, nor possible to determine. But their Happiness not
being intensively infinite, it is certain that they may be Happier than they
are. Note (3.) That God is not only willing to receive and embrace Repenting
and Returning Sinners, but the News of their Repentance is entertained with so
much joy in Heaven, that if it be possible for the Blessed Inhabitants of that
place to have any thing added to their Happiness, this will be a new Accession
to it: For though the Happiness of God himself be intensively infinite, and can
have nothing added to it; yet the Happiness of Angels and glorified Spirits
being but finite, is capable of Addition; and as their Knowledge and Love do
increase, so their Felicity may be growing and improving to all Eternity; so
that it is reasonable enough to suppose, that there is really joy among the
Angels and Spirits of just Men made perfect, over every Sinner that Repents.

11 And he said, A certain man had two sons. 12 And the younger of them said to
his Father, Father give me the portion of Goods that falls to me, and he
divided to them his Living. 13 And not many days after, the younger Son
gathered all together, and took his Journey into a far Country, and there
wasted his Substance with riotous Living. 14 And when he had spent all, there
arose a mighty Famine in that Land, and he began to be in want. 15 And he went
and joined himself to a Citizen of that Country, and he sent him into his
Fields to feed Swine. 16 And he would fain have filled his Belly with the Husks
that the Swine did eat, and no man gave unto him. 17 And when he came to
himself he said, How many hired servants of my Fathers have bread enough, and
to spare, and I perish with hunger? 18 I will arise and go to my Father, and
will say unto him, Father I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee. 19 And
am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired Servants.
20 And he arose and came to his Father; but when he was yet a great way off,
his Father saw him, and had compassion on him, and ran and fell on his Neck,
and kissed him. 21 And the Son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against
Heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son. 22 But
the Father said to his Servants, Bring forth the best Robe, and put it on him,
and put a Ring on his Hand, and Shoes on his Feet. 23 And bring hither the
fatted Calf, and kill it, and let us eat and be merry. 24 For this my Son was
dead, and is alive again, he was lost and is found, and they began to be merry.

In the two former Parables of the lost Sheep and lost Groat, was Represented
to us the great pains and care which Christ takes for the Recovery of lost
Sinners. In this third Parable of the Prodigal Son, is shadowed forth unto us,
with what great readiness, joy and gladness our Heavenly Father receives
repenting and returning Sinners. In the Face of this Prodigal, as in a Glass,
we may behold, first, a riotous Sinners Aversion from God, secondly, a penitent
sinners Conversion to God, thirdly, a pardoned Sinners Acceptance and
Entertainment with God. From the whole Learn (1.) What is the Nature of Sin,
and the Practice of Sinners; Sin is a departing from God, and every Sinner does
voluntarily, and of his own accord, depart from him; He took his Journey into a
far Country. Learn (2.) The great extravagancy which Sinners run into when they
forsake God, and give up themselves to the Conduct of their Lusts and vile
Affections; he wasted all his Substance with riotous Living; that is, spent his
Time, and consumed his Treasure in riot and excess. (3.) Observe That sin will
certainly bring Men into Streights, but Streights do not always bring Men off
from sin; he began to be in want, yet thinks not of returning to his Fathers
House. (4.) That sinners will try all ways, and go through the greatest
Hardships and Difficulties before they will leave their sins, and return home
to their Heavenly Father; He joined himself to a Citizen of that Country, and
went into the Fields to feed Swine; he chooses rather to feed at the Hogs
Trough, then to Feast in his Fathers House. (5.) Observe at last the happy
Fruits of a Sanctified Affliction, they put the prodigal upon serious
Consideration, he came to himself: upon wise Consultation, I perish for hunger;
and upon a fixed Resolution, I will arise and go to my Father; serious
Consideration, and solid Resolution, are great steps to a sound Conversion and
thorough Reformation. Observe (6.) The affectionate tenderness and compassion
of the Father toward the returning Prodigal, though he had deserved to be
sharply reproved, severely Corrected, and finally rejected and shut out of
doors; yet the Fathers Compassion is above his Anger; not a word of his
miscarriages drops from the Fathers Mouth, but as soon as ever the Son looks
back, mercy looks out, and the Father expresses (1.) His speedy readiness to
receive his son, he ran unto him; the Son did only arise and go, but the Father
made haste and ran; Mercy has not only a quick eye to spy out a Penitent, but a
swift Foot, it runs to embrace a Penitent. (2.) Wonderful Tenderness, he fell
upon his neck; it had been much to have looked upon him with the Eye, more to
have taken him by the hand, but most of all to fall upon his Neck. Divine Mercy
will not only meet a Penitent, but embrace him also. (3.) Strong
Affectionateness, he kissed him; giving him thereby a pledge and assurance of
perfect Friendship and Reconciliation with him. Learn hence, That God is not
only ready to give Demonstrations of his Mercy to penitent sinners, but also to
give the Seals and Tokens of his special Reconciled Favor to them, they shall
now have the kisses of his Lips, who formerly deserved the blows of his Hand;
The Father ran unto him, fell on his Neck and kissed him. Observe Lastly, The
great joy that appeared in the whole House, as well as in the Fathers Heart,
upon this great occasion, the prodigal Sons returning, They all began to be
merry, there was Music and Dancing. Learn hence, That sincere Conversion
brings the Soul into a joyful, into a very joyful State and Condition. The joy
that Conversion brings, is an holy and spiritual joy, a solid and substantial
joy, a wonderful and transcendent joy, an increasing and never fading joy; our
joy on Earth is an earnest of the joys of Heaven; where there will be Rejoicing
in the presence of our Heavenly Father, and his Holy Angels to all Eternity;
Because we were dead, but are now alive again, we were lost but are found.

25 Now his elder son was in the field; and as he came and drew nigh to the
house, he heard Music and Dancing. 26 And he called one of the Servants, and
asked what these things meant. 27 And he said unto him, Thy Brother is come,
and thy Father has killed the fatted Calf, because he has received him safe
and sound. 28 And he was angry and would not go in, therefore came his Father
out and entreated him. 29 And he answering said to his Father, Lo! these many
years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy Commandment, and
yet thou never gave me a kid, that I might make merry with my Friends. 30 But
as soon as this thy son was come, which has devoured thy Living with Harlots,
thou have killed for him the fatted Calf. 31 And he said unto him, Son, thou
art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. 32 It was meet that we should
make merry and be glad, For this thy Brother was dead, and is alive again, he
was lost, and is found.

By the murmurings of the Elder Son at the Prodigals Returning to, and
Reception with his Father; some think the Jews in general are to be understood,
whose peevishness to the Gentiles, and their Repinings at the offer of
Salvation, made unto them by the Gospel, is very evident from many places of
Scripture; others understand it of the Scribes and Pharisees in particular, who
presuming on their own Righteousness, as if they had never transgressed God's
Commandments at any time, murmured at our Savior for Conversing with Sinners,
though it were in order to the bringing of them to Repentance; which instead of
being frowardly discontented at, they ought to have rejoiced in. Learn hence,
There is such an envious Spirit in Men, yea even in the best of Men, as
inclines them to repine at such Dispensations of Divine Grace and Favor, ^s
others receive and they want (2.) That to indulge such a Spirit and Temper in
our selves, argues great sin and great solly; great sin, in being dissatisfied
with God's Dispensations, and affronting his Wisdom and Justice; and great
Folly, in making another Good our Grief, as if we had less because another has
more; The elder Son was angry, and would not go in, it follows, therefore came
the Father out and entreated him: This shows the meekness of God, in dealing
with us under our frowardness; and the high satisfaction he takes in a Sinners
Conver^ion and Returning to his Duty. Lastly, This points out unto us our Duty
to imitate God, and be Followers of him as dear Children. Does he Rejoice at a
S^nners Return to his Duty? so should we. It Is the Devil's Temper to regret and
envy the Good and Happiness of others; he gnashes his Teeth, when the Prey he
thought himself sure of, is snatched out of his Jaws. But to God and all his
Holy Angels, nothing is so agreeable as the Repentance and Conversion of a
Sinner from the Error of his ways, and the saving of a Soul from death; this is
looked upon as a Resurrection from the Dead, and a ground of the greatest Joy
and Rejoicing; It was meet that we should make merry and be glad; For this thy
Brother was dead and is alive again, he was lost and is found.

CHAP. XVI.
1 AND he said also unto his Disciples, There was a certain rich Man which had
a Steward, and the same was accused unto him, that he had wasted his Goods. 2
And he called him, and said unto him, How is it that I hear this of thee? Give
an account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward. 3 Then the
Steward said within himself, what shall I do? For my Lord takes away from me
the Stewardship; I cannot dig, to beg I am ashamed. 4 I am resolved what to do,
That when I am put out of the Stewardship they may receive me into their
Houses. 5 So he called every one of the Lord's Debtors unto him, and said unto
him first, How much owe thou unto my Lord? 6 And he said an hundred measures
of Oil, and he said unto him, Take thy Bill, and set down quickly, and write
fifty. 7 Then said he to another, And how much owe thou? and he said an
hundred measures of Wheat, and he said unto him, Take thy Bill and write
Fourscore.

Our Lord begins this Chapter with the Parable of a rich Man's Steward, who
being called upon by his Master to give up his Accounts, in order to his being
discharged from his Office, cast about with himself, what Course he had best
take to provide for his Subsistence, when he should be turned out of his
Employment; at last he resolves upon this Course, That he will go to his Lord's
Debtors, and take a favorable Account of them, writing down Fifty for an
Hundred, that by this means he might oblige them to be kind to him in his
Necessity; this is the Sum of the Parable: Now the Scope and Design of it is
this, To exhort all Men that are entrusted by God here, with Estates, Honors,
and Authority, to make use of all these unto Spiritual Ends, the Glory of God
and the Benefit of others; for we are not Proprietors and Owners, but Stewards
only of the manifold Gifts of God, and must be accountable unto him for all at
last; but in the mean time to use, employ and improve our Lord's Goods to the
best Advantage for our selves, whilst we are entrusted with them; this is the
Scope of the Parable: Now the Observations from it are these, (1.) That all
Persons, even the highest and greatest of Persons are, but Stewards of the good
things of God. (2.) That our Stewardship must and shall have an End; we shall
not be always, nay we shall not be long Stewards. (3.) That when we are put out
of our Stewardship, we must give an A^count of our Carriage ther^in, and the
greater our Trust was, the heavier will our Beck^ning be. (4.) That therefore
it will be our highest Prudence, whilst we are entrusted with our Masters
Goods, so to us^ and improve them, as may make most for our Comfort and
Advantage, when we give up our Account.

8 And the Lord commended the unjust Steward, because he had do^e wisely; for
the Children of this world are in their generation wiser than the Children of
Light.

The Steward here is Commended, not for his dishonesty, but for his policy,
shrewdness, and sagacity, having done cunningly for himself, though knavishly for
his Master; from whence our Savior draws this Conclusion, That the Children of
this World are in their generation wiser than the Children of Light. Hence
Note, That the generality of Men are not so wise and provident for the Soul,
and the Concernments of another World, as Worldly Men are for the Interests and
Concerns of this Life. It is seldom seen, that good Men are so wise for the
Concerns of their Souls, as Worldly Men are for their Worldly Interests.

9 And I say unto you, make unto your selves friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations.

Here our Savior makes Application of the foregoing Parable to his Disciples.
Where Note, (1.) The Title given by our Savior to Wealth and Riches, he calls
it Mammon, and Mammon of Unrighteousness; Mammon was the Name given by the
Heathen to the God of Riches; the Mammon of Unrighteousness, is Riches
unrighteously gotten. (2.) The advice given by our Savior to the Men of
Wealth, Make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of unrighteous^ess, that is,
make God your Friend by a Charitable Distribution, that he may bless you; make
the Poor your Friends, that they may unitedly engage their Prayers for you;
make your own Consciences your Friends, that they may not reproach and shame
you, sting and torment you. (3.) Observe the Argument used to excite the Rich
to this Improvement of their Wealth, That when ye fail, they may receive you
into everlasting Habitations; when ye fail, that is, when ye dye, and your
Riches fail you, and can stand you in no farther stead, they may receive you;
What they? Some understand it of the Holy Trinity, others of the Blessed
Angels, whose Office it is to convoy the Charitable and good Man's Soul to
Heaven, its Eternal Habitation; Some understand it of Riches themselves, they
may receive you, that is, your Estates laid out for God in Works of Piety and
Charity, may enter before you into Heaven, and open the Gate of Eternal Life
for you, not in a way of Merit, but in a way of Means. Lastly, They may receive
you; Some understand it of the poor themselves, whose Bowels our Charity have
Refreshed, that they will welcome us to Heaven, and receive us with joyful
Acclamations into the Eternal Mansions, which are prepared for the Merciful.

10 He that is faithful in that which is least, is faithful also in much; and
he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much. 11 If therefore ye have
not been Faithful in the unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your Trust the
true Riches? 12 And if ye have not been Faithful in that which is another man's,
who shall give you that which is your own? 13 No Servant can serve two Masters,
for either he will hate the one, and love the other, or else he will hold to
the one, and despise the other, ye cannot serve God and Mammon. 14 And the
Pharisees also who were Covetous heard these things, and they derided him.

Our Blessed Savior having declared to his Followers in the foregoing Verses,
the great advantage they shall reap by a charitable Distribution of Temporal
good things, he acquaints them in these Verses with the great Detriment and
Disadvantage that will redound to them if they do otherwise. (1.) If they be
not Faithful in right employing temporal Riches, they must not expect that God
will entrust them with Spiritual and Heavenly; which are the true Riches: God
will deal with his Servants, as we deal with ours, never trust them with much,
whom we find unfaithful in a little, (2.) If they be not faithful in the
improvement of these outward things, which God intrusts them with but for a
time, and must shortly leave them to others; how can they expect that God
should give them those Spiritual good things which shall never be taken away
from them to whom they are given. Where Note (1.) That the Riches we have are
called not our own, but another Man's, If ye have not been faithful in that
which is another man's; Because God has not made us Proprietors, but dispensers,
not owners, but Stewards of these things; we have them for others, and must
leave them to others; we are only Trustees for the Poor; if much be put into
our hands, it is to dispense to others, according to our Masters Order; let us
be Faithful then in that which is another Man's, that is, with what God puts
into our hand for the Benefit of others. (2.) Note, That though our Gifts are not
our own, yet Grace or Spiritual Goods are our own; others may have all the
Benefit of our Gifts, but we shall have the benefit and comfort of our own
Grace; this Treasure we cannot leave to others, and it shall never be taken
away from our selves. Note (3.) That God is just, and will be eternally
justified in denying his special Grace to those, who do not make use of his
common Gifts; would Men be Faithful in improving a little, GOD would entrust
them with more; did they not abuse the Trust of his common Gifts, he would not
deny them the Treasure of his Saving Grace, called here, the true Riches.

13 No servant can serve two Masters, for either he will hate the one and love
the other, or else he will hold to the one and despise the other, ye cannot
serve God and Mammon.

Observe here a Twofold Master spoken of, GOD and the World: GOD is our Master
by Creation, Preservation, and Redemption; he has appointed us our Work, and
secured us our Wages; the World is become our Master, by Intrusion, Usurpation,
and a general Estimation; too many esteeming it as their chief Good, and
delighting in it as their chief Joy. Observe (2.) That no Man can serve these
two Masters, who are of contrary Interests, and issue out contrary Commands;
when two Masters are Subordinate, and their Commands subservient each to other,
the difficulty of serving both is not great; But where Commands interfere, and
Interests clash, it is impossible; no Man can serve GOD and the World, but he
may serve GOD with the World; we may be served of Riches, and yet serve God,
but we cannot serve Riches but we must disserve God; we cannot serve GOD and
the World both, and seek them as our chief Good and ultimate End, because no
Man can divide his Heart betwixt GOD and the World. Learn hence, That to Love
the World as our chief Good, to seek it as our highest Interest, and to serve
it as our chief Commander, cannot stand with the Love and Service which we bear
and owe to God our Maker. The World's Slaves, whilst such, can be none of God's
free Men.

14 And the Pharisees also who were Covetous, heard these things, and they
derided him.

The Pharisees were notoriously addicted to the sin of Covetousness, accounting
no Men happy but them that were rich; and because the Promises made to the Jews
were generally (though not only) of Temporal Blessings, they looked upon Poverty
as a Curse, and esteemed the Poor Accursed, John 7.49. These Pharisees hearing
their Covetousness reproved, and the Doctrine of Charity and Alms preached and
enforced by our Savior, they derided him in the shamefullest manner, with the
highest degree of Contempt and Scorn, wringing the Nose, and making Mouths at
him, as the Original Word seems to import. Learn hence, (1.) That Sinners grow
very angry and impatient under the Ministry of the Word, when they hear their
darling sin, their beloved Lusts struck at, and sharply reproved. (2.) That
Covetous Men, who make Wealth their Idol, when they hear the Doctrine of an
Holy Contempt of the World Preached, and the great Duty of Almsgiving Urged
and Enforced, they make it the matter of their Contempt and Derision; The
Pharisees heard and derided him.

15 And he said unto them, Ye are they which justify your selves before men,
but God knows your hearts; for that which is highly esteemed amongst men, is
abomination in the sight of God.

Here our Savior sharply reproves the Pharisees for their horrible Pride,
their Self-justification, and vain Affectation of the Opinion and esteem of
others; as if Christ had said, You bear up your selves, and take a pride in
this, that Men know no ill by you, that no Man can say, Black is your Eye, but
God can see that black is your Heart. Learn, That no Man ought to think himself
approved of God, barely because he is approved by himself; for all who justify
themselves upon the goodness of their Works, are not good.

16 The Law and the Prophets were until John; since that time the kingdom of
God is preached, and every man presses into it. 17 And it is easier for Heaven
and Earth to pass, then one Tittle of the Law to fail. 18 Whosoever puts
away his Wife, and marries another, commits Adultery; and whosoever
marries her that is put away from her Husband commits adultery.

Our Savior in these words gives the Pharisees to understand that their
contempt of his Person and Doctrine was the more inexcusable, because they
lived in and under the clearest Light of the Gospel; The Preaching of the Law
and the Prophets continued but till John the Baptist came amongst you, since
which time the Gospel has been clearly Preached, both by him, and my self unto
you; and it has pleased God to give my Doctrine great acceptance in the World,
though you Pharisees reject it; yet every one, that is, very many press into it;
so that the Doctrine which you mock, the Holy Doctrine of the Gospel, others
will embrace; yet lest whilst Christ spoke thus highly of the Gospel, the
Pharisees should reproach him as a Destroyer of the Law, he shows that the
Obligation of the Moral Law was of Eternal Force, and that Heaven and Earth
should sooner pass, then the Obligation of that Law cease; which yet the
Pharisees most shamefully violated, particularly the Seventh Commandment, which
they break by permitting and practicing Divorces, upon unjustifiable Grounds.
Learn hence, That the Moral Law, in all the Branches of it, which is summarily
comprehended in the Ten Commandments, is an Eternal Rule of Life and Manners,
which is to stand in force as long as the World stands, and the frame of Heaven
and Earth endures.

19 There was a certain rich man, who was clothed in purple and fine linen,
and fared sumptuously every day. 20 And there was a certain Beggar named
Lazarus, which was laid at his gate full of Sores. 21 And desiring to be fed
with the crumbs which fell from the rich man's Table; moreover the Dogs came and
licked his Sores.

Our Savior in this Parabolical History of Dives and Lazarus, instructs us
concerning the right use of Riches, which is to capacitate us to do good to
others, declaring that in the Life to come, the pious poor man shall be
eternally Happy, whilst the unmerciful rich Man shall be intolerably miserable.
Here Observe, (1.) That our Savior did not censure the Rich Man for being
Rich, but for being sensual, not for wearing costly Apparel, and keeping a
plentiful Table, (which, if managed according to Men's Qualities and Estates is
a commendable Virtue) but his Sensuality and Luxury, and forgetting to feed the
Hungry with the Superfluities of his Table; these are the things for which he
is Censured. From whence me may Learn, That Pride and Luxury, Intemperance and
Sensuality, are such abuses of Worldly Riches as Worldly Men are very prone and
incident to. Rich Men too often make their Back and their Belly their God;
Sacrificing and Devoting all they have, to the Service of those Idols. Observe
(2.) That a poor and mean Condition, is the Lot of many, nay perhaps of the
most in this World. (3.) That a Man may be poor and miserable in this World,
and yet be very dear to God; the Grace of Sanctification is sometimes bestowed
most eminently, where the Gifts of Providence have been dispensed more
sparingly.

22 And it came to pass that the Beggar dyed, and was carried by the Angels
into Abraham's Bosom; the rich man also dyed and was buried. 23 And in Hell lift
up his eyes, being in torments, and sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his
bosom.

Obs. here, (1.) That our Savior represents all Men, both Good and bad,
passing immediately out of this Life, into a State of Happiness or Misery;
Lazarus dyed, and was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom. Thence Note, That
all Holy Souls, and amongst the rest the Godly Poor, are instantly, after
Death, conveyed by Angels to their place of Rest and Blessedness. The Rich Man
also dyed; this is added to let us know, that Riches for all Men's Confidence in
them, will not deliver from Death; the rich Man might be Surfeited, by faring
deliciously every day, whilst Lazarus was Famished. And was Buried; Here is no
mention of Lazarus's Buryal, probably he had none, but flung out of the way
into some Hole or Pit; or if he had a Buryal, a very mean one, which is past
over in silence: All the advantage which a rich Man has by a great Estate after
he is Dead, is only to have a pompous Funeral, which yet signifies nothing to
him, because he is not sensible of it: And in Hell lifts up his Eyes, etc. he
feels at once his own Misery, and sensibly perceives Lazarus his Happiness.
Thence Note, That the Souls of wicked Men, whilst their Bodies lie in the
Grave, are in a State of greatest Misery, which is aggravated, by the sense
they have at the same time of the Saints Happiness.

24 And he cried and said, Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus
that he may dip the tip of his Finger in Water and cool my Tongue, for I am
tormented in this flame.

Observe here, (1.) The place where the rich Man Suffers, it is in Hell; the
Souls of wicked Men, when they leave their Bodies, do certainly go into a place
of Torment, which is not only beyond Expression, but our Apprehension also; Eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the Heart of Man, to
conceive those dreadful things which God has prepared for them that hate him.
Observe (2.) The sin for which he Suffers, it is the Sin of unmercifulness.
Thence Learn, That uncharitableness and unmercifulness to the Poor, is a very
great sin, and such a sin as alone, and without any other Guilt, is sufficient
to Ruin a Man for ever; there is found in this sin, great Impiety toward God,
and great Inhumanity toward our own Nature. Obs. (3.) The Nature and Quality
of his Sufferings, they are exquisitely painful, and void of the least degrees
of Comfort; not a drop of Water is granted to cool an inflamed Tongue. Learn
thence, That the least Refreshments are impatiently desired by damned Souls in
Hell, but righteously denied and withheld from them; a drop of Water was
desired, but not granted.

25 But Abraham said, Son, Remember, that thou in thy Life time receivedst thy
good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things, but now he is comforted, and
thou art tormented.

Observe (1.) The Title given to the rich Man by Father Abraham, Son; He does
not revile him, though a very bad Man; if we revile the Good we are unjust, they
deserve it not; if we revile the Bad, we are unwise, we shall get nothing by
it; a wise Man knows not what it is to give bad Language. Observe (2.) The
Admonition given, Remember, that thou in thy Lifetime receivedst thy good
things; thy good things in which thou placedst all thy Happiness; thy good
things, which thou lookedst upon thy self as the Proprietor, and not as the
Dispenser of; Now remember what thou had, and what thou abusedst. Learn
hence, That the outward Blessings which are afforded to wicked Men on Earth,
will be sadly remembered in Hell; Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime
receivedst thy good things. (2.) That no Man ought to measure his Happiness
hereafter by his Temporal Felicity here; we may receive our good things here,
and yet be tormented hereafter. (3.) That no Man ought to be excessively
troubled if he meets with Hardship here, because those for whom God designs
good things hereafter, may have their evil things here; Son, Thou had thy
good things, and also Lazarus evil things.

26 And besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, so
that they which would pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they pass to
us, that would come from thence.

The meaning is, That there neither is, nor can be any Commerce or intercourse
betwixt glorified Saints and damned Sinners; but the State of Souls at Death is
unalterably fixed and stated. Learn, that the miserable Condition of damned
Souls in the next World, and the blessed Condition of glorified Souls, is
unchangeably and unalterably such; the power of God is irresistible, and the
will of God is invariable, the Oath of God is immutable; I have sworn that they
shall never enter into my rest.

27 Then said he, I pray thee therefore Father, that thou would send him to
my Fathers house. 28 For I have five Brethren, that he may testify unto them,
lest they also come to this place of torment.

Here the rich Man is represented as retaining even in Hell some tenderness for
his Relations on Earth; yet others think, that the kindness intended, was
rather to himself than to his Relations; fearing that their sinning by his
Example should be an aggravation of his own Torments. Note thence, That the
presence of sinful Relations and companions in Hell, may be supposed to make a
considerable Addition to the miseries of the Damned; the sight of those whom
they have sinned with, is a fresh revival of their own Guilt; all the
Circumstances of their past and profligate Lives, are upon this occasion
continually in their remembrance.

29 Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear
them.

That is, they have the inspired Writings of Moses and the Prophets, which
sufficiently declare the Mind and Will of God to Mankind, and therefore it is
unreasonable to expect any farther Revelation. Learn thence, That a standing
Revelation of God, is Evidence sufficient for Divine things; it is a more
certain way of Conveyance, and more secure from Imposture: Secondly, That there
is sufficient Evidence that Moses and the Prophets, or the Writings of the Holy
Scriptures are of Divine Authority, and therefore to be read and heard, to be
believed and assented to; They have Moses, etc.

30 And he said, nay, father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead,
they would repent.

As if he had said, they have always had Moses and the Prophets in their hands,
but yet their Hearts remain impenitent; but if a special Messenger be sent to
them from the Dead, this will not fail to awaken them, and bring them to
Repentance. Learn hence, how prone we are to dislike God's Method and Means,
which he has appointed for Reclaiming us from our Sins, and imagine some Methods
of our own would be more Successful. The Scriptures read, the Word Preached,
the Sacraments Administered; these are the ordinary Means which the Wisdom of
God has appointed for Men's Conviction; and if we think a Messenger from the
Dead would be a more conducible Means, the next Verse will confute us, and
thoroughly satisfy us, that whom the Scriptures convince not, probably nothing
will; for thus it follows:

31 If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded,
though one arose from the dead.

A very awakening Text this is, which speaks dreadfully to Persons sitting all
their days under the Ministry of the Gospel, and yet find not their
Understandings enlightened, their judgments convinced, their Wills subdued, and
their Lives Reformed by it. Were it possible for such Persons to see one come
from the Dead, yea from the Damned, with the flames of Hell about his Ears,
wringing his Hands and gnashing his Teeth, bewailing his Misery, and beseeching
them to take warning by his Example, and in time to acquaint themselves with
God, and be at Peace; all this would have no farther effect upon them, than to
move their Passion a little for the present, whilst the dreadful found is in
their Ears; the Ordinances of God, and not his Providence, are the instituted
and appointed means for Men's Conversion and Salvation. Note then, (1.) That no
Visions or Apparitions, no new revelations concerning Eternal Rewards and
Punishments, are to be expected from the other World, in order to Men's
Conversion and Salvation. Note (2.) That the Word of God dispensed to us, and
the ordinary Means of Grace enjoyed by us, are a more conducible and effectual
means to persuade Men to Repentance, than if one should arise from the Dead and
Preach unto them. A Messenger from the Dead cannot bring with him either a more
necessary Doctrine, or a more certain and infallible Doctrine, nor bring with
him better Arguments for our Conviction, then what the Scriptures do propound
to our Consideration; nor can we expect a greater Cooperation of the Holy
Spirit, or a greater Concurrence of Divine Power to render a Message from the
Dead more effectual, then does ordinarily attend the Ministry of the Word.
Hence forward then, let us not wonder, if when a Drunkard drops down dead upon
the spot, the Companions say to one another, drink on: If Sinners daily tumble
one another into the Grave, without considering the Operation of God's Hand;
this to those that consider this Text, will not seem strange; For if they hear
not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be converted, though hundreds of
Sinners before their Eyes drop down dead; nay, if they hear not Moses and the
Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one arose from the Dead.

CHAP. XVII.
1 THen said he unto the Disciples, it is impossible but that offenses will
come, but woe unto him through whom they come. 2 It were better for him that a
Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and he cast into the Sea, then that he
should offend one of these little ones.

Two things are here Observable, (1.) The Necessity of Scandalous Offenses, It
must needs be that offenses come, if we consider Men's Corruption, Satan's
Malice, God's Permission and just Judgment. Observe (2.) The Misery and
Mischief which comes by these Scandals; Woe unto the World because of Offenses;
Woe to such as give the Scandal, this is vae indignantis, the Woe of one
denouncing; and woe to such as stumble at offenses given, this is vae dolentis,
the Woe of one Lamenting. From the whole Note (1.) That Scandals or Offensive
Actions in the Church of Christ, will certainly happen, and frequently fall out
amongst those that profess Religion and the Name of Christ; It is impossible
but that Offenses will come. Secondly, That Scandalous and offensive Actions
from such as profess Religion, and the Name of Christ, are Baneful and Fatal
Stumbling Blocks to wicked and worldly Men. Thirdly, That the Offense which
wicked Men take at the Falls of the Professors of Religion, to the hardening of
themselves in their wicked and sinful Practices, is matter of just and great
Lamentation; Woe unto the World because of Offenses, Matt. 18.7.

3 Take heed to your selves, if thy Brother trespass against thee, rebuke him,
and if he repent forgive him. 4 And if he trespass against thee Seven times in
a day, and seven times in a day, and turn again to thee, saying, I repent, thou
shall forgive him.

The Doctrine of Forgiving an offending Brother, is pressed upon us with many
forceable Arguments in the New Testament, which speak it to be a Duty of
indispensable Necessity. This place is to be understood of private Offenses,
and personal Wrongs and Injuries done by one Man to another, which we must
first reprove, and then remit; and although it be said, If he repent, forgive
him; that is not to be understood, as if we needed not pardon our Brother if he
neglected to repent and ask Forgiveness; but whether he acknowledges his
offense or no to us, our Hearts must stand ready to forgive the Wrong done to
us, and to pray for Forgiveness on his behalf, at the hands of God; laying
aside all thoughts and desire of Revenge in our own Cause; and standing ready
to do any Office of Love and Service for our offending Brother. Learn hence
(1.) That to fall often into the same Offense against our Brother, is a great
aggravation of our Offense; If thy Brother trespass against thee seven times in
a day; that is, very often. (2.) That as the Multiplication of Offenses is a
great aggravation of Offenses, so the Multiplying of Forgiveness, is a great
Demonstration of a God-like Temper in us; he that Multiplies sin, does like
Satan, sin abundantly; and he that multiplies Pardon, does like God, pardon
abundantly.

5 And the Apostles said unto the Lord, increase our Faith.

Observe here, (1.) The Supplicants, the Apostles; (2.) the Person Supplicated,
the Lord; (3.) The Supplication it self, increase our Faith; (4.) The occasion
of this Supplication, our Savior urging the Duty of forgiving Injuries. Learn
(1.) That all Graces in general, so the Grace of Faith in particular, is weak
and imperfect in the best of Saints. (2.) That the most eminent Saints,
(Apostles not excepted) are very sensible of the imperfection of their Faith,
and very importunate with God, daily for the increase of it, Lord, increase our
Faith. (3.) That Faith strengthened enables the Soul to the most difficult
Duties of Obedience, and particularly helps to the practice of that hard Duty
of Forgiving Injuries: When our Savior had preached the Doctrine and Duty of
Forgiveness, the Apostles instantly pray, Lord, increase our Faith.

6 And the Lord said, If ye had Faith as a Grain of Mustard Seed, ye might say
to this Sycamine-Tree, Be thou plucked up by the Root, and be thou planted in
the Sea, and it should obey you.

Here our Savior tells his Disciples, that if they have the smallest degrees
of true Faith, lively, operative Faith, it will enable them to perform this
difficult Duty of Forgiving Injuries, and all other Duties, with as much
facility and ease, as a miraculous Faith would enable them to remove Mountains,
and transplant Trees. Learn, That there is nothing which may tend to the Glory
of God, or to our own Good and Comfort, but may be obtained of God by a firm
exercise of Faith in him; All things are possible to him that believes.

7 But which of you having a Servant ploughing, or feeding Cattle, will say
unto him, by and by, when he is come from the field, Go, and sit down to meat?
8 And will not rather say unto him? make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird
thy self, and serve me, till I have eaten and drunken; and afterward thou shall
eat and drink. 9 Does he thank that Servant, because he did the things that
were commanded him? I trow not. 10 So likewise ye, when ye shall have done all
those things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable Servants, we
have done that which was our Duty to do.

The Design and Scope of this Parable is to show, that Almighty God neither is
nor can be a Debtor to any of his Creatures, for the best Services which they
are able to perform unto him; and that they are so far from meriting a Reward
of Justice, that they do not deserve a return of thanks; three Arguments our
Savior makes use of, to evidence and prove this; (1.) In respect of God, who
is our absolute Lord and Master; and the Argument lies thus, if Earthly Masters
do not owe so much as thanks to their Servants for doing that which is
commanded them, how much less can God owe the Reward of Eternal Life to his
Servants, when they are never able to do all that is commanded them, in a
perfect and sinless manner? (2.) In respect of our selves, who are his
Bond-servants, his Ransomed Slaves, and consequently we are not our own Men,
but his who has redeemed us; and accordingly do owe him all that Service, yea
more then all that we are able to perform unto him; and therefore whatever
Reward is either promised or given, it is wholly to be ascribed to the Master's
Bounty, and not to the Servants Merit. (3.) To Merit any thing by our good
Works is impossible, in regard of the Works themselves, because all that we can
do, although we did do all that is Commanded us, is but our Duty. The Argument
runs thus; to bounden Duty belongs no Reward of Justice; but all the Service we
do perform, yea more than we can perform to God, is Bounden Duty, therefore
there is due unto us no reward of Justice, but of free Mercy. From the whole
Note (1.) That we are wholly the Lord's, both by a right of Creation, and
Redemption also. (2.) That as his we are, so him we ought to serve, by doing
all those things which he has Commanded us. (3.) That when we have done all,
we are to look for our Reward, not of Debt, but of Grace. (4.) That were ^ur
Service and Obedience absolutely Perfect, yet it could not merit any thing at
the hand of Justice; When ye have done all, say, etc.

11 And it came to pass as he went to Jerusalem, that he passed through the
midst of Sama^ia and Galilee. 12 And as he entered into a certain Village,
there met him ten men that were Lepers, which stood afar off. 13 And they
lifted up their voice and said, Jesus, Master, have mercy on us.

Observe here (1.) Though the Samaritans were bitter Enemies to the Jews, and had
been guilty of great incivility toward our Savior, yet our Savior in his
Journey to Jerusalem balks them not, but bestows the favor of a Miracle upon
them. Civil Courtesy and Respect, may and ought to be paid to those that are
the professed Enemies of us, and our Holy Religion. Observe (2.) Though the Leper
by the Law of God was to be separated from all other Society, (God thereby
signifying to his People, that the Society of those that are spiritually
Contagious, ought to be avoided) yet the Law of God did not restrain them from
Conversing with one another; accordingly these Ten Lepers get together, and are
Company for themselves. Fellowship is that we all naturally affect, though even
in Leprosy; Lepers will flock together, Where shall we find one Spiritual Leper
alone? Drunkards, profane Persons, will be sure to Consort with one another:
why should not God's Children delight in an Holy Communion, when the Wicked
join hand in hand? Observe (3.) Though Jews and Samaritans could not abide one
another, yet here in Leprosy they Accord; here was one Samaritan Leper with the
^ewish. Common Sufferings had made them Friends, whom Religion had disjoined:
Oh what Virtue is there in Afflict^^ to unite the most alienated and estranged
Hearts. Obser^^ (4.) These Lepers apply themselves to Christ the great
Physician, they cry unto him for Mercy, with respect to their Afflictions; they
jointly cry, they all lifted up their voice with fervent importunity, Teaching
us our Duty, to join our Spiritual Forces together, and set upon God by Troops:
Oh Holy and Happy Violence that is thus offered to Heaven; how can we want
Blessings when so many Cords draw them down upon our Heads?

14 And when Jesus saw them, he said unto them, Go, show your selves unto the
Priests, and it came to pass, that as they went, they were cleansed.

Observe here (1.) The preventing Grace and Mercy of Christ, their Disease is
Cured e're it can be complained of; Go, show your selves to the Priests, says
Christ, and in their going they were cleansed; they were healed before they
could come at the Priests, that as the Power that healed them was wholly
Christ's, so might the Praise be also. Observe (2.) A twofold reason why Christ
commanded them to go to the Priests, (1.) In Compliance with the Ceremonial
Law, which required the Leper to be brought to them, to judge whether healed or
not; and if so, to receive the Offering prescribed, in Token of Thankfulness.
(2.) For the Trial of their Obedience; had they stood upon Terms with Christ,
and said, alas, to what purpose is it to show our selves to the Priests? what
good can their Eyes do us? we should be glad to see our selves Cured; but why
should we go to them to see our selves loathed? Had they thus expostulated,
they had not been healed; what Command soever we receive from Christ, we must
rather consider the Authority of the Commander, than the weight of the thing
Commanded; for God delights to try our Obedience by small Precepts; happy for
these Lepers, that in obedience to Christ went to the Priests, for as they
went, they were healed.

15 And one of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, and with a
loud voice glorified God. 16 And fell down on his face at his feet giving him
thanks, and he was a Samaritane.

Observe here (1.) All were Healed, but one was Thankful; the Cure is wrought
upon the Bodies of all, Thankfulness is found but in the Heart of one; the Will
makes the difference in Men, but he makes the difference in Wills, who at first
made the Will. All these Lepers were Cured, all saw themselves Cured, their
sense was alike, their Hearts were not alike. Observe (2.) The Person that made
this return of Thankfulness to Christ, he was a Samaritan; that is, none of the
Jewish Nation, but one that was a Stranger to the Common Wealth of Israel;
neither Place nor Parentage can block up the way, or stop the Current of God's
free Mercy, which reaches the unworthy, and the ill-deserving. Observe (3.) How
singly he returns his Thanks, he gets away from his Fellows to make his
Acknowledgments; there are Cases wherein Singularity is not only Lawful, but
Laudable; instead of Subjecting our selves to others Examples, it is sometimes
our Duty to resolve to set an Example to others; for it is much better to go
the right way alone, then to err with Company. Observe (4.) How speedily he
returns his Thanks; no sooner does he see his Cure, but he hasts to acknowledge
it; a noble Pattern of Thankfulness; What speed of Retribution is here? late
Payments of our Thankfulness Savours of Ingratitude; it were happy for us
Christians, did we learn our Duty of this Samaritan.

17 And ^^^s answering said, Were there not Ten ^le^n^^d? but where are the
Nine? 18 There (...) not found that returned to give Glory to God, save this
Stranger. 19 And he said unto him, Arise, go thy way, thy Faith has made thee
whole.

In the face of these ten Lepers we may, as in a Glass, behold the Face and
Complexion of all Mankind: How few are there, oh Lord! scarce more than One in
Ten, who after signal Mercies, return suitable Thanks. Men howl to God upon
their Beds, but run away from God as soon as they are raised up by him. Observe
farther, what an exact account Christ keeps of his own dispensed Favors; Were
there not not ten cleansed? He forgets our Sins, but Records his own Mercies;
It is one of his glorious Titles, a God Forgiving and Forgetting Iniquity, but
his Mercies are over all his Works, and deserve everlasting Remembrance. God
keeps a Register of his Mercies toward us, oh shall not we record the favors
received from him? at once to declare his Bounty toward us, and our
Thankfulness toward him? Observe Lastly, The thankful Leper was a Samaritane,
but the Nine that were unthankful were Israelites. Learn thence, That the more
we are bound to God, the more shameful is our ingratitude toward him; where
God may justly expect the greatest returns of Praise and Service, he sometimes
receives least. God has more Rent, and better paid him from a smoaky Cottage,
then he has from some stately Palaces.

20 And when he was demanded of the Pharisees, when the kingdom of God should
come? he answered them and said, the kingdom of God comes not with
Observation. 21 Neither shall they say, lo here, or lo there, for behold the
kingdom of God is within you.

The Generality of the Jews, and particularly the Pharisees, expected that the
promised Messiah should be a Temporal Prince, and deliver them from the Roman
Yoke, under which they groaned. Accordingly the Pharisees here demanded of our
Savior, when the Kingdom of God, of which he had so often spoken, should-come?
Christ answers them, That his kingdom comes not with observation, that is
without Pomp and Splendor, which Men may observe and gaze upon; but he tells
them, the Kingdom of God was now among them, by the Ministry of John Baptist
and Himself; and was already set up in the Hearts of his People, by the secret
Operations of his Holy Spirit. Learn here, That the false Notion which the Jews
had of the Messiah and his Kingdom, That he himself was to be a Temporal
Prince, and his Kingdom a secular Kingdom, to be set up with a great deal of
Noise, Pomp and Splendor, did hinder the generality of them from believing in
him. Secondly, That the Kingdom which Christ designed to set up in the World,
was altogether Spiritual, not obvious to Humane Senses, but managed in the
Hearts of his People by the Scepter of his Spirit; My Kingdom comes not with
observation, but is within you.

22 And he said unto the Disciples, the days will come when ye shall desire to
see one of the days of the son of man, and ye shall not see it. 23 And they
shall say to you, see here, or see there, go not after them, nor follow them.
24 For as the Lightning that lights out of the one part under Heaven, shines
unto the other part under Heaven, so shall also the Son of man be in his day.
25 But first must he suffer many things, and be rejected of this Generation.

In the remaining part of this Chapter, our Savior acquaints his Disciples
with what days of Tribulation and distress were coming on the Jewish Nation in
general, and on Jerusalem in particular, Days of Suffering, (as if our Savior
had said) are not far off when you will wish for my Bodily presence again among
you, to support and comfort you; and when many Seducers will rise up,
pretendin^ to be Deliverers, but go not you after them; for after this
Generation have rejected and crucified me, my Coming (says Christ) to execute
Vengeance on my Enemies and Murderers at Jerusalem, by the Roman Soldiers,
will be sudden, and like the Lightning that shines in an instant, from one part
of the Heavens to the other. From this Coming of Christ to judge Jerusalem,
which was an Emblem of the final Judgment, we may gather this Instruction, that
the Coming and Appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the judging of wicked
and impenitent Sinners, it will be a very certain, sudden, and unexpected
Appearance.

26 And as it was in the days of Noe, so shall it be also in the days of the
Son of Man. 27 They did eat, they drank, they married Wives, they were given in
Marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the Ark, and the flood came and
destroyed them all. 28 Likewise also as it was in the days of Lot; they did
eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they builded. 29 But the
same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it rained Fire and Brimstone from Heaven,
and destroyed them all. 30 Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of Man
is revealed.

In these Verses our Savior declares that Jerusalem's Destruction, and the
World's final Desolation at the great Day, would be like the Destruction of the
old World in the Days of Noah, and like the Destruction of Sodom in the Days of
Lot, and that both in regard of unexpectedness, and in regard of Sensuality
and Security; as they before the Flood were eating and drinking, Marrying and
giving in Marriage; that is, wholly given up to Sensuality and Debauchery; and
did not know, that is, did not consider the Flood's coming, till it swept them
away; thus was it before the Destruction of Jerusalem, and thus will it be
before the end of the World. Hence we Learn, That as the old World perished by
Infidelity, Security, and Sensuality, so will the same Sins be prevalling
before the Destruction of this present World, As it was in the days of Noah, so
shall it be in the days of the Son of Man.

31 In that day, he which shall be in the house top, and his staff in the
house, let him not come down to take it away; and he that is in the field, let
him likewise not turn back. 32 Remember Lots wife.

Here our Savior advises them, that when they shall see the Judgments of God
breaking out upon Jerusalem, that they make all possible speed to get out of
it, as Lot and his Family did out of Sodom; and to take heed of imitating
Lott's Wife, who looking back became a pillar of Salt, Genesis 19. Where Observe
(1.) Her Offense, she looked back. (2.) The punishment of her Offense, She
became a pillar of Salt; her Offense in looking behind her was manifest
Disobedience to the Divine Command, which said, Look not behind thee; and
proceeded either from Carelessness, or from Covetousness, or from Curiosity, or
from Compassion to those she left behind her, and was undoubtedly the effect of
great Infidelity, she not believing the Truth of what the Angel had declared as
touching the Certainty and Suddenness of Sodom's Destruction. The Punishment of
her Offense was Exemplary, She became a pillar of Salt; that is, a perpetual
Monument of Divine Severity for her Infidelity and Disobedience. Where Note,
(1.) The suddenness of her Punishment; the Justice of God Surprises her in the
very Act of Sin, with a present Revenge. (2.) The seeming disproportion betwixt
the Punishment and the Offense; her Offense was a forbidden Look. From whence
Carnal Reason might plead, was it not sufficient for her to loose her Eyes, but
must she loose her Life? but the Easiness and Reasonableness of the Command
aggravated her Disobedience; and though her Punishment may seem severe, it was
not unjust. Now says our Savior, Remember Lotts Wife; that is, let her Example
caution all of you against Unbelief, Disobedience, Worldly Mindedness, Contempt
of God's Threatenings, and Lingering after the Forbidden Society of lewd and
wicked Persons.

33 Whosoever shall seek to save his Life shall lose it, and whosoever shall
lose his Life, shall preserve it. 34 I tell you in that night, there shall be
two men in one bed, the one shall be taken, and the other left. 35 Two Women
shall be grinding together, the one shall be taken and the other left. 36 Two
men shall be in the field, the one shall be taken, and the other left.

In this Hour, when Judgment is come upon Jerusalem, Christ declares, that
whosoever shall take any unchristian Course to preserve his Life, by denying
him and his Holy Religion, he shall loose Eternal Life; but he that for
Christ's sake shall loose his natural Life, instead of a Mortal, shall enjoy an
immortal Life in Bliss and Glory. Here we Learn, (1.) That the Love of Temporal
Life is a great Temptation to tempt Men to deny Christ and his Holy Religion,
in a day of Trial. (2.) That the surest way to attain Eternal Life, is
cheerfully to lay down our Temporal Life, when the Glory of Christ, and the
Honor of Religion requires it of us. Christ farther adds, that in this
Terrible Night of Jerusalem's Calamity, when Destruction comes upon her, the
Providence of God will remarkably distinguish between one Person and another:
True Believers, and constant Professors shall be delivered, and none else; such
shall escape the Danger, others shall fall by it.

37 And they answered and said unto him, Where Lord? and he said unto them,
Wheresoever the Body is, thither will the Eagles be gathered together.

The Disciples hearing our Saviout speak of such Tremendous Calamities, inquire
where these Judgments should fall; he answers them figuratively, and by a
Proverbial Speech, That where the Carcass is, there will the Eagles be gathered
together: signifying that Jerusalem, and the obdurate Nation of the Jews, was
the Carcass which the Roman Armies, whose Ensign was the Eagle, would quickly
find out and feed upon; and that Judea in general, and Jerusalem in particular,
would be the Theater and Stage of those Tragical Calamities. Learn thence, That
the appointed Messengers of God's Wrath, and the instruments of his Vengeance,
will suddenly gather together, certainly find out, and severely punish an
impenitent People devoted to Destruction, Where the Carcass is, (that is, the
Body of the Jewish Nation) there will the Eagles (that is, the Roman Soldiers)
be gathered together.

CHAP. XVIII.
1 AND he spoke a Parable unto them, to this end, that men ought always to
pray, and not to faint. 2 Saying, There was in a City a Judge, which feared not
God, neither regarded man. 3 And there was a widow in that City, and she came
unto him, saying, Avenge me of mine Adversary. 4 And he would not for a while:
But afterward he said within himself, Tho I fear not God, nor regard man. 5 Yet
because this widow troubles me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual
coming she weary me. 6 And the Lord said, Hear what the unjust Judge says. 7
And shall not God avenge his own Elect, which cry day and night unto him, though
he bear long with them? 8 I tell you, he will avenge them speedily.

There is no Duty in Christianity, the practice of which our Savior presses
upon us more frequently than this Duty of Prayer. To encourage his Disciples
(and us in them) to fervency, importunity, and perseverance in this Duty, he
propounds here the Parable of an unjust Judge, who was overcome by an
importunate Widow, to do her Justice contrary to his own Inclinations; from
whence our Savior argues, that if Importunity will prevail with a sinful Man,
to grant Petitions offered to him; how much more prevalent will such
Importunity be with the infinitely good God, to relieve the Necessities of such
as devoutly implore his help? And the force of the Argument lies thus; the
Judge in the Parable, was an inferior and subordinate Judge, was an
unrighteous and unjust Judge, was a merciless and hard hearted Judge, and yet
upon her importunity, he avenged her; how much more will the Sovereign and
Supreme Judge, the Holy and Righteous Judge, the Merciful and Compassionate
Judge of all the Earth, hear and help his Praying People, and be the just
Avenger of those that fear him? From the whole Note (1.) That Prayer, or
Liberty of making our Requests known to God is an inestimable Favor and
Privilege; he that considers the Nature of GOD, and the Nature of Man, cannot
question it; God is a Being of infinite Fullness and Perfection; a
Self-sufficient, and an All-sufficient Good; and man an indigent, helpless
dependent Creature; full of Wants, and obnoxious to Dangers. (2.) That Prayer
is not only an inestimable Privilege, but an indispensable Duty. So
sollicitous is God for our Welfare and Happiness, that he makes our Privilege
our Duty, by the Authority of his Command; so that we are at once ungrateful to
God, and unjust to our selves, in the most exalted Degree, if we do not pray
unto him, and spread our Wants before him. Observe (3.) That this Duty of
Prayer is not an Occasional, but a constant Duty; Men ought always to pray,
that is, (1.) at all seasonable times and fit opportunities; we are said to do
a thing continually, when we do it Seasonably; now the Seasons for Prayer are
Morning and Evening. As the Morning and Evening Sacrifice was constant among
the Jews, and the Fire was always upon the Altar and never went out; so he that
prays Morning and Evening, may be said to be instant in prayer, and to pray
without ceasing. (2.) Always to pray, is an endeavor always to keep the Heart
in a praying Frame, and to be very frequent in offering up pious Ejaculations,
and short mental Prayers to God, as occasion shall offer; when in the Field, in
the Shop, in the Bed, when Sleep departs, in the Journey when alone, this may
be done advantagiously without loss of Time, and Acceptably without danger of
Hypocrisy, which too often mingles it self with our more set Prayers. Observe
(4.) We must not only pray constantly, but pray fervently, yea importunately,
if we would pray successfully; we must cry to God, as the Widow to the Judge;
vehemence and importunity, are both helps and ornaments to Prayer, they both
Fortify and Beautify our Prayers, they pierce the Heavens, and offer an Holy
Violence to God: Oration vincit invincibilem and ligat Omnipotentem haec Deo
Grata est, says Tertullian, God delights in such Importunity.

8 Nevertheless when the Son of Man comes, shall he find Faith on the Earth?

If by the Son of Man's Coming, we understand Christ's Coming in Judgment
against Jerusalem, then the sense is this; That when he comes to take Vengeance
on the obstinate Jews, and to destroy their City, he shall find but little
Faith, and patient waiting for help from God in the Land of Judea, and
consequently little Importuning him with incessant Cries and Supplications, as
this poor widow did the unjust Judge. Secondly, if by the Son of Man's Coming,
we understand Christ's Coming to Judge the World at the Last Day, then the
sense is, when he Comes he will find but few Faithful ones, comparatively
speaking; he will find but few sincere and serious Christians, in whom the
genuine effects and fruits of Faith are found. Learn, That when Christ shall
come to Judgment, he will find comparatively very few whose Hearts have not
fainted, and very many, who through the power that Temptation has upon the
Frailty of humane Nature, are fallen away; When the Son of Man comes, will he
find Faith on the Earth? verily but little Faith, and few Faithful ones.

9 And he spoke this Parable unto certain which trusted in themselves, that
they were Righteous, and despised others. 10 Two men went up into the Temple to
pray, the one a Pharisee, the other a Publican. 11 The Pharisee stood and
prayed thus with himself, God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are,
extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican. 12 I fast twice in
the week, I give Alms of all that I possess. 13 And the Publican standing afar
off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto Heaven, but smote upon his
Breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. 14 I tell you, this man went
down to his house justified, rather then the other; for every one that exalts
himself shall be abased, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

The Design and Scope of our Savior in this Parable is to reprove and condemn
the Pharisees, and in them all other Self-Justiciaries, who having an high
Opinion of, and trusting in their own Righteousness, despised others as vile
Persons, whose Religion is not accompanied with Ostentation, and who pretend
not to such extraordinary degrees of Sanctity as themselves. And the Parable
further shows, That an humble, Self-Condemned Sinner, who though he has been
wicked, is now sensible of it, and with shame and sorrow confesses it before
God, shall be sooner pardoned, and find Favor with God, than he that vaunts of
his Virtue, and rests in the outward Duties of Religion; his pride and
exaltation of himself shall abase him, while the others Humility shall exalt
him. This is the general Scope of the Parable; the particular Observations from
it are these, (1.) The Pharisee and the Publican both Pray, they both pray
together, they both pray together in the place of Prayer, the Holy Temple, and
they both Pray, Apud se, with and within themselves; where the Duty and Action
is the same, there may be vast difference in the purpose and intention; does an
humble Saint pray? so may an haughty Hypocrite; Two men went up into the Temple
to pray, the one a Pharisee, the other a Publican. Observe (2.) The Pharisees
Prayer, He stood and prayed with himself, God I thank, etc. Where Note, his
Gesture, He stood and prayed; standing and kneeling are Praying Gestures, but
sitting is a rude Indecency, except in Cases of Necessity; In Prayer, says
pious Bishop Hall, I will either stand as a Servant to my Master, or Kneel as a
Subject to my Prince. Note farther, It is said, he prayed, but here is not one
Petition, but Thanksgiving; God I thank thee, etc. Whence Learn, That
Thanksgiving is a part of Prayer; Hannah's Prayer, as it is called 1 Samuel 2. is
a Canticle or Song of Praise; we then Pray best when we praise God most. Again,
See the Pharisees Pride in this his Prayer; This proud Beggar shows not his
Wounds but his worth, not his Rags but his Robes, not his Misery, but his
Bravery; yea he brings God Almighty in a Reckoning of his Services; I fast
twice a Week, I give Alms of all that I possess, and thanks God more that
others were bad, than that himself was good; had the Pharisee with an humble
Mind thanked God for his restraining Grace, that though he were not so good as he
should be, that yet he was not so vile and bad as some others, this had been no
fault, but when he comes before God with a proud and scornful Mind, inwardly
pleased, that others were so bad, and so much worse than himself; giving Thanks
rather for others Badness, than his own Goodness; This is a wickedness incident
to none but Divellish Dispositions. Learn hence, That whatever shows of
Goodness an Hypocrite may make, yet he is inwardly glad, and takes a secret
Delight in others Badness; God I thank thee that I am not as this Publican;
which was a kind of Triumph, and proud insultation over the poor Publican; he
would seem to thank God that he was not so bad as the Publican, when indeed he
was glad that the Publican was not so good as himself. Observe (3.) The
Publicans Behavior, in an humble sight and sense of his own sinfulness and
unworthiness. He stood afar off, probably in the Court of the Gentiles, where
all sorts of Sinners might come; acknowledging thereby, that he was unworthy to
come near the Holy Majesty of God; not presuming to lift up his eyes to Heaven,
That place of perfect Holiness and Purity; but like a true self-condemned
Penitent, smote upon his Breast, and in bitter Remorse of Soul said, God be
merciful to me a sinner. Hence Learn, That a truly humble temper of mind, well
becomes us in all our Approaches and Addresses to God, and is more acceptable
to him than all pompous Performances whatsoever. For Observe Lastly; The
Publican being thus condemned of himself departs Justified by God; He went down
to his house justified, rather than the Pharisee; the Pharisee justified
himself, the Publican was justified by God. Thence Learn, That a Penitent
Sinner, who is indeed poor in Spirit, is far more esteemed of God, than he that
makes long Prayers, fasts often, Tithes all his Substance, and prides himself
in all this. Without Humility, all is vain Glory and Hypocrisy; and the
Seemingly most Sanctified Person that has it not, is like a painted Sepulcher,
Beautiful without, but full of rottenness within.

15 And they brought unto him Infants, that he would touch them; but when his
Disciples saw it, they rebuked them. 16 But Jesus called them unto him and
said, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such
is the kingdom of God. 17 Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall not receive
the Kingdom of God as a little Child, shall in no wise enter therein.

Observe here (1.) A solemn Action performed; Children, Infants, sucking
Children, as the word signifies, are brought to Christ that he might bless
them, the Parents looking up-Christ as a Prophet, as a great and extraordinary
Prophet, persuaded themselves, that by his Prayers, and laying his Hands on
their Children, they should be preserved from Bodily Diseases, and from Satan's
Power, and that he would confer upon them all needful Blessings. Learn (1.)
That Infants are capable of Benefit by Jesus Chrst. (2.) That it is the best
Office that Parents can perform unto their Children, to bring them unto Christ,
that they may be made partakers of that Benefit. (3.) That if Infants are
capable of Benefit by Christ, if capable of his Blessing on Earth, and Presence
in Heaven; if they be Subjects of his Kingdom of Grace, and Heirs of his
Kingdom of Glory, then may they be Baptized; for they that are within the
Covenant, ( Acts 2.39.) have a Right to the Privileges of the Covenant, and to
Baptism the Seal of the Covenant: And if Christ denies not Infants the Kingdom
of Heaven, which is the greater, What Reason have his Ministers to deny them
the Benefit of Baptism, which is the less. Learn (4.) That Christ will have all
his Disciples and Followers to resemble little Children in such Properties
wherein they may be patterns to them, viz. in Humility and Innocence, in
freedom from Malice and Revenge, in Docibility and Teachableness, in Cleaving
to, and Depending upon their Parents, and in Contentedness with their
Condition; Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little Child,
shall in no wise enter therein.

18. And a certain Ruler asked him, saying, Good Master, What shall I do to
inherit Eternal Life?

We have here a considerable Person, a Ruler, coming to Christ, with an
important question in his Mouth, What must I do to inherit eternal Life? Where
Note (1.) He believes the certainty of future State. (2.) He professes a desire
of an Eternal Happiness in that State. (3.) He declares his readiness and
willingness to do some good thing in order to the obtaining of that Happiness.
Hence Learn, (1.) That the Light of Nature, or Natural Religion, teaches Men
that good Works are necessary to Salvation; or that some good thing must be
done by them, who at Death expect Eternal Life; it is not Talking well, and
Professing well, but Living well, that Entitles us to Heaven, and Eternal Life.

19 And Jesus said unto him, Why call thou me Good? None is good, save one,
that is God.

Our Savior here reproves this Person for calling him Good, when he did not
own to be God; saying, There is none good, that is, Essentially and Originally
Good, absolutely and immutably Good, but God only; nor any derivatively Good,
but he that receives his Goodness from God also.

20 Thou know the Commandments, Do not commit Adultery, Do not Kill, Do not
Steal, Do not bear false Witness, Honor thy Father and thy Mother.

Note here, that the Duties Directed to by our Savior, are the Duties of the
Second Table, nothing being a better Evidence of our unfeigned Love to God,
than a sincere Performance of our Duty to our Neighbor; Love to Man is a Fruit
and Testimony of our Love to God. Learn thence, That such as are defective in
the Duties of the Second Table, Charity and Justice toward Man, do make but a
Counterfeit show of Religion, though they pretend to the highest Degrees of Love
to God.

21 And he said, all these things have I kept from my Youth up.

This Assertion might be very true according to the Pharisees sense and
interpretation of the Law, which Condemned only the gross outward Act, not the
inward Lusts and Motions of the Heart. An external Obedience to the Letter of
the Law this Man might possibly have performed; this made him think well of
himself, and conclude the goodness of his own Condition. Learn hence, How prone
Men are to think the best of themselves, and to have too high an Opinion of
their own Goodness and Righteousness before God; this is very natural, but
dangerous and fatal.

22 Now when Jesus heard these things, he said unto him, Yet lackest thou one
thing, Sell all that thou have, and distribute unto the Poor, and thou shall
have Treasure in Heaven, and come and follow me.

Here Observe (1.) Our Lord's Admonition, Yet lackest thou one thing, which was
true Self-denial, in renouncing the Sin of Covetousness, and the inordinate
Love of Worldly Wealth: We ought in the midst of our abundance, to maintain a
readiness of Disposition, to part with all for God's sake, that is dear unto us
in this World. Observe (2.) Our Lord's Injunction, Sell all that thou have, and
give to the poor. This was not a Common, but a special Precept, given
particularly to this Rich Man for Trial, like that given to Abraham, Genesis 22.
and to convince him of his corrupt Confidence in Riches; yet is the Precept
thus far of general use to us all, to teach us so to contemn Worldly
Possessions, as to be willing to part with them all at God's Pleasure, and when
they prejudice our Salvation.

23 And when he heard this, he was sorrowful, for he was very rich.

Here Note the Effect which our Savior's Admonition had upon this Person, He
was sorrowful. Learn thence, That Carnal Men are exceeding sorrowful when they
cannot win Heaven in their own way. (2.) That such as are wedded to the World,
will renounce Christ rather than the World, when the World and Christ stand in
Competition, he went away sorrowful, (St. Mark 10.22.) for he was very rich.

24 And when Jesus saw he was very sorrowful, he said, How hardly shall they
that have Riches enter into the Kingdom of God? 25 For it is easier for a Camel
to go thorough a Needle's eye, then for a rich Man to enter into the kingdom of
God. 26 And they that heard it, said, Who then can be saved? 27 And he said,
the things which are impossible with men, are possible with God.

Our Holy Lord takes occasion from the rich Man's Departure from him, to
discourse concerning the danger of Riches, and the Difficulties that attend
Rich Men in their way to Heaven. From whence we may collect and gather (1.)
That Rich Men do certainly meet with more Difficulties in their way to Heaven,
then other Men; it is difficult to withdraw their Affections from Riches, to
place their supreme Love upon God in the midst of their Riches, and to depend
entirely upon God in a rich Condition; For the rich man's wealth is his strong
Tower. (2.) That yet the fault lies not in Riches, but in rich Men, who by
placing their Trust, and reposing their Confidence in Riches, do render their
Salvation difficult, if not impossible. (3.) Our Savior's proverbial Speech,
of a Camels going thorough the eye of a Needle, implies thus much, That it is
not only a great Difficulty, but an utter impossibility, for such as abound in
Worldly Wealth, and place their Confidence therein, to be Saved, without an
extraordinary Grace and Assistance from God. It Is hard for God to make a Rich
Man Happy, because he thinks himself Happy without God. (4.) That as difficult
and impossible this may seem to Men, yet nothing is impossible with GOD; he can
change the Heart of the Rich, by the rich and powerful Influences of his Holy
Spirit, That which is impossible with Men, is possible with God.

28 Then Peter said, Lo, we have left all and followed thee.

It was well done, and wisely done of Peter, to leave all and follow Christ, it
was the best Bargain he ever made in all his Life. But Observe how he magnifies
that little he had left for Christ, and ushers it in with a Note of Admiration,
Lo! we have left all and followed thee. Learn hence, That though it be very
little that we Suffer for Christ, and have to forsake upon his Account, yet we
are prone to magnify and admire it, as if it were some great matter. Lord says
Peter, We have left all; What all, Man, had thou to leave? a few ragged Nets,
and a Tattered Fisherboat; a great All indeed, next to nothing at all, scarce
worth mentioning, and yet how is it magnified? Behold we have left all, and
followed thee.

29 And he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that has
left house or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children, for the kingdom of
God's sake. 30 Who shall not receive manifold more in this present time, and in
the world to come Eternal Life.

Observe here the Lenity and Kindness of our Lord's Gracious Answer, he tells
his Disciples, That they who had left all and followed him, should be no losers
by him; that in this World they should receive many fold. St. Mark 10.30. says,
an hundred fold; but how so? Non formaliter, sed eminenter, non in specie, sed
in valor, Not in Kind, but in Equivalency; not an hundred Brethren, and
Sisters, and Possessions, in Kind, but he shall enjoy all that in God, which
all Creatures would be to him, if they were multiplied an hundred times. Oh the
Sanctifying Gifts and Saving Graces, the supporting Comforts, and ravishing
Consolations of the Holy Spirit, are a sufficient Compensation for any thing,
for all, yea for more than all that we can part with for the sake of Christ.

31 Then he took unto him the Twelve, and said unto them, behold we go up to
Jerusalem, and all things that are written by the Prophets concerning the Son
of Man shall be accomplished. 32 For he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles,
and shall be mocked, and spitefully entreated, and spit upon. 33 And they shall
Scourge him, and put him to Death, and the third day he shall rise again. 34
And they understood none of these things, and this saying was hid from them;
neither knew they the things which were spoken

We find our Blessed Savior very frequently acquainting his Disciples with his
approaching Sufferings, to prevent the Offense that they might take at them,
when the Providence of God brought them forth; his Design was to arm them with
expectation of his Sufferings, and to quicken them to Preparation for their
own; yet is it here said, That the Disciples understood none of these sayings;
Why so? were not the words easy enough to be understood? yes, but they could
not reconcile them to the Notion of the Messiah, which they had drank in; they
concluded he should be a Temporal Prince, and subdue their Temporal Enemies,
but could not conceive how he that should redeem Israel, should dye, and be
thus barbarously used; we had great need to consider well what Notions we have
concerning the things of God, before we entertain them; for false Notions once
taken up, are not without great difficulty laid down.

35 And it came to pass, that as he was come nigh unto Jericho, a certain blind
man sat by the way-side, begging. 36 And hearing the multitude pass by, he
asked what it meant? 37 And they told him, That Jesus of Nazareth passes by.
38 And he cried, saying, Jesus, thou Son of David have mercy on me. 39 And they
which went before rebuked him, that he should hold his peace; and he cried so
much the more, Thou Son of David have mercy on me. 40 And Jesus stood, and
commanded him to be brought unto him: and when he was come near, he asked him.
41 Saying, What will thou that I shall do unto thee? and he said, Lord, that I
may receive my sight. 42 And Jesus said unto him, Receive thy sight, thy Faith
has saved thee. 43 And immediately he received his sight, and followed him,
glorifying God, and all the people when they saw it, gave praise unto God.

This Chapter concludes with the recital of a famous Miracle, wrought by our
Savior upon a Blind Man, whom St. Mark calls Bartimeus. Where we have
Observable (1.) The Blind Man's Faith in Acknowledging Christ to be the
Messiah; for so much the Title of Son of David did import. (2.) Observe his
Fervency as well as his Faith, he cried to Christ for the Mercy of Healing,
Have mercy on me thou Son of David: A true sense of Want, either Bodily or
Spiritual, will cause a Soul to cry to Christ with earnestness and importunity.
Observe (3.) The great Compassion and Condescension of Christ toward this
blind Man; he stood still, he called him, and enlightened his Eyes. (4.) Before
Christ would restore the blind Man to sight, he must sensibly complain of the
want of sight, and cry unto him for it. Christ knows all his Creatures Wants,
but takes no notice of them, till they make them known to him by Prayer.
Observe (5.) How much Christ magnifies Faith; what he attributes to it, and how
he rewards the least Exercise of it, Jesus said, thy faith has saved thee.
Christ himself was the efficient Cause of the blind man's Healing; but he
exerted this Divine Power upon the Exercise of the blind Man's Faith; and
accordingly says, Thy Faith has saved thee. (6.) Note in what way and manner
the Blind Man does express his Thankfulness to Christ for his recovered Sight,
he followed him, glorifying God: Mercy received from Christ is then well
Improved, when it engages us to follow Christ; this should be the Effect of all
Salvations wrought for us; he praises God best, that serves him most, the
Life of Thankfulness consists in the Thankfulness of the Life.

CHAP. XIX.
1 AND Jesus entered and passed through Jericho. 2 And behold, there was a man
named Zacheus, which was the chief among the Publicans, and he was rich.

This History which relates the Calling and Conversion of Zacheus the Publican,
is ushered in with a Note of Wonder, Behold there was a man named Zacheus; It
is both great and good News to hear of a Soul Converted unto God; especially
such a remarkable Sinner as Zacheus was; for (1.) he was by Profession a
Publican; a Calling that carried Extortion in its Face, and bad defiance to his
Conversion; yet behold from the Toll Booth is Zacheus called to be a Disciple,
and Matthew an Apostle; such is the Freeness of Divine Grace, that it often
calls the greatest sinners, and Triumphs in their powerful Conversion. (2.) He
was a Chief Publican, and probably one of the chief of Sinners, yet behold him
among the chief of Saints. Lord! What Penitent need despair of thy Mercy, when
he sees a Publican, nay the chief of Publicans gone to Heaven? (3.) It is added
as a farther Circumstance, That he was Rich; his Trade was not a greater
obstacle to his Conversion than his Wealth; not that there is any malignity in
Riches considered in themselves, but they become a snare through the Corruption
of our Natures. Zacheus had not been so famous a Convert, if he had not been
Rich; if more Difficulty, yet was there more Glory in the Conversion of rich
Zacheus. To all these might be added a fourth Circumstance, namely, that
Zacheus was Converted in his old Age, after a long Habit of sin contracted.
Such instances, though few, has God left upon Record in Scripture, Abraham and
Manasses in the Old Testament, Zacheus and Paul in the New.

3 And he ran before, and sought to see Jesus, who he was, and could not for
the Press, because he was little of stature. 4 And he climbed up into a
Sycamore Tree to see him, for he was to pass that way.

Zacheus desired to see Jesus, this was a sight that few rich Men desire to
see; the sight of Cesar's Face upon their Coin is more pleasing to them, then
to see the Face of Christ in his Ordinances; yet it was not Faith but Fancy and
Curiosity that made Zacheus climb the Sycamore to see Jesus; but the Curiosity
of the Eye, gave occasion for the belief of the Heart; he that desires to see
Jesus is in the way to enjoy him, it is good to be near the place where Christ
is, whatever Principle bring us thither.

5 And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up and saw him, and said unto
him, Zacheus, make haste and come down, for to day I must abide at thy House, 6
And he made haste and came down, and received him joyfully.

What an instance is here of Christ's preventing Grace and Mercy; Zacheus
climbs up into the Sycamore to see Jesus, Jesus first sees him; little did
Zacheus think, that Jesus should cast up his Eyes to him; Christ's Looks are
Converting Looks, there went a Divine Power along with them, to change the
Heart of him whom he looked upon; he that could heal a Disease by the Hem of
his Garment, could change an Heart with the glance of his Eye. Observe farther,
Christ does not only Note, but Name Zacheus; He bids him come down, for he must
abide at his house; What a sweet Familiarity was here, though the distance be
infinitely great betwixt our Savior and our selves, yet he treats us, not with
a Majestic Stateliness, but with a gracious Affability. Some Note, That
Zacheus was the first Man we read of to whose House Christ invited himself.
Observe Lastly, With what speed Zacheus hastens down, and with what Alacrity he
entertains our Savior; Curiosity carried him up, but Love brings him down, and
he entertains Christ joyfully; but alas! it was but for a few Hours. Lord! How
great is the Happiness of that Man that Receives and Entertains thee, not for a
Day or a Year, or for Millions of Years, but for Everlasting Ages? Oh let us
welcome thee into our Hearts by Faith, whilst we are here on Earth, and then
thou will make us welcome with thy self Everlastingly in thy Kingdom.

7 And when they saw it, they all murmured saying, That he was gone to be a
Guest with a Man that is a sinner.

That is, the Pharisees who were there, were highly discontented that Christ
went to a Publican's House, whom they looked upon as the worst of Men; their
Eye was Evil, because Christ's was good: Whither should the Physician go, but
to the Sick, the whole need him not.

8 And Zacheus stood and said unto the Lord, Behold, Lord, half of my Goods I
give to the poor, and if I have taken any thing from any Man by false
accusation, I restore him fourfold.

Two things are here Observable, the greatness of his Charity, and the justness
of his Restitution. As to his Charity, Observe (1.) The freeness of it; not I
lend, but I give: (2.) The readiness of it, not I will, but I do give. (3.) The
justness and honesty of it, my Goods, not my Spoils; what is my own, and not
rent from others by Rapine or Extortion. (4.) The largeness, and extensiveness
of this Charity, half of my Goods, not an inconsiderable pittance. (5.) The
fitness of his Charity, to the Poor; not to the rich, not to his rich Heirs,
but to his poor Neighbors. Again, as his Charity was large, so his Restitution
was just; as he gave half to the Poor, so he Restored fourfold to the wronged;
What an evidence was here of a true Penitent, Confession and Satisfaction are
both found with him.

9 And Jesus said unto him, This day is Salvation come unto this house,
forasmuch as he also is the Son of Abraham.

That which Zacheus gave to the Poor, was nothing to what Christ gave to him:
it was but dross he gave to them, it was Salvation Christ gave to him: Where is
the Man that can say God is in his Debt for Acts of Charity and Mercy? Where is
he that will not own God the best and quickest Play Master? This day is
Salvation come to this house; it is thine in Title, and e're long it shall be
thine in Possession; Forasmuch as he also is the Son of Abraham; that is,
either a natural Son of Abraham, a Jew, or a Spiritual Son a Believer; the Heir
of Abraham's Faith, which was also imputed to him for Righteousness: Oh happy
Zacheus! thou have climbed up from thy Sycamore to Heaven, and by thy Charity
and Justice have purchased to thy self a Kingdom that fades not away.

10 For the Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.

Observe here (1.) A Description of Man's deplorable State and undone
Condition, he is Lost. (2.) The Care of Christ to Seek and Recover Man out of
that lost State; The Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which is lost.
Learn (1.) That Man's Condition is a Lost Condition, and every unregenerate Man
is a lost Man; he has lost his God, his Soul, his Happiness, his Excellency,
his Liberty, his Ability. (2.) That the great Errand that Christ came into the
World upon, it was to seek and to save lost Sinners; this he does by his Blood,
by his Word, by his Spirit, and by his Rod.

11 And as they heard these things, he added and spoke a Parable, because he
was nigh to Jerusalem, and because they thought the king. dom of God should
immediately appear. 12 He said therefore, A certain Nobleman went into a far
Country, to receive for himself a Kingdom, and to return. 13 And he called his
Ten Servants, and delivered them Ten Pounds, and said unto them occupy till I
come. 14 But his Citizens hated him, and sent a Messenger after him, saying, We
will not have this Man to Reign over us. 15 And it came to pass when he was
returned, having received the Kingdom, that he commanded those Servants to be
called unto him, to whom he had given the Money, that he might know how much
every man had gained by Trading. 16 Then came the first, saying, Lord, thy
pound has gained ten Pounds. 17 And he said unto him, Well, thou good Servant,
Because thou have been Faithful in a very little, have thou Authority over Ten
Cities. 18 And the second came, saying, Lord, Thy pound has gained Five
pounds. 19 And he said likewise to him, Be thou also over Five Cities. 20 And
another came, saying, Lord, Behold, here is thy pound which I have laid up in a
Napkin. 21 For I feared thee, because thou art an austere Man, thou take up
that thou laid'st not down, and reapest that thou did not sow. 22 And he
says unto him, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked Servant;
Thou knew that I was an austere Man, taking up that I laid not down, and
reaping that I did not sow. 23 Wherefore then gave not thou my money into the
Bank, that at my coming I might have received my own with Usury. 24 And he said
unto them that stood by, Take from him the pound, and give it to him that has
Ten pounds. 25 And they said unto him, Lord, he has Ten pounds. 26 For I say
unto you, that unto every one which has shall be given; and from him that has
not, even that which he has shall be taken away. 27 But those mine enemies,
that would not that I should Reign over them, bring hither, and slay them
before me.

For the better understanding of this Parable, we must (1.) Consider the
occasion of it, (2.) The Design and Scope of it, (3.) The Lessons of
Instruction which our Savior intended us by it. As to the former; the occasion
of our Savior's uttering this Parable, seems to be this, he was now going up
to Jerusalem to dye, some of the Company were of Opinion, that he would
immediately enter upon his Kingdom, and Act as a Temporal Prince, delivering
them from the Romans, and destroying his and their Enemies; he lets them
understand the quite contrary, that he must dye and rise again, and ascend into
Heaven, and then return again and receive the Kingdom; and that he was now
taking his last Journey to Jerusalem, in order to that End. The Design, (2.)
and Scope of the Parable, together with the Interpretation of it is thus, The
Nobleman here mentioned, is our Savior himself, who in his State of great
Humiliation was but like a Nobleman; His going into a far Country, signifies
his return from Earth to Heaven; his coming back again, signifies his Coming
to Judgment; his calling his Servants, and delivering them their Talents,
intimates to us, the various Gifts which he bestows upon the Sons of Men, all
which are to be employed in his Service, and improved to his Glory, his calling
his Servants to an Account plainly signifies, that when Christ comes to
Judgment, he will have an account of every Individual Person, how they have
used the Gifts, and improved the Tallents entrusted with them; and that they
may expect to be impartially Rewarded according to their Works, for God will
appear a Righteous God, and will Condemn Sinners out of their own Mouths, and a
most certain and final Ruin will be their Portion, whilst those that were
Faithful in his Service shall be crowned with his Rewards. Now from the whole
we may Learn these Lessons of Instruction, (1.) That our Lord's State of
Humiliation and great Abasement on Earth, being past and over, a glorious State
of Exaltation he is now arrived at in Heaven; God has exalted him with great
Triumph to his Kingdom in Heaven. (2.) That Clothed with infinite Majesty and
Power, and attended with an innumerable Host of Glorified Angels and Saints,
this exalted Savior will come to Judge Angels and Men. (3.) That in the mean
time Christ variously dispenses to his Servants particular Talents, to be
employed and improved for his own Glory and his Churches good. (4.) That there
will most certainly be a Reckoning-day, or a time when our Lord will take an
Account of Men's improving those Gifts and Graces which were given them as so
many Talents to be improved by them. (5.) That there will be degrees of
Happiness and Misery in the other World, according to Men's Degrees of
Faithfulness or Negligence in this. (6.) That it is abominably False and
Impious to charge God, as being rigid and severe with Men, and requiring
Impossibilities at their Hands, For out of their own Mouths will God condemn
them. Lastly, That the Condition of God's Faithful Servants will be unspeakably
Happy, and that of the unprofitable Servant intolerably Miserable, both in this
World, and in the next; the Righteous shall enter into the joy of their Lord,
and be confirmed therein, with an utter impossibility of losing that Happiness.
The Wicked who would not submit to Christ's Authority, shall not be able to
resist his Power. They that would not suffer Christ to Reign over them, they
shall at the last Day be brought forth and slain before him, These mine Enemies
that would not that I, etc.

28 And when he had thus spoken, he went Before ascending up to Jerusalem. 29
And it came to pass when he was come nigh to Bethpage and Bethany, at the Mount
called the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his Disciples. 30 Saying, Go ye into
the Village over against you, in the which at your entering ye shall find a
Colt tied, whereon yet never man sat, loose him, and bring him hither, 31 And
if any man ask you why do you loose him? thus shall ye say unto him, Because
the Lord has need of him. 32 And they that were sent, went their way, and
found even as he had said unto them. 33 And as they were loosing the Colt, the
Owners thereof said unto them, Why loose ye the Colt? 34 And they said, The
Lord has need of him. 35 And they brought him to Jesus, and they cast their
Garments upon the Colt, and they set Jesus thereon. 36 And as he went, they
spread their Clothes in the way. 37 And when he was come nigh, even now at the
descent of the mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the Disciples, began to
rejoice, and praise God with a loud voice, for all the mighty works that they
had seen. 38 Saying, Blessed be the King that comes in the Name of the Lord;
peace in Heaven, and glory in the Highest. 39 And some of the Pharisees from
among the Multitude, said unto him, Master, rebuke thy Disciples. 40 And he
answered and said unto them, I tell you, That if these should hold their peace,
the stones would immediately cry out.

Our Lord, (as is Noted before) was now upon his last Journey to Jerusalem,
where he was to shed his Blood, and lay down his Life, for the Redemption and
Salvation of a lost World; and it is Observable, what a double Demonstration he
gives of his great Willingness and Forwardness to go up to Jerusalem, there to
dye. (1.) Both St. Luke here, and St. Mark, Chapter 10.32. tells us, That he went
before the Company, leading the way, when he went to Suffer: Lord! With what
Alacrity and holy Cheerfulness did thou manage the great Work of Man's
Redemption. None ever went so willingly to a Crown, as thou to thy Cross. (2.)
Our Savior, who all his Life Traveled like a poor Man on Foot, now he goes up
to Jerusalem to dye for us, he will Ride, to show his great Forwardness to lay
down his Life for us; but what was the Beast he rode upon, an Asses Colt, to
Fulfill that Prophecy, Zach. 9.9. Tell ye the Daughter of Sion, behold your King
comes, riding upon an Ass; yea, it was a Colt upon which never man rode
before; to let us see, how the most unruly and untamed Creatures become
obedient and obsequious to Christ, and render themselves serviceable to him at
his pleasure. It was also a borrowed Ass, taken without the Owners Leave,
whereby our Savior's Right to all the Creatures was manifested; and
accordingly he bids his Disciples tell the Owner, That the Lord had need of
him; not your Lord, or our Lord, but the Lord, that is, he that is Lord of the
whole Earth, whose are the Cattle upon a thousand Hills. Here Note, What a
clear and full Demonstration Christ gave of his Divine Nature; of his
Omnisciency in foreseeing and foretelling the Event; of his Omnipotency in
inclining the Heart, and overruling the will of the Owner to let the Colt go,
and of his Sovereignty, that as he was Lord of the Creatures, he could command
and call for their Service whenever he needed them. The Colt being brought, and
our Savior set thereon; Observe next, the Actions of the Multitude in
Acknowledging Christ to be their King, they spread their Clothes in the way,
casting their Garments on the Ground, for him to ride upon, according to the
Custom of Princes when they ride in State; yea the Multitude do not only
Disrobe their Backs, but expend their Breath in joyful Acclamations, and loud
Hosannah's, wishing all manner of Prosperity to their Meek but Mighty Prince.
In this Princely, yet poor and despicable Pomp, does our Savior enter the
famous City of Jerusalem. Oh how far was our Holy Lord from affecting Worldly
greatness and grandeur? he despised that Glory which Worldly Hearts fondly
admire; yet because he was a King, he would be proclaimed such; and have his
Kingdom, Confessed, Applauded, and Blessed; but that it might appear that his
Kingdom was not of this World, he abandons all Worldly Magnificence; Oh
Glorious, yet Homely Pomp! oh Meek but Mighty Prince! Observe Lastly, The
peevish Envy of the wicked Pharisees who were then in Company, they grudge our
Savior this poor Honor, they Envy him this small Triumph of coming into the
City upon an Asses Colt, attended by a Company of poor People, strewing the way
with Boughs of Trees, with Hosannah's and joyful Acclamations in their Mouths:
These poor Peoples Mouths they would have stopped; Master, rebuke thy
Disciples; they did not like the Music: Christ tells them, that they Labor in
vain to suppress the Testimony given him by his Disciples, for if they should
be silent, the stones would cry out, yea cry shame of them for neglecting their
Duty; as if Christ had said, the Speechless Stones will speak, and give witness
to me if Men will not. Learn hence, They that are owned of God, shall not want
ownings and witnessings from Man at one time or other, in one way or other;
though the Envy and Malice of Men do never so much gainsay and oppose it.

41 And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it.

No sooner did our Savior come within the sight and view of the City of
Jerusalem, but he burst out into Tears, at the consideration of their
Obstinacy, and wilful rejecting of the Offers of Grace and Salvation made unto
them; and also he wept to consider the dreadful Judgments that hung over their
Heads for those Sins, even the utter Ruin and Destruction of their City and
Temple. Learn hence (1.) That good Men ever have been, and are Men of tender
and compassionate Dispositions, sorrowing not only for their own Sufferings,
but others Calamities. (2.) That Christ shed Tears as well as Blood, for a lost
World, Christ wept over Jerusalem, as well as bled for her. (3.) That Christ
was infinitely more concerned for the Salvation of poor Sinners, than for his
own Death and Sufferings, not the sight of his own Cross, but Jerusalem's
Calamities made him weep.

42 If thou had known, even thou at least in this thy day, the things
belonging to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes.

By the things belonging to their peace, we are to understand the presence of
Christ amongst them, the Preaching of the Gospel to them; She did not know,
that is, she did not consider, she did not prize and improve her Privileges as
she ought, but stopped her Ear against the words of Christ; and closed her Eyes
against the miraculous Works of Christ, till at last they were hidden from her
Eyes. Learn hence, (1.) That the time of a Peoples enjoying the Light and
Liberty of the Gospel, it is a limited day, it is a short day, If thou had
known in this thy day. (2.) That it is the sad and usual Lot of the Gospel not
to be embraced, and entertained by a People, to whom it is in Mercy sent, till
it be too late, and the time of their Visitation be past and over, Oh that thou
had known, but now thou shall never know, now they are hid from thine Eyes.

43 For the day shall come, that thine enemies shall cast a Trench about thee,
and compass thee round, and keep thee in on every side. 44 And shall lay thee
even with the ground, and thy Children within thee, and they shall not leave in
thee one stone upon another, Because thou knew not the time of thy
Visitation.

Here we have a Prophetical Prediction of the total and final Destruction of
the City of Jerusalem by the Roman Armies, who begirt the City round, burnt the
Temple, starved the People, and brought such Ruin and Destruction upon the
place, as no History could ever parallel; the reason is assigned, because they
knew not the time of their Visitation; that is, the time when God visited them
with his Gospel, first by the Ministry of John, then by the Preaching of Christ
himself, and afterward by his Disciples and Apostles. Hence Learn, (1.) That
when God gives his Gospel to a People, he gives that People a merciful and a
gracious Visitation. (2.) That for a People not to know, but neglect the time
of their gracious Visitation, it is a God provoking, and a Wrath-procuring Sin,
Because thou knew not the time of thy Visitation, therefore the time shall
come, that thine Enemy shall lay thee even with the Ground, and not leave one
stone upon another; which History tells us was literally fulfilled, when Turnus
Rufus with his Plough, ploughed up the very Foundation Stones upon which the
Temple stood. Lord! how has sin laid the Foundation of Ruin in the most
Flourishing Cities and Kingdoms.

45 And he went into the Temple, and began to cast out them that sold therein,
and them that bought. 46 Saying unto them, It is writ, My house is the house of
Prayer, but ye have made it a Den of Thieves. 47 And he taught daily in the
Temple, but the chief priests, and the Scribes, and the chief of the People,
sought to destroy him. 48 And could not find what they might do; for all the
people were very attentive to hear him.

No sooner was our Blessed Savior entered Jerusalem, but his first walk was to
the Temple, and his first Work was to Purge and Reform it from abuses, not to
ruin and destroy it, because it had been abused. But what was the Profanation
of the Temple that so offended our Savior: Answer, in the Court of the
Gentiles, the outward Court of the Temple, there was a public Mart or Market
kept, where were sold Oxen, Sheep and Doves for Sacrifice, which otherwise the
People must have brought up along with them from their Houses; as a pretended
ease therefore to the People, the Priests ordered these things to be Sold hard
by the Altar; but our Blessed Savior being justly offended at this
Profanation of his Father's House, cast the Buyers and Sellers out of the
Temple. Teaching us, That there is a special Reverence due to God's House, both
for the Owners sake, and the Service sake; nothing but Holiness can become the
place where God is Worshipped in the Beauty of Holiness; the Reason is added,
My house is the house of Prayer, where by Prayer is to be understood the whole
Worship and Service of God, of which Prayer is an eminent and principal part;
That which gives Denomination to an House, is most certainly the chief work to
be done in that House; now God's House being called An House of Prayer,
implies, that Prayer is a chief and principal Work to be performed in this
House; yet take we heed that we set not the Ordinances of God at variance one
with another; we must not Idolize one Ordinance, and vilify another, but
reverence them all, and pay an awful respect to all Divine Institutions. Our
Blessed Savior here in his House of Prayer, Preached daily to the People, as
well as Prayed with them; and all the People were as attentive to hear his
Sermons, as he was constant at their Prayers. Prayer Sanctifies the Word, and
the Word fits us for Prayer, if we would Glorify God, and Edify our selves, we
must put Honor upon all the Ordinances of God, and diligently attend them upon
all occasions.

CHAP. XX.
1 AND it came to pass, that on one of those days, as he taught the people in
the Temple, and preached the Gospel, the chief Priests and the Scribes came
upon him with the Elders. 2 And spoke unto him, saying, Tell us by what
Authority thou do these things? or who is he that gives thee this Authority?
3 And he answered and said unto them, I will also ask you one thing and answer
me. 4 The Baptism of John, Was it from Heaven? or of men? 5 And they reasoned
with themselves, saying, If we shall say from Heaven, he will say, Why then
believed ye him not? 6 But and if we say of men, all the people will stone us,
for they be persuaded that John was a Prophet. 7 And they answered, that they
could not tell whence it was. 8 And Jesus said unto them, neither tell I you,
By what authority I do these things.

The Pharisees having often quarrelled at our Savior's Doctrine before, they
call in question his Mission and Authority now: Although they might easily have
understood his Divine Mission by his Divine Miracles, for Almighty God never
empowered any to work Miracles, that were not sent by him. Our Blessed Savior
understanding their Design, gives them no direct Answer, but Replies to their
Question, by asking them another; The Baptism of John, was it from Heaven? or
of men? that is, was it of Divine Institution or of Humane Invention? plainly
implying, that the calling of them who call themselves the Ministers of God,
ought to be from God; No man ought to take that honor upon him, but he that is
called of God, as was Aaron, Heb. 5.8. The Pharisees Reply, that they could not
tell, whence John had his Mission and Authority; which was a manifest Untruth;
they knew it, but durst not own it. By refusing to tell the Truth, they fall
into a Lie against the Truth; thus one Sin ensnares and draws men on to the
Commission of more: Such as will not speak exact Truth, according to their
Knowledge, they fall into the sin of Lying against their Knowledge, and their
Conscience; our Savior answers them, Neither tell I you by what Authority I do
these things; he does not say, I cannot, or I will not tell you, but I do not,
I need not tell you; because the Miracles which I work before you, are a
sufficient Demonstration of my Divine Commission, that I am sent of God amongst
you; because God never set the Seal of his Omnipotency to a Lie, nor empowered
any Impostor to work real Miracles.

9 Then began he to speak to the People this parable; A certain man planted a
Vineyard, and let it forth to Husbandmen, and went into a far Country for a
long time. 10 And at the season he sent a Servant to the Husbandmen, that they
should give him of the fruit of the Vineyard, but the Husbandmen beat him, and
sent him away empty. 11 And again he sent another Servant, and they beat him
also, and entreated him shamefully, and sent him away empty. 12 And Again he
sent the the third, and they wounded him also, and cast him out. 13 Then said
the Lord of the Vineyard, What shall I do? I will send my beloved Son, it may
be they will Reverence him, when they see him. 14 But when the Husbandmen saw
him, they reasoned among themselves, saying, This is the Heir, come let us kill
him, that the Inheritance may be ours. 15 So they cast him out of the Vineyard,
and killed him: What therefore shall the Lord of the Vineyard do unto them? 16
He shall come and destroy these Husbandmen, and shall give the Vineyard unto
others; and when they heard it, they said, God forbid. 17 And he beheld them
and said, What is this then that is written? The stone which the Builders
rejected, the same is become the head of the Corner. 18 Whosoever shall fall on
this stone shall be broken, but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him
to powder. 19 And the chief Priests, and the Scribes the same hour sought to
lay hands upon him; but they feared the People; for they perceived, that he had
spoken this Parable against them.

In the Parable before us, the Jewish Church is compared to a Vineyard, God the
Father to an Householder, his planting, pruning and fencing his Vineyard,
denotes his Care to furnish his Church with all needful Helps, and Means, to
make it Fruitful; his Letting it out to Husbandmen, signifies the committing
the Care of his Church to the Priests and Levites, the public Pastors and
Governors of the Church; his Servants are the Prophets and Apostles whom he
sent from time to time to admonish them to bring forth answerable Fruits to the
Cost which God had expended on them; his Son, is Jesus Christ, whom the Rulers
of the Jewish Church slew and Murdered. So that the Design and Scope of the
Parable is to discover to the Jews, particularly to the Pharisees, their
obstinate impenitency, under all the means of Grace, their bloody Cruelty
toward the Prophets of God, their tremendous Guilt in Crucifying the Son of
God; for all which God would unchurch them fiinally, Ruin their Nation, and
set up a Church among the Gentiles, that should bring forth better Fruits then
the Jewish Church ever did. From the whole Note (1.) That the Church is God's
Vineyard, a Vineyard is a place enclosed, a place well planter, well fruited,
and exceeding dear and precious to the Planter, and the Owner of it. (2.) That
as dear as God's Vineyard is unto him, in case of Barrenness and
unfruitfulness, it is in great danger of being destroyed, and laid waste by
him. (3.) That the only way and course to engage God's Care over his Vineyard,
and to prevent its being given to other Husbandmen, it is to give him the
Fruits of it; it is but a Vineyard that God lets out; it is no Inheritance; no
People ever had so many Promises of God's Favor as the Jews; nor ever enjoyed
so many Privileges whilst they continued in his Favor, as they did; but for
rejecting Christ, and his Holy Doctrine, they are a despised, scattered People
throughout the World. See the Notes on Mat. 21.39, 44.

20 And they watched him, and sent forth spies which should feign themselves
just men, that they might take hold of his words, that so they might deliver
him unto the power and authority of the Governor. 21 And they asked him,
saying, Master, We know that thou say and teach rightly, neither
acceptest thou the person of any, but teach the way of God truly. 22 Is it
lawful for us to give Tribute unto Caesar, or not? 23 But he perceived their
craftiness, and said unto them, Why tempt ye me? 24 Show me a Penny; whose
Image and Superscription has it? they answered and said Cesar's. 25 And he
said unto them, Render therefore to Caesar, the things which are Cesars, and to
God, the things that are God's. 26 And they could not take hold of his words
before the people; and they marvelled at his Answer, and held their peace.

Both St. Matthew and St. Mark tell us, that these Spies, sent forth to ensnare
our Savior about paying Tribute to Caesar, were the Pharisees and Herodians;
the former were against paying Tribute, looking upon the Roman Emperor as an
Usurper, the latter were for it; These two opposite Parties concluded, that let
our Savior answer how he would, they should entrap him; if to please the
Pharisees he denied paying Tribute, then he is accused of Sedition; if to
gratify the Herodians, he voted for paying Tribute, then he is pronounced an
Enemy to the Liberty of his Country, and exposed to a popular Odium. But
Observe with what wisdom and caution our Lord Answers them: he calls for the
Roman Penny, and asks them whose Superscription it bare, they answer Cesar's;
then says he, Render to Caesar the things that are Cesar's; as if he had said,
Your admitting the Roman Coin amongst you, is an Evidence that you are under
Subjection to the Roman Emperor; because the Coining and imposing of Money is
an Act of Sovereign Authority; therefore you having owned Cesar's Authority
over you, by accepting of his Coin amongst you, give unto him his just dues,
and Render to Caesar the things that are Cesar's. Learn hence, (1.) That our
Savior was no Enemy to Magistracy and Civil Government; there was no truer
Play Master of the King's Dues, then he that was King of Kings; he preached it,
and and he practiced it, Matthew. 17.27. (2.) Where a Kingdom is in Subjection to
a Temporal Prince, whether by Descent, Election or by Conquest he derives his
Title, the Subjects ought from a principle of Conscience, to pay Tribute to
him. (3.) That as Christ is no Enemy to the Civil Rights of Princes, and his
Religion exempts none from paying their Civil Dues, so Princes should be as
careful not to rob him of his Divine Honor, as he is not to wrong them of
their Civil Rights. As Christ requires all his Followers to render to Caesar,
the things that are Cesar's; so Princes should oblige all their Subjects, To
render unto God the things that are Gods.

27 Then came unto him certain of the Sadduces which say there is no
Resurrection, and they asked him. 28 Saying, Master Moses wrote unto us, if any
man's Brother dye, having a wife, and he dye without children, that his Brother
should take his Wife, and raise up Seed unto his Brother. 29 There were
therefore seven Brethren, and the first, took a wife, and dyed without
Children. 30 And the second took her to wife, and he dyed childless. 31 And the
third took her, and in like manner the seventh also; and they left no Children,
and dyed. 32 Last of all the Woman dyed also. 33 Therefore in the Resurrection
whose wife of them is she, for seven had her to wife? 34 And Jesus answering
said unto them, The children of this World marry, and are given in marriage. 35
But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world, and the
Resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage. 36
Neither can they dye any more, for they are equal unto the Angels, and are the
Children of God, being the Children of the Resurrection. 37 Now that the dead
are raised, even Moses showed at the Bush, when he calls the Lord, the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. 38 For he is not a God of
the Dead, but of the Living, for all live unto him.

Our Blessed Savior having put the Pharisees and Herodians to silence in the
foregoing Verses, here the Sadduces encounter him, This Sect denied the
Immortality of the Soul, and the Resurrection of the Body, and as an Objection
against both, they propound a Case to our Savior, of a Woman that had Seven
Husbands; they demand whose Wife of the Seven this Woman shall be at the
Resurrection? as if they had said, if there be a Resurrection of Bodies at the
great Day, surely there will be a Resurrection of Relations too, and the other
World will be like this, in which Men will marry as they do here; and if so,
whose wife of the seven shall this Woman be? they all having an equal claim to
her? Now our Savior for resolving of this question, first shows the different
State of Men in this and in the other World; The Children of this World, says
Christ, marry and are given in Marriage, but in the Resurrection they do
neither; as if our Lord had said, after Men have lived a while in this World,
they dye, and therefore Marriage is necessary to maintain a Succession of
Mankind; but in the other World, Men shall become Immortal, and live for ever;
and then the Reason of Marriage will wholly cease; for when Men can dye no
more, there will be no need of any new Supplies of Mankind. Secondly, Our
Savior having got clear of the Sadduces Objection, by taking away the Ground
and Foundation of it, he produces an Argument for the proof of the Soul's
Immortality, and the Bodies Resurrection, thus, Those to whom Almighty God
pronounces himself a God, are alive, but God pronounces himself a God to
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob many hundred years after their Bodies were dead,
therefore their Souls are yet alive, otherwise God could not be their God, For
he is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living: From the whole Note, (1.)
That there is no Opinion so absurd, no error so monstrous, that having had a
Mother, will dye for lack of a Nurse; the Beastly Opinion of the Mortality of
the Soul, and of the Annihilation of the Body finds Sadduces, to profess and
propagate it. Learn (2.) The certainty of another Life after this, in which Men
shall be Eternally Happy, or Intolerably Miserable, according as they behave
themselves here: Though some Men live like Beasts, they shall not dye like them,
neither shall their last End be like theirs. Note, (3.) The Glorified Saints in
the Morning of the Resurrection, shall be like unto the Glorious Angels; not
like them in Essence and Nature, but like them in their Properties and
Qualities, namely, in Holiness and Purity, in Immortality and Incorruptibility;
and also like them in their way and manner of Living. They shall no more stand
in need of Meat or Drink, than the Angels do; but shall live the same Heavenly
and Immortal Lives that the Angels live. Note (4.) That all those that are in
Covenant with God, whose God the Lord is, their Souls do immediately pass into
Glory, and their Bodies at the Resurrection, shall be sharers in the same
Happiness with their Souls; if God be just the Soul must Live, and the Body
must Rise; for Good Men must be Rewarded, and Wicked Men Punished; God will
most certainly, one time or other, plentifully Reward the Righteous, and Punish
the Evil doers; but this being not always done in this Life, the justice of God
requires it be done in the next.

39 Then certain of the Scribes answering, said, Master, thou have well said.
40 And after that they durst not ask him any question at all. 41 And he said
unto them, How say they that Christ is David's Son? 42 And David himself says
in the Book of Psalms, the Lord says unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand.
43 Till I make thine enemies thy Footstool. 44 David therefore calls him
Lord, How is he then his Son.

The Design of our Blessed Savior in propounding this Question to the
Pharisees, how Christ could be David's Son, when David by Inspiration called
him Lord, it was twofold, (1.) To confute the People's Erroneous Opinion,
touching the Person of the Messiah, who they thought should be a mere Man, of
the Stock and Lineage of David only, and not the Son of God. (2.) To strengthen
the Faith of his Disciples touching his Godhead, against the time that they
should see him Suffer and Rise again: The place Christ alludes to, is Psalm.
110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand; The Lord, That
is, God the Father, said to my Lord, that is to God the Son, who was to be
Incarnate, whom David calls his Lord, both as God, and as Mediator, his Lord
by a Right of Creation and Redemption also: now the question our Savior puts
to the Pharisees is this, how Christ could be both David's Lord, and David's
Son? No Son being Lord to his own Father; therefore if Christ were David's
Sovereign, he must be more than Man, more than David's Son. As Man, so he was
David's Son; as God Man, so he was David's Lord. Note hence, (1.) That although
Christ was truly and really Man, yet was he more than a mere Man; he was Lord
unto, and the Salvation of his own Forefathers. Note (2.) That the only way to
reconcile the Scriptures, which speak concerning Christ, is to believe and
acknowledge him to be both God and Man in one Person: The Messiah as Man, was
to come forth out of David's Loins, but as God man he was David's Lord, his
Sovereign and Savior; as Man he was David s Son, as God man he was Lord to his
own Father.

45 Then in the audience of all the people, he said unto his Disciples. 46
Beware of the Scribes, which desire to walk in long Robes, and love greetings
in the markets, and the highest Seats in the Synagogues, and the chief Rooms at
Feasts. 47 Which devour widows houses, and for a show make long prayers, the
same shall receive greater Damnation.

Observe here, What it is that our Savior condemns, not Civil Salutations in
the Marketplace, not the chief Seats in the Synagogue, not the uppermost Rooms
at Feasts, but their fond affecting of these things, and their ambitious
aspiring after them; it was not their Taking, but their loving the uppermost
Rooms at Feasts which our Savior condemns, God is the God of Order; there may
and ought to be a Precedence among Persons; God commands us to give Honor to
whom Honor is due, but Pride and Ambition are detestable and hateful Vices,
especially in such as are Preachers, and ought to be Patterns of Humility.
Observe (2.) How our Savior condemns the Pharisees for their gross Hypocrisy,
in coloring over their abominable Covetousness with a specious pretense of
Religion, making long Prayers in the Temple and Synagogues for Widows, and
thereupon persuading them to give Bountifully to Corban, that is, the Common
Treasury for the Temple; some part of which was employed for their Maintenance.
Whence we Learn, That it is no new thing for Designing Hypocrites, to cover the
fowlest Transgressions with the Cloak of Religion; thus the Pharisees made
their Prayers a cloak and cover for their Covetousness.

CHAP. XXI.
1 AND Jesus looked up, and saw the rich men casting their Gifts into the
Treasury. 2 And he saw also a certain poor widow casting in thither two mites.
3 And he said, Of a truth I say unto you, That this poor Widow has cast in
more then they all. 4 For all these have of their abundance cast in unto the
offerings of God, but she of her penury, has cast in all that she had.

At the door of the Temple, through which all the People passed in and out, who
came up three times a Year at the Solemn Feasts, to Worship Almighty God in his
own House, there was a Chest set, (like the poor Man's Box in some of our,
Churches) into which all Persons cast in their Free Will Offerings and
Oblations, which were employed either for the use of the Poor, or for the
Service of the Temple; and what was thus given our Savior calls an Offering to
God, v. 4. These of their abundance have cast in unto the Offering of God.
Thence Learn, That what we rightly give to the Relief of the Poor, or for the
Service, and toward the Support of God's public Worship, is Consecrated to
God, and as such is accepted of him, and ought to be esteemed by us. Observe
(2.) With what pleasure and Satisfaction our Savior sets Himself to view those
Offerings, he beheld the rich men casting their Gifts into the Treasury. Thence
Note, That our Savior sees with pleasure, and beholds with Delight whatever we
have Hearts to give unto him, whether for the Relief of his Members, or for the
Support of his Service. Oh Blessed Savior, while now thou sit at thy
Father's Right Hand in Glory, thou see every hand that is stretched forth to
the relief of thy poor Members here on Earth,

But a certain poor widow cast in two mites.

Several Circumstances relating both to the Person and the Action are here
Observable, as (1.) The Person that offered was a Widow, the Married Woman is
under the careful Provision of her Husband, if she spends, he earns, but the
Widow has no hands but her own to work for her. (2.) She was a poor Widow,
poverty added to the Sorrow of her Widowhood; she had no rich Jointure to live
upon; it is some alleviation of the Sorrow that attends Widow-hood, when the
Hand is left full, though the Bed be left empty; this Widow was needy and
desolate, but yet gives; some in her Circumstances would have looked upon
themselves as having Right to receive what was given by others, rather than to
give any thing themselves. (3) Observe her Bounty and Munificence in giving,
her two Mites are proclaimed by Christ, to be more then all the rich Men's
Talents; more in respect of the mind and affection of the Giver, more with
respect to the proportion of the Gift; a Mite to her being more than Pounds to
others, Pounds were little to them, two Mites were all to her, she leaves her
self nothing; so that the poor Woman gave not only more than any of them all,
but more then they all. Christ's Eye looked at once into the bottom of her
Purse, and into the bottom of her Heart, and judge of the Offering, rather by
the Mind of the Giver, than by the value of the Gift. From this instance we
Learn, (1.) That the Poorer, yea the poorest sort of People, are not exempted
from good Works; but even they must and ought to exercise Charity according to
their Ability. This poor Widow that had not a Pound, nay not a Penny, presents
God with a Farthing. (2.) That in all Works of pious Charity which we perform,
God looks at the Heart, the Will, and the Affection of the Giver; more then at
the largeness and liberality of the Gift; it is not said, the Lord loves a
Liberal Giver, but a cheerful Giver; He accepts the Gift according to what a
Man has, and not according to what he has not; Oh our God, the poorest of us
thy Servants have our two Mites also, a Soul and a Body, persuade and enable us
to offer them both unto thee, though they are thine own already, yet will thou
graciously accept them, and oh how happy shall we be in thy acceptance.

5 And as some spoke of the Temple, how it was adorned with goodly Stones, and
Gifts, he said. 6 As for these things which ye behold, the days will come, in
which there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown
down.

Our Blessed Savior being now ready to depart from the Temple, never more
after this Entering into it, and his Disciples showing him with Wonder and
Admiration, the magnificent Structures and Buildings thereof, apprehending that
in regard of its Invincible Strength, it could not be destroyed; not
considering, that Sin will undermine and blow up the most magnificent and
famou^ Structures; For Sin brings Cities and Kingdoms, as well as particular
Persons to their End. Not one stone, says Christ, shall be left upon another;
which threatening was exactly fulfilled after Christ's Death, when Titus the
Roman Emperor destroyed the City, burnt the Temple, and Turnus Rufus the
General of his Army, ploughed up the very Foundation on which the Temple stood;
Thus was the Threatening of God fulfilled, Jerem. 26.18. Zion shall be ploughed
as a Field, and Jerusalem shall become an heap. Learn hence, (1.) That Sin has
laid the Foundation of Ruin in the most flourishing Cities and Kingdoms;
Jerusalem, the Glory of the World, is here by sin threatened to be made a
Desolation. (2.) That the Threatenings of God are to be feared, and shall be
Fulfilled, whatever appearing Improbabilities there may be to the contrary.
It Is neither the Temples Strength nor Beauty, that can oppose or withstand
God's Power.

7 And they asked him, saying, Master, But when shall these things be? and what
sign will there be, when these things shall come to pass?

A double Question is here propounded to our Savior, namely, when the
Destruction of Jerusalem should be? and what would be the signs of it. From
whence Learn, What an itching Curiosity there is in the best of Men, to know
Futurities, and to understand things that shall come to pass hereafter; and
when that hereafter is come to pass, oh how happy were it, if we were as
forward to obey the Declarations of God's Revealed Will, as we are to pry into
the hidden Counsels of his secret Will. Tell us, say the Disciples, when shall
these things be?

8 And he said, take heed that ye be not deceived, for many shall come in my
name, saying, I am Christ, and the time draws near, go ye not therefore after
them. 9 But when ye shall hear of Wars and Commotions, be not troubled, for
these things must first come to pass, but the end is not by and by. 10 Then
said he unto them, Nation shall rise against Nation, and Kingdom against
Kingdom. 11 And great Earthquakes shall be in diverse places, and famines, and
pestilences, and fearful sights, and great signs shall there be from Heaven.

Observe here, Christ does not gratify his Disciples Curiosity, but acquaints
them with their present Duty; namely, to watch against Deceivers and Seducers,
who should have the Impudence to affirm themselves to be Christ, saying, I am
Christ. Some Christ personal, or the Messiah, others Christ Doctrinal,
affirming their erroneous Opinions to be Christ's Mind and Doctrine; Take heed
that ye be not deceived, for many shall come in my Name, saying I am Christ.
Observe farther, the signs which our Savior gives of Jerusalem's approaching
Destruction, namely, the many Broyls and Commotions, the Civil Discords and
Dissentions, that should be found amongst the Jews immediately before; You
shall hear of Wars and Commotions, and see fearful Sights, and great Signs from
Heaven. Josephus declares, that there appeared in the Air, Chariots and
Horsemen Skirmishing, and that a Blazing Star in fashion of a Sword, hung over
the City for a year together, Hence Learn, That War, Pestilence, and Famine,
are Judgments and Calamities inflicted by God upon a sinful People for their
Contempt of Christ and Gospel Grace. Ye shall hear of War, Famine and
Pestilence.

12 But before all these things, they shall lay their hands on you, and
persecute you, delivering you up to the Synagogues, and into prisons, being
brought before Kings and Rulers for my names sake. 13 And it shall turn to you
for a Testimony. 14 Settle it therefore in your Hearts, not to meditate before
what ye shall answer. 15 For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your
Adversaries shall not be able to gainsay, or resist. 16 And ye shall be
betrayed, both by parents, and brethren, and kinsfolks, and friends, and some
of you shall they cause to be put to death. 17 And ye shall be hated of all men
for my names sake. 18 But there shall not an hair of your head perish. 19 In
your patience possess ye your Souls.

Our Savior here goes on in giving farther Signs of Jerusalem's Destruction;
he declares (1.) The sharp Persecution that should fall upon the Apostles
themselves, They shall lay their hands on you, and persecute you. Learn thence,
That the keenest and sharpest edge of Persecution, is usually turned upon the
Ambassadors of Christ, and falls heaviest on the Ministers of God. (2.) He
acquaints them, that for Preaching his Holy Doctrine, they should be brought
before Kings and Rulers; but advises them not to be anxiously thoughtful, or
exceedingly sollicitous what they should say, for it should be suggested to
them by the Holy Ghost, what they should say in that hour. Learn thence, That
though the Truth of Christ may be opposed, yet the Defenders of it, shall never
be ashamed; for rather then they shall want a Tongue to plead for it, God
himself will prompt them by his Holy Spirit, and suggest such Arguments to
them, as all their Enemies shall not be able to gainsay, I will give you a
mouth and wisdom. Observe (3.) How he describes the bitter Enmity of the World
against the Preachers of his Gospel, to be such as would overcome and
extinguish even the Natural Affection of nearest Relations, Ye shall be
betrayed both by Parents and Brethren. Grace teaches us to lay down our Lives
for the Brethren; but Corruption in General, and Enmity to the Gospel in
Particular, will put Brother upon taking away the Life of Brother, and cause
Parents to hate and persecute their own Bowels. Observe Lastly, Our Savior's
Admonition, In your patience possess your Souls; There are three Degrees of
Christian Patience, the first consists in a silent Submission to God's Will;
the Second in a thankful Acceptance of God's Fatherly Rod; the third in
serious cheerfulness under sorrowful Dispensations, Rejoicing in Tribulation,
and counting it all joy when we fall into diverse Temptations, by this Patience
we possess our Souls; as Faith gives us the Possession of Christ, so Patience
gives us the possession of our selves; an impatient Man is not in his own hand;
for what Title soever we have to our own Souls, we have no possession of them
without Patience, In your patience possess your Souls.

20 And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with Armies, then know that the
Desolation thereof is nigh. 21 Then let them which are in Judea flee to the
Mountains, and let them which are in the midst of it, depart out, and let not
them that are in the Countries enter thereinto. 22 For these be the days of
Vengeance, that all things which are written may be fulfilled. 23 But woe unto
them which are with Child, and to them that give Suck in those days, for there
shall be great distress in the Land, and wrath upon this People. 24 And they
shall fall by the edge of the Sword, and shall be led away Captive into all
Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the time of
the Gentiles be fulfilled. 25 And there shall be Signs in the Sun, and in the
Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the Earth, distress of Nations, with
perplexity, the Sea, and the Waves roaring. 26 Men's hearts failing them for
fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the Earth, for the
powers of Heaven shall be shaken. 27 And then shall they see the Son of man
coming in a cloud with power and great glory. 28 And when these things come to
pass, then look up, and lift up your Heads, for your Redemption draws nigh.

The sense is this, As soon as ye shall see the Roman Army appear before the
City of Jerusalem, (called by St. Matthew and St. Mark, The abomination of
Desolation, that is, the Army which is such an abomination to you, and the
occasion of such Desolation wherever it goes) then let every one that values
his own Safety, fly as far and as fast as he can, as Lot fled from the Flames
of Sodom; and be glad, if by flight he can save his Life, though he loses all
besides. Learn thence, That when Almighty God is pouring forth his Fury upon a
sinful People, it is both lawful and a necessary Duty, by flight to endeavor
to shelter our selves from the approaching Calamity and Desolation; When ye see
Jerusalem compassed with Armies, flee to the Mountains. Observe farther, the
dreadful Relation that our Savior here gives of those Desolating Calamities
which were coming upon Jerusalem, partly from the Roman Army without, and
partly from the Seditions and Factions of the Zealots within, who committed
such outrages and slaughters, that there were no less than an Hundred thousand
Jews slain, and Ninety seven thousand taken Prisoners. They that bought our
Savior for Thirty Pence, were now themselves sold Thirty for a Penny. Now did
the Temple it self become a Sacrifice, a whole Burnt-offering, and was consumed
to Ashes. Observe Lastly, What Encouragement Christ gives to all his Faithful
Disciples and Followers, he bids them look up, and lift up their Heads when
these Calamities came upon others; look up with Confidence and Joy, for your
Redemption, Salvation, and Deliverance then approaches. God had a Remnant
which he designed should survive that Destruction, to be an Holy Seed; these
are called upon to look up with cheerfulness and joy, when the hearts of others
were failing them for fear. And thus shall it be at the General Day of Judgment
(of which Jerusalem's Visitation was a Type) Lord! how will the Glory and
Terror of that Day dazzle the Eyes, and terrify the Hearts of all the Enemies
of Christ, but delight the Eyes, and rejoice the Heart of all that love and
fear him, that serve and obey him? then may the friends of Christ look up, and
lift up their heads, for their full Redemption draws nigh.

29 And he spoke to them a Parable, Behold the Fig Tree, and all the Trees. 30
When they now shoot forth, ye see and know of your selves, that Summer is now
nigh at hand. 31 So likewise ye, when ye see these things come to pass, know
ye, that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand. 32 Verily I say unto you, This
generation shall not pass away till all be fulfilled. 33 Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, but my words shall not pass away.

In these words our Savior declares the certainty of his Coming to visit
Jerusalem for all her barbarous and bloody Cruelty toward himself, his
Prophets and Apostles; he is pleased to set forth this by the Similitude of the
Fig Tree, whose beginning to bud, declares the Summer at hand; thus our Savior
tells them, that when they should see the Forementioned Signs, they might
conclude the Destruction of their City and Temple to be nigh at hand; and
accordingly some of that Generation then Living, did see these Predictions
Fulfilled. Learn, that God is no less punctual in the Execution of his
Threatenings upon Incorrigible Sinners, then he is faithful in the performance
of his promises toward his own People: The Truth and Veracity of God, is as
much concerned to execute his Threatenings, as it is to fulfill his Promises.

34 And take heed to your selves, lest at any time your Hearts be overcharged
with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and the cares of this Life, and so that day
come upon you unawares. 35 For as a snare it shall come on all them that dwell
on the face of the whole Earth; 36 Watch ye therefore, and pray always, that ye
may be accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and
to stand before the Son of Man.

Here our Lord cautions his Disciples against such a Distemper and
Indisposition of Mind, as may render them unfit and unready for his Coming and
Appearance, and to take heed of two dangerous Sins, namely, Voluptuousness and
Earthly-mindedness, which above any other Sins will indispose us for the Duty
of Watchfulness. There is a threefold Reason why our Savior fore-warns us of
these Sins, with Reference to the Day of Judgment, (1.) Because they are
peccata praecurrentia, certain prognostics of the Day of Judgment approaching;
as it was in the Days of Noah, so shall the coming of the Son of Man be. (2.)
Because they are peccata Accelerantia, they do not only foretell, but hasten
the Coming of Christ, to see the World drowned in voluptuousness and
earthly-mindedness, in security and sensuality, is not only a Sign to
foretell, but a sin that hastens Judgment, and pulls down Vengeance upon a
wicked World. (3) Christ bids us beware of these Sins with reference to the Day
of Judgment, because these Sins they are derisioria judicii, they beget in Men
a profane Spirit of Scoffing and Deriding, at the Notices of Christ's
appearing to Judgment, 2 Pet. 3.3. In the last days there shall come Scoffers,
walking after their own Lusts, and saying, where is the promise of his coming.
Our Savior having thus warned them of these Sins, he next exhorts them to
Watchfulness, Watch ye therefore, for as a snare that day will come upon you;
that is, very suddenly, and very unexpectedly; a snare has a threefold
Property, to catch suddenly, to hold surely, to destroy certainly. Our Lord's
coming to Jerusalem, was very unexpected, and his coming to us by Death and
Judgment, will steal upon us if we be not watchful. Watch we then, for our Lord
will come, at what hour he will come cannot certainly be known; there is no
time in which we can promise or assure our selves that our Lord will not come;
the time of our whole Life is little enough to prepare for his Coming. Our
Preparation for, will be no acceleration or hastening of our Lord's Coming. And
oh, how dreadful will his Coming be, if we be found off our Watch, and
altogether unready for his Appearance? Appear we must in Judgment, but shall
not be able to stand in the Judgment; see Christ we shall as a Judge, but not
behold him as a Redeemer.

37 And in the daytime he was Teaching in the Temple, and at Night he went out
and abode in the Mount called the Mount of Olives. 38 And all the people came
early in the Morning to him in the Temple, for to hear him.

Our Lord had exhorted his Disciples in the foregoing Verses, to Diligence and
Prayer, here he sets an Example of both before them. Busying himself in God's
Service all the day, and at Night spending much time in Prayer; in the Daytime
he was in the Temple Preaching, in the Evening he was on the Mount of Olives
Praying. Lord! What an Example of indefatigable Zeal and Diligence have thou
set before thy Ministers and Members. Oh that when our Master comes we may be
found Working, our People Watching, and both they and we waiting for the joyful
Coming of our Lord and Savior. Amen.

CHAP. XXII.
1 NOW the Feast of unleavened Bread, drew nigh which is called the Passover. 2
And the chief Priests and Scribes sought how they might kill him, for they
feared the people.

This Chapter gives a sad and sorrowful Relation of the Chief Priest's
Conspiracy against the Life of our Blessed Savior, in which we have Three
Particulars Observable, (1.) The Persons making this Conspiracy, The Chief
Priests, Scribes and Elders, that is, the whole Jewish Sanhedrin, or General
Council; they all lay their malicious Heads together, to contrive the
Destruction of the Holy and Innocent Jesus. Thence Learn, That General Councils
have erred, and may Err Fundamentally, both in matters of Doctrine and
Practice; so did this General Council at Jerusalem, consisting of Chief
Priests, Doctors and Elders, with the High Priest their President; They did not
believe Jesus to be the Messiah, after all the Miracles wrought before their
Eyes, but ignominiously put him to Death. Observe (2.) The manner of this
Conspiracy against the Life of our blessed Savior, it was Clandestine, Secret
and Subtle, They consulted how they might take him by craft, and put him to
Death. Learn thence, That Satan makes use of the subtilty of crafty men, and
abuses their Parts as well as their Power, for his own Purposes and Designs;
the Devil never sends a Fool of his Errand. Observe (3.) The Circumstance of
Time when this Conspiracy was managed at the Feast of the Passover; It was a
Custom among the Jews, to Execute Malefactors at their Solemn Feasts, at which
time all the Jews came up to Jerusalem to Sacrifice, and then they put
Malefactors to Death, that all Israel might see and fear, and not do so
wickedly. Accordingly the Feast of the Passover was waited for by the Jews, as
a fit opportunity to put our Savior to Death. The only Objection was, that it
might occasion a Tumult and Uproar amongst the People, there being such a
mighty Concourse at that Time in Jerusalem. But Judas making them a proffer,
they readily comply with the Motion, and resolve to take the first Opportunity
to put our Savior to Death.

3 Then entered Satan into Judas, surnamed Iscariot, being of the number of the
Twelve. 4 And he went his way, and communed with the chief Priests and
Captains, how he might betray him unto them. 5 And they were glad, and
covenanted to give him Money. 6 And he promised, and sought opportunity to
betray him unto them, in the absence of the Multitude.

Observe here, (1.) The Person Betraying our Blessed Savior, Judas; Judas a
Professor, Judas a Preacher, Judas an Apostle, and one of the Twelve, whom
Christ had chosen out of the World to be his dearest Friend, one of his Family
and Household; shall we wonder to find Friends unfriendly or unfaithful to us,
when our Savior had a Traitor in his own Family. (2.) Observe The heinous
Nature of Judas his Sin, he Betrayed Jesus; Jesus his Maker, Jesus his Master.
It is no strange or uncommon thing, for the vilest of sins, and most horrid
impieties, to be acted by such Persons as make the most Eminent Profession of
Holiness and Religion. Observe (3.) What was the occasion that led Judas to the
Commission of this Sin; it was his inordinate Love of Money. I do not find that
Judas had any particular Malice, Spite, or Ill will against our Savior, but a
base and unworthy Spirit of Covetousness possessed him, and this made him sell
his Master. Covetousness is the Root-sin; an eager and insatiable Thirst after
the World, is the Parent of the most monstrous and unnatural Sins; for which
Reason our Savior doubles his Caution, Luke 12.15. Take heed and beware of
Covetousness; it shows us both the great danger of the Sin, and the great care
that we ought to take to preserve our selves from it.

7 Then came the day of unleavened Bread, when the Passover was to be killed. 8
And he sent Peter and John, saying, Go and prepare us the Passover, that we may
eat. 9 And they said unto him, Where will thou that we prepare? 10 And he said
unto them, Behold when ye are entered into the city, there shall a man meet
you, bearing a pitcher of water, follow him into the House where he enters
in. 11 And ye shall say unto the good man of the House, the Master says unto
thee, Where is the Guest-chamber, where I shall eat the Passover with my
Disciples? 12 And he shall show you a large upper Room furnished, there make
ready. 13 And they went and found as he had said unto them, and they made ready
the Passover.

The time for the Celebration of the Passover being now at hand, Christ sends
two of his Disciples, Peter and John, to Jerusalem, to prepare what was needful
in order thereunto; and here we have Observable, (1.) An eminent Proof and
Evidence of Christ's Divinity in Foretelling his Disciples all the particular
Occurrences and Circumstances which they should meet with in the City, as a man
bearing a pitcher of Water, etc. Observe (2.) How readily the Heart of the
Householder was disposed to receive our Savior and his Disciples, and to
accommodate them with all things needful upon this occasion. Our Blessed
Savior had not a Lamb of his own, and peradventure not Money wherewith to
purchase one; yet he finds a more agreeable Accommodation in this poor Man's
House, then if he had dwelt in Ahab's Ivory Palace, and had the Provisions of
Solomon's Table. When Christ has a Passover to Celebrate, he will dispose the
Hearts of his Children and Servants to a free Reception of himself. The Room
that Christ will enter into, it must be a large Room, an upper Room, a Room
furnished and prepared; a large Room is the Emblem of an enlarged Heart,
enlarged with Love, with Joy and Thankfulness; an upper Room, is an Heart
exalted, not puffed up with Pride, but lifted up by Heavenly Meditations; and a
Room furnished, is a Soul adorned with all the Graces of the Holy Spirit; into
such an Heart does Christ enter, and there delight to dwell; Here is my rest
for ever, says Christ, here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein.

14 And when the hour was come, he sat down, and the Twelve Apostles with him.
15 And he said unto them, With desire have I desired to eat this Passover with
you before I suffer. 16 For I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof,
until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God. 17 And he took the Cup and gave
Thanks, and said, Take this and divide it among your selves. 18 For I say unto
you, I will not drink of the fruit of the Vine, until the kingdom of God shall
come. 19 And he took Bread, and gave Thanks, and brake it, and gave unto them
saying, This is my Body which is given for you, this do in remembrance of me.
20 Likewise also the Cup after Supper, Saying, This Cup is the New Testament in
my Blood, which is shed for you. 21 For behold the hand of him that betrayeth
me is with me on the Table. 22 And truly the Son of man goes as it was
determined, but woe unto that Man by whom he is Betrayed. 23 And they began to
enquire among themselves, which of them it was that should do this thing.

Observe here (1.) What ardency of Desire, and vehemence of Affection, our holy
Lord expresses to Celebrate the Passover with his Disciples, and to Administer
the Sacramental Supper to them before he left them; with desire have I desired
to eat with you before I suffer. Thence Learn, That it is very necessary when
Sufferings do appear, especially when Death does approach, to have immediate
Recourse to the Table of the Lord, which affords both an Antidote against Fear,
and is Restaurative to our Faith. Christ the Night before he Suffered,
Communicated with his Disciples. Observe (2.) The unexampled Boldness of the
impudent Traitor Judas, though he had sold his Master, he presumes to sit down at
the Table with him, and with the other Disciples; had the presence of Judas
polluted this Ordinance to any but himself, doubtless our Savior would not
have suffered him to approach unto it. It Teaches us, That although nothing be
more ordinary then for unholy Persons to press in to the Holy Ordinances of
God, which they have no Right (whilst such) to approach unto, yet their
Presence pollutes the Ordinances only to themselves. Holy Persons are not
polluted by their Sins, therefore ought not to be discouraged from coming, by
their presence. Observe (3.) Christ did not Name Judas, and say, Oh thou
perfidious Traitor! but behold the hand of him that betrayeth me is with me on
the Table. Doubtless Christ did not name him, because he would not provoke him;
he did not name him, because he would not drive him to despair, but draw him to
Repentance. But Lord thou know us, when thou namest us not: Oh how sad is it
for any of thy Family, who pretend Friendship with thee, to conspire against
thee! and after they have eat of thy Bread, to lift up the heel against thee?
Observe (4.) That though Judas was not named, yet he saw himself pointed at by
our Savior; Behold the hand that Betrayeth me is on the Table; and Judas his
Heart told him, whose hand that was; yea, though Judas heard that dreadful
Sentence denounced against him, Woe to the Man by whom the Son of Man is
Betrayed; yet is he no more Blank'd then Innocence it self: This Shameless Man
had the Impudence to say to our Blessed Savior, Master, is it I? though St. Luke
says it not, the other Evangelists tell us, that Christ answered him, Thou
say it. Did not Judas, (think we) blush extremely, hang down his Guilty
Head, at so galling an Intimation? nothing less, we read not of any thing like
it. Lord! How does obstinacy in Sinning Steel the Brow, and render it incapable
of all relenting Impressions. Immediately after the Celebration of the
Passover, followed the Institution of the Lord's Supper; where we have
Observable, The Author, the Time, the Elements, and the Ministerial Actions:
(1.) Observe the Author of this new Sacrament, Jesus took Bread. Learn thence,
That to institute a Sacrament is the sole Prerogative of Jesus Christ; the
Church has no power to make new Sacraments; it is only her Duty to Celebrate
those which our Savior has made. (2.) The Time of the Institution, the Night
before the Passion, the Night in which he was Betrayed, he took Bread. (3.) The
Sacramental Elements, Bread and Wine; Bread representing the Body, and Wine the
Blood of our Redeemer; Bread being an absolutely necessary Food, a common and
obvious Food, a strengthening and refreshing Food; and Wine being the most
excellent drink, the most pleasant and delightful, the most Cordial and
Restaurative; for these Reasons, amongst others did Christ Consecrate, and set
these Creatures apart for those Holy Purposes for which he designed them. (4.)
The Ministerial Actions, Breaking of the Bread, and Blessing of the Cup; Jesus
took Bread, that is separated it, and set it apart, from common Use, for holy
Purposes; He blessed it, that is, he prayed for a Blessing upon it, and brake
it, thereby shadowing forth his Body broken upon the Cross; and he gave it to
his Disciples, saying, This broken Bread signifies my Body, which is suddenly
to be broken upon the Cross, for the Redemption and Salvation of a Lost World;
Do you likewise this, in remembrance of my Death; as to the Cup, Christ having
set it apart by Prayer and Thanksgiving, he commands his Disciples to Drink all
of it; For, says he, this Cup is the new Testament in my Blood; that is, The
Wine in this Cup does represent the shedding of my Blood, by which the New
Covenant betwixt GOD and Man is ratified and confirmed; Drink ye all of this,
says our Savior; whence we gather, That every Communicant has as undoubtedly a
Right to the Cup, as he has to the Bread in the Lord's Supper; therefore for
the Church of Rome to deny the Cup to the Common People is Sacrilege, and
directly contrary to Christ's Institution.

24 And there was also a strife amongst them, which of them should be accounted
the Greatest. 25 And he said unto them, the Kings of the Gentiles exercise
Lordship over them; and they that exercise Authority upon them are called
Benefactors. 26 But ye shall not be so; For he that is greatest among you, let
him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that does serve. 27 For
whether is greater, He that sits at meat? or he that serves? Is not he that
sits at Meat? But I am among you as he that serves.

If these Words be not placed out of Order, by St. Luke here, it may seem very
strange, that the Apostles immediately after their Receiving the Sacrament,
should entertain their Minds with thoughts of Precedence and Superiority, and
much stranger yet, that they should Discourse openly of such a Subject as this,
especially considering what our Savior had just before told them, that he was
betrayed into the hands of Sinners; but whether at this time or not, it is most
certain, at some time or other a strife was found amongst them, which should be
the Greatest; now that our Savior might effectually quench these unhappy
Sparks of Ambition, which were kindled in his Apostles Minds, he tells them,
that Supremacy and Dominion belongs to Secular Princes, not to Evangelical
Pastors, who ought to carry themselves with Humility and Condescension, one
toward another. Not that Christ directs to a parity and equality amongst his
Ministers, or forbids the Preheminency of some over others; but the affecting
of Superiority, and the love of Preheminency, is that which our Savior
disalloweth. Learn (1.) That so far ought the Ministers of Christ to be from
affecting a Domination and Superiority of Power over their Fellow Brethren,
that in imitation of Christ, their Lord and Master, they ought to account
themselves Fellow Servants; I am among you as one that serves. (2.) That such
Ministers as do Love and Affect Preheminency and Superiority are most unfit for
it, and they deserve it best which seek it least. (3.) That the Dignity and
Honor which the Ministers of Christ should chiefly and only affect, is in
another World; and the way to be greatest and highest there, is to be low and
humble here; mean in our own Eyes, and little in our own esteem; Whosoever is
chief, says Christ, let him be your Servant.

28 Ye are they which have continued with me in my Temptations. 29 And I
appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me. 30 That ye may
eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and sit on Thrones, judging the Twelve
Tribes of Israel.

Observe here, What an Honorable Acknowledgment Christ makes of the Constancy
of his Disciples Love and Affection toward him; Ye are they that have
continued with me in my Temptations; that is, in my Afflictions, Trials, and
Sufferings. It is an easy matter to abide with Christ in days of Peace, in
times of Consolation, but when we are under Afflictions, Temptations and
Troubles, then to abide and keep close to Christ, this is the proof of Love and
Friendship: And as Christ makes an honorable mention of their constancy
toward him, so he presently assures them of an honorable Reward; I appoint
unto you a Kingdom. Learn hence, That such as are Sharers with Christ in his
Sufferings, shall certainly Communicate with him in his Glory; If we Suffer
with him, we shall Reign with him. And whereas our Savior promises his
Apostles, To sit upon Thrones with him, judging the twelve Tribes of Israel; we
may gather, That such Ministers as do most Service for Christ and forsake most
to follow him, and continue in Temptation and Tribulation with him, shall in
his Kingdom partake of most Honor and Dignity with him and from him; You shall
eat and drink in my Kingdom, and sit on Thrones judging the Twelve Tribes of
Israel; possibly the Apostles, and all the Zealous, Faithful, and Laborious
Ministers of Jesus Christ, shall be nearer his Throne in Heaven, than either
Saints or Angels; nearer than the Angels, because by Christ's assuming the
Humane Nature, they are more nearly allied to him; he is their Friend, but our
Brother; and nearer than other Saints, as having done more eminent Service for
Christ, and brought more Honor and Glory to him by a Laborious Diligence in
their Place and Station, Dan. 12.3. They that turn many to Righteousness shall
shine, etc.

31 And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, Behold Satan has desired to have you,
that he may sift you as Wheat. 32 But I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith
fail not, and when thou art Converted, strengthen thy Brethren.

Here I shall give (1.) The general sense of the words; (2.) The particular
Matters contained in them. (3.) The special Observations from them. The Sense
of the Words is this; As for you my Disciples in general, and for thee Peter in
particular, I must tell thee, that Satan has accused you all before God; and
desired that he may have the sifting of you all, by his winnowing Winds of
Temptation and Persecution, that he may shake your Faith, and weaken your
Confidence. But I have prayed for you all, and particularly for thy self, who
art in greatest danger of falling, because so confident of thine own Strength
and Standing, that thy Faith, tho severely shaken, may not utterly fail; and
when by Repentance thou art Recovered from thy Fall, be careful to confirm and
strengthen others, that they fall not in like manner. The particular matters
contained in these words are three, a Christians Danger, a Christians Safety,
and a Christians Duty: (1.) a Christians Danger, Satan has desired to sift
you. Where Observe (1.) The Person particularly warned of the Danger, Simon,
Simon; the Doubling of the Word doubtless carries a special intimation with it;
it denotes the greatness and nearness of Peter's Danger, his own security and
insensibleness of that danger, and the great affection of Christ his Monitors
to give him warning of his Danger. Observe (2.) The warning it self, and that
is of a Devilish Conspiracy against himself, and all the Apostles; Satan has
desired to have you; to have you for his own, if it might be; to have you, as
Believers, rather then other Men; to have you as eminent Believers, rather than
other Christians; and to have you, as Apostles and Ministers, rather than other
eminent Believers. And as Satan has desired to have you, so to sift you too, to
winnow you as Wheat. Here Note, That Satan has his Winnowing Winds of
Temptation, and his Tempestuous Winds of Persecution, for the sifting of God's
Children. Note further, That it is the Wheat, the good Corn, that Satan
Winnows; not Chaff, not Dross; Sinners that are all Chaff, and nothing but
Dross, Satan will not be at the pains to sift and winnow them: But what is this
Sifting? Answer, in sifting two things are performed, (1.) The agitation,
shaking, and tossing of the Corn from side to side. (2.) The Separation of the
Corn from the Chaff and Dust; Satan intends the former, GOD effects the latter;
Cribratione non perditur, sed purgatur frumentum; The Corn is improved, not
impaired by Winnowing. The Saints of God shall be no losers in the end, by
Satan's Temptations, how many and strong soever they may be in the way. Observe
(2.) The Christians Safety; But I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail
not. Where Note (1.) The Care that Christ had of Peter, and in him of all
Believers; I have prayed for thee; for thee as a Believing Christian, and for
thee as a Tempted Christian: and it is not said, I will pray for thee, but I
have Prayed for thee: Christ prayed for Peter, before Peter understood that he
had need of Christ's Prayer; Christ Prayed for Peter, as soon as ever Satan
desired to sift Peter: Our Intercessor is full as nimble and speedy in his Suit
for us, as Satan is in his Accusations against us; he has desired, but I have
prayed; he is a potent Assailant, but thou have a powerful Assistant. Observe
(2.) The Subject Matter Prayed for, That thy Faith fail not; not that thy Faith
be not assaulted, not that thy Faith be not shaken, but that thy Faith may not
fail by an absolute and total deficiency. The third Particular is the
Christians Duty; When thou art Converted, strengthen thy Brethren: When
Converted; that is, when Recovered from thy Fall, when Restored upon thy
Repentance to the Divine Favor; (This Conversion is not from a State of Sin;
Peter was so Converted before, but it was from an Act of Sin, into which he
should Lapse and Relapse; Strengthen thy Brethren, that is* establish others in
the Faith from which thou art shamefully fallen thy self: Now the Lessons of
Instructions from the whole, are these; (1.) That Temptations are like
siftings, God sifts to purge away our dust and dross, Satan sifts, not to get
out the Chaff, but to boult out the Flower, his Temptations are Levelled
against our Faith. (2.) That Satan has a continual Desire to be Sifting and
Winnowing God's Flower. Satan's own Children are all Bran, all Chaff, these he
sifts not: God's Children have Flower mixed with Bran, good Wheat mixed with
Chaff; these he desires to sift, winnow and f^n; not to separate the Bran and
Dross, but to destroy the Flower. Learn (3.) That the intercession of Christ
gives Security, Satisfaction and Encouragement to all Believers; that though
their Faith may by Temptations be shaken and assaulted, yet that it shall never
be finally vanquished and overcome; I have prayed that thy Faith fail not. (4.)
That lapsed Christians when Recovered and Restored, ought to endeavor to
Restore and Recover, to strengthen and establish others; When thou art
Converted, strengthen thy Brethren.

33 And he said unto him, Lord, I am ready to go with thee; both into prison,
and to death. 34 And he said, I tell thee Peter; the Cock shall not Crow this
day before that thou shall thrice deny that thou know me.

St Peter's Resolution to accompany Christ, both to Prison, and to Death, was
Holy and Good; but his too confident Opinion of his own Strength and Ability so
to do, without a Divine Aid and Assistance, was his failing and infirmity.
Self-confidence is a sin too too incident to the holiest and best of Men.
Little did Peter think, What a Feather he should be in the Wind of Temptation,
if once God left him to himself, and to Satan's Assaults. Learn farther, How
hard a matter it is for a Christian to excel in Gifts, and not to be
over-confident and conceited. To see a Man eminent in Gifts, and yet exemplary
in Humility, is a rare sight; if we stand in the Evil Day, it is an humble fear
of Falling that must enable us to stand.

35 And he said unto them, When I sent you without Purse, and Scrip, and Shoes,
Lacked ye any thing? and they said nothing. 36 Then said he unto them, But now
he that has a purse, let him take it, and likewise his Scrip; and he that has
no Sword, let him sell his Garment and buy one. 37 For I say unto you, That
this that is written must yet be accomplished in me; And he was reckoned among
the Transgressors; For the things concerning me have an end. 38 And they said,
Lord, behold, here are two Swords, and he said unto them, It is enough.

As if our Lord had said, Hitherto I have been with you, and you have had my
special Protection, and careful Provision, though you went without Purse, Scrip
or Sword. But the Time is now at hand when I must leave you; when your Friends
will be few, and your Enemies many; therefore make such Preparation for your
selves, as Prudence shall direct: Indeed my Sufferings will be first; I must be
numbered with the Transgressors, and all things that are written of me must be
accomplished, and will suddenly be fulfilled; and after me you will next come
upon the Stage, therefore prepare and provide for it. Learn, That Christ having
forewarned his Members, but especially his Ministers, of the Dangers,
Distresses and Difficulties that they are to conflict and encounter with; it is
their Duty, by Faith and Patience, with Courage and Christian Resolution, to be
well armed and prepared against them.

39 And he came out, and went as he was wont to the Mount of Olives; and his
Disciples also followed him. 40 And when he was at the place, he said unto
them, Pray that ye enter not into Temptation. 41 And he was withdrawn from them
about a stones cast; and kneeled down and prayed, saying. 42 Father, if thou be
willing remove this Cup from me; nevertheless, not my Will, but thine be done.
43 And there appeared an Angel unto him from Heaven, strengthening him. 44 And
being in an Agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his Sweat was as it were great
drops of Blood, falling down to the Ground. 45 And when he rose up from Prayer,
and was come to his Disciples, he found them sleeping for Sorrow. 46 And he
said unto them, Why sleep ye? rise and pray, lest ye enter into Temptation.

Our Blessed Savior being now come to the Mount of Olives, and having entered
with his Disciples into the Garden near it, whither he used to retire and pray.
In this place he falls into a bitter and bloody Agony, in which he prayed with
wonderful Fervor and Importunity; his Sufferings were now coming on a great
pace, and he meets them upon his Knees, and would be found in a Praying
posture. Learn thence, That Prayer is the best Preparative for, as well as the
most powerful Support under the heaviest Sufferings that can befall us. As to
this Prayer of our Savior in his Agony, many particulars are very Observable,
As (1.) The Time when he Prayed thus extraordinarily, it was the Evening before
he Suffered, just before Judas with his Black Guard came to Apprehend him; and
when he did come, he found him in a praying Posture; our Lord Teaching us by
his Example, That when Eminent Dangers are before us, especially when Death is
apprehended by us, it is our Duty to be very much in Prayer to God, and very
fervent in our Wrestlings with him. Observe (2.) The Subject Matter of our
Lord's Prayer, That, if possible, the Cup might pass from him; That is, he
might escape that Dreadful Wrath, at which he was so sore amazed. But what! Did
Christ now begin to repent of his Undertaking for Sinners? Did he shrink and
give back when it came to the pinch? No, nothing like this; but as he had Two
Natures, being GOD and Man, so he had two distinct Wills; as Man he feared and
shunned Death; as God-man he willingly submitted to it. The Divine Nature, and
the Humane Spirit of Christ did now assault each other with disagreeing
Interests. Again, This Prayer was not absolute, but Conditional; Father, if it
may be, if thou will, if it please thee, let the Cup pass, if not, I will drink
it. The Cup of Sufferings we see is a very bitter and distastful Cup, a Cup
which Humane Nature abhors; yet does God oft-times put this Bitter Cup of
Affliction into the hands of those whom yet he does sincerely Love; and when he
does do so, it is their Duty to drink it with Silence and Submission, as here
their Lord did before them. Observe (3.) The manner of our Lord's Prayer in
this his Agony; and here we may Remark (1.) It was a Solitary Prayer; he went
by himself alone, out of the Hearing of his Disciples. The Company of our best
and dearest Friends is not always Seasonable; there are Times and Seasons when
a Christian would not be willing that the most intimate Friend he has in the
World should be with him, to hear what passes in Secret betwixt him and his
God. Again (2.) it was an humble Prayer, that appears by the Postures in which
he cast himself, sometimes kneeling, sometimes lying Prostrate upon his Face;
he lies in the very Dust, and lower he could not lie, and his Heart was as low
as his Body. (3.) It was a vehement, fervent, and importunate Prayer; Such was
the Fervor of his Spirit, that he Prayed himself into an Agony: Oh let us
blush to think, how unlike our Praying-frame of Spirit is to Christ's. Lord!
What Coldness, Deadness, Drowsiness, Formality and Laziness is found in our
Prayers? how often do our Lips move when our Hearts stand still. Observe (4.)
The Posture which the Disciples were found in, when our Lord was Praying in his
Agony, they were fast asleep. Good God! Could they possibly sleep at such a
time as this? When Christ's Soul was exceeding sorrowful, could their Eyes be
thus heavy? Learn thence, That the very best of Christ's Disciples may be, and
oft-times are, overtaken with great Infirmities; when the most important Duties
are performing; Then comes he to his Disciples, and find^ them Sleeping.
Observe (5.) The Mild, Meek, and Gentle Rebuke which he gives his Disciples for
their Sleeping; he said unto them, Why sleep ye? could you not Watch with me
one hour? What, not Watch when your Master was in such Danger? Could you not
Watch with me, when I am going to lay down my Life for you? What, not one hour,
and that the parting Hour too? Learn hence, That the holiest and best Resolved
Christians, who have willing Spirits for Christ and his Service, yet in regard
of the Weakness of the Flesh, and frailty of Humane Nature, it is their Duty to
Watch and Pray, and thereby Guard themselves against Temptations, Rise and
pray, lest ye enter into, etc.

47 While he yet spoke, Behold a Multitude, and he that was called Judas, one
of the Twelve went before them, and drew near unto Jesus to kiss him. 48 But
Jesus said unto him, Judas, Betrayest thou the Son of Man with a Kiss? 49 When
they which were about him, saw what would follow, they said unto him, Lord,
Shall we smite with the Sword? 50 And one of them smote the Servant of the
High Priest, and cut off his right Ear. 51 And Jesus answered and said, Suffer
ye thus far, and he touched his ear, and healed him. 52 Then Jesus said unto
the Chief Priests, and Captains of the Temple, and the Elders which were come
to him; Be ye come out as against a Thief, with Swords and Staves? 53 When I
was daily with you in the Temple, ye stretched forth no hands against me; But
this is your Hour and the Power of Darkness.

It was the Lot and Portion of our Blessed Redeemer here, we find, to be
Betrayed into the hands of his Mortal Enemies, by the Treachery of a false and
dissembling Friend: And in this sad Relation before us we have Observable, The
Traitor, the Treason, the Manner how, and the Time when this Treasonable Design
was Executed. Observe (1.) The Traitor Judas; all the Evangelists carefully
Describe him, by his Name Judas, Judas Iscariot, lest he should be mistaken for
Jude, the Brother of James; and by his Office, one of the Twelve. Lord! How
ought the greatest Professors to look well to themselves, and to the Grounds
and Principles of their Profession: For a Profession begun in Hypocrisy, will
certainly end in Apostasy. Observe (2.) The occasion of the Treason,
Covetousness, or the inordinate Love of Worldly Wealth; and accordingly the
Devil lays a Temptation before him, exactly suited to his Temper and
Inclination, and it instantly over-came him. Learn hence, That Persons are
never in such imminent danger of falling into Sin, as when they meet with
Temptations exactly suited to their Master Lusts. Oh pray we, That God would
keep us from a Temptation suited to our predominant Lust and Corruption.
Observe (3.) The Treason of Judas, He led on an armed Multitude to the place
where Christ was, gave them a signal to discover him by, and bids them lay
hands upon him, and hold him fast; Which Treason of Judas was attended with
these black and hellish Aggravations. He had been a Witness of our Savior's
Miracles, an Hearer of our Holy Lord's Doctrine; What he did was not by
Solicitation; the Chief Priests did not send to him, but he went to them.
Lord! How dangerous is it, to allow our selves in any Secret Sin; none can say,
how far that one Sin may in time lead us: Should any one have told Judas that
his Covetousness would at last make him deny his Master, and Sell his Savior,
he would have said with Hazael, Is thy Servant a Dog that I should do this
thing? Observe (4.) The Endeavors used by the Disciples for their Master's
Rescue, One of them (St. Matthew says it was Peter) drew a Sword, and cut off
the Ear of Malchus; But why not the Ear of Judas rather? Because, though Judas
was most Faulty, yet Malchus might be most forward to Arrest and carry off our
Savior. Oh how does a pious Breast boil with Indignation at the sight of any
open Affront offered to its Savior: Yet though St. Peter's Heart was sincere,
his hand was too rash; good Intentions are no warrant for irregular Actions;
and accordingly Christ, who accepted the Affection, reproved the Action: To
resist Authority, even in Christ's own Defense, is rash Zeal, and
discountenanced by the Gospel. Peter did well to ask his Master, If he should
smite with the Sword; but he ought to have stayed his hand till Christ had
given him his Answer.

54 Then took they him, and led him, and brought him into the Highpriests
House; and Peter followed afar off. 55 And when they had kindled a Fire in the
midst of the Hall, and were set down together, Peter sat down amongst them. 56
But a certain Maid beheld him as he sat by the fire, and earnestly looked upon
him, and said, This Man was also with him, 57 And he denied him, saying, Woman
I know him not. 58 And after a little while, another saw him, and said, Thou
art also of them, And Peter said, Man I am not. 59 And about the space of an
hour after, Another confidently affirmed, saying, Of a truth that fellow also
was with him. 60 And Peter said, Man, I know not what thou say; and
immediately the Cock Crew, while he yet spoke. 61 And the Lord turned, and
looked upon Peter; And Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he said unto
him, before the Cock crow, thou shall deny me thrice. 62 And Peter went out,
and wept bitterly.

This Paragraph of the Chapter gives us an account of the Fall and Rising of
Peter; of his Sin in denying his Master, and of his Recovery by Repentance;
both must be considered distinctly. First, touching his Sin and Fall; there are
Four Particulars Observable relating thereunto; namely, the Sin it self, the
Occasion of that Sin, the Re-iteration and Repetition of it, and the
aggravating Circumstances attending it. Observe (1.) The Sin it self, the
denial of Christ Jesus his Lord and Master: I know not the Man; and this backed
with an Oath, he Swear that he knew him not. Lord! How may the slavish fear of
Suffering drive the Holiest and best of Men to commit the foulest and the worst
of Sins. Observe (2.) The Occasions leading to this Sin, and they were these,
First, his Following of Christ afar off: To follow Christ was the Effect of
Peter's Faith, but to follow him afar off at this time, was the fruit of Fear,
and the Effect of Frailty. Woe unto us when Temptation comes, if we be far from
Christ's gracious Presence and Assistance. (2.) His being in bad Company,
amongst Christ's Enemies: Would we escape Temptations to Sin, we must then
decline such Company as would allure and draw us into Sin. Peter had better
have been a cold by himself alone, then warming himself at a Fire which was
Compassed in with the Blasphemies of the Multitude; where his Conscience,
though not seared, was yet made hard. (3.) Another grand occasion of Peter's
Falling, was a presumptuous Confidence of his own Strength and Standing; Though
all Men forsake thee, yet will not I. Oh Lord! to presume upon our selves, is
the ready way to provoke thee to leave us to our selves; if ever we stand in
the day of Trial, it is the fear of Falling must enable us to stand; we soon
Fall, if we believe it impossible to Fall. Observe (3.) The Re-iteration and
Repetition of this Sin, he denied Christ again and again; he denies him first
with a Lie, then with an Oath, and next with a Curse. Lord! How dangerous is
it, not to resist the first Beginnings of Sin? If we yield to one Temptation,
Satan will assault us with more and stronger; Peter proceeded from a Denial to
a Lie; from a Lie to an Oath, from an Oath to an Imprecation and Curse; It is
our Wisdom vigorously to Resist Sin at the Beginning; for the^ have we most
Power, and Sin has least. Observe (4.) The heinous and aggravating
Circumstances of St. Peter's Sin; and they are these, (1.) The Character of his
Person, a Disciple, an Apostle, a chief Apostle, a special Favorite, who, with
James and John had the special Honor to be with Christ at his Transfiguration;
yet he denies Christ. (2.) The Person whom he denies, his Master, his Savior
and Redeemer, he that in great Humility had washed Peter's Feet, had eat the
Passover with Peter, had given but just before the Holy Sacrament to Peter, yet
is this kind and condescending Savior denied by Peter. (3.) Consider the
Persons before whom he denied Christ, the Chief Priests Servants. Oh how
surprising, and yet very pleasing was it to them, to see one Disciple Betray
and Sell his Master, and another disown and deny him. (4.) Consider the Time
when he denied him; it was but a few Hours after he had received the Holy
Sacrament from Christ's own hands: how unreasonable then is their Objection
against coming to the Lord's Table, That some who go to it, dishonor Christ:
as soon as they come from it: Such Examples ought: not to discourage us from
Coming to the Ordinance; but should excite and increase our Watchfulness after
we have been there; that our After-deportment may be suitable to the Solemnity
of a Sacramental Table. Observe (5.) What a small Temptation he lay under, thus
shamefully to deny his Lord and Master; a Damsel only at first spoke to him;
had a Band of Armed Soldiers appeared to him, and apprehended him: Had he been
Bound and led away to the Judgment-Hall, and there Threatened with the Sentence
of an ignominious Death, some Excuse might have been made better for him; But
to disown his Relation to Christ upon a word spoken by a sorry Maid that kept
the door; the smallness of the Temptation was an high aggravation of the Crime.
Ah Peter, How little did thou answer thy Name at this time? Thou art not now
a Rock but a Reed, a Pillar blown down by a Woman's Breath. Oh frail Humanity,
whose Strength is Weakness and Infirmity. Note here, That in most of the Saints
Falls Recorded in Scriptures, the first enticers to Sin, or the accidental
occasions of it, were Women; Witness (besides the first Fall, that of Adam's,
where the Woman was first in the Transgression) the Fall of Lot, Samson, David,
Solomon, and Peter; these are sad instances of the Truth of what I speak. A
weak Creature may be a strong Tempter; nothing is too impotent or useless for
the Devil's Service; it was a great Aggravation of Peter's Sin, that the voice
of a poor Maid that kept the door, should be of more Force to overcome him,
then his Faith in Jesus to sustain him. But what shall we say, small things are
sufficient to cast us down, if God does not hold us up; we sink under any
Burden, if God sustains us not, and yield to the least Temptation, if he
leaves us to our selves; a Damsel shall then make a Disciple shrink; and a
Doorkeeper shall be able to drive an Apostle before her. This is the Account
in short of St. Peter's Fall, considered in it self, and with the Circumstances
relating to it. Now follows his Recovery and Rising again by Repentance; and
here we have Observable, the Suddenness of his Repentance, the Means of his
Repentance, and the Manner of his Repentance. Observe (1.) The Suddenness of
St. Peter's Repentance; as his Sin was sad, so was his Repentance speedy: Sins
committed by Surprise, and through the prevalency of a Temptation that suddenly
Assaults us, are much sooner Repented of, then where the sin is presumptuous
and deliberate; David's Murder and Adultery were Deliberate Acts of Sin, in
which he lay almost Twelve Months, without any Solemn Repentance for them. St.
Peter's Denial was hasty and sudden, under a violent pang and passion of Fear,
and he takes the warning of the Cock's Crowing, to go forth speedily and weep
for his Transgression. Observe (2.) The Means of his Repentance, which was
Twofold; the less Principal-means, was the Crowing of the Cock, the more
principal Means were Christ's looking upon Peter, and Peter's Remembering the
word of Christ. (1.) The less principal Means of St. Peter's Rising and
Recovery by Repentance, was the Crowing of the Cock; as the voice of the Maid
occasioned him to Sin, so the voice of the Cock occasioned him to Reflect, That
God who always can work without Means, can ever, when he please, work by weak
and contemptible Means, and open the Mouth of a Bird or a Beast for the
Conversion of a Man. But why does our Lord make use of the Crowing of the Cock,
as a Means of bringing St. Peter to Repentance? There is ever some Mystery in
Christ's Institutions and Instruments; The Cock was a Preacher to call St.
Peter to his Duty, there being something of Emblem between a Cock and a
Preacher; The Preacher ought to have the Wings of the Cock, to rouse up himself
from Drowsiness and Security, and to awaken others to a sense of their Duty: He
must have the Watchfulness of the Cock, to be ever ready to discover, and
fore-warn Danger; He must have the voice of the Cock to cry aloud, to tell
Israel of their Sin, to terrify the Roaring Lion of Hell and make him Tremble,
as they say the natural Lion does; in a word, he must observe the Hours of the
Cock, to Crow at all Seasons; to Preach the Word in Season and out of Season.
Again (2.) The more principal Means of St. Peter's Recovery were, Christ's
looking upon Peter, and Peter's remembering the word of Christ. (1.) Christ's
looking upon Peter; our Savior looked upon Peter, before either Peter looked
upon our Savior, or upon himself. Oh wonderful Act of Love and Grace toward
this fallen Disciple. Christ was now upon his Trial for his Life (a time when
our Thoughts would have been wholly taken up about our selves) but even then
did Christ find Leisure to think upon Peter, to Remember his Disconsolate
Disciple, to turn himself about, and give him a pitiful but piercing Look,
even a Look that melted and dissolved him into Tears; We never begin to lament
our Sins, but we are first Lamented by our Savior; Jesus, looked upon Peter,
that was the first more principal Means of his Repentance. But (2.) the other
Means was, Peter remembering of the word of the Lord, Before the C^ck Crow thou
shall deny me. Now this Remembrance was an Applicative and Feeling Remembrance;
he Remembered the Prediction of Christ, and applied it sensibly to himself;
Teaching us, That the efficacy of Christ's Word, in order to a sound
Repentance, depends not upon the Historical Remembrance of it, but upon the
close Application thereof to every Man's Conscience. Observe (3.) The Manner of
St. Peter's Repentance, it was Secret, it was Sincere, it was Lasting and
Abibiding. (1.) It was secret; He went out and wept, Vere dolet qui sine Test
dolet; He sought a place of Retirement where he might mourn in Secret:
Solitariness is most agreeable to an afflicted Spirit; Yet must I add, that as
St. Peter's Sorrow, so probably his Shame might cause him to go forth and weep.
Christ looked upon him, and how ashamed must he be to look upon Christ, seeing
he had so lately denied that he had ever seen him. (2.) St. Peter's Repentance
was Sincere, He wept bitterly; His Grief was extraordinary, and his Tears
abundant; There is always a weeping that must follow Sin; Sin must cost the
Soul Sorrow, either here or in Hell; We must now either Mourn a while, or
Lament for ever. Doubtless with Peter's Tears there was joined hearty
Confession of Sin to God, and smart Reflections upon himself after this manner;
Lord! What have I done? I a Disciple, I an Apostle, I that did so lately
acknowledge my Master to be Christ the Lord; I that spoke with so much
Assurance, Though all Men deny thee, yet will not I; I that promised to lay
down my Life for his sake, yet have I denied him, yet have I with Oaths and
Imprecations Disowned him, and this at the Voice of a Damsel, not at the sight
of a Drawn Sword presented at my Breast. Lord! What weakness? what wickedness,
what unfaithfulness have I been guilty of? Oh that my Head were Waters, and
mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might weep all my days for the Fault of
this one Night. Thus may we suppose our Lapsed Apostle to have bemoaned
himself: And happy was it for him that he did so, for Blessed are the Tears of
a Converted Revolter, and happy is the Misery of a Mourning Offender. Observe
(3.) St. Peter's Repentance was not only Secret and Sincere, but Lasting and
Abiding; He retained a very quick Sense, and lively Remembrance of this Sin
upon his Mind all his Life after. Ecclesiastical History Reports, that ever
after when St. Peter heard the Crowing of the Cock, he fell upon his Knees and
wept: Others say, That he was wont to rise at Midnight, and spend the Time in
Prayer and Humiliation, between Cock-Crowing and Daylight: And the Papists who
delight to turn every thing into Folly and Superstition, first began that
Practice of setting up what we call Weather-Cocks upon Towers and Steeples, to
put People in mind of St. Peter's Fall and Repentance by that Signal. Lastly,
St. Peter's Repentance was attended with an extraordinary Zeal and Forwardness
for the Service of Christ, to the end of his Days. He had a burning Love
toward the Holy Jesus ever after, which is now improved into a Seraphick
Flame; Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee, says
himself, John 21.17. And as an Evidence of it, he fed Christ's Sheep; For in
the Acts of the Apostles we read of his Extraordinary Diligence to spread the
Gospel, and his Travels in order thereunto are Computed by some to be Nine
hundred and Fifty Miles. To end all, have any of us fallen with Peter; though
not with a formal Abjuration, yet by a Practical denying of him, let us go
forth and weep with him, let us be more vigilant and watchful over our selves
for the time to come, let us express more fervent Love and Zeal for Christ,
more diligence in his Service, more Concernedness for his Honor and Glory:
This would be an Happy Improvement of this Example; God grant it may have that
Blessed Effect.

63 And the Men that held Jesus mocked him, and smote him. 64 And when they had
Blind-folded him, they stroke him on the Face, and asked him, saying, Prophecy
who he is that smote thee. 65 And many other things blasphemously spoke they
against him.

Observe here, The vile Affronts, the horrid Abuses, the Injuries and
Indignities which were put upon the Holy and Innocent Jesus, in the day of his
Sufferings; the rude Officers and Servants spit in his Face, Blindfold his
Eyes, smite him with their Hands, and in Contempt and Scorn, bid him Prophecy,
who it was that smote him. Verily, There is no degree of Contempt, no mark of
Shame, no kind of Suffering, which we ought to Decline for Christ's sake, who
hid not his Face from Shame and Spitting upon our Account.

66 And as soon as it was day, the Elders of the people, and the Chief Priests,
and Scribes came together, and led him into their Council. 67 Saying, Art thou
the Christ? Tell us; And he said* If I tell you, you will not believe. 68 And
if I also ask you, you will not answer me, nor let me go. 69 Hereafter shall
the Son of Man sit on the Right Hand of the power of God. 70 Then said they
all, Art thou then the Son of God? And he said unto them, Ye say that I am. 71
And they said, What need we any farther Witness? for we our selves have heard
of his own Mouth.

Our Lord is now Arraigned by the Chief Priests, and Observe the Indictment of
Blasphemy is brought in against him; What need we any farther Witness? we have
heard his Blasphemy. Abominable Wickedness! It is not in the Power of Innocence
it self; nay, not in the Power of the greatest and unspotted Innocence, to
protect from Slander and false Accusation. Observe farther, The great Meekness
of our Savior under all these ill Suggestions, and false Accusations, as a
Lamb before the Shearer, so is he Dumb, and opened not his Mouth. Learn thence,
That to bear the Revilings, Contradictions, and false Accusations of Men, with
a Silent and Submissive Spirit, is an excellent and Christ-like Temper. Though
a Trial for his Innocent Life was now Managed most Maliciously and Illegally
against him; yet When he was Reviled, Reviled not again, when he Suffered, he
Threatened not: Oh may the same Meek and Humble Mind be in us which was also in
Christ Jesus, who instead of Reviling his Accusers, Prayed for his Murderers,
and Offered up his Blood to God on the Behalf of them that shed it. Lord Jesus
help us to set thy Instructive Example continually before us, and to be daily
Correcting and Reforming of our Lives by that Blessed Pattern. Amen.

CHAP. XXIII.
1 AND the whole Multitude of them arose, and led him unto Pilate. 2 And they
began to accuse him, saying, We found this Fellow perverting the Na^ion, and
forbidding to give Tribute to Caesar, saying, That he himself is Christ a King.
3 And Pilate asked him, saying, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he answered
him and said, Thou say it. 4 Then said Pilate to the Chief Priests and to
the People, I find no fault in this Man. 5 And they were the more fierce,
saying, He stirs up the People, Teaching throughout all Jeury, beginning
from Galilee to this place. 6 When Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked whether
the Man were a Galilean. 7 And as soon as he heard that he belonged to Herod's
Jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who himself was also at Jerusalem at that
time. 8 And when Herod saw Jesus he was exceeding glad, for he was desirous to
see him of a long Season, because he had heard many things of him, and he hoped
to have seen some Miracle done by him. 9 Then he questioned with him in many
words, but he answered him nothing. 10 And the Chief Priests and Scribes stood
and vehemently accused him. 11 And Herod with his Men of War set him at naught,
and mocked him; And arrayed him in a gorgeous Robe, and sent him again to
Pilate. 12 And the same day Pilate and Herod were made Friends together, for
before they were at enmity between themselves.

In this Chapter we have a Relation of the Black and Saddest Tragedy that ever
was Acted upon the Stage of the World, Namely, the Barbarous and Bloody Murder
of the Holy and Innocent Jesus, by the Jews his own Countrymen; the Best of
Kings put to Death by his own Subjects. And the first step toward it is his
Arraignment before Pilate and Herod; they Post him from one to another; Pilate
sends him to Herod, and Herod having made sufficient Sport with him, Remands
him to Pilate: Neither of them find any Fault in him worthy of Death, yet
neither of them would Release him. Here Observe, That our Savior being before
Pilate, Answers him Readily and Cautiously, Art thou the King of the Jews? says
Pilate; Thou say it, says our Savior. Art thou the Christ, the Son of the
Blessed? He Replied, I am. Hence says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.13. That Jesus
Christ before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good Confession. Teaching us, That
though we may, and sometimes ought to hold our Peace when our Reputation is
Concerned; yet must we never be Silent, when the Honor of God and his Truth
may be effectually promoted, by a Free and a Full Confession; yet is it farther
Observable, That our Savior being before Herod, would neither Answer him to
any Question, nor Work any Miracle before him. This was an Instance and
Evidence of our Lord's great Humility in refusing to Work Miracles before
Herod, who desired it only to gratify his Curiosity. Thus do vile Men abuse the
Holy Power of God, desiring to see it exerted for Admiration and Pastime; not
to be Convinced, or Converted by it. And as Admirable was the Patience, as the
Humility of Christ, and his present Silence, who neither at Herod's Request,
nor at the Jews Importunity and false Accusations, could be moved to Answer any
thing. Observe Lastly, That though Herod had Murdered Christ's Forerunner,
John the Baptist, and our Savior's own Life was in danger by Herod heretofore,
yet now he had him in his Hands, he lets him go; only he first abuses him, and
mocks him, and Arrays him in a Gorgeous Robe, like a Mock King. Thus were all
the Marks of Scorn imaginable put upon our Dear Redeemer; yet all this Jearing
and sportful Shame did our Lord undergo, to show what was due unto us for our
Sins; and also to give us an Example to bear all the Shame and Reproach
imaginable for his sake; Who for the Joy that was set before him, despised the
Shame, Hebr. 12.2.

13 And Pilate when he had called together the Chief Priests, and the Rulers,
and the People. 14 Said unto them, Ye have brought this Man unto me, as one
that perverteth the People, And behold I have examined him before you, and find
no fault in this Man, touching those things whereof ye accuse him. 15 No, nor
yet Herod; For I sent you to him, and lo, nothing worthy of Death is done unto
him. 16 I will therefore chastize him, and Release him. 17 For of necessity he
must Release one unto them at the Feast. 18 And they cried out all at once,
saying, Away with this Man, and Release unto us Barabbas. 19 Who for a certain
Sedition made in the City, and for Murder was cast into Prison. 20 Pilate
therefore willing to Release Jesus, spoke again to them. 21 But they cried,
saying, Crucify him, Crucify him. 22 And he said unto them the third time, Why?
What Evil has he done? I have found no Cause of Death in him; I will therefore
Chastise him, and let him go. 23 And they were instant with loud Voices,
Requiring that he might be Crucified: And the voices of them, and of the Chief
Priests prevailed. 24 And Pilate gave Sentence that it should be as they
Required. 25 And he Released unto them, him that for Sedition and Murder was
cast into Prison, whom they had desired; But he delivered Jesus to their Will.

Observe here, (1.) How unwilling, how very unwilling Pilate was to be the
Instrument of our Savior's Death: One while he Expostulates with the Chief
Priests, Saying, What Evil has he done? Nay, St. Luke here declares, that
Pilate came forth Three several Times, professing that he found no Fault in
him. Where Note, How much more Justice and Equit^ Christ met with from Pilate
an Heathen, then from the Chief Priests, and People of the Jews, professing the
true Religion. Oh how desperate is the Hatred that grows upon the Root of
Religion. Learn hence, That Hypocrites within the Church may be guilty of such
Tremendous Acts of Wickedness, as the Consciences of Infidels and Pagans
without the Church may Boggle at, and Protest against. Pilate a Pagan Absolves
Christ, whilst the Hypocritical Jews that heard his Doctrine, and saw his
Miracles, do condemn him. Observe (2.) How Pilate at last suffers himself to be
overcome, with the Importunity of the Jews, and delivers the Holy and Innocent
Jesus, contrary to his Judgment and Conscience, to the Will of his Murderers.
It is a vain Apology for Sin, when Persons pretend that they are not committed
with their own Consent; but at the Instigation and Importunity of others: For
such is the Frame and Constitution of Man's Soul, that none can make a Person
wicked without his own Consent; It was no Extenuation of Pilate's Sin, no
Alleviation of his Punishment, that to please the People he delivered up our
Savior, contrary to the Direction of his own Conscience, to be Crucified.
Observe (3.) The Person whose Life the wicked Jews preferred before the Life of
the Holy Jesus, Barabbas; We will that thou Release Barabbas, and destroy
Jesus: Mark these Hypocritical High Priests, who pretended such Zeal for God
and Religion, they prefer the Life of a Person Guilty of the highest
Immoralities and Debaucheries, even Murder and Sedition, before the best Man
that ever lived in the World. But whence sprang the Malice and Hatred of the
High Priests, and People of the Jews against our Savior? Why plainly from
hence, Christ Interpreted the Law of God more strictly than their Lusts could
bear; and he lived a more Holy, Useful, and Excellent Life than they could
endure. Now nothing enrages the Men of the World more against the Professors,
but especially the Preachers of the Gospel, then Holiness of Doctrine and
Strictness of Life and Conversation. Such as Preach, and Live well, let them
expect such Enmity and Opposition, such Malice and Persecution, such Sufferings
and Trials as will shock an ordinary Patience and Constancy of Mind. Our Master
met with it, let his Zealous Ministers prepare for it.

26 And as they led him away, they laid hold upon one Simon a Cyrenian, coming
out of the Country, and on him they laid the Cross, that he might bear it after
Jesus.

The Sentence of Death being past by Pilate, who can with dry Eyes, behold the
sad Pomp of our Savior's Execution: Forth comes the Blessed Jesus out of
Pilate's Gates, bearing that Cross which soon after was to bear him; with his
Cross, on his Shoulder, he Marches toward Golgotha; and when they see he can
go no faster, they Compel Simon of Cyrenea, not out of Compassion, but
Indignation, to bear his Cross; This Cyrenian being a Gentile who bare Christ's
Cross, some think, thereby was signified, that the Gentiles should have a part
in Christ, as well as the Jews, and be Sharers with them in the Benefits of the
Cross.

27 And there followed him a great Company of People, and of Women, who also
Bewailed and Lamented him. 28 But Jesus turning unto them, said, Daughters of
Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and your Children. 29 For
Behold the Days are coming in which they shall say, Blessed are the Barren, and
the Wombs that never Bare, and the Paps which never gave Suck. 30 Then shall
they begin to say to the Mountains fall on us, and to the Hills cover us. 31
For if they do these things in the green Tree, what shall be done in the dry?

There were Four sorts of Persons which Attended our Savior at his
Crucifixion, The Executioners that Tormented him, the Jews that mocked him, the
Spectators and Lookers on that Marked him, and Sympathizing Friends which
Lamented him; These last Christ thus bespoke, Weep not for me, but for your
selves; That is, Weep rather upon your own Account, then mine; Reserve your
Sorrows for the Calamities coming upon your Selves and your Children. It is
very probable, That the Tears and Lamentations of many of these Mourners, were
but the fruits of tender Nature, not the Effects of Faith, and flowing from a
Principle of Grace. Learn thence, That melting Affections and Sorrows, even
from the Sense of Christ's Sufferings, are no infallible Marks of Grace. The
History of Christ's Sufferings is very Tragical and Pathetical, and may melt
ingenuous Nature, where there is no Renewed Principle of Grace.

32 And there were also two other Malefactors led with him to be put to Death.
33 And when they were come to the place which is called Calvary, there they
Crucified him, and the Malefactors with him; one on the Right Hand, and the
other on the Left.

Here we see the Infamous Company that our holy Lord Suffered with; Two
Thieves: It had been a sufficient Disparagement to our Blessed Savior, to be
Sorted with the best of Men; But to be numbered with the Scum of Mankind, is
such an Indignity as Confounds our Thoughts: This was designed by the Jews to
dishonor and disgrace our Savior the more; and to persuade the World, that he
was the greatest of Offenders: But God over ruled this, for Fulfilling an
Ancient Prophecy concerning the Messiah, Isa. 53. last, and he was Numbered
with the Transgressors.

34 Then said Jesus, Father, Forgive them, for they know not what they do.

Christ had often Preached the Doctrine of Forgiving Enemies, and Praying for
them, he Practices it here himself in a most Exemplary manner. Where Note, (1.)
The Mercy desired and Prayed for, and that is, Forgiveness. (2.) The Person
desiring that Mercy, Christ, the Dying Jesus. (3.) The Persons for whom it is
Desired, his Bloody Murderers; Father, Forgive them. (4.) The Argument used,
or Motive urged to procure the Mercy; Forgive them, For they know not what they
do. Learn hence, (1.) That Ignorance is the usual Cause of Enmity against
Christ. (2.) That there is Forgiveness with God for such as oppose, yea
Persecute Christ out of Ignorance. (3.) That to Forgive Enemies, and to beg
Forgiveness for them, is an Evidence of a Christ-like Frame of Spirit; Father,
Forgive them.

35 And the People stood beholding, and the Rulers also with them derided him,
saying, He saved others, let him save himself, if he be Christ the chosen of
God. 36 And the Soldiers also mocked him, coming to him, and offering him
Vinegar. 37 And saying, If thou be the King of the Jews, save thy self. 38 And
a Superscription was written over him in Hebrew, in Greek, and Latin; This is
the King of the Jews.

Observe here, (1.) A mighty Aggravation of our Lord's Sufferings upon the
Cross, Namely, The mocking Derision which he met with in his Dying Moments. As
he endured the Pain, so he despised the Shame: Cruel Mockings was our Lord
Tried with, both from the Common People, and from the Chief Priests; yet the
Common People's Reviling him, and wagging their Heads at him, was not so much
to be taken Notice of, as the Chief Priests, who were Men of Age and Gravity,
and the Ministers of Religion; For them Barbarously to Mock him in his Misery,
and which was worse, Atheistically to Jear and Scoff at his Faith and Affiance
in God; Saying, He trusted in God that he would deliver him, let him deliver
him if he will have him. This was such an Indignity as Confounds our Thoughts.
But from hence we Learn, (1.) That Persecutors are generally Atheistical
Scoffers; the Chief Priests and Elders who Persecuted Christ, do Blaspheme God;
they mock at his Power, and deride his Providence, which was as wicked as to
deny his Being. (2.) We Learn from this Example, That such as Minister to God
in Holy things, by way of Office, if they be not the Best, they are generally
the worst of Men; no such bitter Enemies to the Power of Godliness, as such
Preachers, who were never Experimentally Acquainted with the Efficacy and Power
of it, upon their own Hearts and Lives. Observe (2.) The Inscription wrote by
Pilate over our suffering Savior, This is Jesus, the King of the Jews. It was
the Custom of the Romans, when they Crucified a Malefactor, to publish the
Cause of his Death, in Capital Letters placed over the Head of the Person. Now
it is Observable how wonderfully the Wisdom of God overruled the Heart and Pen
of Pilate, to draw this Title, which was truly Honorable, and fix it to his
Cross. Pilate is Christ's Herald, and proclaims him King of the Jews. Learn
hence, That the Kingship and Regal Dignity of Christ was proclaimed by an
Enemy, and that in a time of his greatest Sufferings and Reproaches. Pilate
without his Knowledge did our Savior an eminent piece of Service; Verily he
did that for Christ, which none of his own Disciples durst do; not that he did
it designedly, and with any intent to put Honor upon Christ, but from the
special overruling Providence of God: No thanks to Pilate for all this,
Because the Highest Services performed to Christ undesignedly shall never be
Accepted nor Rewarded by him.

39 And one of the Malefactors which were hanged, Railed on him, saying, If
Thou be Christ, Save thy self and us. 40 But the other Answering, Rebuked him,
saying, Do thou not fear God, seeing thou art in the same Condemnation? 41
And we indeed justly; For we receive the due Reward of our Deeds. But this Man
has done nothing amiss. 42 And he said unto Jesus, Lord, Remember me when thou
come into thy Kingdom.

Here we have a farther Aggravation of our Lord's Sufferings upon the Cross,
from the Company he Suffered with, the Two Thieves who Reviled him with the
rest. Saint Matthew and Saint Mark say, They both Reviled him, Saint Luke says
One of them Reviled; possibly both of them might do it at first, and one of
them Repent, which if so, increases the wonder of the Penitent Thiefs
Conversion: From the Impenitent Thiefs Reviling of Christ, when he was at the
very point of Death, and even in the Suburbs of Hell, we Learn, That neither
Shame nor Pain, will change the Mind of a Resolute Sinner; but even then, when
he is in the Suburbs of Hell will he Blaspheme. From the Penitent Thief's
Confessing of Christ, and Praying to him, Lord, Remember me when thou come
into thy Kingdom; We Learn, Both the Efficacy and Freeness of Divine Grace.
(1.) The efficacious Power of it: Oh how Powerful must tha^ Grace be, which
wrought such a Change in an instant, which supplied that Heart in a Moment,
which had been hardening in Sin for so many Years. (2.) The Freeness of it;
which takes hold of his Heart, when he was at the height of Sin, and was not
only void of Grace, but seemed past Grace. Oh the powerful Efficacy, and
adorable Freeness of the Heart-changing Grace of God in this vile Person; it
disposed him to own his Sin, to confess the justness of his Punishment, to
justify Christ's Innocence, to Reprove his Fellow-Companion, to pray to a
Crucified Christ, and to intercede with him, not for present Deliverance from
Death, but for a place in Christ's Kingdom. Where we Learn, (1.) That true
Conversion is never too late for obtaining Mercy and Salvation. (2.) That True
Conversion, how late soever, will have its Fruits: The Forementioned Fruits of
Faith and Repentance, were found with this penitent Thief; yet must not this
extraordinary Case be drawn into Example: This Extraordinary and Miraculous
Grace of God is not to be expected ordinarily; We have no warrant to expect an
over-powering degree of God's Grace, to turn our Hearts in an instant at the
Hour of Death, when we have Lived in Forgetfulness of God, and in a Supine
neglect of our Soul's Concerns all the days of our Life: For it is evident, as
to this Case of the Penitent Thief's Conversion at the last Hour, (1.) It is an
Example without a Promise; (2.) It is but a single Example; (3.) It is an
Example Recorded but by one Evangelist, the Spirit of God foreseeing what an
ill use some would make of this Instance, leaves one Example upon Record, that
none might despair, and but one, that none might Presume. (4.) This Thief
probably never had any Knowledge of Christ before. (5.) This was a Miracle with
the Glory whereof Christ would Honor the Ignominy of his Cross. So that we
have no more ground to expect such another Conversion, then we have to expect a
Second Crucifixion. This Converted Person was the first Fruits of the Blood of
the Cross. From whence we Learn, That God can, and sometimes does, though very
seldom, prepare Men for Glory, immediately before their Dissolution by Death.

43 And Jesus said unto him, verily I say unto thee, To Day shall thou be with
me in Paradise.

These Words are our Savior's Gracious Answer to the Penitent Thief's Humble
Prayer, Lord, Remember me in thy Kingdom, says the Thief, To day shall thou be
with me in my Kingdom; says our Savior: Where Note (1.) The Immortality of the
Souls of Men is without all doubt: Our desires after, and hopes for
Immortality, do prove our Souls Immortal, and capable of that State. (2.) That
there is a Future and Eternal State into which Souls pass at Death. Death is
our passage out of the swift River of Time, into the Boundless and Bottomless
Ocean of Eternity. (3.) That the Souls of all the Righteous at Death, are
immediately Received into a State of Happiness and Glory; This day shall thou
be with me; not after thy Resurrection, but immediately after thy Dissolution.
That Man's Soul is asleep, or worse, that Dreams of the Soul's sleeping till
the Resurrection; For why should the Believers Happiness be deferred, when they
are immediately capable of Enjoying it? Why should their Salvation slumber,
when the Wicked's Damnation slumbereth not? How do such delays consist with
Christ's ardent Desires, and his Peoples vehement Longings to be together.

44 And it was about the sixth Hour, and there was a Darkness over all the
Earth until the Ninth Hour. 45 And the Sun was Darkened, and the Veil of the
Temple was Rent in the midst. 46 And when Jesus had cried with a loud Voice, he
said, Father, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit: And having said thus, he gave
up the Ghost. 47 Now when the Centurion saw what was done, he Glorified God;
saying, Certainly this was a Righteous Man. 48 And all the People that came
together to that sight, beholding the things which were done, smote their
Breasts and Returned. 49 And all his Acquaintance, and the Women that followed
him from Galilee, stood afar off beholding these things.

Observe here, (1.) What Prodigies in Nature happened and fell out at the
Crucifixion of our Savior; The Sun was Darkened, at the Setting of the Son of
Righteousness; And the Veil of the Temple was Rent, signifying, That God was
now about to Forsake his Temple, that the Ceremonial Law was now Abolishing,
and the Partition Wall betwixt Jew and Gentile, being now pulled down, all may
have Access to God, through the Blood of a Mediator. Observe (2.) The last
Prayer of our Savior, before his Death, Father, into thy Hands I commend my
Spirit: They are words full of Faith and Comfort, fit to be the last Breathings
of every Gracious Soul in this World. Learn hence, That Dying Believers are
both Warranted and Encouraged by Christ's Example, Believingly to Commend their
precious Souls into the Hands of God, as a Gracious Father; Father into thy
Hands. Observe (3.) What influence our Savior's Death had upon the Centurion,
He Glorified God, saying, Verily this was a Righteous Man. Here Note, That
Christ had a Testimony of his Innocence and Righteousness given unto him from
all sorts of Persons whatsoever; Pilate and Herod pronounced him Innocent;
Pilate's Wife proclaimed him a Righteous Person; Judas the Traitor declared it
was innocent Blood; the Thief on the Cross affirmed, he had done nothing amiss;
and the Centurion owned him to be a Righteous Man; yea, the Son of God, Mark
15.39. only the Pharisees and Chief Priests, which were Teachers of others, not
Ignorance, but Obstinacy and Malice Blinded and Hardened them to their Ruin and
Destruction, instead of Owning and Receiving him for their Savior, they
Ignominiously put him to Death as the vilest Impostor.

50 And behold there was a Man Named Joseph, a Counselor, and he was a good
Man, and a just. 51 (The same had not consented to the Counsel and Deed of
them) he was of Arimathea, a City of the Jews; who also himself waited for the
Kingdom of God. 52 This Man went unto Pilate, and begged the Body of Jesus. 53
And he took it down, and wrapped it in Linen, and laid it in a Sepulcher, that
was hewn in Stone, wherein never Man before was laid, 54 And that Day was the
Preparation, and the Sabbath drew on. 55 And the Women also which came with him
from Galilee, followed after, and beheld the Sepulcher, and how his Body was
laid. 56 And they Returned and prepared Spices and Ointments; and rested the
Sabbath Day, according to the Commandment.

The Circumstances of our Lord's Funeral, and Honorable Interrment are here
Recorded by our Evangelist; such a Funeral as never was, since Graves were
first Dug. Where Observe (1.) Our Lord's Body must be Begged before it could
be Buried; The Dead Bodies of Malefactors being in the Power, and at the
Disposal of the Judge that Condemns them. Observe (2.) The Person that Begged
this Body, and bestowed a Decent and Honorable Buryal upon it, Joseph of
Arimathea, a worthy, though a close Disciple. Grace does not always make a
public and open Show where it is: But as there is much secret Riches in the
Bowels of the Earth, though unseen; so is there much Grace in the Hearts of
some Saints, which the World takes little Notice of. Observe (3.) The Mourners
that followed our Savior's Hearse to the Grave; The Women which came out of
Galilee, a poor Train of Mourners; The Apostles who should have been most
officious to bear his Holy Body to the Ground, were sometime since all
Scattered, afraid to own their Master, either Dying, or Dead. Funeral Pomo had
been no way suitable, either to the End or Manner of our Lord's Death, and
accordingly here is is nothing like. Observe (4.) The Grave or Sepulcher in
which our Holy Lord lay; it was in a Sepulcher Hewn out of a Rock; That so his
Enemies might have no occasion to say, that his Disciples stole him away by
secret Holes, and unseen Passages under Ground; It was in a New Sepulcher,
Wherein never Man was laid before, lest his Adversaries should say, it was
another that was Risen, who was Buried there before him: And has Buried in a
Garden. As by the Sin of the first Adam we were driven out of the Garden of
Pleasure, the Earthly Paradise, so by the Sufferings of the Second Adam, who
lay Buried in a Garden, we may hope for Entrance into the Heavenly Paradise.
Observe (5.) The manner of our Lord's Funeral, it was Hasty, Open and Decent.
Hasty, because of the Preparation for the Sabbath; Open, that all Persons might
be Spectators, and none might say, He was Buried before he was Dead. Decent,
being wrapped in fine Linen, and Perfumed with Spices. Observe (6.) The Reasons
why our Lord was thus Buried; Seeing he was to Rise again in as short a Time as
other Men lie by the Walls, doubtless it was to declare the Certainty of his
Death, to Fulfill the Types and Prophecies which went before of him, As Jonas
being Three days and three nights in the Whales Belly; He was also Buried to
Complete his Humiliation; This was the lowest step to which he could Descend in
his Abased State. In a word, Christ went into the Grave, that he might Conquer
Death in its own Territories and Dominions. Observe (7.) Of what Use our Lord's
Buryal is to us his Followers; it shows us the amazing Depths of his
Humiliation, from what, and to what his Love brought him, even from the Bosom
of his Father, to the Bosom of the Grave. It may Comfort us against the fears
of Death, and the Terrors of the Grave: The Grave could not long keep Christ,
it shall not always keep Christians: It was a Loathsome Prison before, it is a
Persumed Bed now: He whose Head is in Heaven, need not fear to put his Feet
into the Grave. Awake and Sing, thou that dwell in the Dust, for the Enmity
of the Grave is slain by Christ.

CHAP. XXIV.
This Last Chapter of St. Luke's Gospel, contains the History of our Savior's
Resurrection, and gives us an Account of what he did upon Earth, between the
Time of his glorious Resurrection and Triumphant Ascension.

1 NOW upon the first day of the Week, very early in the Morning, they came
unto the Sepulcher; bringing the Spices which they had prepared, and certain
others with them. 2 And they found the Stone Rolled away from Sepulcher. 3 And
they entered in, and found not the Body of our Lord Jesus. 4 And it came to
pass as they were much perplexed thereabout; Behold Two Men stood by them, in
shining Garments. 5 And as they were afraid, and bowed down their Faces to the
Earth, they said unto them, Why seek ye the Living among the Dead? 6 He is not
here, but is Risen: Remember how he spoke unto you, when he was yet in Galilee.
7 Saying, The Son of Man must be delivered into the Hands of Sinful Men, and be
Crucified, and the Third day Rise Again. 8 And they Remembered his Words. 9 And
Returned from the Sepulcher, and told all these things unto the Apostles, and
to all the Rest. 10 It was Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the Mother of
James, and other Women that were with them which told these things unto the
Apostles. 11 And their words seemed to them as Idle Tales, and they believed
them not. 12 Then arose Peter and ran unto the Sepulcher, and stooping down, he
beheld the Linen Clothes laid by themselves, and departed, wondering in
himself at that which was come to pass.

The Lord of Life, who was put to Death upon the Friday, was Buried in the
Evening of the same Day; and his Holy Body Rested in the silent Grave, all the
next Day, being the Jewish Sabbath, and some part of the Morning Following.
Thus Rose he again the Third Day, according to the Scriptures, neither sooner
nor later; Not sooner, lest the Truth of his Death should have been questioned,
that he did not Dye at all; not later, lest the Faith of his Disciples should
have failed: Accordingly, when the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, getting
the other Women together, she and they set out very early in the Morning, to
Visit the Holy Sepulcher, and about Sunrising they get to it, intending with
their Spices and Odours farther to Embalm their Lord's Body. Observe here (1.)
That although the Hearts of these Holy Women did burn with an Ardent Zeal and
Affection to their Crucified Lord; Yet the Commanded Duties of the Sabbath are
not omitted by them; they keep close, and silently spend that Holy Day in a
Mixture of Grief and Hope; A good Pattern of Sabbath-Sanctification, and worthy
of our Christian Imitation. Observe (2.) These Holy Women go, but not
empty-handed: She that had bestowed a costly Alablaster upon Christ, whilst
alive, prepares no less Precious Odours for him now Dead; thereby paying their
last Homage to our Savior's Corpse. But what need of Odours to perfume a
precious Body which could not see Corruption? True, his Holy Body did not want
them, but the Love and Affection of his Friends could not withhold them.
Observe (3.) How great a Tribute of Respect and Honor is due and payable to
the Memory of these Holy Women, for their great Magnanimity and Courage: They
followed Christ when his Cowardly Disciples left him; they accompanied him to
his Cross, they attended his Hearse to the Grave, when his Disciples did not,
durst not appear; And now very early in the Morning they Visit his Sepulcher,
Fearing neither the Darkness of the Night, nor the Presence of the Watchmen,
though a Band of rude Soldiers. Learn hence, That Courage and Resolution is the
special Gift of God; if he gives it to the feebler Sex, even to timorous and
fearful Women, it shall not be in the power of Armed Men to make them afraid.
But to come to a close Consideration of the several Circumstances relating to
the Resurrection of our Holy Lord. Note (1.) With what Pomp and Triumph our
Holy Lord Arises; Two Men, that is, Two Angels in the Shape of Men, V. 4. are
sent from Heaven to roll away the Stone. But could not Christ have Risen then
without the Angels help? Yes doubtless; he that Raised himself, could easily
have Rolled away the Stone himself; But God thinks fit to send an Officer from
Heaven, to open the Prison-door of the Grave; and by setting our Surety at
Liberty, proclaims our Debt to the Divine Justice ^^^y Satisfied. Besides it
was fit that the Angels who had been Witnesses of our Savior's Passion, should
also be Witnesses of his Resurrection. Note (2.) our Lord's Resurrection
declared, He is Risen, he is not here. Almighty God never intended, that the
Darling of his Soul should be left in an obscure Sepulcher; He is not here,
said the Angels, where you laid him, where you left him; Death has lost its
Prey, and the Grave has lost its Prisoner. Note (3.) It is is not said, He is
not here, for he is Raised, but he is Risen, V. 6. The Original Word imports,
the Active Power of Christ, or the Self-quickning Principle by which Christ
Raised himself from the Dead, Acts 1.3. He showed himself alive after his
Passion. Hence Learn, That it was the Divine Nature, or Godhead of Christ,
which Raised the Human Nature from Death to Life, others were Raised from the
Grave by Christ's Power, but he Raised himself by his own Power. Note (4.) The
Persons to whom our Lord's Resurrection was first declared and made known, to
Women, to the two Mary's: But why to Women? and why to these Women? To Women
first, because God sometimes makes choice of weak Means, for producing great
Effects; knowing, that the weakness of the Instrument Redounds to the greater
Honor of the Agent: In the whole Dispensation of the Gospel, God intermixes
Divine Power with Humane Weakness: Thus the Conception of Christ was by the
Power of the Holy Ghost, but his Mother a poor Woman, a Carpenter's Spouse; So
the Crucifixion of Christ was in much Meanness and outward Baseness, being
Crucified between two Thieves; But the Powers of Heaven and Earth Trembling,
the Rocks Rending, the Graves opening, showed a mixture of Divine Power. Thus
here, God Selects Women, to declare that he will Honor what Instruments he
pleases, for the Accomplishment of his own Purposes. But why to these Women,
the two Mary's, is the first Discovery made of our Lord's Resurrection?
Possibly it was a Reward for their Magnanimity and Masculine Courage. These
Women cleave to Christ, when the Apostles forsook him: They Assisted at his
Cross, they Attended at his Funeral, they Waited at his Sepulcher; These Women
had more Courage than the Apostles, therefore God makes them Apostles to the
Apostles. This was a Tacit Rebuke, a Secret Check given to the Apostles, that
they should be thus outdone by Women: These Holy Women went before the
Apostles in the last Services that were done for Christ; and therefore the
Apostles here come after them in their Rewards and Comforts. Note (5.) The
quick Message which these Holy Women carry to the Disconsolate Disciples, of
the Joyful news of our Savior's Resurrection; They Returned from the
Sepulcher, and told all these things to the Eleven, Verse 9. And the other
Evangelists say, That they were sent and bidden to go to the Apostles with the
Notices of the Resurrection: Go tell the Disciples, says the Angel, Matthew
28.7. Go tell my Brethren, says Christ, Verse 10. A most endearing Expression;
Christ might have said, Go tell my Apostate Apostles, my Cowardly Disciples,
that left me in my Danger, that durst not own me in the High Priest's Hall,
that durst not come within the Shadow of my Cross, nor within sight of my
Sepulcher. But not one Word of all this, by way of upbraiding them for their
late shameful Cowardice, but all words of Divine Indulgence, and of endearing
Kindness, Go tell my Brethren: Where Mark, that Christ calls them Brethren
after his Resurrection and Exaltation, thereby showing, that the Change of his
Condition, had wrought no Change in his Affection toward his poor Disciples;
But those that were his Brethren before, in the Time of his Humiliation and
Abasement, are so still, after his Exaltation and Advancement; Go tell my
Brethren. One thing more must be Noted with Reference to our Lord's
Resurrection, and that is, Why he did not first choose to appear to the Virgin
Mary, his Disconsolate Mother, whose Soul was pierced with a quick and lively
sight and Sense of her Son's Sufferings? But to Mary Magdalene, who had been a
grievous Sinner? Doubtless this was for the Comfort of all true Penitents, and
Administers great Consolation to them; As the Angels in Heaven Rejoice, much
more does Christ Joy in the Recovery of one Repenting Sinner, then in
Multitudes of Holy and Just Persons (such was the Blessed Virgin) who need no
Repentance: For the same Reason did our Savior particularly Name Peter, Go
tell my Disciples, and Peter; He being for his Denial of Christ, swallowed up
with Sorrow, and standing most in need of Consolation; therefore speak
particularly to Peter: As if Christ had said, Be sure that his sad Heart be
Comforted with this joyful News, that I am Risen; and let him know, that I am
Friends with him, notwithstanding his late Cowardice.

13 And behold two of them went the same day to a Village called Emmaus, which
was from Jerusalem about Threescore Furlongs. 14 And they talked together of
all those things which had happened. 15 And it came to pass, that while they
Communed together, and reasoned, Jesus himself drew near and went with them. 16
But their Eyes were holden, that they should not know him. 17 And he said unto
them, What manner of Communications are these, that ye have one to another as
ye walk, and are sad? 18 And one of them, whose Name was Cleopas, answering
said unto him, Art thou only a Stranger in Israel, and have not known the
things which are come to pass there in these Days? 19 And he said unto them,
What things? And they said unto him, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a
Prophet mighty in Deed and Word, before God and all the People. 20 And how the
Chief Priests and our Rulers delivered him to be Condemned to Death, and have
Crucified him. 21 But we trusted that it had been he which should have Redeemed
Israel; and besides all this, To Day is the Third Day since these things were
done. 22 Yea, and certain Women of our Company made us Astonished, which were
early at the Sepulcher. 23 And when they found not his Body, they came, saying,
That they had also seen a Vision of Angels, which said that he was Alive. 24
And certain of them which were with us, went to the Sepulcher, and found it
even so as the Women had said, but him they saw not.

Here we have Observable, (1.) The Journey which Two of the Disciples took to
Emmaus, a Village not far from Jerusalem; The Occasion of their Journey is not
told us, but the Scripture Acquaints us with their Discourse in their Journey,
and as they were walking by the way: It was Holy and Useful, Pious and
Profitable Discourse that they entertained one another with as they walked;
They Discoursed of Christ's Death and Resurrection, a good Pattern for our
Imitation, when Providentially cast into such Company as will bear it; That our
Lips drop as the Honeycomb, and our Tongue be as choice Silver. Observe (2.)
How our Holy Lord presently made one in the Company, when they were Discoursing
Seriously about the Matters of Religion; he over-took them, and joined himself
to them: The way to have Christ's Presence and Company with us, is to be
discoursing of Christ, and the things of Christ. Observe (3.) Though Christ came
to them, it was Incognito; he was not known to them, for their Eyes were holden
by the Power of God, their Sight was restrained, that they could not Discern
who he was, but took him for another Person, though his Body had the same
Dimensions that it had before. Whence we Learn, The Influence which God has
upon all our Powers and Faculties, upon all our Members and Senses, and how
much we depend upon God for the Use and Exercise of our Faculties and Members;
Their Eyes were holden that they could not see him. Observe (4.) That the
Notion of the Messiah being a Temporal Savior, was so deeply Rooted in the
minds of the Disciples, that it remained here with them, even after he was
Risen from the Dead; They here Own and Acknowledge him, To be a Prophet, mighty
in Deed and in Word, but they Question whether he were the Messiah the Redeemer
of Israel; They could not Reconcile the Ignominy of his Death with the Grandeur
of his Office; nor Conceive how the Infamy of a Cross was Consistent with the
Glory of a King; We trusted that it had been he which should have Redeemed
Israel: As if they had said, we were full of Hopes that this had been the
Messiah so long Expected by us; but this being the Third Day since he Dyed, we
fear we shall find our selves mistaken.

25 Then said he unto them, O Fools and slow of Heart, to believe all that the
Prophets have spoken; 26 Ought not Christ to have Suffered these things, and to
enter into his Glory? 27 And beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he
Expounded unto them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself. 28
And they drew nigh unto the Village whither they went, and he made as though he
would have gone farther. 29 But they constrained him, saying, Abide with us for
it is toward Evening, and the day is far spent; And he went in to tarry with
them. 30 And it came to pass as he sat at Meat with them, he took Bread, and
Blessed it, and Brake, and gave to them. 31 And their Eyes were opened, and
they knew him, and he Vanished out of their Sight. 32 And they said one to
another, Did not our Hearts burn within us, while he talked with us by the way,
and while he opened to us the Scriptures?

Observe (1.) our Savior Reproves, and then Instructs them, he Reproves them
for being Ignorant of the Sense of Scripture: They thought the Death of the
Messiah, a sufficient Ground to question the Truth of his Office, when it was
an Argument to confirm and establish it: Oh Fools, o^^^t not Christ to Suffer:
As if he had said, Do you not find, that the Person described by the Prophets
in the Old Testament to be the Messiah, was to wade to his Glory through a Sea
of Blood? Why then do you think your selves deceived in the Person that
Suffered three Days ago, when his Death does so well agree with the Predictions
of the Prophets, who foretold that the Messiah should be cut off, but not for
himself, and be smitten for the iniquities of his People. Here we may Observe,
The great Wisdom and Grace of God, who makes sometimes the Diffidence of his
People, an occasion of farther clearing up the choicest Truths unto them: Never
did these Disciples hear so Excellent an Exposition of Moses and the Prophets;
concerning the Messiah, as now, when their sinful distrust had so far prevailed
over them. (2.) Observe, The Doctrines which Christ instructs his Disciples in,
namely, in the Necessity of his Death and Passion, and of his Glory and
Exaltation; Ought not Christ to Suffer, and to enter into his Glory. Learn (1.)
That with Respect to God's Decree, and with Relation to Man's Guilt, the Death
of Christ was Necessary and Indispensable. (2.) That his Resurrection and
Exaltation was as Necessary as his Passion. (3.) That there was a Meritorious
Connection between Christ's Sufferings and his Glory; his Exaltation was Merited
by his Passion; He was to drink of the Brook in the way, and then he should
lift up his head. Observe (4.) Christ did not only put Light into these his
Apostles Heads, but Heat also into their Hearts, which burned all the while he
Communed with them; Did not our Hearts burn within us, while he opened to us
the Scriptures? Oh what an efficacious Power is there in the word of Christ,
when set home upon the Hearts of Men by the Spirit of Christ.

33 And they rose up the same Hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the
Eleven gathered together, and them that were with them. 34 Saying, The Lord is
Risen indeed, and has Appeared to Simon. 35 And they told what things were
done in the way, and how he was known to them in Breaking of Bread. 36 And as
they thus spoke, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and says unto them,
Peace be unto you. 37 But they were Terrified and Affrighted, and supposed that
they had seen a Vision. 38 And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why
do Thoughts arise in your Hearts? 39 Behold my Hands and my Feet, that it is I
my self, handle me, and see; For a Spirit has not Flesh and Bones as ye see me
have. 40 And when he had thus spoken, he showed them his Hands and his Feet. 41
And while they yet believed not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them, Have
ye here any Meat? 42 And they gave him a piece of a Broyled Fish, and of an
Honeycomb. 43 And he took it, and did eat before them. 44 And he said unto
them, These are the words which I speak unto you, whilst I was yet with you,
That all things must be Fulfilled, which were written in the Law of Moses, and
of the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning me.

Observe (1.) That these Two Disciples at Emmaus, being fully satisfied in the
Truth of Christ's Resurrection, by his Appearing to them in Breaking of Bread,
they arose presently, and went from Emmaus to Jerus^lem; It must needs be late
at Night, being after Supper, and Seven Miles Distance: Yet considering the
Sorrow that the Disciples were under these Two leave all their Private Affairs,
and hasten to Comfort them with the glad Tidings of our Lord's Resurrection.
Teaching us, That all Secular Affairs, all private and particular Business must
give place to the Glory of God, and the Comfort and Salvation of Souls. Observe
(2.) The great Endeavors which our Savior used to confirm his Disciples Faith
in the Doctrine of the Resurrection, He comes and stands in the midst of them,
and says, Peace be unto you; Next he shows them, h s pierced Hands, Side and
Feet; with the Scars and Marks; which he yet retained, that they might see it
was their Crucified Master: After all this, He eats before them, a piece of
broiled Fish and Honeycomb; Not that he needed it, his Body being now become
Immortal; but to assure them; that it was his own Person, and that he had still
the same Body; Yet so slack and backward were they to Believe that Christ was
Risen, that all the Predictions of the Scripture, all the Assurances they had
from our Savior's Mouth, and the several Appearings of Christ unto them; were
little enough to establish and confirm their Faith in the Resurrection of our
Savior. Observe (3.) The highest and fullest Evidence which our Savior offers
to Evince and Prove the Certainty of his Resurrection; Namely, by Appealing to
their Senses, Handle me, and see; Christ admits the Testimony of our Senses, to
assure it be his Real Body: And if the Church of Rome will not allow us to
believe our Senses, we shall loose the best External Evidence we can have to
prove the Truth of the Christian Religion; Namely, the Miracles of Christ; For
how can I know, that those Miracles were True, but by the Judgment of my
Senses? Now as our Senses tell us, that Christ's Miracles were True, so they
assure us, that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is False.

45 Then opened he their Understandings, that they might understand the
Scriptures. 46 And he said unto them, Thus it is Written, and thus it behooves
Christ to Suffer, and to Rise from the Dead the Third Day. 47 And that
Repentance and Remission of Sins should be Preached in his Name among all
Natitions, beginning at Jerusalem. 48 And ye are Witnesses of these things.

Note here, That the opening of the Mind and Heart, effectually to Receive the
Truths of God, is the peculiar Prerogative and Office of Jesus Christ; Then
opened he their Understandings; Namely; by the Illuminations of his Holy
Spirit. One of the greatest Miseries under which Lapsed Nature Labors, is
Spiritual Blindness; Christ has the only Eye Salve which can Heal and Cure it,
Revel. 3.18. And there is no worse Cloud to Obscure the Light of the Spirit,
than a proud Conceit of our own Knowledge. Observe (2.) The Special Charge
given by our Savior to his Apostles; to Preach Repentance and Remission of
Sin; to Preach it in Christ's Name, to Preach it to all Nations, beginning
first at Jerusalem. Where Note, The Astonishing Mercy of Jesus Christ; Although
Jerusalem was the Place where he lost his Life, the City that Barbarously
Butchered, and Inhumanely Murdered him, yet there he will have the Doctrine of
Repentance Preached; nay, first Preached; there the Gospel-Combination must
first begin, That Repentan^e and Remission of Sin be Preached, beginning at
Jerusalem. Lord! How unwilling art thou that any should Perish, when thou not
only prayedst for thy Murderers, and offeredst up thy Blood to God in the
Behalf of them that shed it, but Requiredst thy Ambassadors to make Jerusalem
the first Tender of Remission, upon Condition of Repentance, That Repentance
and Remission of Sin, should be Preached among all Nations, beginning at
Jerusalem.

49 And behold I send the Promise of my Father upon you, but tarry ye in the
City of Jerusalem, until ye be Endued with Power from on high. 50 And he led
them out as far as Bethany, and he lift up his hands, and Blessed them. 51 And
it came to pass while he Blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up
into Heaven. 52 And they Worshipped him, and Returned to Jerusalem with great
joy. 53 And were continually in the Temple, Praising and Blessing God. Amen.

Our Savior being now about to leave his Disciples, Comforts them with the
Promise of his Holy Spirit, which should supply the want of his Bodily
Presence; And bids them tarry at Jerusalem till they should at the Feast of
Pentecost be made Partakers of this Invaluable Blessing. Observe (2.) Our Lord
having Blessed his Disciples, he takes his Leave of them, and goes up into
Heaven: As he Raised himself out of his Grave, so did he Ascend into Heaven by
his own Power, there to appear in the Presence of God for us, and as our
Forerunner, to give us an Assurance, that in due time we shall. Ascend after
him, Whither our Forerunner is for us entered, Heb. 6.20. Observe Lastly, The
Act of Homage and Adoration, which the Apostles perform to the Lord Jesus; now
they Worshipped him, that is as God, the Eternal Son of God, being so declared
by the Resurrection from the Dead, and by his Ascension into Heaven before
their Eyes, from whence he will certainly come at the End of the World, to
Judge both the Quick and the Dead. For which Solemn Hour God Almighty prepare
all Mankind, by a Renewed Frame of Heart, and a Religious Course of Life; and
then, Come Lord Jesus to Judgment, come quickly. Amen.

The End of St. Luke's Gospel.
EXPOSITORY NOTES, WITH PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS UPON The Holy Gospel ACCORDING
TO ST. JOHN.

St. JOHN v. Ver. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have
eternal life, and they are they which testify of me.

EXPOSITORY NOTES, WITH PRACTICAL OBSERVATIONS UPON The Holy Gospel ACCORDING
TO ST. JOHN.
The Fourth and last of the Holy Gospels falls now under Consideration: Namely,
That which was written by the Evangelist St. John; concerning which we have
Observable, the Writer, the Occasion, the Design and Scope of this Sublime
Book. Obs. 1. The Writer of it St. John, the beloved Disciple, that lay in the
Bosom of Christ; he that lay in Christ's Bosom, reveals the Secrets of Christ's
Heart. John, says St. Austin, drew out of the Bosom of Christ, the very Heart
of Christ, and made it known to a lost World. Obs. 2. The Occasion of St John's
writing this Gospel, and that was the Heresy of Ebion and Cerinthus, which
denied the Divinity of Jesus Christ. When God suffers Heretics to vent their
blasphemous Opinions, he takes Occasion from thence to make a clearer Discovery
of Divine Truth. We had perhaps wanted St. John's Gospel, if Ebion and
Cerinthus had not broached their Heresy against Christ's Divinity. Obs. 3. The
Design and Scope of this Gospel, which is to describe the Person of Christ in
his two Natures, Divine and Humane, as the Object of our Faith: This he does in
a Sublime and Lofty Manner; upon which Account he was compared by the Ancients
to the Eagle that soars aloft, and makes her Nest on high; and was also called
John the Divine. Obs. lastly, The Difference between this and the other
Gospels. The other Evangelists insist chiefly upon the Humanity of Christ, and
prove him to be truly Man, the Son of the Virgin Mary. This Evangelist proves
him to be GOD as well as Man; God from Eternity, and Man in the fullness of
Time. The other three Writers Relate what Christ did; St. John Reports what
Christ said: They Recount his Miracles, he Records his Sermons and Prayers. In
short, the profound Mysteries of our holy Religion are here unfolded by the
beloved Disciple; and particularly, the Divinity and Incarnation of our Blessed
Savior.

CHAP. I.
1 IN the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God. 2 The same was in the beginning with God.

Observe here, 1. The Person spoken of, Jesus Christ, under the name of the
Word, In the beginning was the Word. Because God speaks to us by him, and makes
known his Will to us by Christ, as we make known our Minds to one another by
our Words. Again, As our Words are the Conception and Image of our Minds; so
Christ is the express Image of his Father's Person, and was begotten of the
Father, even as our Words are begotten of our Minds: For these Reasons he is so
often styled the Word. Obs. 2. What the Evangelist here asserts concerning the
Word, Christ Jesus, even three Particulars; namely, his Eternal Existence, his
Personal Coexistence, and his Divine Essence. 1. His Eternal Existence: In the
beginning was the Word; in the beginning when all Things received their Being,
then the Word was and did actually subsist, even from all Eternity. Learn
thence, That Jesus Christ not only Antecedent to his Incarnation, but even
before all Time and the Beginning of all Things, had an Actual Being and
Subsistence. 2. His Personal Coexistence with the Father, The Word was with
God; that is, eternally and inseparably with him; in the same Essence and
Nature, being in the Father, as well as with him, so that the Father was never
without him, Prove. 8.22. I was by him, as one brought up with him, I was by his
Sides, says the Chaldee Interpreter. Learn hence, That the Son is a Person
distinct from the Father, but of the same Essence and Nature with the Father;
he is God of God, very God of very God; being of one Substance with the Father,
by whom all things were made. The Word was with God. 3. His Divine Essence: The
Word was God. Here St. John declares the Divinity, as he did before the
Eternity of our Blessed Savior. He was with God, and existed in him; therefore
he must be God, and a Person distinct from the Father. Learn hence, That the
Eternity, the Personality and the Divinity of Christ are of necessity to be
believed, if we will worship him aright. Christ tells us, John 5.23. That we
must worship the Son, even as we worship the Father. Now unless we acknowledge
the Eternity and Divinity of Christ, the Second Person, as well as of God the
Father, the First Person, we honor neither the Father nor the Son. There is
this Difference between Natural Things and Supernatural. Natural Things are
first understood, and then believed; but Supernatural Mysteries must be first
believed, and then will be better understood. If we will first set Reason on
work, and believe no more than we can comprehend, this will hinder Faith: But
if after we have assented to Gospel Mysteries, we set Reason on work, this will
help Faith.

3 All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made, that
was made.

Observe here, The Argument which St. John uses to prove Christ to be God; it
is taken from the Work of Creation. He that made all things is truly and really
God; but Christ made all Things, and nothing was made without him, therefore is
Christ truly and really God. Here Observe, 1. An Affirmation of as large and
vast an Extent as the whole World. All Things were made by him; not this or
that particular Being, but All Created Beings received their Existence and
Being from Christ. Obs. 2. That to prevent the least Imagination of any Things
having another Author than Christ, here is the most positive and particular
Negation that can be. That without Him was not any thing made that was made;
not without him as an Instrument, but without him as an Agent. Christ being a
Co-worker with the Father and the Spirit in the Work of Creation. He was the
Author of the Creation, not an Instrument in Creating. Learn hence, That Christ
as God, being the Creator and Maker of all Things himself, is excluded from
being a Creature, or any thing that was made.

4 In him was life, and the life was the light of men. 5. And the light shines
in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not.

Here we have a farther Proof of Christ's Divinity, and an Evidence that he had
a Being as God, before his Incarnation; forasmuch as all Life is centered in
him, communicated by him, and derived from him. In him was Life Formaliter and
Causaliter. Life was formally in Christ, as the Subject of it; and also
causally in him as the Fountain of it. Learn, 1. That Christ is the Author and
Dispenser of all Life, unto his Creatures. He is Original Life in the Order of
Nature, because by him Man was created, Genesis 1.26. He is spiritual Life in the
Order of Grace, John 14.6. I am the Way, the Truth and the Life. He is Eternal
Life in the Order of Glory, 1 John 5.20. This is the True God and Eternal Life.
Learn, 2. That all Creatures receiving Light and Life from Christ, not as an
Instrument, but as the Fountain from whence it flows, and in which it is
preserved, is an evident Proof of his Divinity, and an Argument that he is
truly and really God. In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men.

6 There was a man sent from God, whose name was John: 7 The same came for a
witness, to bear witness of the light, that all men through him might believe.
8 He was not that light, but was sent to bear witness of that light. 9 That was
the true light, which lights every man that comes into the world.

Here the Evangelist proceeds in declaring Christ to be really God, because he
was that Original, that Essential Light, which had no Beginning, suffers no
decay, but is so diffusive as in some kind, and in some measure or other, to
enlighten every Man that comes into the World. Some of the Jews had a Conceit
that John the Baptist was the promised Messiah, as appears by Luke 3.15. The
People were in Expectation, and all Men mused in their Hearts of John, whether
he were the Christ or not. Here therefore to undeceive the Jews, the Evangelist
adds, That John was not That Light; John was a great Light, a burning and a
shining Light, but not such a Light as the Messiah was to be. John was a Light
Instrumentally, Christ Efficiently: John was a Light enlightened, Christ was a
Light enlightening: John's Light was by Derivation and Participation, Christ's
was Essential and Original: John's Light was as the Light of a Candle in a
private House, in and among the Jews only; but Christ's Light was as the Light
of the Sun, spreading over the Face of the whole Earth. This is the True Light
that lightens every Man that comes into the World; that is, he enlightens all
Mankind with the Light of Reason, and is the Author of all Spiritual
Illumination in them that receive it. Christ is called a Light in regard of his
Office, which was to manifest and declare that Salvation to his Church which
lay hid before in the purpose of God; and he is called the true Light, not so
much in Opposition to all false Lights, but as opposed to the Types and Shadows
of the Mosaical Dispensation. Learn, 1. That every Man and Woman that comes
into the World is enlightened by Christ in some Kind and Measure, or other. All
are enlightened with the Light of Reason and a Natural Conscience: Some with the
Light of Grace and Supernatural Illumination. Learn, 2. That Christ's being the
Essential, Original and Eternal Light, enlightening and enlivening the whole
Creation, is an evident and undeniable Demonstration that he is truly and
really God.

10 He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him
not. 11 He came unto his own, and his own received him not.

He was in the World, that is, he that was God from Eternity, made himself
visible to the World in the fullness of Time. The Evangelist repeats it again,
That the World was made by him, to show his Omnipotency and Divinity; and then
adds, That the World knew him not, as an Evidence of the World's Blindess and
Ingratitude. Learn hence, That notwithstanding the Eternal Son of God appeared
in the World, and the World was made and created by him; yet the generality of
the World, did not know him; that is, did not own and acknowledge him, did not
receive and obey him. They neither knew him as Creator, nor accepted him as
Mediator: Yea, He came to his own; that is, his own Kindred and Country, the
Church and People of the Jews; but the Generality of them gave him cold
Entertainment. It was the sin of the Jewish Nation, that though they were
Christ's own peculiar People; his own by Choice, his own by Purchase, his own
by Covenant, by Kindred, yet the generality of them did reject him; and would
not own him for the True and Promised Messiah. Learn hence, That the Lord Jesus
Christ met with manifest and shameful Rejection even at the hands of those that
were nearest to him by Flesh and Nature, John 11.5. Neither did his Brethren
believe on Him.

12 But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of
God, even to them that believe on his Name.

That is, Although multitudes rejected him, yet some received and owned him for
the True Messiah; and those that did so, he advanced to the high Dignity of
Adoption and Sonship, giving them Power, that is, Right or Privilege to become
the Sons of God. Here Note, First, The Nature of Justifying Faith, declared; it
is to as many as received him. Now this Receiving of Christ implies these three
Things, 1. The Assent of the Understanding to that Divine Testimony, which the
Scripture gives Christ. 2. The Consent of the Will to submit to this Jesus as
Lord and King. 3. The Affiance and Trust of the Heart in Christ alone for
Salvation; for Faith is not a bare Credence, but a Divine Affiance; and such an
Affiance in Christ, and Reliance upon him, as is the Parent and Principle of
Obedience to him. Note, 2dly, That it is the high and honorable Privilege of
all such as receive Christ by Faith, to become the Sons of God by Adoption.
This is a precious Privilege, a free Privilege, an honorable Privilege, an
abiding Privilege, and calls for all possible Returns of Gratitude and
Thankfulness, of Love and Service, of Duty and Obedience, of Submission and
Self-Resignation.

13 Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God.

Because the bragging Jews did much boast of their Natural Birth and Descent
from Abraham, as being his Blood and Offspring: Therefore it is here asserted,
that Men become not the Children of God by Natural Propagation, but by
Spiritual Regeneration. They are not born of Blood. Grace runs not in a Blood,
Piety is not Hereditary. Religious Parents propagate Corruption, not
Regeneration. Were the Conveyances of Grace Natural, good Parents would not be
so ill suited with Children as sometimes they are. No Person then whatsoever,
has the gracious Privilege of Adoption by the first Birth. They are not born of
Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man; that is, no Man by
the utmost Improvement of Nature can raise himself up to this Privilege of
Adoption, and be the Author and Efficient Cause of his own Regeneration. Learn
hence, That Man in all his Capacities is too weak to produce the Work of
Regeneration in himself. They, says Dr. Hammond, who by the influence of the
highest Rational Principles, live most exactly according to the Rule of
Rational Nature, that is, of unregenerate Morality, are the Persons here
described. Learn, 2. That God alone is the Prime Efficient Cause of
Regeneration. He works upon the Understanding by Illumination, and upon the
Will by Sanctification; Which were born, not of Blood, nor of the Will of the
Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God.

14 And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory,
the glory as of the only begotten of the father) full of grace and truth.

The Evangelist having asserted the Divinity of Christ in the foregoing Verses,
comes now to speak of his Humanity and Manifestation in our Nature, The Word
was made Flesh: Where Note, 1. Our Savior's Incarnation for us. 2. His Life
and Cenversation here among us, He dwelt, or tabernacled for a Season with us.
In the Incarnation, or Assumption of our Nature, Observe, 1. The Person
Assuming, The Word; that is, the Second Person subsisting in the glorious
Godhead. Obs. 2. The Nature Assumed, Flesh: that is, the Humane Nature,
consisting of Soul and Body. But why is it not said, The Word was made Man?
but, The Word was made Flesh? Answ. To denote and set forth the wonderful
Abasement and Condescension of Christ, there being more of Vileness, and
Weakness and Opposition to Spirit, in the Word Flesh, than in the Word Man:
Christ's taking Flesh, implies, that he did not only take upon him the Humane
Nature, but all the Weaknesses and Infirmities of that Nature also, (sinful
Infirmities and personal Infirmities excepted) he had nothing to do with our
sinful Flesh: Though Christ loved Souls with an infinite and insuperable Love,
yet he would not sin to save a Soul. And he took no personal Infirmities upon
him, but such as are common to the whole Nature, as Hunger, Thirst, Weariness,
etc. Obs. 3. The Assumption it self, He was made Flesh; that is, he assumed the
Humane Nature into an Union with his Godhead, and so became a True and Real
Man by that Assumption. Learn hence, That Jesus Christ did really assume the
true and perfect Nature of Man, into a personal Union with his Divine Nature,
and still Remains True God, and True Man in one Person for ever. Oh blessed
Union! Oh thrice happy Conjunction! As Man, Christ has an experimental Sense of
our Infirmities and Wants. As God, he can support and supply them All. Note
farther, 2. As our Savior's Incarnation for us, so his Life and Conversation
among us. He dwelt, or tabernacled amongst us. The Tabernacle was a Type of
Christ's Humane Nature. 1. As the outside of the Tabernacle was mean, made of
ordinary Materials, but it is inside glorious, so was the Son of God. 2. God's
special Presence was in the Tabernacle, there he dwelt, for he had a delight
therein. In like manner dwelt all the fullness of the Godhead bodily in Christ;
and the glory of his Divinity shined forth to the Eye and view of his
Disciples; for they beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only Begotten of the
Father, that is, whilst Christ appeared as a Man amongst us, he gave great and
glorious Testimonies of his Being the Son of God. Learn hence, That in the Day
of our Savior's Incarnation, the Divinity of his Person did shine forth
through the Vail of his Flesh, and was seen by all them that had a Spiritual
Eye to behold it, and a mind disposed to consider it. We beheld his Glory, as
the Glory of the only Begotten of the Father.

15 John bare witness of him, and cried, saying, This was he of whom I spoke,
He that comes after me, is preferred before me; for he was before me. 16 And
of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. 17 For the law was
given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. 18 No man has seen
God at any time; the only begotten son which is in the bosom of the father, he
has declared him.

Here we have John Baptist's first Testimony concerning Christ the promised
Messiah: And it consists of four Parts, 1. John prefers Christ before himself,
as being surpassingly above himself. He that comes after me is preferred
before me, that is, in the Dignity of his Person, and in the Eminency of his
Office, as being the eternal God. Now amongst them that were born of Women,
there was not a greater than John the Baptist: If Christ then was greater than
John, it was in regard of his being God. He is therefore preferred before him,
because he was before him, as being God from all Eternity. Learn hence, That
the Dignity and Eternity of Christ's Person as God, sets him up above all his
Ministers, yea, above all Creatures, how excellent soever. He that comes after
me in Time, is preferred before me in Dignity, for he was before me, even from
all Eternity. 2. John prefers Christ before all Believers in Point of Fullness
and Sufficiency of Divine Grace: Of his Fullness do they receive. They have
their Fillings, Christ has his Fullness; theirs is the fullness of a Vessel, his
is the Fullness of a Fountain; their fullness is Derivative, his Fullness is
Original, yet also Ministerial, on purpose in him to give out to us, that we
may receive Grace for Grace; that is, Grace answerable for Kind and Quality,
though not for Measure and Degree. As a Child in Generation receives from its
Parents Member for Member, or as the Paper in the Printing-Press receives
Letter for Letter, and the Wax under the Seal receives print for print: So in
the Work of Regeneration whatever Grace is in Christ, there is the like for
Kind instampt upon the Christian's Soul. All the Members of Christ being made
plentiful Partakers of his Spiritual Endowments. Learn hence, That all fullness
of Grace, by way of Supply for Believers is treasured up in Christ, and
communicated by him as their Wants and Necessities do require: His Fullness is
inexhaustible, it can never be drawn low, much less drawn dry. Of his Fullness
do we receive Grace for Grace; that is, Grace freely, Grace plentifully. God
grant that none of us may receive the Grace of Christ in vain. 3. John prefers
Christ before Moses, whom the Jews doated so much upon. The Law was given by
Moses, not as the Author, but as the Dispenser of it. Moses was God's Minister,
by whom the Law which reveals Wrath, was given to the Jews; but Grace and Truth
came by Jesus Christ. Grace in Opposition to the Condemnatory Curse and
Sentence of the Law; and Truth in Opposition to the Types, Shadows and
Ceremonies of the Legal Administration. Learn hence, That all Grace for
Remission of Sin, and for Performance of Duty, is given from Christ the
Fountain of Grace: Grace came by Jesus Christ. The Grace of Pardon and
Reconciliation, the Grace of Holiness and Sanctification, the Grace of Love and
Adoption, even all that Grace that fits us for Service here and Glory
hereafter, Christ is both the Dispenser and the Author of it. Grace came by
Jesus Christ. Again, 4. John the Baptist here ( v. 18.) does not only prefer
Christ before himself, before Moses, before all Believers, but even before all
Persons whatsoever in Point of Knowing and Revealing the Mind of God. No Man
has seen God at any time; that is, no mere Man has ever seen God in his
Essence, whilst he was in this mortal State. Here God's Invisibility is
asserted; next Christ's Intimacy with the Father is declared. The only begotten
Son, that is in the Bosom of the Father. This Expression implies three Things,
1. Unity of Natures; the Bosom is the Child's Place, who is part of our selves
and of the same Nature with our selves. 2. Dearness of Affection. None lie in
the Bosom, but the Person that is very dear to us. A Bosom Friend is the
dearest of Friends. 3. It implies Communication of Secrets. Christ's lying in
his Fathers Bosom intimates his being conscious to all his Father's Secrets, to
know all his Counsels, and to understand his whole Will and Pleasure. Now as
Christ's lying in the Father's Bosom implies Unity of Nature, it teaches us to
give the same Worship to Christ, which we give to God the Father, because he is
of the same Nature with the Father; as it implies Dearness of Affection betwixt
the Father and the Son, it teaches us to place our chief Love upon Christ the
Son, because God the Father does so: He, who is the Son of God's Love, should
be the Object of our Love; as God has a Bosom for Christ, so should we have
also; the noblest Object challenges the highest Affection. Again, as Christ's
lying in the Father's Bosom implies the Knowledge of his Mind and Will; it
teaches us to apply our selves to Christ, to his Word and Spirit for
Illumination. Whither should we go for Instruction, but to this Great Prophet,
for Direction, but to this wonderful Counselor? We can never be made wise unto
Salvation, if Christ, the Wisdom of the Father, does not make us so.

19 And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from
Jerusalem, to ask him, Who art thou? 20 And he confessed, and denied not; but
confessed, I am not the Christ. 21 And they asked him, What then? Art thou
Elias? And he says, I am not. Art thou that prophet? And he answered, No: 22
Then said they unto him, Who art thou? that we may give an answer to them that
sent us: What say thou of thy self? 23 He said, I am the voice of one crying
in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet
Esaias. 24 And they which were sent, were of the Pharisees. 25 And they asked
him, and said unto him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ,
nor Elias, neither that prophet? 26 John answered them, saying, I baptize with
water: but there stands one among you, whom ye know not; 27 He it is who
coming after me, is preferred before me, whose shoes latchet I am not worthy to
unloose. 28 These things were done in Beth-abara beyond Jordan, where John was
baptizing.

In these Verses we have a second Testimony, which John the Baptist gave of our
Savior Jesus Christ. The Jews sent Priests and Levites from Jerusalem, saying,
Who art thou? That is, the Sanhedrim, or Great Council at Jerusalem, to whom it
belonged to judge who were True Prophets, sent Messengers to the Baptist to
know whether he was the Messiah or not. John refuses to take this Honor to
himself, but tells them plainly, He was his Harbinger and Forerunner, and that
the Messiah himself was just at hand. From hence Note, how very cautious and
exceeding careful this Messenger of Christ was, and all the Ministers of Christ
ought to be, that they do not assume or arrogate to themselves any part of that
Honor which is due to Christ, but set the Crown of Praise upon Christ's own
Head, acknowledging him to be All in All, 1 Cor. 3.5. Who then is Paul? and who
is Apollo? but Ministers by whom ye believed. Observe farther, in this
Testimony of John the Baptist, these two Things, 1. A Negative Declaration, who
he was not: I am not, says he, the Messiah, whom you look for, nor Elias, nor
that Prophet, you expect; not Elias, that is, in your Sense, not Elias the
Tishbite, not Elias for identity of Person, but Elias for Similitude of Gifts,
Office and Calling. John came though not in the Person, yet in the Power and
Spirit of Elias. He farther denies that he was That Prophet; that Prophet which
Moses spoke of, Deuteronomy. 18.15. nor any of the old Prophets risen from the dead,
nay, strictly speaking he was not any Prophet at all, but more than a Prophet:
The Old Testament Prophets prophesied of Christ to come, but John pointed at,
showed and declared a Christ already come; and in this Sense he was no mere
Prophet, but more than a Prophet. 2. We have here the Baptist's positive
Affirmation, who he was, namely, Christ's Herald in the Wilderness, his Usher,
his Forerunner, to prepare the People for the receiving of the Messiah, and to
make them ready for the Entertaining of the Gospel, by preaching the Doctrine
of Repentance to them. From hence Learn, That the preaching of the Doctrine of
Repentance is indispensably necessary, in order to the preparing of the Hearts
of Sinners for the receiving of Jesus Christ. Observe lastly, The Great and
Exemplary Humility of the holy Baptist, the mean and lowly Opinion he had of
himself. Although John was the greatest among them that were born of a Woman,
and so much esteemed by the Jews, and had the honor to go before Christ in the
Exercise of his Office and Ministry, yet he judges himself unworthy to carry
Christ's Shoes after him. He that comes after me is preferred before me, whose
Shoes I am not worthy to unloose. Learn hence, That the more eminent Gifts the
Ministers of the Gospel have, and the more ready Men are to honor and esteem
them, the more will they abase themselves, if they be truly Gracious, and
account themselves highly honored in doing the meanest Offices of Love and
Service for Jesus Christ. Thus does the holy Baptist here. His Shoes Latchet I
am not worthy to unloose.

29 The next day John sees Jesus coming unto him, and says, Behold the Lamb
of God, which takes away the sin of the world. 30 This is he of whom I said,
After me comes a man which is preferred before me: for he was before me.

This is John the Baptist's third Testimony concerning Christ; in which he
points out Christ as the True Sacrifice for Expiation of Sin. Behold the Lamb
of God; the Lamb of God's appointing to be an Expiatory Sacrifice; the Lamb of
God's Election; the Lamb of God's Affection; the Lamb of God's Acceptance; the
Lamb of God's Exaltation; who, by the Sacrifice of his death, has taken away
the sin of the World. The sin, not the sins, in the plural Number, to denote
Original Sin, as some think, or as others, to show that Christ has universally
taken upon himself the whole Burden of our Sin and Guilt. And there seems to
be a secret Antithesis in the Word, World. In the Levitical Sacrifices only the
sins of the Jews were laid upon the sacrificed Beast; but this Lamb takes away
the sin both of Jew and Gentile. The Lord has caused to meet on him the
Iniquity of us all. And the Word, Takes Away, being of the Present Tense,
denotes a continued Act, and it intimates to us thus much, viz. That it is the
daily Office of Christ, to take away our sin by presenting to the Father the
Memorials of his Death. Christ takes away from all Believers the Guilt and
Punishment of their sins, the Filth and Pollution of them: the Power and
Dominion that is in them; and as St. John called upon the Jews, to behold this
Lamb of God, with an Eye of Observation: so is it our Duty to behold him now
with an Eye of Admiration, with an Eye of Gratulation, but especially with an
Eye of Faith and Dependence, improving the Fruit of his Death to our own
Consolation and Salvation, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, and be saved, etc.

31 And I knew him not: but that he should be made manifest to Israel,
therefore am I come baptizing with water. 32 And John bare record, saying, I
saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him. 33
And I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said
unto me, Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and remaining on him,
the same is he which baptizeth with the holy Ghost. 34 And I saw, and bare
record that this is the Son of God.

Observe here, 1. That John the Baptist, though a near Kinsman of Christ's
according to the Flesh; yet the Providence of God so ordered it, that for
thirty Years together they did not know one another, nor converse with each
other, nor probably ever saw the faces of each other; to be sure he did not
know him to be the Messiah. This no doubt was overruled by the wisdom of God,
to prevent all suspicion, as if John and Christ had compacted together to give
one another Credit, that the World might suspect nothing of the Truth of John's
Testimony concerning Christ, or have the least jealousy that what he said of
Christ, was from any Bias of Mind to his Person; therefore he repeats it a
second time, v. 31. v. 33. I knew him not. Hence we may learn, That a Corporal
sight of Christ, and an outward Personal Acquaintance with him, is not simply
needful and absolutely necessary for enabling a Minister to set him forth, and
represent him savingly to the World. Observe, 2. The Means declared, by which
John came to know Christ to be the true Messiah; it was by a Sign from Heaven,
namely, the Holy Ghost descending like a Dove upon our Savior. He that sent me
to Baptize with Water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shall see the
Spirit descending and remaining, the same is he. Learn hence, 1. That Christ
taking upon him our Nature, did so cover his Glory with the Veil of our Flesh
and common Infirmities, that he could not be known by bodily sight from another
Man. Till John had a divine Revelation, and an evident Sign from Heaven, that
Christ was the Son of God, he knew him not. Learn, 2. That Christ in his solemn
entry upon his Office, as Mediator, was sealed unto the Work by the descending
of the Holy Ghost upon him; he was sealed by the Holy Ghost's descending, and
the Teacher's testifying, that this was his beloved Son, in whom he was well
pleased. Now it was, that God gave not the Spirit to Christ by Measure, for the
effectual Administration of his Mediatorial Office; now it pleased the Father
that in Christ should all fullness dwell. He was filled Extensively with all
Kinds of Grace, and filled Intensively with all Degrees of Grace, in the Day of
his Inauguration, when the Holy Spirit descended upon him.

35 Again, the next day after, John stood, and two of his disciples: 36 And
looking upon Jesus as he walked, he said, Behold the Lamb of God.

It is evident that John's Disciples were never very willing to acknowledge
Jesus for the Messiah, because they thought he did shadow and cloud their
Master. See therefore the Sincerity of the Holy Baptist, he takes every
Opportunity to draw off the Eyes of his own Disciples from himself, and to fix
them upon Christ; he says to two of his Disciples, Behold the Lamb of God: As
if he had said, Turn your Eyes from me to Christ, take less Notice of me his
Minister; but, behold your and my Lord and Master: Behold the Lamb of God.
Learn hence, That the great Design of Christ's faithful Ministers, is to set
People upon admiring of Christ, and not magnifying themselves. Oh! it is their
great Ambition and Desire, that such as love and respect them, and honor their
Ministry, may be led by them to Christ; to behold and admire him, to accept of
him, and to submit unto him: John said to his Disciples, Behold the Lamb of God.

37 And the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus. 38 Then
Jesus returned, and saw them following, and says unto them, What seek ye? They
said unto him, Rabbi, (which is to say, being interpreted, Master) where
dwell thou? 39 He says unto them, Come and see. They came and saw where he
dwelt, and abode with him that day; for it was about the tenth hour. 40 One of
the two which heard John speak, and followed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's
brother. 41 He first finds his own brother Simon, and says unto him, We have
found the Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the Christ. 42 And he brought
him to Jesus. And when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou art Simon the son of
Jona: thou shall be called Cephas, which is by interpretation, a stone. 43 The
day following, Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and finds Philip, and says
unto him, Follow me. 44 Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and
Peter.

This latter part of the Chapter acquaints it is with the calling of five
Disciples; not to the Apostleship, for that was afterward; nor yet simply by
Conversion, for some of them were John's Disciples already, and believed in the
Messiah to come; but they are here called to own and acknowledge Jesus Christ
to be the true and promised Messiah. The Disciples here called, were Andrew and
Peter, and Philip, mean and obscure Persons, poor Fishermen, not any of the
learned Rabbis and Doctors among the Jews. Hereby Christ showed at once the
Freeness of his Grace, in passing by the knowing Men of the Age; the Greatness
of his Power, who by such weak Instruments could effect such mighty Things; and
the Glory of his Wisdom, in choosing such Instruments as should not carry away
the Glory of the Work from him; but cause the Entire, Honor and Glory of all
their great Successes to redound to Christ. As Christ can do, so he chooses to
do great things by weak means; knowing that the weakness of the Instrument
redounds to the greater Honor of the Agent. For these Persons called now to be
Disciples, were afterward sent forth by Christ as his Apostles, to convert the
World unto Christianity. Observe farther, The Order according to which the
Disciples were called; first Andrew, then Peter; which may make the Church of
Rome ashamed of the Weakness of their Argument for Peter's Supremacy, that he
was first called; whereas Andrew was before him, and Peter was brought to Jesus
by him. Andrew finds his own Brother Simon, brought him to Jesus. Such as
have gotten any Knowledge of Christ themselves, and are let into Acquaintance
with him, will be very diligent to invite, and industrious to bring in others
to him. Peter being brought to Christ, our Savior names him Cephas, which
signifies a Stone, a Rock; to intimate to him his Duty, to be firm and steady
in the Christian Profession, full of Courage and Constancy. Thou shall be
called Cephas, which is by interpretation, a stone.

45 Philip finds Nathanael, and says unto him, We have found him of whom
Moses in the law, and the prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of
Joseph. 46 And Nathanael said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of
Nazareth? Philip says unto him, Come and see. 47 Jesus saw Nathanael coming to
him, and says of him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.

The last Person mentioned in this Chapter, who was called to own and embrace
Christ for the Messiah, is Nathanael: Who this Nathanael was, does not
certainly appear; but, it is evident, he was a sincere, good Man, though
prejudiced for the present against Christ, because of the Place of his supposed
Birth and Residence, Nazareth: Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? That
is, can any worthy or excellent Person, much less the promised and long
expected Messiah, come out of such an obscure Place as Nazareth is? Whereas
Almighty God, when ever he pleases, can raise worthy Persons out of
contemptible Places. Observe farther, How mercifully and meekly Christ passes
over the Mistakes and Failings, the Prepossessions and Prejudices of Nathanael;
but takes notice of and publicly proclaims his Sincerity: Behold an Israelite
indeed, in whom there is no guile. That is, no Guile imputed, no Guile
concealed, no prevailing Guile: It being only true of Christ, in a strict and
absolute Sense, that there was no Guile found in his Lips. But in a qualified
Sense it is true of Nathanael, and every upright Man, they are true Israelites,
like their Father Jacob, plain Men, Men of great sincerity and uprightness of
Heart, both in the sight of God and Man. And whereas our Savior speaks of him
with a sort of Admiration: Behold an Israelite in whom is no guile. We learn,
That a Person of great Sincerity and Uprightness of Heart toward God and Man,
a true Nathanael, an Israelite indeed, is a rare and a worthy sight. Behold an
Israelite indeed. Learn, 2. That such as are indeed Nathanael's, need not
commend themselves, Christ will be sure to do it for them. Nathanael conceals
his own worth, Christ publishes and proclaims it, and calls upon others to take
notice of it. Behold, etc.

48 Nathanael says unto him, Whence know thou me? Jesus answered and said
unto him, Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I
saw thee. 49 Nathanael answered and says unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of
God, thou art the King of Israel. 50 Jesus answered and said unto him, Because
I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believe thou? thou shall see
greater things then these.

Observe here, How Nathanael wondereth that Christ should know him, having (as
he thought) never seen him. Christ gives him to understand; that by his
All-seeing Eye he had seen him, when he was not seen by him: When thou were
under the fig tree, I saw thee. Christ's All-seeing, Eye is an infallible Proof
of his Deity and Godhead. Christ sees us where ever we are, and whatever we
do, though we see not him: He sees the sincerity of our Hearts, and will own it,
and bear witness to it, if we are upright in his sight. Observe farther, How
Christ's Omnipresence and Omniscience convinces Nathanael, that he was more
than Man, even the Messiah, God and Man, in two distinct Natures and one
Person. Rabbi, thou art the Son of God. Philip called Christ the Son of Joseph.
Nathanael calls him, the Son of God. Such as believe Christ's Omnisciency, will
never call in question his Divinity. Observe, Lastly, How Christ encourages the
Faith of this new Disciple, Nathanael, by promising him, that he should enjoy
farther helps and means for the Confirmation of his Faith, than ever yet he
had. All that Christ said to him, was only this, That he saw him under the
fig tree before Philip called him. How ready art thou, Oh Lord! to encourage
the beginnings of Faith in the Hearts of thy People, and to furnish them with
farther means of Knowledge, when they wisely improve what they have received.
Never will thou be wanting, either in Means or Mercy to us, if we be not
wanting to thee and our selves.

51 And he says unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter you shall
see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of
man.

The Heavens were open to Christ, and the Angels attending upon him, first at
his Baptism, Matthew. 3. last. then at his Ascension, Acts 1.9. Whether Christ
alludes to the one or the other, or to both, I shall not positively say; but
gather this Note, That the Ministry and Attendance of the Holy Angels upon the
Lord Jesus Christ, in the time of his Humiliation, was very remarkable: An
Angel foretells his Conception to the Virgin, Luke 1.31. an Angel publishes his
Birth to the Shepherds, Luke 2.14. In his Temptations in the Wilderness, the
Angels came and ministered unto him, Matthew. 4.11. In his Agony in the Garden,
an Angel is sent to Comfort him, Luke 22.42. At his Resurrection, an Angel
rolls away the Stone, and proclaims him Risen, to the Women that sought for
him, Matthew. 28.6. At his Ascension, the Angels attended upon him, and bear him
Company to Heaven. And at the Day of Judgment, he shall be revealed from Heaven
with his mighty Angels. Now, thus officious are the Holy Angels to our Blessed
Savior, and thus subservient to him upon all Occasions. 1. In Point of
Affection and Singular Love to Christ. 2. In Point of Duty and Special
Obligation to Christ. There is no such cheerful and delightful Service as the
Service of Love. Such is the Angels Service to Christ; for the Services he has
done them, he being an Head of Confirmation to them: For, that they are
established in that holy and glorious State in which they were at first
created, is owing to the special Grace of the Redeemer. Glorify him then all
ye Angels, and praise him all his Host.

CHAP. II.
1 AND the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and the mother of
Jesus was there. 2 And both Jesus was called, and his disciples, to the
marriage.

The former Part of this Chapter acquaints us with the first Miracle which our
Savior wrought, in turning Water into Wine; the Occasion of it was, his being
invited to a Marriage Feast. Here Note first, That when ever our Savior was
invited to a public Entertainment, he never refused the Invitation, but
constantly went; not so much for the Pleasure of Eating, as for the Opportunity
of Conversing and doing Good; which was Meat and Drink unto him. Note, 2. What
Honor Christ puts upon the Ordinance of Marriage; he Honors it with his
Presence and first Miracle. Some think it was St. John that was now the
Bridegroom; others, that it was some near Relation of the Virgin Mothers: But,
whoever it might be, doubtless Christ's Design was rather to put Honor upon
the Ordinance than upon the Person. How bold is the Church of Rome, in spitting
upon the Face of this Ordinance, by denying its Lawfulness to the Ministers of
Religion? when the Apostle, Heb. 13.4. affirms, that Marriage is honorable
among all. Neither the Prophets of the Old Testament, nor the Apostles of the
New (St. Peter himself not excepted) did abhor the Marriage Bed, or judge
themselves too pure for an Institution of their Maker. Note, 3. That it is an
ancient and laudable Institution, that the Rights of Marriage should not want a
solemn Celebration. Feasting with Friends upon such an Occasion is both lawful
and commendable, provided the Rules of Sobriety and Charity, Modesty and
Decency be observed, and no sinful Liberty assumed. But it must Be said, That
Feasting in general, and Marriage Feasts in particular, are some of those
lawful Things which are very difficultly managed without sin. Note, 4. That our
Savior working a Miracle when he was at a Marriage Feast, should teach us by
his Example, that in our cheerful and free times, when we indulge a little more
than ordinary to Mirth amongst our Friends, we should still be mindful of God's
Honor and Glory, and lay hold upon an Occasion of doing all the Good we can.
Note, Lastly, As Christ was personally invited to, and bodily present at this
Marriage Feast when here on Earth; so he will not refuse now in heaven to be
spiritually present at his Peoples Marriages: They want his Presence with them
upon that great Occasion, they desire and seek it; he is acquainted with it,
and invited to it, who ever is neglected: And where Christ is made acquainted
with the Match, he will certainly make one at the Marriage. Happy is that
Wedding, where Christ and his Friends (as here) are the invited, expected and
enjoyed Guests.

3 And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus says unto him, They have no
wine. 4 Jesus says unto her, Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is
not yet come. 5 His mother says unto the servants, Whatsoever he says unto
you, do it.

This want of Wine was probably so disposed by the Providence of God, to give
our Savior an Opportunity to manifest his Divine Power in working a Miracle to
supply it. Observe here, 1. How the Virgin inquires into the Families Wants,
and then makes them known to Christ. Learn hence, That it is an Argument of
Piety, and an Evidence of Christian Love, to inquire into the Wants, and to
recommend the Necessities of others to Christ's Care and Consideration; whose
Bounty and Munificence can readily and abundantly supply them. Thus far the
Virgins Action was Good, she laid open the Case to Christ; they have no Wine:
But Christ, who discerned the Thoughts of Mary's Heart, finds her guilty of
Presumption; she thought by her motherly Authority she might have expected, if
not commanded a Miracle from him: Whereas Christ was subject to her, as Man,
during his private Life; but now being entered upon his Office, as a Mediator,
as God-Man, he gives her to understand she had no Power over him, nor any
Motherly Authority in the Business of his Public Office; therefore he says to
her, Woman, not Mother, what have I to do with thee? Observe therefore, 2.
Christ calls the Virgin, Woman, not Mother; but this not out of any Contempt,
but to prevent her being thought more than a Woman, above and beyond a Woman,
having brought forth the Son of God: Woman, says Christ, not Goddess, as the
Papists would make her, and proclaim her free from Sin, even from Venial Sin:
But Christ's reproving of her, shows that she was not faultless. Observe, 3.
Christ would not bear with the Virgin's Commanding on Earth; will he then
endure her Intercession in Heaven? Must she not meddle with Matters pertaining
to his Office here below^, and will it be endured by Christ, or endeavored by
her, to interpose in the Work of Mediation, above? No, no; were it possible for
her so far to forget her self in Heaven, she would receive the same Answer from
Christ which she had on Earth, Woman, what have I to do with thee? Or, Thou
with me in my Mediatorial Office? But, instead of this, she returns Answer from
Heaven to her Idolatrous Petitioners here on Earth, What have I to do with you?
get you to my Son, go you to Christ, he that was the Mediator of Redemption;
he, and only he, continues the Mediator of Intercession.

6 And there were set there six water-pots of stone, after the manner of the
purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece. 7 Jesus says
unto them, Fill the water-pots with water. And they filled them up to the brim.
8 And he says unto them, Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the
feast. And they bare it. 9 When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water
that was made wine, and knew not whence it was, (but the servants which drew
the water knew) the governor of the feast called the bridegroom, 10 And says
unto him, Every man at the beginning does set forth good wine; and when men
have well drunk, then that which is worse: but thou have kept the good wine
until now. 11 This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and
manifested forth his glory; and his disciples believed on him.

In this Miracle of our Savior's turning Water into Wine, Observe, 1. The
reality of the Miracle, and the sincerity of Christ in the working of it: To
evidence that there was no deceit in the Miracle, not Wine-Casks, but
Water-Pots are called for; Wine-Vessels, in which some Lees were remaining,
might have given both a vinous color and taste to the Water; but Stone-Pots
could contribute nothing of this nature; and being open Pots, there was no
stealing Wine into them without Observation. Again, Our Savior's employing of
the Servants, and not his Disciples, takes off any suspicion of Collusion; and
his sending it to the Ruler or Governor of the Feast, was an evidence that the
Miracle would bear Examination. Our Savior's Miracles were real and
beneficial; they were obvious to Sense, not lying Wonders, not fictitious
Miracles, which the Juglers in the Church of Rome cheat the People with: The
greatest Miracle which they boast of, Transubstantiation, is so far from being
obvious to Sense, that it contradicts the Sense and Reason of Mankind, and is
the greatest Affront to humane nature that ever the World was acquainted with.
Obs. 2. Though Christ wrought a real Miracle, yet he would not work more of
Miracle than needed; he would not create Wine out of nothing, but turned Water
into Wine. Thus he multiplied the Bread, changed the Water, restored withered
Limbs, raised dead Bodies, still working upon that which was, and not creating
that which was not: Christ never wrought a Miracle but when needful, and then
wrought no more of Miracle than he needed. Obs. 3. The Liberality and Bounty of
Christ in the Miracle here wrought; six Water-pots are filled with Wine;
enough, say some Writers, for an Hundred and fifty Men; had he turned but one
of those large Vessels into Wine, it had been a sufficient Proof of his Power;
but to fill so many, was an Instance both of his Power and Mercy. The Lord of
the Family furnishes his Household not barely for Necessity, but for Delight,
giving richly all Things to enjoy. And as the Bounty of Christ appeared in the
Quantity, so in the Excellency of the Wine. Thou have kept the best Wine till
now, says the Governor of the Feast: It was fit that Christ's miraculous Wine
should be more perfect than the natural. But, Oh Blessed Savior! how delicate
and delicious shall that Wine be, which we shall drink ere long with thee in
thy Father's Kingdom! Let thy Holy Spirit fill the Vessel of my Heart with
Water, (with godly Sorrow and Contrition) and thou will turn it into Wine. For,
blessed are they that mourn, they shall be comforted. Observe, 4. The double
Effect of this Miracle: Christ hereby manifested forth his Glory, and his
Disciples believed in him. 1. He manifested forth his Glory; that is, the Glory
of his Godhead, as doing this by his own Power. Here shined forth his
Omnipotency, his Bounty and Liberality, every thing that might bespeak him both
the Great and Good God. The second Effect of this Miracle was, That the
Disciples believed on him. The great End of Miracles is the Confirmation of
Faith; God never sets the Seal of his Omnipotency to a Lie: All the Miracles
then that Christ and his Apostles did, were as so many Seals, that the Doctrine
of the Gospel is true. If you believe not me, says Christ, believe the works
which I do, for they bear witness of me, John 5.36.

12 After this, he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, and his
brethren, and his disciples, and they continued there not many days. 13 And the
Jews passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, 14 And found in the
temple those that sold oxen, and sheep, and doves, and the changers of money
sitting: 15 And when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all
out of the temple, and the sheep, and the oxen; and poured out the changers
money, and overthrew the tables; 16 And said unto them that sold doves, Take
these things hence; make not my Fathers house an house of merchandise.

Observe here, 1. How obedient in all things Christ was to the Ceremonial Law:
He was not naturally subject to the Law, but to fulfill all Righteousness, he
kept the Passoever yearly, according to the Command of God, Exodus 23.17. That
all the Males should appear before him in the Temple at Jerusalem. Hence it is
probably concluded, that Christ came up to the Passover continually during his
private Life; and being now come up to Jerusalem to this first Passover after
his Baptism, and solemn entrance upon his Office, his first Walk was to the
Temple, and his first Work was to purge and reform it from Abuses, and not to
ruin and destroy it, because it had been abused. Now the Abuse and
Profanation of the Temple at that time was this; In the outward Court of the
Gentiles, there was a public Mart or Market, where were sold Oxen, Sheep and
Doves, for Sacrifice; which otherwise the People with great Labor and Trouble
must have brought up along with them for Sacrifice. Therefore as a pretended
Ease to the People, the Priests ordered these Things to be sold hard by the
Altar; the Intention was commendable, but the Action not justifiable. No
pretenses of good Ends can justify that which is forbidden of God: A good End
can never justify an irregular Action. Obs. 2. Our Savior's fervent Zeal in
purging and reforming his Father's House. The sight of Sin in any Persons, but
especially in and among Professors, ought to kindle in our Hearts (as it did
here in Christ's Breast) a burning Zeal and Indignation against it. Yet was not
Christ's Zeal so warm as to devote the Temple to destruction, because of its
Abuse and Profanation. Places dedicated to the Worship and Service of God, if
idolatrously abused, must not be pulled down, but purged; not ruined, but
reformed. There is a special Reverence due to the House of God, both for the
Owners sake and the Service sake. Nothing but Holiness becomes that Place where
God is worshipped in the Beauty of Holiness. Obs. 3. The greatness of this
Miracle, in the weakness of the Means, which Christ made use of to effect and
work it: He drove the Buyers and Sellers before him out of the Temple; but how,
and with what? St. Hierom in Matthew. 21. says, That certain fiery Rays or Beams
darting from Christ's Eyes, drove out these Merchants from this place. I dare
not avouch this, but am satisfied that Christ drove them out, unarmed with any
Weapons that might carry Dread and Terror with them, at most but with a Whip of
small Cords; which, probably, might be scattered by the Drovers that came
thither to sell their Cattle. Behold then the weakness of the Means on the one
side, and consider the greatness of the Opposition on the other: Here was a
Confluence of People to oppose Christ, this being the most solemn Mart of the
Passover, and here were Merchant Men whose Hearts were set upon Gain (the
Worlds God) to oppose him. But neither the weakness of the Means, nor the
greatness of the Opposition did dismay him, or cause our Savior to desist from
the Attempt of reforming what was amiss in the House of God. Learn we hence,
That it matters not how weak the Means of Church-Reformation is, nor how strong
the opposite Power is; if we engage Christ in the Undertaking, the Work shall
certainly be accomplished. Oh, how great was the Work, and how weak and
unlikely were the Means here! A parcel of sturdy Fellows, whose Hearts were set
upon their Wealth, Christ no sooner speaks to them, and shakes his Whip at
them, but like a company of fearful Hares they run before him. Christ in
purging of his Church will make every thing yield and give way to his Power.
Let it Comfort the Church under all unlikelyhood of Reformation. Who art thou,
Oh great Mountain, before our spiritual Zerubbabel? Thou shall become a Plain.
I shall close my Observations upon this Miracle of Christ's whipping the Buyers
and Sellers out of the Temple, which both St. Origin and St. Jerome do make the
greatest Miracle that ever Christ wrought, all Circumstances considered; I
shall close it with this Reflection; viz. Was there such Power and Terror in
Christ's Countenance and Speech here in the Temple in the days of his Flesh?
Oh, how terrible then will his Face and his Appearance be to the wicked and
impenitent World at the great Day! Lord! how fearful will his Iron Scourge then
be! How terrifying that Voice, Depart, depart from me; depart accursed; depart
into Fire; depart into everlasting Fire, into a Fire prepared for the
Punishment of Apostate Spirits, the Devil and his Angels. God grant we may
wisely consider it, and timely flee from the Wrath to come.

17 And his disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thine house
has eaten me up.

The Disciples upon this Occasion called to remembrance the words of David,
Psalm 69.9. The zeal of thine house has eaten me up. Which was verified in
Christ as well as in David. Where Observe, 1. The Grace described. Zeal, which
is the Ardour of the Affections, carrying forth a Man to the utmost for God's
Glory and his Churches Good. Zeal is not so much one Affection as the intense
degree of all the Affections. Obs. 2. The Object about which our Savior's Zeal
was conversant, God's House; that is, all things relating to the Worship of
God, Temple, Tabernacle, Ark, etc. which were the Pledges of God's Presence.
Obs. 3. The effect of this, it has eaten me up. Like Fire that eats up and
devours that whereon it lights. What was said of St. Peter, that he was a Man
made up all of Fire; and of St. Paul, in respect of his Sufferings, That he was
a Spark of Fire burning in the midst of the Sea; may much more truly be said of
Christ, when he was engaged in the Work of Church-Reformation. Learn, That as
Christ was, so Christians ought to be, very zealous for the Glory of God, the
Honor of his House, and the Purity of his Worship. The Zeal of thine House;
that is, for the Honor of thine House has eaten me up, etc.

18 Then answered the Jews, and said unto him, What sign show thou unto us,
seeing that thou do these things? 19 Jesus answered and said unto them,
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up. 20 Then said the
Jews, Forty and six years was this temple in building, and will thou rear it
up in three days? 21 But he spoke of the temple of his body. 22 When therefore
he was risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this unto
them: and they believed the scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.

Observe here, 1. How exceedingly offended the Jews were at the Reformation
which our Savior had made in the House of God: They were awed indeed with the
Majesty of this great Work, and durst not openly oppose, but secretly malign
it. Thence Note, That a redress of Abuses in God's Worship, especially if it
crosses our Ease, and controuls our Profit (as this did) is usually distasted.
Obs. 2. How these Jews discover their old inveterate Disease of Infidelity;
they require a Sign, and call for a Miracle to justify Christ's Commission.
Why! had they not a Miracle before their Eyes? Was not the Work of purging the
Temple, a wonderful Miracle? Yet they demand another Miracle to make this good.
Learn thence, That obstinate Infidelity will not be satisfied with the most
sufficient means for Satisfaction, but still object, and oppose against the
clearest, the fullest, and most convincing Evidence. What sign show thou us?
say the Jews, when they had so many Signs and Wonders daily before their Eyes.
Obs. 3. The Jews demanding a Sign, our Savior grants them one; he remits them
to his Death and Resurrection, to prove that he was the true Messiah. Destroy
this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up. That is, I know you will
destroy this Temple of my Body by putting me to death, but I will raise my self
again from the Grave the third Day. Christ did not command them to destroy his
Body, but only foretold that they would do it. Non est verbum Praecepti, sed
Praedictionis. Christ fore-declares his Passion and his Resurrection. Learn
thence, That all our Savior's Sufferings were fore-known unto him, were
foretold by him; he would not prevent them, but willingly permitted them, and
cheerfully underwent them. Destroy ye this Temple. Note here, 1. The State and
Dignity of Christ's holy Body. It Is a Temple. He spoke of the Temple of his
Body. The Saints Bodies are Temples by special Sanctification: Christ's Body
was a Temple by Substantial Inhabitation. The Divinity of Christ dwelt in his
Humanity, personally and immediately. God dwells in his Saints by Regal
Authority, he dwelt in Christ's Humanity by personal Residence. Note 2. The
Violence and Indignity offered to this holy Temple at our Savior's Death; it
was pulled down and destroyed. Death dissolved the Union betwixt our Savior's
Soul and Body; but there was a closer Union which no Violence of Death could
dissolve, namely, the Union of his Godhead with his Manhood. This was incapable
either of Dissolution or Destruction. Note, 3. The repairing, restoring and
raising up of this Temple out of the Ruins of it by our Savior's Resurrection.
In three Days I will raise it up. Observe, A full Proof of our Savior's
Divinity. To raise a dead Man exceeds the Power of Nature, but for a dead Man
to raise himself, requires the Power of God. We read of dead Men raised by
others, but none but Christ ever raised himself. The Jews could not say, He
raised others from the Grave, himself he could not raise. Inference 1. Was
Christ's Body a Temple? so should ours be too. Temples for the Holy God to
dwell in. Temples by special Appropriation. Temples by solemn Consecration.
Temples by actual Employment. If any Man defiles this Temple of God, him will
God destroy. 2. Was the Temple of Christ's Body pulled down by death and
destroyed? so must also the Temple of our Bodies ere long. The Temple of his
Body was pulled down for our sin, the Temple of our Bodies is ruined by our own
sin. Sin brought Mortality into our Natures and the Wages of our sin is death.
3. Was the Temple of Christ's Body repaired in the Morning of the Resurrection?
so shall the Temple of our Bodies also, if we be the Members of Christ by a
vital Union. Thy dead Men, Oh blessed Redeemer! shall live, together with thy
dead Body shall they arise. Awake then and sing, ye that dwell in the Dust, for
thy Dew is as the Dew of Herbs, and the Earth shall cast out the Dead, Isa.
26.19.

23 Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover, in the feast- day, many
believed in his name, when they saw the miracles which he did. 24 But Jesus did
not commit himself unto them, because he knew all men,

Observe here, what Influence the sight of our Savior's Miracles had upon many
of the common People, They believed in his Name, when they saw the Miracles
which he did. That is, they were convinced by the Works which our Savior
wrought, that he came from God, and that what he said and did was really True,
and no Imposture. But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew
all Men. Our Savior did not, and would not trust them who yet believed on his
Name. Thence Note, That a naked Assent to the History of the Gospel is not
sufficient to entitle us to saving Faith. We may assent to the Truth of all
that we find there, and yet be far from the Kingdom of God. Saving Faith
implies more than the Assent of the Understanding to the Truths of the Gospel.
We cannot believe or disbelieve what we please, but must needs assent to what
is evident to our Understanding; so that it is possible for a Man to assent to
the Truth of Christianity, and yet remain in a state of Damnation; if he does
not embrace it as Good, as well as assent to it as True; if our Faith be not
the Parent and Principle of Obedience, if our Belief does not influence our
Practice, though we pass for Believers amongst Men, we are no better than
Unbelievers in the Account of Christ. If we believe Jesus to be the True
Messiah, and do not receive him in all his Offices; if we commit our selves to
his saving Mercy, but do not submit our selves to his ruling Power; if we
desire him for our Savior, but disown him for our Sovereign; if we expect
Salvation by him, and do not yield Subjection to him: we put a Cheat upon our
selves, for he only believes as he should, that lives as he does believe.

25 And needed not that any should testify of man: for he knew what was in man.

St. John's design in the writing of this Gospel, being to assert the Divinity
of Christ, he scatters Evidences of it in almost every Chapter. Here he
declares his Omnisciency. He knew what was in Man; that is, being God blessed
for ever, he had an exact Knowledge of the Hearts of Men, not by any Revelation
of Men's Hearts from God; but by immediate Intuitition from himself he knows
all Men, and all that is in Men.

CHAP. III.
1 THere was a man of the Pharisees, named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews. 2
The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that thou
art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles that thou do,
except God be with him.

The former part of this Chapter acquaints us with that famous Conference which
our blessed Savior had with Nicodemus. This Man was by Sect a Pharisee, which
signifies a Person separated and set apart for the study of the Law of God,
and to teach it unto others, and by Calling or Profession a Ruler of the Jews,
that is, probably one of the Jewish Sanhedrim: A chief Person in their
Ecclesiastical Court and Council. Consider we Nicodemus first as a Pharisee,
which sort of Men were filled with inveterate Prejudice and Enmity against
Christ, yet from hence we may gather, that such is the Efficacy of Divine
Grace, that it sometimes convinces and converts also those that are the
greatest Enemies to Christ and the fiercest Opposers of him. No such bitter
Enemies to Christ as the Pharisees, yet behold Nicodemus a Pharisee coming to
him, convinced and converted by him. Consider him, secondly, as a Ruler of the
Jews, as a Person of Place and Power, making a Figure in the World. Though they
were generally the Poor which followed Christ, yet some of the Great and Rich
Men of the World, as Nicodemus a Master of Israel, and Joseph of Arimathea, an
Honorable Counselor, are called to Christ and received by him, lest if he had
admitted illiterate and simple Men only, the World might have thought that they
were deceived through their Simplicity. Observe farther, The Time when Nicodemus
came to Christ, it was by Night, partly out of Shame, lest the World should
think that such a knowing Man as he was, wanted Instruction; and partly out of
Fear, he had something to lose, and therefore durst not own Christ publicly.
However, our dear Lord upbraids him not with his Timerousness, but graciously
condescends to instruct him in the Fundamental Principle of Christianity, the
great Doctrine of Regeneration.

3 Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily verily I say unto thee, except a
man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.

Christ here acquaints Nicodemus, and in him all Persons, that there must be a
Change from Nature to Grace, before there can be a Change from Grace to Glory;
for though he was a Jew, a Doctor, and one that had good Thoughts of Christ,
looking upon him as an extraordinary Person, one that had received Power from
God to work Miracles, yet Christ assures him, that nothing short of the
regenerating Change would bring him to Heaven; it is not enough that we be
new-dress'd, but we must be new-made, that is, thoroughly and universally
changed, the Understanding by Illumination, the Will by Renovation, the
Affections by Sanctification, the Life by Reformation, or we can never come at
Heaven. We must be like God, or we can never live with him: If we be not like
him in the Temper of our Minds on Earth, we can never be happy in the Enjoyment
of him in Heaven; for Heaven which is a place of the greatest Holiness, would
be a place of the greatest Uneasiness to an unregenerate and unholy person.

4 Nicodemus says unto him, How can a man be born when he is old? can he enter
the second time into his mothers womb and be born?

Two things are observable in this Question of Nicodemus, How can a Man be born
when he is old? 1. His Ignorance and Weakness in propounding of such a
Question. So true is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural Man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God. What a gross Conception had this
learned Man of the Notion of Regeneration? How ignorant is Nature of the
Workings of Grace? 2. Yet in this Question of his there is discovered a great
deal of Plainness and Simplicity: He did not come as usually the Pharisees did,
with an insnaring Question in his Mouth, but with a Mind fairly disposed for
Information and Conviction; with a pious desire to be instructed. Whatever
Ignorance we labor under, it is safest and best to discover it to our
Spiritual Guide, that we may attain the Mercy of saving Knowledge, but how many
had rather carry their Ignorance to Hell with them, then discover it to their
Minister?

5 Jesus answered, Verily verily I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water
and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

Nicodemus not rightly understanding Christ's meaning in the former Verse, our
Savior is pleased to explain himself in this, and tells him that the Birth he
spoke of, was not Natural, but Spiritual, wrought in the Soul by the Spirit of
God, whose Working is like Water, cleansing and purifying the Soul from all
sinful Defilement. Learn hence, That the regenerating Change is wrought in the
Soul by the Spirit of God, which purifies it from its Natural Defilement, and
renews it after the Divine Likeness and Image.

6 That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the
spirit, is spirit.

As if Christ had said, As Men generate Men, and Nature begets Nature, so the
Holy Spirit produces Holy Inclinations, Qualifications and Dispositions. Learn
hence, That as Original Corruption is conveyed by Natural Generation, so
Saving Regeneration is the Effect and Product of the Holy Spirit's Operation.

7 Marvel not that I say unto thee, Ye must be born again. 8 The wind blows
where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell whence
it comes, and whither it goes: so is every one that is born of the Spirit.

Nicodemus making an Exception against our Savior's Notion of Regeneration
from the Absurdity and Impossibility of it (as he thought) our Savior
therefore proceeds to clear the Matter, by a Similitude taken from the Wind,
which at once declares the Author and describes the Manner of Spiritual
Regeneration: The Author of it is the Holy Spirit of God, compared to the Wind,
first for the Quality of its Motion, It blows when and where it lists.
Secondly, From the Sensibleness of its Effects, Thou hear the sound thereof.
Thirdly, From the Intricacy or Mysteriousness of its Proceedings, Thou know
not whence it comes, nor whither it goes. As the Natural Wind is not under
the Power of Man, either to send it out, or to restrain it, It blows where it
lists for all us, though not where it lists in regard of God. In like
manner, the Holy Spirit is as Wind in the freeness of its Motion, and in the
Variableness of its Motion also. Learn hence, That the Way and Work of the Holy
Spirit of God in the Soul's Regeneration, it is oft-times very secret and
usually exceeding Various. Various as to the time: Some are wrought upon in
Youth, others in old Age. Various in his Methods of Working. Some are wrought
upon by the Corrosives of the Law, others by the Lenitives of the Gospel.
Various in the Manner of his Working, and in the Means by which he works. Upon
some by a powerful Ordinance, upon others by an awakening Providence. But
though there be such Variety in the Method of the Spirit's Working, yet is the
Work in all still the same. There is no Variety in the Work wrought. The effect
produced by the Holy Spirit in the Work of Regeneration is alike and the same
in all, namely, Likeness to God; A Conformity in our Natures to the Holy Nature
of God, and a Conformity in our Lives to the Will of God.

9 Nicodemus answered and said unto him, How can these things be? 10 Jesus
answered and said unto him, Art thou a Master of Israel, and know not these
things? 11 Verily verily I say unto thee, We speak that we do know, and
testify that we have seen; and ye receive not our witness. 12 If I have told
you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe if I tell you of
heavenly things?

Observe here, 1. How Nicodemus consulting only with carnal Reason, persists in
his Apprehension concerning the Absurdity and Impossibility of our Savior's
Notion of Regeneration, or being born of the Spirit. Nicodemus said, How can
these things be? Learn hence, That the great Cause of Men's Ignorance in the
Matters of Salvation and the Mysteries of Religion, is consulting their own
Natural Reason, without submitting their Understandings to the Authority of
Divine Revelation. Till they can give a Reason for every thing they believe,
they cry out with Nicodemus, How can these things be? whereas though we cannot
give a reason of all Gospel Mysteries which we believe, we can give a good
reason why we believe them, namely, Because God has revealed them. No Man can
be a Christian who refuses to submit his Understanding to the Authority of
Divine Revelation. Observe 2. How our Savior reproves Nicodemus for, and
upbraids him with his Ignorance, v. 10. and his Infidelity, v. 12. 1. His
Ignorance is reproved. Art thou a Master of Israel, and know not these
things? as if Christ had said, Ignorance in any as to the Fundamentals of
Religion is shameful, though but a common Learner, much more in a Teacher and
Master, and he a Teacher and Master in Israel; now art thou one of them, and
yet know not these things? Learn hence, 1. That a Man may be very knowing
himself and take upon him to teach and instruct others, and yet be very
ignorant of the Nature, and much unacquainted with the Work of Regeneration
upon his own Soul. A Man may be sharp-sighted as the Eagle in the Mysteries of
Art and Nature, and yet blind as a Mole in the things of God. 2. That
Ignorance, in the Fundamentals of Religion especially, is very culpable and
shameful in any that enjoy the means of Knowledge, but especially in those that
undertake to teach and instruct others. Art thou a Teacher, thou a Master of
Israel, and know not these things? Next our Savior upbraids him for his
Infidelity, v. 12. If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not. This
Infidelity received its Aggravation from the Facility and Perspicuity of our
Savior's Doctrine. I have told you earthly Things, that is, I have set forth
Spiritual Things, by Earthly Similitudes; not in a Style suitable to the
Sublimity of their own Nature. Let the Ministers of Christ learn from their
Master's Example, in all their Discoures to accommodate themselves and descend
as low as may be to the Capacities of their People. I have told you earthly
things. 2. That even Spiritual Things when they are shadowed forth by earthly
Similitudes and brought down in the plainest manner to the Capacities of our
People, yet are they very slow to understand them, and very backward to believe
them. I have told you of earthly things, and ye believe them not.

13 And no man has ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven,
even the son of man which is in heaven.

Here our Savior declares to Nicodemus, that none ever ascended up into
Heaven, to fetch down from thence the Knowledge of Divine Mysteries. And to
reveal the Way of Life and Salvation to Mankind by a Mediator, but only Christ
himself, who though he took upon him the human Nature and was then Man upon
Earth, yet was he at the same time in his Divine Nature actually in heaven as
God. This Text evidently proves two distinct Natures in Christ, namely, a
Divine Nature as he was God, and an Humane Nature as Man. In his Humane Nature,
he was then upon Earth, when he spoke these Words; in his Divine Nature he was
at that Instant in Heaven. Here observe, That the Son of God has taken the
Humane Nature into so close and intimate an Union with his Godhead, that what
is proper to either Nature is ascribed unto the Person of our Savior. The same
Person who was on Earth as the Son of Man, was then in Heaven as God, and yet
but one Person still. Lord! what Love have thou shown to our Humane Nature,
that under that Name thou ascribest to thy self what is proper to thy Godhead.
The Son of Man which is in Heaven.

14 And as Moses lifted up the Serpent in the wilderness, even so must the son
of man be lifted up: 15 That whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have eternal life.

Christ having instructed Nicodemus in the Doctrine of Regeneration in the
former Verses, here he instructs him in the Death of the Messiah, and in the
Necessity of Faith in his Death. The Son of Man must be lifted up; that is,
upon his Cross, and dye; that whosoever believes in him, should not perish.
Observe here, 1. An Old Testament Type which our Savior refers to, and that is
the Brazen Serpent in the Wilderness, the History of which is recorded, Numb.
21.7, 8. Observe, 2. The Antitype, or the Substance of what that Type did
shadow forth, the Brazen Serpent's lifting up upon the Pole, prefiguring
Christ's Exaltation or lifting up upon his Cross. So must the Son of Man be
lifted up. Learn hence, That the Lord Jesus Christ is of the same Use and
Office to a Sin-stung Soul, which the Brazen Serpent was of old to a
Serpent-stung Israelite. Here observe, First, Wherein the Brazen Serpent and
Christ do agree. And Secondly, Wherein they differ. They agree thus, In the
Occasion of their Institution; they were both appointed for Cure and Healing.
Were they Serpent-stung? We are Sin-stung; Devil-bitten: Was the Sting of the
fiery Serpents inflaming? Was it spreading? Was it killing? So is sin, which is
the Venom and Poison of the old Serpent. They agree in this, that they both
must be lifted up before Cure could be obtained; the Brazen Serpent upon the
Pole; Christ upon his Cross: They both must be looked unto before Cure could be
obtained. The looking up of the Israelite was as necessary unto Healing as the
lifting up of the Serpent. Faith is as necessary to Salvation, as the Death of
Christ. The one rendered God reconcilable unto Sinners, the other renders him
actually reconciled. Again, did the Brazen Serpent heal All that looked upon it,
and looked up unto it, though all had not Eyes alike, some with a weak, others
with a stronger Eye? In like manner does Christ justify and save All, that
with a sincere Faith, though weak, do rely upon him for Salvation; Whoever
believes in him shall not perish. Further, the Brazen Serpent was effectual
for Israel's Cure after many Stingings; if after they were healed, they were
stung afresh, and did look up to it, they were healed by it. Thus the Merit of
Christ's Death is not only effectual for our Cure and Healing at our first
Conversion, but after involuntary Relapses and Backslidings, if by Faith we
have recourse to the Blood of Christ, we shall find it efficacious for our
farther Benefit and future Healing. In a Word, as the Brazen Serpent had the
Likeness of a Serpent, the Form, the Figure, the Name, the Color of a Serpent,
but nothing of the Venom and Poison of the Serpent in it. Thus Christ did take
upon him our Natures; but sin, the Venom and Poison of our Natures he had
nothing to do with; though Christ loved Souls with an invincible and
insuperable Love, yet he would not sin to save a Soul. This was the Similitude
and Resemblance between Christ and the Brazen Serpent. The Disparity or
Dissimilitude follows. The Brazen Serpent had no Power in its self or of its
self to heal and cure, but Christ has a Power inherent in himself for the Cure
and Healing of all that do believe in him. Again, the Brazen Serpent cured only
one particular Nation and People, Jews only. Christ is for the healing of all
Nations, and his Salvation is to the ends of the Earth. Farther, the Brazen
Serpent cured only one particular Disease, namely, the Stingings of the fiery
Serpents; had a Person been sick of the Plague or Leprosy, he might have died
for all the Brazen Serpent. But Christ pardons all the Iniquities and heals all
the Diseases of his People, Psalm. 103.3. Yet again, though the Brazen Serpent
healed all that looked up unto it, yet it gave an Eye to none to look up unto
it: Whereas Christ does not only heal those that look up to him, but bestows
the Eye of Faith upon them to enable them to look unto him that they may be
saved. In a Word, the Brazen Serpent did not always retain its healing Virtue,
but in time lost it, and was it self destroyed, 2 Kings 18.4. But now the
healing Virtue and Efficacy of Christ's Blood is Eternal. All Believers have
and shall experience the healing Power of our Redeemer's Death to the end of
the World. Lastly, The Israelites that were cured by looking up to the brazen
Serpent, dyed afterward; some Distemper or other soon carried them to their
Graves; but the Soul of the Believer that is healed by Christ, shall never dye
more; Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have eternal Life.

16 For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Here observe, 1. The Orignal Source and Fountain of Man's Salvation, and that
is God's free and undeserved, his great and wonderful Love. God so loved the
World, he does not say how much, but leaves it to our most solemn raised
Thoughts; it is rather to be conceived, than declared, and admired rather than
conceived. God so loved the World. Hence Note, That the Original Spring and
first Cause of our Salvation is the free Favor and mere Love of God. Observe
2. The Greatness of the Gift by which God evidenced and demonstrated the
Greatness of his Love to a lost World. He gave his only begotten Son, that is,
he delivered him up from out of his own Bosom and everlasting Embraces. Now
this will appear a stupendous Expression of God's Love, if we consider that
God gave Him for us, who was not only the greatest but, the dearest Person to
him in the World; even his own Son. That he gave him for Sinners; That he gave
him for a World of Sinners; That he gave him up to become a Man for Sinners;
That he gave him up to become a miserable Man for Sinners; That he gave him up
to be a Sacrifice for the Sin of Sinners. Observe 3. The Gracious end for which
God gave this great Gift of his Love to lost Sinners, That whosoever believes
on him should not perish, but have eternal Life. Where Note, 1. The gentle and
merciful Condition upon which Salvation depends, Whoever believes on Christ
shall not perish. 2. The infinite Goodness of God in proposing such a vast
Reward unto us, upon our performing of this Condition; He shall have
everlasting Life. Learn hence, That Faith is the way which God has appointed,
and the Condition which God has required in order to our obtaining Salvation by
Jesus Christ. This Faith consists in the assent of the Understanding, That
Jesus is the Savior of the World. In the Consent of the Will to accept of
Jesus freely and voluntarily, deliberately, advisedly and resolvedly for our
Savior; in accepting the Merit of his Blood and submitting to the Authority of
his Laws, it being in vain to expect Salvation by Christ, if we do not yield
Subjection to him. He that thus believes on Christ, that submits himself to his
ruling Power, as well as commits himself to his saving Mercy; shall not perish,
but have everlasting Life.

17 For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the
world through him might be saved. 18 He that believes on him, is not
condemned; but he that believes not is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the name of the only begoten Son of God.

Observe here, That the Salvation of Sinners was the intentional End and the
Condemnation of them only the accidental Event of Christ's coming into the
World. The Design of Christ's first coming into the World was to save it. The
End of his second coming will be to judge the unbelieving Part of it. Observe,
Secondly, That Unbelief is the formal Cause of the Sinner's Damnation; it is
that sin which does bind all other sins upon the sinner, and consign him over
to Damnation; it is that sin which does not only procure Damnation, but no
Damnation like it; which is intimated in the next Verse.

19 And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men
loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil.

Observe here, 1. The Worth and Dignity of a choice and invaluable Privilege
declared. Light is come into the World. A Personal Light, Christ; a Doctrinal
Light, the Gospel. 2. Observe the Unworthiness, Abuse and great Indignity which
the World, through Infidelity, offers to this Benefit; they reject it, and love
Darkness rather than Light. Obs. 3. The dreadful Sentence of Wrath which the
Rejection of this Benefit, and the Abuse of Christ, brings upon the impenitent
and unbelieving World. It terminates in their full and final Condemnation. This
is the Condemnation. That is, it is a just and righteous Condemnation; it is an
inevitable and unavoidable Condemnation; it is an heightened and aggravated;
it is an accelerated and hastened; an irrevocable and eternal Condemnation. Learn
hence, That the greater and clearer the Light is, under which the unregenerate
and impenitent do live in this World; so much the heavier will their
Condemnation and Misery be in the World to come; if they wilfully and finally
reject it.

20 For every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the
light, lest his deeds should be reproved. 21 But he that does truth, comes to
the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God.

In these Words our Savior acquaints us with the different Nature of Sin and
Holiness. It is the Nature of Sin and the Property of Sinners to hate the
Light, because it discovers the Evil and Sinfulness of their Ways unto them and
condemns them for them; as the Ethiopians are said to curse the Sun for its
bright and hot shining; whereas holy and gracious Persons, that walk uprightly,
do love the Light; that is, they delight to have their Thoughts, Words and
Actions, tried by the Light of the Word, because they are wrought in God; that
is, performed as in the sight of God. According to the Direction of the Word
of God, and with a single Eye and sincere Aim at the Glory of God. Learn hence,
1. That the Word of God, or the Gospel of Jesus Christ, it has all the
Properties of a Great and True Light. It is of a pure and purifying Nature, it
is manifestative, and of a discovering Nature. It has a piercing Power and
penetrating Virtue. It enters the darkest Recesses of the Soul, and detects the
Errors of Men's Judgments, as well as discovers the Enormities of their Lives.
Learn, 2. That nothing is so hateful to, and hated by a wicked Man, as the
discovering and reproving Light of the Word of God; for at the same time that
it discovers the sin, it condemns the Sinner. Learn, 3. That a truly gracious
Person, who acts agreeably to the Will of God, is not afraid to examine his
Actions by the Word of God; but desires and delights that what he does may be
made manifest both to God and Man. He that does Truth comes to the Light, and
rejoices that his Deeds may be made manifest, because they are wrought in God.

22 After these things came Jesus and his disciples into the land of Judea, and
there he tarried with them, and baptized. 23 And John also was baptizing in
Enon, near to Salim, because there was much water there: and they came, and
were baptized. 24 For John was not yet cast into prison.

Our Blessed Savior having now finished his excellent Sermon, preached to
Nicodemus at Jerusalem, he departs thence with his Disciples into the Country
of Judea to make Proselytes by the Ordinance of Baptism. Where Note, 1. Our
Lord's unwearied Diligence in doing his Father's Work and Will. He goes from
Place to Place, from City to Country, preaching with, and baptizing by his
Disciples, for Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples, John 4.2. Note,
2. That the Enjoyment of Christ's bodily Presence did not take away the use of
his own Ordinances. None are above Ordinances till they come to Heaven. The
Ordinance of Baptism is here administered by the Disciples, even in the Presence
of Christ himself. This is called, The Baptism of Repentance, of which Children
as well as others were capable Subjects, because Baptism does not require
Childrens Repentance at present, but engages them to Repentance for time to
come. As Children that were circumcised were obliged to observe the whole Law,
but could not perform it till they came to understand it. Note, 3. How John did
go on with his Work of Baptizing, though Christ and his Disciples did eclipse
and obscure him, though the People now flockt after Christ, All Men came unto
him, v. 26. yet John keeps to his Duty. It Is the Duty of God's Ministers to
continue their Diligence and go on with their Work when God raises up others
about them of greater Parts and better Success. Oh the admirable Humility of
that Minister, who can say with John the Baptist, Let another increase, though
I decrease.

25 Then there arose a question between some of John's disciples and the Jews,
about purifying. 26 And they came unto John, and said unto him, Rabbi, he that
was with thee beyond Jordan, to whom thou barest witness, behold the same
baptizeth, and all men come to him.

Observe here, What a Spirit of Envy there was in John's Disciples against
Christ, upon the account of the multitude of his Followers. He that was with
thee beyond Jordan baptizeth, and all Men come unto him. Where Note, 1. How
meanly John's Disciples think and speak of our Savior, compared with John
their Master. They do not so much as allow him a Name, or give him any Title,
but he that was with thee beyond Jordan, the same baptizeth. Observe, 2. How
they intimate, as if Christ had received all his Credit and Reputation from
their Master John: He to whom thou barest witness, baptizeth; as if they had
said, This Man whom the People flock after, neglecting thee and thy Disciples,
is much inferior to thee, for he came to thee, thou did not go to him; thou
baptizest him, he did not baptize thee; thou gave Testimony to him, he did
not give Testimony to thee. Whence we observe, What a bitter Spirit of Envy and
Emulation there has always been amongst the Ministers of the Gospel, even from
the very first Plantation of the Gospel. Which causes them to look upon the
exalted Parts and Gifts of Others, as a diminution and debasing of their own;
but why should the prospering of the Work of God in one Ministers Hand, be
Matter of repining unto others? shall not God honor what Instruments he
pleases? and will he not reward all his faithful Laborers, according to their
Sincerity, not according to their Success?

27 John answered and said, A man can receive nothing, except it be given him
from heaven. 28 Ye your selves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the
Christ, but that I am sent before him. 29 He that has the bride, is the
bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which stands and hears him,
rejoices greatly, because of the bridegrooms voice: this my joy therefore is
fulfilled. 30 He must increase, but I must decrease. 31 He that comes from
above, is above all: he that is of the earth, is earthly, and speaks of the
earth: he that comes from heaven is above all.

Observe here, How holily and wisely John the Baptist corrects the Envy and
Jealousy of his own Disciples, and endeavors to root out all Prejudice out of
their Minds against Christ; in order to which he shows them a fivefold
Difference betwixt Christ and himself. 1. He tells them Christ was the Master,
John but his Minister; and that he had told them so from the beginning; Ye your
selves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ: but sent before him.
The faithful Ministers of Christ think it honor enough to be Servants to him,
and would not have their Followers attribute the least part of that honor and
glory to him, which is due to Jesus Christ. 2. John acquaints his Disciples
that Christ was the Bridegroom of his Church, to whom the Christian Church was
to be solemnly espoused and married; and that he had honor enough in being one
of the Bridegroom's Friends and Servants; and accordingly instead of envying,
he rejoiced at the Success which the Bridegroom had, and took great pleasure in
it. Learn, 1. That the Relation betwixt Christ and his Church, is a Conjugal
Relation, a Relation of Marriage; yet set forth under the Name of Bride and
Bridegroom, rather than under the Notion of a complete Marriage, because it is
but begun here, and to be consummate in Heaven; and also to show that Christ's
and his People's Affections are as warm and fresh, as strong and vehement each
toward other, as the Affections of espoused or newly-married Persons are to
one another, Isa. 62.5. As the Bridegroom rejoices over the Bride, so shall
thy God rejoice over thee. Learn, 2. It is honor sufficient to the Ministers
of Christ that they as Friends of the Bridegroom are employed by him to farther
the Marriage-Relation betwixt him and his Spouse. Their Office is to woe for
Christ, to commend his Person, and to invite all Persons to accept of him for
their Head and Husband, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one Husband, that I
may present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ. Learn, 3. That there is no
greater Joy to the Ministers of Christ, than to see themselves honored by him,
as his Instruments in preparing a People for Christ, and happily uniting them
unto him. Oh! how little do our People know, and less consider, how much of the
Comfort of their poor Ministers Lives lies at their Mercy: We live as we see
any of them stand fast in the Lord. We die as we see others stick fast in their
Sins. This was the second Difference which John acquaints his Disciples was
found betwixt Christ and himself. The third follows, v. 30. He must increase,
but I must decrease: He must increase; that is, in Honor and Dignity, in
Esteem and Reputation, in Discovery, and Manifestation. He shall shine forth as
the rising Sun, and I must disappear like the morning Star. Not that John's
Light was diminished, but by a greater Light obscured only: As all the Stars
disappear at the appearance of the Sun. Yet observe what matter of Joy it was
to John to see himself out-shined by Christ: Let him increase, though I decrease.
That Minister has true Light in himself, that can Rejoice when he is out-shined
by others: Who is content to be abased and obscured, if he may but see Christ
dignified and exalted in the Lives of his People, whoever the Person is, whom
God honors as his Instrument in that Service. The fourth Difference wherein
Christ excels John and all his Ministers, is in the Divine Original of his
Person, v. 31. He that comes from above, is above all, says John. Now Christ
is from above, his Original is from Heaven; I am from the Earth (though I had my
Commission from Heaven) and accordingly my Words and Actions are Earthly. My
Master therefore infinitely surpasses and excels me in the Dignity of his
Person, and in the Sublimity of his Knowledge. From the whole, Note, How much
it is the Desire and Endeavor of every Gospel-Minister to magnify Jesus
Christ, to display his glorious Excellencies and Perfections before their
People, that they may reverence his Person, revere his Authority, and respect
his Laws. This was the Care of the Holy Baptist here, and it will be the
Endeavor of every faithful Minister of Christ that succeeds John to the end of
the World.

32 And what he has seen and heard, that he testifies; and no man receives
his testimony. 33 He that has received his testimony, has set to his seal,
that God is true. 34 For he whom God has sent speaks the words of God: for
God gives not the Spirit by measure unto him.

Observe, 1. Another great Difference which John the Baptist teaches his
Disciples to put betwixt his Testimony and Christ's: To the intent that he
might remove the Prejudice which was upon his Disciples Mind against the
Messiah, he shows them that his own Testimony (which they so much admired) was
by Revelation only; Christ's by immediate Intuition. John testified only what
he had received; but Christ, what he had seen; lying in the Bosom of the
Father. What he has seen and heard, that he testifies. Learn hence, That it
is Christ's (the great Prophet of his Church) peculiar Prerogative, to have the
knowledge of Divine Truths immediately from the Father by special
Communication; and that all others receive their Knowledge from him by gracious
Illumination only. Observe, 2. How sadly and sorrowfully the holy Baptist
resents it, that Christ's Testimony was no better received and entertained by
the World. He testifies, but no Man receives his testimony. John's Disciples
murmured that all Men came unto Christ, v. 26. but John mourns that there came
no more, and complains that none, that is, very few received his Testimony.
Thence learn, That it ought and will be matter of great Regret and Sorrow to
all the Friends of Jesus Christ, but especially to his faithful Ministers and
Servants, that his Doctrine is so ill received and entertained in the World. It
greatly affects and grievously afflicts them, that when they testify of
Christ, no Man, that is, comparatively, very few Men, receive their Testimony.
Observe, 3. The Eulogy and high Commendation given of all true Believers; they
receive Christ's Testimony, and thereby set to their Seal that God is true;
that is, has subscribed to, and ratified the Truth of God, that God in all his
Promises of the Messiah, under the Old Testament, is faithful and true. Learn
hence, The great Honor that God puts upon the Faith of Believers: As Unbelief
defames God and makes him a Liar, so Faith gives Testimony to the Truth of God,
and sets its Seal that God is true; He that receives his Testimony, has
set to his Seal that God is true. Observe, 4. The Illustrious Character which
the Holy Baptist gives of Christ his Master; he is the Person whom God has
sent, and unto whom God gives not his Spirit by measure. He whom God has sent,
that is, immediately and extraordinarily from Heaven; not as the Prophets and
Apostles were sent, but in a way peculiar to himself: Having Authority for
speaking, not only from God, but as being God himself. And accordingly it is
added, that God gives not the Spirit by measure unto him; that is, the Gifts
and Graces of the Holy Spirit were poured forth upon Christ in a Measure far
above and beyond all finite Creatures: There being a double difference betwixt
Christ's fullness of the Spirit, and all other Persons whatsoever. 1. In the
Measure of it: God did not give out the Spirit to Christ sparingly, and with
limitation, as he did to the former Prophets and John the Baptist, in
proportion to what their Offices required, but he was anointed more plentifully
and abundantly with the Holy Spirit above and beyond his Fellows. 2. In the
manner of its working. The holy Prophets that were filled with the Spirit
(according to their Measures) yet could not do or declare all Things, nor act
upon all Occasions, but sometimes the Spirit restrained them, and sometimes
departed from them. But Christ had no limits put upon the Vigor of his Spirit,
but his own Will; therefore could work what and when he pleased. Learn from
hence, That Christ had an abundant fitness from God for the discharge of his
Office, and an abundant fullness for his People. God did not measure to him a
certain Quantity and Proportion of the Gifts and Graces of his Spirit, but
poured it forth upon him without Measure.

35 The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand.

The Father loves the Son from Eternity, as he was his Son by eternal
Generation; and he loved him as Mediator by special Constitution; he loves him
as the Brightness of his own Glory, and the express Image of his Person, with
an Essential, Natural and Necessary Love. And he loves him as Mediator, for
undertaking our Cause and interposing for our Peace. Learn hence, That God the
Father had a special Love and Affection to Christ, not only in regard of his
Eternal Sonship, but with respect to his Office of Mediatorship; The Father
loves the Son. It follows, he has given all things into his hand; that is,
entrusted him with all things necessary to our Salvation. Lord! what a
Privilege is this, that our Happiness is in Christ's Hand, not in our own,
without his. Oh, wonderful Goodness, to put our Concerns into the sure Hands of
his Son, which were lost by the weak Hands of Adam.

36 He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life: and he that believes
not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him.

Learn, 1. That though all Power be given to Christ, to dispense Grace here and
Glory hereafter, yet none must expect to enjoy it but upon Condition of
believing in him, and obeying of him: For the Original Word signifies both. No
Faith is acceptable to Christ, nor available to our Salvation, but that which
is the Parent and Principle of Obedience. Learn, 2. That final Unbelief renders
a Man infallibly an Object of the Eternal Wrath of God; He that believes not
the Son, the wrath of God abides on him. The Unbeliever now lies under the
Sentence of God's Wrath, hereafter he shall lie under the full and final
execution of it. Lord! how sad is it to be here in a state of Condemnation! But
how intolerable will it be in Hell, to continue eternally under the Power of
Condemnation? To lie for ever in that mysterious Fire of Hell, whose strange
property it is always to torture, but never to kill; or, always to kill, but
never to consume: For after Millions of Years are expired, still it is a Wrath
to come; and though the Unbeliever has felt and endured never so much, yet still
the Wrath of God abides on him.

CHAP. IV.
1 WHen therefore the Lord knew how the Pharisees had heard that Jesus made and
baptized mo disciples then John, 2 (Though Jesus himself baptized not, but his
disciples) 3 He left Judea, and departed again into Galilee.

The former part of this Chapter acquaints us with our Savior's removal from
Judea into Galilee: The occasion of it was this: Christ hearing that John was
cast into Prison, and understanding how the Pharisees were enraged at the
increasing of the Number of his Disciples; to decline their Fury, and to
prevent Danger to himself, he leaves Judea and departs into Galilee, for his
own Preservation. Hence learn, That when the faithful Ministers of Christ do
meet with eminent Success in their Master's Service, they must expect to meet
with a mighty shock of Malice and Envy from Satan and his wicked Instruments.
Christ himself experienced it, let his Ministers expect it and prepare for it.
2. That it is neither unlawful nor unbecoming for the Ministers of Christ to
flee when Persecution threatens them: Their Lord and Master having fled before
them: And commanded also, when they persecute in one City, to flee into another.

4 And he must needs go through Samaria. 5 Then comes he to a city of Samaria,
which is called Sychar, near to the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son
Joseph. 6 Now Jacobs well was there. Jesus therefore being wearied with his
journey, sat thus on the well; and it was about the sixth hour.

Here Observe, 1. How wonderfully the Wisdom of God overrules the Malice of
Men, for his own Glory and the Good of others. The Malice of the Pharisees in
Judea, drives Christ into Galilee, and in his Passage through Samaria, the
first Fruits of the Gentiles are called; and, particularly the Woman of
Samaria. Observe, 2. How in every step of Christ's way he was doing good to the
Souls of Men. In his Passage through Samaria into Galilee, a poor Woman is
brought to know him to be the true Messiah. Observe, 3. Our Holy Lord in his
Journeying from Place to Place, did travel usually on foot; and the wearkness
of his Body upon traveling, shows him to be truly and really Man, and in all
things like unto us, Sin only excepted. Our blessed Lord did not only take upon
him our Nature, but the Infirmities of our Nature also.

7 There comes a woman of Samaria to draw water: Jesus says unto her, Give me
to drink. 8 For his disciples were gone away unto the city to buy meat. 9 Then
says the woman of Samaria unto him, How is it that thou being a Jew, ask
drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? for the Jews have no dealings with
the Samaritans.

Observe here, 1. How all our own Motions and Actions are under the Direction
and Government of God, and how Divine Providence does sometimes dispose of
small Matters to become Occasions of great Good. This poor Woman's coming to
the Well to draw Water, became the means of her Conversion. Observe, 2. Christ
speaks to, and seeks after this poor Woman, before she takes any Notice of him;
God is found of those that seek him not, and makes himself manifest to them
that inquire not after him. Jesus said unto her, Give me Drink. Observe, 3. The
great Poverty of our Lord's outward Condition, he wanted a draught of Water for
his Refreshment, and a meals Meat now at Dinnertime to refresh his wearied
Nature. Oh! what Contempt did Christ cast upon the World when he was here in
it? He would not honor it so far as to keep any Part of it in his own hand.
Yet Observe, 4. That though Christ had neither House, nor Land, nor Money of his
own, yet he lived not by Begging, or upon mere Alms. The Disciples were now
gone into the City to buy, not to beg Meat. For there was a Bag which required
a Bearer, John 12.6. and our Savior's Friends and Followers supplied him with
Money for his necessary Occasions. His Disciples were gone to buy Bread.
Observe, Lastly, How bitter is the Enmity which differences in Religion and
diversity of Opinions do occasion? They do not only alienate Affections, but
even violate the Bonds of civil Society and common Conversation. The Jews had
no dealings with the Samaritans, would neither eat nor drink with them.

10 Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou knew the gift of God, and who
it is that says to thee, Give me to drink; thou would have asked of him, and
he would have given thee living water.

The Samaritan Woman had refused Christ a draught of Water in the former Verse,
he offers her the Water of Life in this Verse. Oh, how kindly does Christ deal
with those that dealt unkindly with him? If thou knew the gift of God, etc.
Here Observe, 1. The Mercy which Christ had for, and was so desirous to bestow
upon this poor Woman; it was the Gift of God; that is, himself, his Holy
Spirit, in the sanctifying Gifts and saving Graces of it: All which are
compared to Water in regard of their Effects and Operations, which are to
purify the Unclean, and to satisfy the Thirsty. Observe, 2. The way and
course which this Woman and every lost Sinner ought to take, in order to the
obtaining of this inestimable Gift; and that is, by asking of it. Thou would
have asked, and he would have given thee living Water. Learn hence, That Christ
himself, his Holy Spirit, with all the sanctifying Graces of it, must be
earnestly sought of God; and such as do unfeignedly seek them, shall certainly
obtain them. Observe, 3. The true Cause and Reason assigned why Sinners ask not
for, and seek not after Jesus Christ, and the Graces of the Holy Spirit; and
that is Ignorance of the worth and want of them. If thou know the gift of
God, thou would have asked. Learn thence, That it is Ignorance of the worth
of Christ, and insensibleness of the want of him, that makes Persons so
indifferent in their Desires after him, and so remiss in their Endeavors for
the obtaining of him.

11 The woman says unto him, Sir, thou have nothing to draw with, and the well
is deep: from whence then have thou that living water? 12 Art thou greater then
our father Jacob, which gave us the well, and drank thereof himself, and his
children, and his cattle? 13 Jesus answered and said unto her, Whosoever
drinks of this water shall thirst again: 14 But whosoever drinks of the
water that I shall give him, shall never thirst: but the water that I shall
give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life.

Observe here, 1. How ignorant Persons are of spiritual things, till enlightened
by the Holy Spirit of God. This poor Woman's Question, Whence have thou that
living Water? looks much like that of Nicodemus, John 3.9. How can these things
be? A natural Person cannot perceive the Mind of Christ when speaking to them
about spiritual things. Spiritual Objects must have a spiritual Eye to discern
and behold them, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man perceives not the things of the
Spirit. Observe, 2. With what great Humility and Condescension our Holy Lord
treats this poor Woman, pitying her Ignorance, and pardoning her Infidelity: He
tells her, That the Water of that Well which she was about to draw, could not
give an abiding Satisfaction; but the Thirst quenched for the present, would
certainly return again: But he that should drink of the Water which he had to
give, that is, be made partakers of the Graces of his Spirit, shall find such
refreshing satisfaction therefrom, that all inordinate Desires after earthly
things will be quenched and extinguished, and will be like a Well of Water
springing up till they come to Eternal Glory. Learn hence, 1. That as the Body
of Man is subject to natural, so is the Soul of Man subject to a spiritual kind
of Thirst. 2. That no Creature-Comfort, or earthly Enjoyment can quench this
Thirst, which the Soul of Man is subject unto. 3. That the Spirit of Grace
(which our Savior here calls the Water of Life) is able fully and perfectly to
quench this Thirst of the Soul: And where it is once savingly received, shall
never be totally or finally lost. It shall be in him a Well of Water springing
up into everlasting life.

15 The woman says unto him, Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not,
neither come hither to draw. 16 Jesus says unto her, Go, call thy husband, and
come hither. 17 The woman answered and said, I have no husband. Jesus said unto
her, Thou have well said, I have no husband: 18 For thou have had five
husbands, and he whom thou now have is not thy husband: in that said thou
truly.

These Words set forth unto us, 1. What manner of Person this Woman was, whose
Conversion Christ sought so industriously after. 2. The Means he used in order
to that End. Observe, 1. What manner of Person this Woman was; besides, that
she was an Idolater, as being a Samaritan, she was also an Adulteress, and
lived now in the Sin of Uncleanness with one that was not her Husband, after
she had had five Husbands before. Whence we learn, That the ice of old Age will
not quench the Fire of Lust, Concupiscentia non senescit; such is the
Pollulution of our Nature, that Lust will be insatiable if Grace does not
restrain it. This Woman, after five Marriages, yet lives in the Sin of
Uncleanness. Observe, 2. The Way and Manner our Lord takes, the Method and
Means our Lord uses in order to her Conversion. 1. He deals very tenderly and
gently with her, he uses no roughness or tartness of Speech with her, he does
not call her Whore, nor upbraid her for her impudent Lewdness, in living with a
Man that was none of her Husband, but only gives her to understand that he knew
the Sin she lived in; yet this he did likewise with all imaginable privacy,
whilst his Disciples were away, and no Body by, but they two only. Hence learn,
1. That private Sins are not to be reproved publicly. 2. That in reproving
Sin, all sharpness and bitterness of Expression must be avoided: The Pill of
Reproof must be rapp'd up in Sugar; for if they to whom it is given taste the
bitterness of Gall and Passion mixed with it, they will certainly spit it out
before, it may be, upon our Faces. Our Lord's Practcie here instructs us, That
Sin is to be so reproved, as that the Credit and Estimation of the Sinner may
be preserved as much as may be. Note, 2. That as Christ dealt with this Woman
tenderly and gently, so he discovers her Sin to her particularly, and sets her
secret Sin before the Face of her Conscience distinctly. If ever the Ministry
of the Word works upon the Minds of Men to their Conversion, it must be by a
particular and close application of the Word to every Man's Conscience.
Generals will not affect. Note, 3. What the particular Sin is which Christ
charges home upon the Conscience of this Woman; it is the Sin of Uncleanness,
that the Man she kept with, was not her Husband. Learn thence, That amongst all
Sins, the sin of Uncleanness will lie heaviest upon the Conscience, and wound
the Soul most deeply, when the Spirit of God once effectually discovers it, and
charges it home upon the Conscience: For there is no Sin so directly opposite
to Sanctification and Holiness as this Sin: No Sin that quenches the Holy
Spirit of God like this Sin.

19 The woman says unto him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet. 20 Our
fathers worshipped in this mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the place
where men ought to worship.

In these Verses the Evangelist declares a threefold Effect and Fruit of the
Grace of Conversion that appeared in this Woman. 1. She neither denied, nor
excused, nor extenuated the Sin which Christ had charged her with; but tacitly
owns and implicitly confesses it. 2. She does not only own and confess what she
was charged with, but she does profess Reverence to our Savior's Person, and
pays Honor to him as an extraordinary Prophet; Sir, I perceive that thou art a
Prophet. 3. She desires Instruction and Resolution from him concerning the
Worship and Service of the true God, how she might seek him, and where she
might serve him most acceptably; whether at Jerusalem, or upon Mount Gerizim:
Our Fathers worshipped in this Mountain; but ye say, Jerusalem is the place
where Men ought to worship. Where Observe, How ready and forward Persons of a
false Religion are to ascribe too much to Antiquity, and to the Example and
custom of their Forefathers. Whereas it is not the continuance of a thousand
or two thousand Years that can make any thing truly Ancient in Religion, except
it has been from the beginning: Nothing is truly Ancient in Matters of
Religion, but that which can derive its Original from him that is truly called
the Ancient of Days.

21 Jesus says unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall
neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father. 22 Ye
worship ye know not what: we know what we worship: for salvation is of the
Jews. 23 But the hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeks such to
worship him.

Here we have our Savior's Answer to the foregoing Question, which consists of
two Parts; 1. Concerning the Place of Worship. 2. Concerning the Worship it
self. As to the Place of Worship, our Savior tells her, that though the Jews
had heretofore by warrant of God's Word regularly worshipped at Jerusalem, and
the Samaritans superstitiously worshipped at Mount Gerizim, yet the Hour was
coming, namely, at his Death, when all difference of Places for God's Worship
should be taken away, and therefore she need not trouble her self about the
Place of God's Worship, to know whether of the two Places were holier, and the
better to serve God in; for ere long the Service of God should not be confined
more to one Place, than another. Hence learn, That since the death of Christ,
the Religious Difference of Places is taken away, and the Worship of God not
confined to any one particular Place or Nation. 2. Our blessed Savior resolves
her concerning the Worship it self, namely, that the Ceremonial Worship, which
the Jews and Samaritans used, should shortly be abolished, and instead thereof
a more spiritual Form of Worship should be established, more suitable to the
Spiritual Nature of the great and holy God, and containing in it the Truth and
Substance of all that which the Jewish Ceremonies prefigured and shadowed
forth. Learn hence, That the True Worship of God under the Gospel, does not
consist in the external Pomp of any outward Ceremonies, but is Spiritual and
Substantial: No Worship is acceptable to him, that is the Father of Spirits,
but that which is truly Spiritual.

24 God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and
in truth.

God is a Spirit; that is, he has no Body nor bodily Parts: He is not a bare
spiritual Substance, but a pure and perfect Spirit, and therefore his
Worshippers must worship him in Spirit and in Truth: Where Spirit is opposed to
the Legal Ceremonies, and Truth to the Jewish Rites, not to Hypocritical
Services; for the old Patriarchs did worship God in Spirit and in Truth. As
Truth is taken for Sincerity, they served him with a sincere Conscience, and
with a single Heart. But our Savior's Business is to show, That a Worship
without Legal Rites and Jewish Ceremonies, is proper to the times of the
Gospel. In the Words, Observe, 1. The Nature of God declared. God is a Spirit.
2. The Duty of Man inferred; therefore they that worship him, must worship him
in Spirit and in Truth. From the whole Note, 1. That God is a pure Spiritual
Being. When bodily Parts, Hands and Eyes, etc. are ascribed to him, it is only
in Condescension to our weakness, and to signify those Acts in God which such
Members do perform in us. Note, 2. That the Worship due from the Creature to
God is spiritual Worship, and ought to be spiritually performed. The Jewish
Ceremonial Worship was abolished to promote the Spirituality of Divine Worship,
yet must not this be so understood, as if God rejected bodily Worship, because
he requires spiritual under the Gopsel; for Jesus Christ the most spiritual
Worshipper, worshipped God with his Body. Besides, God has appointed some Parts
of Worship, which cannot be performed without the Body, as Sacraments. In a
Word, God has created the Body as well as the Soul. Christ has redeemed the
Body as well as the Soul, and he will glorify the Body as well as the Soul;
therefore it is our Duty to worship and glorify God, with our Bodies and with
our Spirits which are his.

25 The woman says unto him, I know that Messiah comes, which is called
Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things. 26 Jesus says unto her, I
that speak unto thee, am he.

Observe here, 1. What a General Expectation there was in the Minds of all
Persons (at the time of our Savior's appearing) of one whom the Jews called
the Messiah. I know that Messiah comes. This Woman, though a Samaritan, yet
knew that the Messiah should come, and that he was now expected. Observe, 2.
What the Work and Office of the Messiah was apprehended and believed to be,
namely, to reveal the whole Mind and Will of God to a lost World. When the
Messiah is come he will tell us all things. Learn thence, That the Lord Jesus
Christ, the promised and true Messiah, being called and appointed by God to be
the great Prophet of his Church, has fully and perfectly revealed all things,
needful to be known for our Salvation, John 15.15. All things that I have heard
of the Father, I have made known unto you. Observe Lastly, How freely and fully
Christ reveals himself to this poor Woman, he tells her plainly, that he was
the Messiah. When the Jews asked him, John 10.24. If thou be the Christ tell us
plainly, Christ did not in plain Terms tell them who he was. Nay, when John
Baptist sent two of his Disciples to ask him whether he were He that should
come, he gave them no direct Answer: Yet behold he makes himself plainly known
to this poor Woman, he discerning her Humility and great Simplicity, that she
was willing to be instructed by him, and did not come to him as the Jews and
Pharisees did, captiously, with a design to entangle and enspare him. Hence
learn, That the Lord Jesus Christ delights to reveal himself and make known his
Mind and Will to such as with an humble Mind, and an honest Simplicity of heart
do desire to know him, and understand their Duty to him.

27 And upon this came his disciples, and marvelled that he talked with the
woman: yet no man said, What seek thou? or, Why talkest thou with her? 28
The woman then left her water-pot, and went her way into the city, and says to
the men, 29 Come, see a man which told me all things that ever I did: is not
this the Christ? 30 Then they went out of the city and came unto him.

Observe here, 1. How the Providence of God so ordered and disposed of things
that the Disciples did not return to Christ till he had finished his Discourse
with this poor Woman. An humbled sinner may meet with such Satisfaction and
sweet Refreshment in Christ's Company, that the presence even of Disciples
themselves (the best and holiest of Saints) may be looked upon as injurious to
it, and an interruption of it. This poor Woman had so sweet a time with Christ,
that an end being put to the Conference by the coming of the Disciples, might
be Matter of Grief and Resentment to her. Yet the Providence of God so ordered,
that the Disciples did not come to break off the Conference till Christ had
made himself known as the Messiah to this poor Woman. Obs. 2. The Carriage and
Behavior of the Disciples upon their return to Christ. Finding him preaching a
Sermon to a single Woman, they marvelled, but yet were silent. Learn, 1. That
the Humility and Condescension of the Lord Jesus Christ in treating poor
penitent and humbled sinners is matter of wonder and admiration, even to
Disciples themselves. Oh blessed Savior* there was more Kindness and
Condescension, more Love and Compassion, more Meekness and Humility in thy self
alone, than in all thy Disciples and Followers put together. Yet Observe, 2.
Though they marvelled, they were silent, No Man said, Why talkest thou with her?
Thence Note, That such Reverence is due to Christ in all his Dispensations and
Actions, that when we can see no reason for what he does, it is not for us to
inquire, much less to quarrel: But we must awfully admire what we cannot
comprehend. Observe 3. the Behavior of this Woman after the Conference was
over, she leaves her VVater-Pot, and makes haste to invite and call her
Neighbors to Christ, whose Grace and Kindness she had experienced. Learn
thence. That such as truly know Christ, have tasted Sweetness in him, and
derived Comfort and Satisfaction from him, will be forward to invite, and
industrious to draw others to a saving Acquaintance with him. Come with me, and
see a Man that told me all that ever I did, is not this the Christ? Learn
farther, from the Woman's leaving her Water-Pot behind her and hastening to the
City, That when once a Soul has tasted the Sweetness and Excellency that is in
Jesus Christ, those things which were highly esteemed before, will be little
regarded then. The poor Woman came to draw Water, and thought much and spoke
much of the Water of that Well, which was before her; but meeting with Jesus
Christ, and tasting of his Grace, she forgets both Water and Water-Pot, and
away she goes to fetch in all her Acquaintance to Christ.

31 In the mean while his disciples prayed him, saying, Master, eat. 32 But he
said unto them, I have meat to eat that ye know not of. 33 Therefore said the
Disciples one to another, Has any man brought him ought to eat? 34 Jesus says
unto them, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his
work.

Observe here, The fit and seasonable Motion which our Savior's Disciples make
to him; Master, eat. Learn from thence, That though a Person's chief Care
should be for his own Soul, and for improving all Opportunities for doing good
to the Souls of others, yet the Bodies of Men must not be neglected, but
supported by Meat and Drink, especially theirs whose Health and Strength may be
of greater Use and Service to God and his Church. The Body is the Servant of
the Soul, the Instrument whereby it works; and therefore to neglect the Body
is to disable and unfit the Soul for Service, to hinder the Functions and
Operations of it. The sixth Commandment which forbids us to kill, requires us
to use all Means for the Preservation of Life both in our selves and others.
Observe next, our Savior's Answer to the Disciples Motion; Master eat, say
they: I have Meat to eat that ye know not of, says he, for my Meat is to do the
Will of him that sent me. Not that our Savior did not want Meat at this time,
for he was both hungry and thirsty, as appears by his asking Water of the Woman
to drink, and by his sending his Disciples into the City to buy Meat. But our
Lord was more intent upon doing his Father's Work, than upon satisfying his own
hunger. Christ hungered more after an Opportunity of doing good to the Souls of
Men, than he did after Meat and Drink to satisfy his hunger. Lord! Let us thy
Ministers learn of thee to prefer the Spiritual Welfare of our People, before
any temporal Advantages whatsoever.

35 Say not ye, There are yet four months, and then comes harvest? Behold, I
say unto you, Lift up your eyes, and look on the fields; for they are white
already to harvest. 36 And he that reapeth receives wages, and gathers fruit
unto life eternal: that both he that sows, and he that reapeth, may rejoice
together. 37 And herein is that saying true, One sows and another reapeth. 38
I sent you to reap that whereon ye bestowed no labor: other men labored, and
ye are entered into their labors.

Our Blessed Savior having in the former Verses given a most plain and evident
Demonstration of his fervent desire to bring Souls home unto God, does in these
Verses labor to stir up and kindle the like Affections in his Disciples, and
this he does by three very effectual Arguments. The first Argument is drawn
from the Ripeness of the People, and their Willingness to hear, and their
Readiness to be reaped and gathered by the Gospel, (whereof there was a present
instance in the Samaritans, who were now coming forth in multitudes to Christ)
which opportunity was therefore to be improved. Lift up your Eyes and look on
the Fields, for they are white already for Harvest. Learn hence, That as a
People is sometimes ripe for the Ministry of the Word, as Corn is ripe and
ready for the Reapers Hand, so it is the Duty of the Ministers of Christ, to
lay hold upon such Opportunities with as much desire and delight as the
Harvest-Man, does upon a reaping Season. The second Argument to stir up the
Disciples Diligence in preaching the Gospel is drawn from the great Reward they
should receive for this their Work. He that reapeth receives Wages. The
Harvest Man's Wages is double to what other Laborers receive. The Ministers of
God shall receive good Wages at his Hand, how ill soever they are requited and
rewarded by an unkind World. And as a farther Encouragement it follows, He that
sows and he that reapeth shall rejoice together; that is, the Prophets who
took much pains in sowing the Seed of the Gospel and particularly John the
Baptist, and you my Apostles which succeed them and reap the Fruit of what they
did sow, shall have the same Reward in Glory and rejoice together. Learn hence,
That not only the Successful but the Faithful Labourer in God's Harvest, shall
be rewarded: not only those which see the Fruit of their Ministry in the
Conversion of Sinners, but such as are faithful Seeds-Men. Though the Seed does
not come up till we are in our Graves, nay, though it rots under the Clods, and
does not come up at all, yet shall the faithful Seeds-Man be rewarded according
to his Labor, not according to his Success. The third Argument to quicken the
Disciples Diligence is drawn from the Easiness and Facility of that Labor
which God required of them; Others have labored, and you are entered into their
Labors; that is, the Prophets and John the Baptist have prepared the Ground
and sown the Seed, and made ready a People for the Lord, and now you enter into
their Labors, by forming and gathering them into a Gospel Church; yet this
must not be understood absolutely, but comparatively: Not as if the Prophets
reaped nothing, converted none; but that their Fruit was small in comparison of
the Success which the Apostles found. Nor is it to be understood as if the
Apostles took no pains at all, but that the Prophets greater pains rendered the
Apostles Labors Successful, who took less pains. Learn hence, 1. That the
Wisdom of God sees it fit that all his Servants in the Work of the Ministry do
not meet with the same Difficulties, nor enjoy the same Success. Some are
laborious Sowers, others are joyful Reapers; some labor all their Days with
little visible Success, others bring in many to Christ, perhaps by a single
Sermon; some labor even with Weariness, and reap little, others enter into
their Labors and reap much.

39 And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him, for the saying of
the woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I did. 40 So when the
Samaritans were come unto him, they besought him that he would tarry with them:
and he abode there two days. 41 And many mo believed, because of his own word:
42 And said unto the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying: for we
have heard him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior
of the world.

Here an Account is given of the Conversion of more of the Samaritans from the
City Sychar. Some believed on him, upon the full Report which the Woman had
made, That he had told her all that ever she did: But others were brought to
believe by his own Word. Now from the VVomans being an Instrument to bring her
Acquaintance to Christ, by her own Experience of what she had heard from him;
Learn, 1. That very weak Instruments, when they employ themselves for Christ,
desiring to extol his Praise, and set forth his Glory, are sometimes richly
blessed with great Success; Many of the Samaritans believed for the Saying of
this poor Woman. Learn, 2. That when a Person can say but little of Christ, yet
if it be spoken from Experience and sensible Feeling, it will be more
Successful and Persuasive, than much more that is spoken from Notional
Knowledge. Such was this Woman's Testimony concerning Christ; Come see a Man
that told me all things that ever I did: Is not this the Christ? She spoke what
she found, yea, what she felt within her self, and speaking her own Experience,
many believed on him for her Saying. But further, these Samaritans believed
Christ to be a Prophet upon the Testimony of this Woman. But they believed him
afterward to be the Messiah or the Savior of the World, upon the Credit and
Authority of his own Word, v. 41. And many more believed, because of his own
Word. Thence Learn, That although Instruments speaking may be a means to draw
Persons to give some assent to Truth, yet it is Christ himself that must work a
full Persuasion, and his own Word is the surest Foundation for Faith to build
and depend upon: Now we believe not because of thy saying, for we have heard
him our selves.

43 Now after two days he departed thence, and went into Galilee: 44 For Jesus
himself testified; that a prophet has no honor in his own country. 45 Then
when he was come into Galilee, the Galileans received him, having seen all the
things that he did at Jerusalem at the feast: for they also went unto the feast.

Our Blessed Savior having spent two days with the Samaritans, as an
Introduction to the calling of the Gentiles, he goes forward toward Galilee,
the Place which he was pleased to make choice of, for the Exercise of the
greatest Part of his Ministry. Coming into Galilee he passes by the City of
Nazareth, where he had had his Education, knowing what little Respect he was
like to find there: A Prophet ordinarily having little Honor in his own
Country: Therefore shunning Nazareth, he goes to Cana, where he had done his
first Miracle. Learn hence, 1. That there is a real Tribute of Honor due unto
every Prophet and Minister of God, which ought to be testified by Reverence to
their Persons, by a due Estimation of the Dignity of their Calling, by
Obedience to their Doctrine, and by an honorable Maintenance. A Prophet should
have Honor; and Honor includes all these. 2. It is very usual and ordinary
for the Prophets of God to meet with least Respect, where they are most known;
their nearest Neighbors, their nearest Relations, their nearest Acquaintance
are oft-times farthest off from giving them that Honor that is due unto them.
Learn, 3. That the true Prophets and Messengers of God shall be sure to find
some that will entertain their Persons, and embrace their Ministry, though they
be disesteemed and rejected by others. Though our Savior had no Honor at
Nazareth, yet he found Entertainment amongst the rest of the Galileans.

46 So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, where he made the water wine. And
there was a certain noble man, whose son was sick at Capernaum. 47 When he
heard that Jesus was come out of Judea into Galilee, he went unto him, and
besought him that he would come down and heal his son: for he was at the point
of death. 48 Then said Jesus unto him, Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will
not believe. 49 The noble man says unto him, Sir, come down ere my child die.
50 Jesus says unto him, Go thy way; thy son lives. And the man believed the
word that Jesus had spoken unto him, and he went his way. 51 And as he was now
going down, his servants met him, and told him, saying, Thy son lives. 52 Then
enquired he of them the hour, when he began to amend: and they said unto him,
Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him. 53 So the father knew that it
was at the same hour, in the which Jesus said unto him, Thy son lives; and
himself believed, and his whole house. 54 This is again the second miracle that
Jesus did, when he was come out of Judea into Galilee.

In this last Paragraph of the Chapter we find our blessed Savior performing a
second Miracle in Cana of Galilee, curing a noble Man's Son that was sick of a
Fever: This noble Man apprehended Christ to be a Prophet, and believed that if
he were bodily present with his Son he might possibly cure him; but he did not
believe him to be the Messiah, who was true God and every where present:
Therefore to give him an infallible Proof that he was so, he tells him his Son
was cured by the Word of his Mouth, even at that distance. By which Miracle he
cured not only the Child of his Fever, but the Father of his Unbelief. From the
whole we Note, 1. The Person that here applies himself to Christ; A noble Man.
We do not find Christ often attended with Nobility. Have any of the Rulers
believed on him? Yes; here is one? The Sovereign Grace of God is free, and he
has his Numbers among all Orders, Ranks and Degrees of Men. And though not many
Noble are called, yet some are. Note, 2. The Calamity which befell this noble
Person; his Son was sick, yea, dying. Earthly Greatness is no Defense against
Afflictions; great Men are in Trouble as other Men; neither the Wealth and
Riches of this noble Man, nor his Power and Authority, nor his Honor in his
Country, nor his Favor with his Prince, could keep off God's Hand either from
himself or from his Son: But the Father feels as much by Simpathy as the Child
by Sense. Note, 3. The Cause and special Occasion which brought this noble Man
to Christ: It was in general, an Affliction; and, in particular, the sickness
of his Child. Learn thence, That great is the Fruit and Profit of Afflictions
to the Children of Men. Many with this noble Man, never come to Christ till
they be driven by the Cross; and particularly, God sanctifies the Sickness and
Death of near and dear Relations, (Children in special) to bring Persons nearer
to himself. Note, 4. This noble Man was neither faithless nor faithful; had he
been quite faithless, he had not taken such Pains to come to Christ; had he
been faithful, he had not limited the Son of God, by saying, Come down and heal
my Son ere he die. Come down, as if Christ could not have cured him absent; ere
my Son die, as if the same Power required to heal him being sick, could not
raise him being dead. Lord, heal my Son, had been a proper Suit to him, who was
the great Physician: But, Come down and heal him, was to teach Christ how to
work. He who does whatsoever he will, must do it how he will, and when he will.
It is for us to crave and receive, not to prescribe and appoint. Note, 5. The
Meekness and great condescending Goodness of Jesus Christ; notwithstanding the
Infirmity of this poor Man, our Lord says, Go thy way, thy Son lives.
Worthiness in the Creature is not the Motive that rules Christ. Should we
measure our Hopes by our Worthiness, there were no Blessing to be hoped for;
but if we measure them by Christ's Bounty and Compassion, there is no Blessing
to be despaired of. Note, 6. How Christ not only answers the Desires, but
exceeds the Expectations of this distressed Person: His Request was only, Come
and heal my Son. Christ's Answer was, Go thy way, thy Son lives. Our heavenly
Father, when he does not give us what we ask, gives us better than we asked. We
ask what we think best, but God gives what he knows best. Christ here gave a
greater Demonstration of his Omnipotency than was craved. Note, Lastly, With
one Word does Christ heal two Patients; the Son of his Fever, the Father of his
Unbelief. It was a low degree of Faith that brought the Father to Christ; it
was an higher degree that sent him back to his Son; but highest of all, when
finding his Son healed, he himself believed and his whole House. Learn hence,
That a weak Faith may be true, but a true Faith is always growing and
increasing; It is like the Path of the Just, that shines more and more until
the perfect Day.

CHAP. V.
AFter this there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. 2
Now there is at Jerusalem by the sheep- market a pool, which is called in the
Hebrew tongue, Bethesda, having five porches. 3 In these lay a great multitude
of impotent folk, of blind, halt, withered, waiting for the the moving of the
water. 4 For an angel went down at a certain season into the pool, and troubled
the water: whosoever then first after the troubling of the water stepped in,
was made whole of whatsoever disease he had.

This Chapter begins with a Description of the famous Pool of Bethesda, whose
Waters were Medicinal to cure the first comer thereinto, whatsoever Disease he
had. Some think this was effected in a natural way, and that the Entrails of
the sacrificed Beasts being wasted in this Pool, an healing Virtue was
communicated for curing the Palsy and such cold Diseases: As Persons that have
lame and withered Hands are at this day, directed to put them into the Belly of
a Beast newly opened. But others look upon the healing Virtue of this Pool to
be supernatural and miraculous, because it cured all Diseases, how old, great
and desperate soever, and this in a moment, or very quickly; and but one at a
time; and that one, the first that stepped in only, after an Angel had
descended and troubled the Waters: All which show that the healing Virtue came
not from the goodness of the Waters, but that it was a supernatural Work. Some
think that the Miracle of this Pool was granted to the Jews, partly to
strengthen them in the true worship of God, and to confirm them in their
religious Course of Sacrificing, against the Scoffs of the Romans, who were now
their Lords; such a Virtue being given to that Water wherein their Sacrifices
were wont to be washed. Learn hence, That means of God's appointment, how
improbable and unlikely soever, must not be despised, but awfully admired, and
thankfully used, although the way and manner of their working be not understood
or comprehended by us.

5 And a certain man was there, which had an infirmity thirty and eight years.
6 When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time in that
case, he says unto him, Will thou be made whole? 7 The impotent man answered
him, Sir, I have no man, when the water is troubled, to put me into the pool:
but while I am coming, another steppeth down before me. 8 Jesus says unto him,
Rise, take up thy bed, and walk. 9 And immediately the man was made whole, and
took up his bed, and walked: and on the same day was the sabbath. 10 The Jews
therefore said unto him that was cured, It is the sabbath day; it is not lawful
for thee to carry thy bed. 11 He answered them, He that made me whole, the same
said unto me, Take up thy bed and walk. 12 Then asked they him, What man is
that which said unto thee, Take up thy bed and walk? 13 And he that was healed,
wist not who it was: for Jesus had conveyed himself away, a multitude being in
that place.

It was very commendable that the rich Men did not engross this Pool, and the
Benefit of it to themselves, but suffered poor People to come to it. In this
College of Cripples a poor Man that had been lame thirty eight Years was found,
who wanting Strength to help himself, wanting Money to hire others, and others
wanting Mercy to help him; Christ takes pity on him, and because he could not
go to Health, Health is graciously brought to him, and that by the Hand of the
great Physician, Christ Jesus. Observe here, 1. That not only are Men's Bodies
subject to innumerable Infirmities and Diseases, but it pleases God for wise
Ends to continue some of his Servants laboring under bodily Weakness for many
Years together, yea, even all the days of their Life. Here is a poor Man for
eight and thirty Years together under the Discipline of God's Rod by bodily
Weakness. Observe, 2. That it is the Duty of the Afflicted to wait upon God in
a diligent use of all Means which God has appointed for their Help and Healing:
As to trust to Means, is to neglect God; so to neglect the Means, is to tempt
God. This poor Man, no doubt, had made use of the Means before, yet waits at
the Pool now. Observe, 3. Though Christ well knew the Case of this afflicted
Person, and wanted no Information, yet he asks him, If he were willing to be
made whole? to make him sensible of his Misery, to quicken his Desires after
healing, and to raise his Expectations of Help from him. Though Christ knows our
Wants, yet he takes no notice of them, till we make them known to him by
Prayer. Observe, 4. The time when Christ wrought this Miracle of healing upon
the impotent Man; it was on the Sabbath Day; and as an Evidence of the
certainty of the Cure, Christ bids him take up his Bed and walk. Our Savior's
Miracles were real and beneficial, they were obvious to Sense, and would bear
the Examination of all Persons. The Miracles which the Church of Rome boast of,
will not bear the Examination of our Senses: Their great Miracle,
Transubstantiation, is so far from being obvious to Sense, that it contradicts
the Sense and Reason of Mankind, and is the greatest Affront to humane Nature
that ever the World was acquainted with. And our Savior's working this and
many other Miracles, on the Sabbath Day was for the Testification of the
Miracles to all Persons that would take notice of them. Observe, 5. How
unjustly the Jews tax the Cripple that was healed with the breach of the
Sabbath, for taking up his Bed and walking on the Sabbath Day; whereas the Law
only forbad carrying Burdens on the Sabbath Day for Profit, in a way of Trade:
But this Man's carrying his Bed, was a Testimony of God's Goodness and Mercy
toward him, and of his Gratitude and Thankfulness toward God. Hypocritical
and superstitious Persons oft-times pretend much Zeal for observing the Letter
of the Law, little respecting the Moral Sense and Signification of it. Besides,
our Savior had a mind to let the Jews know that he was Lord of the Sabbath,
that he had a Power over it, and could dispense with it as he thought good.
Observe, Lastly, The great Modesty and Humility of our blessed Savior, how
hateful all Ostentation and Vainglory was unto him; for having wrought this
famous Miracle before the People at a Public Time, the Feast of the Passover,
to shun all Applause from the Multitude, he conveys himself privately away from
them: Jesus conveyed himself away, a multitude being in that place. Our
Savior's Business was to do much Good, and make but little Noise: He sought
not his own Glory.

14 Afterward Jesus finds him in the temple, and said unto him, Behold, thou
art made whole: sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.

These words are our Savior's seasonable Advice and Counsel to the poor
impotent Cripple, whom he had miraculously restored to Health and Soundness.
Where, Observe, 1. The Person admonishing; Jesus, he that had been his
Physician before, is his Monitor and Teacher now: Behold, thou art whole; sin
no more. Oh, how much is it the Duty, but how seldom the Practice of those whom
God makes Instruments for recovering bodily Health, to put their Patients in
mind of their Obligations to Thankfulness and new Obedience? Thus did our
Savior here. The Recovered Man's Physician gave him Instruction, his Healer
became his Monitor. Sin no more. Obs. 2. The Person admonished, the recovered
Cripple: Thou art made whole. But, what was he? Not a Disciple, not a Believer:
For he that was healed, wist not who Jesus was, v. 13. he knew not Christ,
therefore believed not on him, and yet was healed by him. Thence Learn, That
there are many outward Mercies and common Blessings which Christ bestows upon
those that have no spiritual Knowledge of him, or saving Acquaintance with him.
The Man that was healed, wist not who he was that had healed him. Observe, 3.
The Place where Christ meets this his recovered Patient; not at the Tavern, but
in the Temple, returning Thanks to God for his recovered Health. When God sends
forth his Word and heals us, it is our Duty to make our first Visit to God's
House, and to pay our Vows in the great Congregation, and found forth the
Praises of our great and gracious Deliverer. Observe, 4. The Circumstance of
Time when Christ found him in the Temple, soon after his recovery. Afterward
Jesus finds him in the Temple. We must not be clamorous and importunate to
receive Mercies, and dumb and tongue-tied in returning Thanks; but make haste,
and not delay the time to pay our Acknowledgments to him that heals us.
Observe, 5. The Admonition it self; Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more,
lest a worse thing come unto thee; where our Savior admonishes him of the
greatness of the Mercy; Behold, thou art made whole; and subjoyns a cautionary
Direction, Sin no more. Where it is necessarily employed, that sin is always the
deserving, and often times the procuring Cause of a Person's Afflictions and
Calamities; and that the best and surest way to prevent the Return of Judgments
and Calamities to a Person, is for a Person to return no more to sin; Sin no
more lest a worse thing come unto thee; where it is farther implied, that
Almighty God has sorer Plagues and severer Judgments in store for those Sinners
who go on obstinately in a Course of Sin and Rebellion against God,
notwithstanding all the signal Rebukes of his avenging Anger. From the whole
Note, That when the Lord does graciously heal a Person or a People, it is a
Mercy to be much observed and thankfully acknowledged.

15 The man departed, and told the Jews that it was Jesus which had made him
whole. 16 And therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him,
because he had done these things on the sabbath day.

After the Man understood who his Healer and Benefactor was, he went and told
the Jewish Magistrates, it was Christ that had healed him. This he did, not
with any evil Design no doubt, to inform against him and stir up the Jews to
persecute him, but desirous to publish what Christ had done to his Honor, and
to direct others to make use of him. Learn thence, That it is the Duty of all
those that have experienced the Power and Pity of Christ themselves to proclaim
and publish it to others, to the intent that all that need him may experience
Help and Healing from him. This seems to be the poor Man's Design: But behold
the Blindness, Obstinacy and Malice of the Jews, who persecuted Christ and
sought to kill him for doing good, and healing a Cripple that had been thirty
eight Years so: Therefore did the Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him.
Yet observe, the Cloak and Pretense they have for their malicious Persecution
of our Savior, namely, the supposed Violation of the Sabbath Day; They sought
to slay him, because he had done these things on the Sabbath Day. Learn hence,
That great Cruelty against Christ and his Members, has always been and still
is, masked and disguised with a fair Pretense of Zeal for God and his Commands.
The Pharisees mortally hated our Savior, therefore, to cover their Malice,
they traduce him as a Prophaner of the Sabbath, and seek to take away his Life.

17 But Jesus answered them, My Father works hitherto, and I work.

From this Verse to the End of the Chapter, we have our Savior's Apology, for
his working the foregoing Cure on the impotent Man on the Sabbath Day. And the
chief Argument he insists upon, is drawn from his Unity and Equality in Nature
and Operation with his Father; As the Father works, says he, so I work. Here
he speaks of himself not as a Servant, or Instrument in his Father's Hand, but
as a Fellow-Worker with the Father, both in the Works of Creation and in the
Works of Providence and Preservation also. Learn hence, 1. That although
Almighty God has long since ceased from the Works of Creation, yet not from the
Work of Preservation. My Father works hitherto; not by creating new Kinds of
Creatures, but by upholding and preserving what he has already created. Learn,
2. That Christ the Son of God, is joined with and undivided from the Father in
Working. As the Father created all things by him (not as a Man and as an
Instrument in the Father's Hand, for then he was not such) but as his
Fellow-Worker, being equal in Nature and Power, with the Father; in like manner
as the Father preserves, sustaineth, governs and upholdeth all things, so
does Christ; the Father's Actions and his, being the same. My Father works
hitherto, and I work.

18 Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he not only had
broken the sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, making himself equal
with God. 19 Then answered Jesus, and said unto them, Verily verily I say unto
you, The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do: for
what things soever he does, these also does the Son likewise.

Observe here, the Jews instead of being satisfied, were the more enraged, not
only because he had violated the Sabbath, (as they pretended) by healing the
Cripple on the Sabbath Day, but because Christ had asserted, that God was his
Father in a peculiar manner, and made himself equal with God. Our Savior
therefore goes on to assert his Equality and Conjunction with the Father in his
Operations and Workings, which does at once justify his Work on the
Sabbath Day, and prove him to be truly and really God. Now our holy Lord to
prove himself equal with God the Father, produces first many Arguments to v.
31. and then alleges the Testimony of many Witnesses, to the end of the
Chapter. Our Savior's first Argument to prove himself equal with the Father in
Essence and Nature is this, That the Father and he are equal in Operation, in
Will and Consent for Working; that the Son does all that the Father does, and
the Father does nothing without the Son, v. 19. The Son can do nothing of
himself; that is, as Man, as the Messiah; and as Mediator, he could do nothing
of himself. His perfect Obedience to, and Compliance with, the Will of his
Father that sent him, would not suffer him to do any thing without him: But as
God, he could do all things of himself. Learn hence, That it is an undeniable
Proof that the Father and Son are one in Nature, Essence and Being, in that
they are inseparable and undivided in Operation and Working; What things soever
the Father does, these also does the Son likewise; and the Son does nothing of
himself, but what he sees the Father do: Therefore Father and Son being equal
in Operation and Working, are equal in Nature and Being; and consequently both
essentially truly and really God. Therefore the Arians of old, and the
Socinians at this Day are wide, when they produce this Text, The Son can do
nothing of himself, to prove that Christ is not equal with God the Father. They
forget or neglect to distinguish betwixt his Divine Nature, which could do all
things, and his Mediatorial Office, which could not do, but what the Father
that sent him, had appointed him to do.

20 For the Father loves the Son, and shows him all things that himself
does: and he will show him greater works then these, that ye may marvel.

The second Argument which our Savior produces to prove his Unity in Nature
and Equality in Operation with the Father, is drawn from that special Love
which the Father bears to the Son, which inclines him to communicate all
things to him by a Divine and Ineffable Communication. Learn hence, 1. That God
the Father loves Jesus Christ his Son. with an Essential, Natural and
Necessary Love, as being the Substantial Image of himself and the Splendour and
Brightness of his Glory. The Father loves the Son; that is, with an Essential,
Eternal and Ineffable Love. 2. That the Father's Love to Christ was
Communicative; the Father communicated his Essence and Nature, his Wisdom and
Power for Operation to the Son: The Father shows the Son all things that
himself does, namely, by a Divine, Inconceivable and Unspeakable Communication.

21 For as the Father raises up the dead and quickneth them: even so the Son
quickneth whom he will.

A third Argument proving Christ to be God, and equal with the Father, is here
produced, namely, his raising of the dead: He is jointly with the Father in
that Work, and equal with him: As the Father quickneth whom he please, so does
the Son quicken whom he will; that is, not as the Father's Instrument, but as a
principal Agent, by the same Authority, and with the like absolute Freedom of
Will which the Father uses, being a Sovereign and Independent Being as the
Father is; As the Father raises the dead and quickneth them, so the Son
quickneth whom he will. Learn hence, 1. That quickening and raising of the dead
is an Act of Omnipotency and proper to God only; The Father raises the dead
and quickneth them. 2. That Christ's Power to raise the dead as well as his
Father, is a Proof of his Equality with his Father, and an Evidence of his
being truly and really God; the Son quickneth whom he will.

22 For the Father judges no man; but has committed all judgment unto the
Son: 23 That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. He
that honors not the Son, honors not the Father which has sent him.

A fourth Instance of Christ's Godhead, and proof of his Equality with the
Father, is, That it is his Work to judge the World; The Father, says Christ,
judges no Man; that is, no Man without me, but all Men by me, to this intent,
That all Men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father; that is,
honor him with the same Faith, Love, Fear, Worship that is due and payable to
God the Father. Hence learn, 1. That Christ as God has the absolute Power of
Life and Death, of Absolution and Condemnation, which he executes in
Conjunction with his Father. 2. That Christ having this Power of judging the
World, with the Father, does show that the same Glory is due to him, which is
due unto the Father. All Men should honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father. 3. That such as pretend to honor Christ, but deny him to be God, equal
with the Father, They withdraw the highest Honor from him; and such as
withdraw Honor from the Son, deny it to the Father, who will not be honored
but in and through honoring of the Son. This Text speaks dread and terror to
the Socinians, who pretend to Honor Christ, but not with the same Honor with
which they pretend to honor the Father: in God's Account they honor him not
at all; For he that honors not the Son, honors not the Father.

24 Verily verily I say unto you, He that hears my word, and believes on him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but
is passed from death unto life. 25 Verily verily I say unto you, The hour is
coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and
they that hear shall live. 26 For as the Father has life in himself; so has
he given to the Son to have life in himself; 27 And has given him authority to
execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.

Here we have a fifth Evidence of Christ's Godhead and Equality with the
Father, namely, that he is the Author of Spiritual and Eternal Life, to all
that believe on him. He that was a Fountain of Life equal with the Father, and
communicated to him from the Father, is God: But Christ has this, v. 26. For
as the Father has Life in himself, so he has given to the Son to have Life in
himself. Again, he that has Authority to execute Judgment upon Angels and Men,
is God; but Christ has such Authority, v. 27. He has given him Authority to
execute Judgment. Farther, he that with his Voice quickneth and makes alive
them that hear it, is God, but Christ does this, v. 25. The dead shall hear the
Voice of the Son of God and live. The Dead, that is, 1. The Spiritually dead;
such as are dead in Trespasses and Sins: These hearing the Voice of Christ in
the Ministry of the Word, shall live, a Life of Grace on Earth, and a Life of
Glory in Heaven. 2. Such as are Corporeally dead also; these are likewise
quickened and raised by Christ as God. Learn hence, 1. That God the Father has
communicated to Christ his Son, a Power to quicken and enliven such as are
Spiritually and Corporally dead. 2. That the Father's communicating this Power
to the Son argues no Inequality nor Inferiority in the Son, but he has the
same Life infinitely, independently and equally with the Father, as the Father
has it, so has the Son; the Father has it in himself, and so has the Son
also; therefore the Son as well as the Father, is essentially and truly God.

28 Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in
the graves shall hear his voice, 29 And shall come forth, they that have done
good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of damnation.

Our Savior finding the Jews amazed and astonished at his declaring his
Sovereign and Supreme Authority and Power to quicken and raise whom he pleased
from the dead, does in these Verses assure them, that there should be a general
Resurrection and an universal Day of Judgment, both of the Righteous and the
Wicked; and a future Distribution of Rewards and Punishments in another Life,
according to Men's Actions here in this Life. All that are in the Graves shall
hear my Voice, and shall come forth. Here observe, 1. The Certainty and
Universality of the Resurrection of the dead declared; The Hour is coming in
which all that are in the Graves shall come forth. Obs. 2. The powerful and
efficacious Means by which this great and sudden Change shall be effected and
accompliished in the Morning of the Resurrection; namely, the omnipotent Voice
or Christ; All that are in the Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come
forth. 3. Here are the different ends of the Resurrection declared according to
the Difference of Persons which shall then be raised, Good and Bad; Those that
have done good, to the Resurrection of Life, and those that have done evil to
the Resurrection of Damnation. Learn, 1. That there shall certainly be a
Resurrection of the Body. 2. That all in the Graves shall be raised, though not
all alike; the Wicked shall be raised by the Power of Christ, as their Judge;
the Righteous shall be raised, by Virtue of their Union with Christ, as their
Head. 3. According as Men live in this World and go out of it, so will they be
found at the Resurrection, without any Change of their State; there will then
be only two sorts of Persons, Good and Bad. All that have done Good, how small
soever the Degree of their Goodness has been, shall be rewarded: And all that
have done Evil, shall be everlastingly punished; For all Persons shall be
eternally Happy or intollerably Miserable in the other World, accordingly as
they manage their Deportment and Behavior in this Life; They that have done
Good shall go, etc.

30 I can of mine own self do nothing: as I hear, I judge: and my judgment is
just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father, which has
sent me.

Here Christ declares to the Jews, and in them to all Mankind, that they might
assure themselves his Judgment would be exactly Righteous; because he had no
private Will or Power of his own, contrary to, or different from his Father.
Learn hence, That the Lord Jesus Christ being the same in Essence and Nature,
in Power and Operation with the Father, had no private Will or Interest of his
own, but acted all things as God, in Co-ordination with the Father; and as Man
in Subordination to him; I can of my own self do nothing; that is, neither as
God, nor as Mediator; not as God, for God the Father and Christ being one,
equal in Power, what one Person did the other does; not as Mediator, for so
Christ finished the Work which his Father gave him to do; the Will of the
Father and the Will of Christ being both one.

31 If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true. 32 There is another
that bears witness of me, and I know that the witness which he witnesses of
me, is true.

Our Blessed Savior having produced these five foregoing Arguments to prove
his Unity in Essence, and his Equality in Power with the Father, comes now to
the end of the Chapter, to produce several Testimonies for the Proof of it; and
the first of them is the Testimony of God his Father; There is another that
bears witness of me, whose witness is True. Now the Father had lately at
Christ's Baptism by a Voice from Heaven declared him to be his beloved Son, in
whom he was well-pleased: which illustrious Testimony given to Christ, they had
not regarded. Learn hence, That as Christ came into the World in Obedience to
his Father, and to bear witness to him; so did the Father honor him and bear
witness of him; and his Testimony concerning his Son is undoubtedly True, and
to be depended and rested upon; for we make the Father a Liar, if we do not
depend upon the Record which he has given of his Son.

33 Ye sent unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth. 34 But I receive not
testimony from man: but these things I say, that ye might be saved.

The second Testimony to prove Christ to be the Messiah was that of John the
Baptist. We read, John 1.19. how the Jews sent to inquire of him, whether he
were the Christ or not; and he denied it, and pointed at Jesus, saying, Behold
the Lamb of God; yet would not the Jews abide by this Testimony of John
concerning the Messiah. Nevertheless, says Christ, I receive not testimony from
John; that is, John by his Testimony adds nothing to me; I was what I was,
and I am what I am, before John testified of me, and since. Learn hence, That
the Divinity of Christ's Person, and the Verity of his Doctrine, needs no Man's
Testimony for the Confirmation of it, being sufficiently confirmed by Christ's
own Authority, and his Father's Testimony: I receive not Testimony from Man;
that is, I need it not, I desire it not upon my own Account, but upon yours
only, that upon the Credit of John's Testimony ye might believe on me, and be
saved by me: These things I say, that ye might be saved.

35 He was a burning and a shining light: and ye were willing for a season to
rejoice in his light.

Observe here, John's Character and the Peoples Carriage. 1. John's Character;
he was a Light, a burning and a shining Light: He had in him a Light of
Knowledge, to enlighten, direct, and comfort others; and this his Knowledge was
accompanied with Zeal, he was a burning Light in his Doctrine, and a shining
Lamp in his Conversation: He had the Light of Knowledge in his Head, the Warmth
of Zeal in his Heart, and the Influence of both in his Life. Learn hence, 1.
That those whom God calls to the Office and Work of the Ministry, he furnishes
with Abilities and Endowments suitable to their great Employments, he endues
them with a Light of Knowledge, which is animated with the Heat and Warmth of
Zeal. 2. That Ministerial Gifts and Abilities are not bestowed alike upon all,
but dispersed variously. All are Lights, according to their Measure, but all
are not equally burning and shining Lights for Proportion and Degree. 3. That
the brightest, burning and clearest shining Lights in the Church of Christ,
have but their time in this World, they are subject as well as other Men to the
common Condition of Mortality, and the Lamp of their Lives burns out the faster
by lighting others to Heaven. John was a burning and a shining Light, but now
is put out and gone. Observe, 2. As John's Character, so the Peoples Carriage;
ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his Light. Here is a threefold
Gradation; they rejoiced: They rejoiced in his Light, and they rejoiced for a
season. 1. They rejoiced. The word signifies, they leaped for Joy, and danced
about him as Children do about a Bonfire, when he first began his Ministry
amongst them. Oh, how warm are the Affections of a People, when a pious and
zealous Minister comes first among them! 2. They rejoiced in his Light, not in
his Heat: Or, they rejoiced in John's Light, not in Christ's: For when they
found that John bare Record to Christ, they soon grew cold in their Affections
toward John. 3. They rejoiced only for a season; for an hour, as the word
signifies. For a short time John's Ministry was acceptable. Learn hence, 1.
That it has been an old Practice amongst Professors, not to like their Pastors
long, though they have been never such burning and shining Lights. John was not
changed, but his Hearers were changed; he did burn and shine in the Candlestick
of the Church with equal Zeal and Luster to the last, but they had changed
their Thoughts of him, and lost their Esteem for him. Learn, 2. That as nothing
in general is so mutable as the Mind of Man, so nothing in particular is so
variable as the Affections and Opinions of People toward their Ministers. The
Lamp of John's Ministry was always alike, burning and shining, his Oil did not
waste; but his Hearers Zeal wasted, and their Affections cooled: Those whose
Gifts are not at all abated, may yet find a great abatement in the acceptance
of their Gifts: Therefore let no Men live upon the Breath of Men, least of all
let Ministers live upon the popular Air, or the Speech of People. Oh, let us
live upon the Credit which we have with God, and rejoice chiefly in his Esteem.
If our Performances find acceptance with God, we are safe and happy, though they
fall under Contempt with Men.

36 But I have greater witness then that of John: for the works which the
Father has given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me,
that the Father has sent me.

The third Testimony produced by Christ, to evidence and prove himself to be
the promised Messiah and Savior of the World, is that of his Miracles; which,
by an Omnipotent Power, as God, he was enabled to work. Christ's Miracles were
speaking Testimonies of his Unity with the Father, and of the Divinity of his
Person. Not so the Miracles of his Apostles; for he wrought his Miracles in his
own Name, and by his own Power and Authority; but the Apostles expressly
declared the contrary, Acts 3.12, 16. Why look ye so steadfastly on us, as if we
by our own power had made this Man whole? His name, through faith in his name,
has made this Man strong. Learn hence, That the Testimony of Christ's own
Works, his Miracles wrought in his own Name, and by his own Authority and
Power, is a clearer Confirmation of his Godhead, Office and Doctrine, than the
best of Men's Testimonies; yea, than John Baptist's own Testimony, That he saw
the Spirit descending on him.

37 And the Father himself which has sent me, has born witness of me. Ye have
neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape. 38 And ye have not his
word abiding in you: for whom he has sent, him ye believe not.

Here our blessed Savior produces again the Testimony of his Father, that he
was the true and promised Messiah: This was given him both at his Baptism and
his Transfiguration; when God the Father owned Christ to be his Son, by an
audible Voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased. Which Testimony the Jews now ought the more to have regarded, because
though their Forefathers had heard the Voice of God at certain times, Exodus 20.
and Deuteronomy. 4. yet they in their times had never heard his Voice. Learn hence,
That the Fathers immediate Testimony of Christ from Heaven, is greater than all
Testimonies given to him here on Earth; greater than John's, greater than his
Miracles. The presence of the glorious Trinity, when that Testimony was given,
Matthew. 3. last, made that Witness most awful and solemn.

39 Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they
are they which testify of me.

The next Testimony which Christ appeals to, is the Testimony of the
Scriptures: That is, the Writings of Moses and the Prophets, which Christ bids
the Jews diligently search, and they shall find that they abundantly testified
of him, and that all the Prophecies and Types were fulfilled in him. The word
(search) signifying to search as Men do for a golden Mine in the Bowels of the
Earth; which they must dig deep for, before they can come at. It intimates 1.
That there is an inestimable Treasure lying hid in the holy Scriptures, which
we shall never fathom by a slight superficial search. 2. That this inestimable
Treasure may be found out by the painful Searcher, and it is the Duty of all
the Members of the visible Church to read and search the Scriptures, which
point out the way to eternal Life.

40 And ye will not come to me that ye might have life.

Here our Savior upbraids the Jews for their obstinate Infidelity; that
notwithstanding God the Father by a Voice from Heaven, and John the Baptist by
his Testimony on Earth; notwithstanding all the Miracles which they had seen
wrought by Christ himself, and notwithstanding the Scriptures, which they
pretended so highly to esteem of, did prove him to be the Messiah, and the
Author of eternal Life, which they professed to seek; yet such was their
Obstinacy, that they would not come unto him, nor believe in him. Ye will not
come unto me that ye may have life. Here Observe, 1. A choice and invaluable
Mercy which Christ stands ready to bestow upon poor Sinners, and that is Life,
both Spiritual and Eternal. A Life of Grace, in order to a Life of Glory.
Observe, 2. The gracious Condition upon which this invaluable Blessing may be
had, and that is upon coming to Christ, believing on him, and receiving of him.
3. Here is the true Reason declared why Sinners do miss of Life and Salvation
by Jesus Christ, when he has so dearly purchased it for them, and does so
freely tender it unto them, and that lies in their own Wilfulness and
Obstinacy: Ye will not come unto me. Learn hence, That the true Reason why so
many Sinners miss of Salvation and eternal Life, after all that Christ has done
and suffered for them, is their own obstinacy and unwillingness to come to him
that they may have Life. Man by Nature has not only an Inability, but a fixed
Enmity in his Will against Jesus Christ.

41 I receive not honor from men. 42 But I know you, that ye have not the love
of God in you. 43 I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not: if
another shall come in his own name, him ye will receive.

Here observe, 1. How little our Savior sought the Approbation and
vainglorious Estimation of Men. I receive not honor from Men. The same should
all his Disciples and Followers do; rest satisfied in the secret Testimony and
silent Applause of their own Consciences, without pumping for popular Applause.
Observe, 2. The dreadful sin which Christ charged upon the Jews, as the cause
why they rejected him. I know, that you have not the love of God in you. Oh
deplorable State and Case, to be void of all true Love to God! Love being the
Spring of all Action, and the Root of all true Obedience; he that loves God,
will not only sweat at his Work, but bleed at his Work too, if his Work cannot
be carried on without bleeding: But where Love to God is wanting, and no Care
to please God is found, his Authority is despised, his Son rejected: As the
Jews here would not come to Christ that they might have Life, because they had
not the Love of God in them. Observe, 3. The high Affront which the Jews
offered to the Son of God in preferring any Seducers and Impostors before him,
who came in their own Names; whilst he was rejected, who came in the Name of
his Father. Learn hence, That although Christ was the great Ambassador of his
Father, not a Servant, but a Son, and had his Mission, his Approbation, and his
Testimony from Heaven, yet so far did the Perverseness and Prejudices of the
Jews prevail, that he was rejected, whilst Impostors and Deceivers, false
Christ's, and Antichrists, without any Evidence and Authority from God,
(because promising them a temporal Kingdom) were embraced and entertained. I
come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not: But if another, a Seducer
shall come in his own name, him ye will receive.

44 How can ye believe, which receive honor one of another, and seek not the
honor that comes from God only?

Here Christ tells the Jews, that it is impossible they should believe aright
in him, because they were so in love with the Praise of Men, that they would
own him for the Messiah who would promise them a temporal Kingdom, and in the
mean time reject himself who came authorized with the Testimony and Approbation
of God. You will receive Honor one of another, but reject the Honor that
comes from God only. Learn, That such as ambitiously hunt after Vainglory and
Respect from Men, do evidence themselves to be regardless of God's Approbation
and Acceptance.

45 Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father: there is one that
accuses you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. 46 For had ye believed Moses, ye
would have believed me: for he wrote of me. 47 But if ye believe not his
writings, how shall ye believe my words?

Think not that I will accuse you; that is, that I only will accuse you to the
Father; there is one that accuses you, even Moses; that is, the Writings of
Moses, which you pretend to depend upon and to trust to: For, had you believed
his Writings, that is, the Prophesies and Types contained in his Writings, you
would have been led by them to believe on me; for they all pointed at me, and
received their Accomplishment in me: But, if Moses cannot be heard by you, I
must expect no Authority with you. Learn, 1. That the whole Scope of Moses
Ceremonial Law was to point out and prefigure Jesus Christ; Christ was the Sum
of the Law, as well as the Substance of the Gospel; he was Abraham's promised
Seed, Moses his great Prophet, Jacob's Shiloh, Esay's Emanuel, Daniel's Holy
One, Zechary's Branch, and Malachi's Angel. 2. That such as believed the
ancient Prophecies before Christ came, did see their Accomplishment in him when
he was come.

CHAP. VI.
AFter these things Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, which is the sea of
Tiberias.

Observe here, How busy and industrious our holy Lord was about his Father's
Work, both on the Sea and on the Land, both by Night and by Day; His Meat was
to do the Will of him that sent him, and to finish his Work. Some have inquired
into the Reasons why Christ traveled by Sea, as well as by Land; and they seem
to be these. 1. To show what his intent was in making the Sea, namely, to be
sailed upon, as the Land was made to be walked upon. 2. That Christ might take
occasion to manifest his Deity in working Miracles upon the Sea, as well as
upon the Land. 3. Might it not be to comfort and encourage seafaring Men that
dwell much upon the Waters, in the midst of their Distresses, to trust in and
pray unto such a Savior as had himself an experimental Knowledge of the
dangers of the Seas? Some have farther observed, That after our Savior's
Resurrection, we never find him sailing upon the Seas more; for such a
turbulent Condition which necessarily attends Sea Voyages, was utterly
inconsistent with the stability and perpetuity of Christ's State, when he was
risen from the dead; the firm Land better agreeing with his fixed Estate than
the fluctuating Water.

2 And a great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles which he
did on them that were diseased.

Observe here, What an exact Knowledge Christ had, not only of all his
Followers, but of the Motives and Principles which did induce them to follow
him; it was not the Excellency of his Person, nor the heavenliness of his
Doctrine, that drew the multitude at this time after him, but the Novelty of
his Miracles; They saw the Miracles which he did: It is better to feel one
Miracle wrought upon the Heart, in changing and renewing That, than to see a
thousand outward Miracles wrought before our Eyes.

3 And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his disciples. 4
And the Passover, a feast of the Jews, was nigh. 5 When Jesus then lift up his
eyes, and saw a great company come unto him, he says unto Philip, Whence shall
we buy bread, that these may eat? 6 (And this he said to prove him: for he
himself knew what he would do) 7 Philip answered him, Two hundred pennyworth
of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of them may take a little.
8 One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, says unto him, 9 There
is a lad here, which has five barley-loaves, and two small fishes, but what
are they among so many? 10 And Jesus said, Make the men sit down. Now there was
much grass in the place. So the men sat down, in number about five thousand. 11
And Jesus took the loaves, and when he had given thanks, he distributed to the
disciples, and the disciples to them that were set down; and likewise of the
fishes, as much as they would. 12 When they were filled, he said unto his
disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost. 13
Therefore they gathered them together, and filled twelve baskets with the
fragments of the five barley loaves, which remained over and above unto them
that had eaten. 14 Then those men, when they had seen the miracle that Jesus
did, said, This is of a truth that prophet that should come into the world.

This Miracle of our Savior's feeding five thousand Persons with five Barley
Loaves and two small Fishes is, recorded by all the four Evangelists; and
several Particulars therein are very remarkable. Obs. 1. What a poor and
slender Provision the Lord of the whole Earth has for his Family, for himself,
for his Disciples and the Multitude; nothing more than five Barley Loaves and
two Fishes: Teaching us that these Bodies of ours must be fed, not pampered.
Our Belly must not be our Master, much less our God; and as the Quality of the
Victuals was plain, so was the Quantity small; only five Loaves and two Fishes.
Well might the Disciples say What are they among so many? The Eye of Sense and
Reason sees an utter Impossibility of those Effects which Faith can easily
apprehend and a Divine Power more easily produce. When Men judge by Sense and
Reason, and do not look to Christ's Power, if Extremities come, they are soon
at their wits end, and know not what to do. Obs. 2. How the great Master of
this miraculous Feast does marshal his Guests; he commands them to sit down.
None of the People reply, Sit down? But to what? Here Is the Mouths, but where is
the Meat? we may soon be set, but when shall we be served? not a word like
this; but they obey and expect. Lord! how easy is it to trust thy Providence
and rely upon thy Power, when there is Corn in the Barn, Bread in the Cupboard,
Money in the Purse; but when our Stores are empty, when our Stock runs low,
when we have nothing in Hand, then to depend upon an invisible Bounty is a
noble Act of Faith indeed. Obs. 3. The Actions performed by our Blessed
Savior, 1. He blessed the Loaves: Teaching us, by his Example never to use or
receive the good Creatures of God without Prayer and Praise; not to sit down to
our Food as a Beast to his Fodder. 2. Christ broke the Loaves; he could have
multiplied them whole, why then does he rather choose to do it in the breaking?
perhaps to teach us, that we may rather expect his Blessing in the Distribution
of his Bounty, than in the Reservation of it. Scattering is the way to
increasing, and Liberality the way to Riches. Again, 3. He gave to his
Disciples, that they might distribute to the Multitude; he did not do it with
his own Hands, but by theirs; doubtless it was to gain Reputation to his
Disciples from the People, the same Course does Christ take in Spiritual
Distributions. He that could feed the Souls of his People immediately by the
Hand of his Spirit, chooses rather by the Hand of his Ministers to divide the
Bread of Life among them. Obs. 4. The Reality and Greatness of the Miracle;
They did all eat, and were filled; they did eat, not a Crumb or a Bit, but to
satiety and fullness. All that were hungry did eat, and all that did eat were
satisfied; and yet twelve Baskets of Fragments remain. More is left than was at
first set on. It Is hard to say which was the greatest Miracle, the miraculous
eating, or miraculous Leaving. If we consider what they eat, we may wonder that
they left any thing; if what they left, that they eat any thing. Observe
Lastly, These Fragments, though of Barley Loaves and Fish Bones must not be lost,
but gathered up; the great Housekeeper of the World will not allow the Loss of
his Orts: We must exercise Frugality in the Enjoyment of the greatest Plenty.
Lord! how tremendous will their Accounts be, who having large and plentiful
Estates do consume them upon their Lusts, how will they wish they had been born
to Poverty and Necessity, when they appear to make up their Accounts before God!

15 When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take him by force,
to make him a king, he departed again into a mountain himself alone.

Here we have observable, the wonderful Effect of the foregoing Miracle; the
People seeing so many thousands fed with five Loaves, were so transported that
they conclude that Jesus was certainly the promised Messiah. Now the Notion
they had of the Messiah was this, That he should be a temporal Prince, that
should subdue all Nations under his Feet, and particularly free the Jews from
the Slavery of the Roman Yoke, which was now upon their Necks; forgetting what
our Savior had often told them, that his Kingdom was not of this World, but
within Men; and that his Business was to free Men from Soul-Slavery, not from
civil Subjection: However, upon this Mistake, the Jews here in a furious Zeal
designed to take Christ by force, and make him their King; but our Savior (who
came not into the World to disturb the Order of Civil Government) understanding
their Intentions withdraws himself into a Mountain to avoid giving the least
occasion for any such Jealousy or Suspicion. Hence learn, That although Jesus
Christ be the great King of his Church, and does exercise a Spiritual Kingdom
in it, yet he came not into the World to be a temporal King* nor was his
Kingdom of this World; or ever designed to be prejudicial to the Thrones of
Princes, and Civil Government of Men. Therefore does Christ withdraw himself
and refuse all this Offer, as no ways agreeable to him, or consistent with his
design.

16 And when even was now come, his disciples went down unto the sea, 17 And
entered into a ship, and went over the sea toward Capernaum: and it was now
dark, and Jesus was not come to them. 18 And the sea arose, by reason of a
great wind that blew. 19 So when they had rowed about five and twenty, or
thirty furlongs, they see Jesus walking on the sea, and drawing nigh unto the
ship: and they were afraid. 20 But he says unto them, It is I, be not afraid.
21 Then they willingly received him into the ship: and immediately the ship was
at the land whither they went.

Observe here, 1. The great danger the Disciples were in, and the Difficulties
they encounter with, after they had enjoyed the sweet Privilege of Christ's
gracious Presence with them. They were tossed upon a tempestuous Sea. Learn
thence, That it is not unusual after sweet Refreshments and Manifestations from
Christ unto his People, to meet with a stormy and sharp Exercise of Faith and
Patience; such was the Lot of the Disciples here; a constant Gale of Sweetness
and an uninterrupted Course of Prosperity and Happiness, as it is not to be
expected here; so neither can it be enjoyed here without great peril and
danger. Obs. 2. What haste our Savior makes toward his Disciples when they
were tossed upon a tempestuous Sea; Jesus drew nigh to the Ship. Nothing can
separate between, nor keep Christ from his Children and People in a suffering
Hour. He that waded through a Sea of Wrath to save his People, will walk upon a
Sea of Water to succor and relieve them, in an Hour of Tribulation. Obs. 3.
The Disciples not discerning Christ, nor knowing him to be their Savior, were
afraid of him. Christ may be coming to save his People and they not able at
present to discern and apprehend him; but their Fears may be highest when their
Deliverer and Deliverance is nearest. Obs. 4. How speedily Christ relieves them
and their Fears, by telling them who he was; It is I, be not afraid. It is a
sufficient support in all our Afflictions to be assured of Christ's gracious
Presence with us. Say but Oh Savior! It is I: and then let Evils do their
worst; that one word, It is I: is sufficient to allay all storms, and to calm a
thousand Tempests. Observe Lastly, With what Joy and Gladness the Disciples
received and entertained Christ in this Hour of their Distress; They willingly
received him into the Ship. Though the Company of Christ is always sweet and
welcome to his Disciples and Friends, yet never is it so very agreeable and
desirable to them as in the Hour of Trial and Temptation. Then they willingly
receive him, and joyfully welcome and entertain him.

22 The day following, when the people which stood on the other side of the
sea, saw that there was none other boat there, save that one whereinto his
disciples were entered, and that Jesus went not with his disciples into the
boat, but that his disciples were gone away alone: 23 (Howbeit there came other
boats from Tiberias, nigh unto the place where they did eat bread, after that
the Lord had given thanks) 24 When the people therefore saw that Jesus was not
there, neither his disciples, they also took shipping, and came to Capernaum,
seeking for Jesus. 25 And when they had found him on the other side of the sea,
they said unto him, Rabbi, when came thou hither? 26 Jesus answered them, and
said, Verily verily I say unto you, Ye seek me, not because ye saw the
miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled. 27 Labor not
for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures unto everlasting
life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: for him has God the Father
sealed.

Our Blessed Savior having wrought the foregoing Miracle; feeding five
thousand with five Loaves, the People followed him in Troops from Place to
Place. Christ who knew their Hearts tells them plainly what was their end: They
followed him indeed, but not for any Spiritual Excellencies they saw in him, or
Soul-Advantages they expected from him, but for Bread; only to have their
Bellies fed with the Loaves, not their Souls satisfied with the Bread of Life.
Oh how seldom is Christ so^ght for his own sake; vix Jesus quaritur propter
Jesum. Aug. How natural is it for Men to seek Christ for Sinister Ends and
By-Respects? but to seek him only for outward Advantages, is the basest of
By-Ends, and that which the Soul of Christ exceedingly abhors. Labor not for
the Meat that perishes.] This Prohibition must not be understood absolutely,
but comparatively; not as if Christ intended to take them off from their lawful
Labors and the Business of their Calling; but his meaning is, labor not in
the first and chief Place for worldly Things which are all perishing, but for
Bread for your Souls to live eternally by; even for the Food of my heavenly
Doctrine which will make them that feed upon it Immortal, and this the Son of
Man stands ready to give unto you; for him has God the Father sealed; that is,
by a Special Commission and Authority has empowered him to dispense all
Spiritual Blessings to them that want and crave them. Learn hence, 1. That all
the Things of this Life are perishing and fading. The best of outward Comforts
and Enjoyments are Meat that perishes. 2. That it is the greatest of Follies
to labor intensely and inordinately for, and to set our selves with all our
might and strength to pursue and follow after perishing things. 3. That Jesus
Christ, his Holy Doctrine, his heavenly Grace, is Food which neither perishes
nor diminishes, how many soever partake of it; but makes all that partake
thereof, to be Partakers of Eternal Life therewith. 4. That Jesus Christ is
authorized, sealed and commissioned, by his Father to give eternal Life to such
as industriously labor after him, and will not be satisfied without him: Him
has God the Father sealed: That is, Jesus Christ was sealed to the Office of a
Mediator, by God the Father: Christ was sealed at his Baptism; sealed by his
Doctrine; sealed by his Miracles; sealed by his Resurrection; sealed by his
Unction or Supereminent and Unparalleled Sanctification. Lord! where will the
Rejecters of Christ then appear at the great Day, who have despised the
Authority of him, whom the Father commissioned to give eternal Life, to whom
soever he pleases.

28 Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that we might work the works of
God? 29 Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God, that ye
believe on him whom he has sent.

Here the Jews who were strict Observers of the Ceremonial Law of Moses, and
rested thereupon for Salvation, inquire of our Savior what they should do that
they might please God. Christ directs them to the great Duty of believing on
himself, to own and acknowledge him to be the True Messiah, and as such to rely
upon him alone for Salvation; This is the work of God that ye believe, etc.
Learn hence, That for a penitent, humbled Sinner to believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ it is a work highly pleasing and acceptable unto God. Christ calls Faith
the work of God, upon a threefold Account; it is the Work of his Efficiency and
Operation; it is the work of his commanding; and it is the work of his
Approbation and Acceptance; a work that God is highly pleased with, and
greatly delighted in: This is the work of God.

30 They said therefore unto him, What sign show thou then, that we may see
and believe thee? what do thou work? 31 Our fathers did eat manna in the
desert; as it is written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat.

Here the Jews tell our Savior, that before they will believe in him, they
must see some Sign from him to confirm his Doctrine, and prove him to be the
Messiah: They acknowledge Christ had wrought a great Miracle in feeding five
thousand Persons with five Barley Loaves; but Moses fed their Fathers in the
Wilderness, who were no less than six hundred thousand Persons, with excellent
Manna from Heaven, and this for forty Years together; from whence they would
seem to conclude, that they had more reason to believe Moses than Christ, not
considering that Moses was but an Instrument to obtain by Prayer the Manna at
the Hands of God; but Christ was an Agent, and that by a creating Power
inherent in himself he multiplied the five Loaves to the feeding of five
thousand. Note here, 1. From the Jews requiring a Sign before they would
believe, That he who publishes a new Doctrine to the World ought to confirm his
Mission by some Miraculous Operation. 2. That God honored Moses his Messenger,
very much, and Christ his Minister much more, in that both of them wrought
great and special Miracles for the Confirmation of their Mission. 3. That the
Jews not believing Christ to be the true Messiah upon so many Attestations and
after his Divine Mission was confirmed by such Miraculous Operations, rendered
their Infidelity inexcusable, and their Obstinacy invincible.

32 Then Jesus said unto them, Verily verily I say unto you, Moses gave you not
that bread from heaven: but my father gives you the true bread from heaven. 33
For the bread of God is he which comes down from heaven, and gives life unto
the world.

Upon the Jews mentioning Manna to our Blessed Savior he takes occasion to
make a Comparison betwixt himself the Bread of Life, and Manna the Bread of
Moses, and that in three Particulars. 1. It was not Moses that gave the
Israelites that Manna; it was God at the Prayer of Moses; but it was God that
now offered them the Bread of Life, were they willing to accept it. 2. The
Manna was not given from Heaven, that is, from the Celestial Heaven, but only
from the Air and Clouds, which frequently in Scripture is called Heaven: But
Christ the Bread of Life was given and sent by the Father from the highest
Heaven, even the Heaven of Glory. 3. Manna was not true Spiritual Food,
effectively and of it self, but bodily Food only; but Christ is Real and
Spiritual Bread, which gives Life to lost and dead Men, which Manna did not,
could not do. And whereas Manna was peculiar to Israel only, Christ gives Life
to all sorts of Persons, Gentiles as well as Jews: The Bread of God gives Life
unto the World. Learn hence, That as Christ is the Truth and Substance of all
the Types in the Old Testament, so particularly the Manna was an illustrious
Type of Christ. In many things they agree, and in some they differ. They agree
in their Original, Manna came down from Heaven, so did Christ: Manna was freely
given, so is Jesus Christ the free Gift of God: Manna was not fit to be eaten
as it lay in the Field, but must be ground in a Mill, or beaten in a Mortar,
and baked in an Oven before it was fit for Food: Christ was ground by his
Sufferings, bruised on the Cross, scorched in the fiery Oven of his Father's
Wrath, that he might become a fit Savior for us. Again, as the Manna was
gathered by the Israelites daily, and equally; it was rained down about their
Tents, and every Man had his Omer. Thus is Christ in the Ministry of the Word
daily offered to a lost World, and all that believe in him shall share alike in
the Benefits of Justification, Sanctification and Glorification from him: But
now the Manna and Christ differ in this; and the Truth excells the Type thus.
There is a quickening, inlivening Virtue, a Life-giving, and a Life-upholding
Power in Christ the Bread of Life, which was never found in Manna the Bread of
Israel: And whereas Manna only fed the Body, the Body of an Israelite, and this
only for a little time in the Wilderness; Christ nourishes the Soul; the Souls
of all Believers, be they Jew or Gentile, Bond or Free, and this not for time,
but for Eternity; the Bread of God is he which comes down from Heaven, and
gives Life unto the World.

34 Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this bread. 35 And Jesus
said unto them, I am the bread of life: he that comes to me, shall never
hunger, and he that believes on me, shall never thirst. 36 But I said unto
you, that ye also have seen me, and believe not.

Observe here, 1. How the carnal Jews hearing the Bread which Christ had
commended so highly, and conceiving of it carnally, desire they may partake of
it constantly; Lord, evermore give us of this Bread. The Commendation of
Spiritual Things may move the Affections, and quicken the Desires of Natural
Persons; but if their Desires be not Spiritual and Serious, Diligent and
Laborious, Constant and Abiding, they are no Evidence of the Truth of Grace.
Obs. 2. Christ discovers another excellent Effect of this Bread of Life, which
he had been recommending; that such as feed of it shall never hunger more; that
is inordinately; after the perishing Satisfactions of this World; but shall
find an All-sufficient Fullness in him, and complete Refreshment from him, for
the preserving and perpetuating of their Spiritual Life; He that comes unto me
shall never hunger, etc. Obs. 3. How justly Christ upbraids the Jews for their
obstinate Infidelity; Ye have seen me, says our Savior, yet ye believe not. Ye
have seen me in the Flesh, you have heard my Doctrine; you have seen my
Miracles, I have done amongst you those Works which never any Man did, to
convince you that I am the Messiah; yet you will not own me to be such, nor
believe on me: Oh the Strength of Infidelity and Unbelief! The Devil has as
great an Advantage upon Men by making them strong in Unbelief, as God has by
making his People strong in Faith.

37 All that the Father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes to me,
I will in no wise cast out.

Our Blessed Savior having lamented the obstinate Infidelity of the Jews in
the foregoing Verse, who though they had seen him, would not believe on him, he
does in this Verse comfort himself with the assured Expectation, that there
would be a number which should certainly and infallibly come unto him; All that
the Father has given me shall come unto me, etc. Here observe, 1. An Account
of the Persons that shall come to Christ: All that the Father has given him.
There is a double Gift of us to Christ. 1. In God's Eternal Purpose and
Counsel. 2. In our Effectual Vocation and Calling: When our Hearts are by the
Holy Spirit of God, persuaded and enabled to accept of Christ as he is freely
tendered to us in the Gospel. Obs. 2. The gracious Entertainment which Christ
gives to those that come unto him: He will in no wise cast them out; where the
Positive is included in the Negative; I will not cast them out; that is, I will
kindly receive and graciously entertain them. Learn hence, 1. That both God the
Father and Christ his Son are unfeignedly willing, and cordially desirous of,
the Salvation of lost Sinners. That federal Transaction which was betwixt the
Father and the Son from everlasting about the Salvation of lost Sinners,
evidently declares this. Learn, 2. That the merciful and compassionate Jesus
will in no wise cast out or reject, but kindly entertain and receive every
penitent Sinner that does believingly apply unto him for Pardon of Sin and
Eternal Life; I will in no wise cast out; that is, I will not cast them out of
my Pity and Compassion; out of my Love and Affection; out of my Prayer and
Intercession, out of my Care and Protection: I will not cast them out of my
Covenant; I will never cast them out of my Kingdom; for my Nature inclines me,
my Promise binds me, and my Office as Mediator engages me to the contrary.

38 For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him
that sent me. 39 And this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all
which he has given me, I should lose nothing; but should raise it up again at
the last day. 40 And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which
sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life: and I will
raise him up at the last day.

In these Words our Savior gives us the Confirmation of the foregoing Promise,
That he will in no wise cast out those that come unto him, by assuring us that
it was the great End for which he came into the World. His Father sent him to
do his Will, and not his own; that is, not to do his own Will without his
Father's, but to do his own Will and his Father's. For Christ as God had a
coordinate. Will with his Father's, and as Man, a Will subordinate to the Will
of his Father. Now it was the Will both of Father and Son, that such as Believe
in him should be preserved from perishing, and be raised up by Christ at the
last Day. Hence Learn, 1. That the Lord Jesus Christ stands not only inclined
by his own Mercy and Goodness to Save Repenting and Believing Sinners; but does
also stand obliged thereunto by virtue of a Trust committed to him from the
Father. Therefore Christ mentions the Will of him that sent him, as a Reason of
his Fidelity in this matter. Learn, 2. That the Father's Will, and good
pleasure is the original Source, the Fountain and first Spring; from whence the
Salvation of Believers does proceed and flow. It is the Fathers Will that sent
me, that every one that sees the Son, and Believes on him may have
Everlasting Life. Learn, 3. That such as are given to Christ by the Father, and
put as his Trust into his Keeping, he looks upon them as his Charge; and stands
engaged for the Preservation of them. This is my Father's Will, that of all
which he has given me I should lose nothing. Yet has the Father so committed
the Care of Believers to his Son, as that he keeps them still in his own hand.
John 10.28, 29. My Father which gave them to me is greater than all, and no man
is able to pluck them out of my Fathers Hand. Learn, 4. From those words, I
will Raise him up at the last Day; That the Lord Jesus Christ is Truly,
Essentially and Really God. That person who can by his own Almighty Power raise
the Dead, must certainly be God: but this Christ had. He raised others from the
Dead, and his own Dead Body from the Grave also, by his own Power. And
therefore Christ says, I am the Resurrection, and the Life; and I will raise
him up at the last day. Doubtless he that spoke these words, and made those
promises, knew his own Power to perform them; and that Power must be
Omnipotent, and that Act of Omnipotence, does prove him to be God. It Is true,
the Disciples raised the Dead, who yet were no Gods; but with this difference,
they raised the Dead by Christ's Power; but Christ raised others and himself
also by his own Power.

41 The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which came
down from heaven. 42 And they said, Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose
father and mother we know? how is it then that he says, I came down from
heaven? 43 Jesus therefore answered and said unto them, Murmur not among your
selves.

Although Christ had in the foregoing Verses, plainly Asserted himself to be the
True Bread that came down from Heaven, for the Benefit of the World; yet the
Jews understanding his words carnally, are offended with him, and Murmur at
him; for pretending to come down from Heaven, when they know him to be the Son
of Joseph and Mary. They understood nothing of his Divine Nature, nor of his
Miraculous Conception by the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost; and therefore
were highly offended at him. Thence Learn, That Ignorance of Christ's Divine
Nature was the Ground and Occasion of that Contempt which was cast upon his
person. Observe farther, The proof which Christ gave of his Divine Nature, in
his knowing the Hearts and Thoughts of these murmuring Jews. Jesus said, Murmur
not among your selves. Christ knows and observes the most secret murmurings and
repinings that are found in the Breasts of the Children of Men; and this his
Knowledge, is an Evidence and Proof of his Divinity, that he is truly and
really God.

44 No man can come to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him: and
I will raise him up at the last day.

In which words we have something necessarily implied, and something positively
expres'd. The misery of Man in his Natural and Unsanctified State is here
implied; he is far distant from Christ, and unable of himself to to come unto
him. By Nature we are Strangers, yea Enemies unto God. Enemies to the Holiness
of his Nature, and to the Righteousness of his Laws: And as the State of
Unregeneracy is a State of Enmity; so consequently must it be a State of
Impotency; without me, (therefore says Christ) ye can do nothing, John 15.5.
That is, without interest in me, and influences of Grace derived from me.
Again, the Truths we have expressed are these. 1. That all those who come unto
Christ are drawn unto him. 2. That the drawing of sinful Souls unto Jesus
Christ, is the special and peculiar Work of God: This drawing is a powerful
Act, but not a Compulsory Act. God does not draw any against their wills to
Christ; but he inclines the Will of Sinners to come unto him. He draws by
effectual persuasion, and not by violent Compulsion. 3. That all those who are
drawn to Christ here, shall be raised up Gloriously by him hereafter. I will
raise him up at the last day. Such as are brought to Christ by the Father,
Christ will never abandon them, till he has raised them up at the last day, and
presented them Blameless and Complete before his Father; where they shall ever
be with the Lord.

45 It is written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every
man therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me.
46 Not that any man has seen the Father, save he which is of God, he has seen
the Father. 47 Verily verily I say unto you, He that believes on me has
everlasting life.

In these words our Blessed Savior Confirms his former Assertion, concerning
his Father's drawing from the Prophesies of the Old Testament; which speaking
of the days of Messiah, foretold that persons should be Taught of God to
Embrace the Messiah; whence Christ infers, that every one who is thus Taught
will come unto him, and Believe in him. Learn hence. 1. That the Teachings of
God are Absolutely necessary to every Man that comes unto Christ in the way of
Faith. 2. That such shall not miscarry in the way of Faith, who are under the
special Teaching and Instructions of God; They shall be all taught of God, and
he Teaches to profit, and that not only Authoritatively, but efficaciously and
effectually. Those whom God undertakes to Teach, Receive from him both an Ear
to hear, and an Heart to understand. They shall be all Taught of God, and they
that are taught, have heard and learned of the Father.

48 I am that bread of life. 49 Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness,
and are dead. 50 This is the bread which comes down from heaven, that a man
may eat thereof, and not die. 51 I am the living bread, which came down from
heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread
that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

In these Verses, our Blessed Savior Resumes his former Doctrine, Namely, That
he is the Object of Saving Faith, and the Bread of Life which he compares with
the Manna, the Bread of Israel. Your Fathers did eat Manna in the Wilderness,
which Manna was an Illustrious Type of Christ. Thus, both came down from
Heaven; both were freely given of God, without any merit or desert of Man; both
in a miraculous manner, both at first unknown what they were, and whence they
came. Both equally belonging to all, both sufficient for all, Poor and Rich.
The Manna white in color, so clear our Lord's Innocence. Pleasant like Honey,
so sweet are his Benefits; Beaten and Broken before eaten. Christ on his Cross
bleeding and dying; given only in the Wilderness, and ceasing as soon as they
came into the Land of Promise; as Sacraments shall Vanish, when we enjoy the
Substance in Heaven. But though Manna was thus excellent, yet the eaters of it
were dead; but such as feed upon Christ, the Bread of Life, shall live
Eternally in Bliss and Glory. I am the living Bread which came down from
Heaven, if any man eat of this Bread he shall live for ever. Here we Learn, 1.
What a miserable Creature Man naturally is, in a pining and starved Condition,
under the want of Soul-food. 2. That Jesus Christ is the food of Souls, which
quickens them that are Dead, and is unto the needy Soul all that it can need;
such Spiritual food, as will prove a Remedy and Preservative against Death,
both Spiritual and Eternal. I am the living Bread.

52 The Jews therefore strove amongst themselves, saying, How can this man give
us his flesh to eat? 53 Then Jesus said unto them, Verily verily I say unto
you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you. 54 Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life, and I will raise him up at the last day. 55 For my flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed. 56 He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, dwells in me, and I in him. 57 As the living Father has sent me, and
I live by the Father: so, he that eats me, even he shall live by me. 58 This
is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers did eat manna,
and are dead: he that eats of this bread, shall live for ever. 59 These
things said he in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.

Observe here, How the Jews understanding Christ after a Carnal manner, were
offended at what he said; for they thought it was Inhumane to eat Man's Flesh,
and could not understand how the Body of Christ could in such a Sense be Food
to all the World. Hence Note, That Carnal Persons put a Carnal Sense upon
Christ's Spiritual Words, and so occasion their own stumbling. But yet
notwithstanding the Jews stumbled at our Savior's Expression, he does not
alter his words; but presses more and more the Necessity of feeding upon him
by Faith, in order to Eternal Life. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man,
and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you. Learn from hence, 1. That the Lord
Jesus Christ is the True Spiritual Food of all Believers. 2. That those, and
only those who do by Faith feed upon him shall obtain a Life of Grace and Glory
from him; if we do not by Faith feed upon him, we can have no Evidence for a
Life of Grace nor Title to a Life of Glory. This place some Papists produce to
Countenance their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and a Bodily eating and
drinking of Christ's Flesh and Blood in the Sacrament. But it is evident, that
Christ Treats not of the Sacrament in this Chapter, for the Sacrament was not
now Instituted; and therefore it is not a Sacramental, but a Spiritual feeding
upon Christ by Faith that is here meant. For this eating gives Life to the
Eater; all that eat are saved, and all that do not eat are damned; but this is
not true of a Sacramental eating; besides this eating that Christ speaks of, he
makes absolutely necessary to Salvation; but some are saved that never fed upon
Christ in the Sacrament, as John the Baptist, and the Thief on the Cross.
Lastly, if it be understood of a Sacramental Eating and Drinking, woe be to the
Church of Rome, for denying the Cup to the Laity; because Drinking of Christ's
Blood, is made here as necessary as eating of his Flesh, in order to Eternal
Life. Except ye Eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and Drink his Blood ye have no
Life in you. Observe farther, The close and intimate Union which is betwixt
Christ himself, and those that feed upon him. He that eats me Dwells in me
and I in him. As Meat is turned into the Eater's Substance, so Believers and
Christ become one, and by feeding on him, that is, by believing in him, there
follows a mutual Inhabitation. Christ dwelling in them and they in him; this
is true of a Spiritual feeding upon Christ, but not of a Sacramental Eating.
Nay Christ carries it higher still, and tells us, That as there is a Real Union
between the Father and him, and as the Father Lives who sent him, ^aving an
Eternal Fountain of Life in himself, and the Son Lives by the Father, having
the same Life communicated to him with his Essence from the Father; in like
manner (says Christ) he that eats me, the same shall Live by me. All which is
certainly true of our Spiritual Feeding upon Christ by Faith; but cannot be
applied to a Corporal feeding upon him in the Sacrament, as the Papists would
have it.

60 Many therefore of his disciples, when they had heard this, said, This is an
hard saying, who can hear it? 61 When Jesus knew in himself, that his disciples
murmured at it, he said unto them, Does this offend you? 62 What and if ye
shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before?

The foregoing Doctrine of our Savior concerning eating his Flesh, and
drinking his Blood sounded so very harshly, that not only the common multitude,
but some of them that had been his Disciples, that is, who had given up their
names to follow him, could not tell how to bear them. Our Savior Reproves
their unjust stumbling at what he had said. That he was the Bread which came
down from Heaven; and tells them that his Ascension into Heaven should prove
the Truth of his descent from Heaven. Hence we learn, That Christ's arising
from the Grave, and Ascending into Heaven by his own Power, is an Evident proof
of his Godhead, and that he really came down from Heaven, in respect of his
Divine Nature, which condescended to be clothed with our Flesh. What and if ye
shall see the Son of Man Ascend up where he was before?

63 It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing: the words
that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life.

To convince the Jews, that our Savior did not mean a carnal fleshly eating of
his Body, he tells them that such an eating would profit them nothing; but it
is a Spiritual eating of him by Faith, that brings that Quickening Life of
which he had spoken. It is the Spirit, or Divine Nature that Quickneth; the
flesh or human Nature alone separated from his Godhead, profits nothing, and
can give no Life. Learn hence, That it is the Godhead of Christ united to the
Humane Nature, which adds all Virtue, Efficacy and Merit, to the Obedience and
sufferings of the Humane Nature. It is the Spirit or Divine Nature of Christ
that Quickneth, the flesh or Humane Nature alone profits nothing; and
therefore the carnal eating of my flesh would do no good.

64 But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the
beginning, who they were that believed not, and who should betray him. 65 And
he said, Therefore said I unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it
were given unto him of my Father. 66 From that time many of his disciples went
back, and walked no more with him.

Our Blessed Savior having thus cleared his Doctrine, that he was the Bread of
Life which came down from Heaven, and that he is not to be Carnally, but
Spiritually fed upon: He plainly tells the Jews, That the true cause of their
stumbling at his Doctrine, was their Ignorance and Unbelief; there are some of
you that believe not: Upon which plain dealing of our Blessed Savior's, many
unsound Professors did wholly forsake him, and accompanied no longer with him.
Learn hence, That multitudes who have long professed Christ, and his Holy
Religion, may draw back and fall from their Profession, and finally revolt from
him. 2. That it is an Evil heart of unbelief, which causes Men to depart from
Christ, and to make Shipwreck of their Profession.

67 Then said Jesus unto the twelve, Will ye also go away? 68 Then Simon Peter
answered, him, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life.
69 And we believe, and are sure that thou art that Christ the Son of the living
God. 70 Jesus answered them, have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a
devil? 71 He spoke of Judas Iscariot the son of Simon: for he it was that
should betray him, being one of the twelve.

Our Savior finding many of his nominal Disciples forsaking him, and departing
from him, Asks his Apostles, (the Twelve) whether they would also go away?
intimating that their Departure would go nearer to him, than the departure of
all the rest. The nearer they are from whom we receive unkindnesses, the nearer
do those unkindnesses go to our Hearts. Will you of the Twelve, also go away?
Peter, as the mouth, and in the name of the Rest, Answers, That they knew none
besides to whom they could go, and expect that happiness which they did from
him. They that go from Christ can never hope to mend themselves, let them go
whither they will; therefore it is as irrational, as it is sinful to depart from
Christ; who has the words, that is, the promise of Eternal Life. Observe
Lastly, St. Peter having made this profession for himself and the rest of the
Twelve, that they would not depart from Jesus, whom they believed to be the
True Messiah, the Son of God; Christ intimates to Peter, that his Charity was
something too large in promising so much for them all; for there was one
Traitor among them, whose heart was as open to Christ as his face was to them;
he meant it of Judas Iscariot, of whose perfidiousness he gave them warning at
this Time. Learn hence, That the better any Man is in himself, the more
charitable is the opinion which he has of others. Charity inclines to believe
others good, till they discover themselves to be bad. Learn, 2. That Christ
does approve of our charitable judgment of others sincerity according to what
we hope and believe, though we happen to be mistaken, and our judgment is not
according to Truth; Christ knew Judas to be an Hypocrite at this time, but does
not Reprove Peter for having a better opinion of him, than he deserved. It Is
far better to Err on the Charitable, than on the Censorious hand; it is less
offensive to Christ, and less Injurious to our selves.

CHAP. VII.
1 AFter these things, Jesus walked in Galilee: for he would not walk in Jewry,
because the Jews sought to kill him.

Our Blessed Savior knowing that the Rage of the Chief Priests and Pharisees
in Judea, and at Jerusalem was grown to that height, that they were resolved to
kill him; to avoid their fury he resolves to continue in Galilee, and would not
come into Judea at present, nor go up to Jerusalem into the mouth of his
Enemies; his hour not being yet come. Learn hence, That so long as it was
necessary for Christ to save and preserve himself from danger; he was pleased
to use the ordinary means for his own preservation. Namely, Retirement and
withdrawing himself; Christ as God could have rid himself out of the hands of
his Enemies, by a miraculous preservation; but he uses the ordinary means when
they would serve the turn, and as he would not decline danger when his hour was
come; so would he not run into danger before it was come, but used all
prudential means and methods for his own safety and preservation. He would not
come into Judea, because the Jews sought to kill him.

2 Now the Jews feast of tabernacles was at hand.

There were Three great Feasts which the Jews celebrated every Year. Namely,
The Feast of the Passover, the feast of Pentecost, and the feast of
Tabernacles: This last was observed in the Month of September, after they had
gathered in the Fruits of the Earth: whence it was also called the Feast of
Ingathering: At this Feast they went out of their Houses and dwelt in Booths
Seven Days, in Remembrance of their living in Tents of Booths in the
Wilderness, for Forty Years together, before they came to Canaan: Now the
Institution of this Feast being to call to the Israelites Remembrance their
former condition in the Wilderness; Teaches us, how prone and ready we are to
forget our Troubles, and the Mercies wherewith our Troubles have been sweetened;
when once they are past and over. The Jews when settled in Canaan, going out of
their Houses Yearly and dwelling in Booths, did thereby testify, that present
Mercies had not made them forget former Trials and Troubles.

3 His brethren therefore said unto him, Depart hence, and go into Judea, that
thy disciples also may see the works that thou do. 4 For there is no man that
does any thing in secret, and he himself seeks to be known openly: If thou do
these things, show thy self to the world. 5 For neither did his brethren
believe in him.

Observe here, 1. The Advice which Christ's Brethren, that is, his Kindred,
gave him to render himself more famous and publicly known to the World: they
Advise him not to tarry any longer in Galilee, an obscure place, but go into
the more Noble and Populous Country of Judea, and work Miracles there. But what
high presumption was this, in Creatures to prescribe to Christ and direct him
whither to go, and what to do. Observe 2. The Reason they offer for their
Advice; for no Man that seeks to be known openly will do any thing in secret,
that is, if thou will be thought to be the Messiah by thy working Miracles, do
them not in a Corner; but go up to Jerusalem with us, at this next Feast, that
the Great Men may take notice of them. Such as hunt after Reputation
themselves, and are Ambitious of vain Glory and Commendation from Men; they
measure others, even the most Holy and Religious by their own Inclinations and
dispositions; and wonder that others do not follow their measures, for gaining
Reputation and Respect. Thus did our Lord's Brethren here, but the Wonder
ceases if we consult the following words, Neither did his Brethren Believe in
him. It is no new Thing for the Holiest Servants of God to meet with great
Trials from their graceless Friends. Christ met with this before us; his
Kindred according to the Flesh, not believing in him were a sore Trial and
Temptation to him. Some Martyrs have confessed that the hardest works they have
met withal have been to withstand the Temptations, the Tears and Entreaties of
their dearest and nearest Relations.

6 Then Jesus said unto them, My time is not yet come: but your time is always
ready. 7 The world cannot hate you; but me it hates, because I testify of it,
that the works thereof are evil. 8 Go ye up unto this feast: I go not up yet
unto this feast, for my time is not yet full come. 9 When he had said these
words unto them, he abode still in Galilee.

Here we have Christ's Answer and Refusal returned to his Brethrens desire; he
tells them, they might go up to the Feast at Jerusalem when they pleased, and
as publicly; but it was not fit for him to Appear so publicly, because the
Doctrine which he Taught was so odious to the Pharisees, and the prevailing
Power at Jerusalem; he therefore Resolves to go up privately, that he might not
stir up the Jealousy of the Sanhedrim: but for them they were out of danger of
the Worlds hatred; for being the Children of it, the World would love its own;
but him it hated; because he reproved its Sins. Where we may Remark, That though
our Lord Jesus Christ was most freely willing and ready to lay down his Life
for Sinners, when the Time was come, that God the Father called for it; yet he
would not expose his Life to hazard and danger unseasonably. Teaching us by his
Example, as not to decline Sufferings when God calls us to them; so not to
Tempt God by running into them, when we may inoffensively avoid them. Your time
is always ready, mine is not yet come.

10 But when his brethren were gone up, then went he also up unto the feast,
not openly, but as it were in secret. 11 Then the Jews sought him at the feast,
and said, Where is he? 12 And there was much murmuring among the people
concerning him: for some said, He is a good man: others said, Nay; but he
deceives the people. 13 Howbeit, no man spoke openly of him, for fear of the
Jews.

Observe here, 1. How our Blessed Savior who came to fulfill the Law, goes up
to Jerusalem at the Jewish Feasts, according to the Command of God. Exodus 23.
Three times a Year shall all the males appear before me. Christ being made
under the Law, shows a punctual Obedience to the Law, and fulfilled it in his
own person. Observe, 2. The different Opinion which the Jews at Jerusalem do
express, concerning our Savior; some allowing him the Charitable Character of
being a good Man: others traducing him as being a deceiver of the People. Our
dear Lord we see when here on Earth passed through Evil Report and Good Report.
Is it any wonder to find the Friends of Christ branded with Infamy and
Reproach; when Christ himself passes under the Infamous Character of a Deceiver
of the People? Some allowed him to be a good Man, but others said, Nay; he
deceives the People.

14 Now about the midst of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple, and
taught. 15 And the Jews marvelled, saying, How knows this man letters, having
never learned? 16 Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine, but
his that sent me. 17 If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
doctrine, whether it be of God or whether I speak of my self. 18 He that
speaks of himself, seeks his own glory: but he that seekerh his glory that
sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him.

Observe here, 1. Though Christ went up to Jerusalem privately, lest he should
stir up the Jealousy of the Pharisees against himself unseasonably; yet he
went into the Temple and Taught publicly; his Example teaches us thus much.
That although the Servants of Christ may for a time, and in some cases withdraw
themselves from apprehended danger; yet when God calls them to appear openly
they must do it courageously, without shrinking; tho the danger be still
impending. Jesus went up to Jerusalem, entered the Temple and Taught. Observe,
2. So Admirable was our Holy Lord's Doctrine, that the Jews marvelled how he
should come to the Knowledge of such Divine Mysteries, considering the meanness
of his Education. They were struck with Admiration, but they wanted Faith:
whereas the least degree of Saving Faith is beyond all Admiration without it.
Observe, 3. Our Lord vindicates his Doctrine; telling the Jews that the
Doctrine he delivered was not his own. That is, not of his own inventing and
devising; it was no contrivance of his, nor was it Taught him by Men; but
received immediately from the Father, whose Ambassador and great Prophet he
was. Again, when Christ says, My Doctrine is not mine; that is, not only mine,
but my Father's and mine. For as he was God equal with the Father, so he
Naturally knew all his Counsels; and as Man had Knowledge thereof by
communication from his Godhead. Learn hence, That the Doctrine of the Gospel is
a Doctrine wholly from God; he contrived it, and sent his own Son into the
World to Publish and Reveal it. Christ was sent and his Doctrine was not his
own, but his that sent him. Observe, 4. A double Rule given by our Savior,
whereby the Jews might know whether the Doctrine he preached were the Doctrine
of God. First, if a Man walks uprightly, and does the Will of God in the best
manner according to his Knowledge; If any Man will do his Will, he shall know
of my Doctrine whether it be of God. There is no such way to find out Truth, as
by doing the Will of God. The second Rule by which they might know that his
Doctrine was from God, was this, because he sought his Father's Glory, and not
his own in the Delivery of it. He that seeks his Glory that sent him, the
same is True. Hence Learn, That the Nature and Scope of that Doctrine which
Christ delivered, Eminently tending not to promote his own private Glory, but
the glorifying of his Father, is an undoubted proof and Evidence, that his
Doctrine was of God.

19 Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keeps the law? Why go
ye about to kill me? 20 The people answered and said, thou have a devil: who
goes about to kill thee? 21 Jesus answered and said unto them, I have done one
work, and ye all marvel. 22 Moses therefore gave unto you circumcision, (Not
because it is of Moses, but of the fathers) and ye on the sabbath day
circumcise a man. 23 If a man on the sabbath day receive circumcision, that the
law of Moses should not be broken; are ye angry at me, because I have made a
man every whit whole on the sabbath day?

Observe here, 1. That our Lord having vindicated his Doctrine in the former
Verses, comes now to vindicate his practice in healing the Impotent Man on the
Sabbath Day, for which the Jews sought his Life, as a violation of the fourth
Commandment given by Moses. Our Savior tells them, That notwithstanding their
pretended Zeal for the Law of Moses; they more notoriously broke the sixth
Commandment, by going about to kill him, an Innocent person, than he had broke
the fourth Commandment, by making a Man whole on the Sabbath Day. Hence Learn,
That it is damnable Hypocrisy, when Men pretend great Zeal against the Sins of
others, and do allow and tolerate worse in themselves. This is, for their
practice, to give their profession the Lie; the Jews condemn our Savior for a
supposed Breach of the fourth Commandment; whilst they are guilty themselves of
a real Breach of the sixth Commandment. Observe, 2. The Ignominy, and Reproach
which the Jews fix upon our Blessed Savior, in the height of their Rage and
fury against him. Thou have a Devil; the King of Saints in Heaven, as well as
the whole Host of Saints on Earth, has been frequently smitten and deeply
wounded with reproach. Christ was reproached for our sake, and when we are
reproached for his sake, he takes our reproach as his own. Moses his reproach
was the reproach of Christ. Heb. 11.26. And he esteemed it a Treasure, which
did more enrich him with its worth, than press him with its weight. Esteeming
the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt. Observe, 3.
The wonderful meekness of Christ, in passing over this Reproach and Calumny,
without one word of Reply. Guilt is commonly clamorous and impatient, but
Innocence is silent and regardless of misreports. Our Savior is not at the
pains of a word to vindicate himself from their impotent censure; but goes on
with his Discourse, and justifies his own Action, in healing a Man on the
Sabbath Day from the Jews own practice, in circumcising their Children on that
day, if it happened to be the Eighth day. And the Argument runs thus. If
Circumcision may be Administered to a Child on the Sabbath Day, which is a
servile kind of Work, and Bodily Exercise, without blame or censure; why must I
fall under Censure, for healing a Man on the Sabbath Day, thoroughly and
perfectly, only by a word speaking? Hence Learn, That the Law of doing good,
and Relieving the miserable at all Times, is a more ancient and excellent Law,
than either that of the Sabbath Rest, or of Circumcision upon the Eighth day. A
Ritual Law must and ought to give place to the L^w of Nature, which is written
in every Man's heart. As if our Lord had said; If you may wound a Man by
Circumcision on the Sabbath Day, may not I heal One? if you may heal on that
Day one Member of the circumcised, may not I make a Man whole every whit? if
you be at pains to cure such a one with your hand, may not I without pains cure
a Man with the word of my Mouth?

24 Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment.

From the foregoing Argument, Christ draws an Inference or Conclusion, that
there is no making a judgment according to the first Appearance of Things; and
that Suddenness or Rashness, Prejudice or Partiality in judging, overthrows
Righteous Judgment. This is the general Application of what Christ had said
before; and the particular Application of it as to himself, comes to this;
Judge not according to Appearance, but judge Righteous Judgment: As if Christ
had said, Lay aside your prejudices against my Person, and compare these cases
attentively, and impartially with one another; and then see whether you can
justly condemn me as a Sabbath Breaker and acquit your selves. Such was the
perfect Innocence of our Savior's Actions, that he could and did submit them
to the Reason and Judgment of his very Enemies.

25 Then said some of them of Jerusalem, is not this he whom they seek to kill?
26 But lo, he speaks boldly, and they say nothing unto him: do the rulers
know indeed that this is the very Christ? 27 Howbeit we know this man whence he
is: but when Christ comes no man knows whence he is. 28 Then cried Jesus in
the temple as he taught, saying, Ye both know me, and ye know whence I am: and
I am not come of my self, but he that sent me is true, whom ye know not. 29 But
I know him, for I am from him, and he has sent me. 30 Then they sought to take
him: but no man laid hands on him, because his hour was not yet come. 31 And
many of the people believed on him, and said, when Christ comes will he do mo
miracles then these which this man has done?

Our Blessed Savior having vindicated both his Doctrine and Practice, and
appeared publicly in the Temple, and speaking boldly there, the People of
Jerusalem knowing the hatred and enmity of the Chief Priests and Rulers against
him, do wonder that they did not apprehend him. Learn, Almighty God does and
can preserve his own, in the faithful discharge of their Duty, in such an
admirable manner, that even their Enemies themselves may wonder at it, and be
Astonished with it. Observe, 2ly, The Argument which the Jews urged against our
Savior's being Christ, and the promised Messiah. Namely, That they knew whence
he was, whereas when the Messiah comes, no man will know whence he is; now
herein they Assert a manifest untruth; for though Christ in respect of his
Godhead was prefigured by Melchisedeck, who was without Father or Mother,
without descent; (that is, without any that the Scripture mentions) yet in
respect of his humane Nature, the Jews might know whence he was; for the
Scripture plainly pointed out the Tribe, the Family, the Lineage, and the place
of his Birth. Observe, 3. That Christ being grieved at this impudent Cavil,
does reply unto it with much boldness and Zeal; he cried, saying, ye both know
me, and know whence I am; but the Father that sent me ye know not. That is, you
know me as Man, where I was Born, and of what Family I am, but you know not my
Divine Nature, nor the Father from whom I am by Eternal Generation, and who
has sent me into the World. Observe, 4. What causeless Rage appeared in these
Men against Christ, for declaring the Truth unto them; they would have taken
him by Violence, had not the Power and Providence of God restrained them for
the present, because his time to Suffer was not yet come. Hence Learn, That
Violence and Persecution against the Faithful Dispensers of the Truths of God,
have been the Lot and Portion of such in all Ages and Generations. Christ
experienced it; let his Ministers expect it. Observe, 5. That although the Rulers
at Jerusalem were Angry and enraged, yet the meaner and inferior sort of
People Believed on him, being convinced by the wonderful Miracles which he had
wrought amongst them, that he was the True and promised Messiah. For say they,
when ever the Messiah come, he cannot do greater and more Evident Miracles then
this Man has has done. Learn hence, That although the Grace of God be not
ensured to, or entailed upon any sort of People; yet ordinarily it is the
meaner sort of People with whom it prevails most. Many of the common People at
Jerusalem were Believing, when the Rulers there were Persecuting: Men that live
in Pleasure and at Ease, see no need of dependence upon God; have little
inclination or desire to farther the Gospel, and to encourage either the
Dispensers or Professors of it; nay it is well if they do not turn Persecutors.

32 The Pharisees heard that the people murmured such things concerning him:
and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers to take him. 33 Then said
Jesus unto them, Yet a little while am I with you, and then I go unto him that
sent me. 34 Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither ye
cannot come. 35 Then said the Jews among themselves; Whither will he go, that
we shall not find him? will he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles, and
teach the Gentiles? 36 What manner of saying is this that he said, Ye shall
seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am, thither ye cannot come?

Observe here, 1. How enraged the Pharisees were, when they heard that so many
of the Common People were brought to Believe in Christ, and to cleave unto
Christ; insomuch that they sent public Officers, Armed with Authority to
Apprehend our Blessed Savior. The Pharisees and Chief Priests sent Officers to
Take him. Learn thence, That nothing more enrages the Enemies of Religion, and
draws on Trouble on the Preachers and Professors of it, than the success which
the Gospel at any time meets with. Observe, 2. Our Savior tells them, that as
they desired to be Rid of him; so ere long they should have their desire,; he
would leave them, and go to his Father, and in his Absence they would wish for
his Bodily presence again, but should not have it. Learn, The Despisers of
Christ have little cause to be weary of him, and to seek to put him away by
Violence and Persecution; for their obstinate contempt of him will cause him to
depart from them, and finally to forsake them. Observe, 3. How the Jews not
understanding our Savior's words aright, Reasoned among themselves, whither by
Leaving of them, he meant to go into some Pagan Country, and Teach the Gentiles
the Mysteries of the Jewish Religion; which above all things they could not
endure to hear. Learn hence, That it is the Ordinary Sin of a People,
privileged with the means of Grace, not to be sensible of any hazard or danger
of Christ's Leaving and forsaking them: Till at last he forsakes them finally,
and casts them off to their inevitable and unutterable Condemnation. Thus did
our Lord deal with the Jews here. I go my way, and whither I go ye cannot come.

37 In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried,
saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink.

The feast of Tabernacles, (which is the seast here meant) lasted Eight days;
the first and last of which were to be kept Holy, with Religious Assemblies and
Sacrifices; and it was a Custom among the Jews, upon that Solemn day, to offer
up a Pot of Water unto God, which they drew out of the Fountain of Siloam; with
Reference to this Custom, Christ here cries with a loud Voice, inviting the
People to fetch and draw from him, as from a Living fountain, all the
Sanctifying Gifts and Saving Graces of the Holy Spirit. Learn hence, That Jesus
Christ is the Original and Fountain of all Saving Grace, whom if we Thirst
after, Repair to, and by Faith depend upon as Mediator; we shall certainly
Receive what influences of Grace so ever we want and stand in need of.

38 He that believes on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water.

Here again Christ Alludes to a Jewish Custom; the Jews were wont at Fountains
to Build great Vessels of Stone, and in the midst or Belly of them to have
Pipes, through which the Water passes. Now says Christ, Thus shall it be with
every one that Believes on me; he shall be abundantly filled with the Spirit
of God, in all the Sanctifying and Saving Graces of it. Christ and his Holy
Spirit are a Living Fountain, whose Waters never fail; they are not a
Water-brook, but a Spring of Waters; we shall never miss of the Waters of Life,
if we seek unto and wait upon Christ for them. For if we Believe on him: out of
our Belly shall flow Rivers of Living Waters; sufficient for our selves, and
wherewith to refresh others.

39 (But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him, should
receive: for the holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet
glorified).

These words are the Evangelist, St. John's Commentary upon the foregoing
promise; he tells us, That Christ spoke this of the Miraculous Gifts of the
Spirit, which did Accompany the descent of the Holy Ghost, at the Feast of
Pentecost. For the Holy Ghost was not yet given, that is, not so plentifully
given; because that Jesus was not yet Glorified. Learn hence, That although the
Spirit was in some measure given by God, from the Beginning to good Men; yet
the more plentiful effusion of it was deferred, till the Ascension and
Glorification of Jesus Christ.

40 Many of the people therefore, when they heard this saying, said, Of a truth
this is the prophet. 41 Others said, This is the Christ. But some said, Shall
Christ come out of Galilee? 42 Has not the scripture said, That Christ comes
of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was? 43 So
there was a division among the people because of him. 44 And some of them would
have taken him; but no man laid hands on him.

In these Verses an Account is given of the various effects which our Lord's
foregoing Sermon had upon his Hearers hearts: Some were so affected with it,
that they Believed him to be the great Prophet promised to Israel; Deuteronomy. 18.18.
Others apprehended him to be the Christ: Others contradict both, supposing him
to be Born not at Bethlehem, but in Galilee. And upon this Diversity of
Opinions, there arose a Division amongst them: And some had a mind to have
apprehended him, but by an overruling Providence they were restrained from the
doing of it at present. Learn hence, That Diversity of Opinions in matters of
Religion, even concerning Christ himself, have been even from the beginning.
Some accounted him a Prophet, others the Messiah, some thought him neither; but
a grand Impostor and Deceiver. Our dear Lord, when here on Earth, passed
through evil Report and good Report; let his followers expect and prepare for
the same. For Innocence it self cannot protect from Slander and false
Accusation.

45 Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees; and they said
unto them, Why have ye not brought him? 46 The officers answered, Never man
spoke like this man. 47 Then answered them the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived?
48 Have any of the rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? 49 But this
people who knows not the law are cursed.

Observe here, 1. How God restrained the rage and malice of Christ's Enemies,
till his hour was come; the Officers of the Chief Priests, who were sent forth
with a Commission to apprehend him, return without him; but with this
Honorable mention of him in their mouths, never Man spoke like this Man. Such
is the Power of Christ's Doctrine, that even those that come unto it with
prejudice, and with a persecuting purpose, may be surprised by it; and though not
converted, yet bridled and restrained: the preaching of the Gospel does
sometimes restrain the violence of the Hand, when it works no change in or upon
the Heart. Thus it was with these poor Officers. Observe, 2. That the Pharisees
being more enraged at the Reason which the Officers gave for neglecting their
Office, than for the neglect it self; upbraid them that they should suffer
themselves to be so deceived, whereas none of the Grandees, or Learned Rabbis
had owned him; only an accursed crew of Ignorant People followed him and doated
on him. Here Note, That when Christ came into the World, the great ones of the
World not only refused to Believe on him, but boasted of their unbelief, as an
Argument of their Wisdom. Have any of the Rulers believed on him? Oh no, They
were too Wise to Believe; Faith is left to Fools, and accounted Folly by those
Wise Men. Nay farther, They count the Common People cursed, who did Believe on
Christ. O prodigious stupidity! to account them accursed, who receive Jesus
Christ the chiefest Blessing: Great Men have not always the Wisdom of a Man,
but more seldom have they the Wisdom of a real Christian. Great in Honor and
Wise in Understanding are a sweet couple, but seldom seen together.

50 Nicodemus says unto them, (he that came to Jesus by night, being one of
them) 51 Does our law judge any man before it hear him, and know what he does?
52 They answered and said unto him, Art thou also of Galilee? Search, and look:
for out of Galilee arises no prophet. 53 And every man went unto his own house.

Here Observe, 1. How God stirs up Nicodemus, though he durst not openly own
Christ, yet to plead for him, that he might not be condemned before heard; this
was a common Rule of Justice, and nothing but what might have been said on
behalf of the greatest Malefactor; he could not well have said less, but God so
ordered it, that it was enough to divert the Storm from falling upon Christ at
this time. One word shall be sufficient to blow over a Persecution, when God
will have it so. Obs. 2. They answer Nicodemus with a Taunt, a Mock, and a
Scorn; that no Prophet ever did rise out of Galilee, nor ever should. Therefore
Christ arising out of Galilee, as they thought could be no Prophet. Observe
Lastly, That though they were more and more enraged, yet they scatter without
concluding any thing against Christ, for that time every one went to his own
home. There is no Wisdom, nor Understanding, nor Counsel against the Lord.

CHAP. VIII.
1 JEsus went unto the mount of Olives: 2 And early in the morning he came
again into the temple, and all the people came unto him; and he sat down, and
taught them.

The foregoing Chapter gave us an Account of a most excellent Sermon, which our
Savior Preached in the Temple, at the Feast of Tabernacles. Now the Feast
being ended, Jesus did not tarry in the City all Night; but went out of it two
Miles, as he frequently used to do to the Mount of Olives. And although it was so
dangerous for him to be seen any more in Jerusalem; yet early the next Morning
he returns again to the City, enters the Temple, and falls upon his work of
preaching without fear, and with indefatigable diligence. Oh what a busy,
useful Life was this of our Savior's; he spent the Day in preaching, in the
Temple, the Night in privacy and Prayer on the Mount of Olives; and the next
Morning returns to his work of preaching again. Thus was he always holily and
painfully employed; to glorify his Father, and to be useful and beneficial to
Mankind, was his food by Day, and his rest by Night. Lord, How little do we
resemble thee, if when thy Life was all Pains and Labor, ours all be Pastime,
Pleasure, and Recreation.

3 And the Scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery,
and when they had set her in the midst, 4 They say unto him, Master, this woman
was taken in adultery, in the very act. 5 Now Moses in the law commanded us,
that such should be stoned: but what say thou? 6 This they said, tempting
him, that they might have to accuse him. But Jesus stooped down, and with his
finger wrote on the ground as though he heard them not. 7 So when they
continued asking him, he lift up himself, and said unto them, He that is
without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her. 8 And again he
stooped down, and wrote on the ground. 9 And they which heard it, being
convicted by their own conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the eldest
even unto the last: and Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the
midst. 10 When Jesus had lift up himself, and saw none but the woman, he said
unto her, Woman, where are those thine accusers? has no man condemned thee? 11
She said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee: go,
and sin no more.

Our Savior early in the Morning entering upon the work of Preaching. Observe,
1. What a mixed Auditory he had, of Scribes and Pharisees, and Common People.
All sorts of persons came to hear him, but not all with the same intentions;
the Common People came to Learn, but the Scribes and Pharisees came to Cavil
and Carp; the latter came to Tempt and ensnare him, the former to be Taught and
Instructed by him; it is not our bare attendance upon Ordinances, but the
purity of our Aim, and the sincerity of our Intentions, in waiting upon God in
them; that is an Evidence of our Sincerity. Observe, 2. How the Hypocrisy of
these Pharisees was gilded over with an appearance of Sanctity; as if they were
great lovers of Chastity, and haters of Uncleanness; they bring to Christ a
Woman taken in a Adultery, to be censured by him; one that had not known these
Pharisees, would have concluded them very Holy and Honest, very Conscionable,
and Conscientious Persons; but Christ that saw into their Bosoms, soon found
that all this was done only to Tempt him. Thus a smooth Tongue, and a false
Heart, often accompany one another; when we see too glittering appearances, we
have reason to suspect the inside. Observe, 3. The punishment which the
Pharisees seek to have inflicted on this Adulteress; it is Death, let her be
stoned: Sometimes the punishment of Adultery was burning, sometimes stoning,
always Death: Lord! How ought Christians to Blush? who have slight thoughts of
the Sin of Adultery, which both Jews and Pagans held ever deadly. Observe, 4.
Their ensnaring, Question, Moses commanded such to be stoned, but what say
thou? The Pharisees desire no better Advantage against Christ, than a
Contradiction to Moses their Received Lawgiver: It has been an old Stratagem,
to set Moses and Christ at variance, but they are fast Friends; they are
Subordinate one to another, not opposite one against another. Moses brings us
to Christ, and Christ to Glory: Fain would these colloguing Adversaries draw
Christ to contradict Moses; that they might take Advantage of that
Contradiction to condemn Christ. Observe, 5. The Wisdom and Caution of our
Lord's Answer; he does not excuse her Crime; but bids her Accusers look at
home, and examine their own Consciences, whether they were not Guilty of the
like, or as great a Sin: He does not say, Let her be stoned, this had been
against the course of his Mercy; he does not say, Let her not be stoned, this
had been against the Law of Moses; but he so Answers, that both his Justice and
his Mercy are entire; she dismissed, and they ashamed. It is a false Zeal that
is Eagle-eyed abroad, and blind at home: Such as are most wicked themselves,
are oftimes most ready, and skilful to spy out the faults and failings of
others: We stand too near our selves to discern our own miscarriages. The Eye
that sees every thing, sees not it self. Observe, 6. Though Christ abhorred the
Sin, yet he does not condemn the Sinner. Has no Man condemned thee? Neither do
I condemn thee, says Christ. This Christ said, not to excuse the Woman, or to
connive at her offense, but to show that he declined the Office of a Civil
Judge, which was to pass Sentence on Criminals. He therefore does not say, No
Man ought to condemn thee: but has no Man condemned thee? Christ does not
execute the Office of a Magistrate, in judging her to Death; but of a Minister,
in calling her to Repentance, and Reformation: How ought every one of us to
keep within the bounds of our calling, when our Savior himself will not
entrench upon the Office and Functions of others. Observe Lastly, Our Savior's
cautionary Direction to this Adulteress, Go and sin no more. Where Note, Christ
does not say, Go and commit Adultery no more; but Go and sin no more. It is not
a partial Repentance, or a turning away from this or that particular Sin, that
will denominate us true Penitents, or entitle us to the pardoning Mercy of God;
but a leaving off all Sin of what kind soever. Therefore, says Christ, Go and
sin no more.

12 Then spoke Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world: he
that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life. 13 The Pharisees therefore said unto him, Thou bear record of thy
self; thy record is not true. 14 Jesus answered and said unto them, Though I
bear record of my self, yet my record is true: for I know whence I came, and
whither I go; but ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go. 15 Ye judge
after the flesh, I judge no man. 16 And yet if I judge, my judgment is true:
for I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me. 17 It is also written in
your law, that the testimony of two men is true. 18 I am one that bear witness
of my self, and the Father that sent me, bears witness of me. 19 Then said
they unto him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye neither know me, nor my
Father: if ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also. 20 These words
spoke Jesus in the treasury as he taught in the temple: and no man laid hands
on him, for his hour was not yet come.

Our Blessed Savior having baffled the design which the Pharisees had upon
him: and showed a Spirit of Divine Wisdom, in delivering himself from that
snare which they had laid for him: He returns to instruct the People in the
Treasury. And here Note, 1. He instructs them in the nature of his Office,
which was to inlighten all Men with the Knowledge of Divine Truth; so that they
should not walk in Darkness, either of Sin or Error, but be led to Eternal
Life. Learn hence, That the great End and Errand of Christ's coming into the
World, it was to give Light unto poor Souls that sat in Darkness. Observe, 2.
The Exception which the Pharisees made against our Savior's Testimony of
himself. Thou bear Record of thy self, thy Record is not True. Indeed such
is the Corrupt Nature of Man, which is prone to seek it self, and hunt after
vain Glory, that it may render a person's Testimony of himself suspected; but
Christ being true God that cannot Lie, and coming out of the Bosom of his
Father, as his Ambassador; his Testimony of himself is above all Exception, and
ought to be credited without farther proof. Observe, 3. How Christ challenges
his Enemies the Pharisees, for judging carnally of him, and according to the
meanness of his outward appearance; whereas he judged no Man. That is, First,
No Man as they judged, according to outward show; or 2dly, I judge no Man, that
is, at present, My proper work is not to Condemn any but to Teach all, and my
present Office is that of a Prophet, not of a Judge. My coming now is to
Instruct and Save the World, my next coming will be to Judge and Condemn it.
Observe, 4. Christ declares that he is not alone in the Testimony given of
himself; but that the Father did also Testify and bear Witness of him: and
that according to their own Law, the Testimony of Two was always accounted and
esteemed valid. Now says Christ, If so much weight be to be laid upon the
Testimony of Two Men, how much more forcibly should the Testimony of the
Father, and of him whom the Father has sent satisfy you; that what I say of
my self is True? Learn hence, That the Father and the Son, though one in Essence
and Operation; yet are distinct persons. Secondly, That these distinct persons
did bear joint witness concerning Christ. God the Father testified of him by a
Voice from Heaven; and Christ as God, bare witness of himself as Man, and as
Mediator. Surely out of the mouth of Two such Witnesses, the Truth of Christ's
Divine Mission is sufficiently established.

21 Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and
shall die in your sins: whither I go, ye cannot come. 22 Then said the Jews,
Will he kill himself? because he says* Whither I go, ye cannot come. 23 And he
said unto them, Ye are from beneath, I am from above: ye are of this world, I
am not of this world. 24 I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in your
sins: for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins.

Observe here, A dreadful Threatening denounced by Christ against the Obstinate
and Unbelieving Jews, ye shall die in your sins; that is, in the Guilt of your
Sins, under the Power, and undergoing the punishment of your Sins: Lord! what a
sad word is this, ye shall die in your Sins; Oh better it is a Thousand times
to die in a Ditch; for they that die in their Sins, shall rise in their Sins,
and stand before Christ in their Sins; such as lie down in Sin in the Grave,
shall have Sin lie down with them in Hell to all Eternity. The Sins of
Believers go to the Grave before them; Sin dies while they Live. But the Sins
of Unbelievers go to the Grave with them. While they live they are dead in Sin;
and by Sin they fall into Death; from which there is no Recovery unto Life.
Observe, Secondly, The grand Sin for which this great Punishment is threatened,
and that is the Sin of Unbelief. If ye Believe not that I am he, ye shall Die
in your Sins. Plainly intimating that of all Sins, Infidelity, or Unbelief is
the grand damning Sin under the Gospel. The Devil has as great an advantage
upon Men, by making them strong in Unbelief, as God has by making his People
strong in Faith. Unbelief renders a Sinner's case desperate and incurable; it
does not only procure Damnation, but no Damnation like it.

25 Then said they unto him, Who art thou? And Jesus says unto them, Even the
same that I said unto you from the beginning. 26 I have many things to say, and
to judge of you: but he that sent me, is true; and I speak to the world those
things which I have heard of him. 27 They understood not that he spoke to them
of the Father. 28 Then said Jesus unto them, When ye have lift up the the Son
of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of my self; but
as my Father has taught me, I speak these things.

The Jews hearing our Savior denouncing such a terrible Threatening against
them, because they Believed not on him, in the foregoing Verses; Here they
perversely ask him who he was? Our Savior replies, That he was the same he was
from the Beginning, even the very Christ, and that they were the very same they
were also; the mortal Enemies and opposers of the Truth. But that the time was
hastening when they should be fully convinced who he was. Namely, When they had
lifted him upon his Cross; when he was Risen again and ascended into Heaven,
and brought that destruction upon them, which he had so often threatened. Learn
hence, That the Sufferings of Christ were clear and convincing Demonstrations
both who he was, and what he was; the darkning of the Sun, the quaking of the
Earth, the rending of the Rocks, the opening of the Graves; were such
convincing Proofs of his Deity, that they could not but say, Verily this was
the Son of God.

29 And he that sent me, is with me: the Father has not left me alone: for I
do always those things that please him.

That is, he that sent and Commissioned me for the great work of Redemption, he
is continually with me, both to assist and to accept me; I doing every thing
that is agreeable to his Holy Will and Pleasure. Hence learn, 1. That the work
of Redemption, in the hands of Jesus Christ, was a work well pleasing to God
the Father, the work it self was highly pleasing to him; and Christ's way of
managing it was well pleasing also. 2. That the Reason why it was thus pleasing
to God, was, because he acted in a constant conformity to his Father's Will,
kept to his Father's Commission; and executed his Father's Commands, Doing
always those things that pleased him. Learn, 3. That as the Father and Christ
were inseparable in respect of the Unity of the Divine Essence; So the Father
was always with Christ as Mediator, both to support and to uphold him, to
accept and to reward him. The Father has not left me alone, either in the
doing of his Will, or in the suffering of his Pleasure. Learn, 4. That those
who desire the gracious and special presence of God with them in all
Conditions; particularly in times of Suffering and Trouble; they must make it
their care and study to please God, and to observe his Will in all things. Then
God will be with them in his guiding presence, in his strengthening presence, in
his comforting, in his quickening, in his sanctifying, sympathising and
accepting presence.

30 As he spoke these words, many believed on him. 31 Then said Jesus to those
Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples
indeed; 32 And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.

Observe here, 1. The Blessed Fruit and Success of our Savior's foregoing
Discourse, concerning his Person and Office. As he spoke these words many
Believed on him. Not by their own natural Power and Ability; but by Christ's
omnipotent and efficacious Grace; he that spoke to the Ear, caused his word to
reach the Heart: Christ himself that planted and watered gave also the Increase.
Observe, 2. The Love and Care of Christ mentioned to these new Converts; he
watreth immediately these Plants with wholesome Advice and Counsel. If ye
continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed. Where Note, It must be
Christ's word, the true Doctrine of the Gospel; and this abided and continued
in, which will evidence our Discipleship. Observe, 3. A special privilege
which shall follow upon abiding in the Doctrine of Christ; they shall increase
in the Knowledge of it, and be made free by it. Ye shall know the Truth, and
the Truth shall make you free. Where Note, That Man is naturally in Bondage and
Captivity, by blindness of Mind, by hardness of Heart, by rebellion of Will. 2.
That the means appointed by God for setting him at Liberty from this Captivity
and Bondage, is the word of Christ and the Doctrine of the Gospel. The Truth
shall make you free.

33 They answered him, We be Abraham's seed, and were never in bondage to any
man: how say thou, Ye shall be made free? 34 Jesus answered them, Verily
verily I say unto you, Whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin. 35 And
the servant abides not in the house for ever: but the Son abides ever. 36 If
the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.

Observe here, How these Carnal Jews understand all that our Savior said, to
be spoken in and after a Carnal manner; when he spoke to them before, of eating
his Flesh and drinking his Blood; they understood it grossly of his natural
Body. When he speaks to them here of a Spiritual freedom from Sin, they
understand it of a Civil freedom from servile Bondage and Subjection.
Alleging, They were Abraham's Seed, and never in Bondage to any: Which was a
manifest untruth; having been in Bondage to their Ancestors, to the Egyptians
and Babylonians; and in their own persons to the Romans. But this was not the
Bondage that Christ meant, but a Spiritual Slavery and Thraldom under the
Dominion of Sin, and Power of Satan. For he that commits Sin is the Servant
of Sin. That is, whosoever does habitually, wilfully, deliberately, and
constantly allow and tolerate himself in a sinful course; he is under the
Servitude and Thraldom of Sin. Every Sinner is a Bondslave, and to live in Sin
is to live in Slavery. And this every Man does till the Son makes him free:
Then and not till then is he free indeed. Learn hence, That interest in Christ,
and continuance in his Doctrine, sets the Soul at liberty from all that
Bondage, whereunto it was subject in its natural and sinful State. Oh happy
exchange from being the Devil's Slaves, to become Christ's Free Men.

37 I know that ye are Abraham's seed; but ye seek to kill me, because my word
has no place in you. 38 I speak that which I have seen with my Father: and ye
do that which ye have seen with your father. 39 They answered and said unto
him, Abraham is our father. Jesus says unto them, If ye were Abraham's
children, ye would do the works of Abraham. 40 But now ye seek to kill me, a
man that has told you the truth, which I have heard of God: this did not
Abraham.

The Jews boasting again that they were Abraham's Seed, and bearing themselves
much upon it; our Savior tells them he knew they were so, his natural Children
according to the Flesh; but not his genuine Children according to the Spirit:
This he proves, because they did not tread in Abraham's steps, and do his
works; for if either the Temper of their Minds, or the Actions of their Lives
were agreeable to Abraham, they would not seek as they did to destroy and kill
him, only for bringing the Doctrine of Salvation to them; which he had heard
and learned of the Father. Hence learn, 1. How prone we are to glory in our
outward Privileges, and to re^y upon them. Whereas these are Arguments of
God's goodness toward us, but no evidences of our goodness toward him. 2.
That it is very dangerous and unsafe, to pride our selves in, and depend upon
any external privileges and prerogatives whatsoever. As our being Born within
the pale of the visible Church, our descending from Pious Parents, and Holy
Progenitors; for unless we be followers of their Faith, admirers of their
Piety, and imitate their Example, we are none of their Children; but belong to
another Father, as our Savior tells the Jews in the next Verses.

41 Ye do the deeds of your father. Then said they to him, We be not born of
fornication; we have one Father, even God. 42 Jesus said unto them, If God were
your Father ye would love me: for I proceeded forth, and came from God; neither
came I of my self, but he sent me. 43 Why do ye not understand my speech? even
because ye cannot hear my word. 44 Ye are of your father the devil, and the
lusts of your father ye will do: he was a murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a
lie, he speaks of his own: for he is a liar, and the father of it.

In the former Verses, the Jews made their Boast that they were the Children of
Abraham, in these that they are the Children of God. We have one father even
God. This our Savior disproves, Telling them, that if God were their Father,
they would love him, as proceeding from him by eternal Generation; and in his
Office employed by him as Mediator. Also if God were their Father, they would
understand him speaking from God; whereas now they were so transported with
Malice, that they could not endure his Doctrine with patience, though it came
from God. All which were undeniable proofs, that they were not the Children of
God. Hence learn, That none can justly pretend any Interest in God as his
Children; but they that love Christ, as being the Express Image of his Father's
Person, and do hear and receive his Doctrine, as coming from God: This the Jews
did not do, therefore says Christ, They are not the Children of God. Observe
farther, Having told them whose Children they are not; our Savior tells them
plainly whose Children they were. Ye are of your father the Devil. This appears
by their being Acted by him, by their Resembling and Imitating of him; their
Inclinations, Dispositions and Actions, being all to fulfill the Lusts of the
Devil. Now, as his Servants we are, whom we obey; so his Children we are whom
we resemble. Learn hence, That Men's sinful Practices will prove them to be
Satan's Children, let their Profession be what it will; if in the Temper of
their Minds, and in the Actions of their Lives, there be a Conformity to
Satan's Disposition, and a ready Compliance with his Temptations, they are
certainly his Children; what pretenses soever they make of being the Children
of God. None could pretend higher to the Relation of God's Children than these
Jews did; yet says Christ, Ye are the Children of the Devil, for his work^ ye
do.

45 And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not. 46 Which of you
convinces me of sin? And if I say the truth, Why do ye not believe me? 47 He
that is of God, hears Gods words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye are
not of God. 48 Then answered the Jews, and said unto him, Say we not well that
thou art a Samaritan, and have a devil? 49 Jesus answered, I have not a devil;
but I honor my Father, and ye do dishonor me. 50 And I seek not mine own
glory: there is one that seeks and judges.

Here Observe, 1. The free Reproof which Christ gave the Jews, for their
obstinate Unbelief. Because I tell you the Truth, ye Believe me not. 2. The
Challenge which he gives the worst of his Adversaries. Which of you convinces
me of Sin? So perfectly pure, Innocent and Spotless, was the Doctrine and Life
of Christ: That although his Enemies loaded him with Slander and false
Accusation, yet none of them could justly convince him of; much less condemn
him for the least known Sin. Observe, 3. The Jews being enraged at this free
Reproof, fell a railing at his Person; charging him with being a Samaritan,
possessed with an Evil Spirit. Our Savior meekly replies, That he did not deal
with the Devil; but was honoring his Father in what he did, and said; And
therefore his Father would take care of his honor, and judge between him and
them. Here Note, That though Christ used some sharpness in Reproving the Jews,
and Representing them to themselves; yet he answers with wonderful mildness and
meekness, when he discovers his Resentments of his own Reproaches: How cool was
Christ in his own Cause, but hot enough in Gods.

51 Verily verily I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall never see
death. 52 Then said the Jews unto him, Now we know that thou have a devil.
Abraham is dead, and the prophets; and thou say, If a man keep my saying, he
shall never taste of death. 53 Art thou greater then our father Abraham, which
is dead? and the prophets are dead: whom make thou thy self? 54 Jesus
answered, If I honor my self, my honor is nothing: it is my Father that
honors me, of whom ye say, that he is your God: 55 Yet ye have not known
him; but I know him: and if I should say, I know him not, I shall be a liar
like unto you: but I know him, and keep his saying.

Observe here, 1. The blessed Fruit and effect of observing our Savior's
Doctrine; He that keeps my saying shall never see Death: that is, Shall be
secured from Eternal Misery, and enjoy Eternal Life. Observe, 2. How the Jews
misunderstood our Savior's words, He that keeps my saying shall never see
Death; as if he meant a freedom from Temporal Death, and hereupon they looked
upon him as beside himself, to promise a Privilege which neither Abraham, nor
the Prophets did ever enjoy. Whereas it was not Exemption from Temporal Death;
but freedom from Eternal Destruction, which our Savior promised to them that
keep his sayings. Hence learn, That the misunderstanding of Christ's Doctrine
and taking it in a Carnal Sense, has given occasion for the many Cavils and
Objections made against it. Observe, 3. How Christ clears himself of all
Ambition in this matter, and shows that he did not make this promise of
delivering his followers from Death vain-gloriously; but that God whom they
called their Father, had honored him with Power, to make good what ever he had
promised to them that keep his saying. Learn hence, That as Christ entirely
sought his Father's Glory; so the Father conferred all Honor and Glory upon
Christ as Mediator; thereby testifying, how infinitely pleased he was with the
Redemption of Mankind performed by him. If I honor my self my honor is
nothing, it is my Father that honors me.

56 Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad.

That is, Abraham having Received a Promise, that the Messiah should come of
his Seed, he exceedingly Rejoiced to see the day of my coming in the Flesh,
though afar off with the Eye of his Faith; and in a Figure, in his Sacrificed Son
Isaac. And this sight of his Faith was so Transporting, that he leaped for Joy.
Learn hence, That a strong Faith gives such a clear sight of Christ, (though at
a distance,) as produces an Holy delight and Rejoicing in him.

57 Then said the Jews unto him, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and have
thou seen Abraham? 58 Jesus said unto them, Verily verily I say unto you,
Before Abraham was, I am. 59 Then took they up stones to cast at him: but Jesus
hid himself, and went put of the temple, going through the midst of them, and
so passed by.

Observe here, 1. What a false and Ridiculous construction the Jews make of our
Savior's words, as if he had affirmed that he had seen Abraham, and Abraham
him, with bodily Eyes; whereas Christ only asserted that Abraham had seen his
Day; that is, he foresaw by Faith the Day of his Incarnation and coming in the
Flesh. Observe, 2. Our Savior's positive asserting of his Divinity, or that he
had a Being as God from all Eternity; for says he, Before Abraham was, I am.
Where Note, That Christ does not say, Before Abraham was, I was; but Before
Abraham was, I am; which is the proper name of God, whereby is signified the
Eternal duration and permanency of his Being. The Adversaries of Christ's
Divinity, say that before Abraham was, Christ was; that is, in God's
foreknowledge or Decree; but this may be said of any other person, as well as
Christ, that he was in the foreknowledge of God before Abraham was Born.
Whereas undoubtedly it was Christ's design in these words, to give himself some
preference and advantage above Abraham, which this Interpretation does not in
the least do. Observe lastly. How the Jews looking upon Christ as a Blasphemer,
for making himself equal with God, and for asserting his Eternal Existence;
they make a Zealous attempt upon his Life, by taking up Stones to cast at him,
as the Jews used to deal with Blasphemers; but our Savior delivers himself
miraculously from their fury, and escapes untouched. Hence learn, That when
Arguments fail, the Enemies of Truth betake themselves to force and violence.
They took up Stones to cast at him. 2. That as Christ disappointed his own
Persecutors, so he can and will deliver his People in their greatest extremity
from the Persecutors Rage and Fury. 2. Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to
deliver the Godly out of Temptation, and to reserve the Unjust to the Day of
Judgment to be punished.

CHAP. IX.
1 ANd as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth.

The foregoing Chapter acquainted us with a famous Encounter, which the
Pharisees had with our Blessed Savior in the Temple at Jerusalem: This being
ended, as he passed from the Temple, he saw a Man lying; possibly by the
Highway, who was Born Blind: Him Christ pitches upon as an object fit to
exercise his Divine Power, in the cure and healing of. They that are Blind by
casualty, may possibly be relieved by Art and Industry; but to cure one that is
Born Blind, nothing less is required than an Almighty Power. Learn hence. That
Diseases and Distempers, which are incurable by the ordinary course of Nature,
are not insuperable to Christ's Power, nor impossible for him to help, but a
proper object for him to magnify his Power upon. Therefore is it here
Recorded, that this poor Man was Blind from his Birth; such Blindness being
accounted incurable by Natural means.

2 And his disciples asked him, saying, Master who did sin, this man, or his
parents that he was born blind?

Here Observe, Something implied or supposed. Namely, 1. That all Bodily
Afflictions and Calamities do come upon us for Sin. Whereas Afflictions, though
they always fall upon a Sinner, yet are they not always sent for Sin; but by
way of Purgation and Prevention of Sin. 2. It is here supposed, that as some
Afflictions come upon Men for personal Sins, so others come upon them for
Parental Sins, and that Children may and oftimes do, very justly suffer for
their Parents Sins. 3. It is here supposed, that there is no other Reason of a
person's sufferings but only Sin: Whereas though Sin be much and often the cause
of suffering, yet we may wrong God and Man; yea and Sin too, to conclude, it is
always the cause of suffering. 4. It is implied here, That there is a
Transmigration of Souls, from one Body to another; the Disciples supposed, that
this Soul, when it was in another Body sinned, and was now punished by being
put into a Blind Body. This Pythagorean Error was crept in among the Pharisees,
and the Disciples here seem to be tainted and infected with it. This may Teach
us, how far the Holiest and Wisest of Men are from an Infallible Spirit, and
that the Best Men may be misled by a common Error.

3 Jesus answered, Neither has this man sinned, nor his parents: but that the
works of God should be made manifest in him.

Christ's Answer must not be understood Absolutely, as if he denied this Man
and his Parents to be guilty of Sin, for both he and they had Sin enough, not
only to deserve Temporal Blindness, but Eternal darkness. The meaning is; That
in Afflicting this Man, the Lord did not so much Respect his or his Parent's
Sin, as the manifestation of his own Glory, in this miraculous Cure. Christ
does not deny but that a Man's own Sin, and the Sin of his Parents may be the
procuring cause of Blindness; but that neither the one nor the other was the
cause in that Man's case; but that the Power and Mercy of God might be seen in
Restoring this Man to his Sight, therefore was he Born Blind. Whence Note, 1.
That though Sin be always the deserving, yet is it not always the procuring cause
of Affliction. 2. That we seldom think of, or hit upon, any other cause of
Affliction, but only Sin; though the design of God looks beyond the Sin of Man in
Afflictions; yet Man seldom looks beyond that, or thinks of any other design of
God in Afflicting, but only punishing for Sin.

4 I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night comes
when no man can work. 5 As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the
world.

Here our Savior tells his Disciples, that he was sent by God into the World,
and had a great work assigned him by God, during his abode in it: Namely, To
Instruct, Reform and Save Mankind; and what our Savior says of himself, is
Applicable to every one of us, in a lower Sense we are sent into the World to
work out our own Salvation in the first place, and then to promote the
Salvation of others as much as in us lies. Note, 1. That every one has a work
to do in the World, a great work assigned him by God that sent him into it. 2.
That the Time allotted for the finishing and dispatching of this great work, it
is a limited Time, it is a short Time; our working Season is a short Season;
While it is Day. 3. That after the working Season is past and expired, there
will succeed a Night of Darkness, in which there must be a cessation from work.
The Night comes.

6 When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the
spittle, and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay, 7 And said
unto him, Go wash in the pool of Siloam (which is by interpretation, Sent.) He
went his way therefore, and washed, and came seeing.

Two things concurred toward the Cure of this Blind Man. Namely, An act of
Divine Power on Christ's part, and an act of Faith and Obedience on the Man's
part. 1. An act of Divine Power on Christ's part, he Tempers Clay and Spittle
together, and Anoints the Man's Eyes therewith, and behold he sees. What an
improbable remedy and means was this, to Humane Reason! Much fitter to put out
a seeing Man's Eyes than to cure a Blind Man's: Had Christ pulled out his Box,
and Applied some Medicinal Ointment to his Eyes; then the praise had been
ascribed to his Skill, not to his Power: But now it plainly appeared, that all
the virtue was in Christ, not in the means. Lord! What great things can thou
do by weak and unlikely means; yea by opposite and contrary means. But it is
the praise of Omnipotency to work by Improbabilities. From the Contemptibleness
of the means or Instrument, always redounds the greater honor to the Agent.
Observe, 2. An act of Faith and Obedience on the Man's part. He went his way,
and washed his Eyes in the Pool of Siloam and returned seeing. Where Note, 1.
How Christ delights to exercise and try the Faith of his People, by their
subjection and Obedience to difficult commands. 2. That true Faith joined with
sincere Obedience, never fails the expectation of them that exercise it;
especially in obeying the most hard and difficult commands. Therefore the
Evangelist adds, that the Blind Man after washing Returned seeing.

8 The neighbors therefore, and they which before had seen him, that he was
blind, said, Is not this he that sat and begged? 9 Some said, This is he:
others said, He is like him: but he said, I am he. 10 Therefore said they unto
them, How were thine eyes opened? 11 He answered and said, A man that is called
Jesus, made clay, and anointed mine eyes, and said unto me, Go to the pool of
Siloam, and wash: and I went and washed, and I received sight. 12 Then said
they unto him, Where is he? He said, I know not.

The Blind Man thus miraculously cured, returns with much Joy to his Neighbors
and Acquaintance, who confer with him upon this matter; they enquire whether he
was the person cured or not: who was the person that cured him, and where that
person was? He assures them he was the very person, that was Blind, but now
cured; that he that cured him was Jesus, that the means used was Clay and
Spittle, but where this Jesus was, or what was become of him he knew not. Learn
hence, 1. That the miraculous cures of God, work a sensible alteration in Men;
not only in their own Apprehension but in the judgment of others. This Miracle
shined forth among the Neighbors, who having seen and observed the Blind Man,
admire his healing. Learn. 2. How frankly the Blind Man acknowledges, and how
freely he confesses that he was the person whom Jesus had healed, I am he. It
is an unthankful silence to smother the works of God in an affected secrecy; to
make God a loser by his bounty toward us, is a shameful injustice. Oh God we
are not worthy of thy common favors, much less of Spiritual Blessings, if we
do not publish thy mercies on the House Top, and praise thee for them in the
great Congregation.

13 They brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind. 14 And it was
the sabbath day when Jesus made the clay, and opened his eyes. 15 Then again
the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight. He said unto them,
He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see. 16 Therefore said some of
the Pharisees, This man is not of God, becauseth he keeps not the
sabbath day. Others said, How can a man that is a sinner, do such miracles? And
there was a division among them.

Observe here, 1. How the Jews who should have been full of silent wonder, and
inclined to believe in Jesus Christ, so omnipotent an Agent, are prejudiced
against him, and bring the late Blind Man before the Pharisees, our Savior's
professed Enemies. Observe, 2. The time which our Savior chose for working
this cure; it was on the Sabbath; many if not most of Christ's famous Miracles
were wrought upon the Sabbath Day. Upon that Day he cured the withered Hand.
Math. 12. Upon that Day he cured the impotent Man, at the Pool of Bethesda, St.
John 5. Upon that Day he cured the B^ind Man here. Thus Christ did: probably
for two Reasons. 1. To confirm his Doctrine which he Preached on that Day, by
Miracles; therefore his preaching and working Miracles went together. 2. To
Instruct the Jews, (had they been willing to Receive instru^tion) in the true
Doctrine and proper Duties of their Sabbath; and to let them know that works of
Necessity and Mercy are very consistent with the due Sanctification of the
Sabbath: It his hard to find out any time wherein Charity is unseasonable; for
as it is the Best of Graces, so the works of it are fittest for the best of
Days.

17 They say unto the blind man again, What say thou of him, that he has
opened thine eyes? He said, He is a prophet. 18 But the Jews did not believe
concerning him, that he had been blind, and received his sight, until they
called the parents of him that had received his sight. 19 And they asked them,
saying, Is this your son, who ye say was born blind? how then does he now see?
20 His parents answered them and said, We know that this is our son, and that
he was born blind: 21 But by what means he now sees, we know not; or who has
opened his eyes, we know not: he is of age, ask him, he shall speak for
himself. 22 These words spoke his parents, because they feared the Jews: for
the Jews had agreed already, that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he
should be put out of the synagogue 23 Therefore said his parents, He is of age,
ask him.

Observe here, 1. How desirous the Pharisees were to obscure the Glory of this
famous Miracle which Christ had wrought: In order to which, 1. They Re-examine
the Man, to know what his Thoughts were of the Person who had done this for
him: They judged him to be an Impostor and a great Sinner, the Man declares
freely, That he believed him to be a Prophet. Hence we learn, That there may
be, and sometimes is, more True Knowledge of Jesus Christ in one poor Man, than
in a General Council of Learned Rabbis. This blind Man saw Christ to be a
Prophet, when the Jewish Sanhedrim saw nothing in him but Imposture. This Man
is not of God, says the Council; Verily he is a Prophet, says the blind Man. 2.
They next examine his Parents (being unwilling to believe the Man himself)
whether he was their Son or not; if so, whether he were born blind, and if born
blind, by what means he now sees. Lord! what obstinate and wilful blindess was
found in these Pharisees? How do they close their Eyes and say, We will not
see? What Endeavors are here used to smother a Miracle which undeniably proved
Christ to be the expected Messiah? They examine first the Man, then his
Parents, then the Man again, hoping that being over awed with fear, they would
either deny or at least conceal the Truth; but the more they strove to darken
and obscure the Truth, the more conspicuous and evident they made it. Great is
Truth and will prevail, how many soever oppose it and set themselves against
it. Observe next, The Wisdom and Cautiousness of his Parents Answer, they
expressly own that the blind Man was their Son: That he was born blind, but for
the way of his cure they wave that, possibly because they did not see the Cure
wrought, and fearing the Sentence of Excommunication, a Decree being past among
the Rulers, that whosoever confesses Christ should be put out of the Synagogue.
Hence Learn, 1. That Excommunication, or Separation from the Society of the
People of God is an Ancient and Honorable Ordinance in the Church of God, and
as such to be revered and esteemed. 2. That this Ordinance of God has been and
may be abused by wicked Men, and the Edge of it turned against Christ himself
and his sincerest Members. 3. That the fear of unjust Excommunication must not
discourage Persons from confessing the Truth, when called to it. The Parents of
the Blind Man durst not confess Christ, for fear that they should be put out of
the Synagogue.

24 Then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto him, Give God
the praise: we know that this man is a sinner. 25 He answered and said, Whether
he be a sinner or no, I know not: but one thing I know, that whereas I was
blind, now I see. 26 Then said they to him again, What did he to thee? how
opened he thine Eyes? 27 He answered them, I have told you already, and ye did
not hear: wherefore would ye hear it again? will ye also be his disciples? 28
Then they reviled him, and said, Thou art his disciple; but we are Moses
disciples. 29 We know that God spoke unto Moses: as for this fellow, we know
not from whence he is.

Here we have an Account of the Pharisees farther practicing upon this blind
Man to rob Christ of the Glory of this Miracle; first they insinuate with him,
and then they frown upon him. First they insinuate with him, saying, Give God
the praise. As if they had said, Ascribe the Cure to God, not to this Man, whom
they conclude to be a Sinner, because he broke (as they thought) the Sabbath.
It Is no new thing to see Men pretend to aim at the Glory of God, when at the
same time they are maliciously opposing Christ, and persecuting his Members.
Next they attempt to frown this poor Man into a Denial of the Miracle wrought
upon him, or to persuade the People that it was a Cheat; but it is wonderful to
observe how the Boldness and Confidence of the poor Man increased. God giving
him that Wisdom and Courage which all his Adversaries were not able to resist
or gainsay. Therefore the Pharisees being angry at this Boldness of the Man,
they revile him for being so silly as to become a Disciple to Christ whose
Office and Authority they knew not, whereas they were Disciples of Moses, whom
they knew God spoke unto. Learn hence, That such as are led by Malice and
prepossest with Prejudice against Christ, will not only think basely of his
Person, but refuse to see the clearest Evidences of his Authority and
Commission. As for this Fellow, say the Malicious Pharisees, we know not whence
he is, or who gave him his Commission.

30 The man answered and said unto them, Why, herein is a mavelous thing,
that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he has opened mine eyes. 31 Now we
know that God hears not sinners: but if any man be a worshipper of God, and
does his will, him he hears. 32 Since the world began was it not heard that
any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind. 33 If this man were not of
God, he could do nothing.

In these Verses the blind Man proceeds to vindicate our blessed Savior who
had cured him of his Blindness from the Exceptions of the Pharisees, and
endeavors by solid Arguments to convince them that his Cure (being born blind)
was truly miraculous, and consequently proved Christ to be of God. 1. The Man
admires that Christ having wrought such a Miracle upon him, they should be
ignorant of his Authority. This is mavelous, that ye know not from whence he
is, and yet he has opened mine Eyes. 2. He lays down a general Proposition,
that no Deceiver or false Teacher is heard of God, or enabled by him to work
such Miracles at these, but only such faithful Servants as do his Will are thus
extraordinarily Assisted by him. We know that God hears not Sinners; that is,
such as love and delight in Sin, such as are in a State of Sin, and go on in a
Course of Sin; God will not hear such, or answer the Prayers of such. Indeed
God sometimes hears a Sinners Prayers in Wrath, and refuses to hear a Saints
Prayers in Mercy: But he never denies a Saints Prayers in wrath, or hears a
Sinners Prayers in mercy. The Proposition laid down is an eternal Truth. God
hears not Sinners; that is, so long as they purpose to continue sinners, and
go on in a Course of Sin, and remain bold and presumptuous Sinners. Learn
hence, That none that live in a Course of Sin, can reasonably expect that God
should hear them, and give in an Answer of Prayer to them. God hears not
Sinners: But if any Man be a Worshipper of God, and does his Will, him he
hears; that is, If a Man fears God and works Righteousness, him the Lord
accepts, hears and answers. Learn thence, 1. That such as would be heard
of God and accepted with him, must be devout Worshippers of him. 2. That it is
not enough to prove Men Religious and Accepted with God, that they are devout
Worshippers of him, unless they walk in Obedience to him, and do his Will. If
any Man be a Worshipper of God, and does his Will, him he hears. Observe, 3.
How the blind Man goes on to prove that Christ had a special Authority from God
and an extraordinary Presence of God with him in what he did, because he had
done such a Work, as was never done by Moses, or by any of the Prophets, or by
any Person whatsoever since the Creation of the World. From whence he wisely
and well infers, that Christ was a Person authorized by and sent of God. Learn
hence, 1. That Christ having done that which was never done before, ( namely,
to give Sight to one that was born blind) was an Evidence of his Omnipotency.
2. That this Act of Omnipotency proved him to be God. Whatever Miracles the
Prophets wrought, they wrought them by Christ's Power, but Christ wrought this
and all other Miracles by his own Power.

34 They answered and said unto him, Thou wast altogether born in sins, and
do thou teach us? And they call him out. 35 Jesus heard that they had cast
him out; and when he had found him, he said unto him, Do thou believe on the
Son of God? 36 He answered and said, Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on
him? 37 And Jesus said unto him, Thou have both seen him, and it is he that
talks with thee. 38 And he said, Lord, I believe. And he worshipped him.

Observe here, 1. A special Instance of Pharisaical Pride; they account this
poor Man a vile Person, whom Heaven had marked by his Native Blindess for some
extraordinary Wickedness. How prone are we to judge them the greatest Sinners,
whom we observe to be the greatest Sufferers. Obs. 2. From reviling they
proceed to excommunicating; They cast him out; that is, out of Communion with
the Jewish Church. Oh happy Man who having lost a Synagogue, have found Heaven.
Behold this blind Man and admire him for a resolute Confessor, stoutly
defending the Gracious Author of his Cure, against the Cavils of the Pharisees,
and maintaining the Innocence and Honor of so blessed a Benefactor. Obs. 3.
Our Savior's Regard to this blind Man, whom the Pharisees had set at naught
and excommunicated: He finds him out; reveals himself more fully to him, and
directs him to believe in him. Where observe, That the Miracle which Christ had
wrought upon the blind Man did not convert him, and work Faith in him; till
Christ revealed himself unto him, and enabled him to discern the Truth of what
he revealed. Learn thence, That Miracles confirm Faith, but Miracles alone
cannot work Faith. The blind Man had experienced a Miracle wrought upon him,
yet remains an Unbeliever, till Christ said, I am he. Obs. 4. How readily the
Man receives the Lord Jesus Christ, by Faith upon the forementioned Revelation
of himself unto him: He instantly said, Lord, I believe; and in Testimony
thereof worships him; that is, as God incarnate, as God manifested in the
Flesh. Thence learn, That true Knowledge of the Son of God, will beget Faith in
him, and true Faith in him, will be productive of Homage and Adoration, of
Obedience and Subjection to him. He that knows Christ aright, will believe, and
he that believes will worship and obey: He said, Lord, I believe, and he
worshipped him.

39 And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world: that they which see
not, might see; and that they which see, might be made blind.

In these words our Savior declares not the Intentional design, but the
Accidental event of his coming into the World. Namely, 1. That those who were
Blind might receive Sight. 2. That those who presume they see, and know more
than others, for their despising the Gospel, and shutting their Eyes against
the light of it, should be left in darkness, and by the just judgment of God be
more and more blinded. Those who shut their Eyes wilfully against the clearest
light, and say they will not see; it is just with God to close their Eyes
judicially, and say they shall not see.

40 And some of the Pharisees which were with him, heard these words, and said
unto him, Are we blind also? 41 Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye
should have no sin: but now ye say, We see; therefore your sin remains.

Observe here, 1. How the Pharisees who watched all opportunities to ensnare
our Savior, look upon these last words as reflecting upon them; as if Christ
did insinuate that they were blind. Are we blind also? They that shut their
Eyes and will not see the light which Christ offers to them, are the worst of
blind ones. Observe, 2. Our Savior's Reply to the Pharisees Question, If ye
were Blind; that is, simply ignorant of your Duty, and without the means of
Knowledge and Instruction; you should have no sin; that is, comparatively to
what you now have, you should not have had so much sin and guilt upon you as
now you have, by shutting your Eyes against the Light. But now you say we see,
that is, being puffed up, with the Knowledge which you have, as if you were the
only Men that saw; this proud conceit of yours renders your condition
incurable, and your sin remains unpardonable. Learn hence, 1. That it is a
far greater sin to contemn the known Laws of God, than to be Ignorant of them;
Pride is a greater hinderance of Knowledge than Ignorance, because the proud
Man thinks, he wants no Knowledge. 2. That the most exalted Knowledge is
insufficient to Salvation, without a suitable and correspondent practice. The
Pharisees had the Key of Knowledge at their Girdle; yet our Savior tells them
of a double Damnation: Lord! How sad is it so to know Christ in this World, as
that he will be ashamed to know us in another World.

CHAP. X.
1 VErily verily I say unto you, He that enters not by the door into the
sheepfold, but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. 2
But he that enters in by the door, is the shepherd of the sheep. 3 To him the
porter opens; and the sheep hear his voice: and he calls his own sheep by
name, and leads them out. 4 And when he puts forth his own sheep, he goes
before them, and the sheep follow him: for they know his voice. 5 And a
stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him: for they know not the
voice of strangers. 6 This parable spoke Jesus unto them: but they understood
not what things they were which he spoke unto them.

Our blessed Savior having in the end of the foregoing Chapter, upbraided the
Pharisees for their Blindness and Ignorance in the Mysteries of Religion,
notwithstanding the high conceit which they had of their own Knowledge: He
proceeds in this Chapter farther to convince them, that they were Blind,
Leaders of the Blind; though they thought and looked upon themselves, as the only
Guides and Teachers of the People. And in order hereunto, he propounds before
us a Parable of the true and false Shepherd, which represents a good and bad
Pastor and Teacher; and gives us a fourfold mark and character of a good
Shepherd. Observe, 1. The Good Shepherd enters in by the Door; that is, he has
his Vocation and Mission from Christ, he comes into the Church Regularly, in a
right and approved way and manner; not by any clandestine methods or indirect
means. To him the Porter opens; that is, the Holy Spirit who opens the
Hearts of Men to Receive Jesus Christ and the Doctrine of the Gospel, which the
Faithful Shepherds deliver in his Name, and by Authority Received from him.
Learn hence, That all Faithful Pastors have a lawful call to the work of the
Ministry: They enter by the right door, and execute their Trust in a right
manner; but such as without a Call from God, unwarrantably thrust themselves
into the Ministry; they are no better, nor no other than Thieves and Robbers in
God's Account. Observe, 2. Another property of a good Shepherd, is this, That
he calls his Sheep by their names. This imports Three things; 1. A special
Love that he bears to them. 2. A special care that he has over them. 3. A
particular Acquaintance with them, that he may know how to apply himself
suitably to them; which though it be eminently verified in Christ, yet is it the
Duty of every Faithful Pastor, and under-Shepherd in his measure to labor
after. Observe, 3. The good Shepherd leads out his Sheep into good Pastures;
that is, he feeds them with sound Doctrine; nourishes them with the word of
Life. Whereas the hireling or false Shepherd, whatever he may do for his own
sake, he has no regard to Jesus Christ; to the honor of his Person, to the
Edification of his Church, or the Salvation of Souls; but his design is to
raise and enrich himself, and so he may compass that, he cares not how many
Souls perish through his neglect. Observe, 4. The last property of the good
Shepherd here mentioned, is this, That he goes before his Sheep, as the
Shepherd does before his Flock; Namely, By a holy Life and unblameable
Conversation: He treads out those steps before the People which they are to
take in their way toward Heaven. And the Sheep follow him, and are guided by
him. He leads out his Sheep and goes before them, and the Sheep follow him,
for they know his voice.

7 Then said Jesus unto them again: Verily verily I say unto you, I am the door
of the sheep. 8 All that ever came before me, are thieves and robbers: but the
sheep did not hear them. 9 I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall
be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. 10 The thief comes not,
but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy: I am come that they might have
life, and that they might have it more abundantly.

Observe here, 1. The Character which Christ gives of himself, I am the door of
the Sheep; that is, the only way and means, by which Sinners have access to
God, and can obtain Salvation; the only door by which Sinners are entered into
the Kingdom of Grace, and admitted into the Kingdom of Glory. Learn hence, That
there is no possible way of Access to God, for fallen Man, but by Jesus Christ.
As there is no way of entering the House but by the Door, and those that so
enter are safe, in like manner, such as come unto God through Jesus Christ in the
way of Faith and Holy Obedience, shall be put into a secure Condition, and at
last obtain Eternal Salvation. Observe, 2. The end and design of Christ in
coming into the World, asserted and declared by himself; I am come that they
might have Life, and that they might have it more abundantly. But had not his
People Spiritual Life before he came into the World? Yes, he gave Life to his
People before his coming, in a measure sufficient to supply their Necessity;
but since his coming, he gives it in such a superabounding measure as may
testify his Divine Bounty; they shall not only barely Live, but Live
abundantly; that is, their Spiritual Life shall abound through the upholding,
strengthening, quickening, and comforting presence of my Holy Spirit; for having
conveyed spiritual Life unto his People, in their Regeneration and Conversion;
he will cause it to increase more and more in their Sanctification, until it
arrive at a complete perfection in their Glorification. Observe lastly, The
Character which our Savior gives of the Scribes and Pharisees in general, and
of those false Christ's and false Prophets, which went before him in particular;
he styles them Thieves and Robbers. All that ever came before me, were Thieves
and Robbers. Observe, He does not say, All that were sent before me, but all
that came before me, were Thieves and Robbers. So that Christ does not speak
this of the true Prophets, who were sent by God before him; but of the false
Christ's and false Prophets, that came of themselves without any Commission from
God. The meaning is, all persons that came before me, pretending to be what I
am, the true Messiah; as did Theudas and Judas of Galilee, etc. they were
Thieves and Robbers. That is, they only sought their own Advantage, while they
deceived and ruined you. Learn hence, That whoever took upon them the Office
and Person of the Messiah before Christ, or whosoever have since Usurped a
lawful calling in his Church without his Commission, they are in Christ's
account no better than Murderers, Thieves and Robbers; and they ought to be so
in the Peoples esteem. The Sheep did not hear them.

11 I am the good shepherd: the good shepherd gives his life for the sheep. 12
But he that is an hireling and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not,
sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep, and flees: and the wolf catches
them, and scatters the sheep. 13 The hireling flees, because he is an
hireling, and cares not for the sheep. 14 I am the good shepherd, and know my
sheep, and am known of mine. 15 As the Father knows me, even so know I the
Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep.

In these Verses our Savior Evidently proves himself to be the true Shepherd
of his Church, by the Marks and Signs, by the Properties and Characters of a
good Shepherd, which were eminently found with him. Namely, To know all his
Flock; to take care of them, and to lay down his Life for them. 1. Jesus Christ
the great Shepherd of his Church, has an exact and distinct Knowledge of all
his Flock; I know my Sheep, with a threefold Knowledge, with a Knowledge of
Intelligence and Observation; he knows them so as to observe and take notice of
them; with a Knowledge of Approbation and Acceptance; he knows them so as to
approve and own them; and with a knowledge of Care and Protection; he knows
them so as to defend and keep them. Thus Christ knows his Sheep, and is also
known of them. That is, he is believed on, beloved, and obeyed by them. 2. He
lays down his Life for his Flock: And for this, does he eminently deserve the
Title of the good Shepherd. (As for his Power he is styled the great Shepherd.)
A good Shepherd indeed, who not only gives Life to his Sheep; but gives his own
Life by way of Ransom for his Sheep. This Example of Christ, the Great and Good
Shepherd, in laying down his Life for his Sheep; teaches all Subordinate and
Inferior Shepherds to prefer the Good of their Flock, even before their own
Lives.

16 And other sheep I have, which are not of this fold: them also I must bring,
and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

Here Christ proves himself to be the True Shepherd of his Church, from another
property of a good Shepherd, which is to take care for increasing and enlarging
of his Fold, by bringing in the Gentiles to it; and by breaking down the
Partition wall, to make one Church both of Jews and Gentiles. Christ calls the
Gentiles his other Sheep, by way of Anticipation; because shortly they were to
be so, and united together with the believing Jews, into one Sheepfold; and
whereas he says, He Must bring these Sheep in, we are to understand it not of a
Necessity of Coaction, but of a Necessity of Compact: It being a federal
Agreement, betwixt the Father and himself; that both Jew and Gentile should be
one Flock, enclosed in one Fold, and presented to his Father as a Glorious
Church. Learn hence, How endearing our Obligations are to the Dearest Jesus,
that he should account us Gentiles, who were afar off, his Sheep, (we being so
in respect of his Eternal purpose) and make it his Care, and esteem it his
Charge, to call us home, and bring us in, to his Fold the Church, that we might
be saved amongst the Remnant of the True Israelites. Other Sheep I have which
are not of this Fold, them also I must bring.

17 Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might
take it again. 18 No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self: I
have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment
have I received of my Father.

Here Note, 1. That Jesus Christ certainly foreknew his own Death and
Resurrection. 2. That Christ was a Voluntier in Dying, he laid down his Life:
none could have taken it from him. It Is true, his death was a violent death,
but a voluntary Sacrifice; he died violently, but yet voluntarily: The hand of
his Enemies could never have hurt him without his own consent. 3. That as
Christ died voluntarily with respect to himself, so in a way of Subjection to
his Father's command. This Commandment have I Received from my Father. 4. That
this voluntary Submission of Christ to die for us, was the ground of the
Father's Love to him. Therefore does my Father Love me: because I lay down my
Life. Although the Father had many Reasons to love the Son, yet none was
stronger, than this Obedience of his to Death: even the cursed death of the
Cross, for the Redemption and Salvation of lost Sinners; therefore did the
Father love him with a more exceeding love, because he laid down his Life for
his Sheep.

19 There was a division therefore again among the Jews for these sayings. 20
And many of them said, He has a devil, and is mad; why hear ye him? 21 Others
said, these are not the words of him that has a devil: Can a devil open the
eyes of the blind?

Here the Evangelist shows what different effects this Sermon of our Savior
had upon the Jews, many of them do calumniate and slander him, as one possessed
and mad, and therefore not to be heard and minded: others of calmer thoughts
said, That the Doctrine he taught, and the late Miracle which he had wrought,
in curing the blind Man, were abundantly sufficient to confute such a
groundless slander. Learn hence, That the Doctrine of Christ meeting with
diversity of dispositions, it is no wonder that it occasions different effects,
to the softning of some and hardening of others; even as the same Sun that
melts the Wax hardneth the Clay; yet is not this to be imputed to the
Doctrine of our Savior, but to Men's corruptions which oppose the Truth, and
the maintainers of it. There was a Division again amongst them.

22 And it was at Jerusalem the feast of the dedication, and it was winter.

This Feast was not of Divine, but Humane Institution; it was appointed by
Judas Maccabeus, and continued Eight Days as an Anniversary Commemoration, for
the Reparing of the Temple. Now our Savior was so far from Reproving the Jews,
for observing this Feast, which is of Humane Institution, that he graced the
Solemnity with his own presence. Hence Observe, That our Savior held communion
with the Jewish Church, and did without scruple conform himself to the
observation of their Rites and Customs, although they were not orignally of
Divine Institution. Learn, 2. That such a Christian as does peaceably comply
with the practice of the Church, in whose Communion he Lives, in the
observation of those indifferent Rites and Customs, which are used by Her, acts
most agreeably to our Savior's Practice and Example. Who can with any show of
Reason censure Christians for observing the Feast of the Nativity, who see
Christ himself observing the Feast of Dedication; certainly no person of sober
Principles ever questioned, but that Ecclesiastical Rulers and Civil
Magistrates have a Power to appoint public Days of Thanksgiving Yearly, for
the Commemo^ation of Mercies, which ought never to be forgotten.

23 And Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon's porch. 24 Then came the Jews
round about him, and said unto him, How long do thou make us to doubt? If
thou be the Christ, tell us plainly. 25 Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye
believed not: the works that I do in my Fathers name, they bear witness of me.
26 But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you.

In these Verses we have Recorded a new and fresh Debate betwixt our Savior
and the Jews, and therein we have observable. 1. The time of this Debate, v^r.
22. It was at the Feast of Dedication in the Winter. Our Savior taking that
opportunity to publish his Doctrine, when a concourse of People were gathered
together at that Solemnity. Observe, 2. The place of this Debate, in
Solomon's-Porch. Although the Temple and Porch bu^h by Solomon, was destroyed by
the Babylonians; yet when the Temple was rebuilt, there was one like it which
retained the Ancient name. Observe, 3. The Debate it self. If thou be the
Christ tell us plainly. Not that they affected the Knowledge of the Truth, but
only designed to ensnare him; for if he had affirmed himself to be the Messiah,
he had brought himself in danger of the Roman Governor; because the Jews
expected the Messiah to be a Temporal Prince, that should deliver them from the
Roman Power. Now if Christ had declared himself such a Messiah as the Jews
expected, it might have cost him his Life. Therefore, his hour not being yet
come, he answers with his usual Prudence and wariness to their insnaring
question. Learn hence, That Christ's Enemies are full of subtle policies, and
can turn themselves into all shapes, that if possible they may entrap and
ensnare him; and accordingly they pretend here, great earnestness of desire to
be satisfied, whether he were indeed the true and promised Messiah; when in
truth they had another design. Observe, 4. The Wisdom and Caution of our
Savior's Answer, he refers them to his Miracles. The works that I do in my
Father's Name, they bare witness of me. Our Savior's miraculous works were
sufficient for the Jews, to have grounded and bottomed their Faith upon, and to
have confirmed them in the belief, that he was the promised and expected
Messiah; had not Prejudice, Obstinacy and Malice, blinded their Eyes, that they
could neither see, nor consider. Observe Lastly, How Christ points out to these
Jews, the true cause of their Infidelity; which was, not the obscurity of his
Doctrine, but their not being of his Sheep; that is, not as yet converted, they
not having the Properties of his Sheep, which he sets down in the following
Verses. Learn hence, That Men's final unbelief under the means of Faith, is a
clear Evidence of their being in a lost and perishing condition. Infidelity is
the Sin that does consign a Man over to Damnation; and to such as set under the
Gospel, does not only procure Damnation, but no Damnation like it.

27 My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.

Here observe, 1. That all sincere and faithful Christians are Christ's Sheep,
and he is their great and good Shepherd. This Relation implies tender
Affection, powerful Protection, plentiful Provision. The tenderness of Christ's
Affection toward his Sheep appears by pitying their Infirmities, by having a
Fellow-feeling with them in their Sufferings, by suiting their Temptations to
the Degrees of their Graces. His Care in providing for them appears, in
affording to them the Holy Scriptures, the Ministry of the Word, the
Administration of the Sacraments, and the Operation of his Holy Spirit to make
all efficacious and effectual to them. His Protection of them discovers it self
by preparing them for Trials, by supporting them under them, and by delivering
them out of them, and by sanctifying all to them, causing them to work together
in subserviency to his own Glory and his People's Good. Observe, 2. That
Christ's Sheep hear Christ's Voice and answer the Call of their great Shepherd.
They hear the Voice of Christ speaking to them in the Scriptures, in the
Ministry of the Word, in their own Consciences, in Providence, and they hear
Christ's Voice speaking to them, in and by his Holy Spirit; and as they hear
Christ's Voice, so do they answer his Call; now the right Answer to the Call of
Christ in the Gospel is a present Answer, a willing Answer, and an abiding
Answer. Obs. 3. That all Christ's Sheep do follow him their Shepherd. They
follow him, 1. In his Doctrine. And, 2. In his Example. In his Contempt of the
World, in his Freedom in reproving Sin, in the Holiness and heavenly-mindedness
of his Conversation, in his Meekness and Patience, in Charity and Universal
Goodness, and as he was a mighty Pattern of Prayer. Observe, 4. That Christ the
great and good Shepherd knows all his Sheep. My Sheep hear my Voice, and I know
them. He knows them so as to distinguish them, so as to observe and take Notice
of them, so as to own and approve them, so as to take Care of them and provide
for them. And as the Lord knows who are his, so he knows who are not his
too: As he knows his Sheep, so he knows the Goats also, and their Place will be
at his left Hand. My Sheep hear my Voice, and I know them.

28 And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of my hand. 29 My Father which gave them me, is
greater than all: and none is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand.

Observe here, 1. The Promise made by Christ unto his Sheep, namely the Promise
of Eternal Life and of Perseverance in Grace till they come to the full
Fruition of it in Glory. I give unto them eternal Life, and none shall pluck
them out of my Hand. Obs. 2. The Confirmation he gives of this from his own and
his Father's power, which is employed, engaged and concerned for them, and for
their perseverance and preservation, notwithstanding all Opposition to the
contrary. My Father which gave them me is greater than all, and no Man is able
to pluck them out of my Father's Hand. Learn, 1. That eternal Life is the
portion of Christ's Sheep. 2. That eternal Life is the Gift of Christ. 3. That
eternal Life is now given to Christ's Sheep; they have it now in the purchase,
in the promise and in the first Fruits. 4. That all Christ's Sheep are put by
God the Father into Christ's Hand for Security; My Father has given them me.
5. The Father does so entrust Christ with his Sheep, as yet to take Care of
them himself, they are in the Father's Hand, as well as in the Sons, and their
being in the Hands of both, does assure them of the certainty of their
Perseverance. None shall pluck them out of my Hand; None shall be able to pluck
them out of my Father's Hand, implying, that there are many that would pluck
them out of their Hands, Sin, Satan, the World, etc. but They shall be kept by
the Almighty Power of God, through Faith unto Salvation; for who can be too
strong for omnipotent Power?

30 I and my Father are one.

That is, one in Essence and Nature, one in Authority and Power, and not barely
one in Will and Affection, or one in Concord and Consent. That this is the
Genuine Signification of the Words appears by a threefold Argument, 1. From the
Original Words; it is not said, I and my Father are ((...)) one Person, in the
Masculine Gender, but in the Neuter ((...)) I, and my Father are one thing: Now
if that Thing be not the Divine Being, they cannot be one, for since the Father
is confessed to be God, the Son cannot be one thing with the Father, if he be
not God too. 2. It appears from the Context our Savior in the preceding Verses
ascribed the Preservation of his Sheep to the Power of his Father; None can
pluck them out of my Father's Hand; and he ascribes it also to his own Power,
None shall pluck them out of my Hand; plainly intimating, that his Sheep were
equally safe in his own Hand, as well as in his Father's, for, says he, I and
my Father are one, that is, one in Power; and if they be one in Power, they
must be one in Nature, unless we make an Almighty Creature, which is a
Contradiction. 3. It appears evidently by what Follows in the next Verse that
the Jews understood our Savior in this Sense, why else did they take up Stones
to stone him? We stone thee, say they, for Blasphemy, because thou being a Man,
make thy self God. The Jews took up our Savior's meaning aright, and were
satisfied, that when he said, I and my Father are one, he asserted himself to
be God, and deserved to dye, and well he had deserved it, if he had not been
God. The Adversaries of our Savior's Divinity to elude the Force of these
Words which make so much against them, interpret the Words thus, I and my
Father are one; that is, say they, we are ((...)) one in Will and Affection,
one in Concord and Consent: This is a Truth, but not the great Truth contained
in these Words, for thus Believers are one with God and one with another,
Namely, by an Harmony of Wills and Desires; so far as they are regenerated,
God's Will and theirs are Unisons, they will and desire the same thing, and are
of one Heart and of one Mind. But God and Christ are one in a much higher Sense
than Christ and Believers are one, namely, one in Essence and Nature, one in
Authority and Power, being Consubstantial with God. Learn hence, That the Lord
Jesus Christ is for Nature, Coessential; for Dignity, Coequal; and for
Duration, Coeternal with the Father. 2. That although Christ be one in Essence
with the Father, yet are they distinct Persons one from Another, I and my
Father, we are one. 3. Learn hence, That the Son being one in Essence, one in
Power, one in Consent and Will with the Father, they are both equally concerned
for the Perseverance of the Saints, for preserving them in Grace and for
bringing them to Glory. None shall pluck them out of mine or my Father's Hand;
for I and my Father are One.

31 Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him. 32 Jesus answered them,
Many good works have I showed you from my Father; for which of those works do
ye stone me? 33 The Jews answered him, saying, For a good Work we stone thee
not; but for blasphemy, and because that thou being a man, make thy self God.

Observe here, 1. How the Jews understood our Savior affirming, that he and
his Father were one; that is, one in Essence and Nature, and himself a Person
equal with God. This they looked upon as Blasphemy in him to arrogate to himself
what is proper to God only. Observe, 2. That the Jews looked upon it as a Piece
of Justice in them to stone Christ for this apprehended Blasphemy. Then the
Jews took up Stones to stone him. According to the Law of God, the Blasphemer
was to be stoned to death, but then he was first to be judicially tried and
judged: But such was the furious and fiery Zeal of these Jews that in a
tumultuous Manner they attempt to stone him to death. Lord! how far does the
fury of Men in opposing Truth, outstrip the True Zeal of thy faithful Servants
in defending Truth. Obs. 3. With what Meekness our Lord receives this horrid
Indignity of stoning (for it is probable, that some Stones were cast at him, he
saying, For which of these Works do you stone me) He clears his own Innocence
and expostulates with them for rewarding him Evil for Good. Many good Works
have I showed you from my Father; that is, by my Father's Authority and
Commission, I have been sight to the Blind, Feet to the Lame, a Tongue to the
Dumb, and Hearing to the Deaf. Do any of these Works deserve such Usage as
stoning at your Hands? Learn hence, That such was the perfect and spotless
Innocence of Christ in all his Actions, that he durst and did appeal to the
Consciences of his most inveterate Adversaries; For which of these Works do you
stone me?

34 Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, Ye are gods? 35
If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came, and the scripture
cannot be broken: 36 Say ye of him, whom the Father has sanctified, and sent
into the world, Thou blasphemest; because I said, I am the Son of God?

Here our Savior, by a twofold Argument, vindicates himself from the
Imputation of Blasphemy, in asserting himself to be God. 1. Because the Old
Testament gave to Magistrates and Judges the Title of Gods, as Psa. 82.6. I
have said, Ye are Gods. Now Christ argues strongly from the less to the
greater, thus, If Judges and Magistrates may be called Gods, because they are
commissioned by him and derive their Authority from him; how much more is that
Title due to me, who was sanctified, separated and ordained for a Mediator,
and appointed to the Work of Redemption, before I came into the World, and
consequently was God from all Eternity. This Place the Socinians (those
professed Adversaries of our Savior's Godhead) produce, to prove, That Christ
was not God by Nature, but only in respect of his Sanctification and Mission.
It is a certain Truth, That he that was sanctified and sent was the Son of God;
but he was not therefore the Son of God, because sanctified and sent. His
Sanctification was not the Ground of his Sonship; but his Sonship was the Cause
of his Sanctification. Christ was not therefore God's Son, because he was
sanctified and sent, but he was therefore sanctified and sent, because he was
his Son. He was a Son before he was sent, even from Eternity; otherwise it must
have been said, That God sent him to be his Son, and not that God sent his Son.
This supposes him before he was sent to have been actually his Son, as
certainly he was from before the Foundations of the World, Prove. 8.23. I was
set up from everlasting, from the Beginning or ever the Earth was.

37 If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not. 38 But if I do, though
ye believe not me, believe the works: that ye may know and believe that the
Father is in me, and I in him.

Here we have a second Argument, by which our Savior proves, That it was no
Blasphemy to call himself God. But that he was God in very deed, Namely, an
Argument taken from his Works. If I do not the Works of my Father, believe me
not: And the Argument runs thus, If (says Christ) I do those miraculous Works
which no Power less than a Divine Power can effect, then you ought by these
Works to be led to believe and acknowledge, that I am truly and really God: But
the Works which I do are the Effect and Product of an omnipotent Power,
therefore ye ought to believe, That I am one in Essence with the Father, there
being a mutual Inexistence of one Person in the other, so that the Father is in
me, and I in him; and thus I and the Father are one. Learn hence, That Christ
never required of his Disciples and Followers an Implicit Faith, or a blind
Obedience, but as he submitted his Doctrine to the Trial of Reason, so he
submitted his Miracles to the Examination and Judgment of Sense; therefore he
says, If I do not the Works of my Father, that is, Divine Works, believe me not
to be a Divine Person.

39 Therefore they sought again to take him: but he escaped out of their hand,
40 And went away again beyond Jordan, into the place where John at first
baptized; and there he abode. 41 And many resorted unto him, and said, John did
no miracle: but all things that John spoke of this man, were true. 42 And many
believed on him there.

Observe here, 1. The Violence and Fury of these unbelieving Jews against the
Holy and Innocent Jesus: They sought again to take him. Observe, 2. The
prudential Care of Christ for his own Preservation; his time being not yet
come, he withdraws from Jerusalem, the Nest of his Enemies; and goes beyond
Jordan, when Christ was persecuted in one City, he fled to another; he has
sanctified a State of Persecution to his Ministers and Members, by his own
being in it. It Is no Disgrace for any of them to fly, when their Captain did
it, and bids them do it, saying, When they persecute you in one City, flee unto
another. Obs. 3. The Success of Christ's Ministry beyond Jordan; Many resorted
to him, and believed on him. This Place about Jordan, was the Place where John
had exercised a great Part of his Ministry, and now many Years after John's
Death, the Fruit of his Ministry appears, for many believed on him there; that
is, about Jordan where John had preached and baptized. Learn thence, That the
Labors of faithful Ministers may seem to be lost, and lie long like Seed under
the Ground, and yet at last by some new Watering, may spring up, and the Fruit
appear in abundance. Here John's Ministry about Jordan has fresh Fruit upon
Christ's coming, long after John was dead. Observe, 4. The Dignity of Christ
above John; John did no Miracle; but Christ did all. The Wisdom of God so
ordered it, that though the Old Testament Prophets Elijah and Elisha, wrought
many Miracles for the Confirmation of their Divine Mission, yet John the
Baptist coming immediately before Christ as his Messenger and Forerunner,
wrought none, for these three Reasons probably. 1. That so the Glory of Christ
in working Miracles, when he came upon the Stage of his Ministry, might be the
more clear and evident. 2. That the Evidence of Christ's being the Messiah,
might be made the more clear by the Miracles which he wrought. 3. That the
Minds of the People might not be divided and distracted between John and
Christ, and that there might be no Pretense of Competition between them:
Therefore John did no Miracle; but all things that John spoke of Christ were
true.

CHAP. XI.
1 NOw a certain man was sick, named Lazarus of Bethany, the town of Mary and
her sister Martha. 2 (It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment,
and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick) 3 Therefore
his sisters sent unto him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou love is sick. 4
When Jesus heard that, he said, This sickness is not unto death, but for the
glory of God, that the Son of God might be glorified thereby.

This Chapter relates unto us, the Miraculous Power of Christ in raising of
dead Lazarus, which as it was one of his last, so was it one of the greatest
Miracles which he wrought; and yet we find none of the Evangelists making
mention of it, but only St. John; the Reason supposed to be this, because when
the other Evangelists wrote their History, Lazarus was then alive, (for
Epiphanius says, he lived thirty Years after he was raised by Christ) and
probably the mention of this Relation might have brought Lazarus into Danger
and Trouble; but St. John wrote his Gospel after Lazarus his Death. This
Miracle was a sufficient Demonstration of Christ's Godhead; None but an
Almighty Power, could recall a Man four Days dead, from a settled Corruption to
a State of Life. None but he that created Lazarus could thus make him new. Here
Observe, 1. The Tender Sympathy of these Two endeared Sisters with their
afflicted Brother, they feel his Sorrows and Acquaint their Savior with his
Sufferings. Lord! Behold he whom thou love is sick. They do not say, our
Brother that Loves thee is sick, but he whom thou love is sick. Thereby
pleading not the Merit of Lazarus, but the Mercy of Christ. For how can the
Love of Christ which is infinite and eternal, have any Cause but it self. Note,
the Person whom Christ loved is sick and dies. Learn thence, That Strength of
Grace and Dearness of Respect even from Christ himself cannot prevail either
against Death or against Diseases. Lazarus whom Christ loved is sick. Obs. 2.
The gracious Answer which Christ sent to the Sisters Message, This Sickness is
not unto Death, but for the Glory of God; that is, this Sickness shall not
bring upon him such a Death, as he shall remain under the Power of, to the
General Resurrection, but is only designed to give me an Opportunity of
glorifying God, by exerting my miraculous Power in restoring him to Life. Learn
hence, 1. That as God's own Glory is his supreme Aim and End in all his
Actions, so in particular it is designed by him in sending Afflictions upon his
People to glorify his Power and Wisdom, Mercy and Love, in and upon them. The
Saints Sicknesses are all for the Glory of God. 2. That God is glorified when
his Son is glorified, as none do honor the Father, who do not honor the Son;
so the Father accounts himself glorified when the Glory of his Son is advanced.
This Sickness is for the Glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified
thereby.

5 Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus. 6 When he had heard
therefore that he was sick, he abode two days still in the same place where he
was. 7. Then after that, says he to his disciples, Let us go into Judea again.
8 His disciples say unto him, Master, the Jews of late sought to stone thee;
and go thou thither again? 9 Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours in
the day? If any Man walk in the day, he stumbleth not, because he sees the
light of this world. 10 But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleth, because
there is no light in him.

Observe, 1. What an happy, because an holy and religious Family was here, and
much honored by Christ: Jesus loved Martha, Mary and Lazarus; wherever true
Piety dwells, it draws the Eye and Heart of Christ toward it. Christ had
frequently and familiarly lodged under their Roof, and he rewards them for
their Entertainment, with his Love; Jesus loved Martha and her Sister: Where
Note, That Martha is here named first though elsewhere Mary had the Precedence,
to show no doubt, that they were both equally dear to Christ. Obs. 2. That
although Christ loved Lazarus, yet he seems to neglect him, he delays going to
him for some days: But could Christ absent himself from one so long, whom he
loved so well? we find he did: Let us take heed then that we do not
mis-interpret Christ's Delays. He seldom comes at our time, but never stays
beyond his own. Our Savior had a double End in staying thus long, Namely, for
greatning of the Miracle, and confirming of their Faith. Had Christ gone before
Lazarus was dead, they might have attributed his Recovery rather to the
strength of Nature, than to Christ's miraculous Power; or had Christ raised
Lazarus as soon as he was Dead, they might peradventure have thought it rather
some Trance or Ecstasy, than a Death and Dissolution; therefore Christ stays so
many days, that God might be the more glorified, and his own omnipotent Power
the more magnified. We Learn then, That when Christ delays to help them whom he
dearly loves, it is always for wise ends and holy purposes. Observe, 3. How the
Disciples, though they were dearly affected to Lazarus, (for they had Learned to
love where their Master loved;) yet they discourage Christ from going to him
into Judea, for fear of violence offered to him. Master the Jews of late sought
to stone Thee, and go thou thither again? Here the Disciples pleaded for
their Master's safety, at the same time aiming at their own; they were to go
with him into Judea, and they well knew that their danger was inwrapped in his.
Therefore they seek to divert him from his intention. Oh how has the fear of
Suffering made many of the Friends of Christ decline an opportunity of
glorifying God, and doing good to others. But cannot God give safety in the
midst of danger, if he pleases? let us not then choose our way according to our
own Apprehensions, either of danger or safety; but as we see God going before
us, if our call be clear, let us go on with Courage, whatever difficulties lie
in our way. Observe, 4. How our Savior corrects these fears of his Disciples,
by acquainting them with his call from God, to undertake this Journey into
Judea. Are there not Twelve hours in the day? if a Man walk therein he
stumbleth not; but in the night he stumbleth. As if Christ had said, As he that
walks in the Day is in no danger of stumbling, but in the Night he is in
danger. So as long as I have a call from God, and my working time lasts, there
is a Divine Providence, that will watch over me and secure me from all danger;
now my day is not fully spent, and therefore it is not in the Power of my
Enemies to precipitate my Passion, or to bring the Night of Sufferings upon me
before the appointed time; but ere long the Night will come on, the working
time will be over, and then shall both I and you stumble upon Death; but while
the day lasts we are safe. Learn hence, 1. Every Man has his Twelve hours;
that is, his working time assigned him by God in this World. 2. While these
hours are spent, and whilst his working time is unexpired; he shall not
stumble, he shall not die, he shall not be disabled for working, while God has
any work for him to do; neither the Malice of Men, nor the rage of Devils shall
take them off till their work be finished. 3. Every Man has his Night as well
as his Day, in which he must expect and prepare to stumble; that is, to fall by
Death, for when God has done his work by us and with us, he will withdraw his
protection from us, but not his care over us, we stumble upon Death, and fall
into the Grave, but God receives us to himself, and at the end of our working
Season rewards us for our work.

11 These things said he: and after that, he says unto them, Our friend
Lazarus sleeps; but I go that I may awake him out of sleep.

Observe here, 1. Our Savior coming near to Bethany, Tells his Disciples that
Lazarus sleeps; that is, plainly he was Dead. This showed his omnisciency,
and that he was truly God; for he had received no Advice of his Death from any
person, but as God he knew that he was deceased. Observe, 2. The sweet Title
given both to Death and Lazarus. Death is called a sleep, Lazarus is styled a
friend; yet Christ says not my friend, but our friend Lazarus sleeps;
intimating that gracious Familiarity and Mutual Friendship which was betwixt
himself and all his Members. Learn hence, 1. That all True Believers are
Christ's Friends. 2. That the Friends of Christ must die as well as others. 3.
That their Death is but a Sleep. Our friend Lazarus Sleeps. It follows, But
I go, that I may awake him out of sleep. Observe, Christ says not, we will go
and awake him, but I will go and I will awake him. The Disciples who were
Companions in the way, must not be Partners in the work; Witnesses they may be,
Actors they cannot be; none can awake Lazarus but the maker of Lazarus. Who can
command the Soul to come down, and meet the Body, and who can command the Body
to Rise up and meet the Soul, but that God that created both Soul and Body?
Lord! It is our Comfort against the Dread and Terror of Death, that our
Resurrection depends upon thy Almighty Power. I will go, that I may awake him
out of sleep.

12 Then said his disciples, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well. 13 Howbeit
Jesus spoke of his death: but they thought that he had spoken of taking of rest
in sleep. 14 Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead. 15 And I am
glad for your sakes, that I was not there (to the intent ye may believe)
nevertheless, let us go unto him. 16 Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus,
unto his fellow-disciples, Let us also go, that we may die with him.

Observe here, 1. How desirous the Disciples were that Christ should not go to
Bethany where Lazarus was, Bethany being within two Miles of Jerusalem, where
the seat of our Savior's Enemies was. But our Lord knowing his Call to be
clear, Resolves to go, Nevertheless (says Christ) let us go unto him. Oh Love
stronger than Death! the Grave cannot separate betwixt Christ and his Friends,
other Friends accompany us to the brink of the Grave, and there they leave us
to Worms and Dust, for Death has both horror and noysomness to attend it. But
for thee, O Savior, the Gravestone, the Earth, the Coffin, are no Bounders of
thy Dear Respects. Blessed be God, that neither Life nor Death can separate
from the Love of Christ; but even after Death and Burial he is graciously
affected to those he loves. Christ has a Gracious Regard to the Dust of his
Saints; though his holy ones see Corruption, they shall not always lie under the
power of Corruption; their dead Bodies are a part of the undoubted Members of
Christ's Mystical Body. Blessed be God, the time is coming when Christ will
knock at the door of his Childrens Graves, and call them up out of their Bed of
Dust, and they shall hear the Voice of the Son of God and Live. Observe, 2. The
Wise and Holy design of Christ in delaying to go to Bethany, till Lazarus was
Dead; Namely, That he might at once Raise Lazarus his Dead Body, and his
Disciples Faith, confirming them in the Belief, that he was the Son of God, and
the true Messiah. But could the Faith of the Apostles want confirmation, who
had seen so many Miracles wrought by our Savior, and had lived under his
Ministry all the time of it? Yes, the Faith of the most Eminent Saints, even of
Apostles themselves, wants Confirmation in this state of Weakness and
Imperfection, and is capable of Growth. I am glad for your sakes that I was not
there, to the intent ye may Believe. Observe, 3. The great Passion which Thomas
expresses upon the notice given by Christ of Lazarus his Death: Plainly Lazarus
is Dead, says Christ; Let us go and die with him, says Thomas. Oh what
passionate and impatient Expressions do sometimes drop from our Mouths, on the
occasion of the Death of our dear Relations. We are ready to be so affected
with the Death of our Friends, as to wish our selves out of the World, that we
might be with them. But we must remember that it is God that appoints us our
several Posts, and particular Stations, which we must keep, till the Wisdom of
God sees fit to remove us.

17 Then when Jesus came, he found that he had lien in the grave four days
already. 18 (Now Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs off)
19 And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary, to comfort them concerning
their brother. 20 Then Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went
and met him: but Mary sat still in the house. 21 Then said Martha unto Jesus,
Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not died. 22 But I know, that
even now whatsoever thou will ask of God, God will give it thee.

Observe here, 1. The length of time which Christ designedly delayed before he
would come to Lazarus his Grave, he was not above six Miles off, Bethany being
within two Miles of Jerusalem, and Jerusalem within four Miles of Bethabara
where Christ now was, and yet our Savior comes not of four Days; doubtless,
that the Miracle of Lazarus's Resurrection might be the more Conspicuous and
remarkable. Christ could as easily have cured Lazarus's being sick, as have
raised him being dead; and as easily have raised him the first day as the
fourth day; but that had not carried along with it such a full conviction of
Christ's Almighty Power. Therefore that he might draw the eyes of their Faith
more steadfastly to behold and admire his Almighty Power; our Savior defers
his coming till Lazarus had been dead four Days. Observe, 2. The civil usage of
mourning with those that mourn for the Dead: Anciently they mourned Thirty
Days, and sometimes forty for a dear Relation. Numb. 20, 29. During which time,
Neighbors and Friends came to visit and Relieve them in their sadness with
such consolatory Arguments as they had. Christian Religion does not condemn
natural Affection; humane passions are not sinful, if not excessive; to be
above the stroke of passions, is a condition equal to Angels; to be in a state
of sorrow without the Sense of sorrow is a disposition beneath the Beasts; but
duly to regulate our sorrows, and set Boundaries to our grief, is the Wisdom,
the Duty, the Interest and the Excellency of a Christian. As to be above all
passions, will be our happiness in Heaven, so to regulate and rectify our
passions, is a great part of our holiness on Earth. Observe, 3. Although Martha
was a ^rue mourner for the Death of her Brother; yet she does not so far
indulge to grief, but upon the first notice of Christ's approach, she arises
and goes forth to meet him; with a mournful moan in her mouth, Lord, if thou
had been here my Brother had not died. Where Observe, How Faith and Infirmity
were mixed together, Faith appeared in that him persuasion, which she had of
Christ's Power, as if Death durst not show its face in Christ's presence, had
thou been here my Brother had not died. But then her Infirmity appeared in
limiting Christ both to Time and Place; to Place, if thou had been here: As
if Christ could not, (if it had pleased him) save his Life absent as well as
present; then to time. Now he stinketh; as if she had said, you are come, but
alas! too late; you have stayed too long, he is past Recovery, the Grave has
swallowed him up; as if Death would not deliver up its Prisoner at the command
of Christ; Oh the Imperfect Composition of the Best of Saints, what a mixture
of Faith and Infirmity is found in the Holiest and Best of Christians! This
also farther appears in her next words, ver. 22. I know that whatsoever thou
shall ask of God he will give it thee: She seems not to Believe that Christ was
able to raise him by his own immediate Power, but must obtain Power of God to
do it, as the Prophets were wont to do, that raised the Dead. She thought
Christ a person highly in God's favor, but scarce believed him able to raise
Lazarus by his own Power; had her Faith extended to a Belief that Christ was
equal with the Father, and that the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him, she
would not have questioned his Power to raise him from the Grave; for though
Christ as Mediator did apply himself by Prayer to God at the raising of Dead
Lazarus; ver. 41, 42. Yet as God, he had a Power of himself to raise Lazarus,
an Almighty Power communicated with his Essence from the Father, by an Eternal
and ineffable Generation.

23 Jesus says unto her, Thy brother shall rise again. 24 Martha says unto
him, I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day. 25
Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believes in
me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; 26 And whosoever lives, and
believes in me, shall never die. Believe thou this?

Here Observe, 1. Christ's meek Answer to Martha's passionate Discourse, he
takes no notice of the forementioned failings, but comforts her with a promise
of her Brother's Resurrection, Thy Brother shall rise again. Thence learn, That
the Knowledge and Belief of the General Resurrection, is, and ought to be a
sufficient support under the Loss of our endeared Friends', who die in the
Lord. Observe, 2. That the Doctrine of the General Resurrection was no new
Doctrine. Job believed it, chapter 19.26. Daniel published it, chapter 12.1. The
Pharisees had a Notion of it; but Martha here makes it an Article of her Faith.
I know he shall rise again in the Resurrection at the last Day. Observe. 3. How
Christ particularly Instructs Martha in the cause of the Resurrection,
acquainting her that he himself is the Author and efficient cause of it. I am
the Resurrection and the Life. That is, I am the Author and principal efficient
cause of the Resurrection. And this with respect to both Natures. 1. His Divine
Nature is the efficient cause of the Resurrection, he shall Raise our Bodies
out of the Dust, by the Power of his Godhead. 2. His Humane Nature is the
exemplary cause or pattern of the Resurrection: For which Reason Christ is
called the first Born from the Dead. For though some were raised before him: Yet
was his Resurrection the cause of their Resurrection. Hence St. Paul argues
from Christ's Resurrection, the certainty of the Resurrection of his Members;
Christ and Believers are one Mystical Body, therefore is not Christ perfectly
Risen, till all his Members are Risen with him. Indeed Christ's personal
Resurrection was perfect when he arose, and all Believers arose
Representatively in him. Yet till all Believers arise personally, the
Resurrection of Christ has not received its utmost perfection; but there is
somewhat behind of the Resurrection of Christ. Most fitly then might our
Savior assert, I am the Resurrection and the Life. Observe, 4. That Christ not
only asserts himself to be the Resurrection, but also the Life. I am the
Resurrection and the Life; that is, I am the cause of Life Natural, Spiritual,
and Eternal, and Whosoever Lives and Believes in Me shall never Die. That is,
eternally; though his Body shall die because of Sin, yet his Spirit shall live
because of Righteousness.

27 She says unto him, Yea, Lord: I believe that thou art the Christ the Son
of God: which should come into the world. 28 And when she had so said, she went
her way, and called Mary her sister secretly, saying, The Master is come, and
calls for thee. 29 As Soon as she heard that, she arose quickly, and came unto
him. 30 Now Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in that place where
Martha met him. 31 The Jews then which were with her in the house, and
comforted her, when they saw Mary that she rose up hastily, and went out,
followed her, saying, She goes unto the grave, to weep there. 32 Then when
Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down at his feet, saying
unto him, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not died.

Observe here, 1. The full confession which Martha makes of her Faith in Christ
as God; Thou art the Christ the Son of God which should come into the World. A
confession which comes nearest to that of St. Peter, (Math. 16.16.) of any that
we meet with in Scripture. Nay it seems more full than Peter's Confession; for
those additional words, which should come into the World, are not in his
Confession; the Sum is, She believed Christ to be the very Messiah, who was
Typified and prefigured, Prophesied of, and promised to the Old Testament
Saints, as the person that in the fullness of time should come into the World
for the Redemption and Salvation of it. Thou art the Christ, the Son of God
which should come into the World. Thence Learn, That Christ is never rightly
believed in, nor regularly depended upon for Salvation, except he be owned, and
acknowledged to be the Eternal Son of God. Martha was now fully persuaded of
Christ's Divine Nature, of which the best of the Disciples till after our
Savior's Resurrection, had but a faint and uncertain persuasion. Observe, 2.
How earnest and intent our Savior was to dispatch the errand he came upon,
Namely, to raise Lazarus from the Grave, and to comfort the Two mournful
Sisters, he would not so much as enter the House till he had effected his work;
and therefore he goes strait to the Grave, which probably was the place where
Mary met him: Lord! it was thy Meat and Drink, to do the Will of thy Father; it
was thy Meat and Drink by Day, thy Rest and Repose by Night: How unlike are we
to thy self, if we suffer either our Pleasures or our Profits to divert us from
our Duty. Observe, 3. What haste and speed Mary makes to attend upon her
Savior; she arose quickly and came unto him. Mary's Love added Wings to her
motion. The Jews observing her hasty motion, have a loving suspicion that she
is gone to the Grave to weep there; but their Thoughts were too low, for whilst
they supposed that she went to a dead Brother, she was waiting upon a living
Savior. And she that used to sit at Jesus feet, now falls at his feet, in an
awful veneration; the very gesture was supplicatory. And her humble prostration
was seconded with a doleful Lamentation; Lord! If thou had been here my
Brother had not died. Where Observe, A mixture of Faith with humane infirmity.
Here was strength of Faith in ascribing so much Power to Christ, that his
presence could preserve from Death; but here was Infirmity in supposing the
necessity of Christ's presence for this purpose. Certainly he that did raise
him from Death, being present, could have preserved him from dying, being
absent, had he pleased. This was Mary's moan, Lord! had thou been here, our
Brother had not died; full of Affection, but not from frailty and infirmity.
However Christ takes no notice of her errors and infirmity; but all the reply
we hear of, is a Compassionate Groan: which the following Verses acquaint us
with.

33 When Jesus therefore saw her weeping and the Jews also weeping which came
with her, he groned in the spirit, and was troubled, 34 And said, Where have ye
laid him? They say unto him, Lord, come and see. 35 Jesus wept. 36 Then said
the Jews, Behold how he loved him. 37 And some of them said, Could not this
man, which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man should
not have died?

Observe here, 1. The Condolency and tender Sympathy expressed by our Savior,
upon this occasion. He groaned in his Spirit, and was troubled. Or as the
Original has it, he troubled himself, intimating that our Savior's Passions
were pure and holy, not like ours, muddy and mixed with sinful imperfection. The
Commotions of his Affections were like the shaking of pure Water in a
Chrystal-glass which still remain clear; and they arose and were calmed at his
pleasure; he was not overpowered by them, but had them at his Command. Learn
hence, That as Christ took upon him the Humane Nature, so he did assume also
Humane Affections; thereby evidencing himself to be our Brother and near
Kinsman, according to the Flesh. Learn, 2. That the Passions and Affections
which our Savior had and expressed, were always Holy and Innocent; he was not
without them, but he was above them: they did never violently and immoderately
trouble him, but when he pleased he troubled himself. Jesus groaned in Spirit,
and Troubled himself. Observe, 2. How our Savior manifests this Condolency and
tender Sympathy with Martha and Mary, by his weeping. Jesus wept. Partly from
Compassion, and partly for Example; in Compassion, first to humanity, to see
how miserably Sin had debased the Humane Nature, and rendered Man like unto the
Bruit Beasts that perish. 2dly, In Compassion to Lazarus, whom he was now about
to bring back into a sinful and troublesome World. Thus St. Jerome, Non flevit
Christus Lachrymas nostras, etc. Christ (says he) did not weep our Tears, he
mourned over Lazarus not because dead, but because now to be brought again to
Life. Again, Christ wept for our Example, to fetch Sighs and Tears from us, at
the sight of others miseries, and especially at the Funerals of our godly
Friends. Learn hence, That mourning and sorrow, and this expressed by Tears and
weeping, is an Affection proper for those that go to Funerals; provided it be
decently kept within due bounds, and is not excessive. For immoderate sorrow is
hurtful to the living, and dishonorable to the dead, neither is it an Argument
of more Love, but an Evidence of less Grace. Note, 3. How the Jews observing
Christ's sorrow for, admire his Love to, Dead Lazarus. Behold! how he loved
him. Christ's Love to his People is admirable and Soul amazing, such as see it,
may admire it, but can never fully comprehend it. Note, 4. How some of the
malicious Jews attempt to lessen the Reputation of our Savior, not willing to
own him to be God, because he did not keep Lazarus from dying; as if Christ
could not be the Son of God, because he did not at all times, and in all cases
exert and put forth his Divine Power. Whereas Christ acted freely and not
necessarily, governing his Actions by his own Wisdom, as he saw most conducing
to the ends and purposes of his own Glory.

38 Jesus therefore again groaning in himself, comes to the grave. It was a
cave, and a stone lay upon it. 39 Jesus said, Take ye away the stone. Martha,
the sister of him that was dead, says unto him, Lord, by this time he
stinketh: for he has been dead four days. 40 Jesus says unto her, Said I not
unto thee, that if thou would believe, thou should see the glory of God?
41 Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid. And
Jesus lift up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee that thou have heard me.
42 And I knew that thou hear me always: but because of the people which
stand by, I said it, that they may believe that thou have sent me. 43 And when
he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth. 44 And he
that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with grave-clothes: and his face
was bound about with a napkin. Jesus says unto them, Loose him, and let him go.

In these Verses we find our Lord addressing himself to the Miracle of raising
Lazarus from the Grave. First he commands them to take away the Stone. But
could not that Voice which raised the Dead, remove the Stone? Yes, no doubt;
but it is always the Will of Christ that we put forth our utmost Endeavors and
do what we can, in order to our own Deliverance. To remove the Stone and unty
the Napkins was in their Power; This therefore they must do, but to raise the
Dead was out of their Power; this therefore Christ will do alone. Our Hands
must do their utmost, before Christ will put forth his Help. The Stone being
thus removed, his Eyes begin; they are lift up to Heaven, His Father's Throne,
from whence he expects to derive his Power. His Tongue Seconds his Eye, and he
prays unto his Father. Christ as God wrought this Miracle by his own Power.
Consider him as Mediator, and so he looks up to his Father by Prayer, yet we
hear of no Prayer, but a Thanksgiving only. Christ's Will was his Prayer;
whatever Christ willed, God granted. Christ and his Father having one Essence,
one Nature, and one Will. Neither was it fit for Christ to pray vocally and
audibly, lest the unbelieving Jews should say, he did all by entreaty, nothing
by Power. Observe farther, That as Christ when he spoke to his Father, lifted
up his Eyes, so when he spoke to dead Lazarus he lifted up his Voice, and cried
aloud. This Christ did, that the Strength of the Voice might answer the
Strength of the Affection: Since we vehemently utter what we earnestly desire;
also that the greatness of the Voice might answer to the greatness of the Work,
but especially that the Hearers might be Witnesses that this mighty Work was
performed, not by any magical Enchantments, which are commonly mumbled forth
with a low Voice, but by an authoritative and divine Command. In a word, might
not Christ utter a loud Voice at the raising of Lazarus, that it might be a
Representation of the shrill and loud Voice of the last Trumpet at the General
Resurrection, which shall sound into all Graves, and raise all Flesh from their
Bed of Dust? Obs. next, As the manner of our Lord's speaking with a loud Voice,
so the Words spoken by him: Lazarus, Come forth. Mark, Christ says not, Lazarus
revive, but as if he suppoposed him already alive, he says, Lazarus, Come
forth; to let us know that they are alive to him, who are dead to us. Mark
also, what a commanding Word this was, Come forth: not that it was in the power
of these loud commanding Words to raise Lazarus, but in the quickening power of
Christ which attended these words. Oh Blessed Savior! It is thy Voice which we
shall ere long hear sounding into the Bottom of the Grave and raising us up
from our Bed of Dust. It is thy Voice that shall pierce the Rocks, divide the
Mountains, and echo forth throughout the Universe, saying, Arise ye dead, and
come to Judgment. Observe lastly, How readily obedient Lazarus was to the Call
and Command of Christ; He that was dead came forth; and if Lazarus did thus
instantly start up at the Voice of Christ in the Day of his Humiliation, how
shall the dead be rouzed up out of their Graves by that Voice which will shake
the powers of Heaven and move the Foundations of the Earth, in the Day of his
Glorification! Question, But where was Lazarus his Soul all this while, that he
was dead? if in Heaven, was it not a wrong to him to come from thence? If not,
does it not prove that the Soul sleeps as well as the Body? Ans. Souls go not
to Heaven by Necessitation, as the Fire naturally and necessarily ascends
upward. But are disposed of by God as the supreme Governor, those that have
served him, go to Heaven, and those that have served the Devil, to Hell, and
those that are not yet judged to either place, but are to live presently again
upon Earth, as Lazarus was, are reserved by God accordingly: whether shut up in
the Body as in a Swound, or whether kept in the Custody and Hands of an Angel
not far from the Body, waiting his pleasure, either to restore it to the Body,
or to return it to its proper place of Bliss or Misery. The Scripture has not
told us whether, and it would be too great Curiosity to inquire, and greater
presumption to determine.

45 Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things which
Jesus did, believed on him. 46 But some of them went their ways to the
Pharisees, and told them what things Jesus had done. 47 Then gathered the chief
priests and the Pharisees a council, and said, What do we? for this man does
many miracles. 48 If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him; and
the Romans shall come and take away both our place and nation.

Observe here, 1. The different Effects which this Miracle had upon those Jews
who were present at the raising of Lazarus. Some of them believed on Christ,
but others persisting in their Unbelief, went to the Pharisees and informed
against him. Notwithstanding all the Evidence which our Savior gave of his
being the Messiah by the Miracles which he wrought; yet many rejected him and
refused to believe in him, to their unutterable and inevitable Condemnation.
Obs. 2. How greatly disturbed the Pharisees were upon the Account of our
Savior's Miracles. Knowing how proper an Argument they were to convince Men,
they concluded that if Christ were suffered to go on and work Miracles, he
would draw all Men after him. Learn thence, That Jesus proved himself to be the
true Messiah by the Miracles which he wrought, his Enemies themselves being
Judges. For we find here, the worst of our Savior's Enemies were afraid of his
Miracles, that by them he would draw all Men after him. If we let him alone all
Men will believe on him. Obs. 3. What was the Ground of the Pharisees fear, if
they let Christ go on to work Miracles, that he would have so many Followers as
would Alarm the Romans and awaken their Jealousy and cause them to come upon
them with an Army to deprive them of the little Liberty they indulged them, and
take away their Place and Nation: Their Place; that is, their Place of Worship,
the Temple: And their Nation; that is, bring the whole Body of the Jewish
Nation to utter Destruction. Learn hence, How all the Enemies and Opposers of
Christ and his Kingdom do endeavor to color their Quarrel with some specious
Pretenses, that they may hide the odiousness of their Practices from the Eye of
the World, and may not be openly seen to fight against God. Thus the Pharisees
here persecute our Savior, not as the Messiah, (though the Miracles he wrought
were a sufficient Evidence that he was such) but as one who would bring Ruin
upon their Nation. If we let him alone, the Romans will come and take away both
our Place and Nation.

49 And one of them named Caiaphas, being the high priest that same year, said
unto them, Ye know nothing at all, 50 Nor consider that it is expedient for us,
that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation perish not.
51 And this spoke he not of himself: but being high priest that year, he
prophesied that Jesus should die for that nation. 52 And not for that nation
only, but that also he should gather together in one, the children of God that
were scattered abroad.

The foregoing Verses acquainted us with the Apprehension which the chief
Priests had of the Necessity of taking away the Life of our blessed Savior;
Lest the Romans should take away both their Place and Nation. Now here in these
Verses Caiaphas the High Priest delivers his Opinion for the preventing of this
danger, he tells the rest that they ought not to boggle at the Matter, but come
to a positive and peremptory Resolution to provide for the Public Safety,
Right or Wrong; and that it is great Folly to prefer one Man's Life, though
never so innocent before a Nations Welfare; a most wicked and devilish Speech;
as a Judge he regarded not what was lawful, but as a wicked Politician he
consulted what was expedient; he declares that one Man, though never so good
and holy, though never so just and innocent, had better dye, than a whole
Nation suffer: Whereas it is in any case unlawful to do Evil that Good may
come. Learn hence, That although it be the Duty of all Persons to pray for, and
endeavor after the public Welfare of a Church and Nation whereof they are
Members, yet it is altogether unlawful to promote the greatest National Good,
by wicked and unlawful Means. Observe further, How God overruled the Tongue of
Caiaphas, beyond his own intention, prophetically to foretell that great good
which by our Savior's death should redound to the World. And that the Fruit
and Benefit of his death should not only extend to the Jews, but to the
Gentiles also; and that he should gather into one Body or Church, all that
truly believe in him; though far and wide dispersed upon the Face of the Earth.
Hence learn, 1. That the Spirit of Prophecy did sometimes fall upon very bad
Men; and God has been pleased to reveal some part of his Mind to the worst of
Men. Thus Pharaoh and Nebuchadnezar had in their Dreams a Revelation from God
what things he intended to do. Learn 2. That it is consistent with the Holiness
of God sometimes to make use of the Tongues of the worst of Men to publish and
declare his Will. Caiaphas here though a vile and wicked Man was influenced by
God to prophecy and speak an Oracle. Almighty God may, when he please, employ
wicked Men this way, without any prejudice to his Holiness. This Caiaphas spoke
not of himself, but being High Priest, he prophesied that Jesus should dye for
that Nation.

53 Then from that day forth, they took counsel together for to put him to
death. 54 Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews; but went thence
unto a country near to the wilderness, into a city called Ephraim, and there
continued with his disciples. 55 And the Jews passover was nigh at hand: and
many went out of the country up to Jerusalem before the passover, to purify
themselves. 56 Then sought they for Jesus, and spoke among themselves, as they
stood in the Temple, What think ye, that he will hot come to the feast? 57 Now
both the chief priests and the Pharisees had given a commandment, that if any
man knew where he were, he should show it, that they might take him.

Observe here, 1. How baneful and destructive Evil Counsel is, especially out
of the Mouth of leading Men, and how soon embraced and followed. Caiaphas no
sooner propounds the putting of Christ to Death, but from that Day forward they
lie in wait to take him. The High Priest had satisfied their Consciences, and
now they make all possible speed to put their malicious Designs and purposes in
Execution. Obs. 2. The prudential Care and Means which our Lord used for his
own Preservation, to avoid their fury; he withdraws himself privately into a
Place called Ephraim, and there continues with his Disciples. Learn, As Christ
himself fled, so is it lawful for his Servants to flee when their Life is
conspired against by their bloody Enemies; and the Persecution is Personal.
Observe, 3. When the time was come that he was to expose himself, when the time
of the Passover drew near, in which he being the true Pascal Lamb was to be
slain; to put an end to that Type, he withdraws no more, but surrenders himself
to the Rage and Fury of his Enemies, and dies a shameful Death for shameful
Sinners, as the next Chapter more at large informs us.

CHAP. XII.
THen Jesus, six days before the passover, came to Bethany, where Lazarus was
which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead.

The latter end of the foregoing Chapter acquainted us with the prudential Care
of Christ in withdrawing from the Fury of his Enemies in and about Jerusalem,
who were consulting his Destruction: his time not being fully come, he gets out
of the way of his Persecutors. But now the Passover being at hand, which was
the time that this Lamb of God was to die as a Sacrifice for the Sin of the
World; Our Lord comes forth first to Bethany and then to Jerusalem, not fearing
the Teeth of his Enemies, but with a fixed Resolution to encounter Death and
Danger for the Salvation of his People. His Example teaches us. That although we
are bound by all lawful Means and prudential Methods to preserve our selves
from the unjust Violence of our Persecutors, yet when God's time for our
Sufferings is come, and we evidently see that it is his Will that we suffer for
his sake, we ought to set our Faces very cheerfully toward it, and resign up
our selves to the Wisdom and Will of God. Thus did Christ here, chapter 11.54. we
find he withdrew from Suffering, his Hour not being then come; but now when the
Passover was nigh at hand, which was the time when he was to suffer, he sets
his Face toward Jerusalem, and withdraws no more.

2 There they made him a supper, and Martha served: but Lazarus was one of them
that sat at the table with him. 3 Then took Mary a pound of ointment, of
spikenard, very costly, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with
her hair: and the house was filled with the odor of the ointment. 4 Then says
one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simons son, which should betray him, 5
Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence, and given to the poor?
6 This he said, not that he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and
had the bag, and bare what was put therein. 7 Then said Jesus, Let her alone:
against the day of my burying has she kept this. 8 For the poor always ye have
with you; but me ye have not always.

In these Verses, an account is given of our Savior's entertainment at
Bethany, after he had raised Lazarus. A Supper is made for him; at which Martha
served, and Lazarus sat with him; but Mary Anoints Christ with precious
Ointments. Where Note, 1. The Action which this Holy Woman performed, she pours
a Box of precious Ointment upon our Savior's Head, as he sat at Meat,
according to the custom of the Eastern Countries at their Feasts. I do not find
that any of the Apostles were at thus much charge and cost, to put honor upon
our Savior, as this poor Woman was. From whence learn, 1. That where strong
Love prevails in the Heart, nothing is adjudg'd too dear for Christ; neither
will it suffer it self to be out-shined by any Examples. The weakest Woman that
strongly Loves her Savior, will vye with the greatest Apostle, and Piously
strive to express the fervor of her Affection toward him. Observe, 2. How
this Action was resented and reflected upon by murmuring Judas, who valued this
Ointment at Three hundred Pence, and grudged the bestowing of it upon Christ.
He accuses this Holy Woman of needless prodigality. Lord! How does a Covetous
heart think every thing too good for Thee. He that sees a Pious Action
performed, and seeks to lessen or undervalue it, shows himself possessed with a
Spirit of Envy. Judas his invidious Spirit makes him censure an Action which
Christ highly approved. Hence learn, That Men who know not our Hearts, may
through ignorance or prejudice censure and condemn those Actions which God does
commend and will graciously reward. Happy was it for this poor Woman, that she
had a more Righteous Judge to pass Sentence upon her Action than wicked Judas.
Observe, 3. How readily our Holy Lord vindicates this poor Woman, she says
nothing for her self, nor need she, having such an Advocate, and gives the
Reason for her Action, She did it for my Burial, as Kings and great Persons
were wont in those Eastern Countries, at their Funerals to be Embalmed with
Odours and sweet Perfumes. So says our Savior, this Woman to declare her
Faith in me, as her King and Lord, does with this Box of Ointment as it were
beforehand Embalm my Body for its Burial. True Faith will put honor upon a
Crucified, as well as Glorified Savior. This Holy Woman accounts Christ worthy
of all honor in his Death; believing it would be a sweet smelling Sacrifice
unto God, and the Savor of Life unto his People.

9 Much people of the Jews therefore knew that he was there: and they came, not
for Jesus sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had raised
from the dead.

Observe here, It was not zeal but curiosity which brought these persons at
this time to Christ; they had an itching desire to see Lazarus, to enquire
after the Truth of his Death; and possibly after the state of the Dead, and the
condition that separated Souls are in, after Death. Thus the Miracles of Christ
drew many followers after his Person, who were never converted by his Doctrine.
It was the Sin of many, when Christ was here upon Earth, that they flocked
after him; rather out of Curiosity than out of Conscience, and chose rather to
gaze upon his Works, than to fall in Love with the Worker. The Multitude here
came to Bethany, Not for Jesus's sake only, but that they might see Lazarus
also.

10 But the chief priests consulted, that they might put Lazarus also to death;
11 Because that by reason of him many of the Jews went away, and believed on
Jesus.

Observe here, 1. The unreasonableness of that Rage and Madness, which was
found in the chief Priests against Lazarus; They consulted together how they
might put Lazarus to Death. But supposing that Christ had spoken Blasphemy, in
making himself equal with God, or supposing that he had broken the Sabbath, by
curing the Man that was Born Blind on that Day; yet what had Lazarus done that
he must be put to Death? But from hence we learn, That such as have received
special Mercy and Favors from Christ, or are made the Instruments of his
Glory, must expect to be made the Mark and Butt of malicious Enemies. Christ
had highly honored Lazarus, by raising him from the Grave; and here there is a
Resolution against his Life, whom Christ had thus highly Honored. The chief
Priests consulted that they might put Lazarus to Death also. Observe, 2. The
cause why the Chief Priests consulted that they might put Lazarus to Death;
Namely, Because that by Reason of him many of the Jews went away and believed
on Jesus. That is, many of the Jews seeing the Miracle of Christ's raising
Lazarus from the Grave, were drawn thereby to Believe in Jesus Christ; and this
so enraged the Chief Priests against Lazarus, that they sought to put him to
Death. Learn hence, That nothing so much enrages the Enemies of Christ, as the
enlargement of his Kingdom; and the sight of the number of Believers daily
increasing. This provokes the Devil's wrath, and his Servants rage.

12 On the next day, much people that were come to the Feast, when they heard
that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem, 13 Took branches of palm trees, and went
forth to meet him, and cried, Hosanna, blessed is the King of Israel that
comes in the name of the Lord. 14 And Jesus when he had found a young ass, sat
thereon; as it is written, 15 Fear not, daughter of Sion; behold, thy King
comes, fitting on an asses colt. 16 These things understood not his disciples
at the first: but when Jesus was glorified, then remembered they that these
things were written of him, and that they had done these things unto him.

Here we have Recorded the carriage of the Multitude toward our Savior, when
he came near the City of Jerusalem: They take Palms in their Hands and go forth
to meet him, and cast their Garments on the Ground before him to Ride upon; yea
they do not only Disrobe their Backs, but expend their Breath in joyful
Acclamations, and loud Hosannahs, wishing all manner of Prosperity to their
meek but mighty King. In this Prince-like; yet Poor and Despicable Pomp, does
our Savior enter the Famous City of Jerusalem. Lord! How far were thou from
affecting Worldly Greatness and Grandeur. Thou despisest that Glory, which our
Hearts fondly Admire: Yet because Christ was a King, he would be proclaimed
such, and have his Kingdom confessed, and applauded and blessed. Yet that it might
appear that his Kingdom was not of this World, he abandons all Worldly
magnificence. Oh Glorious, yet homely Pomp! Oh meek, but mighty Prince!

17 The people therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of his
grave, and raised him from the dead, bare record. 18 For this cause the people
also met him, for that they heard that he had done this miracle. 19 The
Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing?
behold, the world is gone after him. 20 And there were certain Greeks among
them, that came up to worship at the feast: 21 The same came therefore to
Philip, which was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and desired him, saying, Sir, we
would see Jesus. 22 Philip comes and tells Andrew: and again, Andrew and
Philip told Jesus.

Observe here, 1. How the Multitude at Jerusalem came forth to meet Christ,
when he was making his public entry into the City; hearing the fame of his
Miracles. For this cause the People also met him, for that they had heard that
he had done this Miracle. Observe, 2. How amongst others who came forth to meet
our Savior, certain Greeks, or Gentile Proselytes, who came up to worship in
the outward Court of the Temple, apply themselves to Philip, that he would help
them to a sight of Jesus. Sir, we would see Jesus. It is probable that this
desire to see Christ in these persons, proceeded from Curiosity only. But if it
did produce true Faith in them, we may thence infer, That a spiritual sight of
Christ by the discerning Eye of a Believer's Faith; it is the most glorious,
and consequently the most desirable sight in all the World; and so must needs
be, for it is a Soul-Ravishing, a Soul-Satisfying, a Soul-Transforming, and a
Soul-Saving sight. This sight of Christ by Faith, will constrain a Soul highly
to admire, and greatly to commend him. It will incline a Soul to choose him, and
cleave unto him; and will set the Soul a longing for the full fruition and
final enjoyment of him. Luke 2.29. Mine eyes have seen thy Salvation: now let
thy Servant depart. Observe lastly, How the Envious Pharisees were galled, and
cut to the Heart, to see such a Multitude both of Jews and Greeks crouding out
of the City, to meet Jesus in his Triumphant entrance into the City. The
Pharisees said, Behold the World is gone after him. Learn hence, That in the
day of Christ's greatest Solemnity and Triumph, there will not be wanting some
persons of such a cankered disposition, that they will neither rejoice
themselves, nor can they endure that others should. This was the case of the
wicked Pharisees here.

23 And Jesus answered them, saying, The hour is come, that the Son of man
should be glorified. 24 Verily verily I say unto you, Except a corn of wheat
fall into the ground, and die, it abides alone: but if it die, it brings
forth much fruit. 25 He that loves his life, shall lose it: and he that hates
his life in this world, shall keep it unto life eternal.

Observe here, 1. How our blessed Savior entertains his followers with a
Discourse concerning his approaching Death and Sufferings. The hour is coming
that the Son of Man shall be glorified. Observe, 2. How he Arms his Disciples
against the scandal of the Cross, by showing them the great Benefit that would
redound by his Death unto all Mankind; and this by a Similitude taken from
Grain, Except a Corn of Wheat fall into the Ground and die, it abides alone.
That is, as Corn unsown, lodged in the Barn, or laid up in the Chamber, never
multiplies nor increases; but sow it in the Field, and bury it in the Earth,
and it multiplies and increases, and brings forth a plentiful crop. So if
Christ had not died, he had remained what he was, the Eternal Son of God; but
he had had no Church in the World. Whereas his Death and Sufferings made him
fructify. That brought a plentiful Increase of exaltation to himself, and
Salvation to his People. Observe, 3. How plainly our Savior dealt with his
Followers; he did not deceive them with a vain hope and expectation of Temporal
Happiness, but tells them plainly that all that will be his Disciples must
prepare for Sufferings, and not think their Temporal Life too dear to lay down
for him, when he calls them to it, this being the surest way to secure unto
themselves Life Everlasting. He that loves his life shall lose it, but he that
hates his life in this world shall keep it unto life eternal. Learn hence,
That the surest way to attain Eternal Life, is cheerfully to lay down our
Temporal Life, when the Glory of Christ and the Honor of Religion requires it
at our hand.

26 If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there shall also my
servant be: if any man serve me, him will my Father honor.

That is, if any Man assumes the Title, and enters into the sacred engagement
of being Christ's Servant, let his Conversation correspond with his Profession,
and let him be willing to follow him in the Thorny path of Affliction and
Sufferings, from this Assurance, that all his grievous Sufferings shall end in
Eternal Joys; Where I am there shall my Servant be, and him will my Father
honor. Learn hence, 1. That all that will be Christ's Servants must be his
Followers; they must obey his Doctrine, and imitate his Example. 2. That
Christ's Servants must not expect better usage at the hand of an unkind World,
than he their Master met with before them. 3. That such as serve Christ by
following of him, shall at Death see him as he is, and be with him where he is:
Where I am, there shall also my Servant be. 4. That God will crown the fideli^y
and constancy of Christ's Servants, with the highest Dignity and Honor; If any
Man serve me, him will my Father honor.

27 Now is my soul troubled; and what shall I say? Father, save me from this
hour: but for this cause came I unto this hour. 28 Father, glorify thy name.
Then came there a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it, and will
glorify it again.

Whilst our Savior was thus preaching of his own Death and Sufferings, a
Natural horror of his approaching Passion, (tho such as was without Sin),
seizes upon him; his Father giving him a Taste of that wrath which he was to
undergo upon the Cross for our Sins. Hereupon he betakes himself to Prayer,
Father save me from this hour; this was the harmless inclination of his sinless
nature which abhorred lying under wrath, and therefore prays against it: yet
(as it were) recalling himself, he submits to what his office, as our surety
required of him, and prays again unto his Father, to dispose of him, as may
most and best conduce to the purposes of his Glory. Father glorify thy name.
Learn hence, 1. That mere Trouble is no Sin; Christ's Soul was troubled,
Christianity does not make Men Senseless; Grace introduces no stoical
Stupidity. 2. That fear of death, especially when accompanied with
apprehensions of the wrath of God, is most perplexing and Soul-amazing. My Soul
is troubled and what shall I say? 3. No extremity of Sufferings ought to
discourage us from laying claim to that Relation which God stands in to us as a
Father. Our Savior in the midst of his distress calls God Father, Father, save
me from this hour. 4. In the extremity of our Sufferings, we may be
importunate, but must not be peremptory in our Prayers; as Christ in his Agony
prayed more earnestly, so may we in ours, but always submissively. Father, Save
me from this hour, but for this cause came I unto this hour. 5. That our
exemption from Suffering may sometimes be inconsistent with the Glory of God.
Father, save me from this hour, Father Glorify thy name. Observe lastly, The
Father's Answer to the Son's Prayer: There came a voice from Heaven, saying; I
have glorified it, and will glorify it again. That is, as God the Father had
been already glorified in his Son's Life, Doctrine, and Miracles; so he would
farther glorify Himself in his Death, Resurrection and Ascension; as also by
the Mission of the Holy Ghost, and the Preaching of the Gospel for the
Conversion of the Gentiles, to the ends of the Earth. Learn hence, That the
whole work of Christ, from the lowest degree of his Humiliation, to the highest
degree of his Exaltation, was a glorifying of his Father; he glorified his
Father by the Doctrine which he Taught, he glorified his Father by the Miracles
which he wrought, by the unspotted Innocence of his Life, and by his
unparalled Sufferings at his Death; by his Victorious Resurrection from the
Grave, and by his Triumphant Ascension into Heaven.

29 The people therefore that stood by, and heard it, said that it thundered:
others said, An angel spoke to him. 30 Jesus answered, and said, This voice
came not because of me, but for your sakes. 31 Now is the judgment of this
world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out. 32 And I, if I be lifted
up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. 33 (This he said, signifying what
death he should die.)

Observe here, 1. The way of God in speaking to his People by a Voice in
Thunder, for the greater declaration of his Glory and Majesty. Thunderings and
Lightnings usually attended the voice of God, even in Consolations, and when he
spoke comfortably to his own Servants. Oh how dreadful and terrible then must
the Voice of God be to his Enemies; when he shall come in flaming Fire, to
render vengeance to them! If there was such Dread and Terrors, such Thunderings
and Lightnings at the giving of the Law; Lord! What will there be another Day,
when thou come to punish the violation of that Law. Observe, 2. The end why
God the Father now spoke with an Audible Voice to Christ his Son; it was for
his Consolation, and the Peoples Confirmation. His Soul being troubled, he
stood in need as Mediator, of comfort from his Father; and the People had here
a farther and fuller Confirmation of his being the promised and true Messiah;
that so they might Believe in him. This voice came not because of me; That is,
not only or chiefly because of me, but to confirm your Faith in the Belief of
this great Truth, that I am the Son of God, by whom the Father has glorified,
and will farther glorify his Name. Observe, 3. Our Savior declares a double
effect and fruit of his Death and Passion. 1. The judgment of this World. Now
is the judgment of this World, now shall the Prince of this World be cast out.
That is, my Death will be the Devil's overthrow; will bring down Sin, and
deliver the World from the Tyranny and Dominion of Sin and Satan. Learn hence,
1. That Satan is the Prince and Ruler of all those who live in Sin; not a
Prince by Legal Right, but by Tyrannical Usurpation. 2. That this Usurper Satan
will not quit his Possession, unless he be cast out. 3. That Christ by his
Death has cast out Satan, dethroned him, and deprived him of his Tyrannical
Usurpation. Now is the Prince of this World cast out. That is, I will shortly
by my Death deliver the World from the slavery of Sin, and Dominion of Satan;
and particularly from that Idolatry which the greatest part of the World were
then in slavery under. The second effect and fruit of Christ's Death which is
here declared, is his drawing all Men unto him. When I am lifted up from the
Earth, I will draw all Men unto me. There is a twofold lifting up of Christ;
the first Ignominious, when he was hung upon the Cross; the second Glorious in
the Preaching of the Gospel, by this he draws all Men unto him; that is, by the
Preaching of the Gospel, he calls and invites all persons to himself; he offers
the Benefits of his Death to all, and gathered a Church to himself out of the
Gentile, as well as the Jewish World. Learn, 1. That all persons are naturally
unwilling to come to Christ; they must be drawn. 2. That Christ meritoriously
by his Death, and instrumentally by the Preaching of the Gospel, draws Sinners
unto himself. 3. That it is not a few, or small number, but a very great
number, consisting both of Jews and Gentiles, Bond and Free, persons of all
Nations, Sexes, Ages, and Conditions, whom Christ draws: Not that all are
effectually drawn to Christ, so as savingly to Believe in him; but by the
Preaching of the Gospel, they are called and invited to him; and the Benefits
of his Death are offered to them. Thus Christ being lifted up, upon his Cross,
and on the Pole of his Gospel, draws all Men unto him.

34 The people answered him, We have heard out of the law, that Christ abides
for ever: and how say thou, The Son of Man must be lift up? who is this Son
of Man? 35 Then Jesus said unto them, Yet a little while is the light with you:
walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walks
in darkness, knows not whither he goes. 36 While ye have light, believe in
the light, that ye may be the children of light. These things spoke Jesus and
departed, and did hide himself from them.

Observe here, 1. T^^ Objection which the Jews make against our Savior's being
the True Messiah. Their Argument runs thus, It was foretold under the Law that
Christ or the Messiah abides for ever; but thou say the Son of Man must be
lift up and die. How then can thou be the promised Messiah? The Answer is, in
his state of Humiliation unto Death, he was lifted up; but in his state of
Exaltation he abides for ever. Learn hence, That Christ's lifting up by Death,
and his abiding for ever, do very well consist together; for both are true of
him: The one in his state of Humiliation, the other in his state of Exaltation.
Observe, 2. Our Savior returns no Answer to their cavilling Objection, nor
does he undertake to demonstrate how his Sufferings and his abiding for ever
are consistent; but gives them intimations that he was the Light of the World,
and advises them whilst they had the Light with them, to prize it highly, and
improve it faithfully. Yet a little while is the Light with you, walk whilst ye
have the Light; lest Darkness come upon you. Note here, 1. A choice and
singular Privilege enjoyed; the Light is with you; a personal Light, Christ; a
Doctrinal Light, the Gospel: Both these brought with them a Light of Knowledge,
answering our Darkness of Ignorance; a Light of Grace and Holiness, answering
our Darkness of Sin, which we had brought upon our selves; and a Light of Joy
and Comfort, answering the Darkness of Misery and Horror, which we lay under by
reason of our guilt. Note, 2. The time of enjoying this privilege limited; yet
a little while is the Light with you. The time of a Peoples enjoying the Light
and Liberty of the Gospel, it is a limited time, it is a short time. Note, 3. A
Duty injoined by Christ, answerable to the privilege enjoyed by us; Walk
whilst ye have the Light. An uniform and constant course of Holy walking,
according to the Rule of the Gospel, is the indispensable Duty and Obligation
of all those that enjoy the Light and Liberty of the Gospel. Namely, To walk
according to the precepts and commands of the Gospel, answerable to the
Privileges and Prerogatives of the Gospel, answerable to the helps and
supplies of Grace which the Gospel affords; and answerable to the glorious hope
and expectation, which the Gospel raises us unto. Note 4. A danger threatened to
the neglecters of this Duty; lest Darkness come upon you. Namely, A Darkness of
Ignorance and judicial Blindness; a Darkness of Error and Seduction, a Darkness
of Horror and Despair; and the fatal and final Darkness of Death and Hell; for
all contemners of Gospel Light, there is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for
ever; where Sin and Torment run parallel, their Torment makes them Sin, and
their Sin feeds their Torment.

37 But though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not
on him: 38 That the saying of Esaias the prophet might be fulfilled, which he
spoke, Lord, who has believed our report? and to whom has the arm of the Lord
been revealed? 39 Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias said
again, 40 He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart; that they should
not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and
I should heal them. 41 These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and
spoke of him.

Observe here, 1. The astonishing Infidelity and unbelief of the Jews, who
heard our Savior's Doctrine, and were Eyewitnesses of his Miracles; Though he
had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed not on him. Let not
the faithful Ministers of Christ be discouraged, and over much dejected, at
their want of success in dispensing of the Gospel, when they observe and
consider the small success of our Savior's own Ministry in the Hearts and
Lives of his hearers: Yea though his Ministry was accompanied with Miracles, and
though his Miracles were many in number, mighty in nature, clear and obvious to
Sense, being wrought before their Eyes; yet his Ministry succeeded not, and his
Miracles prevailed not: Lord! what little success has the offer of Christ in
the Gospel met with, from the first Original Tender to this Day. Obstinate
Infidelity, and cursed Hypocrisy, draw more Souls to Hell, than all the Devils
in Hell. Observe, 2. How the present Infidelity of these unbelieving Jews, was
long before foretold, and Prophesied of, by the Prophet Esaias, chapter 53. 1.
Lord, who has believed our report? that is, our Preaching. Where Note, That
Isaias's Complaint of the small success of his Prea^hing, was a Prophecy and
Prediction of the like success that Christ and his Ministers should have under
the Gospel. Learn hence, That the Gospel in all Ages has met with more that
have rejected it by unbelief, than have savingly entertained it by Faith.
Isaias complained before Christ, and his Apostles and Ministers in every Age
since; that few have believed their Reports. Observe, 3. That though the present
unbelief of the Obstinate Jews, was long foretold by the Prophets of God; yet
the Prophets Prediction was no cause of their unbelief, or that which laid them
under an impossibility of believing; but the fault lay in their own Obstinate
Wills, with respect to which, by the just judgment of God they were blinded and
hardened, for their contempt of Christ, the promised Messiah. When Men close
their Eyes wilfully, and say they will not see, it is just with God to close
their Eyes judicially, and say they shall not see. He has blinded their Eyes
and hardened their hearts, etc.

42 Nevertheless among the chief rulers, also, many believed on him; but
because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, lest they should be put out
of the synagogue. 43 For they loved the praise of men more than the praise of
God.

Observe here, 1. That although the generality of the Jews were thus hardened
under Christ's Ministry and Miracles; yet there were some, and those of the
chief Rank, even Rulers, that did believe on him: That is, they were under
strong and powerful convictions, that he was the true and expected Messiah;
even in times and places where obstinacy and infidelity most prevails, the
Ministry of the word shall not be altogether without its fruit; Christ here had
some, and those of the Rulers too, who believed on him, when others under the
same word were hardened. Nevertheless among the chief Rulers, also many believed
on him. Observe, 2. That though many of the chief Rulers had a secret Belief, or
an inward Persuasion that Christ was the promised and expected Messiah; yet it
was not sufficient to make them openly own, confess and avow him to be such;
for fear of Excommunication from the Pharisees. They did not confess him, lest
they should be put out of the Synagogue. Slavish fear of Men, and suffering by
them, has hindered many from believing on Christ, and kept more from an open
owning and confessing of him. Because of the Pharisees they did not confess
him. Observe, 3. As the fear of Suffering on the one hand, so the Love of
Reputation on the other, kept them from owning and confessing Jesus to be the
Christ. They loved the praise of Men more than the praise of God. That is, They
valued Honor and Applause from Men, more than God's honoring and approving
them. There is no greater snare to draw persons from their Duty, than
inordinate Love and Affection to their own Credit and Reputation. Oh how often
is the Applause and Commendation of Men preferred before the Testimony and
Approbation of God! Here was their snare, They loved the praise of Men more
than the praise of God.

44 Jesus cried, and said, he that believes on me, believes not on me, but on
him that sent me. 45 And he that sees me, sees him that sent me. 46 I am come
a light into the world, that whosoever believes on me should not abide in
darkness. 47 And if any man hear my words and believe not, I judge him not: for
I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. 48 He that rejects me,
and receives not my words, has one that judges him: the word that I have
spoken, the same shall judge him in the last day. 49 For I have not spoken of
my self; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should
say, and what I should speak. 50 And I know that his commandment is life
everlasting: whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the Father said unto me, so
I speak.

In these Verses, we have our blessed Savior's farewell Sermon to the Jews,
concerning his Person, Office, and Doctrine; as touching his Person, he
acquaints them with his Divine Nature, his oneness and equality with the
Father; and accordingly challenges not only the Assent, but also the Obedience
and Adoration of their Faith. Jesus cried, saying, he that believes on me,
believes not on me, but on him that sent me. That is, He that believes on me,
does not believe on a mere Man; but on him that is truly and really God, as
well as Man, and therefore he being true God, one in Essence, and equal in
Power and Glory with the Father; their believing in him, was believing in God
the Father that sent him. Observe. 2. The Argument which our Savior uses to
prove that Believers in Christ do Believe in the Father. He that sees me,
sees him that sent me. That is, He that sees me Spiritually, and by Faith;
sees my Father to be one with me in Essence, though not in person; and he that
sees me in my Miraculous works which I do, sees him also that sent me, by
whom I do these mighty works. Learn hance, 1. That we do not see Christ aright
by the Eye of our Faith, unless we see him and Believe him to be truly and
really God; one with, and equal to the Father, he that sees me, sees in me
him that sent me. Learn, 2. That the Father is not to be seen but in the Son,
nor can Believers know what the Father is, but by seeing what the Son is, and
what they see the Son to be, that the Father is in him. For he that sees me,
sees him that sent me. Observe, 3. The dreadful judgment which Christ
denounces against all Unbelievers, and such as reject him, by rejecting of his
Gospel; for though at Christ's first coming, his errand was not to judge the
World; but to save the World, that is, to offer the tenders of Salvation to
lost Sinners: yet at his second coming he would judge them at the last Day;
when the Word preached to them, and rejected by them, will give a judicial
Testimony against them. Learn hence, 1. That Christ and his Doctrine are
inseparable; to receive his Doctrine, is to receive him, and to reject his
Doctrine, is to reject him. 2. That such rejecters of Christ and the Doctrine
of the Gospel, shall not escape the judgment of Christ at the great Day. 3.
That at the great Day, were there no other witness against the rejecters of
Christ and his Gospel, but the Word preached; yet that alone will be sufficient
both for their Conviction and Condemnation. The word that I have spoken, the
same shall judge him in the last day. Observe, 4. The Argument and Reason which
our Savior produces, to prove that the Word of God, and the Doctrine of the
Gospel slighted and rejected, should condemn Sinners, at the great Day. Namely,
From the Divine Authority of his Doctrine; for albeit, his Doctrine was his
own, as he was true God, yet as Man, and as Mediator it was not his own, but
the Father's which sent him; so that his Word and Doctrine being Divine, and
the Father's as well as his, ( for he did not speak of himself; that is, of
himself alone; and without the Father,) it is sufficient to Judge and Condemn
all the rejecters and despisers of it. Learn hence, 1. That though the Doctrine
of the Gospel be Christ's own, as he is truly and really God; yet it was not
his own as mere Man, exclusive of the Father, who is one God with him; and who
gave him a Commission and Instructions, as Mediator, to Preach and Publish the
glad tidings of the Gospel; for says he, I have not spoken of my self, but the
Father which sent me gave me a Commandment. 2. That the Doctrine which Christ
delivered by command from the Father, does point out the way to Eternal Life,
and will bring lost Sinners thereunto, if they sincerely believe it and obey
it. I know that his Commandment is Life everlasting. 3. That therefore Sinners
who reject the Doctrine of Christ contained in the Gospel, do highly Dishonor,
Offend, and Affront, both the Father and Son, and bring upon themselves a just
and righteous judgment; and expose themselves to unutterable and inevitable
condemnation. The word that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in the last
Day.

CHAP. XIII.
1 NOW before the feast of the passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was
come, that he should depart out of this world, unto the Father, having loved
his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. 2 And supper being
ended, (the devil having now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simons son
to betray him) 3 Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into his
hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God,

In this Chapter is Recorded the History of our Savior's washing his Disciples
Feet, an Action full of Humility and Condescension, and propounded to his
followers Imitation. The Circumstance of Time is here noted, when this Act was
done; Namely, At the Feast of the Passover, when the time of our Savior's
departure was at hand; and having constantly and immutably loved his own, he
expresses the permanency of his Love toward them to the end, by this Action of
his, in washing their Feet. Here Note, How Christ chose the Time of the Jewish
Passover to suffer in, that he might prove himself to be the substance of that
Type; that he was the true Pascal Lamb, who by the Sacrifice of his Death did
atone Divine displeasure, and takes away the Sins of the World. Observe, 2.
The means which the Wisdom of God permitted, to bring the Lord of Life to his
Ignominious Death. And that was the Treason, and perfidiousness of one of his
own Disciples, Judas Iscariot. Where Observe, 1. The person betraying Judas;
Judas a Professor, Judas a Preacher, Judas an Apostle, being one of the Twelve;
whom Christ had chosen out of all the World to be his dearest Friend. Can we
wonder to find Friends unfriendly, or unfaithful toward us, when our Savior
had a Traitor in his own House? Observe, 2. The heinousness of Judas Sin, in
betraying Christ, he betrayed Christ Jesus a Man, Christ Jesus his Master,
Christ. Jesus his Maker; the first was Murder, the second Treason. Lord! It is
no strange or uncommon thing, for the vilest of Sins, and most horrid impieties
to be acted by persons making the most eminent profession of thy holy Religion.
Observe, 3. What hand the Devil had in the Sufferings of our Savior: He put it
into Judas's heart to betray Christ; that is, he did suggest and inject such
thoughts into his mind, which Judas instantly closed with. The Devil being a
Spirit, has a quick access to our Spirits, and can instill his suggestions into
them, as Christ did breath upon his Disciples, and they received the Holy
Ghost, and were filled with the Spirit; so Satan breaths filthy suggestions
into the Spirits of Men, and fills them with all manner of wickedness, even
with the Spirit of Hell it self. The Devil put it into Judas heart to betray
him.

4 He rises from supper, and laid aside his garments, and took a towel and
girded himself. 5 After that, he pours water into a basin, and began to wash
the disciples feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded.

Observe here, The admirable humility, and great self-denial of our Lord and
Master; he arises from Supper, whilst his Disciples sat still, and he that
came in the form of a Servant, performs all the offices of the meanest Servant
to his Disciples; he lays aside his upper Garments, he girds himself with a
Towel, pours Water into a Basin, and begins to wash and wipe their Feet, which
lay out behind them, as they leaned at the Table; all which was a most servile
employment. Learn hence, That the wonderful humility of Jesus Christ inclined
him to do the meanest offices of Service unto his People, even to become a
Servant to them, in the Day of his Humiliation; and though now glorified in
Heaven, he retains the same Compassionate Heart toward them, as when here on
Earth.

6 Then comes he to Simon Peter: and Peter says unto him, Lord, do thou
wash my feet? 7 Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do thou know not
now; but thou shall know hereafter. 8 Peter says unto him, Thou shall never
wash my feet. Jesus answered him, If I wash thee not, thou have no part with
me. 9 Simon Peter says unto him, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands
and my head. 10 Jesus says to him, He that is washed, needs not, save to
wash his feet, but is clean every whit: and ye are clean, but not all. 11 For
he knew who should betray him; therefore said he, ye are not all clean.

Observe here, 1. How Simon Peter refuses to admit of such a condescending act
from Christ his Lord and Master, as the washing of his Feet. Lord! Thou shall
never wash my Feet; it is a sinful humility to refuse the offered favors of
Christ, because we are unworthy to receive them. Though we are not worthy of
Christ, and of his Love; yet Christ is worthy of us, and of our Faith. Observe,
2. Our Savior's Reply to Peter's refusal. 1. He tells him that there was more
in it than the bare act of washing did at first sight import, and that he
should know hereafter what he did not understand now. What I do, thou know
not now, but thou shall know hereafter. Learn hence, 1. That the Servants of
God themselves, are oftimes much to seek and cannot apprehend and understand at
present, the actings and dealings of God with them; they understand not either
the intent, or the event of God's dispensations. 2. That although God's dealings
with his Children and People are for a while in the dark, and are not presently
made known; yet there will come a time for the clearing and evidencing of them,
when they shall understand that all his dispensations were in mercy to them.
The second part of our Savior's Reply to St. Peter follows, If I wash thee
not, thou have no part with me; as if Christ had said, Peter, This external act
of mine in washing thy Feet, does signify something farther, and imports my
washing of thy Soul from the guilt and defilement of Sin, without which thou
can neither have interest in me, nor Communion with me. Learn hence, 1. That
so universal is the pollution of Sin, that every Soul stands in need of
washing. 2. That Christ washes all that have a part and interest in him, both
from the guilt and pollution of all their Sin. Observe, 3. That St. Peter now
understanding better what was meant by this outward washing, Namely, That it
did signify and represent the cleansing of the Soul from the defilement of
Sin, he is so far from refusing that Christ should wash his Feet, that he
offers, Hands, and Head, and all to be washed by him. Lord not my Feet only,
etc. Learn hence, That so thoroughly sensible are the Saints of the filthiness
and pollution of Sin; that they desire nothing more than an inward, thorough,
and prevailing purification of their whole Man, by the Blood and Spirit of the
Lord Jesus. Observe, 4. Our Savior's Reply to St. Peters's last Request, he
that is washed, needs not, save to wash his Feet; plainly alluding to the
custom of those Countries, where going abroad barefoot, or with thin Sandals,
covering only a small part of their Feet, they had frequent occasion to wash
their Feet, but no need to wash their whole Bodies. In like manner, the Saints
and Servants of God, who are already washed and cleansed by the Blood of Christ
from the guilt of their Sins, and have a real work of Renovation and
Sanctification begun in them by the Spirit of Christ, they ought to be daily
purging and purifying their Affections and Actions, and laboring daily after
further measures and degrees of Sanctification. Learn hence, 1. That the
holiest, the wisest, and the best of Saints; whilst here in a World of Sin and
Temptation, do stand in need of a daily washing by Repentance; and according to
their renewed and repeated acts of Sin. 2. That all justified persons are in
God's account clean persons; ye are clean, but not all; that is, you are
justified and pardoned, sanctified and cleansed, all of you excepting Judas,
whose heart was known to Christ, though his Hypocrisy was hid from the Disciples.

12 So after he had washed their feet, and had taken his garments, and was set
down again, he said unto them, Know ye what I have done to you? 13 Ye call me
Master, and Lord: and ye say well; for so I am. 14 If I then your Lord and
Master, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another feet. 15 For
I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you. 16 Verily
verily I say unto you, The servant is not greater then his lord, neither he
that is sent, greater then he that sent him.

In these words, our Savior declares to his Disciples his intention and design
in washing of their Feet; Namely, To teach them by his Example, the duty of
humility; that as he had performed that act of abasement toward them, so
should they be ready to perform all offices of Love, and humble Condescension
one toward another. Behold, I have given you an Example, that ye should do as
I have done unto you. Learn thence, That humility and mutual condescension
amongst the Members and Ministers of Jesus Christ, is a most necessary Grace
and Duty, which the Son of God not only taught by his Doctrine, but recommended
and enforced by his Example. Observe farther, The Argument which Christ makes
use of to press the imitation of his Example upon them; and that is drawn from
the titles given to him by his Disciples. Ye call me Master, and Lord, and so I
am. Now Servants ought to imitate their Master, and Subjects to obey their Lord
and King. Christ is a Master to teach and direct; a Lord to govern and protect;
as he is a Master, we are to learn in his School; as he is a Lord we are to
serve in his House; he must be submitted to as a Prince, as well as relied upon
as a Savior. It is in vain to expect Salvation from him, if we do not yield
subjection to him: Another Argument which our Lord makes use of to press his
Disciples to imitate his Example, is drawn from his Dignity and Superiority
over them: The Servant is not greater than his Lord; as if Christ had said,
Though you my Disciples are to have a very high and honorable station, in the
Gospel Church; yet let not this swell you with pride; but be you mutually
condescending to each other. Remembering you are yet but Servants to my self,
and ought to be so to one another; and the Servant is not greater than his
Lord. Learn hence, That whatever dignity Christ confers upon his Servants and
Officers, yet he is over them all, superior to them and above them. 2. That the
consideration of Christ's Dignity, and his Ministers meanness, ought to keep
their minds humble and lowly, and far from affecting Superiority over their
Brethren. The Servant is not greater than his Lord; nor he that is sent greater
than he that sent him.

17 If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

Our Lord here intimates unto to us these two things. 1. The necessity of
Knowledge, in order unto Practice. 2. The necessity of Practice, in order unto
Happiness. A Man may know the Will of God indeed and not do it; but he can
never do the Will of God (acceptably) and not know it. Learn hence, 1. That
Christ does not approve of a blind Obedience in his People; but requires that
their Practice and Obedience be founded upon Understanding and Knowledge. 2.
That the first care of those that will be Christ's Disciples and followers,
must be this: With all seriousness to apply themselves to the Knowledge of
their Master's Will. 3. That next to the Knowledge of our Duty, our first and
chief care must be to practice every thing that we understand, and know to be
our Duty. 4. That a right-knowledge and practice of our Duty, will certainly
make us happy. If ye know these things, happy are ye if do them.

18 I speak not of you all; I know whom I have chosen: but that the scripture
may be fulfilled, He that eats bread with me, has lift up his heel against
me.

If the choosing spoken of here be understood of Eternal Election, a choosing to
everlasting Life; then it affords a strong Argument to prove Christ to be God.
Thus, he that is the Author of Eternal Election, is God, but Christ is such, I
know whom I have chosen. Consider Christ as God, so we are chosen by him,
consider him as Mediator, and so we are chosen in him. If the choosing here, be
meant of choosing to the work of the Apostleship; then our Savior tells his
Disciples, that it need not seem strange to them, that he chose one to be an
Apostle, whom he knew would prove a Traitor; for hereby that Scripture
Prophecy, Ps. 41.9. would be fulfilled, He that eats Bread with me, has
lift up the heel against me; which though it was literally spoken of Achitophel's
Treachery against David; yet was it Prophetically spoken of Judas his Treason
against Christ; and the Expression of lifting up the heel, is Metaphorical,
taken from a fed Beast, that Kicks against his Master. Learn hence, That Christ
did, and his followers do, daily suffer, not only from open Enemies, but from
bosom and familiar Friends. Lord! How many are there in the World, who by
profession lift up their Hand unto thee; who yet by Treason and Rebellion lift
up their Heel against thee.

19 Now I tell you before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye may believe
that I am he.

Here another Argument occurs, to prove the Divinity of our Blessed Savior;
from his fore knowledge of Judas his Treason, the person who, the Time when,
and the Place where, were all known to Christ. I tell you before it come to
pass. The Argument lies thus, He that foresaw the future Actions of Men, and
infallibly foreknew the future Events and Issues of things, is certainly God.
But Christ did this; therefore he is really God: And he tells us here, that for
this very Reason, he foretold now the Treason of Judas; Now I tell you before,
that when it is come to pass, ye may believe that I am He. What He does he
mean? What He could foretell so many things to come, which did not depend upon
necessary, but contingent causes only? This He was not a mere Man surely, for
he knows not what shall be on the morrow; but must be real God, because he knew
all things; not by Revelation, as the Prophets knew things to come; but by
immediate inspection, and simple intuition; so that we may say with Peter,
Lord, Thou know all things, and because thou know all things, thou art
God.

20 Verily verily I say unto you, He that receives whomsoever I send,
receives me: and he that receives me, receives him that sent me.

Lest his Apostles should think that for the Treachery of one of them, they
shoul all become odious and abominable to the whole World; our Savior
encourages them with this promise and assurance, that there should be those
that would receive them; and he would take it as kindly, as if they received
himself, He that receives you receives me. Learn hence, That it is a sweet
encouragement to the Ministers of Christ; unto the faithful discharge of their
Duty; that Christ and the Father account that the respect paid to the Ministers
of the Gospel, is paid to themselves; and on the contrary, that all the
contempt cast upon them, reflects upon themselves. He that receives you,
receives me, and he that receives me, receives him that sent me.

21 When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and testified and
said, Verily verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me. 22 Then
the disciples looked one on another doubting of whom he spoke.

Oh what an astonishing word was this, one shall betray me; one of my Disciples
shall betray me, yea one of you, my Disciples and Apostles shall do it; well
might they look one upon another with sorrow and amazement, to hear that their
Master should die; that he should die by Treason, and that the Traitors should
be one of themselves; yet do not they censure one another, but suspect
themselves, saying, Master is it I? not Master is it Judas! Learn hence, 1.
That it is possible for secret wickedness to lurk, yea for the greatest villainy
to lodge in the hearts of Professors, in whose Conversation appears nothing
that may give a just suspicion to others. Learn, 2. That it is both the duty
and property of the Disciples of Christ, to have so much Candor and Brotherly
Love, as not rashly to censure and judge one another, but to hope the best of
others, and to fear the worst of themselves.

23 Now there was leaning on Jesus bosom, one of his disciples whom Jesus
loved. 24 Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him, that he should ask who it
should be of whom he spoke. 25 He then lying on Jesus breast, says unto him,
Lord, who is it? 26 Jesus answered, He it is to whom I shall give a sop, when I
have dipped it. And when he had dipped the sop, he gave it to Judas Iscariot,
the son of Simon. 27 And after the sop, Satan entered into him. Then said Jesus
unto him, That thou do, do quickly. 28 Now no man at the table knew for what
intent he spoke this unto him. 29 For some of them thought, because Judas had
the bag, that Jesus had said unto him, Buy those things that we have need of
against the feast: or that he should give something to the poor. 30 He then
having received the sop, went immediately out: and it was night.

Observe here, 1. The Character given of St. John the beloved Disciple, he
leaned on Christ's Bosom; that is, he had most intimate converse with Christ,
one whom Christ treated with greater freedom and familiarity than the rest, and
one that knew more of his Heart than most of his Disciples. We commonly call a
very near Friend a Bosom Friend. Learn, That although Christ had an endeared love
for all his Disciples and followers; yet there were degrees in Christ's own
love, and he had a familiarity with some Disciples beyond others, whilst he
was here upon Earth, even as now in Heaven; though his Heart be toward all his
Children here on Earth, yet he is pleased to let out more kind Manifestations
of himself, and more sensible Evidences of his love toward some, than toward
others. John was the Disciple that lay in Jesus his Bosom. Observe, 2. The way
which our Savior took to discover Judas to the rest of his Disciples, not by
naming of him, but by giving him a Sop; partly because he would not give Judas
any provocation, by mentioning of his Name, and partly because this sign of
eating the Sop was most agreeable to the Prophetical Prediction. Ps. 41.9. Mine
own familiar friend who did eat of my Bread, has lift up the heel against me.
Observe, 3. The time when Judas received the Sop, and the consequent that
followed upon his receiving of it; it was at that time when he had with an
unbelieving Heart, and an unthankful Spirit been eating the Passover, which was
a Type of Christ. Now Satan enters into him; that is, takes fuller possession
of him, and he gives up himself more freely and fully to the Devil's conduct
and suggestions. Satan gets possession of wicked Men gradually and by degrees,
not all at once; the only way to be safe, is to resist the beginnings of Sin,
for when Satan once gets footing, it is hard to prevent a more full possession.
Observe, 4. The place where Judas now was, Namely, at Bethany, some Miles from
Jerusalem, and it was now Night; yet so intent he was upon the Devil's work,
that away he trudges to Jerusalem, and at that time of the Night repairs to the
high Priests, and sells his Savior into their hands. Oh what a warmth and zeal
was here in the Devil's cause! Men given over by God possessed by Satan, are so
restless and unwearied in Sin, that neither by day nor by Night can they cease
from the contrivance and execution of it.

31 Therefore when he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the son of man
glorified, and God is glorified in him. 32 If God be glorified in him, God
shall also glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him.

Observe here, 1. Our blessed Lord calls his Death his glory. Now is the Son of
Man glorified. That is, now is the time at hand when I am to die, and shall by
my Death finish the work of Man's Redemption, and thereby eminently glorify
God. God the Father was eminently glorified in the Obedience and Sufferings of
his dear and only Son. It is true, that the Sufferings of Christ were
Ignominious in themselves, yet were they the way to his own Glory, and his
Father's also; for by them he redeemed a lost World, trampled upon Satan,
triumphed over Sin. And the Father was exceedingly glorified by the Son's
giving Obedience to his Will, and so cheerfully Suffering. Now is the Son of
Man glorified, and God is glorified in him.

33 Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me: and as
I said unto the Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot come; so now I say unto you.

Observe here, An indearing compellation, a sweet Title given by Christ to his
Disciples, Little Children, intimating that tender Affection which he bare unto
them, though now upon the point of departing from them. Learn thence, That
whatever Christ's dealings are, or may be with his People; in respect of his
removing and withdrawing from them; yet he still retains the relation of a
Father to them, and will in his absence from them, exercise such a care over
them, as Parents have of their young and tender Children; so much does the
Title of Little Children imply and import. Observe farther, The plain
intimation which our Savior gives to his Disciples of his death being very
nigh, (for it was the very next day,) he tells them, he was going to Heaven,
and whither he went, they could not come; that is, not presently; they should
follow him their forerunner, afterward, but at present, he had a great deal of
work for them to do, though his own work was done, and till they had finished
their work. Whither He went they could not come. Learn hence, That though it be
Rest which the Saints may lawfully desire, an everlasting rest with Christ in
glory; yet must they not refuse to labor, whilst their Lord will have it so.
Till their work be done, whither Christ is gone they cannot come; Ye shall seek
me, but whither I go, at present, ye cannot come.

34 A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have
loved you, that ye also love one another.

Our Savior having mentioned his departure from his Disciples in the former
Verse; I go away, and whither I go ye cannot come. In this and the following
Verses, he gives them a strict charge, that in his absence they should love one
another. This he calls a new Commandment; not that it was new in regard of
Institution, but of Restitution; not new in regard of the Substance of it, for
it was a Branch of the Law of Nature, and a known precept of the Jewish
Religion. But he calls it a new Commandment. 1. Because purged from the old
corrupt glosses of the Pharisees, who had limited this duty of Love, and
confined it to their own Countrymen; whereas Christ enlarges the object, and
obliges his Disciples to love all mankind, even their very Enemies. 2. Because
this Duty of Love was so greatly advanced and heightened by our Savior, as to
the measures and degrees of it, even to the laying down of our Lives one for
another. 3. It is called a new Commandment, because urged from a new Motive,
and enforced by a new Example. As I have loved you, that ye also love one
another; never was this Duty so effectually taught, so mightily encouraged, so
much urged and insisted upon by any Teacher as our Savior; and never was there
such an Example given of it as his own. 4. It Is a new Commandment, because with
the rest it was never to wax old; but to be always fresh in the memory and
practice of Christ's Disciples to the end of the World.

35 By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to
another.

To recommend the foregoing Duty of loving one another with the greater
advantage; our Savior tells us here, that it will be the best Evidence of our
Relation to him as sincere Disciples. By this shall all Men know that ye are my
Disciples. Where Observe, 1. Our Savior does not say, by this, Men shall
conjecture and guess that you belong to me, as being my Disciples, but they
shall certainly know it. 2. He does not say, by this shall you know your selves
to be my Disciples, and one another to be so; but by this shall all others know
it as well as your selves. 3. He does not say, by this shall all Men know that
you look like my Disciples; but that you are indeed what you pretend to be.
Namely, By your loving one another. 4. Christ does not say, by this shall the
World know that you are my Disciples. Namely, By your assembling often together
in my House of Prayer, by your frequent fastings, by your reading the
Scriptures Daily, by your hearing Sermons Weekly, by your Receiving Sacraments
Monthly; all these put together will be no sufficient evidence of your
Disciple-ship, if you keep up a secret grudg in your Hearts one against
another. But by this shall all Men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love
one another. Learn hence, That one of the best Proofs and Evidences we can have
of our relation to Christ, as his sincere Disciples, is an hearty love and good
will one toward another.

36 Simon Peter said unto him, Lord, whither go thou? Jesus answered him,
Whither I go thou can not follow me now; but thou shall follow me afterward.
37 Peter said unto him, Lord, Why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my
life for thy sake. 38 Jesus answered him, Will thou lay down thy life for my
sake? Verily verily I say unto thee, the cock shall no crow, till thou have
denied me thrice.

Here we find Peter reflecting upon what our Savior had said just before. v.
33. Whither I go ye cannot come; he is inquisitive to know of Christ whither he
went. Our Lord tells him, that for the present he could not follow him, but
should hereafter; he was not as yet strong enough to suffer for him, as he
should and did afterward. St. Peter grieved at this, rashly resolves to follow
him, though he should die for his sake. Christ advises him not to be
over-confident of his own strength and standing; for he should deny him Thrice,
within the Time of Cock-crowing. Observe here, 1. How that fond Conceit which
our Lord's Disciples had of his Temporal Kingdom here in this World, did abide
and continue with them to the very last; for when Christ spoke of leaving them,
by Ascending into Heaven, Peter understands him of a removal that was Earthly,
from one place to another, whereas Christ intended it of a removal from Earth
to Heaven. The Opinion that the Messiah was to be a Temporal Prince, and that
his Kingdom should be of this World, was so deeply rooted in the Minds of the
Jews, that they stumbled at it fatally; and Christ's own Disciples had so drunk
in the notion, that they wonder to hear Christ say, that he is going from them,
and that whither he goes they cannot come. Observe, 2. That Christ's Disciples
shall certainly follow their Master afterward, and be for ever with the Lord;
but they must wait their Lord's time, and finish their Lord's work; they must
patiently wait for their Change, and not peevishly wish for it; for though they
do not follow Christ presently to Heaven, they shall follow him afterward.
Observe, 3. The greatness of St. Peters's self-confidence. I will lay down my
Life for thy sake. Good Man! He resolved honestly, but too too much in his own
strength; Little, Oh little, did he think what a Feather he should be in the
wind of Temptation, if once God left him to the power and prevalency of his own
fears. The holiest of Men knows not his own strength, till Temptation brings
him to the Trial. Observe Lastly, How detestable St. Peters's Presumption and
Self-Confidence was to Christ, and how fatal and pernicious to himself. Will thou lay down thy Life for my sake? As if Christ had said Peter, Thou say
more than thou can do. Thine own strength will fail thee, and thy
Self-Confidence deceive thee; I know thy Heart better than thou do thy self;
and I foresee, that before the Cock crows thou will deny me thrice. Thence
Learn, That none are so near falling, as those that are most confident of their
own standing.

CHAP. XIV.
1 LEt not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe also in me. 2 In
my Fathers house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you: I
go to prepare a place for you. 3 And if I go and prepare a place for you, I
will come again and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be
also. 4 And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know.

Our blessed Savior in the foregoing Chapter, having acquainted his Disciples
with his approaching Death, by the Treachery of Judas, their Hearts were
thereupon overwhelmed with Grief and Trouble. Accordingly in this Chapter, by
sundry Arguments he comforts his Disciples against the perplexity of their
fears and sorrows. 1. Observe, How Christ addresses himself to his Disciples in
a very endearing and Affectionate manner; Let not your hearts be troubled.
Whence learn, 1. That the Best and Holiest of God's Children and Servants,
whilst here in an imperfect state, are subject to desponding, disquieting and
distrustful fears. 2. That no work is more delightful to our Savior, than to
comfort the troubled and perplexed Spirits of his Servants. Observe, 2. The
Remedy which Christ prescribes for the calming their present fears, and for
arming them against future troubles; and that is Faith in the Father and
himself Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Here learn, 1. That God is the
supreme object of Faith; his unchangeable love and faithfulness, with his
infinite Power in the accomplishing of his promises, is the security of
Believers. Learn, 2. That Christ, as Mediator between God and guilty
Creatures, is the immediate object of our Faith. Learn, 3. That Christ being
the true and proper object of our Faith, is a proof of his being truly and
really God. Christ does here assert his own Deity in the substance of the
Command, in making himself an object of Faith, in Conjunction with God the
Father. Ye believe in God, believe also in me. Observe, Next the Arguments of
Consolation, which Christ propounds for the support of his Disciples under the
sorrow, which they had conceived for his approaching departure. 1. He tells
them, That Heaven, whither he was now going, was his Father's House, a place of
happiness, not designed for himself alone; but for many more to enjoy a
perpetual rest and abode in, as in everlasting Mansions, in my Father's House
are many mansions. Heaven is God's House, in which he will freely converse with
his Domestics, his Children and Servants; and they shall enjoy full glory
there, as in a quiet and capacious habitation: A second ground of Comfort is,
that he assures them he will come again and receive them to himself, that they
may live together with him in the Heavenly Mansions. This promise Christ makes
good to his Saints, partly at the day of their Death, and perfectly at the day
of Judgment; when he shall make one errand for all, and take up all his
Children to himself, and make them completely happy both in Soul and Body with
himself. Learn hence, That though Christ has removed his Bodily presence from his
Friends on Earth; yet his love to them is not ceased, nor will he rest
satisfied till he and they meet again; Eternally to solace themselves in each
others Company. I will come again and receive you to my self, that where I am
there you may be also. A Third Argument for Consolation is, That
notwithstanding Christ was to leave them; yet they knew whither he went:
Namely, To Heaven, and which was the way thither; Whither I go ye know, and the
way ye know. It contributes much to the Comfort of Believers, as to know God
and Heaven, so to know the way that leads thither, that so they may be armed
against all the difficulties of that way.

5 Thomas says unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou go, and how can we
know the way? 6 Jesus says unto him, I am the way, and the truth, and the
life: no man comes unto the Father but by me.

Observe here, 1. How Thomas and probably diverse others of the Apostles,
notwithstanding all that Christ had said to the contrary, did still dream of a
Temporal Kingdom, and supposed him to speak of some Earthly Palace which he
was going to; and therefore he tells our Savior he knew not whither he was
going. But Christ meaning not a Temporal, but Heavenly Kingdom, tells them that
if they intended to follow him, and be with him in Heaven, He himself was the
only way thither. I am the way, the Truth and the Life. That is, I am the True
and Living way to the Father; And no Man comes to the Father but by me. That
is, no Man can have any access to God by Prayer, or any other Act of Religious
Worship here on Earth, or any access to God in Heaven, but by me as Mediator.

7 If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also: and from henceforth
ye know him, and have seen him. 8 Philip says unto him, Lord, show us the
Father, and it suffices us. 9 Jesus says unto him, Have I been so long time
with you, and yet have thou not known me, Philip? he that has seen me, has
seen the Father; and how say thou then, Show us the Father? 10 Believe
thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words that I speak
unto you, I speak not of my self: but the Father, that dwells in me, he does
the works. 11 Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: or else
believe me for the very works sake.

Observe here, 1. What a gross conception the Apostles had, and St. Philip in
particular, of the Divine Nature and Being, as if God the Father could be seen
with mortal Eyes. Show us the Father and it suffices us. It is not easy to
determine what degrees of Ignorance may consist with saving Grace; doubtless,
as the degrees of Revelation and means of Knowledge are more or less; so a
person's Ignorance is more or less excusable before God. Observe, 2. How meekly
our Blessed Savior Reproves their Ignorance; Have I been so long time with
you, and yet have thou not known me? Philip! and then proceeds to instruct them
in, and farther acquaint them with, the Oneness of himself with his Father, and
the personal Union of the Divine and Humane Nature in himself. Learn hence,
That the Father being invisible in his Essence; to know or see him with mortal
bodily eyes, is impossible; but he was seen in his Son, who is the express
Image of the Father; being one in Essence with him, and one in operation also
He that has seen me, has seen the Father.

12 Verily, verily I say unto you, He that believes on me, the works that I
do, shall he do also, and greater works then these shall he do; because I go
unto my Father.

Here Christ gives his Disciples a promise of enduing them with Power after his
Departure to work Miracles, in some respect greater than what he wrought
himself; not greater in regard of the manner, for he wrought by his own Power,
and they wrought all in his Name. But greater in regard of the matter of them;
particularly, their speaking with strange Tongues, their giving the Holy Ghost
by laying on of Hands, their healing Diseases by the very shadow of their
Bodies; but especially by their wonderful conversion of the Gentiles, from
Idolatry to serve the living God. When St. Peter converted Three Thousand at
one Sermon, then Christ made good this promise; the Disciple at that time
appeared to be above his Master; Christ all his time was Angling for a few
Fishes, and caught but an Hundred and Twenty. Act. 1.15. Whilst Peter comes
with his Dragnet, and catches Three Thousand at one cast; the reason might be,
because Christ was not properly to be the Builder, but the Foundation it self.
He subjoins the Reason of all this, Because I go unto my Father; that is, to
send down and pour forth upon you my Apostles, the Holy Ghost on the Day of
Pentecost; which was the great cause of the Apostles Miraculous Operations.
Hence learn, That it pleased the Wisdom of Christ to do greater things by the
hand of his weak Servants, here in the World, than he was pleased to do
himself, who was God over all Blessed for evermore.

13 And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may
be glorified in the Son. 14 If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it.

In these words our Savior produces another Argument to quiet his Disciples
Hearts, under their perplexity and trouble for the loss of his Bodily presence;
he assures them, that whatever Comforts they enjoyed by his Presence, they
shall obtain by their Prayers. Observe here, 1. The Qualification requisite in
Prayer; we must Pray in Christ's name, that is, for the sake of his Merits and
Mediation; in Obedience to God's command, and and with an Eye at his Glory, and
for things agreeable to his Will, and for things which his Wisdom sees good for
us. Observe, 2. The promise made to such Prayers, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my
name, that will I do; he says not, that will my Father do, but that will I do,
to testify his Divine Power and oneness with the Father. This evidently proves
him to be God. Observe, 3. The Repetition of the promise for the further
confirmation of it. If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it. The
promise is doubled for the farther Confirmation of it; that so we might be free
from all fears and doubts of being heard, when we put up our Prayers to God, in
the Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ, for things agreeable to his Will. Learn
hence, That although the Children of God, have sometimes many Jealousies and
Fears arising in their Minds concerning the Answer of their Prayers, yet they
are altogether groundless; for it is most certain their desires shall be
granted them, so far as the Wisdom of God sees sit and convenient for them; and
for that reason our Savior redoubles the Promise. If ye ask any thing in my
name, I will do it.

15 If ye love me, keep my commandments.

In these words our Savior implicitly reproves his Disciples, for their fond
way of expressing their Love to him, by doting upon his Bodily presence, and
sorrowing immoderately for his absence, and he expressly warns them to evidence
their Love to him, by their Obedience to his commands. If ye love me, keep my
commandments. Where Observe, Christ requires an Obedient Love and loving
Obedience. Love without Obedience is but dissimulation; Obedience without Love
is but drudgery and slavery. Such a Love as produces Obedience, it must be a
Dutiful Love, a Love of Reverence and Honor to him as a Commander. And an
operative and working Love, a labor of Love as the Apostle calls it; not
waiters but workers are the best Servants in Christ's esteem. And such an
Obedience as is the product of Love; it will be a willing, easy and cheerful
Obedience, a pleasing and an acceptable Obedience. A constant and Abiding
Obedience: All other motives without Love are servile and base, and beget in us
the drudgery of a Slave, but not the Duty of a Son; he that fears God only, is
afraid of smarting, but he that Loves God is afraid of offending. Learn hence,
That the best and surest evidence we can have of our Love to the Lord Jesus
Christ, is an humble, cheerful, universal, and persevering Obedience to his
commands; keep my Commandments, that is, endeavor it without reserve; for though
we cannot keep the Commandments to a just satisfaction; yet we may perform them
to a gracious acceptance. And the Word My, My Commandments is a sweetning and
alleviating Word. Moses's Law, an unsupportable Load, but Christ's Law an easy
Burden. The Law from Sinai dreadful, the Law from Sion Gracious; it pardons
weakness, and accepts sincerity.

16 And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that
he may abide with you for ever; 17 Even the Spirit of truth, whom the world
cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him: but ye know him,
for he dwells with you, and shall be in you.

Christ comfort his Disciples here, with a promise of the Mission of the
Holy Spirit, to supply the want of his Bodily presence. Where Observe, The
procurer of this Blessing. 1. And that is Christ, by his prevailing Prayer and
powerful Intercession. I will pray, it runs in the future Tense; and so it is a
promise of Christ's continual Intercession. As long as Christ is in Heaven, a
Christian shall not want a supply of Comfort and Consolation here on Earth.
Observe, 2. The Author and Donour of the blessing, and that is, God himself; I
will pray the Father and he shall give. The Father, that is, my Father, your
Father, and he that is the Father of Comfort and all Consolation. I will pray
and he will give. It Is an expression of great assurance. Observe, 3. The
blessing it self, the Holy Ghost, called here Another Comforter. Where note, 1.
The Divinity of the Holy Ghost, he that will supply the Comforts of Christ's
presence, must be as Christ is, the God of all Comfort. Note, 2. The person of
the Holy Ghost, he is a Divine person, not a Divine quality or operation; then
we might call him a Comfort, but not a Comforter. Note, 3. The Office and
Employment of the Holy Ghost. He is a Comforter; that is, an Advocate and
Intercessour to sue for us, an Encourager, and one that Administers Consolation
to us; and as he is an Holy Spirit, so are his Comforts Holy Comforts. Observe,
4. The stability of this Blessing, That he may abide with you for ever. The
best of our outward Comforts are sudden flashes, not lasting flames, but the
Consolations of the Holy Spirit are strong Consolations; they are abounding
Consolations, and everlasting Consolations, especially the Holy Spirit will be
the Comforter of good Men in the day of Affliction, in the day of Temptation,
and at the hour of Death, when all other comforts flag and fail. Observe
lastly, The additional Title given to the Holy Ghost, he is called the Spirit
of Truth; partly in opposition to Satan, who is called a Lying Spirit; partly
because he teaches and reveals the Truth, leads his People into all Truth,
and seals and confirms Truth to the Souls of Believers; he is the Spirit of
Truth, both in his Essence and in his Operations. Learn hence, That as the Holy
Spirit is True in his Essence and Nature, so is he True in his Office as a
Comforter to good Men. All his Consolations being real and solid, and free from
imposture and delusion.

18 I will not leave you comfortless; I will come to you.

Here Observe, 1. The Condition which the Disciples were in, upon the account
of Christ's removal from them, and that was sad and Comfortless; Fatherless, or
Orphans, as the word signifies. Hence learn, That Christ's Departure, or the
loss of his gracious Presence, is very sad and Comfortless to a Pious Soul;
well might the Disciples here lament and mourn, upon the occasion of Christ's
leaving of them, seeing thereby they should be deprived of his Doctrine and
Instructions, of his Advice and Counsel, and of the Benefit of his Holy and
Instructive Example. Observe, 2. The care of Christ for his Disciples, in
reference to this their sad and disconsolate Condition. He would not leave them
Comfortless. Where Note, He does not say, I will not suffer you to be
comfortless, but I will not leave you so; that is, he will not desert or disown
them in their comfortless Condition; he will not leave them, either in point of
Affection, or in point of Activity: he will not cease to Love them, nor cease
to bestir himself for them. Learn hence, That Christ will not leave his Friends
in a sad and Comfortless state and Condition; though for a time they may be
brought into it. I will not leave you Comfortless; I will come unto you.
Christ's coming here unto them, is to be understood of his coming to them by
his Holy Spirit; in the Gifts of it, in the Graces of it, and in the Comforts
of it; thus he did not long leave them Comfortless, but at the Feast of
Pentecost came again to them.

19 Yet a little while, and the world sees me no more: but ye see me: because
I live, ye shall live also. 20 At that day ye shall know, that I am in my
Father, and you in me, and I in you.

Here our Savior foretells his approaching Death, that within a little time the
Men of the World should see him no more; for though he arose again, the World saw
him no more, after his Death; for we Read of no Appearances of him, after his
Resurrection to any, but to his Disciples only; indeed the hour is coming when
the World shall see him again. Namely, At the Day of Judgment; when every Eye
shall behold him with Terror and Amazement. Observe farther, The Consolation
given to his Disciples; Ye shall see me, and because I live, ye shall live
also. Because I am raised from the Grave, I will quicken your Dead Bodies in
the Grave, and ye shall live also; and as I live by my Ascension into Heaven,
so shall you my Disciples live a Life of Grace here, and a Life of Glory with
my self hereafter. Learn hence, That a Believer's Spiritual Life is derived
from Christ, who by his Spirit Communicates a quickening virtue to all his
Members: because he lives they shall live also. Observe lastly, A farther
privilege ensured to Believers after Christ's Ascension, and the Spirits
Mission; they should more perfectly understand the Essential union, betwixt
Christ and the Father, and the Mystical Union betwixt Christ and his Members.
At that Day ye shall know that I am in my Father, etc. The knowledge which the
Saints now have of the Mysterious and Mystical Union, is but dark and
imperfect; but in Heaven they shall understand these things clearly.

21 He that has my commandments, and keeps them, he it is that loves me:
and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and
will manifest my self to him.

Our Blessed Savior in these words repeats what he had before injoined, at
Verse 15. Namely, to evidence the sincerity of our Love to him, by the
Universality of our Obedience to his Commands. He that has my Commandments and
keeps them, he it is that loves me. Where Note, 1. The Necessity of
Knowledge in order unto Practice. 2. The Necessity of Practice in order unto
Happiness; we must first have Christ's Commandments before we can keep them, we
must have them in our Understandings and Judgments, in our Wills and
Affections, not have them only in our Eyes to read, in our Ears to hear, or in
our Mouths to talk of them; but to hide them in our Hearts, that we may not Sin
against Christ in the wilful violation of them: Farther we must keep, as well
as have these Commandments. This denotes an universal, diligent, and
persevering Obedience to them. Hence Learn, That although many loose Professors
pretend love to Christ, because they hear, read, know, and can talk of his
Commandments; yet in Christ's Account, none do truly love him, but those who
make Conscience of their Obedience to him. He that has my Commandments and
keeps them, he it is that loves me. Observe next, The gracious Promise of
Christ, to such as thus express their Love unto him. 1. He shall be loved of my
Father, and of my self, And shall he not be loved of the Holy Ghost too? Yes,
no doubt: But why is not he named then? Because the Son dwells in us by the
Spirit, and sheds his Love abroad in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost. 2. I will
manifest my self unto him; that is, such Obedient Christians shall not only
enjoy the Fruit and Benefit of my Love, but they shall enjoy the Sense of my
Love, and experience the sensible manifestations, and inward diffusions of my
Love in their own Souls. Learn hence, That the only way to have Christ Love us,
and to let out his Love upon us, and to know that he Loves us, is to look
diligently to our Obediential walking with him and before him. We may as
rationally think to nourish our Bodies with Poison, as to enjoy the
manifestations of Christ's Love in a way of Sin.

22 Judas says unto him, not Iscariot, Lord, how is it that thou will manifest
thy self unto us, and not unto the world?

Some understand these words of a Temporal manifestation; and think that Judas
the Brother of James, who spoke them, still expected that Christ should be a
Temporal Prince, and have such a Kingdom as should be Conspicuous to all the
World; and therefore puts the question how he could possibly show himself to
his Disciples, and the World not see him? Others understand it of a Spiritual
manifestation; as if he had said, Lord! who or what are we thy Disciples that
we should enjoy more special manifestations of thy Love to us, than to the rest
of the World; why should we be dignified with such distinguishing favors above
others? Learn thence, 1. That there is a real difference put by Christ, betwixt
his own Children and the World, in the matter of special Manifestations. 2.
That there being no cause from the Creature, why Christ should make this
difference, his discriminating Grace is matter of just and great Admiration;
well might the Apostle out of a deep Admiration, say, Lord! how is it that thou will manifest thy self to us, and not unto the World?

23 Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love me, he will keep my words:
and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with
him. 24 He that loves me not, keeps not my sayings: and the word which you
hear, is not mine, but the Fathers which sent me.

Observe here, How our Savior still goes on to direct and encourage his
Disciples, to evidence the sincerity of their Love to his Person, by the
universality of their Obedience to his Commands; and tells them how great their
Advantage would be by so doing. For First, the Father will love them; that is,
manifest his favor to them in farther dispensations of Grace and Comfort.
Learn thence, That all the Manifestations of Divine Love to the Souls of
Believers, depend upon their close walking with God, in the paths of Holiness
and strict Obedience. Secondly, We will make our abode with him. He shall have
Father and Son's Company, an Allusion to a Parent that has many Children; he
will be sure to live with them that are most Dutiful to him, and most observant
of him. The expression of making their abode with us; denotes that sweet and
intimate fellowship which shall be betwixt God and us, and the perpetuity and
constancy of it at all times; till we are taken up by him into Heaven, he will
make his abode with us, by the indwelling presence of his Holy Spirit, the
Graces and Comforts, whereof shall abide with us for ever.

25 These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present with you. 26 But the
Comforter, which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he
shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance whatsoever
I have said unto you.

Here we have a repeated Promise of the Mission of the Holy Ghost, called the
Comforter, and his special Office declared. Namely, To teach and to bring to
remembrance what Christ had taught. He shall teach you all things. As the
Spirit of God is the great Comforter, so he is the special Teacher of his
Children; he Teaches condescendingly, stooping to the meanest capacities; he
Teaches efficaciously, inclining the Heart to receive Instruction, as well as
opening the Ear to hear it; he Teaches plainly and ^learly, unerringly and
infallibly; he is Truth it self, and therefore his teachings are most True. And
as the Holy Spirit is the Saints Teacher, so is he also their Remembrancer; He
shall bring all things to your Remembrance; that is, all Truths needful to be
known, and necessary to Salvation. Here Note, That the Holy Spirit Teaches
nothing but what Christ himself Taught; the Spirit Teaches in the word and by
the word, but never Teaches any thing contrary to the word. He shall Teach and
bring to Remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you.

27 Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world gives,
give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.

As if our Lord had said, Whatever outward Trouble the World gives you, be not
afraid of it before it comes; nor troubled at it when it is come, for I will
give you inward Peace in the midst of all your outward Troubles. Not as the
world gives, give I unto you. Where Note, That Christ's Peace is vastly
different from that Peace which is given, or enjoyed by the World; the World
may wish Peace, yet never intend it, or they may wish it, yet not be able to
give it; but Christ's Peace is real and effectual, solid and substantial; the
World's Peace is only a freedom from outward trouble, but Christ's Peace is a
deliverance from inward guilt; and though it does not give us an exemption from
outward Troubles; yet it gives us a sanctified use and improvement of them, and
assures us of a Joyful Issue and deliverance out of them.

28 Ye have heard how I said unto you, I go away, and come again unto you. If
ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I said, I go unto the Father: for my
Father is greater then I.

That the Disciples of Christ might neither be overset with fears, nor
overwhelmed with grief; he tells them that they ought to entertain the news of
his departure rather with joy and exaltation, than with sorrow and dejection.
If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I go to the Father. True Love to
Christ will make us rejoice in his Advancement and Exaltation, although it be to
our own disadvantage. Those words, my Father is greater then I, must be
understood with reference to his Humane Nature, as Mediator; for so he was the
Father's Servant, and the Father as God was greater than he as Man; again, the
Father may be said to be greater than Christ, in regard of his Paternity, as
being the fountain of the Deity; the Father is of himself, but the Son is
begotten of the Father; but being of the same Substance with the Father, he is
consequently God as the Father is God; for the inequality arises not from the
Essence, but from the order and manner of Subsistence. Thus the Father was
greater than He.

29 And now I have told you before it come to pass, that when it is come to
pass, ye might believe. 30 Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the
prince of this world comes, and has nothing in me. 31 But that the world may
know that I love the Father; and as the Father gave me commandment, even so I
do. Arise, let us go hence.

The time of our Savior's Death now nearer and nearer Approaching, he prepares
the expectation of his Disciples for it; because evils that surprise us
suddenly do sink our Spirits sadly, whereas, what we fear, for that we prepare.
Accordingly our Lord arms his dear Disciples against all disquietude, and
overwhelming sorrow for his Departure from them; I have told you before, that
when it comes to pass ye might believe; that is, be assured that I am not mere
Man, but truly and really God, and depend upon me for Life and Salvation.
Observe, 2. How our Savior points out the cause of his Sufferings. Namely,
Satan and his Instruments, The Prince of this World comes; that is, by Judas,
the Soldiers, and the High Priests, but he has nothing in me; that is, he will
find no Sin or Corruption in me to side with his Temptations, or no guilt upon
me to give him any Advantage against me, for I shall Die as a perfectly
Innocent person. Christ in Suffering for our Sins, did not only conflict with
the wrath of God, but with the rage of Men and Devils; yet all the power and
policy, all the malice and cruelty of Satan cannot prevail against Christ, any
further than he voluntarily yields and submits himself unto it. The Prince of
this World comes, but has nothing in me. Observe, 3. That it was Christ's
Love and Obedience to his Father, that carried him forth so cheerfully to the
work of Sufferings, supported him under it, and carried him thorough it. That
the World may know that I love the Father, and as the Father gave me
Commandment, even so I do. True Love to God will draw Men to Obedience in the
hardest Services and Sufferings; the grand motive of Christ's Sufferings was
Love to his Father, Obedience to his Commands, and a regard to his Glory. Lord,
Let thy Love and Obedience to thy Father in all thy Sufferings, be the subject
of our Admiration, and the matter of our Imitation also. As the Father gives us
Commandment, so let us always do.

CHAP. XV.
1 I Am the true vine, and my Father is the husbandman. 2. Every branch in me
that bears not fruit, he takes away: and every branch that bears fruit, he
purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit.

Observe here, How our blessed Savior under the Metaphor of a Vine elegantly
sets forth himself in his relation to his visible Church, showing under that
similitude, what his Father meant to do with Judas, and with all unfruitful
Branches like unto him, even take them away, cut them off, and throw them into
the Fire; but such as are fruitful, he purges, by his Word and Spirit, by
Ordinances and Providence, by Mercies and Afflictions, that they may be more
aboundingly and abidingly fruitful. Learn hence, 1. That Jesus Christ in his
offices for, and relation to his People, does most fitly resemble a Vine. As
the Vine is weak, mean, and small in outward appearance; not like the Cedar for
height, or like the Oak for strength, so was Christ in his state of
humiliation; there was no beauty in him. Isa. 53. As the Vine is a fruitful
Plant, though it has little pomp, yet has it much plenty, and is only useful for
fruit-bearing, and brings forth both plenty and variety of sweet fruit to make
glad the Heart of Man; thus the fruits of Christ's Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, and Intercession, are many and great, delightful and sweet. In a
word, as the fruit of the Vine is pressed that it may be Drink unto Men, so
Christ submitted to be Trod in the Wine Press of God's Wrath, that thereby the
sweetest fruit and benefit might redound to his People. Finally, as the Vine is
the Root from which all the Branches derive their nourishment and fruitfulness;
in like manner is Christ the Stock, into which all his Members are ingrafted;
the Root in which they all subsist, and the fountain from whence their
spiritual Life and Fruitfulness does proceed and flow. Learn, 2. That as Christ
is the Vine, so his Father is the Husbandman; he ingrafts and implants all the
Branches into this Vine; the Plants of Righteousness are of his own planting;
he takes notice what store of Fruit every Branch does bring forth; and it is
his daily care to dress and dung, to purge and prune, to support and shelter
his Vineyard, that it may bring forth Fruit abundantly. Learn, 3. That there
are two sorts of Branches in this Vnie, some fruitful, others unfruitful; some
have the visibility, but not the reality of Branches; some are branches only by
external profession, others are so by real implantation. Learn, 4. That the
true Touchstone whereby to discern one sort of Branches from another, is not by
the fair Leaves of Profession, but by the substantial Fruits of an Holy and
Righteous Conversation. Learn, 5. That in the most fruitful Branches, in the
best and holiest of Christians, there remains much Corruption to be purged out,
in order to future and farther fruitfulness. Learn, 6. That the Husbandman's
hand (God the Father's) manages the pruning Knife of Affliction, in order to
his Peoples improvement in Grace and Holiness; he had rather see his Vine
Bleed, than see it Barren. Lastly, That such Branches as after all the
Husbandman's Care and Cost remain unfruitful, shall be finally cut off and cast
away; as was Judas here, who in this Discourse of our Savior seems
particularly and especially to be aimed at: He was a Branch in him that bare no
Fruit, who was shortly after taken away and went to his own place.

3 Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. 4 Abide in
me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide
in the Vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me. 5 I am the vine, ye are the
branches: He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much
fruit: for without me ye can do nothing.

Our Savior having in the former Verses distinguished his Disciples into two
sorts; some that were Members of his Body the Church, and Branches of him the
true Vine, by outward show and visible profession only; others that are
spiritually ingrafted into him, and do bring forth much fruit; now in this
third Verse, Christ tells his Disciples which number they were of: Now (says
he) ye are clean, through the word which I have spoken unto you; that is, Now
that Judas the Traitor, that Dead, Rotten, fruitless Branch, is cut off and
cast out, ye are all clean, through the cleansing Power and Virtue of my Word and
Doctrine. Learn hence, 1. That such as are justified by the Blood, and
sanctified by the Spirit of Christ, are in Christ's Account clean,
notwithstanding their many spots and manifold imperfections. Now are ye clean.
2. That as the Blood of Christ is the meritorious, and the Spirit of Christ the
efficacious; so the word of Christ is the Instrumental cause of a Believer's
Purification and Cleansing. Now are ye clean through the word which I have
spoken unto you. Abide in me, and I in you. That is, Abide in me, and I will
abide in you; Abide in me, not only by an outward and visible Profession, but
by a real and fiducial Adherence; and I will abide in you, by the influences
and operations of my Holy Spirit. The Union and Conjunction between Christ and
his Members is mutual, they abide in him by Faith and dependence, and he abides
in them by the indwelling presence of his Grace and Spirit. Abide in me, and I
will abide in you. Observe, Farther the Reason which Christ gives, why they
should thus abide in him, because without Union with him, without interest in
him, without influences of Grace derived from him; they could bring forth no
fruit for him, nor do any thing that is truly acceptable and well-pleasing to
him. As the Branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine,
no more can ye except ye abide in me, for without me ye can do nothing. That
is, As brances severed from the Vine cannot live nor bear Fruit, so neither can
Christians separated from Christ, and without deriving virtue from him do any
thing spiritually good and well-pleasing in the sight of God. Learn hence, That
not only unregenerate Men do labor under an impotency, to that which is
spiritually good, but even Disciples themselves, without daily dependence upon
Christ, and without constant communications of Grace from him, can do nothing
in a lively and acceptable way and manner unto him; without me Ye can do
nothing, you that are Branches of me the true Vine.

6 If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered; and
men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned.

Here our Holy Lord discovers the sad and deplorable Condition of such
professors, who pretending Relation to Christ, do yet bring forth no fruit unto
him; he calls them withered Branches fit only for the Fire. Learn hence, That
such as have had a long standing in God's Vineyard, and contented themselves
with a withered profession; they are in great danger of having God's blasting
added to their Barrenness. All their parts and gifts and common Graces will
wither, and their fair Blossoms of Profession will drop off; and at the great
Day the Angels will gather these fruitless Branches together and cast them into
Hell fire.

7 If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, and
it shall be done unto you.

Observe here, 1. A glorious privilege declared. Ask what ye will, it shall be
done unto you. Not that we are hereby warranted to ask what we please at God's
hand, but our Will must be limited by the Word and Will of God; we must pray in
Faith, and in the Name and Mediation of Jesus Christ, and with a single Eye at
the Glory of God. Observe, 2. The Condition upon which this privilege is
attainable. If ye abide in me, and my word abide in you; that is, practically
and experimentally. If my Doctrine and Commands abide in your Hearts, and
dispose you to an Holy fruitfulness in your Lives, then shall all your just
requests be granted. Learn, That such as by Faith embrace the Promises, and by
Obedience live up to the Precepts of the Gospel, may in Prayer humbly ask of
God what they will, with a due Submission to the Wisdom and Will of God.

8 Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit, so shall ye be my
disciples.

Our Lord here exhorts his Followers to an Holy fruitfulness in good works by a
double Argument. One drawn from the Glory of God. Herein is my Father
glorified. The other from their own Advantage; so shall ye be my Disciples.
That is, hereby ye shall evidence and prove your selves to be my Disciples.
Learn hence, That a Christian's abounding fruitfulness in good works, will
abundantly conduce to the Honor and Glory of God, and also to his own Peace
and Comfort, by being the best evidence of his Discipleship.

9 As the Father has loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye in my love.

Lord! What a comparison is here. As the Father has loved me, so have I loved
you; he does not say, as the Father has loved me, so have I loved him; but so
have I loved you; nor does he say, as God has loved me, so have I loved you;
but As the Father, it is, verbum dilectionis, a word importing dearness of
Affection; nor does he say, the Father has loved me, and I love you; but as
the Father has loved me, so have I loved you; nor does he say, as the Father
has loved me, so will I love you: but so have I loved you. This shows the
priority of Christ's love, that he loved us first, and also denotes the
invincible constancy of his love, and the indubitable certainty thereof. I have
loved you: Follow me from Heaven to Earth, and from Earth to Heaven again; and
you will find that every step I have taken has been in love. Learn, 1. That
the Lord Jesus Christ has given full and ample Demonstration of his great and
wonderful love unto his Church and People. 2. That it is the Duty, and ought to
be the singular care of every Christian, to preserve the sweet sense and inward
diffusions of Christ's love in their own Souls. Continue ye in my love.

10 If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love: even as I have kept
my Fathers commandments, and abide in his love.

Christ had told his Disciples in the foregoing Verse, That he had loved them,
even as the Father had loved him. That is, with an eternal love, with a real
and operative love; with an immutable and constant love. In this Verse he
directs them how they may continue in the sense of his Love. Namely, By their
constant Obedience to his Commands, as his Obedience to his Father's Commands
had secured him a continuance in his Father's Love. If ye keep my Commandments,
ye shall abide in my love. That is, in the sense of my Love, and under the
sweet apprehensions of it. Learn hence, That as our Obedience to Christ is the
best Evidence of our Love to him, so is it the best means to preserve and keep
us in the sense and assurance of his Love to us.

11 These thing have I spoken unto you that my joy might remain in you, and
that your joy might be full.

In these words our Savior declares the Ground and Reason, why he did so
vehemently press and urge the Duty of being universally fruitful upon his
Disciples, and that was twofold. 1. That his joy might remain in them. That is,
That the joy which he had in their Holiness and Obedience might remain with
him; nothing is more desired by Christ, than that he may have cause continually
to rejoice in the Faith and fruitfulness of his People. 2. That their joy in
him might be full. This latter arises from the former; our joy in Christ
results from Christ's joy in us; his delight in us, causes us abundantly to
delight in him. Learn hence, That nothing is more desired by Christ, than that
the joy of his People should be a full, solid, constant, and uninterrupted joy.
2. That the only way and means in order thereunto, is by an Holy fruitfulness
in good works. All these things have I spoken unto you, that my joy may remain
in you, and that your joy might be full.

12 This is my commandment, That ye love one another, as I have loved you.

Our Lord had often in this farewell Sermon, of his, to his dear Disciples,
pressed upon them the Duty of loving one another. chapter 13, and 14. And yet here
he enforces it again from his own Example. As I have loved you, so love you one
another; that is, as truly and as sincerely for the manner, though not to the
same proportion and degree. Learn hence, That for the Disciples of Christ to
love one another upon such grounds, and in such a way as he loved them, is that
which his heart greatly desires and is very much set upon. 2. That Christ's
love unto Believers is both an obligation unto mutual love, and also a pattern
and example for it. This is my commandment, that ye love one another as I have
loved you.

13 Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends.

Here our Savior gives his Disciples an Evidence of the greatness of his love
unto them. Namely, In his readiness to lay down his Life for them, which is the
highest expression of Love to our dearest Friends, because Life is the greatest
earthly blessing. Learn hence, That Christ's Love in laying down his Life for
his People was a matchless Love; for whilst they were Enemies to him, he had a
friendly respect for them, and never ceased till he had brought them into a
covenant of friendship with himself.

14 Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you.

Here Christ invites his People to Obedience, by the honorable title of
Friends. Ye are my Friends. 1. Actively, you will declare and manifest your
selves to be my Friends. 2. Passively, I will declare my self to be your
Friend. Learn hence, 1. How condescending is the Love of Christ, in calling his
Servants by the name of Friends. 2. How glorious is the Believer's Relation to
Christ, in being one of his Friends. 3. How grateful is Obedience to Christ,
seeing it dignifies the Practisers of it, with the Title of his Friends. 4. Our
Conformity to Christ consists not so much in imitation of what he did, as in
Obedience to what he prescribed. Some Actions of Christ are unimitable, but all
his Commands are obeyable. 5. That nothing short of an humble, uniform,
cheerful and constant Obedience to the Commands of Christ, will Evidence the
Truth of our Relation to him, and the sincerity of our friendship with him.
Then only are ye my friends, when you do whatever I command you.

15 Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knows not what his
lord does: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of
my Father, I have made known unto you.

By these words Christ declares the Reason why he was pleased to change his
style, and call his Disciples Friends instead of Servants. Namely, Because of
his Communication of Secrets to them, which Servants are not admitted to the
knowledge of. Henceforth I call you not Servants; that is, not mere Servants,
not that they were to be exempted from Obedience; (for that is called for in
the foregoing Verse,) but Christ treated them now with the kindness and
familiarity of Friends; being about to leave them, he unbosoms himself unto
them, saying, All things that I have heard of my father I have made known unto
you. Not, as if Christ had communicated the infinite Treasures of knowledge to
them, which the Father had imparted to him; but he speaks here as the Prophet
of his Church, that as such he had revealed all things needful for them to know
in order to Salvation; all things belonging to their Case and State; as a
Counselor does not impart all his knowledge to his Clients; but all that is
necessary for his Client to understand and know, that he makes known unto him;
relating to his own Case. Learn hence, 1. That all Christ's Disciples are his
Servants, and all his Servants are his Friends, in regard of intimate Communion
and tender usage. Henceforth I call you not servants but friends. And after his
Resurrection he called them Brethren, John 20.17. The Dignity of Believers is a
growing Dignity, the longer they follow Christ, the higher privileges are
indulged to them. Learn, 2. That all the Fathers counsel concerning our
Salvation, and so far as it is needful and necessary for us to know, is
faithfully revealed by Christ to his Church; he being constituted by God the
Father to be the great Prophet and Instructor of it. All things that I have
heard of the Father I have made known unto you.

16 Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you
should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain: that
whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he may give it you.

Here our Savior gives another Instance and Evidence of his Love to his
Disciples; He tells them that his mercy and free goodness had prevented them in
their election to Eternal Salvation, and in their vocation unto the Office of
Apostleship. Ye have not chosen me, to be your Master and Lord, but I have
chosen you, to be my Disciples, Friends, and Servants. 2. He acquaints them
with the end, design, and intention of his, in choosing of them. Namely, That
they bring forth fruit, and persevere therein, even in all the Fruits of
Holiness and Obedience; which are to the Praise and Glory of God by Jesus
Christ. I have ordained you that you should bring forth fruit, and that your
fruit should Remain. 3. He directs them that in order to their being fruitful,
they should have access to the Father through him, for whatever they wanted and
stood in need of. Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name he will give it
you. Learn hence, That all those whom God has chosen, and called to the
knowledge and Service of Jesus Christ, do and will make it their chief care and
endeavors to bring forth Fruit, and to persevere therein to their Lives end. I
have chosen you, that you should bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should
remain.

17 These things I command you, that ye love one another. 18 If the world hate
you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. 19 If ye were of the world,
the world would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you. 20 Remember the
word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater then the lord. If they
have persecuted me, they will also persecute you: if they have kept my saying,
they will keep yours also. 21 But all these things will they do unto you for my
names sake, because they know not him that sent me.

Observe here, 1. With what frequency and importunity our Lord inculcates and
presses the Duty of mutual Love upon his Disciples. I command you to love one
another. It denotes the great importance of the Duty, and the great aversness
and backwardness of our Hearts to the performance of it. And if we consider the
Disciples as Apostles, and Ministers of the Gospel; it intimates to us the
necessity of mutual Love amongst the dispensers of the Gospel, as conducing
exceedingly to the welfare and benefit of the Church of God, over which he has
set them. Observe, 2. The Argument which our Savior makes use of to press his
Disciples in general, and his Ministers and Ambassadors in particular to love
each other; and that is, because the World would certainly hate them. Learn
hence, That the World's hatred of the Members and Ministers of Christ is, and
ought to be esteemed by them, a strong Argument to excite and persuade them to
Love one another; for this is subjoined as an Argument to press mutual Love,
that we are sure to meet with the World's hatred. Observe, 3. The several
Arguments by way of encouragement, which Christ propounds to Comfort his
Members and Ministers against the World's hatred. 1. Argument is taken from his
own Lot and usage, when here in the World, he met with the very same before
them. The World hated me before it hated you. Learn hence, That Hatred and
Persecution from the World, need not seem hard to the Saints, if they consider
what a shock Christ, before them, had upon him; he is the prime Object of the
World's Hatred, and they who hate his Members much, do hate him more; because
of their likeness to him, and resemblance of him. A second Argument of Comfort
under the World's Hatred, is this, That it will evidence they are not of the
World; but chosen out of the World. v. 19. Because ye are not of the World, but
I have chosen you out of the World, therefore the World hates you. Hence learn,
1. That the Children of God though in the World, yet they are not of the World;
they have not the Spirit of the World in them, nor is the Conversation of the
World led by them. 2. That the difference betwixt them that are of the World,
and those that are chosen out of the World is of God's making. I have chosen
you out of the World. 3. That such Christians as are separated from the World
in Judgment, Affection and Practice, must for that reason expect to be Hated
and Persecuted by the World. Because ye are not of the World, therefore the
World hates you. The Third Argument for Consolation and Support, under the
World's hatred, is taken from our Relation to Christ, as Servants to a Master,
v. 20. Remember, the Servant is not greater than his Lord. As if Christ had
said, is it equal, That you should expect better Treatment than my self, either
as to your Persons or Ministry? or that you should expect that the World should
better Receive your Doctrine than it did mine before you? Learn hence, That
neither the Members nor Ministers of Christ can, nor ought to expect better
Entertainment in, and from, the World than he their Master found before them.
The Servant is not above his Master, nor greater than his Lord. A Fourth
Argument to support them under the Burden of the World's Hatred, is taken from
the goodness of the Cause, for which they were to Suffer, Namely, For Christ's
Name sake. v. 21. All these things will they do unto you for my name sake.
Hence learn, 1. That it is the Duty of all, but especially the Ministers of
Christ, to own the Name of Christ, to stand up in defense of his Name and
Truth, his Glory and Honor; what opposition soever they meet with for the
same. Learn, 2. That the great quarrel of the World against the Disciples of
Christ, is for the Name of Christ, whatever may be pretended; this is the
ground of the quarrel.

22 If I had not come, and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they
have no cloak for their sin.

These Words are not to be understood Absolutely but Comparatively; as if
Christ had said, had not I come amongst them in my Incarnation, and Preached
personally to them the Doctrine of Salvation, and confirmed that Doctrine by
miraculous operations, they might have pleaded Ignorance in some measure; and,
they had not had sin; that is, they had not had the Sin of Unbelief, and
Gospel-Contempt to Answer for; or had not had so great a measure of any kind of
Sin to Answer for, as now they have; but would have had more to say in excuse,
or for a cover for their Sin than now they can. But now they have no Cloak for
their Sin; That is, they are totally inexcusable, and have not the least color
or pretense for their obstinate unbelief. Learn hence, 1. That Sins of
Ignorance are as it were no Sins compared with Sins committed against light and
Knowledge. 2. That Sins committed against Gospel Light, are of an heinous
Nature, and Aggravated Guilt, as being committed against the very Remedy. 3.
That the Gospel where it is plainly preached does take away all pretense and
excuse from Sinners. Now they have no Cloak for their Sin.

23 He that hates me, hates my Father also. 24 If I had not done among them
the works which none other man did, they had not had sin: but now they have
both seen, and hated both me and my Father. 25 But this comes to pass, that
the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law, they hated me without
a cause.

These words declare the heinous Nature of the Pharisees sin, in hating and
persecuting Christ, who had done before their Eyes such Works as no Man besides
him, or before him, ever did; he acting by his own Power. Peter healed the lame
Man, Acts 3. but it was in the Name of Jesus of Nazareth; But Christ healed the
sick and raised the dead in his own Name, and by a special Word of Command; I
say unto thee, Arise: Yet did the Pharisees hate him and his Father, according
to the Prediction, Psalm 35.19. They hated me without a cause. Which being
spoken of David in Type, received a more eminent Accomplishment in Christ the
Son of David. Learn hence, 1. That let Men pretend to never so much Holiness or
Respect to God, yet if they hate Christ, and despise his Gospel, they are
haters of God, who is One in Essence and Nature with his Son: He that hates
me, hates my Father also. Learn, 2. That no Miracles wrought by mortal Men,
were ever comparable with the Miracles wrought by Christ the Son of God; his
did surpass them all, in number, kind, and manner of doing them; by his own
Authority, in his own Name, and not as others, who obtained their Power by
Prayer from God. I have done amongst them the works which none other man did.
Learn, 3. That Christ's having confirmed his Doctrine by such unparalled
Miracles as the World was never before acquainted with, does aggravate the sin
of those that are Haters of his Person, Despisers of his Doctrine, and
Reproachers of his Miracles. It being just with God, when Men obstinately shut
their Eyes and will not see, judicially to close their Eyes and say, They shall
not see.

26 But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father,
even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify
of me. 27 And ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the
beginning.

Here our Holy Lord Comforts himself, that though he had lain then under many
Aspersions and Scandals from the World, yet all these should be done away by
the coming of the Holy Spirit, who should testify of him, and make his Person
and Doctrine to be acknowledged in the World; and that they themselves should
bear witness of him, who had been with him from the beginning; that is, since
he first began to exercise his Prophetic Office. Observe here, 1. That Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, are Three distinct Persons in the Godhead. 2. That the
Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son: Here the Son is said to send
him; and as to the Father, he is said to proceed from him. If the Holy Ghost
does not proceed from the Son, why is he called the Spirit of the Son? Gal.
4.6. Why is he said here to be sent by the Son? The Comforter whom I will send
unto you from the Father. And if the Spirit does not proceed from the Son, what
personal Relation can we conceive betwixt the Son and the Spirit. Observe, 3.
That it is the high Dignity and Honor of the Apostles and Ministers of Christ,
that the Spirit bears no Testimony unto Christ, but with and according to the
Testimony given by them; for here it is conjoined, He shall testify of me; and
ye also shall bear witness, who have been with me from the beginning.

CHAP. XVI.
1 THese things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended. 2 They
shall put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time comes, that whosoever
kills you will think that he does God service. 3 And these things will they
do unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor me. 4 But these things
have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may remember that I told you
of them. And these things I said unto you at the beginning, because I was with
you.

In the close of the foregoing Chapter our blessed Savior had acquainted his
Disciples with the hatred and hard usage which they were like to meet with from
the World; and here he intimates to them the Reason why he did so much insist
upon the Subject; namely, not to sadden their Hearts and grieve their Spirits
before their Sufferings came, but that they might not be offended, discouraged,
or scandalized at them when they came, but prepared for them and armed against
them. Hence Learn, 1. That all Afflictions, but especially Persecutions, are so
searching and trying, that the best of Christians have need to be guarded
against them, that they may not be offended at them. 2. That it was the great
Design of Christ to Arm his Disciples against the Scandal of the Cross, lest
stumbling at that which they expected not, they should fall from the Profession
of Christianity. These things have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be
offended. Observe, 2. How our Savior instances in two particular sorts and
kinds of Sufferings which his Disciples were to expect, in the World and from
the World, namely, Excommunication and Martyrdom, ver. 2. They shall put you
out of their Synagogues; that is, exclude them from all their Assemblies both
Civil and Religious, and shall not only think it lawful, but a very acceptable
Service to God, to put them to death: Whosoever kills you, will think that he
does God service. Observe, 3. How Christ discovers to his dear Disciples, the
Cause and Ground of the World's Hatred against them, and Enmity toward them;
namely, their Ignorance of the Father and himself, ver. 3. These things will
they do, because they have not known the Father, nor me. From whence we may
Learn, That all the Persecutions of the Saints, do speak in Persecutors an
Ignorance both of God the Father and of Jesus Christ his Son. All Persecution
springs from Ignorance as well as from Malice. And Men who continue ignorant of
God and Christ, are in danger of turning Persecutors, if they have a temptation
to it. Observe, 4. How our Lord again forewarns his Disciples of their
approaching Sufferings, to the intent that they might remember that he had
foretold them of them, and would not fail to support them under them. He had
often told them in general of Persecutions and Troubles which they must expect
to meet with, but did not till now intimate the kinds and degrees of those
Sufferings, with respect to their Weakness; and because, whilst he was with
them, he himself bear the brunt of all; the Worlds Rage falling upon him,
letting them along. But after his Ascension, when the Malice of Satan and
wicked Men could not reach him, then did the Storm fall upon them. Hence learn,
1. That Christ is so tender of his Disciples Weakness, that he will not put
them upon the hardship of Sufferings till they be trained up and prepared for
them. 2. That it may encourage the Saints in and under their Sufferings, that
Christ himself is the great Object of the Persecutors Malice; and they only so,
for his sake; for could they reach him, they would not concern themselves with
them. Learn, 3. That the Saints of God, after long Exemption and Freedom from
Sufferings, must expect that Storms will arise, Clouds gather thick, and Trials
come on a pace; and their being under one Trial, will not hide or shelter them
from another.

5 But now I go my way to him that sent me, and none of you asks me, Whither
go thou? 6 But because I have said these things unto you, sorrow has filled
your heart.

Observe here, How our Savior again intimates to his Disciples his speedy
departure from them, and reproves them for being so sadded as it, and concerned
for it; without considering the End and Design of it, and the Benefit and
Advantage they were to receive by it. Here we see how the Disciples Thoughts
were wholly taken up about themselves, what they should do for want of Christ's
bodily Presence, without being instant with him to know whither he was going,
and what Benefit he should reap, and they might expect from his departure.
Learn hence, That Christ's Disciples ought not so much to have lamented the
loss of his bodily Presence, as to have rejoiced in his Glorious Exaltation,
and in their own Advantages by his Death, Resurrection and Ascension. None of
you ask me, Whither go thou? But sorrow has filled your heart.

7 Nevertheless, I tell you the truth; It is expedient for you that I go away:
for if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I
will send him unto you.

In these words our Savior urges his Disciples to submit to his Departure, as
that which would make way for his sending the Comforter to them; which he
assures them would be of more Advantage to them than his own stay and
continuance amongst them. Thence learn, That the Presence of the Holy Spirit
with us, is a greater Comfort and Advantage to us, than the Presence of Christ
in the Flesh amongst us. Christ's bodily Presence was comfortable, but the
Spirit is more intimately a Comforter than Christ in his fleshly Presence:
Because the Spirit can comfort all Believers at once, in all Places; but
Christ's bodily Presence can comfort but few, and that in one Place only, at
once. Christ did converse with his Disciples outwardly, but the Spirit
possessed himself of their Hearts inwardly. Now for the Spirit to dwell in us,
is more advantageous than to have Christ dwell in the Flesh amongst us. The
Benefit of Christ's Conversation was great, but the Advantage of the Spirit's
Renovation and holy Inspirations is much greater: The one encourages and
excites us to be Holy, but the other quickens and enables us to be Holy.
Therefore well might Christ say, It is expedient, or highly necessary and
advantageous for you, that I go away. He subjoyns a Reason; If I go not away,
the Comforter will not come; but if I depart, I will send him to you. Whence we
learn, That Christ's Ascension was indispensably necessary, in order to the
Spirit's Mission; the Spirit could not have descended, if Christ had not first
ascended; the Spirit could not come, but by the Gift and Mission of the
Mediator. Now the sending of the Spirit being a part of Christ's Royalty, as
Mediator, it was not convenient that the Spirit should be sent, till Christ was
Crowned, and sat down on his Throne in his Kingdom; then the Spirit was to
make Application to us, of the Redemption purchased for us.

8 And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness,
and of judgment: 9 Of sin, because they believe not on me; 10 Of righteousness,
because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more; 11 Of judgment, because the
prince of this world is judged.

In these and the following Verses our Savior acquaints his Disciples with the
Advantages that will redound by the coming of the Comforter. First, The
Advantage to the World. Secondly, To the Apostles. And, Thirdly, To himself. To
the World, 1. He shall convince them of Sin, Righteousness, and Judgment. Of
Sin; that is, of their sinful State and Nature; of the large extent of Sin; and
particularly of the sin of Unbelief. Learn hence, 1. That the Spirit of God is
the Author of Conviction of Sin, and that all Convictions of Sin do either
mediately or immediately flow from him. 2. That Unbelief is a Sin of the
greatest malignity against Christ, and of greatest danger to a Christian's
Soul. He shall convince the World of Sin, because they believe not on me.
Secondly, Of Righteousness; that is, of the insufficiency of all humane
Righteousness, and of the necessity of the Righteousness of a Mediator; by
which alone we are to expect acceptance with God. Thirdly, Of Judgment; that
is, the Spirit shall convince the World, that Jesus is both Lord and Christ,
that he had a Power to judge Satan the Prince of the World, and that he did by
his Death put down the Kingdom of Darkness. Learn hence, 1. That Satan is a
Prince who by unjust Usurpation, and the Sinners voluntary Consent, has
exercised a Tyrannical Power over the World. 2. That Christ by his Death, did
judge, condemn and overcome this mighty Prince; and has made his Conquest
evident to the Consciences of Men, by the Convictions of his Holy Spirit. The
Spirit shall convince of Judgment; that is, that Satan the Prince of this World
is judged.

12 I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. 13
Howbeit when he the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all truth:

The second Benefit which our Savior declares was to be expected by the coming
of the Holy Spirit, relates to the Apostles themselves. He shall guide you into
all Truth; that is, into all Truth necessary for you to know in order to
Salvation. This is a principal Text which the Papists bring for their Doctrine
of Infallibility, but groundlesly: For this Promise was made to all the
Apostles as well as Peter; nay, not only to the Apostles, but to all their
Successors; yea, not to the Apostles only and their Successors, but to all
Believer: also; for they are led by the Spirit of God, and that into all Truth
too; not absolutely, but into all necessary Truth: And so far as a private
Christian follows the Conduct and Guidance of the Divine Spirit, he is more
infallible than either Pope or Council, who follow the Dictates and Direction
of their own Spirits only.

13 For he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall
he speak: and he will show you things to come.

That is, he shall not teach you a private Doctrine, or that which is contrary
to what ye have learned of me; but whatsoever he shall hear of me, and receive
from me, that shall he speak; and he will show you things to come. This affords
an Argument to prove the Holy Spirit to be God: He that can show us things to
come, he that clearly foreseeth and infallibly foretells what shall be,
before it is, is certainly God. But this the Holy Spirit does; he will show you
things to come. Men and Devils may guess at things to come, but none can show
things to come, but he that is truly and really God; therefore the Spirit is so.

14 He shall glorify me: for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto
you. 15 All things that the Father has, are mine: therefore said I, that he
shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you.

Here Christ shows the Advantage which would redound to himself by the coming
of the Comforter; he declares that the Spirit should glorify him by his
Testimony, Gifts, and Miracles, and shall in all things accord with him, and
thereby evidence that he has his Mission from him: He shall receive of mine,
and shall show it unto you. And all things that the Father has are mine. Hence
learn, That although the Union in Essence amongst the Persons in the Trinity is
the same, yet the Order of their Subsistence and Operation is distinct; the Son
being from the Father, and the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son. For all
things that the Father has, are mine: And the Spirit shall take of mine, and
shall show it unto you.

16 A little while and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while and ye
shall see me, because I go to the Father. 17 Then said some of his disciples
among themselves, What is this that he says unto us, A little while and ye
shall not see me: and again, a little while and ye shall see me: and, Because I
go to the Father? 18 They said therefore, What is this that he says, A little
while? we cannot tell what he says. 19 Now Jesus knew that they were desirous
to ask him, and said unto them, Do ye enquire among your selves of that I said,
A little while and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while and ye shall
see me? 20 Verily verily I say unto you, that ye shall weep and lament, but the
world shall rejoice: and ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy. 21 A woman when she is in travail, has sorrow, because her hour is
come: but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the
anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world. 22 And ye now therefore
have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your
joy no man takes from you.

In these Words our Holy Lord proceeds to comfort his Disciples with a Promise,
That, however, he was now to be removed from them, yet they should shortly see
him again; namely, after his Resurrection; it being impossible that he should
be held by Death, but must arise and go to his Father. His Disciples not
understanding what he meant, but laboring under the Prejudices of their
national Errors, concerning the Temporal Kingdom of the Messiah, knew not what
to make of those Words, A little while and ye shall not see me. Our Savior
therefore explains himself to his Disciples, telling them that they shall have
a time of sad sorrow and grief of Heart, during the time of his suffering and
absence from them, but their Sadness should soon be turned into Joy, when they
shall see him alive again after his Resurrection. This he illustrates by the
Similitude of a travailing Woman, who soon forgets her Sorrow after she has
brought forth a Child. Thus will their Hearts revive upon the sight of him
risen from the Grave, and no Man shall be able to take their Joy away from
them, because he shall die no more, but go to Heaven, and there live for ever,
to make Intercession for them. Learn hence, 1. From the Apostles not
understanding Christ's Words concerning his Departure, though so often inculcated
upon them, A little while and ye shall not see me, because I go to the Father.
Hence Note, How unreasonable it is to arrogate to Man's understanding a Power
to comprehend Spiritual Mysteries, yea, to understand the plainest Truths, till
Christ enlightens the Understanding; let the Doctrine be delivered never so
plainly, and repeated never so frequently, yet will Men continue ignorant
without Divine Illumination. How often had this plain Doctrine of Christ's
departure to the Father, been preached to the Disciples by Christ's own Mouth,
yet still they say, What is this he says? We cannot tell what he says. Learn,
2. From the different Effects which Christ's absence should have upon the
World, and upon his Disciples: The World will rejoice, but ye shall weep and
lament. Note, 1. That it is the wretched Disposition of the World to rejoice in
the absence and want of Christ out of the World: When I am gone, the World will
rejoice. 2. That nothing is the cause of so much Sorrow and Sadness to sincere
Disciples, as Christ's absence and removal from them: Such is their Estimation
of the worth of him, so great is their Apprehension of the want of him, that
there is no loss comparable to his absence and removal from them; ye shall weep
and lament at my departure, though the World will rejoice. Learn, 3. That the
Believers Sorrow for Christ's absence, though it be very great, yet it shall not
be perpetual. Ye have now sorrow; but I will see you again, and your heart
shall rejoice, and your joy shall no man take from you. The Joy of the Saints
may be interrupted, it shall never be totally extinguished, it is a permanent
Joy, of which they shall never be totally deprived, till they enter into the
Ocean of eternal Joy. Your Joy no Man takes from you.

23 And in that day ye shall ask me nothing: Verily verily I say unto you,
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it you. 24 Hitherto
have ye asked nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy may
be full.

At the first reading of the 23d Verse there seems to be a contradiction in the
words. Christ tells them in the former part of the Verse, That they shall ask
him nothing in that Day, and yet promises that whatever they ask shall be given
them, in the latter part of the Verse. To resolve this, know that there is a
twofold asking one by way of Question, the other by way of Petition. The former
is asking that we may know, or be informed in what we doubt, the latter is
asking that we may receive, and be supplied with what we want; now when Christ
says, In that day ye shall ask me nothing; it is as much as if he had said, at
present you understand but little of the Mysteries of Religion, and therefore
ye put Questions about many things. But in that Day when the Comforter comes,
ye shall be so clearly enlightened by him, that ye shall not need to ask me any
more Questions. But when Christ says, Whatever ye ask the Father in my name,
he will give it. The meaning is, In that day when I have left the World, and
ascended to my Father, you shall not need to address your Prayers to me, but to
my Father in my name. But what is it to pray in the name of Christ? Answer, It
is more than to name Christ in Prayer; it is easy to name Christ in Prayer,
but no easy thing to pray in the name of Christ. To pray in the name of
Christ, is, 1. To look up to Christ, as having purchased for us this
Privilege, that we may pray; for it is by the Blood of Christ that we draw
near to God, and that a Throne of Grace is open for us. 2. To pray in the name
of Christ, is to pray in the strength of Christ, by the assistance of his
Grace, and the help of his Holy Spirit. 3. To pray in the name of Christ, is to
pray by Faith in the Virtue of Christ's Mediation and Intercession, believing
that what we ask on Earth, he interceeds for and obtains in Heaven. To pray
thus; is no easy matter, and unless we do pray thus, we do not pray at all.

24 Hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name:

That is, explicitly and expressly in my name, for the Saints of God under the
Old Testament, and the Apostles themselves under the New, had hitherto put up
all their Petitions in the name of the Messiah; though not in the name of Jesus.
But now he exhorts them to Eye his Mediatory Office, in all their Addresses to
God, and promises them that whatsoever he had purchased of the Father by his
Sufferings and Satisfaction; they should obtain it, for the sake of his
prevailing Intercession. Learn hence, That it is a mighty encouragement to
Prayer, that now under the Gospel, the person of the Mediator is exhibited in
our Flesh, has satisfied Divine Justice in in our Nature, and in that Nature
interceeds as a Mediator, for whatever he purchased as our Surety. Hence is
the encouragement, Whatever ye ask the Father in my name he will give it you.

25 These things have I spoken unto you in proverbs: the time comes when I
shall no more speak unto you in proverbs, but I shall show you plainly of the
Father.

Here our Savior tells his Disciples, That although he had spoken many things
to them in dark Parables, and figurative Expressions; yet now the time was
approaching; Namely, The Comforter's coming, when he would by the Holy Ghost
clearly inlighten their Understandings in the Knowledge of Divine Mysteries, and
the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, and particularly in the Knowledge
of God as his Father, and their Father in him. Hence learn, 1. That the
clearest Truths will be but Parables, Proverbs, and dark Mysteries, even to
Disciples themselves, till the Holy Spirit inlightens their Understandings. 2.
That the clear and full manifestation of Divine Truth was reserved till the
coming of the Comforter, who did communicate it to the Apostles, and by them to
the Church or Body of Christians. I, by him, will show you plainly of the
Father.

26 At that day ye shall ask in my name: and I say not unto you, that I will
pray the Father for you: 27 For the Father himself loves you, because ye have
loved me, and have believed that I came out from God.

At that day shall ye ask in my name, that is, after I am Ascended into Heaven,
and have sent down the Holy Ghost upon you; ye shall put up all your Prayers
and requests to God in my name. And I say not that I will pray the Father for
you, for the Father himself loves you. That is, I need not tell you (though I
shall certainly do it) that I will interceed with the Father for you; for he of
himself is kindly disposed, and affected toward you for my sake. When Christ
says, I do not say that I will pray the Father for you; the meaning is not,
that he will lay aside his Office as Intercessour for Believers; but that they
had not only his Intercession, but the Father's Love upon which to ground their
hope of Audience. Learn hence, 1. That the Christians Prayers put up in
Christ's name cannot fail of Audience and Acceptance, for the sake of the
Mediatour's Intercession and the Father's Love. 2. That in our Prayers we ought
so to eye and look up to Christ's Intercession, as not to overlook or forget
the Father's Love; but ground our hopes of Audience upon both. I say not that I
will pray the Father for you, though I shall assuredly do it, for the Father
himself loves you, because ye have loved me.

28 I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave
the world, and go to the Father. 29 His disciples said unto him, Lo, now
speak thou plainly, and speak no proverb. 30 Now are we sure that thou
know all things, and need not that any man should ask thee: by this we
believe that thou came forth from God.

Here Observe, 1. A proof of our Savior's Godhead, He came forth from the
Father into the World; he came out from the Father in his Incarnation, and came
into the World to accomplish the work of our Redemption. Learn thence, That
Jesus Christ is true God, equal with the Father, for he was not only sent by
him, but came forth from him. I came out from the Father. Observe, 2. That it
pleased Christ out of Love to his People, to leave the Father and come into the
World; not by being separated from the Deity, but by obscuring the Deity with
the vail of our Flesh, in order to the finishing the great and glorious work of
Redemption for us. I came forth from the Father, and am come into the World.
Observe, 3. That Christ having finished his Suffering work here on Earth,
Ascended into Heaven, and sent down the Holy Spirit to apply unto his Church
the Redemption purchased by his Blood. Again I leave the World and go to the
Father. Observe lastly, How the Apostles argue from the Knowledge of Christ's
Omnisciency, to the certainty of his Divinity. Now are we sure that thou
know all things; by this we believe that thou came forth from God. The
Knowledge and Experience of Christ's Omnisciency, may and ought fully to confirm
us in the Belief of his Deity.

31 Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe? 32 Behold the hour comes, yea, is
now come, that ye shall be scattered, every man to his own, and shall leave me
alone: and yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.

In the foregoing Verse, the Apostles made a full profession of their Faith in
Christ's Divinity, and in Christ's Omnisciency. Now are we sure that thou
know all things, and that thou came forth from God. In this Verse, Christ
intimates to them that their Faith should be put upon a great Trial very
shortly; Namely, when his Sufferings came on, and that then they should all
forsake him, and take care of themselves. Ye shall be scattered and leave me
alone. Learn hence, 1. That Christ was forsaken, and left alone by his own
Disciples, in the Day of his greatest Distress and Danger. 2. That when the
Disciples left Christ they were scattered every one to his own. 3. That when
all forsook Christ and left him alone, he was far from being simply alone,
because God was with him. Ye shall leave me alone, and yet am I not alone,
because the Father is with me. God was with Christ; and will be with Christians
in a Suffering hour, in his Essential presence, in his Gracious and supporting
presence. He that sent me, says Christ, is with me, the Father has not left
me alone, for I do always those things that please my Father.

33 These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the
world ye shall have tribulation: but be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world.

These words are the Conclusion of our Savior's farewell Sermon to his
Disciples, in which he declares to them, 1. The inevitable necessity of the
World's Trouble. In the World ye shall have Tribulation; that is, while ye have
to do with the Men of the World, while you have any thing to do with the things
of the World; nay while you have a being in the World, you must look for
Trouble, both from within and from without, from Friends and Foes, in Body,
Soul, Name, Estate, Heartbreaking Troubles, Soul-rending Troubles; such
Troubles as will make the Heart to break, and the Back to bend; and you my
Disciples must expect it as well as others. In the World ye shall have
Tribulation. Hence learn, That the Disciples of Christ in this World may, yea
must expect and look for Trouble. Observe, 2. The Remedy provided by Christ
against this Malady, In me ye shall have Peace, when in the World ye have
Tribulation. Ye shall have Peace; that is, serenity of Mind, a quiet and calm
Temper of Spirit within, when the World like a Tempestuous Air is full of
Storms without. Learn thence, That though in the World Christ's own Disciples
must look for and expect Troubles; yet he has taken effectual care, that amidst
all their Troubles, in him they may have Peace. Christ's Blood has purchased
Peace for them, his Word has promised it to them, and his Spirit seals it up to
their Souls. Observe, 3. The Cordial provided by Christ for the support of his
Disciples Spirits, under the sinking Burden of the World's Tribulations and
Troubles. But be of good cheer, I have overcome the World. I have taken the
Sting out of every Cross, and the Venom out of every Arrow. Learn hence, That
it is a great Comfort to a Christian under all the Troubles of this World, to
consider that Christ has overcome the World. That is, all things in the World
which may hinder his Peoples Comfort and Consolation here, and their Eternal
Happiness and Salvation hereafter. As, Namely, the Prince of the World, the
Rulers of the World, the wicked Men of the World, the Troubles of the World,
the Temptations of the World, the Corruptions that are in the World through
Lust. Now Christ having overcome the World, all persons and things in it are at
his disposal, and can do nothing but by his permission; and as he has overcome
the World himself, so he will enable us through Faith in him to overcome it
also. 1 John 5.4. This is the victory over the World, even our Faith.

CHAP. XVII.
1 THese words spoke Jesus; and lift up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father,
the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee.

Our blessed Savior having ended his Consolatory and Valedictory Sermon,
contained in the Three foregoing Chapters, in this Chapter we have Recorded his
last Prayer, with, and for his Disciples before he left the World; which is a
Copy left upon Earth, of what he does now interceed for, as an Advocate in
Heaven. It is good (says one) to compare Scripture with Scripture, but not to
prefer Scripture before Scripture; all Scripture being written by Inspiration
of God; but if any part of Scripture be to be magnified above another, this
Chapter claims the pre-eminence; it contains the breathings out of Christ's
Soul for his Church and Children before his Departure; not for his Disciples
only, but for the succeeding Church to the end of the World. In the Verse
before us, Observe, 1. The order of our Savior's Prayer. These words spoke
Jesus; that is, after he had finished his Excellent Sermon, he closes the
Exercise with a most fervent and affectionate Prayer; teaching his Ministers by
his Example, to add Solemn Prayer and Supplication to all their Instructions
and Exhortations; if every Creature of God be to be Sanctified by Prayer, much
more the word of God, which works not as a Natural Agent; but as a moral
Instrument in God's hand. Now as God sets the Word on work, so it is Prayer
that sets God on work. Observe, 2. As the order of Christ's Prayer, so the
gesture in which he prayed, He lifted up his Eyes to Heaven, as an indication
of his Souls being lifted up to God in Heaven; to signify his Reverence of
God, whose Throne is in Heaven; and to denote his confidence in God, and raised
expectation of aid and help from God, and not from any Creature. Learn, That
the gestures which we use in Prayer should be such, as may best express our
Reverence of God, and denote our Affiance and Trust in him. Observe, 3. The
Person prayed to, God, under the Appellation of a Father, it intimates a sweet
Relation; it is a word of endearing Affection, and implies great Reverence
toward God, and great confidence and trust in him. Learn, It is very sweet and
comfortable in Prayer, when we can come and call God Father. Observe, 4. The
Mercy prayed for, The hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may
glorify thee; the hour is come; that is, the hour of my Sufferings, and thy
Satisfaction, the hour of my Victory and of thy Glory; the hour, the sad hour
determined in thy decree and purpose; no calamity can touch us till God's hour
is come, and when the sad hour is come, the best remedy is Prayer; and the only
person to fly unto for Succor is our Heavenly Father. Father, the hour is
come, the doleful hour of my Death and Passion; Glorify thy Son, Glorify him
at his Death, by manifesting him to have been the Son of God; Glorify him in
his Death, by accepting it as the Death of thy Son, for the Sins of the World;
Glorify him after his Death, by a speedy Resurrection from the Grave, and a
Triumphant Exaltation at thy Right Hand. Here note, How the Glory of the Father
and the Son are inseparably linked together; it was the Father's design to
Glorify the Son, and it was the Son's desire to have Glory from the Father,
for this end, that he might bring Glory to the Father. Glorify thy Son, that
thy Son may Glorify thee.

2 As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal
life to as many as thou have given him.

Observe here, 1. The Dignity which Christ was invested with; Power over all
flesh, that is, Authority to Judge and Sentence all Mankind. Observe, 2. How
Christ came to be invested with this Power, it was given him by his Father;
Thou have given him power over all flesh. Hence the Socinians would infer, that
he was not God, because he received all from God; but the Text speaks not of
his Divine Power as God, but of his Power as Mediator, and the Note is, That
all Mankind is under the Power and Authority of Jesus Christ as Mediator; he
has a Legislative Power, or a Power to give Laws to all Mankind, and a
Judiciary Power, or a Power to execute the Laws that he has given. Observe, 3.
The end for which Christ was invested with this Power. That he might give
Eternal Life to as many as God had given him. Here Note, 1. That all Believers,
that is, all sincere and serious Christians are given by God the Father unto
Christ; they are given to him as his Charge, to Redeem, Sanctify and Save, and
as his Reward. Isa. 53.10. 2. All that are given to Christ have Life from him,
a Life of Justification, and Sanctification on Earth, and a Life of Glory in
Heaven. 3. The Life which Christ gives to them that are given him is Eternal
Life. 4. That this Eternal Life is a free Gift from Christ unto his People,
though they do not work for wages, yet they shall not work for nothing. I give
unto them eternal Life. John 10.

3 And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

That is, This is the way and means to obtain Eternal Life, Namely, By the true
knowledge of God the Father, and of Jesus Christ the Mediator, who was
commissioned and sent by his Father to accomplish the work of Redemption for a
lost World. Here Observe, Christ calls God the Father the only true God, not in
opposition to the Son and Holy Ghost; who being one in Essence with the Father,
are truly and really God, as well as the Father; but in opposition to Idols and
false Gods, there is a great difference betwixt these two Propositions, the
Father is the only true God; and the Father only is true God: Christ says, the
former; This is Life Eternal, to know thee the only true God. The Socinian
says the latter. This is Life Eternal, to know only thee to be the true God;
and that neither Jesus Christ, nor the Spirit are God, but the Father only. But
how comes Eternal Life to depend as well upon the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, as
of God the Father, if Jesus Christ be only Man? and not truly and really God.
For thus our Savior affirms, this is Life Eternal to know thee and Jesus
Christ. Whence learn, 1. That the beginning, increase, and perfection of
Eternal Life lies in Holy Knowledge. 2. That no Knowledge is sufficient to
Eternal Life; but the Knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, who is also God; for
who can think that the Knowledge of a mere Creature should be accounted equally
necessary to Salvation with the Knowledge of the Great and Mighty God? Surely if
our Happiness consists equally in the Knowledge of God and Christ, then God and
Christ are of the same Nature, equal in Power and Glory. The comprehensive
sense of the words seems to be this; That the Knowledge of the only true God,
and of Jesus Christ the Mediator, is the Life of Grace, and the necessary way
to the Life of Glory.

4 I have glorified thee on the earth:

Learn hence, That the whole Life of Christ when here on Earth, it was a
glorifying of his Father; he glorified his Father by the Doctrine which he
preached, he glorified his Father by the Miracles which he wrought, he
glorified his Father by the unspotted Purity and Innocence of his Life, and by
his unparalled Sufferings at his Death.

4 I have finished the work which thou gave me to do.

That is, I am now about to finish it; he speaks of what he was resolved to do,
as already done. Here Note, 1. That it is work that glorifies God. 2. That every
Man has his work, his proper work assigned him by God. 3. This work must be
finished here upon Earth. 4. That when we have done our proportion of work, we
may expect our portion of wages. 5. That it is a blessed thing at the hour of
Death, to be able to say in sincerity and uprightness, that we have glorified
God in the World, and have finished the work which he appointed us to do.
Father, I have glorified thee on the Earth, and have finished the work which
thou gave me to do.

5 And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory
which I had with thee before the world was.

From the Connection of this, with the foregoing Verse. Learn, 1. That who ever
expect to be glorified with God in Heaven, must glorify him first here upon
Earth. 2. That after we have glorified him, we may expect to be glorified with
him and by him. I have glorified thee, now O Father glorify thou me; it
follows, with the Glory which I had with thee before the World was. Hence Note,
1. That Christ as God had an Essential Glory with God the Father before the
World was, he had this Glory not in the purpose and decree of God only, as the
Socinians would have it; for he does not say, Glorify me with the Glory which
thou did purpose and prepare for me, before the World was; but which I had,
and enjoyed with thee, before the World was; by which words our Lord plainly
asserts his own Existence and Being from Eternity, and prays for a
Re-exaltation to that Glory which he enjoyed with his Father, before his
Incarnation. Note, 2. That Christ as Mediator did so far humble himself, that
he needed to pray to his Father, to bestow upon him the Glory which he wanted;
Namely, The Glory of his Ascension and Exaltation. Now O Father glorify thou
me with thine own self.

6 I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the
world: thine they were, and thou gave them me; and they have kept thy word.

By the name of God, we are here to understand his Nature, his Properties and
Attributes, his Designs and Counsels for the Salvation of Mankind; Christ as
the Prophet of his Church, made all these known unto his People. Learn thence,
That Jesus Christ has made a full and complete Discovery of his Father's Mind
and Will unto his People. I have manifested thy name, unto them which thou
gave me, thine they were, and thou gave them me; and they have kept thy
word Learn, 1. That all Believers are given unto Christ, as his Purchase and as
his Charge. They are given him as his Subjects, as his Children; as the Wife of
his Bosom, as the Members of his Body. Learn, 2. That none are given to Christ,
but those that were first the Fathers. Thine they were and thou gave them me.
Learn, 3. That all those that are given unto Christ do keep his word; they keep
it in their understandings, they hide it in their Hearts, they feel the force
of it in their Souls, they express the power of it in their Lives. They have
kept thy word.

7 Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou have given me, are of
thee.

Observe here, 1. The faithfulness of Christ in revealing the whole Will of his
Father to his Disciples. 2. The proficiency of the Disciples in the School of
Christ; they knew all the things which Christ had told them. Namely, That
whatsoever he had, it was given him of the Father, and that he had these things
from him to be a Mediator. Learn hence, That Christ has approved himself a
faithful Prophet to his Church, a faithful Messenger from his Father to his
People; in that he has added nothing to his Message, nor taken nothing from
it. 2. That it is our duty to know and believe on Christ, as the only Messenger
and Mediator sent of God. Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou
have given me, are of thee.

8 For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me; and they have
received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have
believed that thou did send me.

As if Christ had said, The Message by thee my Father, committed to me, I have
communicated to them my Disciples, and they have received it, and will
communicate it from thee to the World; being sufficiently assured that my
coming and preaching was all by Commission from thee. Hence learn, 1. That the
Doctrine of the Gospel, which was revealed by Christ, was received from the
Father. 2. That Faith is a receiving of the word of Christ, and of Christ in
and by the word. Receiving is a relative term, and presupposes an offer. God
offers on his part, we receive on our part, the whole word with the whole
heart. 3. That the Ministers of the Gospel are to preach that and only that
which they have out of the word of God. I have given them the word which thou
gave me.

9 I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them which thou have
given me, for they are thine.

That is, I now offer up a Prayer particularly, 1. For my Apostles, designed to
so great a work as the Preaching of the Everlasting Gospel, to the obstinate
Jews and obdurate Gentiles. 2. I interceed also for all Believers at this time,
for their perseverance in the Faith, and constancy in Persecution; but I do not
now interceed for the wicked and impenitent World, they not being capable
(whilst such) of these Mercies and Blessings; though at other times we find him
praying for the World, yea for his very Crucifiers. Father forgive them, etc.
Nay in this very Prayer, at the 20th Verse, he Prays for the World; that is,
for the Gentile World; all those that by the preaching of the Apostles and
their Successors should be brought to Believe on him to the End of the World.
Learn hence, 1. That the Lord Jesus Christ is the Great and Gracious
Intercessour. 2. That all Believers, all the Children of God in general are
under the fruit and benefit of Christ's Intercession. 3. That as all the
Members of Christ in general, so the Ministers and Ambassadors of Christ in
special, have a peculiar interest in Christ's Intercession; and great are the
Advantages of His Intercession for them. 1. From the person interceeding,
Christ, consider the Dignity of his Person, God Man; the dearness of his
Person, God's Son. 2. From the manner of his Intercession, not by way of
entreaty, but meritorious claim. 3. From the sublimity of the Office, our
Intercessor is near to God, even at his Right Hand. 4. From the Fruits of his
Intercession, it procures the Acceptance and Justification of our Persons, the
hearing and answering of our Prayers, the pardon and forgiveness of our Sins,
our preservation in Grace, and our hopes of Eternal Glory.

10 And all mine are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in them.

We may understand this two ways, 1. Of all Persons, all my Friends, all my
Disciples are thine, as well as mine. Thence learn, That the Father and the Son
have a like Share and Propriety in all Believers. 2. The words in the Original,
being of the Neuter Gender, signify all thy things are mine, and all my things
are thine; Christ and his Father are one, and they agree in one; they have the
same Essence and Nature, the same Attributes and Will; Christ has all things
that the Father has, wills all things that the Father wills, and does all
things that the Father does; he is therefore really and essentially God. It
follows, and I am glorified in them; that is, I am made glorious by their
owning and receiving me, by their believing in me, and accepting of me for
their Lord and Savior. Thence Note, That the Lord Jesus Christ is eminently
glorified in, and by, all those that believe in him and belong unto him.

11 And now I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I come
to thee. Holy Father, keep through thine own name, those whom thou have given
me, that they may be one, as we are.

Here Observe, 1. Our Savior's present Condition; I am no more in the World;
that is, I shall continue on Earth but a small time longer, and then ascend to
my Father in Heaven. Learn thence, That Jesus Christ, as he is Man, is gone out
of this lower World into the immediate Presence of his Father: He had been
abased before, he must be exalted now: He had no more Work to do on Earth, but
much to do in Heaven; therefore he left this Earth to go to Heaven. Observe, 2.
Our Savior's Prayer to his Father for his Apostles before he left the World.
Holy Father, keep them; that is, preserve them by thy Divine Power and
Goodness, for the Glory of thy Holy Name. Here Note, 1. The Title and
Appellation given to God; Holy Father. Thence Learn, That when we go to God in
Prayer, especially for Grace and Sanctification, we must look upon him as an
Holy Father, as essentially and originally Holy, as infinitely and
independently Holy. Note, 2. The Supplication requested of God: Keep through
thy name, those whom thou have given me. Thence Learn, That the Perseverance of
the Saints in a state of Grace, is the sweet Effect and Fruit of Christ's
Prayer: Christ has begged it, and it cannot be denied, there being such an
Harmony and sweet Consent betwixt the Will of the Father and the Will of the
Son. Three things concur to the Believer's Perseverance. On the Father's Part,
there is everlasting Love and all-sufficient Power. On the Son's Part, there is
everlasting Merit and constant Intercession. On the Spirit's Part, there is a
perpetual Inhabitation and continued Influence. Observe, 3. The End of Christ's
Supplication on behalf of his People; that they may be one, as we are one. Here
Note, 1. That the Heart of Christ is exceedingly set upon the Unity and Oneness
of his Members. 2. That the Believers Union with Christ, their Head, and one
with another, has some resemblance to that Unity that is betwixt the Father and
the Son. For it is an holy and spiritual Union, a close and intimate Union, an
indissoluble and inseparable Union.

12 While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that
thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition:
that the scripture might be fulfilled.

Observe here, 1. That those which shall be saved, are given unto Christ and
committed to his Care and Trust. 2. That none of those that are given unto
Christ, as his Charge, and committed to his Care and Trust, shall be finally
lost. Those that thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost. It
follows, but the Son of Perdition. A Person may be said to be a Son of
Perdition two ways: Actively and Passively. Actively, he is so, who makes it
his Work and Business to destroy others. Passively, he is a Son of Perdition,
who for his Wickedness in destroying others is destroyed himself. Judas was a
Son of Perdition in both these Senses; his Heart was maliciously set upon
destroying Christ, and wilfully set upon his own destruction: His Covetousness
and Hypocrisy prompted him to betray our Savior, his Despair provoked him to
destroy himself.

13 And now come I to thee, and these things I speak in the world, that they
might have my joy fulfilled in themselves.

In these Words our Savior declares the great Reason why he did at this time
so publicly and solemnly pray for his Disciples; it was to fill them with Joy
and Comfort, that their Joy might not be diminished by Christ's departure, but
rather increased by the coming of the Comforter. That they may have my Joy
fulfilled in them; that is, the Joy which they take in me, and the Joy which
they have from me: There is a double Care which Christ takes of his People,
namely, a Care of their Graces, and a Care of their Joy and Comfort: How
solicitous was he to leave his Disciples joyful before he departed from them!
He delights to see his People cheerful, and he knows of what great Use
spiritual Joy is in the Christian's Course, both to enable us for Doing, and to
fit us for Suffering. Learn hence, 1. That Christ is the Author and Original of
the Joy of his People. My Joy. 2. That it is Christ's Will and Desire that his
People should be full of holy Joy. That my Joy may be fulfilled in them. 3.
That the great End of Christ's Prayer and Intercession was and is, that his
Peoples Hearts might be full of Joy. These things I speak in the World, that
they might have my Joy fulfilled in themselves.

14 I have given them thy word; and the world has hated them, because they are
not of the world, even as I am not of the world.

I have given them thy Word; partly by external Revelation, and partly by
internal Illumination; and for thy Word sake the World hates them, as also
because they are not of the World. Learn, 1. That Christians, especially
Ministers, to whom Christ has given his Word, must expect the World's hatred.
Few of the Prophets or Apostles died a natural death: As their Calling is
Eminent, so must their Sufferings be Exemplary. The best Ministers, and the
best Men, are usually most hated. There is an Antipathy against the Power of
Godliness, or a cruel, causeless, implacable and irreconcilable hatred against
the Saints, because of their strictness in Religion, and contrariety to the
World. 2. That it is the Honor of Believers, that they are like unto Christ,
in being the Objects of the World's hatred. The World hates them, because they
are not of the World, as I am not of the World. This Christ adds both for
Information and Consolation; for Information, that they should look for such
Hatred, Misery and Trouble as they saw him grapple with; and for Consolation,
to think that the World can never hate us so bad as it hated Christ.

15 I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou
should keep them from the evil. 16 They are not of the world, even as I am
not of the world.

Here Observe, 1. That the Wisdom of Christ sees it fit to continue his
Children and People in the World, notwithstanding all the Perils and Dangers of
the World: He has Work for them, and they are of Use to him, for a time, in the
World; and till their Work be done, Christ's Love will not; and the World's
Malice cannot remove them hence. Yet Christ prays that his Father would keep
them from the Evil; that is, from the Sins, Temptations and Snares of this
wicked World. Thence Note, That a spiritual Victory over Evil, is to be
preferred before a total exemption from Evil; it is a far greater Mercy to be
kept from sin in our Afflictions, than from the Afflictions themselves.

17 Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth.

Sanctify them not initially, for so they were sanctified already, but
progressively let them increase more and more in Grace and Holiness. Learn
hence, 1. That such as are already sanctified, must labor and ought to
endeavor after further Measures and higher Degrees of Sanctification. The most
Holy may yet be more Holy. 2. That the Word of God is the great Instrument in
God's Hand for his Peoples Sanctification. 3. That the Word of God is the Truth
of God: Sanctify them through thy truth: thy word is truth. The Word of God is
a Divine Truth, an Eternal Truth, an Infallible Truth, an Holy Truth.

18 As thou have sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the
world.

Observe here, 1. Christ's Mission: The Father sent him into the World.
Christ's sending implies the Designation of his Person, his Qualification for
the Work, his Authority and Commission. Learn hence, That Christ himself did
not of himself undertake the Office of a Mediator, but was sent; that is,
authorized and Commissioned of God so to do. Thou have sent me into the World.
Observe, 2. As Christ's Mission, so the Apostles Mission: As thou have sent me,
so have I sent them. Learn thence, That none may or ought to undertake the
Office of the Ministry without an Authoritative sending from Christ himself;
not immediately and extraordinarily by Voice or Vision, but mediately by the
Officers of the Church. And such as are so sent, are sent by Christ himself;
and if so, it is the Peoples Duty to reverence their Persons, to respect their
Office, to receive their Message. As thou have sent me, so have I sent them.

19 And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also might be sanctified
through the truth.

The word Sanctify here is not to be taken for the Cleansing, Purifying, or
making Holy that which before was Unclean: But Christ's sanctifying himself
imports, 1. His separation, or setting himself apart to be a Sacrifice for Sin.
2. His Consecration or Dedication of himself to this Holy Use and Service.
Hence learn, That Jesus Christ did dedicate and solemnly set himself apart to
the great Work and Office of a Mediator. Learn, 2. That the great End for which
Christ did thus sanctify himself; it was that he might sanctify his Members;
therefore did he consecrate and set himself apart for us, that we should be
consecrated to, and wholly set apart for him.

20 Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their word:

Hitherto our Savior had been praying for himself and his Apostles, now he
prays for all Persons, both Jews and Gentiles, that should believe in him,
throughout the World, by the preaching of the Gospel. Hence learn, That all
Believers have a special Interest in Christ's Prayer. 2. That in the Sense of
the Gospel they are Believers, who are wrought upon to believe in Christ through
the Word. 3. That such is Christ's Care of, and Love to his own, that they were
remembered by him in his Prayer, even before they had a Being. I pray not for
them alone, but for all that shall believe in me.

21 That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that
they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou have sent me.

The special Mercy and particular Blessing which Christ prays for on the behalf
of Believers, is a close and intimate Union betwixt the Father, Himself, and
Them, and also betwixt one another; such an Union as does in some sort resemble
that Union which is betwixt God and Christ; not an Unity of Essence and Nature,
but of Wills and Affections. Hence Note, 1. That the mystical Union betwixt
Christ and his Members, carries some resemblance with that Union which is
betwixt the Father and the Son. 2. That Union amongst the Ministers and Members
of Jesus Christ, is of so great Importance, Necessity, and Consequence, that he
did in their behalf principally and chiefly pray for it. An Unity of Love and
Affection, of Faith and Profession, and Unity of Practice and Conversation, are
Mercies which Christ earnestly prayed for, and has dearly paid for; and nothing
is more desired by him now in Heaven, than that his Disciples should be One
among themselves here on Earth. Father, may they be one, as we are one: That
the World may believe that thou have sent me. Here Christ intimates one special
Advantage that would redound to the World by this desirable Union betwixt the
Ministers and Members of Christ, it will, if not Convert, yet at least convince
the World that I and my Doctrine came from God. Thence Note, That Union amongst
Christ's Disciples, is one special means to enlarge the Kingdom of Christ, and
to cause the World to have better thoughts of him and his Doctrine. By their
being one, as we are one, the World will believe that thou did send me.

22 And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them: that they may be
one, even as we are one.

Here Observe, 1. Christ's Communication of that Glory to Believers, which he
had received from the Father; that is, not his essential Glory, but his
mediatorial Glory. The Glory which thou gave me. Now Christ has no Glory
given him as God, but much Glory bestowed upon him as Mediator. Observe, 2.
The end of this Communication; why he gave his Disciples that Glory, which the
Father had given him. Namely, That they might be one. Learn, 1. That God the
Father has bestowed much Glory on Christ his Son, as he is Man and Mediator
of the Church. 2. That the same Glory for Kind and Substance, though not for
Measure and Degree, which Christ as Mediator has received from the Father, is
communicated to true Believers. 3. That the great End of this Communication was
and is, to oblige and enable his People to maintain a very strict Union amongst
themselves. The Glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they may be
one even as we are one. 4. That Unity amongst Believers, is part of that Glory
which Christ as Mediator has obtained for them.

23 I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, and that
the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have
loved me.

Observe here, 1. That as the Father is in Christ, so is Christ in Believers,
and they in him; the Father is in Christ in respect of his Divine Nature,
Essence and Attributes, and Christ is in Believers, by the inhabitation of his
Holy Spirit. Observe, 2. That the Believers happiness consists in their
oneness, in being one with God through Christ and one amongst themselves. That
they may be made perfect in one. Observe, 3. That God the Father loves Christ
his Son; Thou love them as thou have loved me. God loves Christ, first as
God, so he is Primum Amabile, the first object of his Love, as representing his
Attributes exactly. Secondly as Mediator. John 10.17. Therefore does my Father
love me, because I lay down my Life for my Sheep. Observe, 4. That God the
Father loves Believers, even as they loved Christ himself; that is, he loves
them upon the same grounds that he loved him; Namely, For their nearness, and
for their likeness to him. 1. For their nearness and relation to him, he loves
Christ as his Son, Believers as his Children. 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of
Love the Father bestows upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God. 2.
The properties of the Father's Love toward Christ and Believers are the same;
Does he Love Christ with a tender Love; with an unchangeable Love, with an
Everlasting Love? so does he Love Believers also. Observe, 5. That Christ would
have the World know that God the Father loves the Children of Men, as well as
himself; Christ is not ambitious to ingross all our Love unto himself, but
would have the World take notice of the good Will of his Father as well as of
himself, to lost Mankind, of the Father's Love in sending him, as well as of
his own Love in coming. That the World may know that thou have sent me, and
have loved them as thou have loved me.

24 Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I
am; that they may behold my glory which thou have given me: for thou lovedst me
before the foundation of the world.

Our Savior had prayed for his Disciples Sanctification before, here he Prays
for their Glorification. 1. That they may be where he is; now Christ is with
them, in his Ordinances, in his Word, and at his Table, ere long they shall be
with him, as his Friends, as his Spouse, as his Companions in his Kingdom. 2.
That they may be with him where he is; this is more than the former; a Blind
Man may be where the Sun is, but not with the Sun; because he does not enjoy
the light and benefit of it: To be with Christ where he is, imports Union and
Communion with him. 3. That being with him where he is, they may behold his
glory; that is, so see it, as everlastingly to possess and enjoy it. Learn, 1.
That all those that are given to Christ as his Charge, and as his Reward, shall
certainly come to Heaven to him; Father, I will, that they be with me, because
I have merited that they should be with me, I will that they behold my Glory,
because I have purchased it at so dear a rate. Learn, 2. That the work and
employment of the Saints in Heaven chiefly consists in seeing and enjoying
Christ's Glory; for it will be a possessive sight, the language of every look
will be, This Happiness is mine, this Glory is mine. 3. That the top and height
of the Saints happiness in Heaven consists in this, That they shall there be
with Christ. Father, I will that they may be with me to behold my Glory.

25 O righteous Father, the world has not known thee; but I have known thee,
and these have known that thou have sent me.

Observe here, 1. The Appellation given to God. O Righteous Father. This is the
Sixth time that Christ in this Prayer has called God Father, it being so sweet
a Relation, and producing all Love, Delight, Joy, and Confidence in God, by him
that practically improves it. But Observe, That at Verse 11; When Christ prayed
for his Peoples Sanctification, he said, Holy Father; making use of that
Attribute which is the cause of all Holiness in the Creature; but now praying
for their Glorification, he says, O Righteous Father, Righteous in making good
thy promises both to me and them. Observe, 2. What it is that our Savior
affirms concerning the wicked and unbelieving World, that they have not known
God, the World has not known thee; not as if the World had not known him at
all, but not known him aright; the unbelieving and unsanctified part of the
World have no saving knowledge of God, not living answerably to what they know
to be their Duty. Observe, 3. What Christ affirms concerning himself; But I
have known thee, and these have known thee. Intimating thus much unto us, That
Jesus Christ alone knows God immediately, and all others know him by the means
of Christ; Christ is the Original and fontal cause of all the saving knowledge
that Believers have of God. There is not the least Ray of saving Illumination,
that does not descend from Christ and the Spirit of Christ. I have known thee,
and these have known that thou did send me.

26 And I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it:

That is, I have made known unto them thy Nature, Attributes, Counsels, Will
and Commands; and I will continue the manifestation of the same to the End.
Learn thence, That the saving knowledge of God was not attainable by natural
Abilities; but comes to us by the special Revelation of Jesus Christ. I have
declared unto them thy name. Learn, 2. That they that have the Name of God, his
Nature and Will, savingly declared to them, do stand in need of farther
declarations, and discoveries of God's Nature and Will to be made unto them. I
have declared to them thy name, and I will declare it.

26 That the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in them, and I in them.

That is, That the Love which is Originally in thy self, as the fountain of all
Grace may be communicated and dispensed from thee to them, and become inherent
in them. Learn hence, That it is not enough for the People of God that they are
beloved of him, and that his Love is toward them; but they must endeavor to
have it in them; that is, experience it in the effects of it, and in the sense
and feeling of it in their own Souls. The safety of a Christian lies in this,
that God loves him, but the Joy, the Comfort, and Happiness of a Christian
consists in the Knowledge, in the sensible Apprehension and feeling of this
Love; therefore Christ closes his Prayer for his Members, with this
Affectionate and Comprehensive Petition. Let the Love wherewith thou have loved
me be in them, and I in them.

CHAP. XVIII.
1 When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his disciples over
the brook Cedron, where was a garden, into the which he entered, and his
disciples. 2 And Judas also which betrayed him, knew the place: for Jesus
oft-times resorted thither with his disciples.

No sooner had our dear Lord ended his Divine Prayer, Recorded in the foregoing
Chapter, but he goes forth to meet his Sufferings, with a willing cheerfulness.
He retires with his Disciples into a Garden, not to hide and shelter himself
from his Enemies; for if so, it had been the most improper place he could have
chosen; it being the accustomed place where he was wont to Pray, and a place
well known to Judas, who was now coming to seek him. Judas which betrayed him
knew the place, for Jesus oft-times resorted thither with his Disciples. So
that Christ repaired to this Garden not to shun, but to meet the Enemy, to
offer himself as a prey to the Wolves; which in the Garden hunted him, and laid
hold upon him; he also resorted to this Garden now for privacy, that he might
freely pour out his Soul to God. Learn hence, That the Lord Jesus Christ was
praying to his Father in the Garden, when Judas with his Bla k-Guard came to
apprehend him.

3 Judas then having received a band of men, and Officers from the chief
priests and Pharisees, comes thither with lanterns, and torches, and weapons.

Observe, 1. What a multitude were here employed by the Chief Priests and
Pharisees, for apprehending a single Person, Gown-Men, and Swordmen, Young and
Old, Jew and Gentile; all sorts of Persons contriving his Death, as all
Conditions of People were afterward to receive Benefit by it. But what need
these Lanthorns and Torches, it being then as some observe Full-Moon, when they
sought him in the Garden? All this argued their zealous Industry for our
Savior's Apprehension, that they might be sure to find him, in case he should
hide himself in any holes or corners of the Garden. Learn hence, That
Persecutors and wicked Apostates are not asleep in their designs and actings,
but very Vigilant and Active; when at the same time Christ's own Disciples and
Followers are asleep and careless; how active is Judas, and how watchful was
his Bloody Crew, even at that time when Christ's Disciples could not keep their
Eyes open!

4 Jesus therefore knowing all things that should come upon him, went forth,
and said unto them, Whom seek ye? 5 They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus
says unto them, I am he. And Judas also which betrayed him, stood with them. 6
As Soon then as he had said unto them, I am he, they went backward and fell to
the ground.

Observe here, 1. How our Lord's Sufferings were all foreknown to himself,
before they came upon him, and yet how willingly and cheerfully did he go forth
to meet them. Should our Sufferings be known unto us before they come upon us,
how would it disquiet and disturb us; yea, not only discompose us, but distract
us; in great Wisdom therefore, and in tender Mercy has God concealed future
events from us; but it was otherwise with Christ; he had an exact Knowledge of
those bitter Sufferings which he was to undergo, and yet with a composed Mind
he goes forth to meet them. Jesus knowing all things that should come upon him,
went forth. Lord! How endearing are our Obligations to thy self, that when thou
knew beforehand the bitterness of that Cup which the Justice of God was
about to put into thy hand, thou did not decline to Drink it off for our
sakes? Observe, 2. That it was not Man's Power, but Christ's own Permission,
which brought his Sufferings upon him. How easily could Christ have delivered
himself out of his Enemies hands, who with a word from his Mouth, caused them
to go backward and fall to the Ground: Christ in speaking those words, did let
out a little Ray or Beam of his Deity, and this struck them down. O what fear
will Christ send out when he comes to judge the World; who could send forth
such a fear when he yielded up himself to be judged and condemned in the World!
If there was so much Majesty in the Voice of Christ, in one of the lowest acts
of his humiliation; What will the Voice of a Glorified Christ be to Sinners,
when he shall come as a Judge to Condemn the World?

7 Then asked he them again, Whom seek ye? and they said, Jesus of Nazareth. 8
Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he. If therefore ye seek me, let
these go their way: 9 That the saying might be fulfilled which he spoke, Of
them which thou gave me, have I lost none.

Here Note, 1. How voluntarily and freely Christ laid down his Life, when his
Enemies were fallen to the Ground, he suffered them to rise again, and offers
himself to them, to take him and carry him away. Note, 2. How the sight of this
glorious Miracle of the Soldiers falling to the Ground, did not deterr or
discourage them from their wicked purpose; they get up again and go on with
their blody design. Learn thence, That obstinate and obdurate Sinners will not
be reclaimed by the most evident and convincing, by the most miraculous and
surprising appearances of God against them. Note, 3. How mindful in the midst
of his Sufferings, Christ was of his dear Disciples, to secure them, at this
time, from Death and Danger. If ye seek me, let these go their way. That is, my
Disciples, against whom you have no Warrant at this time Learn hence, That
Christ is so tender of his Followers, that he will not put them upon Trials, or
call them forth to Sufferings till they are ripe and ready, fitted and prepared
for them. The Disciples yet were weak and feeble, timorous and fearful: And
Christ had much Work and Service for them to do in the World; namely, to plant
and propagate the Gospel in Foreign Countries; he therefore resolves not to
lose any one of them by Persecution at this time: And thus was his Word
fulfilled; of them which thou gave me, I have lost none.

10 Then Simon Peter having a sword, drew it, and smote the high priests
servant, and cut off his right ear. The servants name was Malchus. 11 Then said
Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath:

Observe here, St. Peter's Love unto, and Zeal for, his Lord and Master; in
defense of whom he now draws his Sword: But why did he not rather draw upon
Judas than upon Malchus? Possibly, because though Judas was most faulty, yet
Malchus might be most forward to carry off our Savior. Oh how does a pious
Breast swell with Indignation at the sight of any open Affront offered unto its
Savior! Observe farther, The Rebuke which Christ gave St. Peter for what he
did; though his Heart was sincere, yet his Hand was rash; good Intentions are no
Warrant for irregular Actions: Christ will thank no Man for drawing a Sword in
defense of him, without a Warrant and Commission from him. To resist a lawful
Magistrate, even in Christ's own Defense, is rash Zeal, and discountenanced by
the Gospel.

11 The cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it?

Here observe, 1. A Metaphorical Description of Christ's Sufferings: They are a
Cup put into his Hand to drink of, and that by his own Father: They are a Cup,
and but a Cup; God will not over-charge his People; and this Cup is from the
Hand of a Father, yea, from the Hand of our Father: The Cup which my Father
has given me. Observe, 2. Our Lord's Resolution to drink off this Cup, how
bitter soever, being put to his Mouth by his Father's Hand. Shall I not drink
it? That is, I will drink it. Learn hence, 1. That oft-times the Wisdom of God
is pleased to put a Cup, a very bitter Cup of Affliction into the Hand of those
to drink, whom he does most sincerely love. 2. That when God does do so, it is
their Duty to drink it with silence and submission. Shall I not drink it? That
is, I will certainly drink it with cheerfulness and resignation.

12 Then the band, and the captain, and officers of the Jews took Jesus, and
bound him, 13 And led him away to Annas first (for he was father-in-law to
Caiaphas, which was the high priest that same year.) 14 Now Caiaphas was he
which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one man should die
for the people.

Judas having made good this Promise to the Chief Priests, and delivered Jesus
a Prisoner bound into their Hands; those Evening-Wolves no sooner seize the
Lamb of God, but they thirst and long to suck his innocent Blood; yet, lest it
should look like a downright Murder, they allow him a Mock-Trial, and abuse
the Law by perverting it to Injustice and Bloodshed. How impossible is it for
the greatest Innocence and Virtue to protect from Slander and false Accusation;
and no Person can be so innocent or good, whom false Witness may not condemn.

15 And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple. That disciple
was known unto the high priest, and went in with Jesus into the palace of the
high priest. 16 But Peter stood at the door without. Then went out that other
disciple which was known unto the high priest, and spoke unto her that kept the
door, and brought in Peter. 17 Then says the damsel that kept the door unto
Peter, Art not thou also one of this man's disciples? He says, I am not. 18
And the servants and officers stood there, who had made a fire of coals, (for
it was cold) and they warmed themselves: and Peter stood with them, and warmed
himself. They said therefore unto him, Art not thou also one of his disciples?
He denied it, and said, I am not. One of the servants of the high priest, being
his kinsman whose ear Peter had cut off, says, Did not I see thee in the
garden with him? Peter then denied again, and immediately the cock crew.

All the four Evangelists give us an Account of Peter's Fall in denying his
Master. And therein we have Observable, 1. The Sin it self which he fell into,
the Denial of Christ, and this backed with an Oath; he swear that he knew not
the Man. Lord! how may the slavish fear of Suffering drive the holiest and best
of Men to commit the foulest and worst of Sins! Observe, 2. The occasion of his
Fall. 1. His presumptuous Confidence of his own strength and standing; though
all Men forsake thee, yet will not I. Lord! to presume upon our selves, is the
ready way to provoke thee to leave us to our selves. If ever we stand in the
Day of Trial, it is the fear of falling must enable us to stand; we soon fall,
if we believe it impossible to fall. 2. His being in bad Company, amongst
Christ's Enemies; Peter had better have been a cold by himself alone, than
warming himself at a Fire which was compassed in with the Blasphemies of the
Soldiers, where his Conscience, though not seared, was yet made hard. Observe, 3.
The reiteration or repetition of this Sin, he denied Christ again and again; he
denied him first with a Lie, then with an Oath and Curse. Oh, how dangerous is
it not to resist the beginnings of Sin! If we yield to one Temptation, Satan
will assault us with more, and stronger. Observe, 4. The heinous and
aggravating Circumstances of Peter's Sin. 1. From the Character of his Person,
a Disciple, an Apostle, a chief Apostle; yet he denies Christ. 2. From the
Person whom he denies, his Master, his Savior. 3. The Time when he denied him,
soon after that Christ had washed his Feet; yea, soon after he had received the
Sacrament from Christ's own Hand. How unreasonable then is their Objection
against coming to the Lord's-Table, That some. who go to it, dishonor Christ
as soon as they come from it? Such Examples ought not to discourage us from
coming to the Ordinance, but should excite and increase our watchfulness after
we have been there, that our after-deportment may be suitable to the Solemnity
of a Sacramental Table.

19 The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine. 20
Jesus answered him, I spoke openly to the world; I ever taught in the
synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort, and in secret
have I said nothing. 21 Why ask thou me? ask them which heard me, what I
have said unto them: behold, they know what I said.

Our Savior being brought before Caiaphas the High Priest, he examines him
concerning his Doctrine and his Disciples, pretending him to be guilty of
Heresy in Doctrine and Sedition, in gathering Disciples and Followers. Our
Savior answers, That as to his Doctrine, he had not delivered it in Holes and
Corners, but had taught publicly in the Temple and Synagogues; and that in
secret he had said nothing; that is, nothing contrary to what he had delivered
in Public. Christ never willingly affected Corners, he taught openly, and
propounded his Doctrine publicly and plainly to the World. A convincing
Evidence that both he and his Doctrine were of God. Learn hence, 1. That it is
not unusual for the best of Doctrines to pass under the odious name and
imputation of Error and Heresy. Christ's own Doctrine is here charged: The
High Priest asked Jesus of his Doctrine. 2. That the Ministers of Christ, who
have Truth on their side, may and ought to speak boldly and openly. I spoke
openly to the World. Veritas nihil erubescit praeterquam abscondi. Truth
blushes at nothing, except at its being concealed. In secret, says Christ, have
I said nothing.

22 And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by, stroke
Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high priest so? 23
Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: but if
well, why smitest thou me? 24 (Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas the
high priest.) 25 And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself: They said therefore
unto him, Art not thou also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said, I am
not. 26 One of the servants of the high priest (being his kinsman whose ear
Peter cut off) says, Did not I see thee in the garden with him? 27 Peter then
denied again, and immediately the cock crew.

Observe here, 1. How insolently and injuriously an Officer strikes our Savior
in this Court of Judicature: One of the Officers stroke Jesus with the Palms of
his Hands. What had the Holy and Innocent Jesus done, to deserve these
Buffettings? He only made use of the Liberty which their Law did allow him,
which was not to accuse himself, but to put them upon the Proof of those
Accusations which were brought against him. But from this Instance of our
Savior's Sufferings we learn, That Christ did endure painful Buffettings,
ignominious and contemptible Usage, even from Inferior Servants; giving his
Cheek to the Smiters, to testify that Shame and reproachful Usage which was
deserved by us, and to sanctify that Condition to us, when ever it is allotted
for us. Observe, 2. The meek and gentle Reproof which the Lord Jesus gives to
this rude Officer, he does not strike him dead upon the Place, nor cause that
Arm to wither which was stretched forth against the Lord's anointed; but only
lets him know, there was no Reason for his striking of him. Where Note, That
though our Savior does not revenge himself, yet he vindicates himself, and
defends himself both with Law and Reason: If I have spoken evil, bear witness
of the evil: But if well, why smitest thou me? Note, 2. That when the Soldier
had struck Christ upon one Cheek, he did not turn to him the other also,
according to Matthew. 5.39. Which evidently shows, that That Precept, if they
smite thee on one Cheek, turn the other also, commands only this, That rather
than take Revenge, we should take a second Injury. Christians ought rather to
suffer a double Wrong than to seek a private Revenge: Christianity obliges us
to bear many Injuries patiently, rather than to avenge one privately: But though
it binds up our Hands from private Revenge, yet it does not shut our Mouths
from complaining to public Authority. Christ's own Practice here, expounds the
Precept elsewhere, Matthew. 5.39. for he complains here of the Officers Injustice
in smiting him before the Judicatory, and challenges the Man to bear witness of
the Evil. Observe, Lastly, How our Lord was not only buffetted, but bound and
sent bound from Annas to Caiaphas, from Caiaphas to Pilate, from Pilate to
Herod, and from Herod to Pilate again: And all this on foot through the Streets
of Jerusalem, from one end of the City to the other; partly, to render his
Passion more public, being made a Gazing-stock to the World, and a Spectacle
both to Angels and Men. And his condescending to go bound from one High Priest
to another, and from one Tribunal to another, teaches his People what
Delinquents they were before the Tribunal of God, and what they deserved by
reason of Sin; even a Sentence of eternal Condemnation at the Tribunal of the
Just and Holy God.

28 Then ^ed they Jesus from Caiaphas, unto the hall of judgment: and it was
early, and they themselves went not into the judgment-hall, lest they should be
defiled: but that they might eat the passover.

There were two Courts of Judicature which our blessed Savior was brought
before and condemned by. 1. The Ecclesiastical Court or Sanhedrim, in which the
High Priest sat as Judge: Here he was condemned to Death for Blasphemy. 2. The
Civil Court, or Judgment-Hall, where Pontius Pilate the Roman Governor sat
Judge, who because he was a Gentile, they would not go into his House, lest
they should be defiled; for they accounted it a Legal Pollution to come into
the House of a Gentile. Where Observe, The notorious Hypocrisy of these Jews,
they scruple the defiling of themselves by coming near the Judgment-Hall where
Pilate sat, but make no scruple at all to defile themselves with the guilt of
that innocent Blood which Pilate shed. When Persons are over-zealous for
Cerem^nial Observations, they are oft-times too remiss with reference to Moral
Duties. They brought him to the Judgment-Hall, but they themselves went not in,
lest they should be defiled.

29 Pilate then went out unto them, and said, What accusation bring you against
this man? 30 They answered and said unto him, If he were not a malefactor, we
would not have delivered him up unto thee.

Observe here, 1. How Pilate humors these Jews in their Superstition. They
scruple to go into the Judgment-Hall to him; he therefore goes out to them, and
demands what Accusation they had against Christ. They charge him here only for
being a Malefactor, or an evil Doer in the general; but elsewhere ( Luke 23.)
they particularly accuse him, 1. For perverting the Nation. 2. For forbidding
to pay Tribute to Caesar. 3. For saying that he himself was Christ, a King. All
of which was filthy Calumny; yet Christ underwent the Reproach of it without
opening his Mouth: Teaching us, when we lie under Calumny and unjust
Imputation, to imitate him, who opened not his Mouth, but committed his Case to
him that judges uprightly.

31 Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him and judge him according to your
law. The Jews therefore said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any man
to death: 32 That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke,
signifying what death he should die.

The Jews being now under the Power of the Romans, though they had a Power of
Judging and Censuring Criminals in smaller Matters, yet not in capital Cases;
they could not pronounce a Sentence of Death upon any Person, say some; they
might and did, say others, punish Blasphemers by stoning them to death; but
then their Sentence was to be ratified by the Roman Power: Accordingly here
they had in their Ecclesiastical Court condemned Christ for Blasphemy; now they
bring him to Pilate the Roman Governor to confirm the Sentence of Death. From
hence it appears, that Christ was the true Messiah, being sent into the World
when the Scepter was departed from Judah, according to that ancient Prophecy of
Jacob, Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah until Shiloh come.
The Jews now had no Power absolutely to condemn any Man, or to put him death;
but this Power the Roman Emperor reserved to his own Deputy. This contributed
toward the fulfilling of our Savior's Words, Matthew. 20.19. That he should be
delivered to the Gentiles, and should be crucified: Which was not a Jewish but
a Roman Punishment. Had the Jews put him to death, they had stoned him. But
Christ was to be made a Curse for us by hanging upon a Tree, and accordingly
the Jews execute the Counsel of God, though they knew ^^ not, by refusing to put
him to death themselves. Learn hence, How willing Christ was to undergo a
shameful, painful and accursed Death, that he might testify his Love unto, and
procure a Blessing for his People. Thus the Saying of Jesus was fulfilled,
which he spoke, signifying what Death he should die.

33 Then Pilate entered into the judgement-hall again, and called Jesus, and
said unto him, Art thou thou the king of the Jews? 34 Jesus answered him,
Say thou this thing of thy self, or did others tell it thee of me? 35 Pilate
answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation, and the chief priests have delivered
thee unto me: What have thou done? 36 Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this
world: if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I
should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is my kingdom not from hence.

Observe here, 1. Pilate's insnaring Question, Art thou King of the Jews? How
jealous are great Men of Jesus Christ, and how afraid are they of his Kingdom,
Power and Authority, as if it would be prejudicial to their Authority and Power
in the World, which was far enough from Christ's Thoughts. Observe, 2. The
Wisdom and Caution of our Savior's Answer, he neither affirms nor denies;
though whenever we speak, we are bound to speak the truth, yet we are not bound
at all times to speak the whole truth. Christ tells him therefore, That upon
the supposition that he was King, yet his Kingdom was no Earthly but a
Spiritual Kingdom; he was no Temporal King, to Rule over his Subjects with
Temporal Power and Worldly Pomp; but a Spiritual King, in and, over his Church
only, to order the Affairs and look after the Government thereof. Learn hence,
That Christ as God, has an Universal Kingdom of Power and Providence, even
over the highest of Men; and as Mediator has a Spiritual Kingdom in and over
his Church. 2. That it is a clear Evidence that Christ's Kingdom is Spiritual,
in as much as it is not carried on by violence and force of Arms as worldly
Kingdoms are, but by Spiritual means and methods. If my Kingdom were of this
World, my Servants would fight for me; but now is my Kingdom not from hence.

37 Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king then? Jesus answered, Thou
say that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into
the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Every one that is of the
truth, hears my voice.

Pilate asks him again directly and expressly, Art thou a King or not? Our
Savior Answers, Thou say that I am a King, and so it is indeed as thou
say; I am a King, and the King of the Jews too; but not a Temporal King to
Rule over them, after the manner of Earthly Kings, with Temporal Power, and
Worldly Pomp and Splendor; but I am a Spiritual King to Rule and Govern not
only the Jews, but my whole Church, consisting both of Jews and Gentiles, after
a Spiritual manner. Observe here, 1. The Dominion and Sovereignty of Jesus
Christ, he has a Kingdom; My Kingdom, Observe, 2. The Condition and
Qualification of this Kingdom, Negatively expressed. My Kingdom is not of this
World. Observe, 3. The Use and End of this Kingdom, that the Truth may have
place among the Children of Men for their Salvation. To this end was I Born,
and came into the World, to bear witness unto the truth. Observe, 4. The
Subjects of Christ's Kingdom declared. Every one that is of the truth, hears
my Voice. That is, Every one who is by Divine Grace disposed to believe and
love the Truth, will hear and obey Christ's Doctrine.

38 Pilate says unto him, What is truth? And when he had said this, he went
out again unto the Jews, and says unto them, I find in him no fault at all. 39
But ye have a custom, that I should release unto you one at the passover: will
ye therefore that I release unto you the king of the Jews? 40 Then cried they
all again, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber.

Observe here, 1. The Question Pilate put to Christ, What is Truth? a most
noble and important Question, had it been put forth with an honest Heart, with
a Mind fairly disposed for Information and Satisfaction; but it is evident,
Pilate's enquiry was not serious; nay it is generally thought that Pilate asked
this Question in Scorn, Contempt, and Derision; for he stays not for our Lord's
Answer, but as soon as he startled this Query, went often the Bench in haste.
Learn hence, That this Question, What is Truth? or how may we come to the
Knowledge of the Truth, is of unspeakable use and importance, and a Question
whereon the whole frame and Constitution of Religion depends. Because Truth is
claimed by all Parties of Men, by all Professors of Religion: Ask the different
Parties, from the Old Gentleman at Rome, to the poorest Quaker and
Muggletonian, where is Truth? and they will all tell you, they are in the
possession of it; every Sect has thus much of Popery with it, that the
professors of it, think themselves Infallible, and every one cries out, Here is
Truth. But God has given us a twofold Light to search for Truth by. Namely,
The Light of Reason, and the Light of Scripture, and Divine Revelation: The
former Solomon calls the Candle of the Lord, set up in our Breasts by God, on
purpose to discover Truth unto us; God allows us, yea injoyns us, the free and
impartial use of our Understandings and Judgments, in order to the finding out
of Divine Truth; but because Nature's Light, or the Light of Natural Reason is
not clear and bright enough to give us a prospect of supernatural Truths: for
Nature and Reason can never dictate those things which depend wholly upon God's
free Grace and good Pleasure; such are the Doctrine of a Savior and Redeemer,
and the method of Man's Salvation by the Sufferings of the Son of God; it had
been Blasphemy once to have supposed such things, had not God revealed them in
Scripture: Therefore the Second Standard of Divine Truth is the infallible Word
of God. The Gospel of Christ is the way and the Truth; Truth came by Jesus
Christ, and would Men be ruled and conducted by these unalterable Standards of
Truth, namely, Right Reason, and Divine Revelation, they would easily agree in
their Judgments, what is to be believed, and all Disputes and Controversies
would vanish; right Reason and Inspired Scripture are the best Judges of
Controversies; they being the fixed Standards and Measures of Divine Truth, can
best Resolve Pilate's Question here, and tell us What is Truth. Observe, 2. How
unwilling, how very unwilling Pilate was to be the Instrument of our Savior's
Death: He came forth three several times, and tells the Jews, that he finds no
fault in him, he bids them take him, and judge him according to their Law.
Pilate a Pagan Absolves Christ, whilst the Hypocritical Jews that heard his
Doctrine, and saw his Miracles do Condemn him. Observe, 3. Pilate having
absolved Christ, I find no fault in him, endeavors next to Release him, and
takes occasion from their Custom of having a Prisoner released to them at their
Feast, to insinuate his Desire that they should choose Christ. Ye have a custom,
that I release unto you one at the Passover. Observe lastly, How the Jews
prefer, Barabbas, a Robber, before the Holy and Innocent Jesus. They all cried
out, saying, not this Man but Barabbas. Learn hence, That no Persons how wicked
and vile soever are so odious in the Eyes of the Enemies of God, as Christ
himself was, and his Friends and Followers now are: Christ did find it thus in
his own Person when on Earth; Barabbas a Robber was preferred before him, and
now he is in Heaven he suffers in his Members; the filth of the World being
preferred before them.

CHAP. XIX.
1 THen Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him.

Observe here, 1. That as the Death of the Cross was a Roman Punishment, so it
was the manner of the Romans to whip their Malefactors before they Crucified
them. Accordingly Pilate took Jesus and scourged him. Observe, 2. How
unwilling, how very unwilling Pilate was to be the Instrument of our Savior's
Death; it is very evident that he had a mind to Release him, and it is
concluded, that Pilate was thus forward to Scourge Christ, hoping that the Jews
would have been satisfied with this lighter Punishment, and so have dismissed
him: From this instance we may gather, That Hypocrites within the pale of the
Visible Church, may be guilty of such tremendous Acts of wickedness, as the
Conscience of an Infidel and Pagan may boggle at and protest against. Pilate a
Pagan Absolves Christ, and seeks to release him: whilst the Hypocritical Jews,
who heard his Doctrine, and saw his Miracles, condemn him. Observe, 3. How
wretchedly Pilate suffers himself to be overcome with the Jews importunity, and
contrary to the light of his own Reason and Conscience delivers the Holy and
Innocent Jesus, first to be Scourged and then Crucified. Learn thence, That it
is a vain Apology for Sin, when Persons pretend that it was not committed with
their own consent, but at the instigation and importunity of others: for such
is the frame and Constitution of Man's Soul, that none can make him either
wicked or miserable without his own Consent. Then Pilate took Jesus and
Scourged him.

2 And the soldiers platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his head, and
they put on him a purple robe. 3 And said, Hail King of the Jews: and they
smote him with their hands.

The next part of our Savior's Sufferings consisted of cruel mockings: Christ
had owned himself to be the King of the Jews; that is, a Spiritual King, in and
over his Church. But the Jews expecting that the Messiah should have appeared
in the Pomp of an Earthly Prince, and finding it to be quite otherwise in our
Savior, they look upon him as a Deceiver and Impostour; and accordingly Treat
him as a Mock-King, with all the marks of Derision and Scorn; for first they
put a Crown upon his Head, but a very Ignominious and Painful one, a Crown of
Thorns. They put a Scepter in his Hand, but that of a Reed; a Robe of Scarlet,
or Purple upon his Body, and then bowed their Knees unto him, as they were wont
to do before their Princes; crying, Hail! King! Thus were all the marks of
Scorn imaginable put upon our dear Redeemer; yet what they did in Jest, God
permitted to be done in Earnest; for all these things were ensigns and marks of
Sovereignty, and Almighty God caused the Royal Dignity of his Son to shine
forth even in the midst of his greatest Abasement. Whence was all this Jearing
and Sport? but to flout Majesty? and why did the Son of God undergo all this
Ignominy, Disgrace and Shame? but to show what was due unto us for our Sins; as
also to give us an Example, to bear all the Scorn, Reproach and Shame
imaginable, for the sake of him; who for the Joy that was set before him
despised the Shame, as well as endured the Cross.

4 Pilate therefore went forth again, and says unto them, Behold, I bring him
forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him. 5 Then came Jesus
forth, wearing the crown of thorns, and the purple robe. And Pilate says unto
them, Behold the man. 6 When the chief priests therefore and officers saw him,
they cried out, saying, Crucify him, crucify him. Pilate says unto them,
Take ye him, and crucify him: for I find no fault in him.

Observe here, 1. The great variety of our Savior's Sufferings, he is made the
Football of Cruelty and Scorn; his Sacred Body is stripped of his Garments,
and his Back disguised with Purple-Robes, his tender Temples wounded with a
Thorny Crown; his Face spit upon, his Cheeks buffetted, his Head smitten, his
Hand Sceptred with a Reed. By his wearing a Crown of Thorns, he took away the
bitterness of that Curse, which our Sins brought upon the Earth. Genesis 3.18.
Thorns and Briars shall it bring forth: Christ by his Bitter and Bloody
Sufferings, has turned all the Curses of his People into Crowns and Blessings.
Observe, 2. The noble Testimony given of Christ's Innocence, by the mouth of
Pilate, I find in him no fault at all; he does not say, I find him not Guilty
of what is laid to his Charge; but gives an universal Testimony of our Lord's
Innocence. I find no fault at all in him. In spite of all Malice, Innocence
shall find some Friends and Abettors. Rather than Christ shall want witnesses,
Pilate's mouth shall be opened for his Justification; how fain would he have
freed Jesus, whom he found faultless. Our Lord found more Compassion from
Pilate, an Heathen, than he did from them of his own Nation. Pilate would have
saved him, but they cry out for his Blood: Hypocrites within the visible Church
may be guilty of such monstrous Acts of wickedness, as the Consciences of
Heathens, without the Church may boggle at and protest against. Pilate a Pagan,
pronounces Christ Innocent, whilst the Hypocritical Jews, who had heard his
Doctrine, and seen his Miracles do Condemn him. Observe, 3. Who influenced the
main Body of the Jews to desire Pilate to put Jesus to Death; it was the Chief
Priests and Elders, they persuaded the Multitude: Woe be to the Common People,
when their Guides and Leaders are corrupt; and woe unto them, much more if they
follow their wicked and pernicious Counsels; the Jews here followed their
Guides the Chief Priests; but it was to their own destruction, as well as their
Leaders, when the Blind lead the Blind, both fall into the Ditch.

7 The Jews answered him, we have a law, and by our law he ought to die,
because he made himself the Son of God. 8 When Pilate therefore heard that
saying, he was the more afraid; 9 And went again into the judgment-hall, and
says unto Jesus, Whence art thou? But Jesus gave him no answer.

Observe here, 1. How Ambitious the Chief Priests were that Christ should Die
under a color of Law. We have a Law, and by that Law he ought to Die. The Law
which they allude to, is the Law for putting false Prophets and Blasphemers to
Death; of which number they conclude Christ to be, because he made himself the
Son of God, whereas he did not make himself so, or only pretend to be so, but
really and indeed was so; to wit, the eternal Son of God. Such as are indeed
Blasphemers, and do Arrogate to themselves what is proper to God only; by the
Law of God they ought to be put to Death; but Christ was not Guilty of the
Violation of that Law; for he was indeed the Son of God, and did not make
himself so. Observe, 2. How full of fear the Conscience of Pilate was, when the
Jews told him that Jesus made himself the Son of God; he was afraid to Condemn
him, not knowing but that he might be some Divine and extraordinary Person, and
consequently might draw down Divine Vengeance on his own head. Learn hence,
That serious thoughts of a Deity will strike terror even into a natural
Conscience, especially when the Sinner is following a course which his own
judgment cannot approve; when Pilate heard of Christ's being the Son of God he
was afraid, knowing that what he had done to him was against his own
Conscience. Observe, 3. The Question Pilate puts to Christ upon this occasion,
Whence art thou? that is, what is thy Original, or Parentage? Art thou a Divine
Person or not? our blessed Savior being unwilling to obstruct his own
Sufferings, or to discover any thing that might hinder Pilate from proceeding
against him, would give him no Answer; having before made a reasonable and
sufficient Defense. Oh how ready was Christ to lay down his Life for Sinners,
and how willing to pay that Ransom for his People, which the Justice of God
required.

10 Then says Pilate unto him, Speak thou not unto me? know thou not
that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee? 11 Jesus
answered, Thou could have no power at all against me, except it were given
thee from above: therefore he that delivered me unto thee has the greater sin.

Observe here, 1. How offended Pilate was at Christ's silence, and how
unreasonably he boasts of his Power and Authority. Have not I Power to Crucify
thee, and Power to Release thee? It is the great Sin and snare of Men in Power,
to forget from whom they derive their Power, and to think that they may employ
their Power as they please. Observe, 2. The Piety and meekness of our Savior's
Answer. Thou could have no Power against me, except it were given thee from
above. That is, Thou have no Power over me, nor could thou inflict any
punishment upon me, were it not that my Father had in his great Wisdom, Divine
Counsel, and for glorious Ends permitted it so to be. Learn, That Christ's
being under the Power of any Man, how great and eminent soever, did flow from
the peculiar Dispensation of God; who in his wise and wonderful Counsel so
ordered it, and ordained it for the Redemption and Salvation of his People; he
was above all Humane Power as God, and no ways obnoxious to Pilate's Power,
being a perfectly Innocent Man. Observe, 3. How Christ charges his Death more
upon Judas and the Jews, than upon Pilate and the Gentiles. They that delivered
me unto thee, have the greater Sin. Not that Pilate was excused from Sin, in
delivering Christ to be Crucified; he sinned heinously in abusing his Power;
but Judas sinned more in delivering him up to the Chief Priests, and the Chief
Priests in delivering him up to Pilate, than Pilate himself whom they made a
Tool to serve their Malice and Revenge; they had better means of Knowledge than
he, and so sinned against more Light than he; and consequently their Guilt was
greater, and their Condemnation heavier than his. Learn thence, That the
greater means of Light and Knowledge Persons Sin against, the more aggravated
is their Guilt, and the more heigthned will be their Condemnation. He that
delivered me unto thee has the greater Sin.

12 And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him: but the Jews cried out,
saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Cesars friend: whosoever makes
himself a king, speaks against Caesar. 13 When Pilate therefore heard that
saying, he brought Jesus forth, and sat down in the judgment seat, in a place
that is called the Pavement, but in the Hebrew, Gabbatha.

Still Observe, How unwilling Pilate was to put Christ to Death, Conscience
bids him spare, Popularity bids him Kill; how frequently and how fervently did
he contend with the Jews, till they make it a State-case, and Tacitly Accuse
him for a Traitor, to the Roman Emperor, if he released him. If thou let this
Man go, thou art not Cesar's friend. When Pilate heard that, he delivers up the
Innocent Jesus to be Crucified. Learn hence, That the Natural Consciences of
Men, and the Innate notions of Good and Evil, may carry Men on a great way in
opposing that which is a barefaced Iniquity; but at last, either fear or shame
will overruled, if there be not a Superior and more noble Principle. Though
Pilate's Conscience acquitted Christ, and his Mouth had declared that he found
no fault at all in him; yet fear of Cesar's displeasure, causes him to deliver
up to Death, the Holiest and best of Men, against his Judgment and his
Conscience. When Pilate heard that, he brought Jesus forth unto them.

14 And it was the preparation of the passover, and about the sixth hour: and
he says unto the Jews, Behold your king. 15 But they cried out, Away with him,
away with him, crucify him. Pilate says unto them, Shall I crucify your
king? The chief priests answered, We have no king but Caesar. 16 Then delivered
he him therefore unto them to be crucified.

Observe here, How careful the Holy Ghost is to Record and set down the Time
when Pilate gave Sentence against Christ: In general, it was on the Day of the
preparation for the Passover; that is, the Day immediately before it, when they
prepared every thing needful for the Solemnization; and in particular it was
about the sixth hour of that Day. St. Mark calls it the third hour, St. John
the sixth; but this is easily reconciled thus; the Jews divided the Day into
four quarters, which they called hours; the first was called the third hour,
which answers our ninth, the second called the sixth hour, answering our
twelfth, the third called the ninth hour, answering our three in the Afternoon;
the fourth called the twelfth hour, which was the time of their Retirement from
Labor, and beginning of the first Night watch: Now the whole time from the
third hour to the sixth; that is, from Nine to Twelve, was called the Third
Hour, and the whole intervening time, from the Sixth to the Ninth; that is,
from Twelve to Three, is called the Sixth Hour, and so of the rest. Now when
St. John says, it was about the Sixth Hour when Christ was condemned by Pilate,
and led away to be Crucified, and St. Mark says it was the Third Hour; we are
to understand that St. Mark takes in the whole time of the Third Hour, from
Nine to Twelve; and St. John saying it was about the sixth Hour, implies that
it was near Twelve; so that between the Hours of Nine and Twelve our Lord was
Sentenced, and led away to his Cross, about Twelve fastened to his Cross, upon
which he hung till the Ninth Hour; that is, till about Three in the Afternoon,
during which time, there was such an Eclipse of the Sun, as did occasion
darkness over all the Earth. Learn hence, The great Love and Condescension of
Jesus Christ in stooping so low, to have his Sufferings lengthned out upon our
accounts, to expiate our Guilt which deserves Eternal Sufferings; that he
might by his Example warn us to prepare for Trials of long continuance, and
Sanctify a state of continual Affliction to us. Behold the Son of God harassed
all Night before he suffered, hurried from place to place, posted backward and
forward, from Pilate to Herod, and from Herod to Pilate, wearied, scourged,
buffetted, crowned with Thorns, at last nailed to his Cross, and hanging
thereupon from about Twelve to Three, in exquisit Torture of Body, and under
the sense of his Father's wrath in his Soul. Oh Lord! Thy kindness toward us
is matchless and inimitable, never was Love like thine.

16 And they took Jesus and led him away. 17 And he bearing his cross, went
forth into a place called the place of a scull, which is called in the Hebrew,
Golgotha. 18 Where they crucified him, and two other with him, on either side
one, and Jesus in the midst.

Here Observe, 1. That it was a Custom among the Romans, to cause the Person
condemned to crucifying, to carry his own Cross; accordingly our Savior bare
his own Cross part of the way, till fainting under the burden of it, they laid
it upon another, not out of Mercy but Malice, reserving him for a more public
Death: They were loath he should go away in a fainting Fit. But why could not
Christ bear his own Cross? who was able to bear the Sins of the whole World,
when hanging upon the Cross? Answer, 1. Probably the Jews Malice provided for
him a Cross of extraordinary greatness, proportionable to the Crimes they
charged him with. 2. He was much debilitated and weakened, with his long
watching and sweating the Night before. 3. The sharp edges of the Cross grating
his late whipped and galled Shoulders, might occasion the fresh bleeding of his
wounds, and his weakening thereby. 4. Hereby he gave the World a Demonstration
of the Truth of his Humanity; that he was in all things like unto us, with
respect to his Humane Nature, and the common Infirmities of that Nature.
Observe, 2. The Infamous Company which our Holy Lord suffered with, two
Thieves; on either side, one, and himself in the midst; it had been a
sufficient disparagement to our blessed Redeemer, to be sorted with the best of
Men; but to be numbered with the Scum of Mankind is such an Indignity as
confounds our Thoughts. This was designed by the Jews to dishonor and disgrace
our Savior the more, and to persuade the World, that he was the greatest of
Offenders. But God overruled this, for fulfilling an Ancient Prophecy
concerning the Messiah, Isaiah 53. last. And he was numbered with the
Transgressors.

19 And Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the cross. And the writing was,
JESUS OF NAZARETH THE KING OF THE JEWS. 20 This title then read many of the
Jews: for the place where Jesus was crucified, was nigh to the city: and it was
written in Hebrew, and Greek, and Latin. 21 Then said the chief priests of the
Jews to Pilate, Write not, The king of the Jews; but that he said, I am king of
the Jews. 22 Pilate answered, What I have written, I have written.

Observe here, 1. The Inscription wrote by Pilate over our suffering Savior;
This is Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews. It was the manner of the Romans
when they crucified a Malefactor, to publish the Cause of his Death in Capital
Letters over his Head, that so the Equity of their Proceedings might more
clearly appear to the People. Now it is Observable, how wonderfully the Wisdom
of God overruled the Heart and Pen of Pilate to draw this Title, which was
truly Honorable, and fix it to his Cross. Pilate who was before his Judge, and
pronounced him Innocent, is now his Herald to proclaim his Glory. Learn hence,
That the Regal Dignity of Christ was openly proclaimed by an Enemy, and that in
the time of his greatest Reproaches and Sufferings. Pilate without his own
knowledge, did our Savior an eminent piece of Service; he did that for Christ
which none of his own Disciples durst do; not designedly, but from the special
Overruling Providence of God. No Thanks to Pilate for all this. Because the
highest Services performed to Christ undesignedly, shall neither be accepted
nor rewarded by God. Observe, 2. How the Jews endeavor to alter this: Write
not, The King of the Jews; but that he said, I am the King of the Jews. The
Jews thought it would be a disgrace to them, that Christ should be reported
abroad to have been their King; therefore they desire an alteration of the
Writing: But Pilate that wrote in Honor of Christ, stiffly defends what he had
done: To all their Importunity he returns this resolute Answer, What I have
written, I have written. Surely the Constancy of Pilate at this time, must be
attributed to special Divine Providence. How wonderful was it, that he who
before was as inconstant as a Reed, should now be as fixed as a Pillar of
Brass! Whence is this, but from the God of Spirits, moving upon his Spirit to
write, and to defend what was written? The Providence of God has a Prospect
beyond the Understanding of all Creatures.

23 Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments (and
made four parts, to every soldier a part) and also his coat: now the coat was
without seam, woven from the top throughout. 24 They said therefore among
themselves, Let us not rent it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be: that
the scripture might be fulfilled, which says, They parted my raiment among
them, and for my vesture they did cast lots. These things therefore the
soldiers did.

Here we have recorded our Savior's Sufferings from the Soldiers, they strip
him of his Garments before they fastened him to his Cross, and divide those
Garments which could be parted amongst them, and cast Lots for his woven Coat
which could not be divided. Little did these vile Soldiers think that they were
now fulfilling a Scripture-Prophecy. Yet so it was, this Action of theirs being
foretold, Psalm 22.18. They part my Garments amongst them, and cast lots upon
my Vesture. Not that the Prophecy made them do it, but was fulfilled by their
doing of it. From hence we may gather, That Christ suffered naked upon the
Cross; as naked (say some) as he came into the World. We had made our selves
naked to our shame, and Christ became naked to cover our shame. If sensible of
our own Nakedness and Shame, we flee unto him by Faith, we shall be clothed
upon with Robes of Righteousness and Garments of everlasting Praise.

25 Now there stood by the cross of Jesus, his mother, and his mothers sister,
Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. 26 When Jesus therefore saw his
mother, and the disciple standing by, whom he loved, he says unto his mother,
Woman, behold thy son. 27 Then says he to the disciple, Behold thy mother. And
from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home.

These Words contain our Savior's affectionate Recommendation of his
distressed Mother to the Care of a dear Disciple. It was an Argument of
Christ's wonderful Love to her, that when he was nailed to the Cross and ready
to die, he was more concerned for his Mothers Sorrows than for his own
Sufferings. Now was Simeon's Prophecy fulfilled, Luke 2.35. A Sword shall pass
through thine own Soul also. Her Soul was pierced for him, both as his natural
Mother and also as a mystical Member of him her Head; therefore Christ applies
these comfortable Words as a Salve to her Wounds, even whilst his own were
bleeding unto death: Woman, behold thy Son. Where Note, He calls her Woman, and
not Mother; he does not say, Mother, behold thy Son; but, Woman, behold him:
Not that Christ was ashamed of, or unwilling to own her for his Mother: But
either, 1. Fearing that calling her by that name should augment and increase
her Grief and Trouble. Or else, 2. To intimate his change of State and
Condition, that being ready to die and return to his Father in Heaven, he was
above all earthly Relations, and knew no one after the Flesh, no not his very
Mother: Yet see at the same time, when he was above her, and about to leave
her, how his Care manifested it self for her, when his Soul and Body were full
of Anguish to the very brim: Yet all this makes him not in the least unmindful
of so dear a Relation. Thence learn, That Christ's tender Care of his Mother,
even in the time of his greatest Distress, is an excellent Pattern for all
Children to imitate and follow, to the end of the World. St. John here obeyed
Christ's Command, and imitated his Example, he took her to his own Home; that
is, he treated her with all that dutiful Regard which a tender and indulgent
Mother challenges from a pious and obedient Son. No personal Trial or Trouble
upon our selves, does exempt us from the performance of our Duty toward
others, especially toward our near and dear Relations. Christ in the extremity
of his Sufferings, accounted it his Duty to take care of and provide for his
dear Mother: Teaching us by his Example, That Children ought to evidence that
they honor their Parents, by taking care of them in their decayed and desolate
Condition. Again, Inasmuch as St. John took care of the holy Mother after her
dear Son's death: That Disciple took her to his own home. We Learn, That the
Lord never removes one Comfort, and takes away the means of subsistence from
his People, but he raises up another in the room of it. It is very probable
that Joseph her Husband was before this time dead, and Jesus her Son was now
dying; but still God provides, he raises up St. John to take care of her; he
takes her to his own Home, and looks upon her as one of his Family. But how
comes St. John above the rest to have this honorable Service put upon him, and
this high Trust reposed in him? Answer, The Text tells us, he was the Disciple
whom Jesus loved; that is, in a more especial manner, treating him with greater
Freedom and Familiarity than the rest; he also evidenced more Love unto, and
more Courage and Resolution for Christ than the rest of his Disciples, he
standing by the Cross, when they got afar off, Mark 15.49. Thence we learn,
That such as are beloved of Christ, as do keep close unto him, and express most
Zeal and Resolution for him, they shall be peculiarly honored by him, and be
employed in the highest Services for him.

28 After this, Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled, says, I thirst. 29 Now there was set a vessel
full of vinegar: and they filled a sponge with vinegar, and put it upon hyssop,
and put it to his mouth.

Observe here, 1. The Affliction or Suffering which our Savior complained of,
and that is Thirst; there are two sorts of Thirst; one Natural and Proper, the
other Spiritual and Figurative: Christ felt both at this time. His Body
Thirsted by Reason of those Agonies which it labored under. His Soul Thirsted
in vehement Desires, and fervent longings to accomplish that great and
difficult Work he was now about. 2. The design and end of our Lord's Complaint.
That the Scripture might be fulfilled, he says, I Thirst. Our Savior finding
that all was accomplished which he was to do before his Death; but only the
fulfilling that one Scripture, Ps. 69.21. They gave me Vinegar to Drink. He for
the accomplishment thereof. Said I Thirst. Whence Note, That such were the
Agonies and Extreme Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ upon the Cross, that
they drank up his very Spirits, and made him cry, I Thirst. 2. That when Christ
cried out, I Thirst; it was to show that what ever was foretold by the Prophets
concerning him, was exactly accomplished, and even to a Circumstance fulfilled
in him. That the Scripture might be fulfilled, Jesus says, I Thirst.

30 When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is finished: and
he bowed his head, and gave up the Ghost.

Observe here, 1. Our Lord's last word, It is finished. 2. His last Act, He
bowed his Head, and gave up the Ghost. As to the former, his last Word, It is
finished. This might be the probable intendment of it. 1. It is finished; That
is, Now is my Father's Eternal Council concerning me accomplished; and now is
the Promise that he made of my becoming a Sacrifice for Sin fulfilled; both my
Father's Purpose and my Father's Promise, are now receiving their final
Accomplishment. 2. It is finished; that is, the Scriptures are now fulfilled;
all the Types that did prefigure me, all the Prophetical Predictions that were
made of me, all the Jewish Sacrifices that pointed at me, have now received
their final accomplishment in me, and are abolished in my Death. 3. It is
finished; that is, my Sufferings are now ended, my Race is Run, my work is
done, I am now putting my last Hand to it, my Death is before me, I have
finished the Work, the whole Work which I came into the World for, doing, as
well as dying; all is upon the matter completed, it is just finishing, it will
be instantly finished. Again, 4. It is finished, that is, the Fury and Malice,
the Rage and Revenge of my Enemies is now ended, they have done their worst;
the Chief Priests and Soldiers, the Judges and Witnesses, the Executioners and
Tormenters have all tired out themselves, with the Exercise of their own
Malice; but now their Spite and Spleen, their Envy and Enmity is ended, and the
Son of God's at Rest. 5. It is finished; that is, the Glorious work of Man's
Redemption and Salvation is perfected and performed, consummated and
completed, the Price is paid, Satisfaction is given, Redemption is purchased,
and Salvation insured to a miserable World. Woe unto us if Christ had left but
one farthing of our Debt to the Justice of God unpaid, we must have lain in
Hell to all Eternity, as being insolvend. But Christ has by one offering for
ever perfected them that are sanctified. Learn hence, That Jesus Christ has
perfected and completely finished the great work of Redemption committed to him
by God the Father. Observe, 2. Our Savior's last Act. He bowed his Head, and
gave up the Ghost. Whence learn, The spontaneity and voluntariness of Christ's
Sufferings, how freely he surrendered to Death, his Soul was not rent from him,
but yielded up to God by him; Christ was a volunteer in dying, though his Death
was a violent Death, yet it was a voluntary Sacrifice. He bowed his Head, and
gave up the Ghost.

31 The Jews therefore because it was the preparation, that the bodies should
not remain upon the cross on the sabbath day (for that sabbath day was an high
day) besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be
taken away. 32 Then came the soldiers, and brake the legs of the first, and of
the other which was Crucified with him. 33 But when they came to Jesus, and saw
that he was dead already, they brake not his legs. 34 But one of the soldiers
with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came there out blood and water. 35
And he that saw it, bare record, and his record is true: and he knows that he
says true, that ye might believe. 36 For these things were done, that the
scripture should be fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken. 37 And again
another scripture says, They shall look on him whom they pierced.

These Verses contain several remarkable passages tending to the Confirmation
of our Faith, in the Belief of the certainty and reality of our Savior's
Death; in which the Jews, the Soldiers, and St. John do all give their several
and sufficient Evidences. Observe, 1. The Jews part in clearing up this Truth;
They desire Pilate, (who had Power alone to dispose of the Dead Bodies of
condemned Persons) that the Legs of the crucified Persons might be broken to
hasten their Death, that so they might be taken away and buried; because
according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 21.22, 23. the Land was defiled with those that
were hanged, if not timely buried; and they judged if the Bodies of these
Persons did remain on the Cross all that Night, and the next Sabbath Day which
was an high day, (the ordinary Sabbath, and the first Day of the Passover, or
Feast of unleavened Bread meeting together) it might pollute both them and
their Feast. Where Note, The cursed Hypocrisy of these Jews, they look upon
themselves as strictly bound to observe an outward Ceremony, but their
Consciences never scruple to violate the most weighty Precepts of the moral
Law; they strictly observe the Ceremonial Precept, that the dead bodies should
not remain upon the Cross; but they scruple not to Crucify the Son of God, and
to use him with the utmost Rigor, desiring his Bones may be broken. Observe,
2. the Soldiers part contributing to clear the Truth of Christ's Death; they
execute what the Jews had desired and Pilate granted, breaking the Legs of the
two Thieves, but not of Jesus, because he was already Dead; but one of the
Soldiers resolving to make sure work, thrusts a Spear into his Side, and there
came out straight way Blood and Water, proving that he was really Dead. All
which points out to us, that it is he who came by Water and Blood, 1 John 5.6.
and that from the merit and efficacy of his Death there flows out Blood for
the obtaining Remission of Sin, and Water to Regenerate and wash us from our
Uncleanness. From the Barbarous Soldiers peircing of Christ's Side after he was
Dead, We learn, That no cruelty was omitted toward Christ either Dead or
alive, which might testify the great desert of our Sin; nor was there any
needful Evidence wanting, which might make clear the Truth of his Death; the
Soldier's piercing of our Savior's Side was at once an exercise of their
Cruelty, and an Evidence of the certainty of Christ's Death. Observe, 3. St.
John's part in this Evidence, he avouches that Christ really died, and expressly
affirms that he saw it with his own Eyes, for the confirmation of our Faith; he
that saw it, bare Record, and his Record is True. And farther shows that by
these Actions of the Soldiers That was done, by which several
Scripture-Prophecies were fulfilled, and received their Accomplishment:
particularly, That of Exodus 12.46. concerning the Paschal Lamb, which was a
Type of Christ, that a Bone of it should not be broken; and that prediction
Zach. 12.10. They shall look on him whom they have pierced. Learn hence, That
Christ is the Truth and Substance of that Type, the Paschal Lamb, mentioned
Exodus 12. and the True Passover Sacrificed for us; therefore what was ordained
concerning the Paschal Lamb, is applied here to Christ, as the Substance of
that Type. A Bone of him shall not be broken.

38 And after this, Joseph of Arimathea, (being a disciple of Jesus, but
secretly for fear of the Jews) besought Pilate that he might take away the body
of Jesus: and Pilate gave him leave: he came therefore and took the body of
Jesus. 39 And there came also Nicodemus (which at the first came to Jesus by
night) and brought a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about an hundred pound
weight. 40 Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in linen clothes,
with the spices, as the manner of the Jews is to bury. 41 Now in the place
where he was crucified, there was a garden; and in the garden a new sepulcher,
wherein was never man yet laid. 42 There laid they Jesus therefore, because of
the Jews preparation- day, for the sepulcher was nigh at hand.

This last Paragraph of the Chapter gives us an Account of our Lord's
Honorable Burial; such a Funeral as never was since Graves were first dug.
Where Observe, 1. Our Lord's Body must be begged before it could be buried; the
dead Bodies of Malefactors being in the Power and at the Disposal of the Judge:
Pilate grants it, and accordingly the dead Body is taken down; wrapped in fine
Linen and prepared for the Sepulcher. Observe, 2. The Persons who bestowed
this Honorable Burial upon Christ, Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus; the one
provided fine Linen, the other fine Spices, and they jointly wound and embalmed
his Body after the Jewish manner; both of them Worthy, though close Disciples;
Grace does not always make a public and open show where it is. But as there is
much secret Treasure unseen in the Bowels of the Earth, so is there much Grace
in the Hearts of some Saints, which the World takes little notice of. We Read
of none of the Apostles at Christ's Funeral; fear had put them to flight; but
Joseph and Nicodemus appear bold: If God strengthen the weak, and leave the
strong to the prevalency of their own fears, the weak shall be as David, and
the strong as Tow. Observe, 3. The Grave, or Sepulcher in which our Lord was
buried, it was a Sepulcher in a Garden, to expiate Adam's Sin committed in a
Garden; as by the Sin of the First Adam we were driven out of Paradise, the
Garden of Pleasure; so by the Sufferings of the Second Adam, who lay buried in
a Garden, we may hope for Entrance into the Heavenly Paradise. And it was in a
new Sepulcher wherein never any Man was laid, lest his Adversaries should say,
it was another that was Risen, who was buried there before, or that he Arose as
one of the Old Prophets did, by touching the Bones of some other Dead Person.
Observe, 4. The manner of our Lord's Funeral, it was hasty, public, and
decent; it was hasty by reason of the streights of Time; the Sabbath was
approaching, and all Business is laid aside to prepare for that. Teaching us,
how much it is our Duty to dispatch our Worldly business early in the Evening
of the Lord's Day; that we may be the better prepared to Sanctify that Day.
Again, our Lord's Funeral was public and open, all Persons that would, might
be Spectators, to cut off occasion from any to object that there was deceit,
and fraud used in or about our Lord's Burial; yet was he also Interred
decently, his Holy Body being wrapped in fine Linen, and perfumed with Spices,
according to the Jewish Custom. Observe, 5. The Reasons why our Lord was thus
buried, seeing he was to Rise again in as short a time as other Men lie by the
Walls; doubtless it was to declare the certainty of his Death, and the reality
of his Resurrection, to fulfill the Types and Prophesies which went before of
him; As Jonas being three Days and three Nights in the Whale's Belly; he was
also buried to complete his Humiliation, this being the lowest step to which he
could descend in his abased State. Finally he went into the Grave, that he
might conquer Death in its own Territories. Observe Lastly, Of what use our
Lord's Burial is to us his followers. It shows us the amazing depths of his
Humiliation, from what and to what his Love brought him, even from the Bosom of
his Father to the Bosom of the Grave. It may also comfort us against the fears
of Death; the Grave could not long keep Christ, it shall not always keep us; it
was a loathsome Prison before, it is a perfumed Bed now; he whose Head is in
Heaven, need not fear to put his Feet into the Grave. Awake and Sing thou that
dwell in the Dust, for the Enmity of the Grave is slain by Christ.

CHAP. XX.
This and the following Chapter gives us an Account of our Savior's
Exaltation, and Victorious Triumph over all his Enemies, by his powerful
Resurrection. All the four Evangelists do confirm the Truth of it, by recording
the several steps and degrees of the manifestation of it. In this Chapter,
Christ's Resurrection is confirmed, first to Mary Magdalene, next to Peter and
John, then to all the Disciples except Thomas.

1 THe first day of the week comes Mary Magdalene early when it was yet dark,
unto the sepulcher, and sees the stone taken away from the sepulcher.

In this Verse is Recorded how Mary Magdalene came early to the Sepulcher, on
the first Day of the Week to Anoint the Dead Body of our Lord Jesus. Where
Note, That though her Heart did burn with an ardent Zeal and Affection to her
Crucified Lord, yet the commanded Duties of the Sabbath were not omitted by
her, she kept close, and silently spent that Holy Day in a mixture of Grief and
Hope; her Example is a good Pattern of Sabbath-Sanctification, and worthy of
our Christian Imitation. Note, 2. What magnanimity and courage is found in this
weak Woman, she followed Christ Courageously, when his Disciples left him
Cowardly; she accompanied him to his Cross, she followed his Hearse to the
Grave, when his Disciples durst not appear; and now very early in the Morning
she goes to visit his Sepulcher, fearing neither the Darkness of the Night, nor
the presence of the Watchmen. Learn thence, That Courage is the special gift
of God, and if he gives it to the feebler Sex, even to timorous and fearful
Women, it is not in the Power of Man to make them afraid.

2 Then she runs, and comes to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whom
Jesus loved, and says unto them, They have taken away the Lord out of the
sepulcher, and we know not where they have laid him.

It was a great Honor that God put upon this poor Woman, Mary Magdalene, that
she has the first Notice of our Savior's Resurrection, and is the first that
discovers it to the Apostles. But why had not the Virgin Mary, his Disconsolate
Mother this Privilege conferred on her, rather than Mary Magdalene, who had
been a grievous Sinner? Doubtless, this was for the Comfort of all True
Pentitents, and Administers great Consolation to them: As the Angels in Heaven
Rejoice, much more does Christ Joy in the Recovery of one repenting Sinner,
than in multitudes of Holy and Just Persons (such was the blessed Virgin) who
need no Repentance.

3 Peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to the
sepulcher. 4 So they ran both together: and the other disciple did outrun
Peter, and came first to the sepulcher. 5 And he stouping down and looking in,
saw the linen clothes lying; yet went he not in. 6 Then comes Simon Peter
following him, and went into the sepulcher, and sees the linen clothes lie. 7
And the napkin that was about his head, not lying with the linen clothes, but
wrapped together in a place by it self. 8 Then went in also that other disciple
which came first to the sepulcher, and he saw, and believed. 9 For as yet they
knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead.

Here observe, 1. How Peter and John moved with Mary Magdalens words, They have
taken away the Lord, etc. do run to the Sepulcher to satisfy themselves in the
Truth of it. Such as sincerely Love Christ, upon the least intimation that he
is missing, bestir themselves with great Activity and Diligence, that they may
see him, or hear of him; Peter and John run to the Sepulcher to see what was
become of their Holy Master. Observe, 2. That there were such clear Evidences
about Christ's Grave, as made it apparent that he was indeed Risen from the
Dead, and not conveyed away either by Friends or Foes; It cannot be supposed
that any of his Friends (could they have come at it) would have so handled his
Holy Body, as to carry it away naked; and for his Foes had they Stole away the
Body, they would never have left the Fine Linen behind them. Observe, 3. That
when Christ arose from the Grave, he left his Grave Clothes behind him; whereas
when Lazarus arose, he came forth with his Grave Clothes about him; it Teaches
us that Christ Rose never to Die more, but to Live and Reign for ever;
therefore he left his Grave Clothes in the Grave, as never to make use of them
more. But Lazarus was to Die again, Death was once more to have Dominion over
him; he therefore came forth with his Grave Clothes about him. Observe Lastly,
How ignorant the Apostles were of the Doctrine of Christ's Resurrection, and of
the Holy Scriptures, which declared he was to Rise again from the Dead. They
knew not the Scriptures: That is, They did not heed and regard them, ponder
them in their Hearts, and feed upon them by Faith.

10 Then the disciples went away again unto their own home. 11 But Mary stood
without at the sepulcher, weeping: and as she wept, she stouped down, and
looked into the sepulcher, 12 And sees two angels in white, sitting, the one
at the head, and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had layen:

Here we have a Description of the great Love of Mary Magdalene, which she
expressed toward Christ after his Resurrection; she went to his Sepulcher
early, when it was yet dark, she hastily calls the Disciples, Peter and John to
the Sepulcher. And she stays behind weeping at the Sepulcher, when they were
gone away to their own home. And as Mary first sought him and longest sought
him, so she first finds him. Here Note, 1. Mary's carriage and behavior
toward her Savior, this is discovered by her patient attendance, She stood
without at the Sepulcher; by her passionate mourning, she stood at the
Sepulcher weeping; by her unwearied diligence, she stooped down and looked into
the Sepulcher; here was great Love indeed in this poor Woman, a Love stronger
than Death, a Love which did outstrip and go beyond the greatest Apostles.
Learn thence, 1. That true Love to Christ suffers not it self to be stinted or
limited, no not by the greatest Examples; the weakest Woman that truly Loves
Christ, may piously strive with the greatest Apostle in this point; though he
be Learneder, Wiser, more Useful and more Eminent than any of us; yet it is
Holy and Wise, not to suffer our selves to be exceeded by any in our Love to
Christ; every Christian may strive to exceed any one in Grace, and to attain
the highest place in the Kingdom of Heaven. Learn, 2. That strong Love is
valiant and undaunted, it will grapple and encounter with the strongest
opposition; Mary fears nothing in seeking of her Lord, neither the darkness of
the Night, nor the terror of the Soldiers, nor the malice of the Jews; Love is
strong as Death, and the Flames thereof are vehement. Note farther, The success
of Mary Magdalen's Love to Christ, and unwearied Attendance on his Sepulcher;
she found not the Dead Body of Christ; and it was well she did not; for if
Death could have held him, it would not have let us go. But though she found
not her Lord in the Grave, she found two of his Servants there, two Angels; of
all things in the World, one would least have expected to find an Angel in a
Grave, Spirits in the place of Dead Bodies, and Immortality in the place of
Corruption. But from hence we Learn, That such as sincerely seek the Lord shall
certainly find, if not the very thing which they seek, yet that which is much
fitter and better for them; Mary did not find Christ's Dead Body, but she finds
that which was more comfortable for her to find, Namely, Two Angels to testify
that he was Risen. Where Note, The posture of these Angels described; the one
sitting at the Head, the other at the Feet: It is matter of Comfort to the
Members of Christ, that Angels do not wait upon the Head only, but upon the
Feet also. And it ought to be matter of imitation, also. Let us imitate our
blessed Savior, in having an Angel not at our Head only, but at our Feet also;
many have an Ambition to have an Angel at their Head, a great measure of Light
and Knowledge there; but they care not for an Angel at their Feet, they delight
not to walk answerably to their Light and Knowledge, they have an Angelical
Understanding, and a Diabolical Conversation; it is sad for a Man to have all
his Religion in his Brain and Tongue, and nothing in his Heart and Life.

13 And they say unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? She says unto them,
because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.
14 And when she had thus said, she turned her self back, and saw Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was Jesus. 15 Jesus says unto her, Woman, Why
weepest thou? Whom seek thou? she supposing him to be the gardner, says
unto him, Sir, if thou have born him hence, tell me where thou have laid him,
and I will take him away.

Observe here, 1. That the best company in the World will not satisfy or
content such as are seeking for Jesus Christ, when they find not him whom their
Souls seek; Mary now enjoyed the Presence and Company of two Angels, but this
did not satisfy her in the Absence of Christ himself. Observe, 2. How
Passionately did Mary mourn for the Loss and want of Christ's Bodily Presence,
thereby giving Testimony of her great Affection toward him; but truly our Love
to Christ is best shown not by our Passionate desires for his Bodily Presence,
but by our Holy longings after his Spiritual Presence in his Word and
Ordinances here on Earth, and his blessed and immediate Presence in Heaven.
Observe, 3. How Christ may be present with and very near unto his People, and
yet not be presently discerned by them; Jesus stood by Mary, but she knew not
that it was Jesus; her not expecting a living Christ was one cause why she did
not discern him. Observe, 4. How exceedingly Mary's thoughts were taken up with
Christ; she says to the Gardener, If thou have born him hence. What Him? She
does not say whom, but her Heart was so taken up with Christ, and her Mind so
full of him, that she concluded every body would understand whom she meant,
though she did not say whom she meant. Hence Note, That the Soul of a sincere
Believer is full of earnest and longing desires after Jesus Christ. 2. That
such a Soul is yet sometimes at a loss for Christ, and cannot tell where to
find him. 3. That whilst the Soul is at a loss for Christ, its desires are
often quicker and more stirring after Christ. This was the case of Mary here,
with the Spouse, by Night on her Bed, and early in the Morning she sought him
whom her Soul loved.

16 Jesus says unto her, Mary. She turned her self, and says unto him,
Raboni, which is to say, Master. 17 Jesus says unto her, Touch me not: for I
am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I
ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God.

In the former of these Verses, Christ makes himself known to Mary, and calls
her by her Name. In the latter he gives her a Prohibition and an Injunction.
Observe, 1. The Prohibition, Touch me not; together with the Reason of it, for
I am not yet ascended to my Father. It is concluded by Interpreters, that Mary
Magdalene was now fallen at Christ's Feet, and embraced them; that having found
him whom her Soul loves, she hugs him now, and hangs about him; but Christ
forbids any farther embracing, and rejects such Testimonies of her Love; as if
he had said, Although I will allow you as much familiarity as shall
satisfactorily Convince you of the verity of my Resurrection; yet you must not
expect to converse with me in that carnal manner which you did before my Death;
for I am ascending to my Father, and must be enjoyed no longer after a
Corporal, but Spiritual manner. Learn hence. That our Love to Jesus Christ is
best shown, not by our Humane, Passionate, Affections to his bodily Presence,
but by our Spiritual Communion with him by Faith here on Earth, in order to an
immediate Communion with him face to face in Heaven. Christ now after his
Resurrection was advanced to a more Spiritual Condition, therefore refuses at
Mary's Hand the Offices of Humane Conversation, but expects of her the Duties
and Services of Spiritual Devotion. Obs. 2. Christ's Injunction. But go to my
Brethren and say, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, to my God and your
God. Where Note, The endearing Title given to the Disciples. My Brethren, he
had before his Death called them his Servants, his Friends, his Children, but
now after his Resurrection he calls them his Brethren; he became our Brother,
by assuming our Nature in his Incarnation, he continues our Brother by resuming
that Nature at his Resurrection Note farther, That Christ calls his Disciples
Brethren after his Exaltation and Resurrection; thereby showing that the change
of his condition, had wrought no change in his Affection toward his poor
Disciples; but those that were his Brethren before, in the time of his
Humilition and Abasement are so still, after his Exaltation and Advancement. Go
to my Brethren and say, Humility does not only go before Honor, but it dwells
with Honor, and does ever more accompany it. Observe lastly, The good News or
Message of Joy which Christ sends by Mary to his dear Disciples; say, I ascend
to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God; as if Nature and Adoption
gave the same Interest. Christ calls God, his God and his Disciples God, his
Father and their Father; first his, and then theirs, and therefore theirs
because his. Learn hence, That God for Christ's sake has dignified Believers
with that near and dear Relation of his being a Father to them in and through
his Son; so that as they ought to carry it toward him like Children by
Obedience, Subjection and Resignation; so they may expect he will retain a
Fatherly Affection toward them, and they may expect from him Fatherly
Compassion, Provision, Protection, Correction, and all things needful.

18 Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples, that she had seen the Lord, and
that he had spoken these things unto her. 19 Then the same day at evening,
being the first day of the week, when the doors were shut, where the disciples
were assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and
says unto them, Peace be unto you. 20 And when he had so said, he showed unto
them his hands and his side. Then were the disciples glad when they saw the
Lord.

Our blessed Savior's first appearing after his Resurrection, having been to
Mary Magdalen, as the former Verses acquainted us: The same Day at Evening,
when the Doors were shut for fear of the Jews, Jesus miraculously, and as to
the Disciples insensibly, opens the Doors, and stands in the midst of them, and
says, Peace be unto you, and shows them his Hands and his Side. Where Note, 1.
That it has been no strange thing in the Church, that the best Members of it
have been put to frequent their Assemblies with great fear, and been forced to
meet in the Night with great Caution, because of the Fury of the Persecutors:
Here Christ's own Disciples were forced to get together in the Night, the Doors
kept shut, for fear of the Jews. Note, 2. Let Christ's Disciples meet together
never so privately, and with never so much hazard and jeopardy, they shall have
Christ's Company with them; neither Bolts, nor Locks, nor fastened Doors shall
hold Christ from them: When the Doors were shut, Jesus came and stood in the
midst of them. Observe lastly, The Evidence which our Savior offers to evince
and prove the certainty of his Resurrection; he showed his Disciples his Hands
and his Feet. Christ appealed to, and admitted of the Judgment of their Senses,
to assure them that it was his real Body. And if we must not be allowed to
believe our Senses (as the Romish Synagogue would persuade us) we shall want
the best external Evidence we can have to prove the Truth of the Christian
Religion; namely, the Miracles of our Savior: For how can we be assured that
those Miracles were true, but by the Judgment of our Senses? Now as our Senses
tell us that Christ's Miracles were true, so they assure us that the Popish
Doctrine of Transubstantiation is false.

21 Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: as my Father has sent
me, even so send I you. 22 And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and
says unto them, Receive ye the holy Ghost. 23 Whose soever sins ye remit, they
are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.

Observe here, 1. The Repetition of our Savior's endeared Salutation to his
Disciples. Peace be unto you, Peace be unto you. This was no more than might be
needful, to signify his firm Reconciliation to them, notwithstanding their
late Cowardice in forsaking of him, and flying from him, when the Storm fell
upon him. Observe, 2. How Christ does renew his Disciples Commission for the
Work of the Ministry, who possibly were much discouraged with the remembrance
of their faint-heartedness in the time of his Sufferings; he does therefore
anew Commissionate them, and sends them forth in these Words: As my Father sent
me; that is, to preach, plant and propagate the Gospel, so send I you. By the
same Authority, and for the same Ends, in part, for which I was sent by my
Father, do I send you; namely, to gather, to govern, and instruct my Church.
Learn hence, That when Christ left the World, he did not leave his Church
destitute of a Gospel Ministry, which shall continue to the end of the World.
As Christ was sent by the Father, so are his Ministers sent by him; and they
may expect, having the same Authority and Commission, the same Success and
Blessing; and the Contempt cast upon them and their Message, ultimately
reflects upon God and Christ, whose Messengers they are. Observe, 3. How Christ
that sends them forth, does furnish them with the Gifts of the Spirit for their
Office: He breathed on them and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost; that is, the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost. They had received the Holy Spirit before as a Spirit
of Sanctification; here they receive it in its extraordinary Gifts, to fit them
for their Office. And Christ's conferring the Holy Ghost by breathing upon
them, shows that the Holy Spirit proceeds as well from the Son as from the
Father. And as by God's breathing, the first Man was made a living Soul; so by
Christ's breathing on the Apostles, they were quickened and extraordinarily
enabled for the Service they were called to. Learn hence, That when Christ
sends forth any about his Work, he will furnish them with Endowments answerable
to their vast Employment: And the best Furniture they can have, is the Holy
Spirit in his Gifts and Qualifications suitable to their Work. He breathed on
them and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Observe, 4. How Christ asserts their
Authority in the discharge of their Commission, and declares that what they act
Ministerially, according to their Commission here on Earth, is ratified in
Heaven: Whose Sins ye remit, they are remitted. Where Note, That there is a
twofold Power of remitting or forgiving Sins; the one Magisterial and
Authoritative; this belongs to Christ alone: The other Ministerial and
Declarative; this belongs to Christ's Ambassadors, who have a Power in his Name
to bind and loose. It is a pious Note of St. Austin upon this Place, That
Christ first conferred the Holy Ghost upon his Apostles, and then said, Whose
Sins ye remit, they are remitted. Thereby intimating that it is not they, but
the Holy Ghost by them, that puts away Sin. For who can forgive Sin, but God
only? The Power of forgiving Sin that Man has, is only to declare, That if Men
be truly and really Penitent, their Sins are forgiven them, for the sake of
Christ's satisfaction.

24 But Thomas one of the twelve called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus
came. 25 The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord.
But he said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails,
and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his
side, I will not believe.

What the cause of Thomas his absence was, is not declared; it is evident that
he was not with the rest of the Disciples when Christ appeared to them; and his
absence had like to have cost him dear, even the loss of his Faith; and he
might have had cause for ever to have bewailed his absence from that Meeting of
the Disciples, had not Christ been more merciful. Learn thence, That the
letting slip of one holy Opportunity may prove exceedingly prejudicial to the
Souls Advantage: It is wise and safe to lay hold upon every Opportunity for
enjoying Communion with God and Fellowship with his Saints. Thomas his absence
deprived him not only of the good News which Mary brought of Christ's being
risen, but also of the sight of him; which the other Disciples got by
assembling together; and for want thereof Thomas is left under many Doubts and
Fears. Observe farther, What a strange Declaration Thomas makes of his
obstinate Unbelief. Except I see the print of the nails, and put my finger into
his side, I will not believe. Where Note, How strangely rooted Unbelief is in
the Hearts of holy Men, insomuch that they desire the Objects of Faith should
fall under the view of their Senses. Thomas carries his Faith at his Fingers
ends, he will believe no more than he can see or feel; whereas Faith is the
Evidence of things not seen.

26 And after eight days, again his disciples were within, and Thomas with
them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said,
Peace be unto you. 27 Then says he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and
behold my hands; and reach hither, thy hand, and thrust it into my side: and be
not faithless, but believing.

Observe here, First, Our Savior's appearing again to his Disciples after his
Resurrection, it was eight days after he first arose, which was the first day
of the Week. Here Note, That Christ's rising the first day of the Week, and
appearing on the next First Day of the Week after to the Disciples, and they
observing that Day for their solemn Assemblies, and St. Paul administering on
that Day the Lord's Supper, Acts 20. and commanding on that Day Collections for
the Poor, 1 Cor. 16. and St. John calling it the Lord's Day, Rev. 1.10. From
these Authorities, and the Primitive Practice, we derive our Christian Sabbath:
For we do not find in all the Scripture one Instance, of any one Congregation
of Christians only assembling upon the Jewish Sabbath, but on the First Day of
the Week, on which we ground our Observation of that Day. Observe, 2. The
wonderful Condescension of Christ to the weakness of Thomas his Faith, he bids
him reach forth his hand, and thrust it into his side. Not that Christ was
pleased with, but only pitiful toward Thomas his Infirmities; and it ought to
be no encouragement to any Person to follow his Example, in seeking or
expecting the like Signs of their own prescribing for helping of their Faith.
Observe, 3. How mercifully Christ overruled Thomas his Unbelief for the
Confirmation of our Faith. His Doubting proved a means for establishing his own
and our Faith. Therefore says Gregory well, Plus mihi profuit dubitatio Thomae
quam credulitas Mariae. Had not Thomas doubted, we had not been so fully
assured that it was the same Christ that was crucified who rose again.

28 And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord and my God.

These Words may be considered two ways. 1. As an abrupt Speech, importing a
vehement Admiration of Christ's Mercy toward him, and of his own Stupidity and
Dullness to believe. Learn hence, That the convincing Condescension of Christ
turns Unbelief into a Rapture of holy Admiration and humble Adoration. 2. This
Expression of Thomas, My Lord and my God, contains a short but absolute
Confession of Faith. Thomas rightly collects from his Resurrection, that he was
Lord, God, blessed for evermore, the true Messiah, the expected Redeemer, and
accordingly with an explicit Faith he now professes his Interest in him,
saying, My Lord and my God.

29 Jesus says unto him, Thomas, because thou have seen me, thou have
believed: blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

Here we have Christ's Reprehension of Thomas for not believing without such
sensible Evidence as he desired. He believed now that Christ was risen from the
Dead, but it was upon the Testimony of his Senses only: Therefore Christ tells
him, that his Faith would have been more excellent and more eminently
rewardable if he had believed without such demonstrative Evidence. Faith is the
Evidence of things not seen. Therefore to give Credit to a thing upon the
Evidence of Sense, is not properly believing. Observe farther, How Christ
pronounces them Blessed who should hereafter believe on him through the
preaching of the Gospel, though they did not see him as Thomas did, nor handle
him as he might. This is a sure Rule, that by how much our Faith stands in less
need of the external Evidence of Sense, the stronger our Faith is, and the more
acceptable it is, provided what we believe be revealed in the Word of God.
Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed.

30 And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples,
which are not written in this book. 31 But these are written, that ye might
believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing ye might
have life through his Name.

Observe here, 2. The true End for which the Miracles of Christ were so
carefully recorded; namely, that we might believe. By believing that Christ is
the Son of God, we have Life; and by the Evidence of his Miracles we know and
believe him to have been the Son of God: The Miracles which Christ wrought were
the best external Evidence of his Mission. Observe, 1. That all Christ's
Miracles, both before his Passion and after his Resurrection, were not recorded
by the Evangelists. Observe, 2. The great Point concerning Christ to be known
and believed from the Scriptures is this, That Jesus the Son of the Virgin is
the promised Messiah, the anointed of the Father, he in whom all the Types and
Shadows of the Law are accomplished; and that this Jesus is for Nature
Co-essential, for Dignity Coequal, and for Time Coeternal with the Father:
One in Essence, equal in Power and Glory. Thus believing that Jesus is the Son
of God, and accompanying that Belief with a holy Life, if we believe well and
live well, we shall have Life through his Name.

CHAP. XXI.
AFter these things Jesus showed himself again to the disciples at the sea of
Tiberias; and on this wise showed he himself:

The foregoing Chapter acquainted us with several Appearances of Christ to his
Disciples after his Resurrection: All which were in Jerusalem. This Chapter
acquaints us with his appearing to his Disciples in Galilee, whither he had
ordered his Disciples to go, promising there to meet them. Jerusalem now
becomes a forsaken Place, a People abandoned to destruction, Christ will not
show himself openly to them; but Gallilee was a Place where Christ's Ministry
had found better acceptance; to Galilee therefore does he go. Such Places
wherein Christ is most welcome to preach, shall be most honored with his
Presence. Jesus showed himself to his Disciples at the Sea of Tiberias, called
elsewhere the Sea of Galilee.

2 There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathanael of
Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two other of his disciples. 3
Simon Peter says unto them, I go a fishing. They say unto him, We also go with
thee. They went forth, and entered into a ship immediately; and that night they
caught nothing.

Observe here, That after Christ was crucified the Disciples returned for a
time to their Trade and Employment of Fishing; though they were called to be
Fishers of Men, yet Churches not being gathered and constituted at present, nor
able to maintain them, they labor with their Hands to supply their present
Necessities. Afterward, when at the Feast of Pentecost, they had received
those visible Gifts of the Holy Ghost, which did furnish them for preaching the
Gospel to all Nations, and they went forth to plant and propagate the Gospel,
we may believe they then gave over the Labors of their Secular Calling, and
applied themselves wholly to the Work of the Ministry. That may be done (in
Ecclesia Constituenda) in a Church which is constituting or about to be
constituted, which is not convenient to be done in a Church already
constituted. Observe farther, How Peter, with the rest, toil all night and
catch nothing; but no sooner is Christ come among them, but they enclose a
multitude of Fishes. Thereby teaching us, That all human Labors and Endeavors
are in vain, unless Christ by his Presence and Blessing crown them with success.

4 But when the morning was now come Jesus stood on the shore: but the
disciples knew not that it was Jesus. 5 Then Jesus says unto them, Children,
have ye any meat? They answered him, No. 6 And he said unto them, Cast the net
on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find. They cast therefore, and now
they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fishes.

Observe here, 1. Christ was near, very near to his Disciples, but they
perceive it not: Jesus stood on the shore, but they knew not that it was Jesus.
Learn, Christ is not always discerned by us when he is present with us; it is a
double Mercy to enjoy his Company, and to know indeed that it is he. Observe,
2. Although they had labored all the Night in vain, yet at Christ's Command they
go to Work again, and with great success; they were not able to draw the Net
for the multitude of Fishes. When Christ is about to do great things for his
People, yet will he have them exert all possible Endeavors of their own; and
the want of former Success must not discourage from future Endeavors, Observe,
3. What a Proof Christ here gives of his Divinity and Godhead: How were all the
Fish in the Sea at his Pleasure, and obedient to his Command! He knew where
they swim, and brings them from one part of the Lake to the other, where the
Disciples had toiled all night and caught nothing. Christ our Mediator is true
God, and as such has a Sovereign Power and Providence over all the Creatures;
the Cattle on a thousand Hills, and all the Fish swimming in the Sea are
obedient to his Power and observant of his Commands.

7 Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved, says unto Peter, It is the Lord.
Now when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his fishers coat unto
him, (for he was naked) and did cast himself into the sea. 8 And the other
disciples came in a little ship (for they were not far from land, but as it
were two hundred cubits) dragging the net with fishes. 9 As Soon then as they
were come to land, they saw a fire of coals there, and fish laid thereon, and
bread.

Observe here, 1. The great Zeal and Forwardness of Peter; hearing that it was
Christ, he leaps into the Sea to get to him. Oh how inviting, attractive, and
alluring, is a sight of Christ! It will make those that know him, break through
all Difficulties to come unto him. It is not a Sea of Water, no not Seas of
Blood, that can keep a zealous Soul at a distance from Christ. When Peter heard
that it was the Lord, he girt his Coat and cast himself into the Sea. Observe
2. What a Complication of Miracles here were; as soon as they came to Land they
discerned another Miracle, viz. A Fire of Coals, and Fish laid on and Bread,
all created and produced by Christ out of nothing, at this time, as an Evidence
of his Divine Power; for, before they could get the Fish to shore, they saw
Fish broiling upon Coals; which makes it evident that these were none of the
Fish which they had caught. Christ when he pleases, for the Benefit and
Comfort of his People, will work Miracle upon Miracle, Mercy upon Mercy, one
Wonder upon the head of another. For here after a Miracle at Sea they meet with
another Miracle at Land. As soon as they came to Land they saw a Fire.

10 Jesus says unto them, Bring of the fish, which ye have now caught. 11
Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land full of great fishes, an hundred,
and fifty and three: and for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken.

Observe here, 1. What was Christ's End in commanding his Disciples to bring
forth the Fish which they had now taken; namely, That the sight of their number
and bigness, together with the sight of the Net remaining unbroken, might
confirm them in the belief of its being a real Miracle. Christ had fed their
Bellies before, his business now is to feed their Minds with the Contemplation
of the Greatness and Reality of the Miracle. All Christ's Miracles were obvious
to Sense, and would bear the examination of the Senses; not like the lying
Wonders of the Church of Rome, which are commonly wrought in the dark to cousen
the Vulgar, and are mere Cheats and Impostours. Observe, 2. That this full
Draught of Fishes which Peter and the rest of the Disciples now had, might
probably presage that great and wonderful Success which he and they afterward
were to have, in fishing for Men. Here we have an Hundred fifty and three great
Fishes caught at one Draught; but, Acts 2. we find Three thousand Souls
converted by St. Peter at one Sermon. Oh the mavelous success of the Gospel
at the first preaching and planting of it! Three thousand then proselyted by
one Sermon. Now we have cause to fear that there are Three thousand Sermons
preached and scarce one Soul savingly converted. Lord! Who has believed our
Report?

12 Jesus says unto them, Come and dine. And none of the disciples durst ask
him, Who art thou? knowing that it was the Lord. 13 Jesus then comes and
takes bread, and gives them, and fish likewise. 14 This is now the third time
that Jesus showed himself to his disciples, after that he was risen from the
dead.

A twofold Reason may be assigned why Christ did at this time invite and call
his Disciples to dine with him: The first and more principal Reason was, to
evidence to them the reality of his Resurrection, and to assure them of the
Truth of his Manhood, that they might not think it was an Apparition only. By
the Miracle in catching the Fishes, he proved himself to be God; by his present
eating of the fish, he evidenced himself to be Man: And consequently teaches
us, That our exalted High Priest continues our Kinsman in Heaven. He is still
Bone of our Bone, and Flesh of our Flesh: He has taken possession of Heaven in
our Nature, sitting there in our glorified humanity, united to the glorious
Deity, clothed with that Body which hung in its Blood and Gore upon the Cross,
but now shining brighter than ten thousand Suns. The second and less principal
Reason why Christ called his Disciples to dine with him, was this, To show his
tender Care over the Bodies of his dear Disciples, as being the Tabernacles of
his own Spirit, the Temples of the Holy Ghost: Therefore Christ incourages,
though not to the pampering, yet to the refreshing of them. Jesus said unto
them, Come and dine. And he would not confer with them till they had dined; as
the next Verse shows.

15 So when they had dined, Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon son of Jonas,
love thou me more then these? He says unto him, Yea Lord; thou know that
I love thee. He says unto him, Feed my lambs. 16 He says to him again the
second time, Simon son of Jonas, love thou me? He says unto him, Yea Lord;
thou know that I love thee. He says unto him, Feed my sheep. 17 He says
unto him the third time, Simon son of Jonas, love thou me? Peter was grieved,
because he said unto him the third time, Love thou me? And he said unto him,
Lord thou know all things; thou know that I love thee. Jesus says unto
him, Feed my sheep.

Observe here, 1. Christ puts Peter upon a threefold profession of his Love
unto him; answerable to his threefold Denial of him: His threefold Denial
required a threefold Confession. True Repentance ought, and will be, as eminent
in the Fruits and Effects of it, as the Saints Fall has been. A threefold
Denial of Christ, shall be attended with a threefold profession of Love unto
him. Observe, 2. The solemn Question put by our Savior unto Peter, Love thou
me? Love thou me more than these? That is, more than the rest of my
Disciples. Do thou love me more than thou love them? Or, more than they
love me? If so, evidence the sincerity of thy Love to me, by thy Care of mine.
Thence Note, That Ministers who are called to take Care of Christ's Flock, had
need of much Love to Jesus Christ, and great Compassion for Souls; by which
they will be animated and fortified to go through with the Labors and
Difficulties, as well as to encounter the Dangers and Sufferings which do
accompany their Calling. Simon love thou me? Feed my Flock. Note farther,
That the surest Argument and best Evidence of a Minister's Love to Jesus
Christ, is his conscientious Care to Feed; that is, to Teach, Instruct, and
Govern the whole Flock of Christ: Lambs and Sheep, weak and strong, the
feeblest in the Fold, were purchased by the great Shepherd. And if he judged
them worth his Blood, well may we judge them worth our Sweat. Note Again, That
such as would be faithful in their Ministerial Charge, ought to look upon their
People as committed to them by Christ himself, as loved of him, and committed
to their care by him, and for which they must be accountable to him. Christ
calls them three times over, His Lambs and His Sheep, and as often charges
Peter to feed them. Observe next, Peter's threefold Answer to Christ's
Question. Simon love thou me more than these? Lord! thou know that I love.
Where Note, 1. The great Modesty of Peter in his Reply, Love thou me more
than these? says Christ, Peter replies, Lord, Thou know that I Love thee; he
does not say, Lord! I Love thee above them (...), and before them all, here is
no boasting now; once it was said, and Peter vaunted, though all Men forsake thee
yet will not I; but now his Fall had taught him Humility, he boasts not of his
Love above others, and makes no comparison with others, but only ranks himself
among the true lovers of Christ. Lord! I love thee. Note, 2. The Evidence that
Peter gives of his sincere Love to Christ, he dare appeal to Christ himself,
Lord! thou know that I love thee, yea thou that art, Omniscient, the
all-knowing and Heart-searching God, Thou that know all things, know that
I Love thee: Oh! it is a blessed thing when we can and dare Appeal to God's
Knowledge, and it is matter of high consolation to know that God knows our
sincerity and Love unto him, and that he knows and approves us as such:
Lord! Thou know all things, thou know that I Love thee.

18 Verily verily I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girdedst thy
self, and walkedst whither thou would: but when thou shall be old thou shall
stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither
thou would not. 19 This spoke he, signifying by what death he should
glorify God. And when he had spoken this, he says unto him, Follow me.

In these words our Savior forewarns Peter of his future Sufferings,
intimating, that he should prove more stout than in his former Trial, when he
was young and unexperienced he enjoyed his Liberty, but when he was grown older
in Years and stronger in Grace, he should willingly stretch forth his Hands,
and quietly suffer himself to be bound to the Cross; for Peter (say some) was
not nailed, but tied and bound to the Cross only, and so as a Martyr or Witness
for the Truth of Christ glorified God by his Death. Learn hence, 1. The
Ministers of Jesus Christ when they undertake the charge of his Flock must
prepare for suffering work, and lot upon it: Therefore is this Prediction of
Peter's sufferings joined with the former injunction, feed my Sheep. 2. That
Humane Nature in Christ's Ministers as well as in other Men reluctates
Sufferings, has an antipathy against a violent Death, They shall carry thee
whither thou would not. 3. From the time of Peter's sufferings, when he is
old. Learn, That the timing of the Saints Sufferings is in Christ's Hands, he
can, and when he pleases does screen them from suffering till old Age; when
their work is almost done for God, they close their Days with suffering for
him. When thou art old thou shall stretch forth thine Hands and another shall
gird thee. Learn lastly, That the sufferings of the Saints in general, and of
the Ministers of Christ in particular, do redound much to the Glory of God;
which is a consideration that ought to reconcile them to the Cross of Christ,
and support them under it. This spoke he signifying by what Death he should
glorify God.

20 Then Peter turning about, sees the disciple whom Jesus loved, following;
which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that
betrayeth thee? 21 Peter seeing him, says to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this
man do? 22 Jesus says unto him, If I will that he tarry, till I come, what is
that to thee? Follow thou me.

Our Savior having foretold the manner of Peter's Death in the foregoing
Verses; here in these Peter is inquisitive after, and very solicitous for, the
Knowledge of what kind of Death St. John should die. Christ cheeks him for his
Curiosity, as meddling with that which did not concern him; yet intimates to
him, That John should live till he came to take Vengeance on the Jews and
destroy Jerusalem. If I will that he tarry till I come; that is, till I come to
execute Judgment upon Jerusalem. Here we may Note, There are two great Vanities
in Men with reference to Knowledge; the one, a Neglect to know what is our Duty
to know; the other a Curiosity to know what does not belong to us to know.
Christ tells Peter, it was none of his Business to inquire what John should do:
But he ought rather to be preparing for what he himself should suffer. If I
will that he tarry, what is that to thee?

23 Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should
not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die: but, If I will that he
tarry till I come, what is that to thee?

Here Observe, How strangely our Savior's Words were mistaken and
misunderstood by his own Disciples: They apprehend presently that John should
not die: And so it passed current among them. From hence we may Note, How much
the Wisdom of God is and ought to be admired in giving us a written Word, and
tying us to it when we see erroneous Traditions so soon on foot in the World,
and our Savior's own Speeches so much mistaken; and that by wise and holy Men
themselves in the purest Times. Much more may the Words of others be
misreported, and wrested contrary to their sense and meaning. How great then is
the Vanity and Uncertainty of Oral Tradition! Men are naturally prone to
mistake; to mistake themselves and to mistake one another. The more to be
admired is their over-daring Ignorance, who think they cannot err. Such an
haughty Opinion of a Man's self, concludes him to be neither good nor wise.

24 This is the disciple which testifies of these things, and wrote these
things: and we know that his testimony is true.

The great Modesty of the holy Evangelist St. John, is all along throughout his
Gospel very observable; he mentions himself hitherto under a third Person, he
calls himself a Disciple, a Learner; who excelled the most accomplished
Doctors of the Ages ever since. Here he speaks more plainly and expressly
concerning himself, declaring that he was an Eyewitness and an Ear-witness of
what he wrote, for the greater certainty thereof. And this Protestation here
made by the Evangelist of the Truth of what he wrote was highly necessary, lest
any should think that Christ's extraordinary Love and Affection to him (he
being the beloved Disciple) should move him to exceed (as we are prone to do)
in writing the History of their Lives, who are dear to us and we to them. Learn
hence, That this Gospel was written by John the beloved Disciple; and the
Narration is of Divine Truth, worthy to be embraced and received by us as a
perfect Rule of Faith and Life. We know that his Testimony is true.

25 And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if they
should be written every one, I suppose that even the world it self could not
contain the books that should be written. Amen.

John being about to conclude the History of our Savior's Life, asserts that
there were many other Miracles and special Deeds done by Christ both before and
after his Passions, which he had not recorded or set down; because should all
that Christ did and said be committed to Writing, it would even fill the World,
the Volumes would be so many. From hence we gather, 1. The wonderful Activity,
Industry, and Diligence of the Lord Jesus Christ, that he was never Idle, but
that his whole Life was spent in doing Good; because, should all the particular
Instances have been recorded, it would amount to an incredible Bulk. Learn, 2.
That it is impossible to get all said, which might be said of Christ, and in
his Commendation; such is the transcendent Excellency of his Person, and the
Weakness of our Apprehensions and Judgments, that if all were written, which
might be written concerning him, the World it self could not contain the Books
which should be written. Learn lastly, That although many of Christ's Sermons,
Conferences, Miracles, and Actions, be not Recorded; yet it does not follow,
nor can it be inferred from thence, That any necessary Doctrine is omitted, or
not sufficiently confirmed: There being so much written as it pleased God we
should know, and was necessary for us to know, in order to our Improvement in
Faith and Holiness. If then, after all the Revelation and Discovery which God
has made of his Son Christ Jesus, and of the Way that leads to eternal
Salvation by him, Persons remain willingly ignorant of him and their Duty to
him; Where shall they appear? And how shall they escape?

Revel. 1. Verse 5, 6. Now unto him that loved us, and washed us from our Sins
in his own Blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father:
To Him be Glory and Dominion for ever and ever. Amen.


The CLOSE.
THE design of the foregoing Notes upon the Holy Evangelists, being to
recommend the Instructive Life of our blessed Redeemer, to our Observation and
Imitation. Although I have upon all occasions propounded his Example to be
followed by us in all the steps of an Imitable Virtue, as the matter every
where occurred; yet adjudging it may be profitable to sum up together the
several Graces and Virtues which were so Orient in the Life of Christ, that
having them daily before our Eyes, we may be continually correcting and
reforming of our Lives by that blessed Pattern. I shall therefore briefly offer
at it. Because,

Nothing is so proper to form us to Holiness, as the Example of the Mediator,
it being absolutely perfect and thoroughly Accommodate to our present state;
there is no Example of any mere Man that is to be followed without limitation:
But the Life of Christ was as the purest Gold without the least Allay. His
conversation was a living Law, and Christianity which is the Best and Holiest
Institution in the World, is nothing else but a Conformity to his Precepts and
Pattern. The Universal Command of the whole Gospel is this, To walk as Christ
walked. This denotes a sincere intention, design and endeavor to imitate and
follow him in all the paths of Holiness and Obedience.

Particularly let us imitate Jesus,

I. IN his early Piety. We find him at Twelve Years Old about his Father's
Business, sitting in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing and asking them
Questions. See on St. Luke 2.46.47. An early Piety gives both the Person and
the Service a peculiar preheminency; no Comfort in Life, no Happiness in Death,
like the Happiness and Comfort of being good betimes.

II. In his Obedience to his Earthly Parents. See on St. Luke 2.51. He went
down to Nazareth and was subject to them. He paid Homage to the Womb that bare
him, and to his supposed and reputed Father that provided for him; let a Person
be never so high above others, he is still below his Parents; if the Highest
upon Earth think their Parents beneath them, and themselves above their Parents
Commands. Our Savior did not so, what shall we think of those Monsters of
Ingratitude, the Reproach of Humane Nature; who are ashamed to own their
Parents, because of their Poverty, or, despise them because of the Infirmities
of their Age. Prove. 23.22. Hearken to thy Father that begat thee, and despise
not thy Mother when she is old.

III. In his unwearied Diligence in doing Good, Acts 10.38. Who went about
doing good. This was his Meat and Drink by Day, his Rest and Sleep by Night. He
fed the Hungry, clothed the naked, visited the Sick, was Eyes to the Blind,
Feet to the Lame, and Administered to such as were in Necessities and Streights.
And he has declared that he will Judge us at the great Day, according to our
imitation of him in doing good to all Mankind. See the Notes on S. Math. 25.
Ten last Verses.

IV. In his Humility and lowliness of Mind. Math. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in Heart; witness his stooping to the meanest Office, even that
of washing his Disciples Feet, S. John 13.5. He that came in the form of a
Servant, performs the Office of the meanest Servant to his Disciples. And all
this was to set us an Example of mutual Condescension each to other; if I your
Lord and Master have washed your Feet, you ought also to wash one another
Feet; which Precept though it does not bind us to the same Action, yet it obliges
us to the same Condescension. Namely, to think no Office of Love beneath us,
which the necessities of our Brother call for from us.

V. In the Vnblameableness and Inoffensiveness of his Life and Actions. He
injured none and justly offended none, but was Harmless as well as Holy; he
wrought a Miracle to pay Tribute Money, rather than give occasion of Offense to
the Government. See on Math. 19.27. Accordingly let us be Harmless and
Blameless; Wise as Serpents, and Innocent as Doves; Piety without Policy is too
simple to be safe; Policy without Piety is too subtle to be good.

VI. In his Eminent Self-Denial. He emptied himself and became poor, when he
was Rich as God from all Eternity; He impoverished himself by becoming Man: Oh!
what did he not deny when he left the Bosom of his Father, with the ineffable
Delights and Pleasures which he there enjoyed from all Eternity. And instead
thereof to Drink the Cup, the Bitter Cup of his Father's wrath for our sake.
Lord! how can we enough abase our selves for thee, who thus deniedst thy self
for us.

VII. In his contentment in a low and mean Condition in this World: Yea in a
Suffering and Afflicted Condition; he would not honor the World so far as to
have any part of it in his own hand, was therefore of himself less provided of
comfortable accommodations than the Birds of the Air, or the Beasts of the
Field. See Luke 9.58. The Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the Air have
nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his head. Let us learn from him
to manage an afflicted Condition with a contented Spirit; let there be no
murmurings, complaints, or foolish chargings of God heard from us, whatever
straits or Troubles we may be brought into; but in whatsoever state we are, let
us be therewith content. Phil. 4.11.

VIII. In his frequent performance of the Duty of private Prayer and Fasting;
he sometimes spent a whole Night in Prayer. Luke 6.12. He went into a Mountain
to Pray, and continued all Night in Prayer to God. And Mark 1.35. In the
morning rising up a great while before Day, he went into a solitary place and
prayed. It is certain we have much more business with Almighty God in Prayer
than Christ had; he had no Sins to Confess, no wants of Grace to make known;
yet did he delight with frequency and fervency to perform this Homage to his
Heavenly Father. Lord! how does thy Zeal and forwardness condemn our remisness
and lukewarmness in praying to our heavenly Father.

IX. In his Affectionate performance of the Duty of Praise and Thanksgiving,
Our blessed Savior was a great Pattern of Thankfulness. Matthew. 11.25. I thank
thee Oh Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, etc. John 11.41. Father I thank thee
that thou have heard me; when he was to eat common Bread he received it with
Thanksgiving: What a Pattern of Thankfulness then was Jesus to his followers!
There is hardly any one External Duty which we do not find the Hypocrite
performing in Scripture, except this of Thanksgiving and Praise; we find Judas
Repenting, Ahab Humbling himself, Saul Sacrificing; but we do not find any
wicked Man in an humble Spiritual manner, blessing and praising God: Need will
make us Beggars, but Grace only Thanks-givers.

X. In his Compassion toward those that were in Distress and Misery. Matthew.
20.34. Great was his Compassion to the Bodies of Men; he healed all that came
unto him, he healed many undesired; with great Condolency and tender Sympathy,
he exercised acts of Mercy and Compassion when the object of Compassion was
before him, and did perfectly abhor and severely condemn all Acts of Cruelty:
How great was his Compassion to the Souls of Men; what Pains did he take, and
what Hazards did he run in preaching the Gospel to lost Sinners, in his fervent
Prayers for them; but especially in Dying for them! Let us imitate Christ
herein, as his Compassion was universal to all Mankind, to the whole Man Soul
and Body; as it was Active and Operative, as it was exercised with mavelous
Complacency and delight; as it was a preventing Compassion, and an unwearied
Compassion, so let ours be also.

XI. In his Holy and fruitful Discourse, his Lips dropped as the Honey Comb, and
his Tongue was as choice Silver; when walking with his Disciples to Emaus, with
what Heavenly Discourse did he entertain them in the way! See Luke 24.13, etc.
A good Pattern for our Imitation, when providentially cast into such Company as
will bear it. Lord! what a Shame and Reproach is it to us, that in common
Conversation we spend so many hours together, in talking over all the News of
City and Country, and part without speaking one word of Jesus Christ our best
Friend.

XII. In his free Conversation; The Son of Man came eating and drinking, Matthew.
11. v. 19. that is, was of a free and familiar Converse, Affable and Sociable,
not Sower or Morose, never shuning the Society of the worst of Men, even of the
Pharisees themselves; but complying with their innocent Customs, and
accompanying them at their Feasts. See on Luke 5.29. We do not find that when
Christ was invited to any public Entertainment that ever he refused to go, not
so much for the pleasure of Eating, as for the opportunity of Conversing and
doing good; Christ converst with bad Men, but as their Physician, not as their
Companion: Let us go and do likewise.

XIII. In his Patience under Sufferings and Reproaches, when he was reviled he
reviled not again; but under-went the Burden of his Sufferings with admirable
Patience and Meekness of Spirit; when his Name and Honor suffered the vilest
Indignities, Blasphemies and Reproaches, that the Malice of Satan and the
Malignity of wicked Men could belch out against it; when he was called a
Blasphemer, a Sorcerer, a Devil, a Wine-bibber, a Glutton, a Friend of
Publicans and Sinners. For an innocent Person, and a dignified Person to bear
all this, when he could have looked all his Enemies into Hell, and have frowned
them into nothing: Verily, to bear all this, without the least discomposure of
Spirit, is the highest Triumph of Patience that ever the World was acquainted
with. And why all this, but to leave us an Example that we should follow his
Steps, 1 Pet. 2.21, 22.

XIV. In his readiness to forgive Injuries. One of his last Words upon the
Cross, was a Prayer for his Murderers; Father forgive them, Luke 23.34. He
offered up his Blood to God on the behalf of them that shed it. Thus to forgive
our Enemies, and to beg Forgiveness for them, will be an Evidence of a
Christ-like Frame and Temper; when the Grace of God calms those tumultuous and
outrageous Passions, which at any time we find raging in our Breasts, moulding
our Spirits into Sweetness and Gentleness, freeing us from all malicious
desires of Revenge, which are so far beneath a Christian, that it is the
baseness of a Man; yea, as Jealousy is the Rage of a Man, so Malice is the
Rage of the Devil; it is the very Soul and Spirit of the Apostate Nature.

XV. In his laying to Heart the Sins as well as the Sufferings of others. Mark
3.5. He was grieved for the hardness of their Hearts. Such was his Zeal for his
Father's Glory, such his Compassion to the Souls of Men, such his Antipathy
against, and hatred of Sin; that he was grieved for Sin wherever he found it,
and mourned over those who had no Hearts to mourn for themselves. Lord! how far
are they from a Christ-like Spirit and Temper, who instead of mourning for
other Men's Sins, rejoice in Iniquity, and take Pleasure to see their Brother
stab at once the Christian Name and his own Soul.

XVI. In his Zeal for the Public Worship of God. John 2.17. The Zeal of thine
House has eaten me up. Now as Christ was, so Christians ought to be, intensly
Zealous for the Glory of God, the Honor of his House, and the Purity of his
Public Worship. The Zeal of thine House; that is, for the Honor of thine
House, has eaten me up. Our Zeal for the Public Worship of God glorifies him
most, and he accepts it best. Now we own that God, whom we serve, in the face
of the World: And this creates a veneration and esteem of God in the Minds of
Men.

XVII. In his glorifying of his Father in all he did. John 17.4. I have
glorified thee on the Earth. The whole Life of Jesus when here on Earth, it was
a glorifying of his Father; he glorified his Father by the Doctrine which he
taught, by the Miracles which he wrought, by the unspotted Purity of his Life,
and by his unparalled Sufferings at his Death. In like manner should we
glorify God in all we do, in all we design, in all we desire; in our natural
Actions of eating and drinking, in our Civil employments, buying and selling,
in our lawful Recreations, taking care that too much of our time be not
consumed therein. Recreation is not to be our business, but to fit us for
business; but especially let us seek to glorify God in our Religious Duties;
Public, and Private and Secret.

XVIII. In his Impartiality in reproving Sin. He feared the Faces and spared
the Faults of no Offenders. The Pharisees were a Proud and Haughty sort of
People, who dishonored God above most, when they pretended to glorify him
above any. Therefore we find Christ denouncing a Bed-Roll of Woes against them
in one Chapter. St. Matthew. 23. Woe to you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites; Eight
several Woes are denounced against them, for so many several Sins committed by
them: Those to whom God has given Authority to Reprove the Sins of others,
ought to imitate their Pattern in his Impartiality in reproving Sin. His very
Enemies gave him that Character. St. Matthew. 22.17. Thou carest not for any Man,
thou regardest not the Person of Men: That is, Thou sparest none, but tellest
all Men of their Faults.

XIX. In his Universal Obedience to his Father's Will, and cheerful Submission
to his Father's Pleasure. He obeyed the Will of his Father Universally,
Voluntarily, Sincerely, and with a single Eye at his Glory, perseveringly, and
to the End; and as he was, so must we be, faithful to the Death, if ever we
expect the Crown of Life. And in like manner did he submit to the Will of his
Providence, Father not as I will, but as thou will, not my will but thine be
done. O let us keep this Example continually before us, and every day obey the
will of God's Precept universally. And submit to the Will of his Providence
very cheerfully, this is Heaven on Earth.

XX. In his Love and Practice of Universal Holiness both in Heart and Life: He
was Holy in his Nature, Holy in his Principle and Motives, Holy in his Aim and
Ends; he was perfectly Holy, precisely Holy, uniformly Holy, exemplarily Holy;
he delighted only in holy Persons and holy Things; it concerns us to imitate
him herein, if ever we expect to be where he is. Heaven is the habitation of
Holiness, the company is Holy, the employment Holy, the enjoyments Holy, no
unclean Thing can enter into Heaven, or could be Happy in Heaven; Heaven is
rather a Nature than a place. It Is not the place of Heaven can make us Happy,
but the Disposition and Temper of our Minds in Heaven; without Conformity to
the Nature of God there can be no Communion with him, nor Delight in him; what
a discourteous Courtesy would it be to turn a filthy Swine into a Garden of
curious Flowers, to lodge it in a Bed of sweet Perfumes, to bath it in a clear
and Crystal Fountain? Alas! its unclean Temper and sordid Inclinations would
rather choose to lie down in a Kennel, and to wallow in the Mire, its proper
Element. Thus unsuitable would Heaven be, that place of greatest Happiness be
the greatest Uneasiness to an unholy Heart. Let us then Pray and Endeavor that
the Temper of our Minds, and the Actions of our Lives may be a lively
Transcript of the Mind and Life of the Holy Jesus, that we may be like him in
Purity and Holiness, in Justice and Righteousness, in Patience and Meekness in
Charity and Universal Goodness. That as he was, we may be in the World, Holy,
Humble, Harmless, Heavenly Minded, glorifying God on Earth, that we may be
glorified with him and by him in his Eternal Kingdom.

Yet before I close this Exhortation to an Imitation of Jesus, I must subjoin
this cautionary Direction; Take heed that you do not so imitate Christ for your
Pattern as to disown him for your Priest. This is the dangerous Error of those,
who affirm that the great End of Christ's Death was to give the World an
Example of Patience, Humility, Meekness, and the forementioned Christian
Graces, and that his Sufferings were Exemplary but not properly Satisfactory.
We acknowledge that Christ's giving us an Example, was one End of his coming
into the World, and Dying for us, but not the great End. A Subordinate End, but
not the Vltimate. God preserve us from the Contagion of this growing Error;
other Errors only scratch the Face, but this stabs the Heart of the Christian
Religion, in that it deprives us of the choicest Benefit of Christ's Death;
namely, The Expiation of Sin, by a proper Satisfaction to the Justice of God.
But blessed be God we have not so learned Christ; as we are Taught so we
Believe, that the Holy Jesus by the Sacrifice of his Death has Redeemed us from
Death and Hell, and Saved us from Wrath to come; by a full and adequate payment
to Divine Justice, and by the Redundancy of his Merit, has purchased an Eternal
Inheritance for us, and as we are Taught and Believe so we Pray,

Almighty God, who have given thine only Son to be unto us, both a Sacrifice
for Sin and also an Example of Godly Life: Give us Grace that we may always
most thankfully receive that his inestimable Benefit, and also daily endeavor
our selves to follow the blessed Steps of his most Holy Life; through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Almighty and everlasting God, who of thy tender Love toward Mankind, have
sent thy Son, our Savior Jesus Christ, to take upon him our Flesh, and to
suffer Death upon the Cross, that all Mankind should follow the Example of his
great Humility: Mercifully grant that we may both follow the Example of his
Patience, and also be made Partakers of his Resurrection, through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisements.
BOOKS published by Mr. WILLIAM BURKITT, and printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at
the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside.
THE Poor Man's Help, and Young Man's Guide: Containing, I. Doctrinal
Instructions for the right Informing of his Judgment. II. Practical Directions
for the General Course of his Life. III. Particular Advices for the
Well-managing of every Day: With reference to his, 1. Natural Actions, 2. Civil
Employments, 3. Necessary Recreations, 4. Religious Duties. Particularly, I.
Prayer, Public in the Congregation, Private in the Family, Secret in the
Closet. II. Reading the Holy Scriptures. III. Hearing of the Word Preached. IV.
Receiving of the Lord's Supper. Unto which is added, An Earnest Exhortation
unto all Christians to the Love and Practice of Universal Holiness. The Fourth
Edition.

An Argumentative and Practical Discourse of Infant Baptism. In which, I. The
Lawfulness of Infant Baptism is Demonstrated. II. The Objections against
Infant Baptism are Answered. III. The Usefulness of the Ordinance is Asserted.
IV. The Sinfulness of Re-baptizing Manifested. V. The Non-necessity of Dipping
Evidenced. VI. The Practical Use of Infant Baptism Urged and Enforced. The
Second Edition.

A Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. William Gurnall.

THE Works of the late Reverend and Learned William Bates, D. D. In one large
Volume in Folio. Viz. 1. Of the Existence of God; the Immortality of the Soul;
and the Divinity of the Christian Religion. 2. The Harmony of the Divine
Attributes. 3. The Great Duty of Resignation. 4. The Danger of Prosperity. 5.
Sermons of the Forgiveness of Sins. 6. The Sure Trial of Uprightness. 7. The
Four Last Things: viz. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell: (In which his Book
called, The Final Happiness of Man, is included.) 8. Of Spiritual Perfection.
9. Eleven Sermons on several Occasions. 10. A Sermon upon the Death of Queen
Mary. 11. A Funeral Sermon on Dr. Manton. 12. A Funeral Sermon on Dr. Jacomb.
13. A Funeral Sermon on Mr. Baxter: With his Life. 14. A Funeral Sermon on Mr.
Clarkson. 15. A Funeral Sermon on Mr. Benjamin Ashurst. To which are added, Two
Discourses never before published, being exactly taken in Shorthand, and
Approved by the Author in his Lifetime; viz. 16. A Discourse on Divine
Meditation. 17. A Discourse on the Fear of God, etc. With an Alphabetical Table
to the Whole. As likewise, The Author's Effigies, curiously Engraved by Mr.
Robert White, from an Original of Sir Godfrey Kneller. And some Account of his
Life and Character, in a Funeral Sermon preached by the Reverend Mr. How.
Printed for Johnathan Robinson, at the Golden-Lyon, in St. Paul's Churchyard.

There will be speedily published,
A Catechetical Course of Sermons for the whole Year: Being an Explanation of
the Church-Catechism, in Fifty Two Distinct Discourses, on so many several
Texts of Scripture. Wherein are Briefly contained the most Necessary Points of
Christian Doctrine; in Two Volumes, in Octavo: With an Alphabetical Index to
each Volume. Recommended Especially for the Use of Families. By Peter Newcome,
M. A. and Vicar of Aldenham in Hertford-shire. Printed for John Wyat at the
Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard.


