A MODEST AND FREE CONFERENCE BETWIXT A Conformist and a Nonconformist, about
the present distempers of Scotland. The second Edition. Now in seven Dialogues.
By a Lover of Peace.

Gal. 5.15. But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed
one of another. Published by Order.

Printed Anno Dom. 1669.



The Stationer to the Reader.
Reader,
ALL the account I can give of this Book, or the Author, is in the following
Letter which came to my hands a few days after I received these Sheets, and is
prefixed to them in stead of a Preface.

For the Stationer.
THough these Dialogues were brought to you by another hand than my own, yet
since it is upon my motion that they came to be Published, contrary to the
Authors design, and truly without his order: I think my self oblidged to say
somewhat of the Author and the book, and the rather that the Author, not being
forward to the publishing of it, will say nothing of Preface himself; But
withal, I am resolved you shall be as ignorant of the Writter of this, as of
the Author of the Book.

The Author is a person of extraordinary moderation and peaceablness: he can
allow any difference of opinion, but such as is incompatible with the peace and
quiet of the Church. And though there be some expressions in these Dialogues
that would appear tart; yet it is merely occasioned by the zeal he has against
that uncharitable spirit, which can allow of nothing that is not exactly of
their own way.

The occasion of writting in this way, was, that a Book of the same title and
nature, printed in England, came to the Author's hands; and he, being pleased
with that familiar way of Writting, thought presently of composing Dialogues
suitable to our Differences here, as that was to the Differences of that
Nation: If there be any thing in this coincident with that Book, it is in such
things as the humors of that unquiet spirit in both Nations are the same. And
the Author designs not vanity by these few sheets, written, to my knowledge, in
as few hours as they could hardly be transcribed; But wishes every one to see
the weakness of those grounds upon which such specious structurs are built;
which when they come to be examined, prove but painted sepulchers.

The great design of the Author in this small Book, is, to let some
well-meaning people, who have a love to godliness, see that Religion is not at
all concerned in things wherein they do concern themselves very much, and that
in contending for the shell we are like to loose the kernel of Religion.

The language and manner of Writting, is accommodated to these meaner
capacities, who are most apt to be abused, by such as care not, nay, which is
very sad, but too true, wish not Religion nor godliness to prosper in the hands
of those who differ from them in opinion about external things, which are not
of great moment: as may appear from their persuading poor souls to take for a
mark of zeal that which in all christian Nations is looked on as a very great
mark of impiety, to wit, not going to Church: by which people do show, in the
most signal manner they can, their not owning the worship and adoration of God.

The Author meaned no prejudice to any person in vvritting of it, Nor is it
published upon any such design, but in hopes that it may inform sincere people.
And whoever reads it without prejudice, will I hope judge so of it.

Farewell.
A modest and free Conference betwixt a Conformist and a Nonconformist, about
the present distempers of Scotland.
In six Dialogues.
DIALOGUE I.
Con. YOu are welcome from the West. How are all things there?


Non. Never worse; The glory is departed from that people: and the power of
godliness is gone there. God pity that poor place, which was once so Glorious.


C. I perceive by your manner of speaking, that you are much concerned in these
matters: but I pray you tell me wherein things are turned so much to the worse
among you?


N. Alas! are you such a stranger in Israel, as not to know these things? are
not our gracious Ministers taken from us? so that the work of God is much born
down: the brave days of Communions, Preachings, Prayers, are away; and in
stead of the fire was once there, there remain but a few sparks in some secret
corners: for, the precious Ordinances are gone.


C. What you say upon the matter, I know well enough: but do not apprehend it
to be of such importance, as you seem to do.


N. What! do not you think it sad, that Christ is not Preached?


C. God forbid but he be? I do not know how it is in your Country, but I am
sure with us Christ is preached very faithfully, but I fear you consider not
well what it is to preach Christ; do you think to tell us only of his death, is
to preach him?


N. No, no, but oh how does my heart melt within me, when I remember how
sweetly I have heard the Ministers there, clear up my interest in Christ?


C. May be it was more sweetly then sincerly; for to tell you of an interest in
him, while you are strangers to his Laws and Gospel, is to deceive you: since
you can have no interest in the blood of Christ, till you have his Spirit
dwelling in you.


N. Blessed be God, I know no name to be saved by, but the Name of Christ: And
I renounce mine own righteousness, and accept of his righteousness.


C. It is very true, that we are saved by the blood of Christ: but it is as
true, that we must be purified by his Spirit, else we are none of his. If by
renouncing your own righteousness; you mean, what you naturally can perform
without grace, you are in the right, but if you lean so to Christ's
righteousness, as to neglect to be righteous your self, you with Judas, kiss
your Master, while you betray him. And I fear your Ministers studied more to
convince you of the need of Christ's righteousness, then of having any of your
own: For indeed it is a cheap Religion, to lean so entirely to Christ, that we
do nothing our selves.


N. We are far from thinking there is no need of good works: We only exclude
them from Justification, which is by Faith only.


C. Truly your practices tell, you think there is as little need of them to
Salvation, as to Justification, remember the Gospel is plain and simple, and
came not to teach men Sophistry or Logic: therefore I shall not contend with
you about words or phrases: for as I believe, that Christ came to lay down his
life a ransom for our sins; so if you believe, that without holiness we shall
never see the face of God, we are agreed in this matter. But I wish we all
studied to live better, and then our differences would quickly end.


N. Yes, I hear some of you are still talking of holiness and peace, but you
forget truth: which is so necessary, that without it holiness is but hypocrisy.


C. I acknowledge that, if you speak of the fundamental Articles of our Faith.
But all truths are not of equal certainty, nor of equal importance: now it is a
certain and important truth, that there should be an unity in the Catholic
Church; which is not to be broken, but upon a matter of greater certainty and
weight.


N. One precious truth is worth all the world: therefore I will not quite one
truth for the love of all men. Not a hoof, said Moses.


C. If you were required to condemn or deny any thing you judged truth, I
confess you ought to obey God rather than man. But it is another case to quite
the communion of the Church; because they are not, as you think, in the truth:
unless that truth be of greater importance than is the Article of your Faith,
The Catholic Church, and the communion of Saints. And when you are as sure of
your call to contend for these truths, as Moses was of the will of God, you may
use his words. Let me then examine you a little, how do you know your opinions
are truths?


N. Who can doubt of it? are they not the cause and interest of Christ, his
Kingdom and Crown, his glorious work, to which we are all bound by the oath of
God taken in the Covenant, whereinto even the children unborn are oblidged.


C. If big words prove truths, you are full of them: But remember of whom the
Apostle gives this Character, they speak swelling words of vanity. And there is
no party but have the same language in their mouth: these are fine contrivances
to lead away silly women captive, who would be ready to judge your blustering
confidence, an evidence of truth, when a modester way of speaking is suspect of
diffidence: whereas in right scales, the one looks like arrogant pride, and the
other like the modest Spirit of Jesus Christ.


N. How can you deny, that what is now cried down, was the work of God?


C. I confess it was so the work of God, as the Prophet said, is there any
evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it: but in the sense you take it,
it was as far from it, as darkness is from light.


N. How can you speak so, was not sin strangely born down in our days?


C. I confess you studied to repress some sins: so did the Pharisees. But
remember the Apostle divides filthiness, in that of the flesh, and of the
Spirit: and indeed, the latter proves a much subtiller and stronger opposition
to the Gospel, than the former. It is true, some of these were repressed by
you; though I must add, in a way, scarce suitable to the Gospel: but for other
sins, you were very gentle to them, nay, were guilty of them your selves: for
they mingled in all you did.


N. Now you begin to rail, and I cannot endure to hear those glorious days so
spoken of. Is this the moderation you so much pro^esse?


C. I love moderation as much as any can, and declare to you once for all, that
I have no quarrel at any, for their opinions in these matters: nor shall I
labor to disgrace the leaders of your party, by searching into their private
escapes; a practice much used by you against us, your mouths being ever full
of bitter reproaches against some of our way: but it is directly contrary to
the Spirit of Christ and his Gospel, wherein we are put in mind to speak evil
of no man. I shall therefore from your public and avowed actions, and printed
papers, show how far you are out of the way of God. And first, what think you
of your rebellion? this was the Soul of your whole work, and your Covenant was
a Bond to cement you in this.


N. Call you fighting for God and his Cause, rebellion?


C. It is yet under debate, whether it be the Cause of God: Suppose it were,
show me one place in either Testaments, that warrands Subjects fighting for
Religion? you know I can bring many against it; yea, though the old
dispensation was a more carnal and fiery one, than the new one is; yet, when
the Kings of Judah and Israel made Apostasy from the living God, into
^eathenish Idolatry, some of the Kings of Judah polluting the Temple of
Jerusalem, as did Ahaz and Mannasseh, so that God could not be worshipped
there, without Idolatry, yet where do we find the people resisting them, or
falling to popular Reformations? Neither do the Prophets that were sent by God,
ever provoke them to any such courses. And you know the whole strain of the New
Testament runs upon suffering.


N. The law of nature teaches us to defend our selves, and so there is no need
of Scripture for it?


C. This is marvelous dealing, in other things you always flee from reason, as
a carnal principle, to Scripture; but here you quite Scripture and appeal to
it: but it seems you are yet a stranger to the very design of Religion, which
is to tame and mortify nature: and is not a natural thing, but supernatural.
Therefore the rules of defending and advancing it, must not be borrowed from
nature, but grace: The Scriptures are also strangely contrived, since they ever
tell us of suffering under persecution: without giving your exception, that we
resist when we are in a capacity. And I appeal to your conscience, whether it
be a likelier way to advance Religion, fighting or suffering? since a carnal
man can do the one, but not the other.


N. How can we neglect the interests of Christ, and let them ruin, when we are
in a capacity to defend them?


C. If there were not a God who governs the World, your reasoning might have
force: but do you think that God cannot maintain his own right, but the wrath
of man must work his righteousness? nay, we see the contrary, for from the
beginning, till this day, God has made the sufferings of his people, the chief
mean of propagating Religion; whereas fighting has been ever fatal to it. And
Christ did begin the Gospel with his suffering, though he could have commanded
Legions of Angels for his defense.


N. Christ knew it was the Fathers will that he must suffer.


C. This shows how little you understand when you speak so: are not Christ's
injunctions our rule. Since then he forbade his Disciples to draw a sword for
him, with so severe a threatening, as whosoever will draw the sword, shall
perish by the sword, this must bind us, and what he says to Pilate on this
^ead, My Kingdom is not of this world, etc. is so plain language, that I wonder
how it does not convince all. I know there are some pitiful answers made to
those places: but they are so irrational, that they deserve not a serious
reply, and I am not of an humor to laugh at them: only take notice of this,
that if an ingenuous man speak plainly, much more must the God of truth: Judge
then whether these unworthy glosses, make Christ likeer a nibling Logician,
then the true and faithful witness.


N. Then you condemn our first reformation carried on by fighting.


C. Since you go to examples, rather begin with the Ages that immediately
followed Christ, in which for three hundred years the Gospel was preached and
propagated by sufferings, but never by fighting, though their number enabled
them to it, and they were irritated by the cruellest provocations and
persecutions: And it is to be supposed, that they who saw and conversed with
the Apostles, understood their meaning better than these who lived at so great
a distance from them: I acknowledge there was force used in our Reformation;
but so much the worse for that: And you know the enemy sowes his tares, even in
that field, wherein the Wheat is sown. But never allege to me the president
of men, against the express Word of God.


N. What say you then to these who died sealing their opinion, fighting for
Religion, with their blood?


C. You put me to a hard lock, to rake amongst the ashes of the dead: As for
those who died, I had that compassion for some of them, that I could willingly
have redeemed their lives at the rate of mine own: And I doubt not but many
sincerely followed their Conscience in it. But I am far from thinking the
better of the Cause, because some died handsomely for it, otherwise I should be
reconciled to Atheism, and all Heresies, who want not their pretended Martyrs.
But I need go no further then England, at His Majesty's Restoration, where the
murderers of the late King, died gallantly, ow^ing what they did as the Cause
of God. So the seal of a Martyr's blood, is not always the seal of God.


N. Well, but why do you remember bygones? We are now all good Subjects, and do
bless God for His Majesty's Restoration, and do pray for him more then you do.


C. May be so, that he may be of your way; but, if that be not, I doubt your
love to him is very cool. I do not remember bygones to bring an odium upon you,
but to show that a course which was managed by a spirit of Rebellion, was none
of Gods. As for your rejoicing at His Majesty's Restoration, I scarce believe
it, since you will not keep a day of Thanksgiving for it.


N. It is not that we scruple the thing, but because you make it a holy day.


C. This is very nice, for by holy day we mean ^ot that the twenty ninth of May
is a more sacred time, then other days: but that the day shall be devoted to
holy exercise.


N. This should not be enjoined by the Magistrate, but by the Church, who ought
only to order the worship of God.


C. I shall not against this allege the commands of David and Solomon, since
you may allege they were extraordinary persons; but you cannot say that Esther
and Mordecai were such, who enjoined the observation of Purim, and call that
Feast a good day; and the odds betwixt holy and good is not very great. And
although there be no divine order for the Feast of Dedication, yet our Savior
was at the Feast, and in the Temple: though you will not come to Church on the
twenty ninth of May.


N. Well then, all you can charge upon us is a little disloyalty, but for all
that, our way may be the Cause of God: for even the Saints have their
infirmities.


C. Truly this is so great a one, that I dare pronounce none a Saint, who has
been guilty of it, till he repent of it: But I am far from being at the end of
your faults, having but begun with this. The next thing persuades me of your
evil way, is, your cruelty and rigor: Did you not force all to take the
Covenant, severely punishing such as would not? And did you not cruelly
persecute all those who opposed you? Truly this has so confirmed my aversion
from your way, that I hope never to be reconciled to this part of it.


N. That was a fault too, and many of us are very sensible of it.


C. Let not my soul enter into the secrets of bloody men: Your very Leaders,
who if they had known any thing of the meek spirit, should have opposed these
severities; not only countenanced, but drove them on, and rejoiced in them. And
if they think it a fault, how comes it that none of them offers to disclaim it?
Yea, some of you in your confessions of sins, and causes of wrath, rather tax
your courses of too great lenity.


N. Whoever may object that, you may be silent; for what severity have we felt?
how many Ministers are turned out, and people oppressed for not owning you?


C. I must in so far justify the rigor you have met with, as to show it is far
short of yours. People are required to do nothing, but live peaceably, and join
in Worship; whereas you made them swear to you: and the Ministers are not made
swear to maintain the present establishment, and to root out the contrary, as
you did; they are only required to concur in Discipline, and to promise
submission to Episcopacy.


N. Do you not wonder at my patience, who hear you inveigh so bitterly against
us? but I let you see, a Presbyterian can be calm: I hope you have done.


C. Not yet indeed; I am not trying your calmness, but your conscience, and
what I speak, is not to irritat, but to convince you. I shall next take notice
of the great insolence and height was among you: I speak not of personal pride,
though I could say enough on that Head: I only tax your public actings. What
insolence was it, to assume bi^ names, of the godly party, and the people of
God and to call your way, The Cause and Kingdom o^ Christ? Whether looks this
like the Pharisees an^ Hypocrites, or not? And in this you were punished with
your own weapons: for the Protester^ wrung that from the rest of you, and the
Independants assumed it from you both.


N. I am sure we were the Godly Party, compared to those we had to do with.


C. This bewrayes your arrogance: though it were so, you ought not to bear
witness to your selves, nor assume such titles. Remember the Pharisee, who
said, I thank the Lord that I am not like this Publican. You know the loudest
pretenders have not always the justest title.


N. I hope now you have done with your scolding.


C. This is like all guilty persons, who take every modest representing of
their faults to them, as scolding and bitterness; so did the Jews use St. Paul.
It shows the sore or disease is desperate, when the Patient cannot be touched.
I have not yet begun to scold, but I have not done with admonishing. Next, How
did your Leaders complain of Bishops their meddling in matters of State: and yet
when the Scene turned, how absolutely did they govern? Churchmen grew the
advisers of all businesses, Juntoes held in their houses. And how impudently
did the Church countermand the State, Anno 1648. even in Civil matters? as were
the Levying of Armies, and the paying of Taxes. And after the Tragical
Catastrophe of the unlawfully called unlawful Engagement, they barred the
Nobility from their privileges as Peers, till they must be satisfied.


N. All that was done in order to Religion, which is in the Churches care.


C. This is the very Plea of the Pope: and indeed in Politics, the Pope and
the Presbyterians agree in more things than you think on. By this Maxim all
Civil matters must come under Ecclesiastical cognizance; since every action can
be reduced to one of the Tables of the Law. But particularly to meddle with War,
and matters of Blood, has been ever judged directly contrary to the Pastoral
duty, which obliges to feed, and not to kill. But I shall add one thing more,
which was your Superstition.


N. I had resolved to have objected that to you, and I am sure we cannot be
guilty of it, since there is nothing we hate more?


C. You know not the true notion of it, and so are guiltier then you are aware
of. Superstition is an over-rating of things, as if God were more pleased with
them, than indeed he is: And therefore to lay too great weight upon any thing,
is superstition. He then that judges a thing of it self indifferent, to be
necessary: And he that condemns it as unlawful, are equally superstitious. It
were a long and tedious story, to let you see how great weight you laid upon
many small matters, both in doing and forbearing. But I will leave particulars
to your conscience; and I protest in all I have said, I have no other design,
but to teach you no^ to have men's persons or ways too much in admiration.


N. You have now run out in a long and furiou^ career against us: hear me next,
reckon the excellent things were amongst us, and I doubt not yo^ shall confess
our good did far preponderat ou^ evil.


C. I shall hear you with all my heart, but in the mean time let us take a
little refreshment an^ respite.


N. Be it so.


DIALOGUE II.
^. NOw let us again resume our discourse, and tell me what great goodness was
it, which ^o commended your party; for I love what is good, ^e where it will:
and therefore though I be none ^f your party, yet I shall heartily rejoice to
hear ^ood of them.


N. I fear you are either so carnal, as not to re^ish things that are
spiritual, or so biased, as not ^o set the due value upon us: But who can
doubt we were the people of God, who remember how we bore down sin and
wickedness? How much good preaching there was amongst us? What fer^our was on
peoples minds, when they heard Sermons? What heavenly prayers we poured out to
God? But when I remember our Fasts, and days of Communion, my very heart
breaks to think these sweet days are now gone: Then what delight in Scripture
had we, that all our Vulgar were acquainted with it? How well was the Sabbath
observed amongst us? And what order was there in Families, morning and evening?
All this is now gone. Alas for poor Scotland! that had once the light of the
Gospel so brightly shining in it! But now, ah, ah, for the darkness that has
overspread it! had you but seen what I saw, your very heart would have been
ravished with it.


C. Truly, I expected to have heard some great matter from you, of the
self-denial, contempt of the world, resignation, humility, meekness, patience,
obedience, charity, abstraction of mind, and the other great heights of
Christian Religion; but you tell me only of their external devotion, which how
good soever it be, yet is far from being the Character of a Christian; since
the very Pharisees were eminent in those things.


N. I told you, you were carnal, and savoured not the things of God; you look
after morality, as the great matter: but we look after true Christianity.


C. If by morality, you mean the affecting a virtuous behavior, without a
dependence on God and Christ, I have as low an account of it as any can have;
but if by morality, you mean a pure and holy Conversation, I doubt it is the
greatest and best part of Religion: Without which, the other parts are but
hypocrisy and formality. But I shall examine all these things which seem to
knit your hearts so much to that way: And shall begin with their diligence in
repressing sin. I confess they had a kind of Discipline: but it was wholly
different from the rules of the Gospel, and far short of the ancient Bishops
discipline.


N. I see you undervalue every thing we did, but I am sure you have no reason
for it.


C. First then, were not your Church-Sessions like Birla-Courts, where every
one came and complained of wrongs, which belonged to the Magistrate: for the
Church should only meddle with sins, as they are Scandals, and not as they are
injuries. Next, Dilations, according to our Lords rule, should not be received,
till the person be first privately admonished by the party offended; next, by
two or three; and if he be obstinat, the Church should be told: But you
observed no such rule. Next you imposed and exacted Fines, which was the
Magistrate's work, whereas the Church should take no money, but what is offered
in Charity. You also forced people to stoop to your Discipline, for if they
refused, you threatened them with the temporal sword: which by the unhappiness
of the times, was too much at your dispose. And this shows, that you did not
carry on the Gospel, by a Gospel Spirit, though that was ever in your mouths,
but by secular ways: for, offenders should come and offer themselves to
Discipline, and not be driven to it. The time wherein your penance lasted, was
also short: the ancient Bishops did separate offenders, as many years, as you
did weeks. It is also clear, you used Discipline to put a temporal shame upon
offenders: For you set them in a high place to be gazed upon, whereas they
should have been rather set without the doors of the Church. And to conclude,
how wretchedly did you abuse this? subjecting people to censure, for your
triffling matters, when you knew they were acting a mock-penitence: and were
more zealous to preach against oppositions to your courses, than against the
oppositions to the everlasting Gospel.


N. Now you tax us for what we were very free of: Was ever sin so boldly
reproved, as in our Pulpits? Our Ministers sparing no rank nor quality.


C. I confess some things, I say not sins, you reproved boldly enough: not
sparing the Lords Anointed, whose pretended faults, you, like so many unnatural
Hams, were ready enough to publish, when your so doing, could have no other
effect, but to irritate his Subjects against him. How often was that sacred
Prince charged with Popery, Tyranny, and the Massacre of Ireland? and that
Royal Family termed, the bloody-house? yea, after his accursed enemies had
murdered him, when common humanity should have oblidged you to let the dead
alone, and Christianity should have taught you to have had more reverent
thoughts of one who died so piously and devoutly; yet you ceased not to
persecute and tear his memory, which in spite of your malice, will be glorious
to all posterity: and that with the height of insolence and barbarity, in the
very hearing and presence of his Son, who now reigns. This was your bold
reproving of faults. But how little were you in secret reproving faults? When
you got to the Pulpit, there indeed you triumphed, because you knew none were
to oppose you. Now it is certain, reproofs should be begun in private, and not
brought to public; but upon the obstinate rejecting of private admonitions.
And for what end were you often so bitter to absents? This, and such other
things could be upon no other design, but either maliciously to disgrace them,
or to get a following among your party, and the name of faithful, free, and
zealous preachers.


N. You speak with very great heat and passion, against better men then your
self, and better preachers than ever any of your way will be.


C. May be so, I wish both they and their Gifts had been sevenfold better than
they were: but if I shall judge of them, either by their printed Sermons, or
those I have heard, they are no extraordinary things. And first, The half of
their Sermons were upon public matters: and what did these concern the Souls
of the poor people? Was not this for bread, to give them a stone? Next, for the
solid practices of a Christian life, I scarce ever heard them named, except
overly. Whom heard you preach against the love of the world, seeking of esteem,
quarrelling, seeking of revenge, anxiety and passion? Virtue was little
preached, and far less practiced.


N. I am sure we heard much spiritual Doctrine from them; for, these are common
matters.


C. Read our Saviors Sermons, particularly, his longest upon the mount, and
you shall find these to be the great subjects of his discourse: I confess
they are common, but remember the commonest things are often most useful. As
for your spiritual Doctrine, the true heights of spirituality were as little
preached, as the living much in abstraction, silence and solitude, the being
often in the still contemplations of God and Christ, the becoming dead to all
things else, spending days and nights in secret fastings and prayers, how
seldom were these things spoken of?


N. What then make you of them, since you d^ not allow them to be spiritual
doctrine?


C. I shall not deny but they were spiritual, bu^ I add, they were of a very
low size and degree, an^ such as could never carry on the Auditors to an^ great
perfection, and most of them were practise^ by the Pharisees. You know they
read the Scrip^ ture, and knew it so exactly, as no Christians do their Bibles:
they observed the Sabbath severly* they prayed many and long prayers. So that
these external things, are but the fringes of true Religion.


N. We heard Christ and him crucified preached much.


C. It was well if ye did, but let me tell you, i^ Christ was so preached, as
to cry up a bare relying on him, without obedience to his Gospel, as I fear too
many did, this was a very antichristian^ way of preaching Christ. Next, you got
amongst you a world of nice subtilties, which you called Cases of Conscience,
and these were handled with so metaphysical curiosities, that I know not what^
to make of them: And the people that should* have been driven out of these,
into the great practices of a Christian life, were too much flattered and
humoured in them. I am sure our Savior, and the Penmen of Scripture had no
such stuff.


N. This still discovers your carnal heart: God help you who understand not the
ways of the Spirit.


C. Never tell me of other ways of the Spirit, but holiness, charity, and
humility, etc. I do not deny but some devout people will be under doubtings and
fears, but this is a weakness which ought not to be fed and humoured in them,
and such scruples are to be satisfied in private. But to hear people, who lead
but common lives, talk of such things, is unsufferable. I shall not here take
notice of their strange methods, which they so much admired in preaching:
though I could tell you how our Savior and the Apostles used none of these:
but I shall be sparing in this, it not being of so great, or necessary
concernment.


N. O but what powerful Sermons were theirs! they made my very heart shake.


C. I am glad it was so, but see that by power you do not mean a tone in the
voice, a grimace in the face, or a gesture and action, or some strange phrases,
these indeed affect the vulgar much: but considering people see through them,
and value them little. The voice of God was a still voice, and Christ was not
heard in the streets.


N. But there were many converted by the preachings, and then there was a great
love to the word, people running far to hear it.


C. Truly I am so far from envy, that I wish from my Soul, where one was
converted by you, a thousand had been. But see that by conversion you do not
mean only, a change in opinion, or outward behavior, which might be done upon
interest: and remember that there was a kind of Proselytes, even to the service
of God, who thereby became more the children of the devil, than they were. And
see that you do not mistake every hea^ in the fancy for a conversion; one
thing I mu^ challenge you of, that you call always you^ preachings, the word
of God, for to term them so and yet to confess, you may be mistaken in them is
a contradiction, since Gods word is infallible* Your texts indeed are the word
of God, but you^ glosses on them, are but the words of fallibl^ men: Now this
was a great Art to conciliat ^ hudge veneration and authority to your
preachings; for you called them the words of the Lord and applied all the
places of Scripture that belonged to the inspired and infallible preachers,
unto your selves, that so you might be Rabbis in deed.


N. I, but their lives was preaching, and the^ looked like the Gospel indeed.


C. I am far from denying that there were ver^ good men among you, and there
are some of the^ whom I know to have the fear of God before their eyes: but I
must say, they seem to be little advanced above babes in Christ. For your great
men, how strangely did they involve themselves in all businesses? and truly a
meddling temper, look not like a devout one: but, what great spirituality
appeared amongst most of them? Leaders o^ Churches and parties should be
always commending God and Religion to people, and truly hear there is little
of this in their mouths; shrewd presumption that there is not too much o^ it
in their hearts.


N. Alas! you know us not, we seldom meet but, we expound Scripture, and have
spiritual exercise amongst us.


C. I confess you have enough that way, but that looks more artificial and
formal, but in your discourse, how few of your words are seasoned with salt,
ministering grace to the bearers? which is a more genuine and native, and so a
more convincing way of commending Godliness to people. But what great things
of devotion, or holiness, appear amongst you? who of you despise the world?
give away your goods to the poor? who bear injuries without resentments and
revenge? who are willing to be set at naught? who are mortifying themselves
even in the lawful pleasures of sense? who bear crosses without murmurings?
and for the devotional part, who of you seem to live only to God, and consecrat
your time and strength to divine exercises? truly these things are as little
among you as any party ^ know: nay, one thing I cannot pass by, that you
generally seem so desirous of being noticed i^ your Religion; this is far from
our Savior practice.


N. This is all your prejudicat opinion again^ us, but had you been ever with
us at our Communions, you would have been forced to confes^ that God was
amongst us.


C. I never denied it, for I am far from being ^ hidebound, as to affix God to
a party, as you to confidentlie do. But for your Communions, I a^ not like to
be much convinced by them, I cann^ like your running so many miles to them,
this ^umultaurie and disorderly; for if it be the Sacrament it self you value,
you may have it neare^ hand: but this shows, you idolize men too much ^ Next,
at your Communions, all your business i^ to hear and talk, whereas the truest
preparation for that work, is, an inward stillnesse and recollection of mind;
and certainly much talk at that time particularly in the very action it self,
does bu^ draw out, and disturb the mind: and by reason o^ your crowds, you
cannot have occasion of such retirement as is necessary at so solemn a time.
And to speak plainly, I cannot think persons very devout, who love rather to
hear one talk, were it never so good purposes, than to retire inwardly and
commune with their own hearts, and with God. Some of you will be many hours in
public worship, and perhaps not a quarter of an hour in secret devotions. It
would look like^ Christ, to be many hours secret in prayer, and very short in
public.


N. I see nothing among us pleases you, but we are never the worse for all
that.


C. Truly I cannot admire what I judge but simple and mean. But another fault
about your Communions, was, that you had them so seldom, against the express
practice of the Apostles, who continued daily breaking Bread: and the whole
Church in all ages and places, were frequent in this, which you brought to once
a year. And who taught you to separate it from the rest of the solemn worship,
and not have it every Lords day?


N. That was, that by the unfrequency of it, it ^ight be the more solemn.


C. Then at length you confess, you use your ^wn devices, to make the worship
of God more ^lemn. But it had been much liker the Apostles, ^o have celebrate
frequently, but withal to have ^oticed well such as did receive.


N. Did you never observe the great devotion ^ our worship?


C. Truly I am sorry, I saw so little of it: what ^rreverence is it, that when
prayer is in the church, most of you ^it on your breeches? is this ^o approach
unto God with the reverence be^omes dust and ashes? notwithstanding of the
ex^resse command of Scripture, O come let us wor^hip, and bow down, and kneel
down before the Lord ^ur Maker, and you cannot say this was one of Moses rites.


N. God looks not to the outward man, it is ^he inward bowing and kneeling of
the soul he regards; and it is your superstition to stand much ^t these outward
things.


C. But we are commanded to glorify God, as ^ell with our bodies, as with our
spirits. And ^ow unhandsome is it, that we will not testify that reverence to
God, we would show to a man, were ^he but a few degrees above us? beside, you
who always call for Scripture, ought quickly to be convinced here? most
Scripture-prayers being said, either to be in that posture, or in that which
comes next in reverence to it, to wit, standing. Our Savior kneeled when he
prayed to the Father. St. Paul, both at Miletus and Tire knee^ ed down, and
prayed with the people: though ^ Tire, it was upon the shore, a pretty
inconvenie^ place for kneeling. You know how much Scri^ ture I can bring, for
kneeling or standing.


N. But it is written, David sat before the Lord, and prayed.


C. But is not this strange; that you will brin^ one practice, and follow that
rather than the co^ stant and universal practice registrated in Scripture^
Beside, the word there does not import that h^ sat, but rather that he sifted
himself before the Lord. And then you do not consider that praye^ was private,
and it is undoubted, more solemnit^ is necessary in public, than in the
private worship. Why then do you not kneel or stand in Churches^ since you do
so in secret, and in your Family-wor^ ship? and why not as well, if not rather
in the one nor in the other? truly this bewrayes both great weakness, and
great irreverence. And beside the irreverence of that wretched posture of
^itting it is so convenient for your ease, that we see mo^ sold themselves to
sleep in the prayers: and suc^ as do not so, seem to listen to the prayer, as
the^ do to the Sermon, without thinking they are t^ join in it. And indeed to
fit, is so gross an abus^ in prayer, unless some bodily infirmity impos^ it,
that I rather not see you come to our Church^ es, than come to them thus to
give a bad example.


N. But since you named Family Worship, take but notice what order was amongst
our Families they looking like little Churches: Our Masters of Families
praying, praising, and expounding Scripture, with their Families; what, was not
this a heavenly thing?


C. I do approve of a part of it, and think it a pious and a Christian custom,
to have Families worshipping God together, providing the way of it be grave and
regular: of which I shall speak afterward. But for Masters of Families, their
expounding Scripture, it is intolerable, unless they be very intelligent
persons. How patent a way otherwise may this prove, for venting and broaching
errors, and heresies? but I would not have you value this too much: Otherwise
I shall send you to the religious houses in the Church of Rome, where they have
worship seven hours a day, in a word, those external things make not men good
of themselves.


N. But I hope you will not condemn private meetings, especially when a
Minister is with us for spiritual conference.


C. Truly the thing in it self looks fair and well, but since these secret
assemblings have been much scandalized, since also they may be a cloak for
hatching mischievous practices, and for debauching peoples minds into schism
and faction, and to a contempt of the Public Worship, they are not to be used.
Let people meet as often as they will in Church for Worship: and what is not fit
to be said in a Church, is not fit to be said in a Chamber full of people. Such
persons as desire resolution for their scruples, ought to ask it in private,
and not in these thronged Conventicles. Since in su^ matters the more private
one be, the more li^ he is to the lowly spirit: and the more talking be, he
looks liker one that affects a name, and be thought somewhat. The Gospel is a
humbl^ simple thing, whereas formal affected stuff, loo^ like the spirit of
pride, and Pharisaical vanity, a^ least it gratifies it too much.


N. I see you will not allow us the praise w^ truly deserve, but it is no
matter, our record i^ on high. The men in the world always set a^ naught the
children of God, but at least you can^ not deny us this glory, that were long
in great unity.


C. I love not the spirit of detraction, but I con^ sess I wonder to see a
party cried up to the Hea^ vens for nothing; since I can speak it with grea^^
sincerity, I could never see any thing amongst you that could raise in me any
great veneration so^ you. And I am sure, what ever do it, your unity will never
do it. It is true, as long as you had to^ do with these, whom you most
unchristianly, and maliciously called the Malignants, you were one, as Simeon
and Levi were: but when ever that was done, you quickly broke amongst your
selves and to let see how keen you were upon your contention, even though the
ground of your first breach was soon taken out of the way; yet you kept up your
differences, with as much heat, as if they had been the great matters of
Christian Religion. How fierce were you one against another, in your Papers,
Sermons, and Prayers? ^ou had so inured the Pulpit to scolding, that in ^any
places it was the vulgar Dialect of that place; and this you did publicly in
the sight of the Sun. ^ea, so hot were you on both sides, that you ^ould listen
to no accommodation, nor to any ^lew (they were very few) who would have
brought things to a temper.


N. This was our fault, but you exaggerat the ^natter too much.


C. I do it but with truth, and to show that the spirit moved among you, was so
contentious, that when you had no body to contend with, you fought amongst
your selves. Yea, upon the happy revolution; how hot was the Party among you
which prevailed against the other, and was beginning snaply to depose them,
till you were alarmed that the Bishops were coming in, and so left it to them?


N. Now you are malicious, to inveigh so against us, you know I can repay you
in your own coin. I will then go to, and examine your way next.


C. I never doubt, but you can scold well, but we have had a sharp bout of it,
we will therefore draw breath a little.


DIALOGUE III.
N. BY all you have hitherto said, one shou^ expect there were some
extraordina^ sublime thing among you; but he that looks o^ must consess, that
all these defects you charge^ us, are far more amongst you; besides, you con^
short of us, in what you acknowledge was go^ amongst us. So that you have all
our evil, a^ none of our good: And you dare not deny, but our days Scotland
looked liker a Christian Church than it does at this day.


C. Do not mistake me, as if I were so ingage^ to any interest, or party, as
blindly to defend i^ which most of you commit. I am so far Episc^^ pal, as to
love the Order, and to live in peac^ and submission under it. But I never swore
sea^ ty to any Sect. My hearty wish, and daily earne^ prayer to God, is, that
all these distinguishin^ names were buried, and out of head, that ^ with united
force we may all join to advance the true and everlasting designs of the
Gospel. As for the sins many among us are guilty of, I abhor the thought of
patronizing them; and, may be, some of us, though we love not in public to be
eve^ speaking of the times, whereby peoples mind are easily bribed to a
contempt of the Gover^ nours; a sin little noticed by you: yet in secre^ mourn
for these things as bitterly as any of you ^o. But remember you your selves are
guiltier ^ the present looseness, than perhaps you think.


N. How can that be, since for as bitter as you ^re against us, you dare not
charge us with coun^enancing of vice.


C. But you make Religion such a cloak to so ^any State-designs, that this
makes too many ^mpiously to suspect Religion to be but a design ^f it self.
Beside, you drove people to an out^ard compliance with you, in many of your
forms, against their hearts, which has made them nauseat ^t all Religion: not
being able to judge betwixt Religion and these mistakes. But that which is of
greatest weight, is, that our Savior knits the abounding of iniquity, with the
waxing cold in love; now, how faulty you are in this, I shall easily
demonstrate.


N. No peace, says my God, to the wicked; you ever charge our hating of sin,
as uncharitableness: whereas this is but zeal for God and his truth.


C. These are the false glosses you put on things, but take notice of the
humor of your people, you are apt to judge us in these matters which are
doubtful disputations, and think a man no good Christian except he be of your
Party. Next, you are ever listening to, and spreading a great many tattles of
us, which are the great subjects of your discourse; and what can be more
uncharitable than this is? You also carry sourly, and unkindly to us, as if we
were of another Religion, and shun all converse or friendship with us: You
likewise cast very odious aspersions upon us, as Apostates, Changlings,
Time-servers, and the like. and some of you rail at us, most petulantly: Now
whereas you always talk of persecution truly it is more on our side than
yours: for, t^ an ingenuous spirit, if he be not much above a^ these things,
such usage chiefly when it is universal, is a far greater trial, than to suffer
a little i^ the world.


N. Truly I do not deny, but too much of tha^ you speak is true, and I wish
there were more charity on all sides. But, are not most of you Apostates,
Changlings, and Time-servers?


C. What invidious work is it for you to faste^ that Brand, which the Christian
Church only stained those with, who fell off from Christianity to Heathenism,
upon the leaving of a party? Looks not this like the spirit of the Devil? just
as if one should apply all the places in the Epistles against the horrid
heresies and crimes of the Gnostics, to every little error, which you are
ready enough to do. And as for changing, except you make it a reproach for a
man to grow wiser, it can be none for a man to see he was once mistaken. This
generation was engaged by you, ere they could well consider things, to your
way, and your oaths, and then you strive to keep them always in a nonage, by
telling them they must be steadfast, and that it is a snare after vows to make
enquiry. And what strange doctrine is it, to tax an obedience to the Laws of
the Kingdom (when in our consciences we can so do) as time-serving? Nay,
perhaps as I hinted before, you are the greater time-servers.


N. Well, though I owe charity to your persons, yet I owe none to your ways,
and I call what ^s black, black, therefore I can never be reconci^ed to your
Episcopacy.


C. This head falls asunder in two things; The one is, a general consideration
of that Government; The other is, supposing it were as you think it, how far
you ought to separate from what is ^misse. Now, tell me what are your quarrels
at Episcopacy?


N. I cannot think that Churchmen should be called Lords, and be great persons.


C. This belongs not to the thing it self, but is an addition of the Christian
Magistrates; and, Sir, ^or Lord, and Gentleman, and Nobleman differ but in
degree: Since then a Minister, were he never so meanly born, gets the temporal
honor of a Gentleman put upon him, why may not the temporal honor of a Lord,
be as well put upon a Bishop? surely this must not be considered by you.


N. But they should not Lord over Gods heritage: therefore away with your Lord
Bishop.


C. If you understand all Scriptures as you do this, you may write excellent
Commentaries: for, by Lording, is meant a tyrannical domination, as the word
clearly imports, and not a title. Next, Gods heritage, which you apply to the
Clergy, is not in the Text. All in the Greek, is* not tyrannizing over your
Lots or divisions: and with whatever reason you put down Bishops from being as
Noblemen, that same will prove, you Ministers ought not to be Gentlemen, excep^
they be born such; and I sear your Leaders wi^ have no mind to this.


N. But this is not all: my chief quarrel again^ Bishops is, that they are a
function of man's de^ vising, and no where instituted by God.


C. Truly you may speak soberly here, for be^ fore I meddle with this, I will
show in a few things that however you talked bigly of jus divinum yet you
minded it as little as any could. You^ Lay Elders, though I deny them not to be
a good institution, are founded on no Scripture, as no^ the most judicious of
your party own: For when you urge, that because the Apostle gives rules on^ ly
for Bishops and Deacons, that the other orde^ of Diocesan Bishops must be
shuffled out; how a^ that same time did you not see, that ruling Elder^ were
not there? and the places you allege for them, are so abused, that it appears
you fir^ resolve to maintain them, and next to seek Scrip^ ture-proof for them.
The Brethren in the Council of the Apostles, proves too much, that the^ are
judges of doctrine; which yet you will no^ own. Beside, it is absurd to think
that was ^ Church Judicature, as shall soon appear. Tha^ of ruling with
diligence, is fond; for there, is mad^ an emuneration of Christian duties, and
if you mak^ an office for all there, we shall I have more ranks o^ Churchmen,
then they of Rome have. And it i^ palpable, that by helps and Governments, are
meant^ some extraordinary Gifts. Who would not pity men who build upon such
sandy foundations?


N. But what say you to the Elders that rule well?


C. Truly this is far from instituting an office; for, this speaks of an office
then in being; so, by some other place, you must prove their institution. There
are five or six several glosses put on these words, but I protest, I think any
of them appears more genuine then yours. That which I conceive the true sense
of the words, is, Let such among you as are fixed to rule particular charges, be
doubly honored: but especially those Evangelists, who have no meddling with
rule, but labor in word and doctrine. Thus you see how ^ill grounded your
Elders are. Next, how want you Deacons?


N. It seems you know our Discipline ill, that know not we had Deacons.


C. I know very well you had somewhat called Deacons, but this was only a name
to deceive the people, who otherwise might have been startled, to have found
Deacons in their Bibles, and not in your Churches; but I tell you, your Deacons
are ^o Scripture-deacons, who were not as yours are, Lay-persons, but
Ecclesiastic, and separate by the ^mposition of hands for that function, and
so were ^o continue. Beside, where was it ever heard of, that a Church-office
was taken from any, without ^ fault? whereas you yearly altered your Elders and
Deacons. Next, why wanted you Diaconesses, ^nce the Scripture is so particular
about them, telling of their order, of their being received to it, of their
Qualifications, of their Age, and of their Employment?


N. Truly I have heard many of our Ministers say, the want of them was a fault.


C. Next, why wanted you Evangelists, since there are still men who have
peculiar eminencies in preaching? why should they be confined to one charge,
and not to be made to preach over a country, as they shall be called?


N. That was an extraordinary thing, which was in the days of the Apostles.


C. This is well asserted: any thing in Scripture that makes for you, call it
ordinary, and what does not please you, is extraordinary. But truly, since it
is impossible to get a whole Church served with such a Ministry, as were to be
desired, it seems to be necessary, even in those days, to have an office of
Evangelists. But further, in what place of Scripture read you your classical
Subordination of Sessions to Presbyteries, etc? This I acknowledge is rational
and orderly, but founded upon no divine right.


N. How did they of Antioch send up to these at Jerusalem? and are not the
spirits of the Prophets subject to the Prophets?


C. By the last place, it is clear, he is speaking of Parochial Churches, which
subjection none deny; but for the former, it is ridiculous to urge it, since it
is certain they of Antioch sent not up to Jerusalem, either as to a Church
superior to it, or as to an Oecumenick Council, but to men there, who were
immediately inspired by God: as the Jews consulted the high Priest his U^im and
Thummim; and if that was a Council, then all Councils may speak in their style,
which none but a Papist can say. For to preface our acts, with, It seems good
to the Holy Ghost, and yet to say, we are subject to error, is a contradiction.
And thus the subordination of your Courts was a mere humane device; so that if
the jus divinum be the rule, the Independants had the better of you. But as for
your Discipline, what warrant of Scripture have you for it?


N. The excommunicating the Incestuous person, and the noting those that walk
disorderly, etc.


C. I do not deny, but there are clear grounds for separating scandalous
persons from our Worship; but, why so many days? and why in a place of
repentance? and why the use of Sackcloth sometimes? is not this the device of
men? bring Scripture for it?


N. Sure the Church has power to do in these things, as shall tend most to
order: and the days, place, and habit, are but external things.


C. Now I have you at a great advantage, though you understand it not. Why may
the Church impose such days of penitence, and not as well order all for the
sins of the year to be in penitence all the time of Lent? And why is one place
made a part for Penitents to be in, and may not another with as good and better
reason be made the proper place for Communicating? And why may not a Churchman
officiat in a Surplice, as well as a penitent put on Sackcloth? since the one
is a ceremony expressive o^ repentance, as well as the other is of innocence:
and both were equally practiced under the Law.


N. I confess, I did not think on these things, but I believe our Ministers
have answers to them.


C. You may well believe, for you shall never see it, for there is no
imaginable difference betwixt them: One thing I confess, that a man once
resolved not to believe a thing, if he have any subtlety of spirit, will make
a shift to say somewhat upon any thing. But I have not done with showing your
difformity with the Scripture-pattern; since then we were just now speaking of
the Council at Jerusalem, why do you not observe that Law?


N. Because that was only to bury the Synagogue with honor, and as for the
meats offered to idols, St. Paul takes that away.


C. This is like you, still to devise fancies against express Scripture; where
says the Scripture, that was done to please the Jews? as for St. Paul,
consider that he wrote his Epistle before he went to Jerusalem, and yet St.
James tells him these things were still observed there; which shows, that a
thing may be obligatory in one place, and not in another: and so, that in these
externals, commands are not intended for lasting obligations. Next, why use you
not washing of feet, since there is no Sacrament set down more punctually in
Scripture? The Element is, Water, the Action, washing the feet, the
Institution, as I have done, so do ye, and ye ought to wash one another feet,
and the spiritual use of it, is humility. Why do you not therefore use this
rite?


N. Why do not you use it, since you cannot refuse the Scripture more than we?


C. For all such matters, I have a clear answer, that in these externals, God
intended no perpetual obligation; and therefore in them I follow the practice
of the Catholic Church. Next, in your Worship, why do you not kiss one
another with a holy kiss? why do you not anoint the sick with oil, as St.
James commands?


N. It is clear, that was extraordinary, for he promises recovery upon the
anointing.


C. No such matter, it is upon the prayer of faith, that he promises recovery,
he also promises forgiveness, and since you pray by all, and do not say that
it is more then a mean for their being raised up and forgiven; why do you not
as well anoint, since the Scripture commands it? But all this shows, that
however, with women, and simple people, you talk much of your sticking to the
Word, and by your grave nods, and big words would persuade them, that it is so;
yet you are as far from it as any. I shall end all this with an instance of
great importance, who taught you the change of the Sabbath? I am far from
speaking against the Church that did so, but you will read the Bible long ere
you find it there; that of their meeting on the first day of the week, says
not, that they antiquated the Saturnday; that of the Lords day, says yet less
for it.


N. Well, what make you of all this? it may well prove, our Church was not
perfect; it never justifies you. Or, do you mean to lay aside the Scriptures?


C. It once checks your insolence, who pretend so big, upon so light grounds;
and it is certainly a directer opposition to Scripture, to neglect what is
expressly enjoined, as you do, than to add in some lesser matters. All I say
upon the whole matter, is, that the Scriptures were designed by God, for the
purifying the hearts and conversations of men; and therefore it was not
necessary they should contain direct rules; for the Church-policy, which being
a half civil matter, needs not divine warrands; and therefore the common rules
are in Scripture, that there should be Church Officers, that those should be
separate for that Function, that they should be obeyed, that things should be
done to order, edification, and peace. These are everlasting obligations,
because the reasons of them are perpetual: But the other rules were accommodat
to the then state of things; which altering, they alter likewise. And this is
so rational, that I can see nothing to be excepted against it, with any show or
color of reason. Nay, this looks like the Christian liberty, for, whereas the
old dispensation was bound up, and limited to the smallest matters, Christ has
delivered us from that law of Ordinances, and has made us free.


N. This is to take the Crown off Christ's head, and to pull him off his Throne,
and to deny him King, which was the good confession he witnessed before Pilate,
and for which he came into the world; this also makes him unfaithful, and
inferior to Moses.


C. These are fine devices to terrify simple people, and with such talk you
triumph among women, and in your Conventicles. But, how little reason will
suffice to let a man see through that canting? I say then, Christ's Crown, his
Throne, and Kingdom, is an inward and spiritual one, and not of the world, nor
as the Kingdoms of the world: And a great part of his Kingdom, is, the liberty
whereto he has called us, freeing us from the yoke of the former slavery and
pedagogy. And since no Allegory holds, it is ridiculous to argue, because
offices in a Kingdom are named by the King, therefore it must be so in the
Church; since you may as well say, there must be coin stamped by Christ.
Beside, what King will think his prerogative lessened, by constituting a
Corporation, to whom he shall leave a liberty to cast themselves into what
mould they please, providing they obey the general laws, and hold that liberty
as a thing depending upon him? Christ's faithfulness consisted in his
discharging the Commission given him by the Father; of which, whosoever doubts,
let him be Anathemae Maranathae. But, who told you, it was in the Fathers
Commission? If you argue from Moses, it will say more than you will grant, that
all particulars must be determined: since then, as Moses determines the days
of separation for a legal uncleanness, why does not the Gospel determine the
separation ^o^ spiritual uncleanness? Nay further, consider Moses instituted
no Church Government, in the way we use it; for that of the Tribe of Levi, and
house of Aaron, was only Typical, and to wait on the Temple, and the Worship to
be performed there. Beside which, they had Synagogues all the Land over, and
wherever they had Colonies in the World, and in these they had their Rabbis,
their Scribes, and their Rulers, and their chief Ruler of their Synagogues,
which read their Law, performed such Worship as was not tied to the Temple at
Jerusalem, and they inflicted Discipline upon offenders: and these might have
been of any Tribe, not only of that of Levi; and yet our Savior never
challenges this, but went in to the rulers of their Synagogues; the like you
find done by his Apostles, and they never declame against it, as an humane
invention. Whence it must follow, that you must grant, either what they did,
was founded on divine tradition (which no Christian will grant) or that a form
of Government was devised by men, and yet no unlawful thing. And if the Jews
had such liberty, certainly the Christian Church is at least more free, as to
these externals. And after all, since Christ is the Head of the World, as well
as of the Church, why did not he determine the order of the one, as well as of
the other?


N. The odds is very great, for his Church is dearer to him than all the world.


C. Why then does he not determine how his Church should be governed, as to the
civil matter, since Justice is a part of his Law, as well as devotion? and the
civil peace, I hope, you will grant, is more necessary to the very being of the
Church, than is order in Discipline; and so it was determined in the old Law,
but yet it is left at liberty in the new. And though I should grant, the
Church, as Church, is dearer to Christ, then as they are men, a foolish and
childish nicety: Yet a King, though he looks most to what is dearest to him, he
will have his authority acknowledged in all his dominions: whence it will, with
the same parity of reason follow, that since Christ is the King of the earth,
there should be no Offices in it, but of his appointment.


N. I never loved this carnal reason, it is an enemy to Religion: Our Ministers
bring us to the Bible for every thing they say, but you come on with your
reason.


C. Truly you have good cause to be against reason, for it and you cannot both
prevail. If by carnal reason, you mean a sober examining things, by the
dictates of Nature; see that you condemn not that, which is indeed the voice of
God in us, and therefore is to be received. And if you make this contrary to
Religion, you bring as great a stain upon Religion, as an Atheist could devise:
But if by reason, you mean little pitiful nibling with some ill understood,
and worse applied distinctions, out of Aristotle and Ramus, as is very frequent
among you, that is justly called vain Philosophy. And for Scripture, do not
think they build surest upon it, who are ever quoting it fastest; the Devil did
that, and so do all Sects. And thus if you can rightly weigh things, I have
said enough to convince you, that in matters of Government, the Church is at
liberty: But if you will still go to Scripture, I can positively say, though in
it nothing amounts to a demonstration; There are fairer likelihoods for
Bishops, from that of the Angels of the Churches, than ever you shall find in
it for Presbytery: but I will not say more of this. Next, let me tell you how
soon this Government was in the Church.


N. I will not deny, tares sprung very early in Gods Husbandry, but that will
never convince me. To the Law, and to the Testimony; for from the beginning it
was not so.


C. You do well to possess your self with a prejudice against these Churches;
but think soberly, whether is it likelier, that those who lived so nigh the
sacred time, understood the mind of the Apostles better then we do, at the fagg
end of an thousand and six hundred years? As also, whether is it liker, that
the Church then, always in the fire of persecution, was purer then she is now?
God bless me from the pride of comparing my self with these worthies, who were
honored to convert the world, and to die for the truth?


N. But Bishops were not in the two first Centuries, as our Ministers say.


C. They are grossly ignorant, or disingenuous, who say so, all History being
against them: Ignatius Epistles are plain Language. The Apostolical Canons (a
work of very venerable antiquity, at least the first 50 of them, though none of
theirs perhaps) all over, show the difference was then betwixt Bishops and
Presbyters, particularly the 40. Can. The Presbyters and Deacons shall finish
nothing without the Bishop's sentence: For, he is entrusted with the people of
God, and shall be required to give account of their souls. And the same thing
was also enjoined, Syn. Azel. Can. 19. And in Cyprian's time it is undenied,
that their power was then well regulate and settled. For though that great
Saint and Martyr tells, lib. 3. Epist. 10. That he had decreed in the beginning
of his Bishopric to do nothing without the advice of his Presbyters, yet, Ep.
9. of that book to Rogatian a Bishop, who had asked his advice concerning an
affront he had received from a Deacon, he says, that by his Episcopal vigor
and authority of his Chair, he had power presently to punish him: And toward
the end of that Ep. he says, these are the beginnings of Heretics, and the
rise and designs of Shismaticks, to please themselves and contemn their Bishop
with insolent pride. And it is clear, Presbyters at that time, even in the
Vacancy of a See, did not judge themselves sufficiently empowered for
Ecclesiastical administration, by what the Presbyters and Deacons of Rome write
to Cypr. lib. 2. Ep. 7. saying, That since a Bishop was not at that time
chosen, in place of the deceased Fabian, there was none to moderate all things
amongst them, who might with authority and advice take account of matters: Sure
they thought little of Presbyters, being equal in power to their Bishop, who
write so of a Church wherein the Episcopal power might seem devolved on them.
But, I believe, few of you know these Writings. In the Council of Nice,
speaking of the power of Metropolitans, which was an additional thing to that
of Bishops over Presbyters: The Canon says, Let the ancient Customs be in
force. Now, how this excressing power should have crept into the whole Church,
and no mention when it came in, no temporal Princes, nor universal Councils to
introduce it, and that at a time of persecution, when the Church was least to
be suspected of pride, no Secular consideration being to flatter this power;
nay, on the contrary, they always bore the first brunt of the Persecution; and
how none opposed it, if this was not introduced by Apostles, or Apostolical
men, passes my divination. Neither can any thing be alleged against this, but
some few or disjoynted places of some Authors, which at most prove, that they
judged not the origin of Bishops to be Divine* But none except Aerius (branded
upon that account with Heresy, both by Augustine and Epiphanius) ^id ever
speak against the difference was betwixt Bishops and Presbyters. And for the
few places they allege, should I reckon up all that from these same Authors
may be brought for it, I should grow too tedious. Ierom is he for whom they
triumph, but upon very small ground: for, beside that he being but a Presbyter,
might have exalted his own dignity to the height, and his fervent (I had almost
said fiery) spirit, drives him along in every thing to an excess; as may
appear from, not only his ingadgements with Iovin. Vigilan. and Ruffin. but
even with the incomparable St. Austine: all can be drawn from his words, is,
that the difference betwixt Bishop and Presbyter, was only of degree and not of
office, and that the difference was not of Divine, but Ecclesiastical
authority: but even he expressly confesses, that Presbyters did not ordain, and
that the origin of the exercising power was in the days of the Apostles, to
prevent Schisms; for, he says, that from the days of St. Mark, till Denis and
Heraclas, there were constantly Bishops in Alexandria; and he compares the
Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons in the Church to Aaron the High Priest, his sons
the Priests and the Levites in the Temple, and says that it was decreed
through the whole World, that one Presbyter should be set over the rest; and to
root out the seeds of difference, the whole care was laid upon one: for all
this, see Ier. ad Euag. and upon Titus: and from this you may see how little
show of ground there is from him or any other Church-writter to reject the
Episcopal authority.


N. But these Bishops were not such as ours are.


C. I confess they were better men, than either Bishops, or Presbyters alive
are: But he knows little Church-story, who knows not, that the Presbyters did
nothing without them, and that particularly, Presbyters could never ordain
without a Bishop.


N. Well then, as it was good then, so it may be ill now, and there is our
present case.


C. I say still, it is a rational, just, and a most necessary thing, that the
Senior, and most approven Churchmen, be peculiarly incharged, as well with the
trial of Intrants, as with the inspection of the Clergy: since no order of men
needs so much to be regulated, as that of Churchmen. And therefore unless they
be all equal in gifts, and parts, they ought not to be equal in power and
authority. If the power of Bishops be at any time abused, it is but that to
which all humane things are liable: nor can Presbytery be freed of that, but
let the common maxim in such cases be applied to this, remove the abuse, but
retain the use.


DIALOGUE IV.
N YOu have said, I confess, a great many things, that I cannot well answer;
yet my conscience still tells me, that Episcopacy is no good Government; and I
cannot act against my Conscience.


C. You must remember, this is the Plea of all Heretics, who still pretend
Conscience. I confess there is nothing in the world, wherein I desire to be
more tender, than in offering the least violence to Conscience, there not being
a wider step to Atheism, than to do any thing against the conviction of
Conscience. But see it be not humor, and wilfulness, that you scorn to change
your opinion, or love to your party: whom you dare not displease: or vanity,
that you may be noticed; or faction; Or simple and blind following of your
Leaders, without clear convictions in your own mind; all which, for most part,
are the true reasons of schisms, though Conscience be ever pretended. And
remember, that God will not hold them guiltless, that take his Name in vain, so
you shall not pass unpunished, if you pretend Conscience, and be not acted by
it.


N. How then must I examine any persuasion, to know if it be conscience, or not?


C. If you find in your heart a serious desire to please God in all things,
together with a desire of obeying the Laws of the Kingdom, and of complying
with the Church, in what you judge lawful, but out of grounds which appear to
you founded upon the will of God, you are led to a persuasion, this is
Conscience: provided there be joined with it, a modest distrust of your self,
with a charitable opinion of those that differ from you. And such as are of
this temper, were their judgments never so bemisted, I reverence, and love:
Weigh the matter therefore in just scales, and I doubt you shall see, that at
best, you are led by a blind and implicit obedience, for I will not
uncharitably censure you as guilty of worse.


N. You are so proudly blown up, with an opinion of your self, that you think
all who are not of your mind, are ^lind and ignorant at best: whether is not
this arrogance in you?


C. Consider my grounds, ere you give a judgment against me. I say then,
private persons have nothing to do with matters of Government; your business
is, to submit in these things, and not to judge: For, whether think you, God in
the great day, will call you to answer at his Tribunal, if you were Episcopal,
or Presbyterian? As also, since the great design of the Gospel is, to purify
the heart; these things which have no tendency to the purifying* or blotting of
the Soul, are not matters of Conscience: And these are two easy Rules, whereby
private persons might well examine their Consciences.


N. But if we think you are wrong, can we join with you?


C. First, I say, you can have no rational ground to think us wrong, in matters
of Religion: And since it is not a matter of Religion, and Salvation, you
cannot without being Schismatical, separate from us. But further, even every
error in Religion, ought not to unty the bond of the unity of the Catholic
Church, unless the error be of greater importance, than the Communion of
Saints is: a consideration which you never seem to weigh. How did the Apostle
St. Paul become a Jew to the Jews? though he tells us to do these things, out
of an opinion of necessity in them, was to antiquat the cross of Christ. And
let all men judge, whether to circumcise, and purify in the Temple, were not
greater compliances, in matters more justly to be scrupled, than what we
contend about. Nay, the free spirit of Christianity, made St. Paul see well
that these externals were of themselves nothing; so that either doing, or
forbearing in them, might be acceptable to God; as he clearly shows in his
fourteenth Chapter to the Romans. Yea, he carries this liberty further, even
to an instance, which I confess, I should never have yielded to, had not he
determined in it; that is, the eating in the Idols Temples, of their feasts,
and eating meat offered to Idols. Now, if St. Paul did this freely, both to Jew
and Gentile, are not you bound to more obedience, when not only charity, but
duty to the Laws exact it? This shows how far you are, both from the free and
charitable spirit of St. Paul.


N. It is true, he complied in these things, but it was freely, and not when it
was exacted, as you do of us. Next, he avoided to do these things, when they
occasioned scandal, which is our case.


C. You in this bewray great simplicity; for St. Paul did not refuse
compliance, because they were commanded by authority, which you do: but because
certain false brethren came to spy out his liberty, to whom he gave place by
subjection, no not for an hour. If therefore any require your compliance, as if
it were necessary of it self, you have reason to stand fast in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made you free. But it is unsufferable peevishness, to
say, if the Magistrate enjoin a thing, declaring that it is still free in it
self, and only necessary, because it is commanded, upon that score, to refuse
obedience. And may not offenders as well refuse to undergo the Discipline you
enjoin them, and say, though the thing be lawful, yet it is but indifferent,
and therefore they cannot obey you, because you command things indifferent,
which, as you reason, makes them necessary. As for the point of scandal, do not
mistake it, as if the displeasing your party, were a giving of scandal, as many
of you weakly think; to give scandal then, is, to stretch your liberty, when
that freedom of yours, may draw others to follow your practice, though they
have not the same clearness in their mind. And hence it appears, that to avoid
scandal, is only an abridging your liberty, for the good of your brother. If
therefore you be not at liberty, but already restrained in it by the lawful
command of authority, you ought not in that case to be disobedient, upon a
pretense of avoiding scandal. But I shall yet examine the matter of conformity,
more closly. And, first, why do not your Ministers join with our Courts for
Church Discipline?


N. They cannot do it, because they are no Legal Courts, the Law that
established them being taken away, so that now they are but the Bishops
Deputies.


C. I have before studied to convince you, that all that is divine in
Discipline, is, that scandalous persons be noted, and separated from worship;
but how this shall be administered, can be no matter of Religion; since,
wherein are souls concerned, whether a Court, acting in a parity, or with one
over them, do this; providing it be done? But waving this, whether judge you
the Presbyters power for Discipline is founded upon a Divine Law, or upon the
Act of Parliament? no doubt, you will say, the first: well then, can the
abolishing that Act of Parliament take away your power? if not, you ought to
sit in these Courts, and still do your duty.


N. But this is to sit in a Bishops Court, which acknowledges his authority.


C. I pray you, suppose the case, that the King should abrogate all Laws for
the worship of God, and declare, that all that assemble to worship God, shall
be understood to worship Mahomet, and thereupon oblidge all to meet; though you
meet not upon that command, yet I hope you will still meet to worship God; let
them interpret that as they please. So, I say, since a power of Jurisdiction,
is that to which Presbyters lay claim, by a divine right, they ought to meet in
these Courts, let the Law call it what it will.


N. But the Bishop is over them, and overruleth them as he pleases.


C. But, suppose this were true, and that Episcopacy is a tyranny in the
Church; Why ought you not to submit to them, as well as you did to the late
Tyrants in the State? And why, as your Ministers say, they will be content to
take Churches, and preach, but let Discipline alone; which is a quiting of some
of their Rights, that they may retain the greater? May they not as well
exercise Discipline, though they cannot do it with all the liberty they desire?
Sure, there is nothing but peevishness in this.


N. Do you think our Ministers would quite their Churches, and liberty of
Preaching the Gospel, which is dearer to them than all the world, for any thing
but Conscience?


C. I am not so severe as to doubt, but in most of them it is Conscience; but I
must add, it is ill informed Conscience. But what can you pretend, for your
peoples withdrawing from our Churches? since our Religion, in Doctrine, Worship
and Discipline, is the same: only a small alteration in the point of Government
is made.


N. I am not for separating from you, as my practice tells, but much may be
said for it; therefore I will judge none that do it.


C. Truly I desire to be as sparing in passing Judgments on people, as any can
be: but since separation must be either a necessary duty, or a very great sin,
being a forsaking the unity of the Church: it can be no light matter to tear
the Body of Christ, when there is scarce a color of pretense for it. Now, the
Schismatical humor among you, appears palpably in this, that you come
sometimes to Church, but seldom; this seems indeed to be time-serving, that you
may both evite the punishment of the Law, and also retain your interest with
your party; for, if you come once in three months, you may come every Lords
day; and if you may come, you ought to come; otherwise you forsake the
assemblings of the Saints, and contemn what you call the Ordinances. Others of
you also join with some of us, but not with others. Now as to our public
transgressions (if they be such) we are all equally guilty, why then make you a
difference? Others of you come to Churches in the Country, but do not so in
the City: what does this look like, but that you have freedom for the thing,
but will not do it, for fear of being noticed? which is to prefer the pleasing
of men, to the pleasing of God. And finally, some of you join with us in the
ordinary Worship, but will not communicate with us, which bewrayes great solly;
for if you may pray and praise with us, which is the spiritual communicating:
why do you not join in the Eucharist, which is but solemn praise?


N. How can we acknowledge them our Pastors, who are intruders, and are in the
places of our faithful shepherds, whom you have torn from us?


C. Supposing it were as you assert, yet that will never warrant your
separating from them: since, although by the Law of Moses, the eldest of the
house of Aaron was high Priest; and the Romans by force driving them from
their right, exposed this most sacred function to sale, so that the high
Priests not only invaded the right of others, but also obtained their office by
the most horrid Simony imaginable; yet Caiaphas, as high Priest, prophesied;
Our Savior also answered at his Bar, and gave confession, when he
authoritatively adjured him, in the Name of the living God. St. Paul also
acknowledged Annanias. And though the Pharisees were wretched teachers, guilty
both of greater crimes and heresies, than you dare charge on us; Yet our
Savior says, hear them, for they sit in Moses Chair. This is so convincing,
that nothing in reason can be alleged against it: Yea, it was the doctrine of
your own Teachers. Finally, what cruelty is it, if a Minister be put from his
place, be it justly or unjustly, that the people should be starved? It shows
your Ministers can have no love to their flocks, if they desire it should be so.


N. But your Curats are naughty men and weak preachers.


C. This is an excellent piece of Religion in you, to take up, and use
reproachful names of your Pastors. For though the name Curat, be a designation,
no Minister ought to be ashamed of; it signifying one that has the care of
Souls; yet ye use it as a term of contempt: and this is your obedience to St.
Paul's rule, honor them that are over you in the Lord: Which, as he adds, is
for their works sake, and not for their persons sake, as you do. As for their
persons and Gifts, where is Christian charity, that should make you slow to
take up a bad impression upon slight grounds? But if your grounds be good,
where is your charity to the Church? since you do not make it known, that they
may be cast out. Beside, it will open a very wide door to separation, if you
say, that upon the personal failings, much more weakness of a Preacher, you
may separate. This is to ty the good of Church Worship to him that mannageth
it. And further, it seems, you think to hear Sermon, all you go to Church for:
But the chief reason of our meeting, is solemnly to acknowledge God, and that
we are members of his Church: which we can do, be the Minister what he will;
and hear good Scriptures read, and sing good Psalms. Besides, let me tell you,
you are not so zealous for good Preachings, as you would make the world
believe. For, are there not many of your Preachers, who, while they were in
place, were of no esteem, nor following; and are undoubtedly men of weak Gifts,
yet now are crowded to by you? and the Church Sermons are deserted, and their
Conventicles frequented. All the reason for this is, because they rail against
the Church and State; which is the only way to make a man popular amongst you.


N. You have pretended to answer a great many things, but one thing remains,
wherein our chief strength lies, and that you shall never be able to unbind;
which is, the Covenant: wherein the whole Nation, and the generations to come
in their loins are engaged; and, can such sacred and solemn vows be broken,
without shameful perjury?


C. This you always bring out as your Goliath, to defy the Armies of the living
God. But as Sampson's strength lay in his hair, without which he was as other
men; so upon a full survey, it appears that the Covenants strength consisted in
the Armies that fought for it, and not in any inward or innate vigor. And,
first, what a ridiculous fancy is it, to say, Children can be bound by their
fathers Oath? is not this to make us the servants of men, and to give them
authority over our consciences; which is Gods peculiar power? Alas, what kind
of souls have you, that can be led into such conceits!


N. Does not the fathers debt oblidge the son? why not also his oath?


C. A man's debt affects his estate, which if the son get, he is bound to pay
the debt. But if the son get no estate by his father, then I hope you will not
say he is bound to pay his fathers debt. And this shows that the fathers
promises bind nothing upon the sons conscience.


N. But are not we bound to duty to the King, because of the Allegiance our
fathers swore, even though we never swear it our selves?


C. Not at all, because they swore Allegiance, but because the right of the
Crown is in the Kings person, and therefore we are born his Subjects.


N. But how was Adam oblidged for his Posterity, if Parents cannot bind their
children?


C. This is strange dealing, to apply a mystery of our faith, which we cannot
well comprehend, to your triffling matters. But take notice, that Adam did not
bind his children, by his undertaking for them, but by a secret transaction of
Gods; who covenanted with him, as with the common head of mankind. And if
Parents can bind duties upon their children, they may as well bind sins upon
them. And this is new Doctrine unheard of in the Church, which never
acknowledged any Original sin, but that derived from Adam.


N. How then do Parents vow for their children in Baptism? and are not they
bound by the Baptismal vow, taken by the father, in their name?


C. The Parent binds for the child, as a tutor in legal matters for his Pupil:
that is, they bind for their interest. The child is indeed tied by his
Baptism, not as it was his fathers vow, but because by the command of God, he
was Baptized into the likeness of Christ.


N. How then is Saul charged, and his children punished for killing the
Gibeonites?


C. It was not because he had falsified the oath, the Princes swore: which is
no where said But these Gibeonites, by that oath, got a right to their lives;
and so were excepted, when God ratified it, from the general command of cutting
off the Canaanites: therefore, to kill them, wa^ cruelty, and not perfidy. And
Saul is not taxe^ of perjury, but of blood. For although the second of Samuel
make mention of the oath swor^ to them, that is, only to reminde the Reader o^
the History set down in Joshuah: but does not at all say, the oath was still
binding, as appears from the words. Thus I have taken more pains tha^ was
needful, to show the ridiculous fondness o^ this absurd notion: and have met
with all ca^ be said for it.


N. Well, for all this, ye cannot deny but the Covenant binds these who took it.


C. I will, ere I come to that, let you see ho^ little noise you made in the
breaking it in some things. When then the Tyrant had murdere^ the King,
enslaved this Nation, antiquated the Covenant, discharged General Assemblies,
Inhibited praying any more for the King, who the^ stood up for the Covenant; or
clamoured, a^ you now do, of Apostasy, Tyranny, and Perjury I know, a few spoke
somewhat, but it was so se^dom, so faintly, and so disguisedly, that it was fa^
from the thundering that was in some of you^ Pulpits before you were silenced,
and as at thi^ day is in your Conventicles. The true reason was ye knew the
Tyrant would made no bones of ma^king heads fly, or sending you in Shipfuls to
Barbados: but you presume upon the King's clemency. And you know what a trip
some made, when upon a threatening of taking their Stipends from them, they
passed from what, in a printed Paper, they had owned as their duty, both from
Scripture and their Covenant.


N. It is uncharitably done of you, to rake into these things: but if we were
faulty in some particulars, that is ill corrected, by becoming so gross, as to
renounce all.


C. I meddle with none of your private escapes, but such as were public: and do
it not, as I have often said, to reflect upon you; but to let you see, you are
but as other men, and not such wonders, as you would have the world believe. I
shall next tell you, what monstrous faults you committed in exacting the Oath,
not returning upon what was hinted, Dial. 1. That it was a Bond of Rebellion,
against the Lords Anointed. As for your National Covenant, what a cruel
imposing upon Consciences was it, to make a Nation swear an Oath, which they
could not understand? For you made them therein renounce all the Articles of
Popery; amongst the rest, opus operatum, a Latin word, and abstruse conceit;
with many other niceties, which you could not but know, your women and simple
people did not understand. And was it not a contradiction, to make them swear
against Worship in an unknown Tongue; and yet in that very Oath so to use it?
For swearing is an act of Worship. Yea, you made them preface all this with a
gre^ lie, that it was after full and mature considerat^on of all particulars;
when you knew they we^ not capable of considering them. And wha^ strange
Tyranny over Consciences was it, t^ make people swear in these matters, some
where of might be disputable; so that a man could no^ be of your communion,
except he were in you^ opinion in all things? A rigor never before practiced
but in Trent. Then, what a tr^pane was it, to make the Nation swear the
Cov^nant, and by an after-game to declare that Epi^copacy was abjured in it?
Next, what violen^ used you to oblidge all to bow to this Idol^ Churchmen were
not only deposed, who refuse it; but both Churchmen and Laymen were
ex^communicated, if they did not submit to you^ tyranny. What man of common
sense can thin^ this was the Cause of God, which had such mo^struous errors in
its first conception?


N. All you can say upon this head, may we^ prove, there were some faults in
imposing it but it still does bind, since he shall dwell in Go^ holy hill, who
swears to his own hurt, and chan^eth not.


C. I confess, Oaths, when the matter is lawful, do oblidge: but if the nature
of things change, so the matter grow unlawful, you the cannot say the Oath
binds. In a word, a man, or Society can only bind themselves, in things tha^
are left to their power, and are in their own (...): but if the matter be not
in their power, ^hen their Oath cannot bind them.


N. That is not our case, since you acknow^edge the thing to be of it self
indifferent.


C. I confess, if you take the thing abstractly in ^t self, it is indifferent:
but as the case now ^tands, it is not so: for, by the command of God, we are
oblidged to obey the Magistrate in all things lawful: so that all just Laws
oblidge our Consciences: And this is a tie before all Oaths. And as by no act
of ours, we can be bound to break the commands of God; so, no more can we
oblidge our selves to do any thing in prejudice of another right; such as is
the Sovereign's Authority. Therefore, no Covenant can bind us to deny obedience
to the King's Laws, because they are in a measure, the Laws of God; and it is
his right to command us, from which, ^o Act of ours can exclude him. Therefore,
since the King and Parliament have annulled the Covenant, and required us to
submit to Episcopacy, it can no more bind us.


N. This is good Doctrine, to teach that we should obey man, rather than God.


C. This is gross ignorance in you, it is, that we should obey God rather than
our selves: for, the just Laws, are the mediate commands of God; whereas our
Oaths were a voluntary deed of our own, to which we were not bound by any
command of God. Now, if you comprehend not this clear demonstration, it is
because you are a stranger to common sense.


N. Wherein could Episcopacy have been more for the good of Scotland? or what
could the Kings reason be, for preferring it to Presbytery at least for judging
it fitter for us?


C. This is like all mutinous Subjects, to b^ judging and censuring the actions
of their Princes, unless they be on all their secrets, and kno^ what all their
reasons, and designs are. Go^ has given Kings the authority to command^ and
has left us the glory of obedience; which we ought to do without further
inquiry: provided what they enjoin be against no comman^ of God. But we need
not seek to rifle the Ca^binets of the King, and his Counselors, ther^ being
many apparent cogent reasons, to have en^forced the change. You know what work
you^ Leaders occasioned, both to his Royal Grandfather, and Father, and to
Himself. You had in^volved the Nations in blood; and not satisfie^ with this,
after you got all the security yo^ could demand, you engaged with his enemie^
in England, against him; you opposed the de^sign of delivering his Father, Anno
1648. In word, what jealousies had you justly raised in the hearts of Princes,
of your Government? an^ your Tyranny (1649.) against the Nobility, ha^ justly
irritated them against you. Next, you ha^ divided shamefully amongst your
selves, on^ great party amongst you, being such, that you^ selves sound it
necessary to turn them out; the^ maxims being inconsistent with all Order and
Government. And of these that are outed, i^ ^s clear, that more than three
parts of four, are of that party. Why then are ye so blind as to ^sk a reason
for the change was made, as if at ^oon one should ask where were the Sun?


N. Sure you are an enemy to Godliness, who ^ave an heart so to rail at us.


C. I am such a lover of true piety, that for ^ll this dross that is amongst
you, such of you, ^s live well, and walk conscientiously, I still love and
value; and the Searcher of hearts knows, that I daily pray he may find a way
to reunite ^s all again; and to bring such of your Leaders, ^s are sensible of
their errors, in these great ^scapes, to a capacity of serving him in the
Church. But it is strange you should take such ^ liberty, both in Discourses,
Conventicles, and ^rinted Writings, or rather Libells, to inveigh against us;
and then, if we but say a little for ^ustifying the King, the Laws, and our
Consci^nces, and for undeceiving the people of these ^ists you would cast over
their eyes, then you ^^ry out, that we are uncharitable, bitter and malicious.
Sure you who are so much for de^enfive arms, may, at least, allow us to defend
the truth, the law, and our selves, with our Tongues and Pens.


DIALOGUE V.
N. I Confess you have much shaken me in the matter of the Bishops, though I
never find in my heart to love them. But one thing stil^ sticks, they are great
friends to the Common* Prayer Book, which I cannot think upon in patience; and
therefore I cannot join with them.


C. Truly if that be your chief quarrel against them, it is as well grounded as
the rest.


N. How! do not you think it a great matter, to take from us the pure and
spiritual Worship of God, and in stead thereof, set up a dea^ and formal
Liturgy?


C. I perceive you are still abused after on^ manner, your Leaders put big
words in you^ mouths to make you stick stiffl^y by them; you^ Government, they
taught you to account the interest and Kingdom of Christ; they also would make
you believe your Worship to be the onl^ spiritual one, and all others but
carnal. Now, ^ will let you see the great fallacy of this prayin^ by the
Spirit, as you understand it. To pra^ by the Spirit, is, when out of a deep
sense of ou^ misery and need, and firm confidence in God, w^ draw near to him,
to offer up our prayers, an^ praises to him, through Jesus Christ. Our heart^
being molded in this frame, we pray by the Spirit; use we words, or not, the
same, or di^ferent expressions. Nay, it will appear, w^ are carnal, when we
need to have our devotion tickled, and provoked with new words.


N. Now, I clearly see the rottenness of your heart, and your superstitious
cold formality.


C. This is great arrogance for you thus to judge of things ye understand not.
Consider then, the Will is the supreme power of the Soul, and the fancy is a
lower faculty; the true and spiritual devotion therefore, must be that which
lies in the Will, and not in the Fancy: now, the varying of one thing into
several shapes, is only a gratifying of Fancy: and all the devotion can be
raised by such Chimes, is only sensible, whereas one of a deep and steadfast
spirit, is equally affected with a thing, though still in the same dress. Since
then, for instance, our petition for pardon of sin, is fully comprised in this,
have mercy upon me, O God, does it not show, that the thing, and not the words,
affect him, who with the newness of affection, can make that prayer, though an
hundred times repeated, at every return, new? whereas he must have a lower
mind, who needs a new phrase to renew his servour. And thus you see, it
expresses a more spiritual temper, to be able to worship God in simple and
constant forms.


N. I never thought to have heard the Liturgy-Worship called spiritual, and the
conceived one, carnal. You that are Scholars make any thing of any thing with
your Logic, but you will never make me think but our Ministers prayed by the
Spirit.


C. It needs but a very little knowledge of our selves, and none of Logic, to
make you comprehend this: for, do you think, the heating of the fancy cannot
make wicked men pray without the Spirit, as to appearance very spiritually?
Finally, words, and all the heat begot by words, gesture, voice, or phrases, or
the like, are but a false fire in the natural powers of the Soul, which may
well heat the brain, draw forth tears, seem to wring the heart; and all this,
is but a sensible fervor, which (as the temper raised by music) amounts to
nothing, but to a present tickling; whereas the true devotion of the heart, is,
an inward, still, humbling and melting thing, and so equable, that it is above
these frisking fits of the fancy. And it is certain, to pray by the Spirit,
must be the immediate work of the Spirit of Grace: Since then we see, that the
praying in words depends most upon Memory, Fancy, Eloquence, Confidence and
Custom; he that abounds in these, is like to excel in it; whereas one,
defective in all these, so that he cannot pray in a variety of words, yet may
understand interior prayer and spiritual converse with God, better than any
other.


N. This is new doctrine to me. And I cannot understand nor believe it.


C. Consider then, that the sublimest way of prayer, is in the simplest acts:
such as these; thou art my God, and I am thine. And in such breathings, a
devout mind will persist long, with great sweetness: and in this, God has
strangely shapt Religion, so that the highest strain of it, is, what the
simplest mind can most easily reach. Nay, perhaps multiplicity does lead out
the mind from pure and still devotion. And thus extemporary prayer, cannot be
called praying by the Spirit, except by spirit you understand the animal or
natural spirits: for, if it be by the Spirit, it must be infallible, since all
that is dictated by the Spirit of God is so: yet your people do not assert
their prayers as such. Further, let one with a shorthand, follow that man's
prayer, who you say prays by the Spirit; then, may not that prayer be read and
used over again? or, is the Spirit in the prayer so volatile, that it evaporats
in the saying, and the prayer becomes carnal when it is repeated? Finally, if
praying by the Spirit, be a praying in new words, then only he that conceives
the prayer, prays by the Spirit: since they who hear and join with him, are
tied to his words.


N. The words were dictated by the Spirit to him that conceives them.


C. Then to the people it is not necessary, the words be new: since to them it
is all one, if it were once dictated by the Spirit. But why do you not believe
the prayer composed by the Church, to be of the Spirits dictating, as well as
that of your Ministers? And, since the people can join and pray by the Spirit,
though the words be not of their framing; why may not the Minister pray in the
Spirit, though he use words framed by others? All this shows how weak and ill
grounded a notion, that of praying by the Spirit, in the sense you understand
it, is. And it clearly appears, that the dress of the prayer in words, and the
life begot by them, is but sensible and low.


N. But does not the Spirit help our infirmities, and teach us to pray?


C. If you consider the words aright, they speak out a thing very far different
from what you would draw from them. The Spirit teaches us to pray, for what we
ought, that is the matter of our prayers; and as we ought, that is the manner,
to wit, the temper of our hearts. For, that words are not meant, appears from
what follows, and makes intercession for us with groannings that cannot be
uttered: or literally, which cannot be worded.


N. But though the renewing of words were a lower way of devotion; yet, we in
this inbodied state, need to have our souls stirred up by the commotion of our
fancies.


C. Then at least, this must convince you, that such a way of praying, is not
so sublime, and therefore ought not to be called praying by the Spirit. And you
must acknowledge, such as can worship God devoutly in a set Form, to be of a
higher size: as being above these gratifications of nature and fancy. I will
next convince you of the evil of extemporary forms. In such then, I must long
exercise my attention to consider what he who prays, intends; that I may
judge, whether I can join with him or not: Now this strangely draws out the
mind from devotion: for, two powers of the Soul cannot be vigourously acted at
one time. The attention therefore must put great stops to the progress of the
devotion: and the mind being so prone to wander in Worship; this opens a wide
door to it. But he who knows already what the prayer is, runs along in his
devotion, without anxiety, or wavering. Hence I have heard devout men say, they
were ever much troubled, while they joined in extemporary Worship, to keep
their mind from distraction; which they found wholly remedied, when they were
where God was worshipped in set Forms.


N. What sort of devout men could these be? sure they knew not what devotion
meant.


C. This is like all weak people, to censure what is above them, and they do
not understand. But judge whether it be fit, I blindly join with one in the
worship of God, when I know not how he is to manage it: and you cannot deny,
some may pray things you dare not join in. Shall I not trust a man in any
matter, without understanding how he will discharge it? only in my devotions to
God I will blindly trust so great a concernment, to one who says he does not
know how he will manage it himself. It is not enough to say, you join not in
these things to which you cannot say Amen; for, at least to others you seem so
to do. And this will keep you still in some anxiety, when in your heart you may
say Amen, and when not: and indeed this way of praying, was the best could have
been devised, for spreading of error, or sedition: for Ministers prayed over
their Sermons; so that what in the discouse seemed the words of man, in the
prayer was called the dictate of the Spirit. And this was an excellent device,
to make all go down, had it been of the worst stuff.


N. All things may be abused, but by your own rule, this should not strike
against their use.


C. Things of themselves good, falling into abuse, ought not for that to be
taken away; except the abuse be greater than the goodness of the thing: but, if
a thing, not of it self good, be grossly abused, then there is ground to change
the use of it. Now, since we speak of abuses, I might run out in a long career,
and tell of the redious length, the scurrilous expressions, the involved
periods, the petulant and wanton affectations, and other great abuses in
extemporary prayer: with which, no doubt, you your self has been often much
troubled; but I bear that tender respect to every thing that has any relation
to God's service, that I love not so to scoff at any thing looks that way: But
you know these are sad truths. Whether then, Is it not necessary to redress
these abuses by a regular form?


N. You know we had a Directory of the things we should pray for.


C. And why may not you have a Directory for words, as well as things? since
the Spirit rather helps in things than in words. But it was clear you brought
up that Directory merely to cozen the world; which otherwise might have been
startled, to have seen you without all form, or rule for Worship: for, even
your Leaders quickly wearied of it, and regarded it not. And one thing clearly
followed, that the Preaching was the great matter of the Worship: all the
Prayers and Psalms relating to it. But the constant acts, wherein the Church
should adore God, were thought too homely. To conclude, the least evil of
extemporary forms, is, that a Minister is ready to pour out his soul to God, in
such devotions as are then most in his own spirit: Suppose he be mourning for
sin, under affliction, rejoicing in God, or the like; he is apt to pray in
these strains. But these being his private exercises, are not fit for public
Worship, which, as it ought to be grave and solemn; so, it should be general
and comprehensive.


N. I see you are for set-forms: but what reason have you for them? Sure the
Apostles used them not.


C. You are not so sure as you imagine, for I cannot doubt but they used our
Saviors Prayer, he taught them; for whereas, at first, in his Sermon on the
Mount, he had given it as a pattern of Prayer, they afterward, as is clear by
the series of the Gospel, came and asked a form of him, as St. John had given
his Disciples: and then he does not say, as he formerly said, After this manner
pray, but when you pray, which clearly shows, he intended it as a practice,
as well as a pattern. Nay further, the Jews at that time had a Liturgy, and
their hours of Prayer, which our Savior never reproves, as a formal thing:
but, on the contrary, he takes his Prayer, word for word, out of it, as may be
seen, if you will read their Liturgy. And this shows how foolish that exception
against the Liturgy of England is, that some of its prayers are translated out
of the Roman Missall or Breviary. But though the Apostles and persons
immediately inspired, might pour out extemporary prayers, thence it will not
follow, that every one may assume the same liberty. Beside, you see by the
Worship of the Corinthians, they used Hymns of their composing, as well as
Prayers: Now I could never comprehend why you will allow the Spirit to be
restrained in praising, as to words, and not in praying, since both are duties
equally spiritual; nay, perhaps praising, is the most sublime of the two.


N. Because the Plalms are a collection of praises dictated by the Spirit of
God for Worship.


C. This is all you can say upon the matter, but never were more absurdities
crowded in less bounds. And first, it is clear, we may worship in the Spirit,
and yet be restrained as to words; since you acknowledge God has done it in
praising. Next, the Psalms are full of acts that are prayers, as well as
thanksgivings; why may we not use these for constant prayers, as well as the
other for constant praises? Nay, since we use to sing these prayers, why may we
not for instance use the 51. Psalm, in plain words, with a plain voice, as
prayer, as well as in hobling ryme, with a Tune? Sure you will find no
difference in this, since you cannot say we are bound to use the Psalms in
Meeter, or with Tunes: for nothing proves we ought to use them with vocal
Tunes, but will conclude as strongly for all David's Instruments. Besides, who
told you that all David's Psalms were to be constantly used in Worship? It is
clear, most of them was not intended for constant use: they relating to
particulars of David's History and Victories, which belongs not to us. And it
is hard to say, we ought to sing his imprecatory Psalms: As also, many things
are in the Psalms which we cannot sing, because we do not understand them: And
it is clear, we ought to praise God with our understandings; and not above
twenty of the Psalms were used by the Jews in Worship. To conclude, why may not
the Christian Church compose new Hymns, as they of Corinth did? for which they
are approven by St. Paul. And this is the more necessary, because from David's
Psalms, we are not furnished with such full and clear Hymns, upon the great
Mysteries of the Christian Belief, as were needful. And what kind of reasons
can you have, who plead so much for a liberty in Prayer, and yet allow none in
making of Hymns? Why then do not ye use the Glory to the Father?


N. Because it is not in the Scripture, and is but a device of men.


C. Who would not be sick with such pitiful folly? Show me a reason why you may
make prayers, and not praises? Beside, are not your Meeter Psalms a device of
men? And they recede from the Text, as I can trace it in an hundred places, as
much as the Doxology does from Scripture words. And you understand Music
little, if you do not know that the Psalms in Prose may be sung as well, and as
Musically, as they can be in Ryme. Besides, since the Mystery of the S.S.
Trinity, is not so clearly in the Old Testament, nor in any Psalm, why may not
the Church use an acknowledgement of it, in the end of their singing, as well
as in the end of prayer, is ordinarily said, To the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, be glory for ever and ever? Such childish weakness makes me sometimes
doubt whether your rational faculties be not troubled: since what difference
can you pretend betwixt singing and saying? But I will return to Prayer.
Consider next, how Hosea the Prophet prescribes a form, when he says, take
with you words, and say, etc. Our Savior also prayed thrice, and though the
third time was more fervently, yet it was in the same words: which shows, that
fervor consists not in a varying of the phrase Next, it is clear, that in
the Church they used forms very early; since in the Council of Laodicea, it was
decreed, that the same Liturgy of Prayer should be used morning and evening.
It^ is true, there was not an universal Liturgy then agreed to, but Bishops had
their several Liturgies: So we have the Liturgies of St. Basile* St.
Chrysostom, and St. Ambrose; not to mention those of St. James, and St. Mark.
But never were extemporary heats used in the Church: and all the Reformed
Churches have their Liturgies; so we had ours at our first Reformation.


N. But we are a purer Church than any of them: and therefore we are not to
learn of them.


C. I know you were made believe, that all the world were wondering at you, but
this was a cheat upon you, like that of your alleged Prophetess; for, I can
assure you, there was no such thing true. One thing is strangely
inconsequential amongst you, you will not pray in a Liturgy, and yet you
always bless the people in a set form. Do you think prayer for a blessing, is
not a prayer? Or do you think, the spirit is not stinted when the form is
short, but only when it is long? Sure these things show you are not governed by
reason.


N. What then conclude you from all this; is it that the English Liturgy be
brought in?


C. It is, that you consider better how you ought to worship God. As for the
English Liturgy, I do not say any thing is absolutely perfect, but God; yet
till I see a better Liturgy compiled, which I never hitherto did, pardon me to
think it an excellent rule for Worship, although your deep, but groundless
prejudices against it, have rendered you so incapable of receiving good by it,
that such is your Sovereign's Princely tenderness, and your Superiors discreet
prudence, that they do not obtrude on you while you are but babes this stronger
food, but are willing to let you be doing with your milk.


N. This is easy way for men to read their Prayers off their Books; God keep
us long from it.


C. Truly, if by easiness, you mean what is pleasant to a man, it is far from
it; for certainly the natural man would be much better pleased, to be running
out with his own conceptions, and to have all the Worship depending upon his
lips this is indeed to be Rabbi. But to use the form of the Church is a more
simple, and a more humble way of Worship.


N. I begin to think you can have no piety, who are so in love with that dead
and dull Worship.


C. Would to God you and I had more of it than we have: but it is perhaps your
stupidity, that makes you dead and dull in it. And I know godly people, who
protest, they never in their lives worshipped God with more pure and simple
devotion, than when they joined in the English Liturgy-worship: therefore in
such matters speak more modestly.


N. But what vain repetitions are in the Liturgy? how often redouble they, Lord
have mercy upon us?


C. I have not yet asserted, that it is in all things perfect; but truly, I can
think that no fault, except you will also quarrel with the Psalms, particularly
with the 136. in which is repeated 26. times, for his mercy endures for ever,
it being in every verse. But in the true sense of vain repetitions, I fear
there is ground to say, many of ^our prayers may be censured for them.


N. But what a confusion is it, that all say some of the prayers together, and
use Amen?


C. It seems you have read the Scripture well, else you would have found, Acts
4. how a whole company there, lifted up their voice to God with one accord, and
said, etc. And St. Paul plainly intimates that there was a custom of saying
Amen, at the giving of thanks. Why then do you not in this follow the express
Scripture-rule? And what imaginable ground is there that the people shall all
with their voice join in the Psalms, and not also in the Prayers?


N. Well, I see you are zealous for that Service Book, but should you speak
till to morrow, you should never persuade me to join in it: but are you as keen
for the Ceremonies?


C. I verily believe, your prejudice against it, though ill grounded, yet is so
deep, that no reason will overthrow it: but perhaps, if you saw that worship
gravely managed, you should be more reconciled to it. As for the Ceremonies, I
will meddle with none, but such as were commanded here, well known by the name
of the five Articles of Perth. And for these, if you can hear and understand
reason, I doubt not to convince ^ou, they were both lawful, and most of them
^oth useful and necessary. I begin with confirmation.


N. Well, is not this a Popish Sacrament which you would bring into the Church?


C. I confess, if it had been introduced as a Sacrament, you had reason to
except against it but you know no such thing was ascribed to it, and it was
only designed for a solemn renovation of the Baptismal Vow. Now since Children
are baptized, and so in Baptism do not engage for themselves; can any thing be
more rational, than that when they come to the years of discretion, they do it
themselves? And this Rite wa^ very ancient in the Church, and with great show
of reason, the laying on of hands mentioned wit^ Baptisms, Heb. 6. was
expounded of it: and yo^ know most Reformers were for it.


N. But why must it be done only by a Bishop* as if it were beyond Baptism?


C. That was only to conciliat the more veneration for it, by making it the
more solemn and therefore it has been generally appropriated to the Bishop.
Yet I shall not contend about that, since St. Ambrose, or rather Hilary says
that in Egypt, the Presbyters in the Bishop's absence did confirm. And St.
Ierom says, that ^ Bishop did nothing, except the Ordination, which a
Presbyter did not likewise. The next Articl^ was private Baptism.


N. This was another piece of Popery, to mak^ the Sacraments necessary to
Salvation.


C. It is rather gross Superstition, to confir^ the Sacramental actions to the
walls of a Church for it is the assembly of the faithful that makes ^ Church.
Our Savior said, Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, I will
be in the midst of them. As for the necessity of the Sacraments, none calls
them simply necessary to Salvation; but since they were commanded, they ought
to be used, unless some more cogent reason stop the use of them, than is the
want of a dedicated House. And who should expect, that they who are so much
against reverence to Sacred Houses, should likewise be against private
Sacraments? As for Baptism, what a cruel thing is it, to oblidge Children;
especially when they are tender, to be brought, perhaps in the coldest season,
many miles, rather than go and Baptize at their Houses? this looks liker
Heathenish barbarity, than the Christian tenderness. And for Communion, why
should not sick persons receive on deathbed, when all the reasons of receiving
are most strong? Their faith and love needs then to be most quickened; Never is
the death of Christ more to be remembered, than when they are to pass through
the valley and shadow of death; and never is it more fit, that they declare
their Communion with the Church, and their love to the Brethren, than when they
are entering upon their last pangs: And it is well known how early a practice
this was in the Church of God. Justin Martyr tells, that they sent of the
Eucharist to them that were absent: and by the famous Story of Serapion, about
the 200. year, it is apparent how necessary the Christians then thought it was
to be guarded with this holy Viaticum. Private Sacraments then are not proposed
as necessary, but as highly expedient: which I think I have made appear they
are.


N. But what can you say for kneeling in receiving? sure this looks like
Superstition and Idolatry.


C. I confess this is the Article of them all, I have the least fondness on:
but it is great uncharitableness to call it Idolatry, when such as do so,
declare they neither believe Christ to be corporally present, nor do they
intend any Worship to the Bread and Wine, but direct their worship to God and
Christ, for that death which is therein showed forth.


N. But why do not you sit? since our Savior did institute this rite in the
Table Gesture?


C. Since you do not exactly follow Christ, you ought not to stand at this:
none therefore should allege this, but such as Communicate leaning, and after
supper, and in an upper Room. And though the Passover was ordained to be eaten
by the Jews standing with their loins girt, and their shoes on their feet, yet
without any written warrant, they changed that posture into the ordinary eating
posture, and did eat the Passover leaning, in which our Savior conformed to
them. And if the Jews, against an expresse^ precept, without any countermand,
may chang^ the posture; sure the Christians who are less restrained as to
outward, may change the gesture^ especially there being no command for it: and
but a lame example, since our Savior did not sit, but lean. And perhaps more
veneration is due to that action, now that our Savior is exalted, than he
could have allowed of in his humiliation.


N. What can you say for holy days? can any man make days holy?


C. If by holy days you mean, portions of time so sacred, that in these days,
our services are more acceptable to God than on other days; or that of their
own nature they are holy, so that of it self it is a sin not to be particularly
devout on these days, you have reason to say, none can make a day holy. And
this was never asserted. But it is another thing to keep peculiar days of
thanksgiving, for the great and signal mercies of the Gospel Dispensation. I
confess I am so dull, as not to be able to apprehend what evil can be in such
customs. And it is undoubted, that in all ages and places of the Church,
Christians have had a peculiar veneration for these Days. St. Paul says of
the legal holy Days, he that regards a day, to the Lord he does regard it;
And, if Moses his Feasts might have been kept holy to the Lord, much more may
these be which the Church has instituted. Beside, you know the observation of
Easter and Pentecost, are according to clear History derived from Apostolical
practices. And it appears, St. Paul hasted to be at Jerusalem to keep the feast
of Pentecost there. And, from all this I may assume, that your dislike of these
Festivals and the other Articles of Perth, is ill grounded.


DIALOGUE VI.
N. I See we have no reason to hope for any good from you, who are so fierce
against u^* ^u^ God be thanked, an ill-willed Cow has fro^^ ^orns.


C. If by fierceness you mean a desire to see you ^uined and destroyed, you
mistake me quite; since there is none living, mo^^ a verse from fierce and
violent ^ourses than my self. I love all Christians, who live according to the
rules of the Gospel* And I pity such as I judge mistaken, knowing how subject I
am to error my self. I quarrel with no man for his opinion in these matters*
which are, as the (...) incomp^rable King in his divine work call^ them, But
the Ski^^ and Suburbs of Religion. And as all the thoughts of that divine Book
bew^ay an augustnesse, which spe^ks the Author a King indeed* so his mode^a^ion
in these matters looks like the paternal clemency which becomes the Father of a
Country; he then advises his Son, our Gracious Sovereign, thus, Beware of
exasperating any Factio^s, by the crossnesse and asperity of some men^
passions, humors, or private opinions, employed by you, grounded only upon the
differences in lesse^ matters, which are but the Ski^s and Suburb^ of Religion:
wherein a charitable connivance^ and Christian-^oller^tion often dissipa^^
their strength, wh^^ ^ougher opposition fortifies; and puts the despised and
oppressed party into such combinations, as may most enable them to get a full
revenge on those they count their persecutors, who are commonly assisted by
that Vulgar commiseration which attends all that are said to suffer under the
notion of Religion. And a little after, Take heed, that outward circumstances
and formalities of Religion, devour not all, or the best encouragements of
Learning, Industry, and Piety. Thus that Great and glorious Prince.


N. By this it seems you are a Latitudinarian, and I have heard much ill of
these new sort of people.


C. Truly I own no name, but that of Jesus Christ, in which I was baptized; and
these are invidious Arts, to coin names of parties, and to affix them on such
as disown them; I am, and desire to be a sincere Christian, but of no party nor
Sect. But if by latitude, you mean charity, truly I must tell you, I glory in
it, which is no newer way, than the new commandment which our Savior gave to
his Disciples, to love one another, as he loved them.


N. I confess they say you live very good lives, but you have dangerous and
loose principles.


C. Are you not strange people, who fasten such Characters on men whose
conversations you cannot disprove; for, what can you call an Atheist, but a man
of dangerous and loose principles? these are uncharitable aspersions, as if not
to be so hidebound and starcht on every trifle as you are, were to be loose and
dangerous men.


N. Some say you are strong witted people, and so they suspect you of Atheism.


C. It seems they are weak witted people who talk so; since though some foolish
pretenders to wit, are Atheists, yet no sort of men discover their folly, as
well as wickedness, so much as these do. And that cursed Pest is hated by none
more than us, who perhaps can give better and more convincing accounts of these
principles of Religion, that there is a God, a life to come, and that the
Scriptures are the word of God, than these who so charge us. But what
unchristian work is it, thus to disgrace us?


N. Many of you are suspect of Socinianism, for you all magnify reason, and
are often telling how rational a thing Christian Religion is, which they also
do.


C. Indeed if to call Religion a rational worship, or reasonable service make a
Socinian, w^ are such, and so was St. Paul: but as for the horrid errors of
Socinus his School, touching the Trinity, Christ's satisfaction, Gods
prescience, and^* these we condemn and Anathematize: and w^ judge it most
suitable to reason, that in these sublime Mysteries, Divine Revelations should
b^ our rule. But notwithstanding of this, we wi^^ be very loath to deny that
Christian Religion both in its Articles of Belief, and Precepts ^ Practice, is
highly congruous to the dictates ^ right reason: And we judge to propose them
s^ shall be a convincing way to commend them all clear-witted men. And
certainly, God having created man rational, the highest accomplishment of his
nature, which is Religion, must not be contrary, but suitable to his supreme
faculty.


N. It seems you are sound here, but I fear you Latitudinarians are Papists, at
least Cassandrians.


C. You are resolved to charge us with one heinous thing or another, and when
one fails you, you catch hold on another. We are far from that height of
uncharitableness which some of you own, of damning all Papists; since they
hold the foundation Jesus Christ, though they build upon it wood, hay and
stubble: neither will we stiffly say, that all things controverted betwixt the
reformed Churches and them, are matters of Salvation; yet in the greater
controversies with them, we condemn them: such as are the Popes supremacy, the
Churches infallibility, the Corporal presence, the worshipping Images, Saints,
Angels, Purgatory, prayer for the Dead, withholding the Chalice, worshipping in
an unknown tongue; these with many more we disprove and dislike as much, and
perhaps on clearer grounds than you do. Yet we are such lovers of the unity of
the Catholic Church, that we much honor and esteem all who have studied to
bring things to a temper, though they have not come up to the desired length.


N. But how comes it, that amongst all the Articles of Popery, you never reckon
the merits of good works, nor Justification by them; since these are their
chiefest errors?


C. I have not given a full enumeration of all that is wrong in that Church;
but, for good works, though many of them, particularly the J^suits, have
written very harshly in that matters; and before the Reformation, generally all
the Preachers did intollerably extol, not so much morally good works, as the
superstitious and tyrannical injunctions of the Stepdame of Rome; yet now it is
clear, the more sober of them expound Merits, in a sense which no Protestant
can disown, to wit, that they are actions so acceptable to God, that he who is
faithful in his promises, will certainly reward them. Though I have no
fondness on the term Merit, which way soever expounded, it still sounds
somewhat too high for a creature in reference to his Creator, much more
heartily do I reject the term Condign.


N. What ^ay you of Justification by faith only? sure this is a fundamental
matter.


C. There is nothing in Scripture more clearly set down than the Doctrine of
Justification; but as it is generally explained, there is nothing more nice or
subtle: Justification and condemnation are two opposite legal terms, relating
to the Judgment shall be given out at the last day; for though we are said to
be now justified, as the unbelieving are said to be condemned already, this is
only that we are now in the state of such as shall be solemnly justified or
condemned. Now at ^he great Day we must give (...) ^^ount of our actions, and
we must be judged accordingly* but since all must be condemned, if God enter in
Judgment with them, therefore God gave his Son to the death for us, that
thereby we might obtain* Salvation; and all Judgment is by the ^^ther
committed to the Son: And Jesus Christ has proposed ^ife through his death to
as many (...) receive his Gospel, and live according* ^o it. And as that which
gives us ^^title to the ^^vour of God, is the blood of Christ, so that which
gives us an interest in his death, is faith, with ^ life conform to the rules
of his Gospel, and the ^oo^ of this new life, is a faith, which worke^h by
love, purifyeth the heart, and! overcom^^^ the World; and therefore
Justification is ascribed ^o^ it in Scripture. Now, judge but a little what
(...) is to have a righ^ apprehension of things* si^^e ^ have in a few plain
words told you that which with much nice^y swells amongst you to Volume^* And
as this ascribes all to Christ, through^ whom it is that our sins are pardoned,
our services ^^cepted, and grace and glory conveyed to us^* so also the
necessity of a holy life is clearly declared* as being that whereupon we shall
be solemnity judged, justified and absolved at the last day.


N. I think this is very clear, but why do not you use the terms of the
Protestant^ Church? this looks like a humor of singularity amongst you, that
you will not speak like other men.


C. Whether do you think it fitter in the Mysteries of ^aith to keep close to
^^rms of Scripture or not? since these, as they are the truest, so are the
fittest and most expressive: but if we will speak in the language of men, I
think the style of the Catholic Church is to be chosen, rather than Modern and
Scholastical expressions, which are too too horridly abused, as well by
Antinomians, as by carnal Christians, who love well to hear of Salvation by the
death of Christ, provided they be bound to do nothing themselves, that they may
be saved.


N. You have sufficiently vindicated your self of Popery, but are you not
Arminians?


C. Truly I believe both you and I may be good Christians, and not understand a
word of these controversies. And certainly the great itch of multiplying and
canvassing subtle questions in matters of Religion, has proven one of the
chief pests of the Church; it is good to be sober-minded. As for Gods
Sovereignty in all things, but more especially in the conversion of souls, and
the gracious influence of his Spirit, I do firmly believe it: I as firmly
believe, that God is infinitely good and holy, and think I may well take his own
Oath for it, that he takes no pleasure in the death of sinners: But how to
reconcile these his Attributes, I confess is beyond my capacity. God is an
unfathomable Abyss, and imperscrutable to any but himself: therefore as I do
not doubt there are Three persons in one God, though I cannot reconcile that to
Aristotle's Logic; so I believe, God is Sovereign and absolute, as well as holy
and just, though I cannot answer all objections. In a word, let this whole
matter be thus transacted, and no article of faith is violated; Let none of our
good be ascribed to our selves, and none of our evil be imputed to God.


N. I see if you have any errors, you have so much Legerdemain, that you are
not easily discovered. But, our Ministers are more jealous of some of this new
way of the latitude, than of any body; for, often in our Conventicles they bid
us beware of Wolves in sheeps clothing: and this is meant of you.


C. Judge of the tree by its fruits, said our Savior; Do not therefore upon
jealousies and misrepresentations pass judgments; for, who art thou that
judge another man's servant? But I am now weary with wrangling, it being a
thing much against my Genius; I will therefore leave these dry and arid
matters, and talk a little with you on better Subjects.


N. I will hear you in these with all my heart; for though you have said many
things that do much displease me, yet as uncharitable as you think me, I am
full of kindness for you; and I love to hear good spoken by any body: therefore
we will dispute no more.


C. Ah, how strangely is the world mistaken in matters of Religion! Some
placing it wholly in debates, others in external forms; others in some private
devotions, and others in a regulation of the outward man; but true Religion is
power and life, and far above all these shadows. The Kingdom of God is not meat
and drink, but righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; it does not
level at externals only, but secretly insinuats it self into the Soul; whereas
a divine seed it propagates, diffusing its virtue through the whole man: In a
word, Religion was given of God to transform a man into the Divine likeness,
and to a real participation of the Divine Nature.


N. What then is the great scope and design of Christian Religion?


C. God's method in clearing up this day of Salvation was indeed wonderful:
many ages after the Creation, the world was overspread with darkness, and
wrapped up in blind Idolatry, only as the (...) reflection of the Moon, with
the twinklings of a few Stars, do give some radiance in the furthest absence of
the Sun, so these darkest ages had still some of the remains of Natures light;
and the holy Patriarchs were burning and ^hi^ing lights: but darkness still
covered the face of the earth. At length there was a dawning ^p^^ed by Moses,
whose greatest splendour was c^ast upon it, by the approaching Sun, the
Messia^s: Indeed the old dispensation was a great ^idd^ for all was managed
then with great ^errour, po^p and state: their call out of Egypt, and the
pro^ulging of the Law were dreadfu^, their Temple, Worship and Ceremonies were
Majesti^k and Solemn; but by none of these the doer could be made perfect: At
length came the Sun of Righteousness, as a light to lighten the Gentiles, and
the glory of his people Israel, and brought to light life and mortality through
his Gospel; the great designs whereof are, to beget in a man such apprehensions
of the Divine Majesty as might both possess him with the holy reveren^^ becomes
his great Name, and inspire him with a love and delight in him, that so man
might be brought to a more free converse with God, and might be swallowed up in
divine contemplations. The next thing in the Gospel, is to propose to us that
stupendous contrivance of the redemption of the World through Jesus Christ,
that we may adore him as the author and finisher of our faith. Beside, the
Gospel came to mould us into such a lively conformity to Jesus Christ, that we
may imitate him in all things, chiefly in his holiness, meekness, and humility:
And further, the Gospel was designed as a cement and bond of perfection, to
unite us all more clossly, even beyond the natural ties, with those of
brotherly-kindness and charity.


N. What then are the methods to be used by one that would lead a spiritual
life?


C. This ought to be the great design of our lives; for, wherein shall it avail
us, if we shall gain the whole world, and lose our own souls? The way then to
purify our souls, is, not barely to affect a little virtue, or morality, but to
apply our minds to God, that by frequent and deep contemplations of his glory,
his excellent perfections may be derived into our souls. Be therefore much in
stillness and abstraction of mind, that you may become of a thinking temper:
give up with passions, designs, and humors, and use much inward recollection;
this at first will prove ^inful to you, but when once you have brought your
mind into a serene and not easily agitated temper, you shall after that enjoy
great quiet in divine converse.


N. What mean you by this converse with God?


C. You shall feel such a belief and sense of the divine perfections in your
soul, as shall make the thoughts of God familiar and easy to you: your
converse with him shall not only consist in prayers, and acts of worship, but
you shall be often admiring him in his Attributes of Power, Wisdom, and
Goodness, and chiefly his Love to you in Christ; which sense of God shall be as
a fountain of living waters, ever jetting up divine thoughts into your mind:
And these will not be crabbed, curious, or subtle speculations, but humble
adorations, and divine embraces, in such acts, as, Thou art my God, my good
God, I am thine, I will love thee above all things, and none but thee; thou art
my joy and only delight. Thus the more you converse with God, your acts will
grow the simpler and the purer: it will not only be at some returns, morning or
evening, or in public Worship, that such thoughts will stir in you; but your
heart will be full of them, and swiming in them, and they will rise natively in
you. Hence will gush in upon your soul much inward sweetness of mind; you will
be ever well pleased, because you will see God in all things, and you will see
all he does is good; you will therefore not only practice submission, but
complacency and delight in all his ways; you will also rejoice in the Divine
Attributes, and glory in your interest in Heaven. Oh, how sweet will your hours
then grow to you! But debates and opinions and every thing that leads out the
mind from that inward stillness, will become sapless to you.


N. Wherein consists that sweetness you say is to be found in divine converse?


C. In the stillness wherewith the mind is overflowed, the clearness in the
judgment, the stedfastness of the will, and calmness of the passions; and then
indeed a man lives in the perfection of his nature. But, beside these, there
are some divine touches, wherein the soul is carried, as it were, out of her
self, into most sublime heights, which cannot be uttered. But as for the
affections of the sensible part, these may be very high in an impure mind; for
the natural devotion, especially if the person be Melancholic, a woman, or
histerical, will mount very high, but this devotion does not humble nor purify
the mind. Now, persons so divinly acted, are nothing in their own eyes, and
willing to be nothing in the account of all the world, and all the world is
nothing to them, their God is their all: they resign all to him, and are
willing he dispose of them, and every thing else, as seems good in his eyes; so
they are not sollicitous, nor disturbed, however squares go in the world.
Finally, by the Elevation of this spiritual life, they are made to think not
only placidly and serenly of death, but to long for it, accounting that the
worst office death can do them, is to free them of a vile body, and to give
them entrance into their heavenly Kingdom, this is the union of the Soul to
God.


N. But how must we enter into that state of divine union?


C. Truly the gate is low, and the passage strait, we must be dispossessed of
self-love, and of all intense affections to created objects; we must ^now and
abhor our bygone escapes, we must by the humble applications of our souls to
Jesus Christ, press in by violence into this heavenly state* to which the
passage is so narrow, that we must be stripped of all the bulksome farthingales
and trains of vanity ere we can enter: but when we shall be divested of these,
the path of life will prove easy. Oh! how shall these pangs be recompensed,
when we have broke through, and got into the blessed shades of the Garden of
God? And, how infinitely more shall they be swallowed up, when getting beyond
the dark regions of Mortality, we shall arrive at the uncreated light, which
without a cloud or vail, shines above? Then our glorified bodies, with our no
less purified Souls, being made like unto Angels, yea, unto a greater than
Angels, shall be incessantly employed in exercises, services and adorations, so
far elevated beyond, and disproportioned to our highest a^chievements and
enjoyments here, that in this imperfect state we cannot so much as frame
suitable apprehensions of that unconceived Glory! Now we who have the
possession of so great a joy, and the hope of a greater blesse^nesse proposed
to us, have we not all reason vigorously to set about the duties of a Christian
life, not intangling our selves with thorny and harsh debates, which will but
retard our progress to sublimer states, and higher and undisturbed Regions?


N. Is this all then that is required to accomplish a Christian?


C. This is but the Basis and roo^ of a Christian life, which is never barren
nor unfruitful: he then whose heart is thus fixed on God, his life and actions
quickly declare that he has not only the form but the power of Godliness in
him: he lives above the world, in such a contempt of it, as discovers he has
greater riches and treasures in his design, than these a^e; he hates the base
and impure pollutions that abound in the world through lust, and underva^^^eth
even the lawful pleasures and enjoyments off sense: he sets no value on things
in themselves, riches and poverty, shame and contemp^a^e equally welcome to
him, the one does not sink him, nor can the other swell him: his actions and
discourses have that candor, ingenuity and goodness in them, as convince all,
that the fear of God is before his eyes. Finally, he li^es in the world, as out
of the world, and above the world* His humility also testifies, that in
nothing the does, he seeks or regards himself; he does not hang out his piety
nor good actions to public view, but wraps them up in unaffected self-denial.
He courts not applause, nor is he fretted with contempt, but is willing that
none but God, for whom he does all, know his actions, and with a virginal
modesty shuns and rejects the praises which are undesired, as well as
undeserved: he flies the crowds and public scenes, that in corners he may find
that which by venting in a throng, is often evaporat and lost. And as he does
not cowardly stoop to mean things, so he does not stubbornly refuse the poorest
office God calls him to: he peaceably obeys the public Father of his
Country, and the Ghostly Fathers of his Soul: he undervalueth none but
himself, neither are his ears pained with applauses given to others, nor
itching for them to himself. His charity also appears in his readiness to do
good to all men, looking on that as one of the greatest conformities to the
Divine Nature: He relieveth the poor with his Goods, the perplexed with his
Advice, the oppressed with his Assistance, the disconsolat with his Sympathy;
and all with his Prayers. He judges rashly of none, he does not easily
believe, but quickly pardons an injury: he is not soon irritated, but readily
pacified: he confineth not his charity to a party, but extends it to all
Christians. This is a rude Character, containing some of the fairer Lines of a
Christian-life; by which you may see wherein Christian Religion consists, and
how far even those who pretend most loudly to it, recede from it.


N. What say you of his Devotions, both private and public?


C. In his secret retirements he often revieweth and examineth his actions,
that discovering what has been defective and amiss in him, he may be humbled
for it, and quickened to new vigor and alacrity in Divine Services: he begs
the divine love through Jesus Christ, by whom he makes all his addresses to the
Throne of Grace; he offers up himself to God by pure and free resignations,
that he may dispose of him as pleases him; he imploreth the Divine Grace, and
assistance for mortifying all sins, overcoming all temptations, and advancing
in every thing that is acceptable and well-pleasing to God: he also offers up
his praises to God for all his mercies, chiefly for that unvaluable one of the
Redemption of the world through Jesus Christ: he prays also for the Catholic
Church, his King, Country, and Friends. This he performs not as an homage or
vassalage which he must do, but out of pure delight in God and Divine
exercises: neither does he rest on these, as all he owes God; but besides, he
orders all he does for his Glory, and is often bending his mind to an
application to God in all his ways: And this is his secret and inward
devotion. He worships God in public, that he may avowedly own his dependence
on him, and his union with his Church: he goes to the holy place, not out of
custom or formality, but that he may jointly with others, acknowledge and
adore his Maker and his Redeemer; and gives no^ only an external concurrence
with the Worship in Voice, Gesture, or Presence, but his hear^ says Amen to
his lips and profession.


N. I confess I find it much more pleasing and edifying to talk on these
heads, than on ou^ doubtful disputations; and therefore I will bi^ an endless
farewell to them.


C. I was to have desired that of you: for though my affection to you has at
present drawn from me a great deal of contentious discourse; yet I find no
pleasure in it; and therefore as I seldom in my thoughts remind^ these matters,
so here I put a point, and will never resume them again. Let us therefore
provoke one another to Charity and good Works^ We have a better exercise for
our tongues, wit^ them we are to bless God even the Father; le^ us not
therefore utter any thing with them that may seem to curse man, that was made
after the similitude of God.


N. Yet your pains are not wholly lost: for though I am not altogether changed
as to (...) Principles; yet you have brought me to a great temper in things
wherein I must confess I wa^ unmeasuredly furious: but I will henceforth study
to draw in my mind from every distraction, and more vigorously pursue the
great en^ of my Being.


C. If this be your temper, you and I cannot disagree, did our thoughts, as to
other things, differ never so widly: And I pray God keep you and me both in
this temper long, but now we must part for a while, it is like we may shortly
meet again, if not on earth, at least in heaven: So I bid you heartily adieu.


POSTSCRIPT.
THese Dialogues were the hasty product of some idle hours, wherein the Author
thought fit to gather in a few words, the matters which now creat us so much
trouble, and to represent the Arguments of both parties heartily; which he
hopes he has done. He protests he has no design to wrong either party or
person, but merely to propose these matters to others, in the same light
wherein they appear to himself: had his design been to disgrace persons or
ways, he would have done it at another rate; but he abhors such a thought.
If these papers grow public, and be of use to any, he desires no thanks as he
expects no rewards: and for the Censures of persons concerned, he will shroud
himself from these with the vail of one unconcerned.

FINIS.
A PINDARICK ODE Upon Contentions in matters of Religion, by a friend of the
Authors, and a zealous promoter of all designs for Peace and Love.
I.
SHall that which was designed to end our toils,
Increase our flames, and raise new broils;
And must we triumph in our Brethrens spoils?
Women are said by contraries to walk,
So now Religion which Heaven intends
To quiet minds, all hearts to quarrel bends;
And to contentious talk.
And as the feuds of Brethren hottest are,
(Where concords ought to be, there harshest proves the jarr)
So Nations Christened into unity,
And twisted in fraternal ties,
Yet do these Sacred bonds despise:
And the endearing names of Brethren all belly.
II.
Great were disorders which at Babel sprang,
Each did his Mothers Tongue forget;
Brother to Brother spoke a stranger Dialect,
And new coined words only the ear did wound.
In vain it was to speak, and all grew mutes,
And man seemed to descend to rank of bruits.
The Gospel came to heal this breach,
And Canaans hallowed style mankind did teach:
At first all seemed made of a piece;
One heart and soul them did inspire,
Free was the peaceful company from warlike ire,
When charity was all their fire.
The Heavenly dew still moistened the fleece.
While they sought only how to propagate their kind,
'Midst all their Hymns no discord could one find.
But when the wretched Arts of Humane Policy,
Mingled with primitive integrity,
They by unhallowed tools began to build
Their fabriques, and by Laws of State
Religion did adulterate.
Then did incensed Heavens against them rage,
And put an early period to the golden age:
All in disorder ravel'd out,
The Church grew a tumultuous rout.
And all with cloven Tongues did speak:
Fierce wrath prevailed, and Gospel force grew weak*
And all its harmony died in a groan:
Oh strange! even Paradise becomes a to^ride Zone.
III.
Jesus blessed names were not their only styles,
They left his Standart, and were ranged in files,
Under the Banners of dividing names,
And quenched in angry heats were divine flames,
Some quarel'd only about doubtful words,
But to decide the matter, used swords:
Others 'bout Logic niceties did contend,
Yet such poor stuff put to their love an end:
And while some plea'd the practice of small forms,
Did their unformal pleas occasion storms.
Wondrous Metamorphose!
St. James counts lust the source of War,
But now Religion proves the cause of jarre.
Inverted Chemistry!
Which turns the Gold to base allay.
Must Rome be damned as Antichrist,
Because it to unerring Chair pretends;
And forth as Oracles its dictates sends?
While each among us to that height raise their creast,
And do expect that all to them submit,
Conceiting that to error proof's their wit.
But once a Woman did usurp that Chair,
That stain wipe off could never any care:
Yet now against us that Sex conspires,
And to our Crown with insolence aspires.
Each Dame a Sybill grows, and does refuse
To stoop to wisest sort, and our just yoke abuse.
The names of factions are infused
In harmless infancy, which early thus abused,
Retains the venom it from breast derives,
All roads are block't by which the truth arrives,
Fond prejudice does so bemist,
Trepaning custom does so twist
Their minds to error, that it vain
And bootless labor proves them to regain.
IV.
Disputing is as Oil to raging flame;
They glory in their sufferings pompous name,
And by resisting do increase their fame.
All gentleness they think a cheat,
And dread the enemy most when he does treat.
God bless me, what disease is this,
Whose cure all Medicines do miss!
They Are wanton if we cordials use,
Sure, goodness they abuse;
Or if to abate the feverish heat,
Some noisome blood we would let out;
Then grows the madness of the frantic rout.
If fines as Medicines their bowels drain,
Then they aloud of grinding do complain.
This strange distemper does all skill defy*
Physicians hopes still falsify.
But as a joint which Gangrene does corrupt,
Must be cut off from the sound lump^
Better the body grow a stump,
Than by such members bankerrupt.
Yet often does this Hydra multiply
When cropped, one head to seven will fructify.
Or as a tree which with new force does spring,
When lopt by pruner is its over spreading wing;
So does this poisonous Weed still further spread,
And as the Camomine, grow the more it is tread.
The Cockle still with Wheat will blend,
Till winnowing flames to mixture put an end.
Good Grains with Tares may chance to be pulled up,
Delay their doom till brimfull be their cup.
Then chaffed justice shall the chaff devour,
And Angel-reapers bring the just to Heavens floor.
FINIS.
A continuation of the former Conference.
DIALOGUE VII.
C. I Am heartily glad of this opportunity of meeting with you again, and will
be more glad to find our last Conference producing the effect designed by it;
which was to beget in you a true sense of Religion, that you may walk worthy of
your high and holy calling; for, I can have no greater joy than to see you
walking in the truth.


N. I thank you for being so concerned in the welfare of my Soul: and, by the
grace of God, I shall make it my daily work to be perfecting holiness in his
fear: But, I must be on my guard when I converse with you; since you publish
our private discourses, which I do not take kindly; for, you take advantage
from my weakness, and, by running me down, make the whole party suffer.


C. The true reason why I consented to the publishing of our Conference (for I
heartily assure you, I did no more but give my consent to him, who, being
pleased with the written account of it, desired to make it public) was, since
I thought I had allayed a great deal of the heat I met with in you upon these
matters, I presumed it might produce the like good effect in others. If in any
thing I seem to take too great advantage against you, it is with reason:
neither is it an humor of drolling or insulting, that makes me sometimes a
little pleasant; since in all Dialogues you will find the transitions sweetened
with somewhat of that, even when the gravest matters are treated of.


N. Some charge you with Socinianism, others with Popery, others with
Arminianism, and others with Quakerism. I confess their grounds seemed to me,
very slender, but they say it is very clear, and tell their followers to shun
you as a pest.


C. God forgive their malice, I pray God it be not laid to their charge at the
last day, that they so falsely and injuriously reproach me. I know the Arts of
some well, they will tell their people that we are unsound and Heterodox, and
back their hard words with grave nods and wry faces; and the poor people, too
inured to implicit faith, give an undoubted credit to what they say: But do
they understand things, who charge a man with Socinianism, who believes that
Christ is the eternal Son of God, and hopes for salvation only through his
blood? and they are as well versed in Popery, who charge me with it; for, can
he be heretical in Justification, who ascribes all we receive in this life and
in that to come, to the love and grace of God through Jesus Christ? And you
know all that Calvin and his followers aim at in the matter of Arminius his
points, is, that all ou^ good be ascribed to God: how then can he be erroneous
in this matter, who asserts that? But as for Quakerism, the grounds on which
they tax me of that, are so ridiculous, that I am ashamed to name them; and, I
assure you I am so far from inclining to Quakers, that I look on that Sect, as
one of the subtillest devices yet broached for the overthrow of Christian
Religion. But, if that spirit be not the womb, from whence all these Sects and
errors have sprung amongst us, let all that look on, judge; none falling to
them in this Country but such as were formerly most violent in their way. And
though I am sure, they are far enough from being Quakers, yet their principles
have a natural tendency that way: whence, think you, have they sucked their
rejecting of all forms and order (under ^ pretense that the Spirit is not to be
prelimited) but from your notions against Liturgies and for extemporany heats?
Next, the liberty you take to meddle in matters too high for you, and judge of
every thing, without thinking you are bound to reverence either the present or
ancient Church, (I plead not for implicit faith) opens a wide door for their
pretensions to a liberty of the Spirit; which at once renounceth all modesty
and humility. Next, your humor of separation, begets that giddiness in people,
that, no wonder, they, being shaken from the unity of the Church, also stagger
through unbeleef. As also, many of you cherish in your followers a dejection of
mind too much, as if Religion, which gives a man a right to the purest joys,
should become a life of doubting, and this introduces a spirit of Melancholy,
which clearly makes way to that pretended Enthusiasm. And thus you may see who
are to be blamed for the progress that way makes amongst us, you having
prepared the people so to it. But still I assure you, though I cannot but see
the faults, too many amongst you are guilty of, I am far from hating or
despising you, God knows I pity and love you with all my heart.


N. But every one does not judge so favorably of you; in a word, you are
called ^ petulant profane and malicious person, and ^ scoffer at true piety;
under a pretense of it laboring to defame the Cause and work o^ God, which
shall have a sweet savor to al^ posterity, when your memory will rot: Yo^
pretend to moderation, but art the most immoderat of any: this is the vulgar
sense (...) that Book, and of its concealed Author, who, they add, does well
to conceal his name from such a work of darkness.


C. I hope you know my temper better, than to think these things will much move
me: I will learn to live through good report and ill report, and am so far from
being angry with those who thus traduce me, that if I knew how to do them a
good office I would infallibly do it. Yea, if my heart deceive me not, I could
die to do them service. I have no anger, God knows, at their persons nor
their ways, further than I think they are destructive of the unity of that
body, whereof Christ is the head: and consequently obstruct the advancement of
Religion. I always class them in two divisions, the one is, of such as are
indeed differing from us in their opinion, but withal are sober and modest,
not rash in their censures, nor bitter in their passions: and such I honor and
love, and doubt not but there are grave and pious persons of that persuasion,
whom I also honor the more, because of their first founder Calvin (take not
this as a jeer; for, I assure you, the first being ever Presbytry had, was in
Calvius brain.) But others, besides their opinion in the matter of
Church Government, are of four tempers, condemning such as differ from them,
judging all who are not as violent as themselves, placing Salvation in these
matters, and thus confining their charity within the narrow circle of their own
opinion: as for such, they get but their true name, when they are called
Fanatics, and though I will be loath to judge them as to the state of their
souls; yet, whatever good Christians they might prove in a Cell, or in a
Desert, I assure you, they are not shaped for Societies; their maxims being
inconsistent with peace, order and unity: And they are as unfit to govern, as
incapable of being governed; and, for these do not quarrel me, if I speak
severly of them: but remember what one of your own deservedly esteemed
Preachers says (it is like occasioned by the differences then, when they were
forced to repress the insolence of the protesting Party) on Job 17. verse 10.
Doct. 4. Albeit Godliness teach men modesty and sobriety, and to be tender of
the reputation of others; yet that does not hinder them to tell men, what they
are, when they are called to it in the defense of truth: and that they may give
a check to their proud conceit of themselves: These words are so clear and
comprehensive that they need no further explication, and serve as a complete
apology for any sharpness I might have used. I should indeed be very injurious
to the Presbyterian party, did I charge them with all the humors and follies
that are among you: the English Presbyterians are far beyond you in their
moderation, as is notour to all that know them, and may appear from Mr.
Baxter's Disputations on Church Government: yea, in the late treaty, all they
desired, was, to be conjoined with the Bishops in the exercise of Discipline,
which you refuse, though it be offered and pressed upon you. Next, before the
late disorders, all the Presbyterians in Scotland, did fit in the Courts for
Church Discipline, and why may you not as well do the like?


N. The odds is very great; for, then Presbyteries stood by the Legal
establishment; the Act for them being still in force, which was rescinded at
the restoration of Bishops, Anno 1662: so that the old foundation being razed,
they are no more Presbyteries.


C. You may remember what I said to you at our fourth meeting upon this head:
but one thing I must add, which will surprise you, it is truly very strange
how matters of fact are so confidently asserted, and so tamely believed,
without consideration: you give it out to every body, that the law for
Presbyteries, was in force till the year 1662. and this is in all your mouths,
and I confess, I never doubted the matter of fact to be true, till of ^ate I
was undeceived by a person of great honor, who show me the Act Parliament 21.
Jacob. chapter 1. where it is expressly said, annulling and rescinding the 114 Act
of his Majesty's Parliament, holden Anno 1592. and that is the Act which settled
Presbytery; and now, what can I think? God forbid I suspect this of
disingenuous forgery; and yet perhaps, if you catched us in such a trip, it
would be told us on our deafest ear; but it cannot be denied to be intolerable
ignorance and supinnesse, to take such a matter upon ^rust; and since you make
this the chief ground why you differ from your Predecessors in this matter, how
can you answer to God who have made a Schism from the Church, without
examining the grounds upon which you did it? but I hope now that you see upon
what sandy and slender foundations you have been building, you will consider
your way better hereafter, and return into union with us: for I am still
desirous and willing to hope well of you.


N. Truly you are in the wrong to many of them, for few of them are so bitter
against you as you seem to be against them: and I assure you they pray often
for you, though you I doubt seldom pray for them.


C. I tell you again and again, I have no quarrel with such of them as are calm
and modest, only I regrate they are too few. As for the others love to us, woe
should it be to you and me, if the love of God to us (which ought to be our
measure of love to the brethren) did appear in such effects as theirs does. If
they pray for us, it is in the most invidious strain imaginable, that God would
bring us down and destroy such of us as are incorrigible, and show the rest of
us the evil of our apostasy and defection: this you know is the universal
strain of their prayers concerning us. But, how would they take it, if we
should pray that God would destroy their party, and show them the evil of their
cruelty, rebellion and other wicked courses? Now this is the true Character of
an insolent, who takes a liberty with all the world, but cannot be touched
himself. And you know, we always pray, that God would unite this poor Church,
and heal our breaches; which shows the healing and peaceable spirit is on our
side: Our prayers being such, that none can refuse to say Amen to them: And
upon all occasions, we declare we are not only ready to unite with them, but
are extremely desirous of it. And if you will believe me, I assure you, I daily
pray for them in this strain most cordially: whereas there is nothing they fear
more than an accommodation; nay, in their Books they directly own, that all
that can be done, ought to be done for keeping life in our differences: and who
could ever have expected to have heard this doctrine in the school of Christ?
And let all men judge, if there be not a bitterness in the preface to Mr.
Rhetorfort's letters, the Apologetical Narration, and Naphtali, which is
unsampled in any Satire, not to say grave and Christian writing. And what
cursed doctrine is it Naphthali broacheth concerning private persons their
punishing of crimes in case of the supinnesse of the Magistrate? for, ransack
all the Provincial letters, Escobar or the other profane Casuists of that
wicked school, you shall not find a more impious and detestable opinion among
them; and what cursed effects this produced, all the Nation saw: when in the
sight of the Sun a vilain with a pistol invaded the persons of two of the
Fathers of the Church, and that in the chief street of our royal City. And
though the providence of God shielded the one totally from his fury, and
preserved the life of the other, though with the loss of his arm, all
shattered with the wound; yet his malice was not to be blamed, for that
asassinations were only wanting to compleet the parallel betwixt that spirit
and the Jesuits, which is indeed the same spirit moving in different
Characters. I do not charge the fact on that party, but acknowledge, I never
spoke with one who did not express their abhorrency of it; but, without all
uncharitableness, I may charge it on the Author of Naphthali.


N. But one thing ever sticks with me: I confess at our last discourse, you
gave me good rules in order to a Christian life, but still you design to make
me regardlesse of the state of the Church, which is, that I be only
self-concerned, and neglect the interests of Christ, whereas, what ought to be
dearer to me then the glory of God? and surely when that suffers, all that love
him will be tenderly affected, so was David and Jeremiah, for the desolations
of their times; and it is a strange piece of Religion to be unconcerned in Gods
glory, which is to be like Gallio, to care for none of these things.


C. All things have two sides; so this doctrine of resignation, if you look to
it on the wrong one, seems like unconcerned stupidity; yet, rightly considered,
it is one of the highest pieces of Christianity: for, if you believe (which you
must believe, else you are no good Christian) that Christ governes his Church,
you must also believe that he does all things well: since he has all power in
heaven and earth committed to him; and in him are all treasures of wisdom and
of knowledge; and he loved his Church so, that he died for it. Now since his
power enables him to do what he pleases, and his goodness inclines him to
please what is best, and his wisdom cannot err in the choice, Where is there
rowm for any miscarriage in the government of the World? why then are we to vex
our selves with any anxiety? does not that tacitly accuse God, as if he did not
mind his Church as he ought? or does it not imply if we were of his council, we
could adjust things better? Therefore, as in all our personal concernments, we
ought to go about our duty with diligence, leaving events wholly to Gods care;
So, in the public conce^nments of his Church, we are to commit the management
of them to him, on whose shoulders the Government was laid by the Father; and
rest securely in this persuasion, that all things cooperat in promoting the
grand designs of eternal wisdom and goodness: but still we are to concern our
selves in the good of the Church above all things, next to the salvation of our
own souls: but this is to be expressed, as in our most servent soliciting of
God in behalf of his Church (to which we are oblidged as well as to pray for
our selves, we thereby expressing to God our zeal for his glory, and our
servent charity to the brethren) so also we are to let no opportunity slip,
that God puts in our hands of doing good: But, as we are called, we are to do
good as far as our station reaches, and that upon all hazards; yet, even in
that, we are with David, not to meddle in matters too high for us, and with St.
Paul, not to stretch our selves beyond our own measure and line; but withal,
we are to let no inward dejecting melancholy possess our souls, which is
contrary to the end of Religion, wherein we are called to rejoice evermore; it
being contrived of God to beget in us joys, which cannot be taken from us; and
nothing marrs the souls inward joy in God more than such sorrows.


N. But all this is still contrary to the holy men of God: What sad complaints
are in the Psalms and Prophets, and chiefly in the Lamentations? And certainly,
we, in the new dispensation, enjoying a clearer manifestation of the love of
God, ought to be so much the more zealous for his glory.


C. It seems you consider little the difference of the two dispensations: for,
that of Moses was carnal, chiefly made up of temporal promises of an external
prosperity; so these outward desolations were then signs of Gods displeasure
against them, and therefore they did lament because of them: but now the Scene
is wholly altered, and these outward afflictions and persecutions, are so far
from being curses, as they were of old, that our Savior has pronounced them
blessings; yea, he has made these trials the Badges of our conformity to our
Head, who was made perfect through sufferings. And therefore we are to glory
and rejoice in our sufferings, as did the Apostles; and in the primitive
Church, though they were made havoc of, in the most cruel manner, some torn by
Lions, and other wild beasts, some killed by the sword, some burnt in the
fire, some roasted on Gridirons, some thrown in boy^ing Caldrons, some had
their flesh torn off by pincers, some were starved to death by hunger and cold;
in a word, all the cruelty that diabolical malice could devise, was exercised
upon them; yet not only the Martyrs themselves bore all, singing in the midst
of their tortures, but the Churches also rejoiced in it: And the days of their
death, were Festivals, called naetalitiae Martyrum, they counting their
Martyrdom their most glorious birth. And by the Epistles Eusebius inserts in
his History, we see they were far from complaining because of their sufferings.
But you (because the Laws are altered, and the Magistrate has denied you
further encouragement, and punished you, not for your Conscience, of which you
cannot brag much, since none has suffered because he was for Presbytery, or
against Episcopacy, but for your unruly humors and practices) make such
complaints to God as if heaven and earth were mixed, and adapt all the
Lamentations of Jeremiah to your sorry matters, as if the overthrow of
Presbytery were to be compared to the Babylonish captivity; And see if the
conclusion of the Apology, and all your other writtings run not in this style.
Now were your way what you imagine it to be, you should rejoice, that you are
called to suffer for it, and not to make such tragical complaints. And I am
sure, your bitterness against those whom you call your enemies, looks nothing
like the mildness of Christ or the primitive Sufferers, who carried with all
gentleness toward their persecutors, in meekness instructing those that
opposed them; And this does too palpably declare, you are strangers to the
serene and dove-like spirit of the Gospel.


N. You always run to the primitive Christians; but far fowls have fair
feathers, and if you examine the practice of the Reformers, they universally
resisted the Magistrate, and carried on the Reformation by Arms; and how then
dare you charge the Doctrine of resistance with Rebellion, since you thereby
stain that glorious Work?


C. I assure you, I have a great veneration for the Reformers, and look on them
as persons sent of God, to rescue his Church from the gross superstition and
Idolatry had overspred it; but for all that, you must pardon me still to prefer
the primitive Christians to them: As for casting reproaches on them, it shall
quickly appear whither of us be the more guilty in it. I will therefore from
undeniable evidence of History convince you of the falsehood of that vulgar
error, that the Reformation was carried on by restistance; and shall begin
with the Waldenses, who resisted not the King of France, as is clear in the
History, notwithstanding of their unparallelled persecutions, when they were
destroyed by thousands: Belle forest tells, that 60000 were killed in one town
of Beziers; Spond. ad an. 1209. tells of seven thousand, being murdered at once
in one Church. It is true there were Wars betwixt the Count of Monfort and the
Count of Toulouse; but the Count of Toulouse was a Peer of France; And the
Peers, by the Constitution of Hugo Capit, were rather vassals then subjects to
the King: besides, he only sought against Monfort. So Petrus Vallisarnensis,
Hist. Albig. And in the Counc. of Monpellier, the Dominions of Toulouse were
given to Simon Monfort, but not by the King, neither was the Legate well
pleased, that the Kings Son came and took the cross, lest he might thereby
pretend some right in these Dominions, which the Pope pretended were his: Simon
Monfort therefore was a bloody Emissary of the Popes, and not authorized by
Philip August. then King of France, who gave no other concurrence to the War,
save that he permitted his Subjects to Arm in it: so, here was no resistance of
Subjects against their Sovereign.


N. But did not the Bohemians, under Zisca, fight and resist when the Challice
was denied them?


C. In the general, consider that the Crown of Bohem, is elective: in which
case, certainly the States of a Kingdom share more largely of the Sovereign
power: Besides, he from whom we have the best account of the Bohemian Churches,
Comenius ( in ordine unitatis Bohemicae) gives but a slender character of Zisca
and his bussinesse, extolling him chiefly as a good soldier. Besides, the
justifiers of the late Bohemian Wars, never run upon this strain of subjects
resisting their Sovereign, upon the account of Religion, but upon the laws and
liberties of that elective Kingdom. Neither were the Protestants too well
satisfied with the last Bohemian-bussinesse; yea, King James, notwithstanding
of his interest in the elected King, was no way cordial for it: these two I
have joined together, because the Scene was the same, though the interval was
great.


N. But you know there was fighting in Germany upon the account of Religion.


C. This shows how overly you read History, when you bring this as a
president. When Luther rose, the Duke of Saxe, being moved of God, did receive
the Reformation peaceably into his principalities, without any force; and his
example was followed by other Princes and free cities: but, in the year 1524.
and 1525. there arose a War in Germany, fomented by some troublesome Preachers,
as says the Historian, who pretended the liberty of the Gospel for their chief
quarrel; and this was called the War of the Rusticks. And they appealing to
Luther's judgment, he wrote again and again to them, condemning what they did,
as an execrable and cursed Rebellion. He says indeed, it was a great
wickedness in their Princes to force their consciences, but that did not at
all excuse them; and tells how far he himself had been ever from such courses:
and he calls those that somented the Rebellion, vilains; and not content with
this, he stirred up the protestant Princes against them, who fought them and
broke them. And in this I desire you will not consider the tatles of some
ignorant persons, but read the History it self, and those excellent papers of
Luther: for which I refer you to Sleidan, Lib. 5. And he will give you full
satisfaction. Afterward the Duke of Brunsuick, and some other Princes of
Germany, did invade their neighbor protestant Princes, and combined in a
league for the destruction of Lutheranisme: whereupon the Duke of Saxe, the
Langrave of Hessen, and other Princes and free cities, met at Smalcald, to
unite among themselves: but Luther was dissatisfied with this, till their
Lawyers showed him how by the bulla aurea, and other constitutions of the
German Empire, it was lawful for them to defend themselves: whereupon he
consenting, they entered into that famous League. And every one who knows any
thing of that Empire, knows well that the Princes are Sovereigns within
themselves, and that the Emperor is only the head of the union. As for the War
that afterward followed betwixt Charles the 5th, and the Duke of Saxe,
besides, that the Duke of Saxe, was free to defend himself, as I have told,
Charles the 5th, declared it was not for Religion he fought, whatever his
design was: neither did all the Princes of the Religion join against him. The
Electors of Cullen and Pallatine, both Protestants, lay neuters; and the
Elector of Brandenburg, and Maurice, afterward Elector of Saxe, armed for the
Emperor: So you may see, what pitiful Historians they are, who allege the
precedent of Germany. In Sweden, King Gustavus, Anno, 1524. with the States of
that Kingdom, peaceably received the Reformation; neither were their any broils
about it, till about seventy years after, that Sigismond, King of Polland (whom
notwithstanding of his being Papist, they received for their King, he being the
son of the former King of Sweden, and peaceably obeyed him) was by force
entering the Kingdom, resolving to root out the Protestant Religion: Whereupon (
Vide Decret. in comitiis Lincop. Anno, 1660.) they deposed him, and choosed his
Uncle Charles King; no strange thing in the Swedenish History, that being an
Elective Crown, before the Year, 1644. that the States received Gustavus then
reigning for their Hereditary King; but still the States retained the supreme
Authority, as may appear by all their writs. Nor was it any wonder, if they,
who had but a while before, crept out of an Elective Kingdom into an
Hereditary, could not brook Sigismond his tyrannical invasion. And if this
serve not to vindicat the Swedes; at least, the Reformation was not introduced
by Wars among them, neither were ever the actions of that State, looked upon as
a precedent to others. In Denmark, Frederick the first, with the States of that
Kingdom, received the Reformation peaceably, nor was there any violence used.


N. But you cannot deny, there was force used in Helvetia and Geneve.


C. This shows what a superficial Reader of History you are. In Switzerland,
the Reformation was peaceably received by Zurich (the first and chief Canton
of that State) and other Towns. But other Cantons maligning them for this, at
the instigation of the Pope and his instruments, injured them; so that at
length it broke out into a civil War: wherein they of Zurich, as they were
surprised by them, so continued to be purely defenders, vide Sleid. lib. 8. But
you know Helvetia ill, if you know not that the Cantons, are no way subject to
one another, and are free States, only united in a League, as are the seven
Provinces: So that in their Treaties with France and other Princes, they often
Treat sever'dly, Vide Siml. de Rep. Helv. As for Geneve, the Bishop fled from
it, out of a pannick fear, when the Reformation was received: but no force was
used to drive him out. Sleid. lib. 6. And beside, Geneve was a free Town,
neither subject to the Bishop nor the Duke of Savoy; Vide Siml. de Rep. Helv.
lib. 10. de Geneve.


N. What say you to the War in the Netherlands?


C. I say still, it was not for Religion they sought, Papists and Protestants
jointly concurring; And C. Egmond and C. Horn who were beheaded by the Duke of
Alve, as the chief instruments in it, died both Papists; yea, the State by a
placart, declared it scandalous to say they fought for Religion; the true
ground of the quarrel (as you may read in all the Histories) was, that their
Prince was not an absolute Sovereign, but limited in his power, and that by
express compact, they might use force if he transgressed his limits: which he
did most notoriously and tirandically: and for all this, I refer you to
Grotius, de Antiquitate Bataviae and in lib. Ann. who yet is one of the
strongest pleaders for subjection to Magistracy.


N. But nothing of this can be alleged to palliat the French civil Wars?


C. The first civil Wars were managed by the Princes of the blood, who by the
Laws of that Crown, are not ordinary subjects. Besides, the Wars were begun in
the minority of the King; in which case the powers of the Princes is greater: I
do not for all this deny their following Wars, were direct rebellion; but
consider the fierce spirit of that Nation (ready to fight for any thing) and
you must confess, it was not Religion, but their temper that was to be blamed;
but now many of the eminent men of that Church are fully convinced of the evil
of these courses: and do ingenuouslie condemn them. Yea, in the Wars of the
last King, one of the glories of our Nation, Cameron, at Mountowban directly
preached against their courses, and taxed them of Rebellion.


N. But if that was Rebellion, how did the late King of Britain give assistance
to the Rochellers in the last Wars?


C. There was a particular reason in that, as appears from the account the
illustrious Duke of Rohan gives of it: for the King of Britain had interposed
in the former pacification, and had given surety to the Protestants, that the
French King should religiously observe the agreement: But the King of France
violating this, the King of Britain thereby receiving so public an injury and
affront, was oblidged in honor to assist them: which for his part was most
just, whatever the Subjects of France their part in it might be. And thus I
have cleared the Churches abroad of that injurious stain you brand them with:
And by this let all men judge whether you or I do them the best office. But to
come to our own Britain, you know it is the glory of the English Reformation,
that it was stained with no blood, save that of Martyrs, which was its chief
ornament: Yea, though a Popish and persecuting Queen interveened betwixt the
first Reformation of King Edward, and the second of Queen Elizabeth; yet, none
rebelled: For that of Wyat, was not upon the account of Religion; but in
opposition to the matching with King Philip of Spain. It is true Scotland has
not that glory: but as we were long allied to France; so we have too much of
their temper: so that it passes as a common saying, of Scots-men, praefervida
Scotorum ingenia. And all that traveled the world, can witness that we were
not approven in our late rebellion abroad. I shall not instance what Diodati,
Spanhem, Rivet, Salmasius, Blondel, Amerald, de Moulin, and many of the
greatest and most famed Foreign Divines, have publicly expressed against it.
Some in Print, others in public discourses and Sermons. One thing I will not
pass by, that in the consistory of Charrenton, they made an Act, that no man
should be barred the Communion for the Scots excommunication, except it were
for a crime; and so told the late Bishop of Orkney then of Galloway, that the
pretended excommunication of Scotland, should no way hinder their receiving him
to their Communion; and this was a loud declaration of their disowning and
condemning the Scots practices.


N. But tell me ingenuously, Are there no precedents in History for Subjects
fighting upon the account of Religion; and have none of the Writters of the
Church asserted it?


C. Yes, there have, and I will deal ingenously with you upon this head. The
first I know is Pope Gregory the seventh, who armed the subjects of Germany
against Henry the fourth Emperor, upon the account of Religion; because the
Emperor laid claim to the investitures of Bishops, they being then secular
Princes. And this prospering so well in the hands of Hildebrand, other Popes
made no bones, upon any displeasure they conceived, either against King or
Emperor, to take his Kingdom from him, and free his subjects from their
obedience to him; always pretending some matter of Religion, as you may read
particularly in the History of Frederick the first, Frederick the second, Lewis
of Baviere, Emperors, Philip Le bell and Lewis the 12th of France, Henry the
second, and John of England, Conradine of Naples, and Charles of Navarre. These
are the eldest precedents I meet with in History, for your bussinesse; and the
latest is the holy League of France, from which our whole matter seems
transcribed. The authors who plead for this, are only Courtiers, Cannonists and
Jesuits. Now how are you not ashamed in a matter of such importance to
symbolize with the worst gang of the Roman Church, (for the soberer of them
condemn it) yet fill heaven and earth with your clamours if in some innocenter
things the Church of England seem to symbolize with them?


N. No, you still retain the Papacy, you only change the person from the Pope
to the King, whom you make head of the Church, and swear to him in these terms.


C. This is so impudent a calumny, that none but such as have a mind to
reproach would use it: which I shall clear by giving an account of the whole
matter. In England, you know the Pope, beside his general tyranny, exercised a
particular authority, after King John had basely resigned the Crown to him,
vide Matthew. Paris. ad An. 1213. When therefore the Reformation was introduced
in England, and the Papal yoke shaken off, the oath of Supremacy was brought in
to exclude all foreign jurisdiction, and to reinstate the King in his civil
authority over all persons and in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as civil.
I confess Henry the eight, did directly set up a civil Papacy, but you know
the Reformation of England was never dated from his breach with the Bishop of
Rome: But the oath of Supremacy was never designed to take away the Churches
intrinsic power, Or to make that the power of Ordination, giving Sacraments,
or Discipline, flowed from the King, to which he only gives his civil sanction
and confirmation. However, because the words being general, might suggest some
scrouples, they are clearly explained in an Act of Parliament of Queen
Elizabeth; and in one of the 39 Articles, and more fully by the incomparable
and blessed Bishop Usher, to whom, for his pains, King James gave thanks in a
letter. Now this Oath being brought from England to Scotland, none ought to
pretend scrouples, since both the words in themselves are sufficiently plain,
and the meaning affixed to them in England, is yet plainer: And we having it
from them, must be understood to have it in their sense.


N. But this clearly makes way for Erastianism.


C. This is one of your mutinous Arts, to find out long and hard names, and
affix them to any thing that displeases you. In the Old Testament, you find
the Kings of Judah frequently meddling in Divine matters; and the Sannedrim,
which was a civil court, determined in all matters of Religion; And you are
very ignorant in History if you know not, that the Christian Emperors still
meddled in matters of Religion. The first general Councils, were called by them,
as appears by their Synodical Acts and Epistles. And by the accounts all the
Historians give, they also preceeded in the Councils; so Constantine at Nice,
Theodose at Constantinople, Earl Candidianus in name of Theodose the second at
Ephesus, and Martian at Chalcedon. Its true in preceding, they only ordered
matters, but did not decide in them, as particularly appears from the
Commission given to Earl Candidianus, inserted in the Acts of the Ephesin
Council. They also judged in matters of schism; so Constantine in the Donatist
bussinesse, even after it had been judged, both by Miltiades and Marcus,
Bishops of Rome and Millan, by the Synod of Arles, and by the Council of Nice;
Yea, the Code and Basilicks, and the Capitolers of Charles the great, show,
they never thought it without their sphere, to make laws in Ecclesiastic
matters. The Bishops also were named by them, or, at least, their elections
were to be approven by them, not excepting the Roman Bishop, though he was the
proudest pretender of all, who after the overthrow of the Western Empire, was
to send to Constantinople or Ravenna, to get his Election ratified: and when
the Western Empire was reasumed by Charles the great at Rome, it was expressly
provided, that the Emperor should choose the Roman Bishop. So Kings meddling in
Ecclesiastical affairs, was never contraverted till the Roman Church swelled
to the height of Tyranny, and since the Reformation, it has been still stated
as one of the differences betwixt us and them.


N. Well then, I hope you who are so much for the Kings Supremacy, will not
quarrel at this indulgence, which is now granted to us.


C. We are better subjects then to criticize upon, much less condemn our
Sovereigns pleasure in such things, neither do we as you did, carry all these
matters to the Pulpit. But, I pray, how would you (Anno 1641.) have received
such a proposition from the King in favors of the Doctors of Aberdeen, or
other worthy persons, whom you drove away by tumults, not by laws: I doubt,
all your Pulpits should have rung with it. And we may guess at this by the
opposition many of you made to the receiving of suspected persons into the
Army, for the necessary defense of the Country, then almost overrun by the
enemy: so that you have now got a favor which you were never in a capacity to
have granted to us when you governed: and yet you see with what cheerful
obedience we receive his Majesty's pleasure, even in an instance, which may
seem most contrary to all our interests: Or, if any have their jealousies, they
stiffle them so within their breast, that none whisper against authority.


N. This says it is against your will, and therefore your compliance to it is
forced, not voluntary.


C. So much the greater is our virtue, when we obey and submit to things
against our inclinations, which you never dream of: but we are so inclined to
peace, that if you abuse not this liberty you have got, we shall never complain
of it; nay, if it produce the effects which we desire, and for which we are
assured it is designed, we shall rejoice for it: which are to bring you to a
more peaceable temper, to make you value and love more one of the Noblest and
most generous Princes that ever ruled, and to dispose you to a brotherly
accommodation with us, which the Fathers of the Church, are ready to offer to
you on as fair terms as could be demanded by any rational person; whereby, if
you listen not to them, it will appear to the world, that you are truly
Schismatical: And to incline you more to union, I intend, at our next meeting,
to give you a full prospect of the state of the ancient Church, both in their
Government, Worship, and Discipline; whereby I doubt not to convince you, that
their frame was far better suited for promoting all the ends of Religion, then
ever Presbytery could be. But though I have made considerable observations in
this, besides what is in various Collectors; yet, I cannot at present give you
so particular a plann as I design; but shall reserve it till another meeting.
Meanwhile do not abuse our Sovereigns royal goodness, nor the tenderness of
these he sets over you. But let us all jointly pray, that God, in whose hands
all our hearts are, may incline us all to peace, love and charity: I shall
therefore sum up all in the words of Scripture, which if they weigh not with
you, there is no hope man shall prevail on you; If there be therefore any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any bowels and mercies: fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having
the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done through
strife, or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem others better
then themselves. Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge among you? let
him show out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom* But if
you have bitter zeal (for that is the word in the Original) and strife in your
hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth: this wisdom descends not
from above, but is earthly, sensual and divelish: For where zeal (the word is
still the same) and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work. But the
wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to
be entreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without partiality, and without
hypocrisy; and the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make
peace. Put on therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of
mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing
one another, and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any:
even as Christ forgave the Church, so also do ye: but above all these things,
put on Charity, which is the bond of perfectness; and let the peace of God rule
in your minds, to the which also you are called in one body: and be ye
thankful. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, ^eaching
and admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing
with grace in your hearts to the Lord.


N. In all this I agree with you, and heartily wish these words were more
deeply infixed in our minds: For, I confess, I am weary of the janglings of
Divines, and long for peace as much as any can; and indeed there is nothing
makes converse grow more wearisome to me, then that I meet with very few who
love peace; but, generally, the minds of all are so fretted, that I often
remind and repeat David's groan, Oh! that I had wings like a Dove, for then
would I flee away and be at rest; I would hasten my escape from the windy storm
and tempest. And indeed the farther I see into the great business of Religion,
I am the more convinced of the necessity of a serene and placide temper, which
so qualifies the soul for divine converse.


C. Oh! how have these words you dropped last united my heart to you? My Soul
has too long dwelt amongst them that hate peace; and the thick foggs and mists
of contention, have rendered the air of this valley of tears the more noisome:
But my releef is in divine contemplation, whether, as to the mountain of God, I
flee for sanctuary, that being above this atmosphere of contentions and
passions, I may take that rest in God, which is denied me here below: whether
whosoever arrive, find that placide tranquillity and joy unspeakable, that they
must needs heartily compassionat all such who are strangers to this peace of
God which passes understanding: for, I assure you, there are no joys
comparable to these purer solaces. This is the secret of Gods presence, where
you may be hid from the pride of man, and kept, as in a pavilion, from the
strife of tongues. Let us therefore flee from this evil world, and flee into
the blessed and refreshful shades of the Almighty, avoiding foolish and
unlearned questions, knowing that they do gender ^^rife; for, the servant of
the Lord must not strive. I shall therefore leave you with these thoughts,
hoping they shall be daily more deeply infixedin your mind. Farewell.


FINIS.

