THE EXPEDITION Of his Highness the Prince of Orange FOR ENGLAND. Giving an
Account of the most Remarkable Passages thereof, from the Day of his Setting
Sail from HOLLAND, to the First day of this instant December, 1688.
In a Letter to a Person of Quality.
SIR,
THE Account (you so earnestly desire of me) of the Prince's Expedition and
Invasion of England, is a Task no one should have commanded from me, but
yourself; the ancient Friendship between us, makes nothing appear difficult in
the way to serve you.

I shall not undertake to determine the Legality of this great and bold
Attempt, nor reflect on the Counsels that have brought this Misery upon us, but
shall content myself with giving you a brief Account of the Prince's Expedition.

And first, you are to take notice, That his Highness set Sail from Holland
with 51 Men of War, 18 Fireships, and about 330 Tenders, being Ships hired of
Merchants, for the carriage of Horse and Foot, Arms, Ammunition, etc. The
Fleet stood out at Sea to the Norward, which met with horrid Storms for two
days and two nights together, in which bad Weather there were lost above 500
Horse, and a Vessel parted from the Fleet, wherein were 400 Foot, supposed to
be lost, but now known to be arrived safe at the Texel, but grievously
shattered and torn by the Storms; two of the Prince's principal Men of War were
^^^^ed to new Rigg at Helversluse.

The Prince immediately on his return back informed the States of the condition
of the Fleet, (which was not so damnified as was represented by the Vulgar and
Ignorant) who thereupon, to lull a great Man asleep, the States, or some one
employed by them, ordered, That the Harlem and Amsterdam Courrantier should
make a dismal Story of it, by representing to the World, that the Prince
returned with his Fleet miserably shattered and torn, having lost nine Men of
War, and diverse others of less concern; 1000 Horse (...)ture among the Seamen;
the loss of Dr Burnett, and the chief Ministers under the Prince, the ill
Opinion the States had of the Expedition; in short, that a 100000 l. would not
repair the Damage sustained; and, almost next to an impossibility, that the
Prince should be in a condition to pursue his Design till the Spring. And yet
at the same time all hands were at work to repair the damaged Ships, which were
inconsiderable: so that in eight days time they were all re-fitted. The Signal
being given by the discharge of a Gun, all the Fleet immediately weighed Anchor
and stood out at Sea, steering their Course Norward all that night; next day,
upon Tide of Ebb, they made a Stretch and made a Watch above a League, and then
stood Westward, and lay all night in the same posture, not making two Leagues
of Watch.

In the middle of the night, an Advice-boat brought us an Account, That the
English Fleet, consisting of 33 Sail, lay to the Westward of ours. Upon which
the Prince fired a Gun, which caused a great consternation in the whole Fleet,
we having a brisk Easterly Wind, concluded ourselves to be all ruined: But the
small Advice boats crusing for a more certain account of the English, brought
us back word, That instead of the English Fleet, which the former Advice had
alarmed us with, it was Admiral Herbert with part of our Fleet which had been
separated some hours from the body of the Fleet: Upon whose arrival, great
rejoicing was among us all, and a Signal of Joy was given for it by the Prince.

In the morning, about eight, the Prince gave a Signal, that the Admirals
should come aboard him: Immediately after the whole Fleet was got into the
North-foreland, upon which the Prince gave the usual Sign of Danger, (according
to the printed Book) and ordered that the Fleet should all come up in a Body,
some fifteen or sixteen deep, his Highness leading the Van, in the Ship Brill,
(in English, Spectacles:) His Flag was English Colors, the Motto impaled
thereon, is, The PROTESTANT RELIGION, and LIBERTIES of England, and underneath,
instead of Dieu and Mon Droit, And I will Maintain it.

The Council of War, from aboard the Prince, sent three small Frigates into the
Mouth of the Thames, viz. the Porpus, Postilion, and Mercury; who on their
return, brought us word, That the English Fleet lay in the Buoy of the Nore,
consisting of 34 Sail, and three more which lay in the Downs. The Wind
continuing at E. N. E.

The Prince immediately thereupon, gave another Signal of stretching the whole
Fleet in a Line, from Dover to Callis, twenty five deep: So that our Fleet
reached within a League of each place; the Flanks and Rear were guarded by our
Men of War. This sight would have ravished the most curious Eyes of Europe.
When our Fleet was in its greatest splendor, the Trumpets and Drums playing
various Tunes to rejoice our hearts; this continued for above three hours.

Immediately after the Prince gave us a Sign to close, and failed that night as
far as Beach, and commanded us to follow the Signal by Lights he had hung out
to us, viz. all the small Sail should come up to him by morning.

By the morning-day we espied the Isle of Wight, and then the Prince ordered
the Fleet to be drawn into the same posture as before related; yet not
stretching above half Channel over in this place. About five in the morning we
made the Start, the Wind chopping about to the Westward; upon which we stood
fair by Dartmouth, and so made for Torbay, where the Prince again ordered the
whole Fleet into the same posture as at Dover and Callis.

Upon his arrival at Torbay, the People on Land, in great numbers, Welcomed his
Highness with loud Acclamations of Joy.

Immediately after the Prince gave two Signals, that the Admirals should come
abord him, which they did; and then ordered, that the whole Fleet should come
to an Anchor, and immediately Land; and further ordered, that the Admirals
should stand out at Sea as a Guard, as well as the smaller Men of War to Attend
and Guard their Landing; and also ordered six Men of War to run in to Guard
Torbay.

The Prince then put out a Red Flag at the Misen-yardarm; and provided to land
in sixty Boats, laid ready for that purpose: Upon which the Prince signified,
that General Mackay with his six Regiments of English and Scotch should first
Land; and also, that the little Porpus with eighteen Guns should run a Ground
to secure their Landing: But there was no Opposition; for the People bid us
Heartily Welcome to England; and gave us all manner of Provisions for our
Refreshment.

The fifth of November (a Day never to be blotted out of the English-man's
Heart) the Prince caused to be landed about 2000: On the sixth we landed as
many Horse and Foot as we could possibly; and so continued the seventh. The
Country bringing in all manner of Provision both for Man and Horse; and were
paid their Price honestly for it.

The Prince the same day commanded Captain M -- to search the Lady C -- 's
House, at Tor-Abby, for Arms and Horses; and so all other Houses which were
Roman Catholics. The Lady entertained them civilly, said her Husband was gone
to Plymouth: They brought from thence some Horses and a few Arms, but gave no
further Disturbance to the Lady or her House. Nor shall it be forgotten, what
was faithfully acted at this Lady's House, immediately on our arrival at
Torbay: There was a Priest, and some others with him were upon a watch Tower,
to discover what our Fleet was, whether French or Dutch: at last they
discovered the White Flags on some of our Men of War; the ignorant Priest
concluded absolutely we were the French Fleet, which with great impatience they
had so long expected; and having laid up great Provisions for their
Entertainment; the Priest ordered all to the Chapel to Sing Te Deum for the
arrival of their supposed Forces; but being soon deceived, on our landing we
found the benefit of their Provisions; and instead of Vostre Serviture
Monsieur, they were entertained with Yeen Mijnheere, Can you Dutch Spraken;
upon which they all run away from the House, but the Lady and a few old
Servants.

The whole Army, to the best of my knowledge, consisted of 1800 Horse, 3000
Draggons, and 1800 Foot, besides 1000 Volunteer Persons of Quality, Horse well
equipped, and about 800 Horse for Carriage.

November the Eighth, the Prince came from Chudleigh toward Exeter with the
greatest part of his Army attending him, and about one of the clock Entered at
the Westgate of the City, welcomed with loud Acclamations of the People. The
manner of his public Entrance into Exeter was as follows.

1. The Right Honorable the Earl of M -- with 200 Horse, the most part of
which were English Gentlemen richly mounted on Flanders Steeds, managed and
used to War in Head-pieces, Back and Breast, bright Armor.

2. 200 Blacks brought from the Plantations of the Neatherlands in America,
having on Imbroyder'd Caps lined with white Fur, and Plumes of white Feathers,
to attend the Horse.

3. 200 Finlanders or Laplanders in Bears Skins taken from the Wild Beasts they
had slain, the common Habit of that cold Climate, with black Armor, and broad
Flaming Swords.

4. 50 Gentlemen, and as many Pages to attend and support the Prince's Banner,
bearing this Inscription, God and the Protestant Religion.

5. 50 Led Horses, all managed and brought up to the Wars, with two Grooms to
each Horse.

6. After these Rid the Prince on a Milk White Palfrey, Armed Cap-a-Pee, a
Plume of white Feathers on his Head, all in bright Armor, and Forty two
Footmen running by him.

7. After his Highness followed likewise on Horseback 200 Gentlemen and Pages.

8. 300 Switzers with Fuzies.

9. 500 Volunteers, each two led Horses.

10. His Captain and Guards 600 Armed Cap-a-Pee. The rest of the Army brought
up the Rear.

That night the Prince lay at the Deanery, having before ordered the Advanced
Guard to March to Clist-heath, and settled the Quarters of the Army; which was
done so much to the content and satisfaction of the Inhabitants in and about
the City, and such just payments made for what the Soldiers had, and such civil
behavior among them, without Swearing and Damning, and Debauching of Women, as
is usual among some Armies, that it is to admiration to behold. I am sure Sir I
was an eyewitness of the whole order, and when we marched away from this City,
their joy was turned into dullness and cloudiness.

On the Ninth the Prince commanded Dr. Burnet to order the Priest, Vicars of
the Cathedral, not to pray for the Prince of Wales, and to make use of no other
Prayer for the King, but what is in the second Service, which they refused to
observe, till they were forced and very severely threatened; the Bishop and Dean
being then gone from the City.

About Twelve this day, notice was given to the Canons and all the Vicars,
Choral and Singing Lads, to attend in the Cathedral immediately, for that the
Prince would be there, and Dr. Burnet ordered them as soon as the Prince entered
into the Quire, they should sing Te Deum, which was observed. The Prince sat in
the Bishops Chair, and all his great Officers attending on him. After Te Deum
was sung, Dr. Burnet in a Seat under the Pulpit, read aloud the Princes
Declaration and Reasons for this his Expedition: when this was over the Prince
returned to the Deanery.

The Baggage was many days bringing from Torbay, but the Ammunition, both Arms
for Foot and Horse, and the Artillery were brought into Topsham Road, and there
by Boats and other Carriages landed; the Field pieces were sent after the Army
at Clist-heath, the Brass Canon remaining some of them in Exon.

The greatest part of the Army were ordered to march forward to Ottery and
Honyton, and in several Parties were ordered to diverse places in the County.
One party was sent to the North of Devon for Horses, which were bought at
excessive rates: From Roman Catholics they took Horses without Money, and many
Gentlemen who might have had Money for their Horses refused, as the Bishops Son
and diverse others.

On Sunday Dr. Burnet Preached at the Cathedral on this Text, 107 Psalm, last
verse. Ferguson Preached in the Presbyterian Meeting house, but was fain to
force his way with his Sword up to the Pulpit, for even the old Presbyter
himself could not away with the breath of his Brother Ferguson in his Diocese:
His Text was in the 94 Psalm, Who will rise up for me against evil doers. I
heard one of that Gang say, that his Discourse came very much under the lash of
the 25 of Edward the Third; he is not much regarded by any of the Princes
Retinue.

Sir William W -- who had been at Ford with the Prince, to see Sir William G --
were both refused to be seen of him. One Major M -- and Sir Will were in
Commission to make new Levies, which was carried on vigourously, and many
Listed under them: but Sir. W. it seems began to use an old Trade of taking
Money for Quarters: Complaint was made thereof to the Prince, and they were
discarded, and the Men Disbanded to seek for new Officers. But Sir W. does
continue under the Prince's Protection.

The Prince was here above three days, before any appearance of Gentry came,
insomuch that the great Officers began to wonder, that the Prince should be
Invited into England by them, and not to appear to the Prince's Assistance; but
this consternation was soon over, when a considerable body of the Gentry came
into him. Some that were for taking off the Test and Penal Laws, they have not
appeared as yet. So that now the Counties of Cornwall and Devon are in the
possession of the Gentry thereof, and the Prince's Army quite marched away.

Pendennis Castle is managed by several Gentlemen, who take their turns,
Plymouth Fort is declared for the Prince's Service, by the Earl of B -- who it
seems was to have been poisoned, by throwing white Mercury over a Leg of Mutton
(appointed as one Dish for his Supper) instead of Flower; that, and for some
other Reasons, he secured the Lord H -- turned out all Papist Soldiers, and has
taken in the County Soldiers into the Fort.

Since which, there is an Association among the Gentry, worded much after that
of my Lord Shaftsbury's.

Mr. Seymour being made Governor of Exeter, and the Lord Mordant in his
absence; there are new Leavies raising every day; so that this City is almost
full of these new Regiments, which are hourly disciplining by Officers and old
Soldiers left here by the Prince. All their Arms are the Prince's, and I am
told, he brought with him as many as will set out 20000 both Horse and Foot. I
am apt to believe this to be true, having seen most of what has been Landed.
All the Vessels that brought up the Ammunition, etc. are returned again to
Torbay, under the Guard of the principal Men of War, a Squadron of which lie
now in the Sound of Plymouth, and saluted each other with many Cannon from the
Fort and the Fleet.

On Sunday last there was a report that the French were Landed 20000, at
Porlock in this County, upon which the whole Country rise with Pikes, Spits,
Scythes, and what weapons they could get, and made away for Exeter; but it
proved a false Allarm; for there were two small French Ships driven by the
Dutch Fleet ashore, and the French quitted their Vessels and went on Land, and
were some Killed, others sent hither. So that now they are pretty quiet again;
but has given that advantage to the Commissioned Officers, who are to raise New
Leavies, to pick and choose amongst them whom they please.

I shall now return again to the Prince; when his Highness left Exeter,
Wednesday Nov. 21. he marched with his own Guards, attended by a great many of
the Gentry both of Somersetshire and Devon, to St. Mary Ottery, where he dined,
after which he marched to Axminster, where he continued four days, from thence
to Crookehorn, where he tarried only one night, from thence to Sherborne, where
his Highness was splendidly entertained by the Lord D -- From thence he went to
Wincanton, where he Lodged at the House of one Mr. Churchill a Merchant, and
its credibly reported, designs for Oxford.

Sir, I have given you the best Account I can of this great Affair, you may
Communicate it to such Friends as you think fit. Sir, I am with all due
Respects,

Wincanton 1 Dec, 1688. Your most Obedient Servant, N. N.

Printed for T. W. and are to be sold by the Booksellers of London. 1688.


