Dr. Burnet's LETTER To his Friend in LONDON. Being an Answer to a late
Scurrilous Pamphlet Entitled HIS FAREWELL.
SIR,
MY acquaintance with you, which happily commenced at our meeting in Scotland,
and those many friendly caresses wherewith you have vouchsafed to salute me,
are the daily remembrancers of that great respect and veneration I owe you, and
seem to imply that I have leave to address my self to you as to an Asylum, a
place of refuge and security. I know Sir, you are, so great a friend to truth
and honesty, that you always appear vigorous in the defense of Innocence, you
comfort the Dejected, relieve the Oppressed, and to speak the sense of all that
know you, your Charity is universal, and extends it self to the several
exigences of those that become your Petitioners.

My circumstances at present enforce me Sir (without any Introductions, or
circumlocutions) to Solicit your favor for the prevention of that mischief
that so loudly threatens me. I am sensible that the lashes, and persecutions of
malevolent Tongues, are more intolerable than the severest of human
inflictions, and to my great* dissatisfaction I find, since my departure, I am
too too grossly scandalized, and reproach't* what the consequence of such
popular license may prove, such a discerning person as your self may easily
foresee: To you therefore Sir, and to all other Gentlemen of the like
integrity* and veracity, I apply my self, that by your undaunted Vindication of
me, you may put a check to that impetuous torrent of Scandal that seems to
overwhelm me.

I am lately Sir, exposed, and insufferably abused not only by the perverse
Tongues of inveterate Men, whose Passions are as irregular as their Morals; But
by the wider and more licentious Mouth of the Press: The scurrilous Pamphlet
has circulated the Town, and by this time I presume it is seen by you. How full
of Spleen and Malice it is, is easily discernable to any unprejudiced person.
The Spirit of malediction is so notoriously visible through every line, that
one would think, people should not be so credulous as to take for granted, what
is so slily insinuated by the mercenary-Scribler. I shall therefore unravel all
the Vanity, Folly, and inconsistency of that sheet that bears so hard upon my
Reputation. Wherein you must understand he First gives me the Title of a
Confessor, yes and Confessor to the Late King of Poland, too. A great promotion
to which this insignificant Pamphleteer advances me: Certainly if ever
impudence be reckoned a virtue* it will be now, for never did sham, and
imposture prevail so much upon a people as at this Instant,

The next Complement he affords me is no less than deep died Rebel, and maks me
leap from Poland into Hungary in a moment, and to show himself a man of
judgment he pretends a substantial reason for so doing* which is ^^d likeness*
(...) (his hard word) Congeniality to the Cause here. Profound pieces of
Scandal! I would fain know whether this mighty Man of Parallels, values himself
upon such a production; if he does, I must tell him, that any Billingsgate
Oyster Woman can easily arrive at the like excellence. For Scandal, and
Reproach is the talent of the Rabble, and Porters, and Carmen can challenge as
great a share as our Scribler. But however Sir, this is my comfort, that men of
that sobriety and seriousness of life with your self, cannot easily entertain
any vile, or mean thought of me. Now (...) this clutter about Hungarian Rebels
his Tapsky's- Perkinaski's, his ridiculous chiming with Routs and Riots,
Confusion, and Faction; His profane intermixing Sacred History with his
excrementitious stuff, his ridiculous discourse of the Acts of the Diet, his
foolish story of Milk and Mackrel; What is it the Gentleman fixes upon me? Why
Sir, it is some Enormous Crime, some grande nefas, and morte piandum, no less
than Misprision at least. Now where is the proof of what is so heavily laid to
my charge? Not a word of seriousness, argument, or any thing like to be found.

I shall therefore to satisfy you Sir (and all whose curiosity leads them to
peruse those Pamphlets that are daily vended) open my self with all ingenuous
freedom and plainenss, for the confirmation of that good opinion you have
conceived of me. The general outcry against me is in reference to that
Gentleman, my late Lord Russel, of my advising him to conceal and palliate
those things, which he seemed to confess of his own inclination; The report is
so current and so universally received, that it is not without great difficulty
to remove their prejudices. But those that will credit truth when, as delivered
with such asseverations, can distinguish 'twixt credulity, and mistaken zeal,
and I suppose will vouchsafe to believe me upon those Protestations.

1. I declare that I had no other design in visiting my Lord in his unhappy
circumstances, than to give him Spiritual instructions and advice for the
benefit of his Immortal Soul. Let the malice of men suggest what it pleases,
the dictates of my own conscience tell me, that I have done nothing but what a
Christian might Honorably justify before the face of the whole World. And in
that capacity of a Divine, I reckoned it my duty (considering my acquaintance
with his Lordship) to interpose with my Prayers and Spiritual assistances. But
for having that influence over his Lordship, as people would fain represent, is
a mistake as groundless as ridiculous* Besides, they little imagine how much
they reflect upon his Lordship's judgment, to be byast according to the
insinuations of any near him. It Is certain my Lord fell not under the Character
of so injudicious a Person amongst the knowing part of mankind, as to be so
easy, and credulous as to be modeled according to any one's fancy.

But for my self I must declare that I had no interest in paying him those
frequent visits, but the real promotion of his Souls Eternal welfare.

2. As for my disaffection to the present Established Government or my
lukewarmness, or damned neutrality (as they call it) it is as Groundless as the
former objection against me. I am, I presume, so well known, that I need not
make any great Apology for this calumny against me. Those that have had the
opportunity of my Conversation and the advantage of my Ministry, cannot find by
any of my discourses any thing tending to the derogation of the Government.

However this abusive Pamphleteer takes great Freedom with me, and it is no
wonder, for it must be an elevated piece of Impudence that does the thing when
nothing of reality appears in the Accusation.

3. Be pleased to observe the scurrility of his language; he says I have
nothing but a Religious cant to recommend me to the Observation of any
judicious person. I have no mind to take notice of the obloquy, since I am not
fond of my Credit in that particular. There is no man has more humble thoughts
of himself then I have* and for his envious reflections that I was taken notice
of before any of the Reverend Prelates of the Land, by the Members of
Parliament, I have nothing to say at present, but that my designs were
Honorable, without any affectation of popularity.

I must be bold to say that I have a great veneration for that August Assembly,
and what I have delivered from the Pulpit, has been honestly designed, and
meant.

4. As for those Doctrines which he would needs insinuate that I approve; I
utterly deny it. Assistance and taking up Arms against Lawful Authority, is a
Doctrine I never believed, neither did I ever teach, or encourage it. My
conversation has been always peaceable, free from extremes, and if my
strictness of Life, and strongly inculcating of it to others is become a Crime,
I wonder to what a pitch of impiety the World will come. As I have been a Son
of the Church of England, I endeavored (in that Sphere I was) to keep up its
Credit and reputation against the wild Opinions of some hot Brained people. But
I find let a man be never so Orthodox, some people (who make it their business
to disparage our reformed Religion) will find somewhat whereby to calumniate
and reproach him. I wish this licentious Spirit of malediction may be stopped,
otherwise I cannot find but the very foundations of our Church and Religion
will totter, and come to Ruins* I am sure some would be glad to see her in the
Dust.

Lastly for the other inconsistent foppery's his imputation of Lechery and
Treachery, to pass it over in silence would be the greatest piece of prudence.
The great sceptic's of the Age know no more compendious way to affront
Religion, than by casting dirt in Face of its Professors; And in their most
remarkable abuses they are sure something will stick close, that afterward may
reflect upon a man's reputation, fortiter calumniare, aliquid haerebit.

Now after all Sir, I must beg your pardon for this Freedom in molesting you
with such ungrateful repetitions; However my design is to satisfy a too
credulous World, that those common popular reflections upon me, are the
inventions of Malice and revenge. I find other people that make considerable
Figures in the Church, cannot be exempted from unwarrantable reproaches, what
with their Quaeries etc. No serious person can be secure without being
Stigmatized.

To you therefore I apply my self that by your influence over your acquaintance
you may stop that Torrent that seems to carry all before it. This you may
please to let the World know that the Dr. (for reasons best known to himself)
tho at present retired will appear again to the confusion and confutation of
such pedantique Calumniators as our insignificant Pamphleteer. I am with all
respect and submission,

Your Humble Servant, G. B.

London, Printed by G. C. for A. Gad, 1683.


