THE Peoples Zeal Provoked TO AN Holy Emulation, By the Pious and Instructive
Example of their dead MINISTER: OR A Seasonable Memento to the Parishioners of
Lavenham in Suffolk. BEING A SERMON Preached to that People, soon after the
Solemn Enterrment of their Reverend and Pious Minister, Mr. William Gurnall;
Who Aged 63, Died October 12. 1679.

Heb. 11.4. Abel being dead, yet speaks. (...), Ignat. Epist. ad Phil. And
now at their request made public, by William Burkitt, M. A. of Pembrook Hall
in Cambridge, and Rector of Mildin in Suffolk.

LONDON, Printed by M.W. for Ralph Smith, at the Bible under the Piazza of the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1680.

To my Honored Friend Mrs Sarah Gurnall, the sorrowful Relict of Mr William
Gurnal, late of Lavenham deceased; and to the rest of the surviving Inhabitants
of that Town.
THAT I appeared no sooner in the Crowd of Mourners, to condole with you in
your public loss; it was because I would not rudely disturb the motions of so
just a sorrow. It has been long observed, that during the prevalency of
excessive grief, the soul has no leisure to attend to those advices; which
(when the floods of sorrow are a little dried up) are not only seasonable but
advantageous. May what is here then, modestly presented to your impartial view,
be like the Rod of Moses to divide the waters of sorrow, or like the Mantle of
Elijah to restrain those sloods of your immoderate grief, which will be too
ready to overflow their banks, if Reason and Religion do not prevent by a
seasonable interposure. But I am very willing to persuade my self that Almighty
God has wrought your hearts to such a cheerful temper, as may give an obedient
welcome to this so smarting an affliction; that even whilst you weep, you may
yet smile upon the Rod of your Heavenly Father, whose stripes you do so
tenderly suffer; and enabled you also to bring your minds to a willing and
contented acquiescency in the wisdom of divine appointments: how cross and
contradictory soever they may seem to rebellious nature. It Is easy indeed for
those whose bones are full of marrow, to be joyful, but for the bones which God
has broken to rejoice, is questionless the praise of Divine Mercy; to be not
only patient, but praiseful under so severe and killing a dispensation, is
certainly the highest pitch of Christian Fortitude; to smile upon affliction,
and under its severest pressures, to sing when others shriek, will eminently
bespeak you a singular pattern of holy cheerfulness.

Yet withal understand and know, that the ingenuity of Christianity does allow
you to express your sorrowful resentments of the absence and loss of your
useful Friend: and it is a truth by the common consent of all mankind
acknowledged, that there is no burden so absolutely intolerable to humane
nature, as the death and separation of those whom Gods Honorable Ordinance
has conjoined and made one, the bonds of Matrimonial Love, being stronger than
those of Nature. How often have we seen men of noble and gallant spirits, able
to scorn injuries, and bravely to conquer, yea to revenge themselves upon the
base attempts of malice; by not vouchsafing so much as to take any notice of
them: yet how have their generous minds been disconsolately dejected, when the
doleful tidings of their Relations death have first surprised them? The
victorious David, who was no whit astonished at the great Goliahs valor, nor
his Attendants rage, but with an undaunted resolution (though but a Stripling)
encounters with him, and utterly overthrows him; yet when the sad and sudden
news came of the death of his beloved Jonathan, sorrow like a thick Cloud sat
upon his Countenance, 2 Samuel 1.26.
and the bitter anguish of his painful soul constrained him to cry out, I am
distressed.

Yea, the holy Jesus, that grand exemplar of piety, who always submitted to his
Fathers will in all things, and therefore could never be subject to the
corroding thoughts of discontent, yet he by his own practice, showed the
propensity of our natures to grief and sorrow, for the loss of those whom we
highly value and dearly love; he himself passionately weeping when his beloved
Lazarus lay asleep in the silent dormitory of the Grave, St. Joh. 11.35.
and the chorus of Mourners stood lamenting him.

Christian Religion does not destroy humane passions and natural affections,
which were originally planted in innocent nature, and were afterward found in
Christ's spotless nature; yea so far are they from being sinful, that they are
highly useful when kept (as they ought to be) under the Lock and Key of Reason:
then it is that our passions become unlawful, when they become excessive, and
grow impatient of restraint by the superior powers and faculties of man's soul,
when the dictates of reason prevail nothing, but the Prince Lackeys after the
Servant, and passion usurps the Throne, whose place is no higher than the
Footstool.

Thus I observe good Jacob guilty of too much indulgence to his natural
affection, when he sorrowfully cries out like a man resolved to exasperate his
own miseries, Genesis 37.35.
I will go down into the grave, unto my Son mourning: for the truth is, as the
excess of any passion is sinful and injurious, so immoderate sorrow is
particularly hurtful to the living, and dishonorable to the dead; neither is
it an argument of more Love, but an evidence of less Grace.

You may please to remark the difference between the Egyptians mourning, Genesis
50.3. and 10. compared.
and Joseph's for his Father Jacob; they mourned seventy days for the old
Patriarch, he but seven days for his own Father: What! Did Heathenism outdo
Religion? or had strangers more natural affection than his own Bowels? I hope
not so. But Joseph's piety prevails above his passion, and the certain knowledge
of his holy Fathers joyful resurrection (which they were ignorant wholly of)
administered more matter of comfort, than his death could occasion sorrow.
Joseph knew that immoderate Tears were the prodigality of affection; he knew
the unprofitableness as well as the impiety of a sullen sorrow; he knew that
could he have melted himself into tears or by weeping have occasioned a second
Deludge, yet all would have been in vain. Orpheus in the Ethnic Mythology
could make Trees and Stones dance after the Music of his Harmonious Lute, yet
could not with all his Melodious Harmony reduce his deceased Friends from the
power of the Grave: for the house of death is like the Lions Cave, from whence
there are no returning Footsteps.

Seeing then that the Supreme Majesty (whose paths are in the labyrinths of
Unsearchable Wisdom, and whose footsteps are like the track of a mighty ship in
the over-swelling Ocean, past finding out) has by the late issue of his
Providence declared his will, it is most reasonable that this declaration of
Gods will should satisfactorily determine yours: for remember that when God
rings changes in a Town, he well knows how to make Music thereby to his own
Glory: and in the intervals of passion, let me beg of you to consider, that a
just and pious imitation of his holy example, whom God has removed from you,
is the important duty which now lies incumbent upon you, with a persevering
diligence to perform.

To Inform and Convince you how highly accountable you are to almighty God,
both for the long enjoyment of his Ministry, and also for the happy advantage
of his example, is the honest design of the following Sermon: and also to let
this censorious age, (in which some persons are so overgrown with the
Anti-Episcopal Jaundice, that their Eye can see nothing in a Conformist, but
what is discolored and of a different tincture) understand and know that you
had a Conformist for your Minister, who rendered solid Religion amiable, by a
Conversation in all things worthy of it; who did by a Regular Piety, a strict
Sobriety, a Catholic and diffusive Charity, render Religion venerable to the
world; one whose whole time, strength and parts, were piously devoted to God
and his sacred Service.

Moses, I observe, was in one particular privileged by God above all other
holy persons: their souls (in common with his) at death have Angels for their
Convoy toward the Mansions of Bliss and Glory: but he had an Angel for his
Sexton, who buried his Body in an unknown place, lest the Israelites should
superstitiously Idolize and adore it: There would be no fear at all of any such
offensive adoration on your part, were I able (as indeed I am not) to draw to
the life the fair Effigies of your absent Minister, who was, like Moses,
faithful in all Gods house whilst he lived, and not unlike him at his death;
his meek soul gliding from him in a fine imperceptible vehicle, and he dying as
the modern Jews by tradition tell us Moses did, ad Nutum Dei, and Osculo Oris
ejus, at Gods beck, and as it were with a kiss of Gods mouth; It was no more
betwixt God and them but this, Go up and dye.

To conclude then, May all your practices appear to the world in a faithful
compliance with what was truly imitable and praiseworthy in him. May the
living Example of your dead Minister, be exemplified in the lives of you his
People. May you daily dress by his Glass, and walk in his pious and devout
Footsteps. May you all meet him with astonishing Joy, and behold him also with
unutterable delight and comfort in the day of your great Audit, this is and
ever shall be the hearty and affectionate supplication of

Your sympathizing Friend and Servant, William Burkitt.
Mildin, December. 10. 1679.
HEB. xiii. 7. Remember them that have the rule over you, who have spoken to
you the word of God, whose faith follow, considering the end of their
Conversation.


HOwever at the first appearance, the Text may seem not unfitly acommodated to
the sad and sorrowful circumstances, in which you the People of this place do
at present stand; yet it is no part of my intention by the reading of these
words to exasperate your grief, or revive your sorrow for the loss of your
truly Reverend, and lately deceased Watchman; but rather to moderate and
regulate your just sorrow for him, whom without weeping eyes it had been a sin
in you to part with. That People have a hard and dry haert indeed that can part
with Gods Prophets without tears. Physicians tell us, that if Rheum be sweetened
it cannot hurt the Lungs; sure I am, if sorrow be sanctified, it cannot hurt
the heart, nor prejudice the soul: now that your sorrow may be such, it is my
design in appearing here at your request this day, to call you off from
mourning for him, who wants neither the benefit nor benevolence of your Tears,
to a just imitation of him; to transcribe his excellent pattern, in fair and
legible Characters in your own lives.

How lovely was that copy of Religion which he set before you in his daily
Conversation! So forcible was the Majesty of that holiness that shined forth in
him, that it did extort a veneration from its most violent Opposers; and so
convictive also, that it pierced the very Consciences of his Enemies, and
constrained them whom prejudice only had made his Foes, tacitly to acknowledge
that God was in him of a Truth. Know then that it is a poor and low evidence of
your respects to him, should you go with Mary to your dear friends Sepulcher,
and there bedew his Coffin with your Tears: the highest demonstration of your
ardent love to him, and of your unbounded and inexpressible gratitude to God
for him, is to take up his exemplary graces, by a Christian imitation, and to
mourn more passionately that you are so unlike him, than that you have at
present lost him; that all your long converses with him should no more
assimilate you to his own likeness.

Think it not, I beseech you, a sufficient and suitable return to almighty God,
for sive and thirty years enjoyment of his ministerial labors, to follow his
Hearse to the Grave with a sigh and a groan: believe it, God expects somewhat
more at your hands for such a mercy, than all this comes to; if you shall
forget to obey his Counsels, if you shall neglect to follow his example; not
only the dust of his feet whilst alive, but the very ashes of his Grave now
dead, will sadly appear as a judicial testimony against you in the day of your
account.

What, is this all you can afford, to sprinkle a tear upon the Hearse of so
faithful a servant of Christ and of your souls? have you nothing but a sew
briny drops wherewith to preserve and perpetuate his excellent memory beyond
his Urn? will you suffer this burning and shining light, which was so signal an
Ornament to the Candlestick it so long stood in, to go out in silence like a
Glowworm at the Hedges bottom, with no greater noise than you make with your
Eyes? I hope not so, but rather that you will remember him that so long had the
Ministerial Rule over you, who has so often with an indefatigable industry and
laborious diligence spoken to you the word of God, whose faith it is your
highest wisdom perseveringly to follow, considering the blessed end of his
Christian conversation.

In a word, I hope you will honor and hear him as long as ever he preaches to
you, and then I am sure you will not fail to do so still, for with righteous
Abel, he being dead, yet speaks; yea dead as well as living he is still your
Preacher, his Shroud and Coffin are his Pulpit, his Grave and Tombstone are
his Temple, and he still preaches to you, though he lies in silence before you
and utters never a word, I mean by his pious and most instructive example left
among you, and by that fair character and good report, which he has so
deservedly obtained with you, upon which account, allow me, I pray, the liberty
to bespeak you freely in the words of the great Apostle now read unto you,
Remember them that have the Rule over you, who have spoken unto you the word of
God; whose faith follow considering the end of their Conversation.

Which words contain the Apostles advice to the Christian Hebrews, and in them
to all succeeding Christians, how to manage their deportment toward their
Ecclesiastical Governors, whom God by death or persecution at any time removes
from them; and that is, first ever to preserve their name and memory fresh
among them as a precious treasure, Remember them that have the Rule over you:
Secondly, to propound their holy conversation to their daily view, in a
Christian imitation of those Evangelical graces and Moral virtues, which were
so orient and exemplary in their Rulers lives, whose faith follow.

In the words you have four particulars observable.

1. The Persons exhorted, the Church of God; unto whom he mercifully affords
the honor and happiness of a Spiritual Guide and Ruler.

2. The Duty exhorted to, and that is two sold. (1.) To embalm their names with
a precious memory, remember them, etc. (2.) To imitate their Christian Example,
and transcribe it impartially into their own lives; whose faith follow.

3. Here is the pattern propounded to the Christians imitation; or the persons
described whom we ought thus to imitate and follow, and they are our Spiritual
Rulers, described here to us by a double character; (1.) By their Ministerial
Office; who have spoken unto you the word of God (2.) By their Ministerial
Power, which they exercise by virtue of that Office, and that is to rule and
govern the Flock committed by Christ to their care and charge; Remember them
that have the Rule over you.

4. Here is the Argument and Motive which the Apostle makes use of, to excite
and quicken a People to this commendable imitation of their Spiritual Rulers,
and that is drawn from the happy conclusion which they make, when they have
finished their testimony at death; they go off the public Stage with honor
and applause: this I conceive lies coucht and comprehended in the last words,
Considering the end of their Conversation.

The strait limits of our time will not permit a distinct handling of all the
foregoing particulars. I shall therefore propound one general note to your
observance, which (as I conceive) is the principal intendment of the Text. Take
it thus;

That it is the standing Duty of that people, Note.
whom God has honored with the long enjoyment of a Spiritual Guide and Ruler,
perseveringly to follow his Faith, and to imitate his exemplary Conversation.

(...) The original word (...), which we translate to follow and imitate, does
not simply signify to remark and observe another actions, but to perform a
work according to example and pattern: a Metaphor as some conceive borrowed
from Theaters, where the Stage Players study with the greatest accuracy and
exactness, to express the gestures and dispositions of those persons, whom they
design to personate and represent: to the faithful exercise of which
industrious care, does the Apostle exhort all Christians, in their imitation of
those whom God has set over them, in whatever was truly exemplary and
praiseworthy in them; when here he bids us follow their Faith.

If you will consult the sacred Scriptures, you will find this Duty frequently
recommended to, and as highly commended in the Christian; observe how strictly
it is recommended to our practice, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me, even as
I also am of Christ: note also how the performance of this Duty is commended by
the same Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 1.6. Ye became followers of us, and of the Lord,
having received the word in much affliction, etc. that is (as I humbly
conceive) ye followed us with a resolute perseverance in the same thorny path
of persecution and affliction for the Gospel sake, in which we before you had
traced the Footsteps of the suffering Jesus.

For the more distinct and methodical handling of the Note propounded, I shall
attempt to give you a satisfactory resolution to these two inquiries.

1. I shall inquire how and after what manner are a People concerned, to
imitate and follow the pattern and example of their Spiritual Rulers.

2. From what Motives, and upon what Considerations are they obliged so to do.

1. Inquiry; How and after what manner ought a people to imitate and follow
their Ministerial Rulers?

To this I shall return a double Answer.

1. Negative: The best of Ministers being but men at the best, therefore their
peoples imitation of them and their Example must not be an universal but a
limited imitation; with this just caution the great Apostle Saint Paul
propounded his own example to the Corinthians view; 1 Cor. 11.1.
be ye followers of me, as I also am of Christ; as if he had said, If at any
time you find me your Spiritual Guide stepping aside, and walking unanswerable
to that uniform pattern of obedience which the holy Jesus set before both me
and you in his own holy and immaculate life, take heed that you decline my
example, and follow not my footsteps.

Indeed the Doctors of the Romish Synagogue do peremptorily oblige their
followers to believe whatever they (as infallible Dictators) propound to them,
be it never so unreasonable; and to practice also whatever they set in example
before them, be it never so ridiculous and absurd. Verily they impose the same
ignominious terms upon the people of their Communion, 1 Samuel 11.2.
which Nahash once offered to the men of Jabesh-gilead, that every one shall
put out his right Eye (Reason) that so they may be the more fit for their blind
devotion; yea both Eyes if the Church command it; the Eye of Sense too must at
least be disbelieved, otherwise that grand affront to humane nature the
doctrine of Transubstantiation had never obtained credence in the world.

But blessed be God your Ministers have more integrity, than thus magisterially
to impose either upon your belief or upon your practice. We charitably warn you
of your danger, if you try not both our Doctrine and our Manners, by the
infallible touchstone of the Holy Scriptures, before you believe the one or
imitate the other. We freely acknoweldge, and impartially confess that we are
men of like passions and infirmities with your selves, and as obnoxious to
error through ignorance, as we are to sin through infirmity.

You are not then, you see, either commanded by God, or encouraged by us, to
imitate and follow your spiritual Guides universally, and in all things: but
with a due restriction and just limitation, you are to follow your Ministers no
further than they follow their infallible Minister, Christ Jesus.

2. Positively. A peoples imitation of their Preachers exemplary Pattern ought
to have this threefold signature instampt and impressed upon it.

1. It ought to be a regular and uniform imitation; you are not to follow him
universally in all his actions, but in the impartial exercise of all his
graces; this Counsel the holy Apostle gives, Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, what soever things are of good report; if
there be any virtue, praise or comeliness in his Actions, those things you must
think upon. Remember to follow your Spiritual Guide in that even path of piety,
wherein he has uprightly followed the Captain of your salvation. Hypocrisy
singles out one grace and shuns another, but sincerity discovers it self by an
uniform care and endeavor to transcribe all, and does nothing by partiality.

2. It must be a vigorous and industrious imitation: indeed to imitate sinners
in an evil way, requires no great pains, in regard of the natural vent and
tendency of our natures to sin and vanity; as also in regard of the pronity of
the Tempter to solicit and invite forth our innate corruption into act and
exercise. But to follow a Christian in what is eminently good, requires a
vigorous intention of mind; and all the superior faculties of our souls must
be employed industriously in that noble exercise: here our understandings must
be exercised to discover the radiant excellency of those Christian Graces which
shine forth in others: here must our judgments be employed to discover by the
light of Scripture and Reason, what is to be chosen, and what to be eschewed in
the Pattern we propound to follow: here our affections also must be concerned
in taking a daily pleasure and delight, to hold with an unwearied hand the
Glass of their holy lives continually before us, the better to dress our Souls
by it. Certainly to perform all this, requires a soul fortified with courage,
and armed with such an impregnable resolution, as no difficulties can dismay or
vanquish.

3. It ought to be a constant and persevering imitation: be always endeavoring
to keep your Ministers example fresh in memory, and make this duty your daily
work and constant practice. So much, I conceive, is employed in that Apostolical
injunction, Heb. 6.12. Be ye followers of them, who through faith and patience
inherit the promises: that is, follow the Saints with the same Christian
patience, and persevering faith, with which they inherit the glorious
accomplishment of all the promises.

Having thus briefly shown you how, and after what manner a People are obliged
to follow the Religious footsteps of their exemplary Guides, The

2. Inquiry follows, viz. from what Motives, and upon what Considerations
they are concerned thus to do.

To which I answer, A People lie under a threefold obligation to this Duty,
viz. in regard of God, in relation to themselves, and in reference to their
Ministers.

1. In regard of God, Because this is one of his principal ends in bestowing
such gracious qualifications upon his Ministers; yea, Gods great design in
sending his Messengers amongst a people, is, that by the holiness of their
example, as well as by the purity of their Doctrine, they may win souls to a
love of Righteousness: this is the Duty which Timothy is exhorted to, when the
Apostle bids him hold forth the word of life; that is, the purity of it in his
Doctrine, and the power of it in his Conversation: from hence, no doubt, it is
that Christ Compares his Apostles to lights, ye are the light of the world:
Mat. 5.14.
an allusion (as may be probably conjectured) to Torches held out in a dark
night, to direct Passengers their way; or to fires upon a Beacon near the
Seacoast, to prevent the bewildered Mariners splitting upon Rocks, and
suffering Shipwreck. Believe it, God does not only bestow his graces upon his
Ministers for their own sakes, to qualify them for their future happiness and
glory, but he designs also your advantage by those endowments; so that a people
do apparently sin against the great end and purpose of Gods love and kindness,
in sending his Ambassadors among them; if they do not fruitfully improve their
Religious Example set before them: for verily your Ministers gifts are a
talent, for which you, as well as they, are responsible to God: yea, you are as
highly accountable to God for the Holy Example they set before you, as you are
for that sacred Depositum, the doctrine of faith, I mean, which they deliver to
you.

2. In relation to your selves: Without a Christian imitation of the
stedfastness of their faith, and the exemplariness of their conversation, whom
God has set over you, and made patterns of solid piety unto you; that which
was your mercy and privilege in the enjoyment, will apparently tend to the
dreadful aggravation of your sin, and the eternal heightning of your account.
St. Paul in his famous funeral Oration for the Saints departed, Hebrews 11.
tells us of Noah, verse 5. that he condemned the world, which no doubt he did
by his practice, as well as by his preaching: indeed he preached by his hand as
well as with his tongue; his building of the Ark was a daily visible Sermon to
that unreclaimable generation: with what scoffing derision did the old world
laugh at Noah for his Ark, and tell one another in sport, that too much
holiness had made the old man mad: and that all the alarms of a flood
approaching, were but the idle dreams of the doting Prophet? yet his example
not followed, brought vengeance upon that people to extremity.

Think then of this all you the people of this place, who have so long enjoyed
a Preacher of Righteousness among you, and all that while have found him a
faithful witness from God unto you; for not receiving his testimony, you must
expect to find him another day an eternal witness for God against you. Believe
it timely, if you be not awakened to a fruitful contention of being like him,
in all that was truly imitable and praiseworthy in him, verily your sins would
not have been accented with such an aggravated guilt (as they will then be) had
you never known him.

3. A people are obliged thus perseveringly to follow the holy example of their
Spiritual Guides, with a reference unto them; and that in two respects.

1. In that your Christian imitation of their instructive example will conduce
very much to make up their loss, and render them less mist and wanted in the
world. I doubt not but many of you are justly sensible of the severity of that
stroke, which the hand of Almighty God has given your Town in your late
Ministers death; yet think not, I pray, your loss irreparable; for be assured
it is very much within the compass of your power, to repair and make up your
own loss: stand but you all up, and appear in your distinct and several
capacities for God (as he did) by a public owning of his ways and worship;
fill you up the breach made by the death of him with your gracious influence,
and his absence will be the better born. It is very observable what our dying
Saviors comfort was upon the bed of his Cross; next to the supports of the
divine presence, this revived his soul that he had a Seed in the world which
should stand up and appear for God, after his departure; Psalm. 22.30. My seed
shall serve him; as if our Lord had said, Although I am taking my final
farewell of this world, yet I shall leave a spiritual generation behind me,
that will carry on my Fathers work in the world, and build up my spiritual
kingdom, when I shall be at rest. And I am sure it did not a little conduce to
the support of your dying Ministers spirit, when he had death before him in
immediate prospect, to hope upon good grounds that he (as a Spiritual Father)
should leave many Children behind him, to carry on the work of Christ in the
world, when his head should be laid among the clods.

2. In as much as your Christian care to imitate your Ministers pattern, will
be the best and fullest commendation you can bestow upon their person; it is
indeed no less the duty, than the commendation of a people, to embalm the names
of their dead Ministers with a precious memory, who have worn out amongst them
with use, and not with rust; equity as well as ingenuity requires this, that
when they are in Heaven, they should live in their good name on earth, as when
they were on earth, they lived by their good heart in Heaven. Yet withal I
crave leave to interpose a double caution.

1. That your highest commendations and praises of them without a Christian
endeavor to exemplify and imitate whatever you observed praiseworthy in
them, is but an unprofitable complement, of no more fragrancy, than a handful
of Flowers which the innocent Child strows upon its Parents grave, which make
the Corpse smell not at all the sweeter. Nay,

2. To commend and not to imitate, is not only disingenuity but hypocrisy, not
only bare complement, but which is far worse, it is self-condemnation; for if
you do believe that to be truly excellent in your Minister which you commend
him for, why do you then not imitate it? if you apprehend it not excellent, why
do you then commend it? so that thy tongue does either belly thy heart, or else
thy life does contradict thy tongue. To cure which vanity, apply your selves to
an industrious following of what the word of God and your own Consciences tell
you did deserve your notice; and let your own works, as well as his, praise him
in the gate.

The Application.
From all that has been spoken I infer,

1. That it is no less than our obliged duty to bless almighty God with hearty
gratulation and praise, for the pious lives, and exemplary deaths, of such whom
his divine grace has made patterns of holiness to us in the world. Certainly
to bless his holy name for all his Saints and Servants departed this life in
his faith and fear, is so far from smelling of the rank superstition of the
Church of Rome (as some have weakly thought) that it is matter of positive duty
to express our thankfulness for such excellent helps to further us in our way
toward Heaven. Precepts may be dark and obscure, but precepts exemplified are
plain and facil: the holy example of departed Saints afford us a double help in
running our Christian Race.

1. As they assure us that whatever the Gospel requires at our hands, is a
possible attainment; the same assistance that enabled them, stands ready to
succor us: so that the poor and little excuses of difficulty and impossibility
in what the Gospel enjoins, are hereby obviated, whilst we behold those virtues
and graces flourishing in others, with an happy facility, from which we would
excuse our selves upon those weak pretenses.

2. In that examples do inspirit us with life and vigor. Miltiades his
victories would not suffer Themistocles to sleep: so highly did the success of
the one animate and inflame the zeal of the other. Bless we God then for that
cloud of Witnesses, Heb. 12.1.
(with the great Apostle) which does at once both encourage our endeavors, and
also assure us of success.

2. Inference. I next infer from what has been already offered, how exact and
circumspect the Ministers of Christ ought, and are obliged to be in that
example which they daily set before their people. O how highly are we all
concerned to oblige our selves to an eminent and exemplary piety of
conversation! the Reason is obvious, because the eyes of all our Flock not only
are, but ought to be upon us: our mistakes then, are not like the errors of a
Pocket-watch, which mislead only a single person, but like those of a Town
Clock, which misguides a multitude. What a strange curiosity and holy niceness
was there in the election of those who were under the Law admitted to serve at
the Altar; if there wore the least blemish in the Head, Eye, Hand or Foot, they
were forthwith excluded from those Levitical administrations; Lev. 21.17, 18,
19.
if there were not an exact symmetry of parts, they must not set a foot upon
the floor of the holy place. What, think you, was the Gospel of that Ceremonial
Rite but this, to intimate and signify that inward purity of heart, and
unspotted innocence of life which Almighty God expects in the Evangelical
Priesthood? Certainly the Spiritual blemishes of Gods immediate Servants under
the Gospel, are not a less eyesore to the Divine Purity, than those Legal
imperfections, which did deny the Sons of Aaron an allowed access to Gods
Altar, during the Ceremonial Law. Consider we then, that our actions have an
aptitude to make a deeper impression upon the minds of our people, than our
words: Those that do forget our Doctrine, will be sure to remember our example,
at least so far, as to produce it boldly by way of Apology for themselves, when
they walk in any path of Impiety and disorder. Theophylact in his commentary
upon those words, Christ opened his mouth and taught, Mat. 5.2.
makes this Query, whether the first words were not superfluous; he answers No,
because, (...) although Christ, when he opened his mouth taught, yet he did
teach, when he did not open his mouth, viz. ((...)) by his life; so then there
is a preaching life as well as a preaching doctrine: if Religion be taught by
the first but not by the second, we fadly disappoint the end of what is spoken;
and thus Penelope like, what we do in the day we may undo in the night, in
works of darkness. Yet let it not be inferred from hence, that the Ministers
unworthiness does make void his Office, and evacuate his Commission; for the
efficacy of the sacred Function depends not upon our dignity, but on the energy
of Divine Grace: yet as to his own soul it renders all his labors fruitless.
Admit his Doctrine be sound; yet an Heterodox Conversation will carry an
Orthodox Judgment to Hell. In a word, though like a cracked Bell he may be
instrumental to ring others to Heaven, yet for himself there is no remedy, but
to the fire he must go, either for his refining or his condemnation. To
conclude this, the Throne and the Pulpit, above all places call for holiness:
the Prince and the Preacher, above all persons, are most accountable to God for
their Example.

3. Inference. I infer from hence in the last place how signal your obligations
are to Almighty God for the long enjoyment of that exemplary pattern of all
true piety and virtue (your deceased Minister I mean) whom (for your sins I
fear) he has lately taken from you. Show now your obedience to God, your
respects to him, your kindness and charity to your own souls, by a zealous and
faithful care to transcribe impartially in your own lives whatever was truly
imitable in your Ministers. And not to carry you beyond the confines of the
Text, let me earnestly bespeak your Christian compliance with a double duty
here enjoined.

1. To follow his faith.

2. To imitate his exemplary conversation.

1. Follow his faith, and that in a double respect, in the soundness of his
faith, and in the stedfastness of his faith.

1. Follow him in the soundness of his faith. The faith which he perseveringly
professed, and taught, was that Doctrine which is according to Godliness; that
faith which owns God for its immediate Author, and the Scripture for its
infallible Rule: the faith that was once delivered to the Saints, which is not
the result of fancy and imagination, but the product of an eternal Counsel,
which was confirmed by the miracles, and sealed with the blood of a Savior. In
a word, that faith which he so zealously taught, had sure footing in the holy
Scriptures. Whenever he propounded any truth which required not only the
assent of your understandings, but also the obedience and adoration of your
faith, he constantly showed you the Canon of the Scriptures for its
confirmation. If any then (which God forbid) should appear after him in this
place, and attempt the proselyting of you to another Gospel, or to any new
doctrine of faith foreign to the Scriptures, should he pretend to the authority
of a commissioned Angel from Heaven, let him be held accursed.

2. Follow him in the stedfastness of his faith. The same rule of faith which
he laid before you at his first coming amongst you, he lived and preached by to
the day of his death: and this I take the greater liberty to assert, because
some persons have not blushed to tell the world publicly, that since his
conformity to the discipline of the Church, he had apostatized and revolted
from that faith which he had formerly professed and taught; but be ye all
assured, that as to the great fundamentals of Faith and Religion he was ever
the same, and what he taught you to his last breath, I doubt not but he stood
ready to confirm and seal with his blood, even in the fiercest flames of
martyrdom, if God had called him to that fiery trial.

2. Imitate his Christian Conversation. My meaning is, exemplisie those
Evangelical Graces and Christian Virtues in your lives, which did so oriently
shine forth in his. To propound a few:

1. His Eminent Humility. This was the garment which covered all his excellent
accomplishments, although indeed their beauty was rendered more conspicuous and
amiable by casting this veil over it. Oh what mean thoughts had he of himself
and was not only content, but desirous also that others should have so too: no
man ever expressed so low a value of his worth and merits as himself did. Every
thing in others that was good, he admired as excellent, whilst the same or
better in himself, he thought not unworthily contemned: his Eyes were full of
his own deficiencies and others perfections. In a word, he was a lowly Valley,
sweetly planted, well watered, richly fruitful; imitate him then herein, and by
a holy emulation study to excel him in this adorning Grace; and for your help
herein recollect what you heard from him in his elaborate Discourses among you
upon Phil. 2.5. Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus, this
humble mind.

2. His extensive Love: this grace did variously exert it self.

1. His love to God, he loved him exceedingly, whom he could not love
excessively, having such high and raised apprehensions of his Makers
excellencies, as caused him to judge his prime and best affections unworthy to
be placed upon so Divine an Object.

2. His Love to the holy Jesus: this was such a Seraphick and Divine fire in
his soul, as did marvellously consume his love to the world and all sublunary
comforts. You are witnesses, and all that knew him, in how eminent a measure
and degree the world was crucified unto him, and he unto the world, by the
Cross of Christ.

3. His love to souls; this was it, no doubt, that made him so indefatigable
both in his Study and the Pulpit; from hence it was, that the Throne of Grace,
his Study, the Pulpit and his sick Neighbors, had the whole of his time
divided amongst them, and devoted to them.

4. His unbounded love to all Christians, though they differed in their
sentiments from him: he loved Christians for their Christianity, and did adore
the Image of his Savior wherever he saw it in any of his members, unhappily
persecuting one another with hard names and characters of reproach. How often
did he publicly deplore and bewail, that the greatest measure of love that is
found at this day amongst the professors of the Cross, was not true Christian
love, but only love of a party! Follow him then in the impartial exercise of
this grace, and for your help therein remember what he taught you from Ephesians.
5.2. And walk in love as Christ also has loved us; and as you have any regard
for the Author of your profession, take heed that a spirit of Division (now)
crowd not in among you: your unity is your strength as well as your beauty;
persist therefore, I beseech you, in that Christian Order amongst your selves,
in which it was his great ambition all his days to preserve and keep you.
Timely oppose the crafty design of the subtle Adversary of souls, who will
take this occasion (if possible) now the Spiritual Parents is out of the way,
to set the Children together by the ears.

3. His diffusive Charity: his Alms were as exuberant as his Love: misery and
want wherever he met them, did sufficiently endear their objects to him; he
was none of those that hide their faces from the Poor, nor of the number of
them, who satisfy their Consciences with a single exercise of their Charity
once a year, but daily were the emanations of his Bounty. Yet although he cast
the seeds of his Charity upon all sorts of ground, he sowed them thickest upon
Gods enclosure; my meaning is, he did good unto all, but especially to those
that were of the Household of Faith. Make him herein, and his example the
pattern of your daily imitation; for the world which is chained together by
intermingled love, will soon shatter and fall in pieces if Charity shall once
fail and dye: and for your better help herein, call over those potent Arguments
for the exercise of this Evangelical Duty, which he urged upon you, from that
Apostolical injunction, Heb. 13.16. But to do good, and to communicate forget
not, for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

4. His persevering diligence and faithfulness in his place and station. You
could not but observe, that his whole disposal of himself was to perpetual
industry and service; he not only avoided idleness, but seemed to have a
forcible antipathy against it, and was often recommending it to you with great
concern and vigor in his public advices, to be always furnished with somewhat
to do; ut te inveniat semper Diabolus occupatum, that the Devil may never find
thee at leisure to listen to his temptations, as St. Hierom advises. The idle
man's brain being, in truth, not only the Devils Shop, but his Kingdom too, a
Model of, and an Appendage unto Hell; a place (like that) given up to torture
and mischief. As to himself, his chiefest recreation was variety of work; for
beside those portions of time, which the necessities of nature, and of civil
life extorted from him, there was not a minute of the day which he left vacant.
Now to extimulate your zeal to a pious imitation of him herein also; let me
admonish you to ruminate upon those accurate Sermons you heard from him upon
St. Mat. 20.6. Why stand ye here all the day idle?

5. His tender sympathy with the afflicted Church of Christ. Like a true son
of Zion he could not rejoice when his Mother mourned, he daily felt as much by
sympathy as he did by sense; and no wonder, for he that has a stock going in
the Churches Ship, cannot but lament and quake at every storm: Oh how frequent
were his enquiries after her, how fervent were his prayers for her, how bowelly
and compassionate were his mournings over her! The deplorable condition of the
Church and Nation lay exceeding near his heart, both living and dying; he
preferring their happiness and welfare above his chief joy. Now in order to
your attaining the same Christ-like temper with him, frequently meditate upon
what you heard from him, upon Nehemiah 1.4. where the sympathizing Prophet
refuses to drink wine, when the afflicted Church drank water.

6. And lastly, to sum up all, imitate him in his daily care and endeavor to
live Religion in all his capacities. As a Minister, ye are Witnesses, and God
also, how faithfully, how conscientiously he discharged his duty toward you.
In the exercise of his Ministerial Function, if censure it self be able to tax
him for any neglect, it must be in no more frequent visiting his Flock, from
which nothing but a weak body kept him, not a proud or unwilling mind; the
obstruction he met with in this part of his Duty from his tender habit of body
(which would not suffer him so frequently to perform it as he desired) was his
great sorrow both living and dying; yet having this to comfort him, that the
frailty of his body was his affliction, but not his sin. Consider him in his
next relative Capacity, as a Child, how dutiful and obsequious! O how great was
that tribute of veneration and respect which he constantly paid to the hoary
hairs of his aged Parents! As a Husband, how tender and compassionate; as a
Parent, how indulgent and affectionate; as a Minister, how kind and munificent!
Thus was he universally good in all stations, and lived Religion in very
capacity. And if you desire to imitate him herein also, as becomes you, dress
then your souls by that Glass daily, which his dying hand last held up before
your Eyes, I mean by Heavenly meditation, make those useful truths your own,
which you last heard from him upon Titus 2.12. That denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world: Which Christian Lesson, if it shall be as practically learnt by you, as
it was faithfully taught by him; I will be bold to say thus much in the
singular commendation of you his People, that you will thereby give the world a
convictive instance, that this age has Virtues as stupendous as its Vices.

The Conclusion.
Thus I have given my self the satisfaction of doing my Duty, in propounding
your Ministers example to your Christian view. Let none censoriously say, I
have been all this while painting the Prophets Sepulcher. No, but describing
the Prophet himself, and with this single and sincere intention, that you may
timely know, you have had a Prophet of the Lord among you; a person that had
(omnia in se sempiterna praeter corpusculum) all things living and lasting to
eternity except his body, which was the only thing he had subject to mortality,
and besides which, nothing of him does see corruption. 'Twill be below the
merit of his person, as well as the greatness of our loss, to celebrate his
death in womanish complaints, or indeed by any verbal lamentations; nor can any
thing beseem his memory but what is Sacred and Divine, as his Writings are. May
his just fame from them, and from his virtues, be precious to all succeeding
ages; and when Elegies committed to the trust of Marble, shall be as illegible
as if they had been writ in Water, when all stately Pyramids shall be dissolved
in dust, and all the venerable Monuments of Antiquity be devoured by the
corroding Teeth of Time, then let this short Character, describing him in his
best and fullest Portraicture, remain of him, viz. that he was A CHRISTIAN IN
COMPLETE ARMOR.

FINIS.

