INJUNCTIONS FOR THE ARCHDEACONS OF THE Diocese of SARUM.
To be delivered by them to the CLERGY in their Easter-Visitations, 1690.

Together with a Letter from their Diocesan GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARUM.

Imprimatur.

April 30. 1690. Z. Isham R. P. D. Henr. Episc. Land. a Sacris.



I. YOU shall read His Majesty's Letter, of the 13. of February last, to the
Clergy in your Respective Archdeaconries; and you shall press them seriously to
consider and observe the Rules that are set in it.

II. You shall signify to the Clergy of this Diocese, That in order to their
obeying Regularly and Uniformly the Commands sent to us and them by His
Majesty's Letter, they shall observe this Method. On the second Sunday in May
they shall read the Act of Parliament concerning the Observation of the Lord's
day, and shall exhort their Hearers to the Religious Observation of it. On the
Sunday sevennight before the Assizes, they shall read the Act against Perjury,
and preach on the same Subject. On the first Sunday in Advent, they shall read
the Act against Drunkenness, and li^ewise preach against that Uice. And on the
second Sunday in Lent they shall read the Act against Blasphemy Swearing, and
Cursing, and preach on the same Subject: And on the fourth Sunday in Lent they
shall preach against the sins of Adultery and Fornication. It is intended to
provide Homilies* for all these days, but till these are prepared, every one
is to furnish himself with Sermons on these Heads: and this is to be continued
from year to year.

III. You shall read this our Letter, that is herewith given to you, to our
Clergy, of which care shall be taken to send to every one of them a printed
Copy; and you shall charge them strictly to consider well the Contents and
Matter of it.

IV. You shall require such as have Sermons twice a day in Summer, to make
their Evening-Sermon on some part of the Church-Catechism, in such a Division,
that they may go quite through it once a year. And for such as preach but one
Sermon a day, you shall charge them, that every fortnight they preach on some
part of the Church-Catechism, so that once a year in every Church the Catechism
be explained quite through: and charge them likewise to examine the young
persons of their Parishes quite through the Catechism at every time that they
preach on any part of it.

V. You shall signify to the Clergy of the Diocese, That for avoiding Crowds
and Disorders in Confirmations, we intend to confirm frequently, not only in
our Cathedral on Good-Fridays, and Whitsun-Eves, and Christmas-Eves, but as we
go about to any of the Churches of our Diocese; and that therefore they take
care to send such to us, to be confirmed by us, when they hear that we are in
their Neighborhood, whom they find not only capable of repeating the words of
the Catechism, but likewise sensible of those Uows which were made in their
name in Baptism, and which they are then to renew: and who are of an age
capable of receiving the Sacrament, and in a disposition fit for it.

VI. You are to deal with our Clergy* and particularly with the Rural Deans, to
see if the Clergy of each Rural Deanery* can be brought to meet together in
some convenient place within the respective Deanery, if it may be three or four
times in a year, to consult of their common Concerns, and to acquaint us with
such things in which we may be assistant or helpful to them. This may be a
great means of begetting and keeping Brotherly Love and Friendship among them,
of giving advice to such as want experience, and of strengthening the whole
Body: therefore we do most earnestly recommend it to you and them.

VII. You are to enquire into the Deportment of the Clergy, and to see what
Scandals or ill Reports go upon any of them; and in particular, what their
Behavior is, with relation to those Canons which His Majesty has charged us to
look more narrowly to. You are also to examine who reside in their Livings, who
attend constantly on them, or are frequently, and without any just cause,
absent from them; who have Prayers Wednesdays and Fridays at the least* if not
oftener, where it is possible to have any number of Christians brought
together, though it were a very small one: and you are to accept no Excuse from
those who have not for some considerable time tried it: even two or three make
a Congregation.

VIII. You are to enquire, If under the pretense of having the benefit of the
Indulgence granted by Law there are any that do cast off quite the Worship of
God, neither coming to Church, nor going to any of the Meetings of the
Dissenters; and since it was far from the intent of the Law to grant any
Indulgence to Atheism, you are to enquire after all such persons, that they may
be proceeded against; but you are not to suffer any Uexation to be created upon
this pretense, to any that go to the Meetings of the Dissenters.

IX. You are to signify to our Clergy, That all such as desire to be put in
Orders, must be addressed to us some considerable time before the
Ordination-Sundays, that so we may have sufficient time not only to try and
examine them, but also to order notice to be given at the Parish-Churches where
they live, that so any who have any Impediment to object why they should not be
admitted into Holy Orders, may have timely warning, and may signify it to us.
We do desire that such as come for Orders, appear before us in the Ember-week,
not immediately preceding, but three months before we ordain them, that so we
may have a larger time and better opportunities of being fully satisfied
concerning them, remembering those heavy words of St. Paul's, Lay hands suddenly
on no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins; keep thy self pure.

GI. SARUM.

My Dear Brethren,
I Send you herewith His Majesty's Letter that was sent to me by My Lord Bishop
of London, which, according to my duty, I do now transmit to all you the Clergy
of my Diocese. I do bless God that has put into His Majesty's heart such a Zeal
for this our Church, and such a sense of the ways that are most proper for
preserving it, and which by the Blessing of God will certainly do it. For if
the Pastors and Guides of the Church of all Ranks, do adorn their Profession
with a good Conversation, and apply themselves seriously and zealously to the
Duties of their Function, the Church will both shine and prosper in spite of
all the opposition that can be made to it from its enemies of both hands. The
least blemish in a Church man's Life, as it is searched out and observed by all
men, so it not only lessens the force of all his other Labors; but it weakens
very much the credit of the whole Church, which is often judged by the Errors
and Disorders of every one of its Pastors. Yet it is not enough for men in Holy
Orders to be free of those crying sins which are odious in all Christians, but
are to be detested out of measure in Church men. It is a monstrous thing to see
one of that Holy Profession give himself to the excesses of Eating and
Drinking, or to other Sensual Appetites, to be guilty of Injustice or Lying, of
ungoverned Passion or Swearing, of Malice or filthy Avarice. These things ought
not to be named but with detestation among us. We ought not only to be
blameless and harmless, but to shine as lights in the World, and to show in our
lives, that to which we exhort our People in our Sermons, being Patterns to the
Believers in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Faith, and in Purity, and
giving attendance to Reading, to Exhortation and to Doctrine, that in so doing
We may both save our selves, and also them that hear us. Consider often what a
great Account you have to make to God for the Souls committed to your charge.
Remember and read over frequently the Vows that you made to God at your
Ordination, and the Charge that was then given you, and examine your selves
frequently whether you do observe these or not. Think how Sacred a Trust that
of Souls is, which the Son of God has purchased with his own Blood: and how
severely he will reckon with you, if through your ill Example, bad Doctrine, or
the other neglects of your duty, those Souls perish, for which he died. Think
it not enough barely to read Prayers, or perform other Divine Offices. You must
go often among them to instruct, exhort, admonish, or reprove them, as the^e is
occasion for it; You must instruct the Youth, visit the Sick reprove Offenders,
and reconcile such Differences as happen at any time to create Quarrels among
your People, and all this you must do with Zeal and Affection. And in
particular, you ought to warn your People frequently of the heavy Judgments of
God, which the sins of the Land give us just cause to apprehend; and that the
rather since God has spared us so long, whilst he has visited so many Nations
round about us in so terrible a manner, and has given us so great a measure of
the light of his Gospel, and so long a course of Temporal as well as Spiritual
Blessings; and you ought frequently to set forth to them the heinousness of
such sins as you find do most abound among them, whether they be the crying
ones mentioned in the Acts of Parliament herewith sent you, or others You ought
to represent to them the high contempt done to God, when Men make their Bodies,
which ought to be Temples for God to dwell in by his Spirit, the members of a
Harlot, and the Indignity done their own Natures, when by the excesses of
Drinking, a Man has changed himself into a Beast. You ought to show them what a
horrible Affront it is to Almighty God to profane his Holy Name by rash and
vain Swearing, and what a dreadful thing it is to swear falsely, even in common
Discourse, but much more when it is before a Judge. You ought to set often
before your People the great wickedness of Lying and Slander, of Falsehood and
Injustice, and of all Cheating and Oppression, and that in all cases of wrong
done their Neighbors, there is no repentance that is acceptable to God, but
that which is accompanied with restitution or reparation, as far as the Party
can possibly make it. You are often to represent to your People the
indispensable necessity of true holiness, without which no Man can see God, and
without which, their believing a true Faith, and their being of a true Church,
cannot serve them in any stead. For we are assured from the Word of God, that
not only Idolaters, but Fornicators, and Adulterers, Thieves, Covetous Persons,
Drunkards, Revilers and Extortioners cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Put
them often in mind of the importance of the Word Reformed Church, that imports,
that as our Doctrine and Worship are by the blessing of God Reformed; so our
Lives ought also to be Reformed; otherwise all the advantages that we have of
light and truth beyond other Churches, will rise up in Judgment against us, if
we do not live suitably to them. But above all things study to possess your
people with a deep sense of the duty that they owe to God their Maker, and to
Jesus Christ their Savior, that they may apply themselves to the exercises of
Devotion in secret, to the frequenting the Public Worship of God, and chiefly
to the receiving the Sacrament with that serious disposition of mind that
becomes such Holy Performances* that so they may delight in going together to
the House of God. And in order to their doing this aright, infuse into them a
great reverence for the Lord's Day, as a time separated from the common
business of life, for their attending on the Worship of God, and such other
Religious Exercises as may both increase their knowledge and their sense of
Divine Matters, and that therefore they ought not to satisfy themselves with
going to Church, and assisting publicly in the Service of God; but that they
should set themselves more to Prayer on that day, and to the reading of
Scriptures, or other good Books, both apart and together in their Families,
that so they may grow up in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ. These things you must open to your People frequently in season
and out of season, both at Church, and from House to House. And I charge you by
all the Authority that I have over you, by the Zeal that you bear to the Church
of England, and as you desire to have from your Labors and your People, a
Crown of rejoicing in the day of the Lord, and as you bear a due regard both to
your own Souls, and to the Souls that are committed to your care, and to that
Precious Blood by which they were redeemed, as you desire to be faithful to
your Ordination-Vows, and to have a share in those blessed words; Well done,
good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord: That you will
give your selves wholly to these things, that you will account no labor great
in advancing that Work for which our Savior spared not his own life: and that
you will pursue all the parts of your Ministry with a Zeal suitable to the
importance of them, that so we doing our parts faithfully under the Protection
and Favor of Our Gracious King and Queen, whom God long preserve, this Church
may recover its first Glory, and may so shine in all those things which can
adorn our Holy Profession, that she may become the head of the Reformation, and
the joy of the whole Earth; that she may still be safe under the Protection of
God, and may so conquer and gain upon all that depart from her, that all her
Children may with one Heart, and with one Mouth glorify the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to whose Grace and Favor I do most earnestly commend
you and your Labors. And am very sincerely,

My Dear Brethren, Your most Affectionate Brother and Servant in the Lord
Jesus, GI. SARUM.
Salisbury April 22. 1690.
London, Printed for Ric. Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1690.


