MARIA II. GULIELMI III. MAG. BRIT. FRAN. ET HIB. REGIS UXOR ET CONSORS
IMPERII. Nata 30 Aprils. 1662. Chiit 28 December. 1694. An. Aetat. 33.


AN ESSAY ON THE MEMORY Of the Late QUEEN.

BY GILBERT, Bishop of Sarum.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown, in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCV.

AN ESSAY ON THE MEMORY OF The late QUEEN.
ALL flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof, is as the flower of the
field: Some of these Flowers have more life and luster than others: They are
more beautiful, as well as more lasting: Yet in the course of things, the Grass
withers and the Flower fades; and that sometimes so quick, and by such an
unlooked for turn, that in the Morning it grows up and flourishes, and in
the Evening it is cut down and withers. One stroke of a Scithe cuts them down
by handfuls: And then the best decked spot of Ground, does quickly change its
Face, and lose all its Beauty. We who but the other Day, saw a Great Queen, (I
say, the other Day, for such an Idea must live so long and so fresh in our
Minds, that for a great many Years we will still say the other Day) we who saw
Her, like the Masterpiece of Nature, wrought up by all the Polishings of Art
and Improvement, look with so fresh a Bloom, and such promising Appearances,
who carried that Air of Life and Joy about Her, that animated all who saw Her,
and who reckoned their own lives both the safer and the happier, because Hers
was so firm, must now lament, that all this is taken from us, with one sudden
and amasing stroke. The best part of us, our hearts and hopes, are struck down
with Her; who was the best, God knows, the much best part of us all. We look up
to Heaven with deep, though silent regret, as if we envied Her blessedness: We
look down to the Earth, like men that are sinking thither: We look to the
Grave, where what was mortal is lodged till it becomes immortal, with a sort of
Indignation, that it should receive and consume those sacred Remains for which
we feel a sort of superstition, which though our Reason may check, yet it
cannot quite silence or extinguish.

NATURE, even on very extraordinary occasions, is apt to give it self some
vent, and to procure to it self some mitigation of its pain. And when it is too
full, for well chosen Expressions or regular Discourses, the broken and
inarticulate Language of Sighs and Tears, gives some relief: A Calm succeeds
those Storms: They give at least a breathing, and softer intervals. Here we
feel such an oppression, and distraction of Thought, that they choke us
inwardly, and break out only in amasement, and in a wildness of look and
behavior. We feel so great a loss in present, that we need not heighten it by
the gloomy prospect of the fatal Consequences, that may follow it: And yet we
cannot help seeing that, which is but too visible. We dare not pretend to enter
into the secret of God's Counsels, which are wrapped up from the Eyes of Mortals:
Yet they have such Characters upon them; that from thence we are induced to
make some Conjectures about them; though, after all, these are but Conjectures,
and are often ill grounded. But whether we look up to God, or to the outward
face of things, and to those appearances that are but too obvious, we soon find
cause enough to drive back our thoughts to that dark and native horror that
does now haunt and possess them. Some may perhaps make vain Complaints against
God, and try to ease their own grief, by accusing his Providence: Our Hearts
may carry us to say, Why was so much worth laid in one Mind, and so nobly
lodged? Why was it just showed the World, with advantage enough to let all Men
see what might have been expected from it? Why were so many great Idea's and
vast Designs formed by her? Why was she furnished with such skill and softness
in the management of them? And the sad Why comes last, Why was all this
snatched from us so early and so suddenly?

IT is true, all God's ways are a great depth; and we may never presume to ask
of him a reason of any of his Dealings, which are past finding out: But here
the Steps of his Providence are so accountable, that we ought not to be long in
the Dark about them. So much Worth was full Ripe for Heaven: And was much too
Good for Earth, especially for so corrupt a part of it, as we are. If those
great Blessings which Heaven held forth to us in Her, had attained the Ends for
which they were Designed, we might then have hoped that Her Crown would have
been the longer delayed; and that our Happiness might have been the more
lasting. The cutting part of our Sorrow is this, That we have too good reason
to believe that we have procured this to our selves.

UNLESS, according to the growing Impiety that spreads it self amongst us, we
will conclude that God has forsaken the Earth, and that all things roll, either
under the sullenness of Fate, or the giddiness of Chance; if we believe that
Providence watches over, and governs all that happens here below; we must then
acknowledge, that so great a Change as this has made, could not have come upon
us, but by a just and wise Direction. Therefore instead of those irregular
Thoughts and Expressions by which so great a Commotion of Mind may discharge it
self, and instead of those wild and dejecting Apprehensions, which it may be
apt to throw upon us, we ought to reduce our selves to more order, and to
consider more sedately, what we may justly fear, and how we may wisely provide
against it.

IF we will examine what may have brought so severe a stroke upon us, and what
may draw after it yet heavier ones, (but can any be heavier!) then if there is
yet room for Hopes, if our Wound is not incurable, and if the Breach that is
made upon us is not wide as the Sea, so that nothing can hinder our being
overflown by it, then I say, the searching into this, is all the reserve that
is left us, all that can balance so inestimable a Loss, or rather all that can
save us from being swallowed up utterly by it.

EVEN in a Shipwreck every one is forced after all his astonishment at their
common Fate, to try by what shift he himself may escape: For though the first
disorders of Melancholy may make one wish rather to perish in so terrible a
Calamity, than to furvive it, yet after all, Nature returns to it self, and
feels Self-preservation to be too deeply wrought into its Composition, to be
easily shaken off. While then such a Load oppresses us, and when such Fears
compass us round, all that remains, to make the one lighter, and to dissipate
the other, is for us to lay our Hands on our Mouths, because God has done it:
But then to lay them on our Heart, and to ask our selves what have we done? And
what shall we do to be saved?

HOW just soever any Affliction may seem to be, yet it must have its Bounds.
Our Religion gives a Temper: It does not impose upon us the dry Sullenness of
Stoics; Their most admired Sayings, That Fate is inexorahle; That it is in
vain to be troubled at that we cannot help: And the famed Answer of him, who
upon the News of his Son's Death, said coldly, I knew I begat him mortal, have
an air in them, that seems above the present state of human Nature. It looks
too savage and contrary to those tender Affections that are planted in us; and
that are in some sort necessary for carrying on the common Concerns of Life.
But the Extremes on the other hand, are much more boisterous and untractable:
While the Rages of Passion govern; neither the Calmness of Reason, nor the
Authority of Religion will be hearkened to. Heathenism was fruitful in the
Inventions of Fury, Hecatombs of living Creatures were thought poor Oblations:
Humane Sacrifices were offered liberally on those Occasions, nor was the
greatest waste of Treasure, with all the Profusion of Funeral Piles and
magnificent Buildings, thought a suitable addressing of their Dead to the
invisible State, to which they went, unless innumerable Ghosts were sent after
them as a welcome Convoy to follow them thither. When the Civilizing of the
World and the Decencies first of Humanity, then of Philosophy, and chiefly when
Revealed Religion came to soften and enlighten Men; those outrageous
Solemnities fell off: Though the costly Part was by many kept up with too much
Ostentation. The Corrupters of Religion, found that the Tenderness of
Affection, with that generous Dissinteressedness which it gave, offered to them
a Harvest, that might be fruitful: And they were not defective in the Art of
Cultivating it.

OPINIONS were invented, and Practices were contrived, that drew great Wealth
into their Hands; and begat a Consideration for them, which, if it had not been
over-done by the Managers, and that in a manner too course and too ravenous not
to be found out at last, was bringing the whole World under their Authority.
Their Title seemed sure: And it was to have its chief Operation; when both
those who died and those who lived, were the least able to examine their
Pretensions: the Fears of the one and the Sorrows of the other, made them very
pliant to their Conduct, and implicit under it.

WE have a better Light, and are governed by truer Measures: We know there is a
wise Providence, and a future State; and in those two never failing Sources of
Quiet and Submission, we give our Sorrows just Abatements. But since all the
Steps of Providence, though just and wise in themselves, have not the same Face
to us, some of them being as bright as others are dark; we ought not to look on
Providence as rigid Fate; but as the steady Conduct, of a Mind that is
infinitely wise: we ought therefore to go as far as reasonably we can, in
judging what is the Language of that Providence to us, and what the Designs of
it upon us may be.

THE liveliest as well as the usefullest Exercises of our Thoughts, is to sum
all that was excellent and imitable in the Person whose Loss we lament; to lay
it all together; to observe how Amiable it was, what an Influence it had, and
in what Effects it appeared. This if it rests in the bare commendation of one,
that may be safely praised, when Flattery or Interest cannot be thought to have
any share in the Incense, that is then given, it is at least a Justice to the
Memory of a Person that deserved it, and a Homage to Virtue it self. It will
probably go deeper, and have its best Effect upon us: It will engage us to love
those Virtues in our selves, which we admire in others, and will reproach us,
if we commend that in another, which we take no care to imitate our selves.
Probably this will not evaporate quite into Discourse, or wear off with Time:
somewhat will stick, and have a due Effect upon us. Some of those Virtues may
so far insinuate themselves into us, that we may grow to love and practice
them. A noble Pattern cannot be much looked at without begetting some
disposition to copy after it; and to imitate it. A great Luster, though it may
sometimes dazzle, yet it enlightens, as well as it strikes.

THOSE who are perhaps tied too closely, by some fatal Engagements to Practices
that they cannot resolve on forsaking, yet have that secret Veneration for true
Virtue, especially for the sublime of it, and saw so much of that in our
blessed Queen, that they may be desirous to see such a just Representation of
those various Branches of her Character, as may entertain their Admiration at
present, and be perhaps of some more Use to them, in other Periods of their
Lives. They may desire to be made wiser, if not better by it. They may hope
that what Effect soever it may have on the present Age, it will have some on
those that are to come: It will be a lively Part of our History, and set a
noble Pattern to succeeding Princes. And all Persons, how bad soever they may
be themselves, have too sensible a share in Government, not to wish that their
Princes were truly and heroically Good.

A Picture of Her, that may have some Life in it, is that which all seem to
desire. Where there were so many peculiar Features, and yet so much of Majesty
spread over them all, it seems as hardly possible not to hit a great deal of
the Resemblance, as to hit it all, and to draw truly, and to the life. Every
one will at first view say, It is She: But this abatement must be expected,
that it has not quite taken Her. It has not Her Air, though it may have Her
Features. The Colors will seem to sink, when we remember how the Original it
self looked.

EXTRAORDINARY Degrees of Virtue in Sovereign Princes, happen so seldom, that
it is no wonder if they give the World, a surprise that is as great as it is
agreeable. When we look through past Ages, and through all the different
Climates and Corners of the World, we find little that is truly Eminent,
without some great diminution accompanying it.

WE accustom our selves by Study and Observation, not to be flattered with the
Hopes of seeing Idea's of Perfection on the Throne. It seems a Presumption to
fancy that our own Times, should have a Privilege that former Ages could not
boast. We find that even David, and Solomon much more, had Blemishes almost
equal to their Virtues. Few of their Successors arrived at their Degree of
Perfection; though they might have all their Allay. Hezekiah and Josiah are the
least exceptionable: Yet some lesser slips occur even in their History.
Constantine and Theodosius were two of the greatest Blessings of the Christian
Church; yet we dare not propose them as Patterns in every thing. Clovis and
Charles the Great make a mighty Figure in History: Because the World is
disposed to remember what was Good in them, and to forget the rest. A full
Picture of these would have one side so bright, with another so spotted, that
the whole would look but odly. If the good and bad that was in most Princes,
whose Names sound the best, were set against one another, as critically as
Suetonius has represented the Roman Emperors, the World would perhaps retract
much of the admiration that it has paid them: And might be for some time in
suspense, which side of the Character was superior, and did preponderate the
other.

FEMALE Government has had its peculiar Blemishes, with fewer Patterns to
compensate for the Faultiness of others. The fierceness of Semiramis Character,
does lessen her Greatness: And the Luxuries of Cleopatra does more than balance
her Beauty. The Cruelties of Irene were such, that even her Zeal for Images
could not cover them, in the thickest Mist of Superstition. Mathildis and the
Ioans of Naples, are too black to be well thought of, for all the Flatteries of
Popes: And Pope Gregory's Raptures upon Brunichild have lessened him, rather
than changed her Character. It is true, Pulcheria has a fairer Grace, yet some
Suspicions have a little eclipsed her; and her Reign was but of a few days
continuance, till she chose a Husband, who was made Emperor by the right of
Marrying her. Amalazuntha has a nobler Character, it is indeed given her by
Cassiodore, that had been her chief Minister; but he was the wisest and best
Man of the Age: Her Fate was dismal; and others have cast black Imputations on
her: But if that wise Senator, is to be believed, she was one of the best and
greatest, though the most unfortunate of Women. Female Government has seldom
looked so great as it did in Isabel of Castile. But if she was a good Queen,
she was but an indifferent Wife: And all the Honor she did her Sex, was thrown
down in her Daughter, who was likewise a Sovereign; whose violent affections to
her Husband, were as troublesome while he lived, as extravagant after his
Death: She keeping the Dead Body still in view, and making it Travel about with
her, in her Journies which she made only in the Night; neglecting Government,
and sinking into a feebleness that made her become at last utterly incapable,
of even the shadow of it; which was all that had remained in her for many Years.

IF Jane of Navarre had had a larger Sphere, she was indeed a perfect Pattern:
Nothing was ever suggested to lessen her, but that which was her true Glory:
Her receiving the Reformation. She both received it, and brought her Subjects
to it. She not only Reformed her Court, but her whole Principality to such a
degree, that the Golden Age seemed to have returned under her; or rather,
Christianity appeared again with the purity and luster of its first beginnings.
Nor is there one single abatement to be made here: Only her Principality was
narrow: Her Dominion was so little extended, that though she had the rank and
dignity of a Queen, yet it looked liker the Shadow, than the reality of
Sovereignty: Or rather it was Sovereignty in Miniature, though the Colors were
very bright, it was of the smallest form.

TWO Mary's in this Island showed a greatness of Genius, that has seldom
appeared to the World. But the Superstition and Cruelty of the one, and the
Conduct and Misfortunes of the other, did so lessen them, that the Sex had been
much sunk by their means, if it had not been at the same time as powerfully
supported by the happiest and most renowned of all Sovereign Queens. I know I
need not name Her.

THE great Figure she made both at home and abroad, Her wise Conduct and able
Ministry were such, that the Nations flourishing in Trade, and extending it
self in Colonies, the increase of our Wealth, and the strength of our Fleets,
owe their beginnings to Her Auspicious Reign. The great Transactions then
abroad in the World, took their turn from the direction and the support that
she gave them. But that which is above all, and for which we owe her Memory the
profoundest acknowledgments; It was by her means, that the true Religion
received its establishment among us. She delivered us from a Foreign Yoke; she
freed us from Idolatry and Superstition; and settled us upon a Constitution
that has been ever since the truest Honor, as well as the greatest support of
the Reformation. So much we owe to the Ashes of that Great Queen, that Her
Memory is still fresh and sacred among us: Her Times are esteemed the standard
of our Happiness, and her Name still carries a delightful Sound to every
English Ear. If there were any defects or disorders in that time, we ought to
think mildly of them, and to censure them gently. In Her we must own that
Female Government seemed to have shined with the fairest Glory: We are sure
that History can show nothing like it.

BUT the latest Instance is commonly the freshest in our Thoughts: And what
luster soever, Authority in that Sex, may have cast about it in the last Age,
it has come under a Cloud in the present. A Queen has lived in our own Times,
whose great Descent gave Her a just Title to the highest Gratitude, and whose
Mind seemed born with a sublimity made for Empire, that for some time, like the
Northern Star, attracted the Eyes of all the World to Her. But she abandoned
her Throne and Subjects, and chose rather to wander Ingloriously, than to
maintain her Post, and exert Her superiority of Genius in governing well at
home, and giving Law to those about her. This had made the disposition to
Salick Laws become more universal. We have seen that which has not only taken
off the Cloud, which she had cast on her Sex, but has raised it far beyond the
Precedents or Patterns of former Times. In Her, that name, which all
Generations shall call blessed, has recovered the amiable sound, that it ought
ever to have. We heard it, not without some harshness, when we remembered some
who had carried it: Nothing can add to the glorious beginning of that Name; yet
our Mary has restored it to its first sweetness.

WE seek in vain for a Pattern to resemble her: Her Grandmother of Navarre, is
the likest thing we find to Her. But we do not lessen that Queen's Glory, when
we say, that this descendant of Hers had an Auguster appearance and a more
exalted Throne. She had the higher Sphere, and so we may conclude she was the
superior Intelligence. She was all that the other Queen had been, even while
she was in her Princely State. The World has reason to believe, that every
thing would have been the same in the other, if she had been advanced to an
Imperial Crown. But what may be well believed of Her, was seen in this branch,
that sprang from Her Root: Her worth grew with her Advancement. She was not
only better known in it, but there was a constant progress in her Virtues, even
beyond that of Her Fortunes.

YET after all this cannot so properly be called a Female Government: Though
Sovereignty was in Her, it was also in Another: Her Administration supplied the
Others Absence. Monarchy here seemed to have lost its very Essence; it being a
Government by One. But as the Administration was only in One at a time; so they
were more One, than either Espousals or a Joint Tenure of the Throne could make
them: There was an Union of their Thoughts as well as of their Persons; and a
concurring in the same Designs, as well as in the same Interests. Both seemed
to have one Soul, they looked like the different faculties of the same mind.
Each of them having peculiar Talents, they divided between them the different
parts of Government, as if they had been several Provinces: While He went
abroad with the Sword in His Hand, She stayed at home with the Scepter in Hers:
He went as the Arbiter of Europe, to force a just, as well as a general Peace,
She stayed to maintain Peace, and to do Justice at home. He was to Conquer
Enemies, and She was to gain Friends. He, as the Guardian of Christendom, was
to diffuse himself to all, while She contracted her care, chiefly to the
concerns of Religion and Virtue. While He had more business, and She more
leisure, She prepared and suggested, what He executed. In all this, there was
so close, but so entire an Union, that it was not possible to know how much was
proper to any one; or if ever they differed in a Thought from one another: But
the Living are not now to be spoke of: Our Thoughts must run wholly where our
Sorrows carry us.

WHILE we seek for resemblances to Her, in Sacred History, we find her so like
Josiah, that their being of the same Dignity, may excuse the Parallel, though the
Sex is different. He came, after a long and deep corruption: A Reign that had
so entirely vitiated the Nation, that neither the Judgments of God that fell on
Manasses, nor his own sincere, though late Repentance, was able to correct the
disorders of his former Years. So soon is a Nation run into so depraved a
State, that its recovery becomes almost desperate. Josiah was under much
disadvantage in his first Education: His being a King so young, exposed him to
all the Flatteries by which those about him might hope to insinuate themselves
into his favor; but his happy temper was above it. While he was but growing
out of Childhood, in the Eighth Year of his Reign; and the Sixteenth Year of
his Age, he began to seek after God: He continued four Years in this Pious
course of Life, before he set about the reforming of his People, that his own
good Example might have such Influence, and give him such credit in it, as
might balance the slowness of beginning it. When he set about it, it was the
work of six Years to purge the Land from Idolatry; and of other six to set
forward the repairing the Temple. All was not finished before the Eighteenth
Year of his Reign, so hard it is to recover a degenerated Nation. As they were
searching the Temple, the Book of the Law (by which most do understand the
Original it self) was found: the dreadful Threatenings in it struck Josiah with
a just horror. He sent to Huldah, a famed Prophetess, to see what comfort she
could give him; she answered, that the decree was fixed and irreversible; but
he should die in Peace, and not see those fatal days. This was some mitigation
to his Grief. He tried all he could to reform his People, but without Success;
they were weary of him and of his Virtue: And were longing for an opportunity
to return again to their Idolatry. So inveterate was the Corruption, that all
the exactness of Iosiah's care, as well as the strictness of the Example that
he set his own Sons, could not keep them from the spreading Contagion; it was
so catching. This was the last Essay of Mercy upon that People; in the best of
all their Kings. He was fatally engaged in an unequal War, and was killed in
the Day of Battle. His Death, upon his own single account, would have given the
Jews but too just a Cause of a bitter Mourning for him: But the Miseries, that
did immediately follow his Death, made it to be so long remembered, that in a
Book writ about an hundred Years after, it is said, that they continued their
Mourning for him to that Day. It was no wonder that it was remembered by them
with so solemn and so lasting a Sorrow. A succession of Calamities came so
thick after it, that there was scarce a lucid Interval between them: Captivity
came after Captivity: And what by War, what by Famine, and what by Desertion,
in the course of Four and twenty Years after his death, their Nation became an
Astonishment, a Curse, and a Byeword to all Nations. Jerusalem was laid in
Heaps, their Temple was rased down to the Ground, and Zion became a ploughed
Field. And if the second and final Destruction of that City and Nation, had not
been so signal* and so particularly related by one, who was an Eyewitness of
it, that it wore out the remembrance of all that had happened in former Times;
this would have past for one of the blackest and the most amazing Scenes in
History.

THAT pathetical Lamentation which Jeremy writ upon it, has strains in it so
tender and so moving, that no Man who has not hardened himself against the
Compassions of human Nature, can read them without a sensible Emotion; though
they relate to Transactions, that happened many Ages ago: Such a lively Poem,
as that is, makes them ever look fresh, and seem present.

I will make no Reflections on any part of this historical Deduction. It leads
one so naturally to Application, that there is no need of offering any. Here
one may go rather too fast, than too slow, and stretch the Matter, further than
it will bear.

THE whole of it without any straining, lets us see, that in the worst State
under which a Nation can fall, a good Prince gives a full stop to those
Judgments, that are reserved for them: Even when they seem to be just breaking
out upon them: And that the removal of such Princes is like the letting loose
that Hand of Justice, which was restrained by their Intercessions. But, since
there is an Uniformity in the Methods of Providence; and that which has been,
is that which shall be, then such an amazing Misery as accompanied the utter
Ruin of the Jewish Nation, ought to make deep Impressions on all others, and
to give these Words of the Prophet a formidable sound; The righteous perish,
and the merciful Persons are taken away from the evil to come: Which will come
the quicker, as well as the more certainly, for their being taken away: And
that will be yet the nearer, if while such an appearance of things is in view,
no Man considers it, nor lays it to Heart.

HERE I return to my Subject, from which all that has been now said, is not so
much a Digression, as it may appear to be, to Vulgar Readers: A Subject it is,
where the common Censures of Discourses of this kind, are not to be much
apprehended. On other occasions of this nature, a few Virtues must be raised,
to make the most of them that may be; and some few Accidents must be set out,
with due Advantages. For the sake of these, a great deal must be forgiven, and
the rest is to be shaded, or showed as at a distance and in perspective.
Mankind is so little disposed to believe much Good of others, because most Men
know so much Ill by themselves, and are very unwilling to be made better, that
in order to the begetting a full belief, of that which is proposed to the
Imitation of others; the Words by which it is expressed, must be severely
weighed and well chosen. When Things of this kind are related with an exactness
that seems to be too much studied, the Wit that is ill placed, lessens the
Effect that might have followed, if the recital had been more natural: For what
is most genuine, will be always the best received: Nor must too much be said,
how true or just soever.

THE present Age may be easily brought to believe any thing that can be said
upon this Subject, because the Attestations of it, came so thick from all
Hands. Yet such a Character as is now to be offered the World, and to be
conveyed down to Posterity, must be so managed, that it may not seem too
excessive: That Duty or Affection may not be thought to have raised it too
high. The living Witnesses, to whom we may now appeal, will soon go off the
Stage; The silent Groans, as well as the louder Cries that are now sounding in
all our Streets, and in every Corner, will soon be drowned and hushed in
silence: And then, that which will be now censured, as a narrow and scanty
Commendation, far below the Subject, and unworthy of it, will appear to
succeeding Ages to be a strain above human Nature: It will pass for the Picture
of an imaginary Perfection, that seems rather to set forth what our Nature
ought to rise to, than what has really happened.

THIS Precaution is necessary, when Persons have lived in the shade, known only
to a few and in a narrow Neighborhood. But a Man may take a freer range, when
he undertakes to describe One, that was always in view; that was under a
constant Observation; and where a high Elevation, did put even that, which
Humility might endeavor to cover, in a true Light. The bright as well as the
dark sides of such Persons, must be found out. Management may serve a turn, and
go on for a time with Secrecy and Success: But the continued and uninterrupted
Thread of a Life, led with so uniform an exactness, that Censure it self, could
never find Matter to fix on, even so long, as to keep a doubtful Thought in
suspense, is that which one may venture on, without the danger of over-doing
it, he must rather despair to do it Justice.

WHERE the Matter rises with so copious a fruitfulness; a nice choice must be
made; much must be omitted, a great deal must be only mentioned, rather glanced
at than enlarged on. The World is now so far beforehand in every thing that
can be said, that we must own Fame has here changed her Character, and has
given such true and full Representations, that there is little left to be done;
but to put things that are generally known, and universally talked of, in a
little order, and to tell them as natively as she did them.

HERE arises an unexampled Piece of a Character, which may be well begun with:
For I am afraid it both began and will end with Her. In most Persons, even
those of the truest Merit, a studied management will sometimes appear with a
little too much Varnish; Like a nocturnal Piece, that has a Light cast through
even the most shaded Parts: Some Disposition to set ones self out, and some
Satisfaction in being commended, will at some time or other show it self, more
or less. Here we may appeal to great Multitudes, to all who had the honor to
approach Her, and particularly to those who were admitted to the greatest
Nearness, and the most constant Attendance; if at any one time, any thing of
this sort, did ever discover it self. When due Acknowledgments were made, or
decent Things were said, upon Occasions that had well deserved them, (God knows
how frequent these were!) these seemed scarce to be heard: They were so little
desired, that they were presently past over; without so much as an Answer, that
might seem to entertain the Discourse, even when it checked it. She went off
from it to other Subjects, as one that could not bear it.

So entire a deadness to the desire of Glory, which even the Philosophers
acknowledged, was the last thing that a wise Man put off, seemed to be somewhat
above human Nature: And nearly resembling that State of absolute Perfection, to
which she has now attained. The desire of true Glory, is thought to be the
noblest Principle that can be in Sovereigns; which sets them on, with the most
constant Zeal, to procure the Good of Mankind. Many have thought that a zealous
pursuit of the one, could not be duly animated and maintained without the
other. It was a part of the Felicity of our Times, that we have seen the most
active Zeal for the Public, and a constant Delight in doing Good, joined with
such unaffected Humility, so regardless of Applause or Praise, that the most
critical Observers, could never see Reason to think, that the secret Flatteries
of Vanity, or Self-love, did work inwardly, or had any power over Her.

AN open and native Sincerity, which appeared in genuine Characters, in a free
and unconstrained manner, did easily persuade those who saw it, that all was of
a Piece. A constant uniform Behavior, when that which is within, does not
agree with the appearances, seems to be a strain above our pitch. Nor could any
Person find any other Reason to suppose that it was otherwise in this Instance,
but from the secret Sense that every Man has, of some latent Corruption, and
the stolen insinuations of Pride that he feels within himself, which may make
him conclude, that the whole Race of Mankind is so tainted, that nothing can be
entirely freed from those Infirmities, which do so naturally beset us. But such
Persons ought to make another Reflection, that daily Observation shows to be
true; That no Man lives under so exact a Guard, and such a constant presence of
Mind, but that all those hidden Dispositions which lurk within him, will shoot
at some times, and show themselves upon great Occasions, or sudden Accidents.
Nature will break through all Rules, when it is much excited, or taken at
unawares. Therefore it is much more Reasonable, as well as it is more
Charitable, to think that there are no secret Inclinations, which lie so quiet,
that they do never discover themselves, in a course of many Years, and of
unlooked for Accidents, than to imagine that they are so covered and managed,
as to be chained up in a perpetual Restraint. There is an Air in what is
Genuine that is soon seen, (I had almost said felt.) It looks Noble, without
Strains or Art; It pleases as well as it persuades, with a Force that is
irresistible; and how silent soever it may be, it looks like the Universal
Character: It Is a Language which Nature makes all Men understand, how few
soever they are that speak it: This was so peculiar to Her, and so singular in
Her, that it deserved well to be begun with.

IN most of those Persons who have been the eminentest for their Piety and
Virtue, their Thoughts have risen too high for human Nature: Their Notions have
become too fierce, and their Tempers too sullen and untractable: They have
considered only what was good and desirable in it self, without regarding what
the World could bear. They have not softened themselves enough into that
agreeableness of Temper, that might give such an amiable prospect of Virtue, as
should encourage the World to love and imitate it. Their Meditations have
soured them too much: And, by an obstinate pursuing their own Idea's, without
accommodating themselves enough to the frailties of others, they have given
advantage to those who have studied to load them with Prejudices: Their Designs
have miscarried, and they themselves have become morose and melancholy;
despairing of doing any thing, because they could not hope to do every thing.
Cato's Error has run through the best sort of Men that have ever lived: Of
projecting a Commonwealth like Plato's, when the Romans were run to a dreg.
Children must be gained even by flattering their Weaknesses, and by the
softness of Kindness and good Humor. The grown state of Man is often but an
advanced Childhood: A Dotage rather than a Ripeness. It must be confessed, that
few of those who in all other respects seem to have been born for the good of
Mankind, have been able to give their Notions that turn, to set them off with
that Air, and to recommend them with that Address, which we of late admired so
much. A charming Behavior, a genuine Sweetness, and the Sprightliness, as well
as the Freedom of good Humor, had softened all those frightful Apprehensions,
that the World is too willing to entertain of the Severities of Virtue, and of
the strictness of true Religion. Lesser matters were not much stood on: An
easy compliance in some of these, how little soever they were liked, on their
own account, was intended to give Her advantages, in order to the compassing of
greater things. While a fresh and graceful Air, more turned to seriousness, but
always serene, that dwelt on her looks, discovered both the perfect Calm that
was within, and showed the force as well as the amiableness of those
Principles, which were the springs of so cheerful a Temper, and so lively a
Deportment.

THE freedom of Cheerfulness is not always under an exact Command: It will make
escapes from Rules, and be apt to go too far, and to forget all Measures and
Bounds. It is seldom kept under a perpetual Guard. The openness of Her
Behavior was subject to universal Observation; but it was under that
regularity of Conduct, that those who knew Her best, and saw Her oftnest, could
never discover her Thoughts or Intentions further, than as She her self had a
Mind to let them be known. No half Word, or change of Look, no Forgetfulness,
or run of Discourse, did ever draw any thing from Her, further, or sooner than
as she designed it. This was managed in so peculiar a way, that no distrust was
showed in it, nor distaste given by it. It appeared to be no other, than that
due reservedness which became her Elevation; and suited those Affairs that were
to pass through her hands. When She saw cause for it, She had the truest Methods
to oblige others to use all due freedom with Her self; while yet She kept them
at a fit distance from Her own Thoughts.

SHE would never take any Assistance from those Arts, that are become so common
to great Posts, that some perhaps fancy them necessary: She did not cover Her
Purposes by doubtful Expressions, or such general Words, as taken strictly do
signify little, but in common Use are understood to import a great deal more.
As she would not deceive others, so she avoided the saying of that which might
give them an Occasion to deceive themselves: And when she did not intend to
Promise, she took care to explain Her meaning so critically, that it might be
understood that no Construction of a Promise was to be made from general Words
of Favor. In a course of several Years, and of many Turns, when great Occasion
was given for more artificial Methods, and when, according to the Maxims of the
World, great Use might have been made of them; yet she maintained Her sincerity
so entirely, to the honor of Truth, be it said, as well as to Hers, that she
never once needed Explanations to justify either Her Words or Actions.
Integrity preserved Her, as well as she preserved it.

SUCH eminent, I am sorry to say, such unusual Perfections, had they appeared
in one of the meanest Capacity, and of the lowest degree of Improvement, yet
must have challenged great Veneration. Common observation makes it but too
apparent, that those of the highest form, that have an exaltation in them,
which makes them like another rank of Mortals, that have a true flight of
Thought, a great compass of Knowledge, a stability and equableness of Temper,
with a deep and correct Judgment, who have cultivated the advantages of Nature,
by searching and laborious Acquisitions; such Persons, I say, do swell too much
upon the preference that is due to them; and soil those shining distinctions
that were born with them, by mixtures that need not now be enlarged on. A
Subject composed of so much Perfection, ought not to be digressed from, to set
out the disorders that appear but too frequently in the sublimest pieces of
Mankind. These are so unacceptable, while Virtue has so benign an aspect that
eminent degrees of it, though joined with a lower proportion of that which seems
to have more luster, is much more valuable, that all that can be called Great
in Human Nature, is without it.

BUT if both these should happen to meet together, and that in as high a degree
as our mortal State is capable of, then we must acknowledge, that this is all
that we can expect from our Nature, under its present depression. So few
Instances of such a mixture have appeared to us, that we must confess, it is
much more than we ought to look for. The History of Princes that have lived at
a great distance from us, is seldom believed to be so exact, especially in the
Commandatory part, that we rely much upon it. Xenophon has made Cyrus appear to
be a Prince, so much perfecter than the World is disposed to believe, that the
Picture he gives of him passes rather for a piece of Invention, than of
History. When the World shall have lived beyond the fame of Tradition, and
Report, a Minute History of this Life, if exactly writ, may probably have the
same Fate: It will look too great to be credible.

WHAT is Good, as well as what is Great in humane Nature, were here so equally
mixed, and both shined so bright in Her, that though one of these is always the
better part, yet it is hard to tell, in whether of the two she was the more
eminent.

I will say little either of her Rank, or of her Person: the Dignity of the
one, and the Majesty of the other, were born with Her. Her Sphere was great,
and She was furnished with advantages proportioned to it. She maintained her
Authority with so becoming a Grace; and inspired so particular a Respect, that
in this regard only, She was Absolute and Despotical, and could not be
resisted. The Port of Royalty, and the Humility of Christianity did so happily
concur in Her; that how different soever their Characters may seem to be, they
gave a mutual luster to one another.

SHE maintained that respect that belonged to her Sex, without any of those
Diminutions, that though generally speaking, they do not much misbecome it, yet
do seem a little to lessen it. She would never affect to be above it in common
and meaner things: She had a Courage that was resolute and firm, mixed with a
Mildness that was soft and gentle; She had in Her all the Graces of Her own
Sex, and all the Greatness of Ours. If She did not affect to be a Zenobia or a
Boadicia, it was not because She wanted their Courage, but because She
understood the decencies of her Sex better than they did. The Character of a
Iean of Navarre, or of our Celebrated Elizabeth, was much more valuable in her
esteem, than that of a Semiramis, or of a Thomiris. A desire of Power, or an
eagerness of Empire, were things so far below Her, though they generally pass for
Heroical Qualities; that perhaps the World never yet saw so great a capacity
for Government, joined with so little appetite to it; so unwillingly assumed,
so modestly managed, and so cheerfully laid down.

THE clearness of her Apprehension, the presence of her Mind, the exactness of
her Memory, the solidity of her Judgment, the correctness of her Expressions,
had such particular distinctions in them, that great enlargements might be made
on every one of these, if a Cloud of Witnesses did not make them less
necessary. None took things sooner, or retained them longer: None judged truer,
or spoke more exactly. She writ clear and short, with a true beauty and force
of Style. She discovered a superiority of Genius, even in the most trifling
matters, which were considered by Her, only as amusements, and so gave no
occasion for deep reflections. A happiness of Imagination, and a liveliness of
Expression, appeared upon the commonest Subjects, on the sudden and in the
greatest variety of Accidents: She was quick but not hasty: and even without
the advantages that Her condition gave Her, She had an exaltation of Mind, that
subdued, as well as it charmed all that came near Her.

A quickness of Thought is often superficial; it catches easily, and sparkles
with some Luster; But it lasts not long, nor does it go deep: A bright Vivacity
was here joined with searching Diligence. Her Age and Her Rank had denied Her
opportunities for much study. Yet She had gone far that way, and had read the
best Books in the three Languages, that were almost equally familiar to Her.
She gave the most of Her Hours to the study of the Scriptures, and of Books
relating to them. It were easy to give amasing Instances of Her Understanding
in Matters of Divinity. She had so well considered our Disputes with the Church
of Rome, that She was capable of managing Debates in them, with equal Degrees
of Address and Judgment: Nor was She unacquainted with those unhappy Questions,
that have distracted us: And had such just, as well as large Notions about
them; that they would have soon laid our Animosities, and have composed our
Differences, if there had been Temper enough, of all Sides, to have hearkened to
them.

SHE had a generous and a sublime Idea of the Christian Religion, and a
particular Affection to the Church of England: But an Affection that was
neither blind nor partial. She saw what Finishings we still wanted; and had
dedicated Her Thoughts and Endeavors to the considering of the best Means that
might both complete and establish us: She intended to do all that was possible,
in order to the raising a higher Spirit of true Devotion among us, to engage
those of our Profession to a greater Application to their Functions; and to
dispose us all to a better Understanding among our selves; that we might with
united Endeavors, set our selves to beat down Impiety and Imorality. She read
and meditated much on these Subjects; and judged of them with so just an
Exactness, that it appeared the Strength of Her Mind went far beyond the
Compass of Her Knowledge. She took that Care to be well informed of these
Matters, that when She met with Hints, either in Books or Sermons, that related
to other Subjects with which She was not acquainted, She lost none of them: If
they seemed to be of Importance, She called for Explanations of them, from
those whom She suffered to entertain Her upon such Subjects. She proposed them
often with a Preface, confessing Her own Ignorance: And when She had stated
some Difficulties to them very clearly, She would conclude with Words that
carried in them an Air of Modesty, that shined then most particularly, when She
seemed to desire an increase of Knowledge. She would say, She did not know if
there was any Difficulty in such things or not; or, if She apprehended or
expressed it right; or, if it was only Her Ignorance. When any new thing was
laid before Her, She seemed glad to have an occasion to own, that She knew
nothing of that before: But then She would have it to be fully explained to
Her, till She found She did thoroughly apprehend it. All these Intimations were
so carefully laid up by Her, that She seemed scarce capable of forgetting them.
After several Years of Interval, She returned in Discourse to some Subjects,
that had been formerly opened to Her, with a freshness of Apprehension about
them, as if the first Discourse had never been interrupted. She knew none of
the learned Languages, yet when some Passages of Scripture were explained to
Her, by the Genius and Phrases of the Original Languages, She retained them
very carefully, even though She understood not the Foundation of them. She loved
sincerity in every thing, to such a degree, that She desired to understand the
weak side as well as the strong one of all Parties and Doctrines. She loved a
distinct Knowledge of every thing; and She had accustomed those whom She
admitted to talk to Her, on such Subjects, to hide neither the Weakness of the
one side, nor the Strength of the other from Her. When She delivered Her own
Judgment, which She generally avoided to do, unless there was some necessity
for it, She did it with that Modesty, as well as Exactness, that it showed the
Force as well as the Purity of Her Mind.

Next to the best Subjects, She bestowed most of Her time on Books of History,
chiefly of the later Ages, particularly those of Her own Kingdoms, as being the
most proper to give Her useful Instruction. Lively Books, where Wit and Reason
gave the Mind a true Entertainment, had much of Her time. She was a good Judge
as well as a great lover of Poetry: She loved it best when it dwelt on the best
Subjects. So tender She was of Poetry, though much more of Virtue, that She had a
particular Concern in the Defilement, or rather the Prostitution of the Muses
among us. She made some Steps to the understanding Philosophy and Mathematics,
but She stopped soon; only She went far in natural History and Perspective, as
She was very exact in Geography. She thought sublime Things were too high
Flights for the Sex; which She often talked of, with a Liberty, that was very
lively: But She might well be familiar with it, after She had given so
effectual a Demonstration of the Improvements it was capable of. Upon the whole
Matter, She studied and read more than could be imagined, by any, who had not
known, how many of Her Hours were spent in Her Closet. She would have made a
much greater Progress, if the frequent returns of ill Humors on Her Eyes, had
not forced Her to spare them. Her very Diversions, gave Indications of a Mind
that was truly Great: She had no relish for those lazy ones, that are the too
common Consumers of most Peoples time, and that make as great wastes on their
Minds, as they do on their Fortunes. If She used them sometimes, she made it
visible, it was only in Compliance with Forms; because she was unwilling to
offend others, with too harsh a Severity: She gave Her Minutes of leisure with
the greatest willingness, to Architecture and Gardenage. She had a Riches of
Invention, with a happiness of Contrivance, that had Airs in it, that were
freer and nobler than what was more stiff, though it might be more regular: She
knew that this drew an Expense after it; She had no other Inclinations besides
this, to any Diversions that were expenceful; and since this employed many
hands, She was pleased to say, That She hoped it would be forgiven Her. Yet She
was uneasy when She felt the weight of the Charge that lay upon it.

When her Eyes were endangered by Reading too much, She found out the amusement
of Work: And in all those hours that were not given to better Employments, She
wrought with her own Hands; and that sometimes with so constant a diligence, as
if she had been to Earn her Bread by it. It was a new thing, and looked like a
Sight, to see a Queen Work so many hours a day. She looked on Idleness as the
great Corrupter of humane Nature: And believed that if the Mind had no
Employment given it, it would create some of the worst sort to it self: And She
thought that any thing that might amuse and divert, without leaving a dreg and
ill Impressions behind it, ought to fill up those vacant hours, that were not
claimed by Devotion or Business. Her Example soon wrought on, not only those
that belonged to Her, but the whole Town to follow it: So that it was become as
much the Fashion to Work, as it had been formerly to be Idle. In this, which
seemed a nothing, and was turned by some to be the Subject of Railery, a
greater step was made, than perhaps every one was aware of, to the bettering of
the Age. While She diverted her Self thus with Work, She took Care to give an
Entertainment to her own Mind, as well as to those who were admitted to the
honor of Working with Her: One was appointed to read to the rest, the Choice
was suited to the time of the Day, and to the Employment: Some Book or Poem
that was Lively, as well as Instructing. Few of her Sex, not to say of her
Rank, gave ever less time to Dressing, or seemed less curious about it. Those
Parts of it which required more Patience, were not given up entirely to it. She
read often, all the while her Self, and generally aloud; that those who served
about Her, might be the better for it: When She was indisposed, another was
called to do it; all was intermixed with such pleasant Reflections of Her own,
that the Gloss was often better liked than the Text. An agreeable Vivacity
spread that innocent Cheerfulness among all about Her, that whereas in most
Courts, the Hours of strict Attendance are the heaviest Parts of the Day, they
were in Hers, the most Delightful of all others.

HER Cheerfulness may be well termed Innocent; for none was ever hurt by it: No
natural Defects, nor real Faults, true or false, were ever the Subjects of her
Mirth: Nor could She bear it in others, if their Wit happened to glance that
way. She thought it a cruel and barbarous thing, to be merry on other Peoples
cost; or, to make the Misfortunes or Follies of others, the Matter of their
Diversion. She scarce ever expressed a more entire Satisfaction in any Sermon
that She had heard, than in our late Primates against Evil Speaking. When She
thought some were guilty of it, She would ask them, if they had read that
Sermon. This was understood to be a Reprimand, though in the softest manner. She
had indeed one of the Blessings of Virtue, that does not always accompany it:
For She was as free from Censures, as She was from deserving them. When
Reflections were made on this, before Her, she said, She ascribed that wholly
to the Goodness of God to Her. For She did not doubt but that many fell under
hard Characters, that deserved them as little. She gave it this further turn,
That God knew her Weakness, and that She was not able to bear some Imputations;
and therefore he did not try Her beyond her Strength. In one respect, She
intended never to provoke Censure: She was conscientiously tender of wounding
others; and said, She hoped God would still bless Her in her own good Name, as
long as she was careful not to hurt others; but as She was exact in not
wronging any other while she diverted Her self, so upon indifferent Subjects
she had a Spring of Cheerfulness in Her, that was never to be exhausted: it
never run to Repetition, or forced Mirth.

A Mind that was so exalted by Nature, and was so improved by Industry, who was
as much above all about Her by her Merit, as she was by her Condition, and that
owed those peculiar Advantages, under God, chiefly to her Self; for very little
was added to Her by others; had certainly a Right to indulgent Censures, even
though She had given occasion to them. Much ought to have been forgiven, to one
that had deserved so well: But this is perhaps the first Instance that the
World has yet seen, of One that had so much in Her, that deserved to be valued
and admired, without one single Defect, or Grain of Allay, that needed
Allowances to be made for it.

I have dwelt hitherto upon the more general Parts of Her Character; I go next
to consider what was more special. Those that deserve to be most enlarged on,
are the Dispositions of Her Mind, both with relation to the Impressions of
Religion, and the Compassions of human Nature. What She was inwardly with
relation to God; was only known to him, whom She now sees Face to Face. Those
with whom She talked, with more than ordinary Freedom, upon those Matters, saw
on many Occasions, what an awful Sense she had of God, and of all Things in
which his Glory was concerned: they saw with how exact a Tenderness, She
weighed every Thing by which the Purity of Her own Conscience was to be
preserved, unblemished as well as unspotted.

IN those great Steps of Her later Years, that carried a Face which at first
appearance seemed liable to Censure; and that were the single Instances of Her
whole Life, that might be thought capable of hard Constructions; She weighed
the Reasons she went on, with a Caution and Exactness that well became the
Importance of them; the Biass lying still against that, which to vulgar Minds
might seem to be Her Interest. She was convinced that the Public Good of
Mankind, the Preservation of that Religion which she was assured was the only
true one, and those real Extremities to which Matters were driven, ought to
supersede all other Considerations. She had generous Notions of the Liberty of
human Nature, and of the true Ends of Government: She thought it was designed
to make Mankind Safe and Happy; and not to raise the Power of those, into whose
Hands it was committed, upon the Ruins of Property and Liberty. Nor could She
think that Religion was to be delivered up to the Humors of mis-guided
Princes; whose Persuasion made them as cruel in imposing on their Subjects the
Dictates of others, as they themselves were implicit in submitting to them: Yet
after all, Her Inclinations lay so strong to a Duty, that Nature had put Her
under, that she made a Sacrifice of Her self, in accepting that high Elevation,
that perhaps was harder to Her to bear, than if she had been to be made a
Sacrifice in the severest Sense. She saw that not only Her own Reputation might
suffer by it, but that Religion too might be concerned, in those Reproaches
that she was to look for. This was much more to Her, than all that Crowns with
their gaudy Luster, could offer instead of it; but the saving of whole Nations
seemed to require it: And that being the only visible Mean left to preserve the
Protestant Religion, not only here, but every where else, she was thereby
determined to it.

SHE was no Enthusiast: And yet she could not avoid thinking, that Her being
preserved during Her Childhood, in that flexibility of Age and Understanding,
without so much as one single Attempt made upon Her, was to be ascribed to a
special Providence watching over Her: To that She added, Her being early
delivered from the Danger of all Temptations: And the Advantages she had
afterward, to employ much privacy in so large a course of Study, which had not
been possible for Her to have compassed, if she had lived in the constant
Dissipation of a Public Court. These concurring, had convinced Her, that God
had conducted Her by an immediate Hand, and that she was raised up to preserve
that Religion, which was then every where in its last Agonies: Yet when these
and many other Considerations, which she had carefully attended to, determined
Her; Nature still felt it self loaded: She bore it with the outward appearances
of Satisfaction, because she thought it became Her not to discourage others, or
to give them an occasion to believe, that Her uneasiness was of another Nature
than truly it was: But in that whole Matter she put a constraint upon her Self
(upon her Temper I mean, for no Consideration whatsoever, could have enduced
her to have forced Her Conscience,) that was more sensible and violent to Her,
than any thing that could have been wished Her, by the most enraged and
virulent of all Her Enemies.

OH, could any be Enemies to such Virtue! and to so pure and so Angelical a
Mind! Could She that was the Glory of her Sex, the Darling of human Nature, and
the Wonder of all that knew. Her, become the Subject of Hatred or Obloquy!

A nobler Subject calls me from this Transport; to look over the other Parts of
her Character, upon this Head of Religion. Modesty and Humility covered a great
deal from common Observation; indeed all that was possible for Her to conceal;
but no Clouds can quite darken the Day; it casts a Light, even when it does not
shine out. Her punctual exactness, not only to Public Offices, but to her
Secret Retirements, was so regular a thing, that it was never put off, in the
greatest Crowd of Business or little Journeys; then, though the Hour was
anticipated, the Duty was never neglected: She took Care to be so early on
those Occasions, that she might never either quite forget, or very much shorten
that, upon which she reckoned that the Blessing of the whole Day turned. She
observed the Lord's Day so Religiously, that besides her Hours of Retirement,
she was constantly thrice a Day in the Public Worship of God: And for a great
part of the Year, four times a Day, while she lived beyond Sea. She was
constant to her monthly Communions: And retired her Self more than ordinary for
some Days before them. In them, as well as in all the other Parts of the
Worship of God, an unexampled Seriousness appeared always in Her, without one
glance let out for Observation: And such care was taken to hide the more solemn
Elevations of her Mind to God; that these things struck all those who saw them,
but had never seen any thing like them before. This did spread a Spirit of
Devotion among all that were about Her: Who could not see so much in Her,
without feeling somewhat to arise in themselves; though few could chain
themselves down to such a fixed and steady Application as they saw in Her.
Nothing in that was theatrical: Nothing given to show: Every thing was Sincere,
as well as Solemn: And Genuine as well as Majestical.

HER Attention to Sermons was so entire, that as her Eye never wandered from a
good Preacher, so she showed no weariness of an indifferent one: When she was
asked, how she could be so attentive to some Sermons, that were far from being
perfect, she answered, That she thought it did not become Her, by any part of
her Behavior, to discourage, or seem to dislike one, that was doing his best.
The hardest Censure that she past on the worst, was, to say nothing to their
Advantage: For she never denied her Commendations to any Thing that deserved
them. She was not content to be Devout her self, she infused that Temper into
all that came near Her: Chiefly into those whom she took into her more
immediate Care, whom she studied to form with the Tenderness and Watchfulness
of a Mother. She charmed them with her Instructions, as she overcame them with
her Kindness: Never was Mistress both feared and loved so entirely as She was.
She scattered Books of Instruction to all were round about Her: And gave
frequent. Orders that good Books should be laid in the places of Attendance,
that such as waited, might not be condemned to Idleness; but might entertain
themselves usefully, while they were in their turns of Service.

SHE had a true regard to Piety where ever She saw it, in what Form or Party
soever. Her Judgment tied her to our Communion, but her Charity was extended to
all. The Liberty that some have taken to unchurch great Bodies of Christians,
for some Defects and Irregularities, were strains that She could never assent
to: Nor indeed could She well bear them. She longed to see us in a closer
Conjunction with all Protestants abroad: And hoped we might strenghthen our
selves at home, by uniting to us as many as could be brought within our Body.
Few things ever grieved her more, than that those Hopes seemed to languish: And
that the Prospect of so desired an Union vanished out of sight.

THE raising the Reputation and Authority of the Clergy, as the chief
Instrument for advancing Religion, was that to which She intended to apply her
utmost Diligence. She knew that the only true way to compass this, was to
engage them to be Exemplary in their Lives, and Eminent in their Labors: To
watch over their Flocks, and to edify them by good Preaching and diligent
Catechizing. She was resolved to have the whole Nation understand, that by
these ways, and by these only, Divines were to be recommended to Favor and
Preferment. She made it visible, that the Steps were to be made, by Merit, and
not by Friendship and Importunity. Solicitations and Aspirings were Practices
that affected her deeply; because She saw the Use that was made of them, by
malicious Observers: Who concluded from thence; that we run to our Profession,
as to a Trade, for the sake of the Gains and Honors that we might find in it;
and not to save Souls, or to edify the Church. Every Instance of this kind
gave her a sensible Wound, because it hardened bad Men in the contempt of
Religion. She therefore charged those, whom She trusted most in such Matters,
to look out for the best Men, and the best Preachers, that they might be made
known to Her. She was under a real anxiety when Church-Preferments, especially
the more Eminent ones, were to be disposed of. She reckoned that that was one
of the main Parts of her Care; for which a particular Account was to be given
to that God, from whom her Authority was derived, and to whom She had devoted
it. When She apprehended that Friendship might give a Biass, to those whom She
allowed to speak to Her, on those Heads. She told them of it, with the
Authority that became Her, and that they well deserved. She could deny the most
earnest Solicitations, with a true Firmness, when She thought the Person did
not deserve them: For that was Superior with Her, to all other Considerations.
But when She denied things, She did it with so much Softness, and upon so good
Reason, that such as might be mortified by the Repulse, were yet forced to
confess, that She was in the right: Even when, for the sake of a Friend, they
wished that She had for once been in the wrong.

IT grieved Her to hear how low and depauperated a great many of the Churches
of England were become: Which were sunk into such extreme Poverty, that it was
scarce possible, even by the help of a Plurality, to find a Subsistence in
them. She had formed a great and noble Design, to bring them all to a just
state of Plenty, and to afford a due Encouragement: But Pluralities and Non
residence, when not enforced by real Necessity, were otherwise so odious to
Her, that She resolved to throw such perpetual Disgraces upon them, as should
oblige all Persons to let go the hold that they had got, of these Cures of
Souls, over whom they did not Watch, and among whom they did not Labor.

IN a full Discourse on this very Subject, the Day before, the fatal Illness
overtook Her; she said, She had no great hope of mending Matters; yet She was
resolved to go on, and never to suffer Her self to be discouraged, or to lose
Heart: She would still try what could be done, and pursue Her Design, how slow
or insensible soever the Progress might be. She had taken Pains to form a true
Plan of the Primitive Constitutions; and had resolved to bring ours, as near it
as could be: That so it might become more firm and useful, for attaining the
great Ends of Religion. Neither the Spirit of a Party, nor of Bigottry, lay at
the bottom of all this. She did not Project any Part of it as an Art of
Government, or an Instrument of Power and Dominion.

HER Scheme was thus laid: She thought that the Christian Religion was revealed
from Heaven, to make Mankind happy here, as well as hereafter: And that as
Mankind and Society could not subsist without any Religion at all, so also the
Corruption of Christianity, had made many Nations the worse rather than the
better, for that Shadow of it, that was received among them. She thought that a
pious, learned, and a laborious Clergy was the chief Mean of bringing the World
under the Power of the Chistian Religion: And that the treating their Persons
with Respect, was necessary to procure them Credit in the discharge of their
Function. She intended to carry on all this together, and not any one Part of
it, separate from the rest. If at any time, She knew any thing in those who
served at the Altar, that exposed them to just Censures, She covered it all
that could be from common Observation; but took Care that the Persons concerned
should be both roundly spoke to, and proceeded against, when softer Methods did
not succeed, or that it seemed necessary that their Punishment ought to be made
as public, as their Crimes were. She would never suffer any to go away with a
Conceit, that a Zeal for the Service of the Crown, could atone for other
Faults; or compound for the great Duties of their Function. This seemed to be
the setting the Interests of Religion after their own: But She was resolved to
give them always the preference.

No Intimation was ever let fall to Her in any Discourse, that offered a
probable Mean of making us better; which was lost by Her. She would call upon
some to turn that Motion over and over again, till she had formed Her own
Thoughts concerning it. The last thing that She had settled with our late
Blessed Primate, was a Scheme of such Rules, as our present Circumstances could
bear, published since by His Majesty: Which was an Earnest of many others that
were to follow, in due time. It was indeed an amasing as well as a delightful
thing, to see how well She understood such Matters, and how much she was set on
promoting them.

SHE judged aright, That the true End of Power, and the best Exercise of it,
was to do Good, and to make the World the better for it. She often said, that
she found nothing in it to make it supportable; not to say pleasant, besides
that: And She wondered that the true Pleasure which accompanied it, did not
engage Princes to pursue it more effectually. Without this She thought, that a
private Life, with moderate Circumstances, was the happier as well as the safer
State. When Reflections were once made before Her, of the Sharpness of some
Historians, who had left heavy Imputations on the Memory of some Princes: She
answered, That if those Princes were truly such, as the Historians represented
them, they had well deserved that treatment: And others who tread their Steps,
might look for the same: For Truth would be told at last: And that with the
more acrimony of Style, for being so long restrained: It was a gentle suffering
to be exposed to the World in their true Colors, much below what others had
suffered at their Hands: She thought that all Sovereigns ought to read such
Histories as Procopius; for how much soever he may have aggravated Matters, and
how unbecomingly soever he may have writ, yet by such Books they might see,
what would be probably said of themselves, when all Terrors and Restraints,
should fall off with their Lives. She encouraged those whom She admitted to
frequent access, to lay before Her, all the Occasions of doing Good that might
occur to their Thoughts: And was always well pleased when new Opportunities
were offered to Her, in which She might exercise that which was the most valued
of all Her Prerogatives. So desirous She was to know both how to correct what
might be amiss, and to promote every good Design, that She not only allowed of
great Freedom, in bringing Propositions of that kind to Her, but She charged
the Consciences of some, with a Command to keep nothing of that Nature from
Her, which they thought She ought to know. Nor were such Motions ever
unacceptable to Her; even when other Circumstances made it impossible for Her,
to put them in execution.

THE reforming the Manners of Her People was one of Her chief Cares. If a
greater Progress was not made in this, according to the pious Wishes of some,
who had good Intentions, and much Zeal, the true Account of that slowness was,
this: She had often heard that the Hypocrisy of the former Times, had brought
on the Atheism and Impiety of the present; and had fortified Libertines in
their Prejudices: Therefore She resolved to guard against every thing that
might seem to revive that. She observed that Josiah was, for the space of four
Years, engaged in a Religious course of Life, before he set himself to the
reforming of his People: That by the Example he set them, he might gain so much
Credit in carrying on that Design, as might excuse, as well as compensate the
slowness of beginning it. She judged that all People ought to be well possessed
of their Intentions in that Matter: And She feared, lest in the dis-jointed
State, in which our Affairs have lain so long, the going on with that Design,
might have the Face of serving some other End, under that appearance: For that
will be Popular, even when things are in a very corrupt State. Therefore, though
this was no sooner moved to Her, than She set it a going, yet finding few
Instruments to concur in it, and seeing a violent Opposition to those that did,
She thought that the putting Her whole Strength to it, might be reserved with
great Advantage to aanother time, in which our Affairs should have a calmer
Face, and be brought to a more sedate State. She did hearken carefully after
every thing that seemed to give some hope, that the next Generation should be
better than the present, with a particular Attention. She heard of a Spirit of
Devotion and Piety, that was spreading it self among the Youth of this great
City, with a true Satisfaction: She enquired often and much about it, and was
glad to hear it went on and prevailed. She lamented that whereas the Devotions
of the Church of Rome were all Show, and made up of Pomp and Pageantry; that we
were too bare and naked: And practiced not enough to entertain a serious
Temper, or a warm and and affectionate Heart: We might have Light enough to
direct, but we wanted Flame to raise an exalted Devotion.

I have now given some Instances of the Temper of Her Mind, in that which
concerned God and Religion; I go, in the next place, to consider Her with
relation to human Nature.

PRINCES are raised so far above the rest of Mankind, that they do generally
lose sight of those Miseries, to which the greater part is subject. It would
disturb that Ease, in which they pass away their Hours, too much, to hear
dismal recitals of the Calamities of their People. How much soever they may be
lifted up with the glorious Title of the Parents of their Country, yet for the
most part they know little of the Pressures their People lie under, and they
feel them less. Our blessed Queen was become the Delight of all that knew Her,
by the obliging Tenderness with which She treated all those who came near Her:
She made the Afflictions of the Unfortunate easier to them, by the share that
She bore of them; and the Necessities of the Miserable the more supportable, by
the relief that She gave them. She was Tender of those who deserved her Favor;
and Compassionate toward those who wanted her Pity. It was easy for Her to
reward: For all sorts of Bounty flowed readily from Her. But it was much harder
for Her to punish, except when the nature of the Crime, made Mercy become a
Cruelty, and then She was Inflexible, not only to Importunity, but to the
Tenderness of Her own compassionate Heart.

SHE was indeed happily framed by Nature: Which wrought so soon that it
prevented Education. She was good and gentle, before She was capable of knowing
that She ought to be so. This grew up with Her in the whole Progress of
Childhood: She might need Instruction, but she wanted no Persuasion: And I have
been often told that She never once, in the whole course of her Education, gave
any occasion to reprove Her: So naturally did She go into every thing that was
Good, often before She knew it, and always after She once understood it.

SHE was but growing out of Childhood, when She went among Strangers: But She
went under the Guard of so exact a Conduct, and so much Discretion: She
expressed such a Gentleness, Access to Her was so easy, and Her Deportment was
so obliging; Her Life was such an Example, and Her Charity was so Free, that
perhaps no Age ever had such an Instance. Never was there such an universal
Love and Esteem (one is tempted to seek for other Words, if Language did afford
them,) paid to any, as She had from Persons of all Ranks and Conditions, in the
United Provinces. It was like Transport and Rapture. The Veneration was so
profound, that how just soever it might be, it seemed rather excessive. Neither
Her Foreign Birth, nor Regal Extraction, neither the diversity of Interests or
Opinions, nor Her want of Power and Treasure, (equal to Her Bounty) diminished
the Respects that were offered Her, even from a People, whose Constitution
gives them naturally a Jealousy, of too great a Merit, in those who are at the
Head of their Government.

I am afraid to enlarge too much on the Justice that was done Her in these
Parts: Or on that universal Mourning, with which Her departure from them was
followed: That seemed scarce capable of an addition; till now that there has
appeared, so black a Gloom of desponding Sorrow spread among them all; Despair
and Death seeming to dwell on every Face, when the dreadful News flew over to
them. I am afraid, I say, to dwell too much on this, lest it may seem to
reproach those, who owed Her much more.

IN Her Character, ordinary things, how singular soever She might be in them,
must be thrown into the Heap. She was a gentle Mistress, a kind Friend, (if
this Word is too low for her State, it is not too low for her Humility,) and
above all, She was so tender and so respectful a Wife, that She seemed to go
beyond the perfectest Idea's that Wit or Invention has been able to rise to.
The lowest Condition of Life, or the greatest Inequality of Fortune, has not
afforded so perfect a Pattern. Tenderness and Complacency seemed to strive
which of them should be the more eminent. She had no higher Satisfaction in the
prospect of Greatness, that was descending on Her, than that it gave Her an
occasion of making Him a Present worthy of Himself. Nor had Crowns or Thrones
any Charm in them, that was so pleasant to Her, as that they raised Him to a
Greatness, which He so well deserved, and could so well maintain. She was all
Zeal and Rapture, when any thing was to be done, that could either express
Affection or show Respect to Him. She obeyed with more Pleasure, than the most
Ambitious could have when they command. This Subject is too hard to be well set
out, and so it must be left, in general and larger expressions.

Those who served Her, can never give over, when they are relating the
Instances of Her gentleness to them all. She was so soft when She gave her
Orders, and so careful of not putting too much upon them; so tender of them in
their Sickness and Afflictions, so liberal on many different occasions, that as
the Instances are innumerable, so they have peculiarities in them, which show
that every thing in Her was of a Piece with the rest. She showed a sensibility
at the death of those whom She particularly valued; that Persons of so exalted
a Condition, do generally think may mis-become them. The many Tears that She
shed upon the death of our good Primate, who got the start of Her, a very few
Days, showed how well She understood his Worth, and how much She valued it.

So careful She was of all that belonged to Her, that when She saw what her
last Sickness, was like to grow to, She made those, who had not yet gone
through it, withdraw. She would suffer none of them to stay about Her, when
their Attendance might endanger their own Health: And yet She was so tender of
them, when they fell under that so justly dreaded Illness, that She would not
suffer them to be removed, though they happened to be lodged very near Her self.

HER Bounty and her Compassions had great Matter given them to work upon. And
how wide soever her Sphere may have been, She went in this rather beyond her
Strength, than kept within it. Those generous Confessors and Exiles whom the
Persecution of France sent over hither, as well as to the United Provinces,
felt the Tenderness as well as the Bounty of the Welcome that She gave them. The
Confusions of Ireland, drive over Multitudes, of all Ranks, who fled hither for
Shelter, and were soon reduced to great Straights, from a state of as great
Plenty: Most of these were by Her means, both supported during their stay, and
enabled to return home after that Storm was over: The largeness of the Supplies
that were given, and the tender Manner of giving them, made their Exile both
the shorter and the more tolerable: The miserable among our selves,
particularly those who suffered by the Accidents of War, found in Her a relief,
that was easily come at, and was copiously furnished. She would never limit any
from laying proper Objects for her Charity, in her way: Nor confine that Care
to the Ministers of the Almonry: She encouraged all that were about Her, or
that had free access to Her, to acquaint Her, with the Necessities, under which
Persons of true Merit might languish: And She was never uneasy at Applications
of that kind; nor was her Hand ever scanty, when the Person was deserving, or
the Extremity was pinching. She was regular and exact in this: She found that
even a Royal Treasure, though dispensed by a Hand that was yet more Royal, could
not answer all Demands. Therefore She took Care to have a just Account, both of
the Worth and of the Necessities, of those who pretended: And She showed in
this as great an Exactness, and as attentive a Regard; as much Memory, and as
much Diligence, as if she had had no Cares of a higher Nature upon Her. It
seemed She kept Tables or Journals: For She had a Method in it, with which no
Body was ever acquainted, as far as I could learn. It was very reasonable to
believe, that She took Notes and set Rules to her Self in this Matter.

BUT She was so exact, to the Rule of the Gospel, of managing it with deep
Secrecy; that none knew what or to whom she gave, but those whom she was forced
to employ in it. When it was to fall on Persons who had access to Her; her own
Hand was the Conveyance: what went through other Hands, was charged on them,
with an Injunction of Secrecy. And She her self was so far from speaking of
such Things, that when some Persons were offered to her Charity, who had been
already named by others, and were relieved by her self, she would not let those
who spoke to Her, upon the Fame of their being in Want, understand any thing of
the Notice that had been already taken of it; but either She let the thing pass
in silence, or if the Necessity was represented as heavier, than She had
understood it to be, a new Supply was given, without so much as a Hint of what
had gone before.

BUT how good soever She was in Her self, she carried a heavy Load upon her
Mind: The deep Sense that she had of the Guilt and Judgments that seemed to be
hanging over us, as no doubt it gave Her many afflicting Thoughts in the
presence of God, so it broke often out in many sad strains, to those to whom
she gave her Thoughts a freer vent. The Impieties and Blasphemies, the open
Contempt of Religion, and the Scorn of Virtue, that She heard of from so many
Hands, and in so many different Corners of the Nation, gave Her a secret
Horror, and offered so black a Prospect, that it filled Her with melancholy
Reflections, and engaged Her into much secret Mourning. This touched Her the
more sensibly when She at any time heard that some, who pretended to much Zeal
for the Crown, and the present Establishment, seemed from thence to think they
had some Right to be indulged in their Licenciousness, and other
Irregularities. She often said, Can a Blessing be expected from such Hands, or
on any Thing that must pass through them? She longed to see a Set of Men of
Integrity and Probity, of generous Tempers and public Spirits, in whose Hands
the Concerns of the Crown and Nation might be lodged, with reasonable Hopes of
Success, and of a Blessing from above, upon their Services. She had a just
esteem of all Persons as She found them truly Virtuous and Religious: Nor could
any other Considerations have a great Effect upon Her, when these were wanting.
She made a great difference between those that were convinced of the Principles
of Religion; how fatally soever they might be shut up, from having their due
effect on them; and those who had quite thrown them off: Where these were quite
extinguished, no Hope was left, nor Foundation to build upon: But where they
remained, how feeble or unactive soever, there was a Seed still within them,
that at some time or other, and upon some happy Occasion might shoot and grow.
Next to open Impiety, the Coldness, the want of Heat and Life in those who
pretended to Religion, the Deadness and Disunion of the whole Body of
Protestants, and the Weakness, the Humors and Affectations, of some who seemed
to have good Intentions, did very sensibly affect Her. She said often, with
feeling and cutting regret, Can such dry Bones live! When She heard what crying
Sins abounded in our Fleets and Armies; She gave such Directions as seemed
practicable, to those who She thought might in some measure correct them: And
She made some in very eminent Stations understand, That nothing could both
please, and even oblige Her more, than that Care should be taken to stop those
growing Disorders, and to reduce Matters to the Gravity and Sobriety of former
Times. The last great Project that Her Thoughts were working on, with relation
to a Noble and Royal Provision, for maimed and decayed Seamen, was particularly
designed, to be so constituted, as to put them in a probable way, of ending
their Days in the Fear of God. Every new Hint that way, was entertained by Her
with a lively Joy: She had some Discourse on that Head, the very Day before She
was taken ill. It gave Her a sensible Concern, to hear that Ireland was scarce
got out of its Miseries, when it was returning to the Levities, and even to the
Abominations of former Times: She spoke of those things like one that was
trembling, and sinking under the weight of them. She took particular Methods to
be well informed of the State of our Plantations; and of those Colonies that we
have among Infidels: But it was no small Grief to Her, to hear that they were
but too generally a reproach to the Religion by which they were named, (I do
not say which they professed, for many of them seem scarce to profess it:) She
gave a willing Ear to a Proposition that was made for erecting Schools, and the
founding of a College among them. She considered the whole Scheme of it, and
the Endowment which was desired for it. It was a noble one, and was to rise out
of some Branches of the Revenue, which made it liable to Objections: But She
took Care to consider the whole Thing so well, that She her self answered all
Objections; and espoused the Matter with so affectionate a Concern, that She
prepared it for the King to settle it at his coming over. She knew how heartily
He concurred in all Designs of that Nature, though other more pressing Cares
denied Him the Opportunities of considering them so much: She digested and
prepared them for him: And as She knew how large a share of Zeal, His Majesty
had for good Things, She took Care also to give Him the largest share of the
Honor of them. Nor indeed could any thing Inflame Her more, than the Prospect
of setting Religion forward, especially where there were Hopes of working upon
Infidels: Though after all, the Infidels at home, seemed to be more incurable and
desperate, than those abroad.

HER Concern and Her Charity was not limited to that which might seem to be Her
own immediate Province: And was more especially put under Her Care. The Foreign
Churches' had also a liberal share of it. She was not insensible of the
Kindness of the Dutch: She remembered it always with a grateful Tenderness; and
was heartily touched with all their Concerns. The Refuges of France were
considered by Her, as those whom God had sent to sit safe under Her Shadow, and
easy through Her Favor. Those scattered Remnants of our elder Sister, that
had been hunted out of their Valleys, were again brought* together by Their
Majesty's means. It was the King's powerful Intercession, that restored them to
their Seats, as well as to their Edicts: And it was the Queen's Charity that
formed them into Bodies, and put them in the Method of enjoying those
Advantages, and of transmitting them down to the succeeding Ages. She took Care
also of preserving the little that was left of the Bohemian Churches: She had
formed Nurseries of Religion in some of the Parts of Germany, which were
exhausted by War, and disabled to carry on the Education of their Youth; and to
transmit to the next Age, the Faith which they themselves professed.

SUCH was the Temper of our blessed Queen: These were the Earnests of what we
expected from Her: They had been a full Return of the most promising
Expectations in any other: But in Her they were only Earnests of what we looked
for. It was but the dawning of Her Day: The Mists and Clouds rose so thick upon
it, the Disorders of War did so obstruct many great Designs, that Her Light was
much intercepted: It could not shine through: She understood well the Decencies
of Things: They were beautiful in their Seasons; and they would not have had so
fair an appearance, if they had come before the proper time, and the other
Circumstances that might fit them. She seemed to have many Years before Her:
Her Youth was that which added this particular Happiness, to all the other
Blessings that we had in Her, That we thought we were secure in a long
continuance of it. We flattered our Selves with the Hopes of a Reign that
should have been lasting. The Hopes of that made us neither to doubt nor fear
any thing else. What generous or abstracted Thoughts soever we may have, in
speculation, Self-love lies so near us, that after all, we are chiefly
concerned for our own Times. We think, we may more easily deliver over the
Concerns of the next Age to those who are to live in it. It seems to be the
Voice of Nature that Hezekiah said, Good is the Word of the Lord, that Peace
and Truth shall be in my Days. Therefore when the Prospect of a fixed
Happiness, goes farther than the reasonable Prospect of our own Continuance
here, we think we our selves are very safe. It is also a delightful Thought to
one, that considers how much all Things are out of Joint, and into what
Disorder they have fallen, to hope that so dexterous a Hand was like to have so
long a course of Life, before Her, for putting every Thing again into proper
Methods, and in regular Channels: And that might have lived till the Nation had
put on another Face, till we had recovered our ancient Virtue, as well as our
much blasted Fame: Till Religion had been not only secured, but raised to such
a Degree, as to have shined out from us through the whole Earth, with a benign
Influence on all the Foreign Churches; as well as with a dreadful one toward
the Roman Church: (I mean not the Dreadfulness of Cruelty: That is Her own
Character, which we still leave entire to Her: I mean the dazzling Her with the
brightness of Virtue and Religion among us,) and till Public Liberty had been
settled upon a true Basis. I mean the Authority of a well-balanced and
wellconducted Government: That should have maintained Property, and have
asserted the generous Principles of the Freedom of human Nature: That should
have dispensed Justice, and rewarded Virtue, with a gentle but steady Hand: And
have repressed the luxuriant Pretensions of those, who understand Public
Liberty so little, as not to be able to distinguish it from Licenciousness;
which strikes first at Religion and Virtue, and then must soon fall with its
own Burden, under the Misery of Usurpations at home, or become an easy Prey
to Foreign Conquerors. A corrupted state of Mankind is well prepared to be a
Scene of Slavery. Liberty cannot be maintained, but by Virtue, Temperance,
moderate Desires, and contented Minds: And since those are not to be attained
to but by Religion, this is an uncontested, Truth, That Liberty and Religion
live and die together.

ALL this and a deal more, both with relation to our selves, and to all that
are round about us, was that which we thought we had a Right to expect from the
continuance of such a Reign: We thought that God had formed Her by so many
peculiar Characters, and conducted Her by so many happy Providence, that from
all these we had some Right to conclude, that it would be lasting. The
Apperances were of our side: For though She tempered the Cheerfulness of Youth,
with the Gravity of Age, and the Seriousness even of old Age, yet Youth still
smiled in Her Countenance, with so fresh an Air, that we thought Nature had not
gone half its way; and had yet a long Career to to run. So firm a Health, so
regular a Course of Life, and so calm a Temper, that exactness of Method, and
punctualness to Hours, seemed to add a further Security to our Hopes: Nor did
they stop under the Reign or Age of a Queen Elizabeth.

WE felt so happy an Influence from Her Example, as well as by Her Government,
that even under the Terror that Her Sickness gave us, we flattered our selves
with the Hopes that God was only trying us, to give us a juster Value of so
inestimable a Blessing, that so it might be restored to us with the more
Advantage, and a higher Endearment. We could not let our selves think, that so
terrible a Stroke was so near us. We who but a few Days before, had been
fanoying, what our Childrens Children were to see in Her, were then driven to
apprehend that our Sun was to set, before it had attained to its Noon. Then
under the Darkness of that thick Cloud, every one begun to recollect what he
had seen and observed in Her: And though some knew more than others, yet every
one knew enough, to strike him with Amazement and Sorrow. Then Her whole
Administration, as well as the privater Parts of Her Life was remembered: Every
one had somewhat to say, and all added to the common Stock, and increased the
general Lamentation.

IT is true, a Veil ought here to be drawn, over that which is Sacred. The
Secrets of Government are so; and must not break out, till the proper time
comes of recording them, and of delivering them down to Posterity: And then we
know what a Figure Her History must make. But in this way, and under the due
Reserves of speaking of present Things, somewhat may be ventured on, without
breaking in too far. Her Punctualness to Hours, Her Patience in Audiences, Her
Gentleness in Commanding, Her Reservedness in Speaking, Her Caution in
Promising, Her Softness in finding Fault, Her Readiness in Rewarding, Her
Diligence in Ordering, Her Hearkening to all that was Suggested, and the
copious Accounts that She gave to Him whom both God, and Her own Choice, had
made her Oracle, were every one of them surprising; but altogether they seemed
to look rather like the Idea of what ought to be; than that which could in
Reason be expected from any one Person. It might have been supposed that Her
whole Time must have gone to this. If many other Things had been omitted, it
was that which must have been well allowed of: But that there might be a
fullness of Leisure for every thing, the Day was early begun; She had many Hours
to spare; and nothing was done in haste; no Hurry nor Impatience appeared. Her
Devotions, both private and public, were not so much as shortened; and She
found time enough for keeping up the Cheerfulness of a Court, and for admitting
all Persons to Her. She was not so wholly possessed by the greatest Cares, that
She forgot the smallest. Those who are exact in little Things, generally trifle
in great ones: And those who mind great Things, think they have a Right to
neglect smaller ones: They think they should rather be lessened if they were
too exact in them. But it was a new thing to see one, who never forgot Things,
which She her self esteemed but Trifles, and which She managed with so becoming
a Grace, that even in these she preserved her own Character; yet to carry on
the great Concerns of Government with so firm a Conduct, and such an Air of
Majesty.

IF any thing was ever found in Her, that might seem to fall too low, it was
that Her Humility and Modesty did really depress Her too much, in her own Eyes:
And that she might too soon be made to think, That the Reasons which were
offered to Her by others, were better than Her own. But even this, was only in
such Matters, in which the want of Practice, might make that modest Distrust
seem more reasonable: And when she did see nothing in that which was before
Her, in which Conscience had any share; for whenever that appeared, She was
firm and unmovable.

HER Administration had a peculiar Happiness attending on it: We had Reason to
believe that it went the better with us upon Her Account. There was somewhat in
her Self, that disarmed many of her Enemies; such of them as came near Her,
were soon conquered by Her: While the Dexterity and Secrecy of her Conduct,
defeated the Designs of those, who were restless and implacable. We seemed once
to be much exposed: Unprosperous Accidents at Sea, gave our Enemies the
appearance of a Triumph: They lay along our Coasts, and were for some time the
Masters of our Seas. But a secret Guard seemed then to environ us: All the Harm
that they did us, in one Instance of Barbarity, That showed what our general
Treatment might probably have been, if we had become a Prey to them, did us
little hurt: It seemed rather suffered by Heaven, to unite us against them. The
Nation lost no Courage by it: Their Zeal was the more inflamed. This was Her
first essay of Government: But then, She, who upon ordinary Occasions, was not
out of Countenance to own a Fear that did not misbecome Her, did now when a
visible Danger threatened her, show a firmness of Mind, and a composedness of
Behavior, that made the Men of the clearest Courage ashamed of themselves. She
covered the inward Apprehensions that she had, with such an equality of
Behavior, that She seemed afraid of nothing, when She had Reason to fear the
worst that could happen. She was resolved, if Things should have gone to
Extremities, to have ventured her Self with her People, and either to have
preserved them, or to have perished with them.

THIS was such a beginning of the Exercise of Royal Power, as might for ever
have given Her a disgust of it. She seemed all the while to possess her Soul in
Patience; and to live in a constant resignation of her Self to the Will of God,
without any Anxiety concerning Events. The happy News of a a great Victory, and
of a greater Preservation of His Majesty's Sacred Person, from the surest
Instruments of Death, which seemed to be sent with that Direction, that it
might show the immediate Watchfulness of Providence about Him; did soon change
the Scene, and put another Face on our Affairs. She only seemed the least
changed; she looked more Cheerful, but with the same Tranquillity: The
appearances of it had never left Her. Nor was it a small Addition to her Joy,
that another Person, for whom She still retained profound Regards, was also
preserved. She was a true Sabine in the Case: And though She was no Part of the
Cause of the War, yet she would willingly have sacrificed Her own Life, to have
preserved either of Those, that seemed to be then in Danger. She spoke of that
Matter, two Days after the News came, with so tender a sense of the Goodness of
God to Her, in it, that it drew Tears from Her: And then She freely confessed,
That her Heart had trembled, not so much from the Apprehension of the Danger,
that She her Self was in, as from the Scene that was then in Action at the
Boyne: God had heard Her Prayers, and she blessed him for it, with as sensible
a Joy, as for any thing that had ever happened to Her.

THE next Season of Her Administration concluded the Reduction of Ireland. The
expectations of Success there, were once so much sunk, that it seemed that that
Island was to be yet, for another Year, a Field of Blood, and a Heap of Ashes.
She laid the Blame of this in a great measure, on the Licenciousness and other
Disorders, that she heard had rather increased, than abated among them. A
sudden turn came from a bold but necessary Resolution: That was executed as
gallantly, as it was generously undertaken. In the face of a great Army, a
handful of Men passed a deep River, forced a Town, and made the Enemy to retire
in haste. All Posterity will reckon this, among the most signal Performances of
War. An Instance that showed how far Courage could go; and what brave Men, well
led on, could do. A great Victory followed a few Days after: The Success of the
Action was at so long and so doubtful a stand, that there was just Reason to
belileve, that pure Hands lifted up to Heaven, might have great Influence, and
might have given the turn: From that time, Success was less doubtful. All was
concluded with the happy Reduction of the whole Island. The Reflections that
She made on this, looked the same way that all her Thoughts did. Our Forces
elsewhere, both at Sea and Land, were thought to be considerable, and so
promising, that we were in great Hopes of somewhat that might be decisive: Only
Ireland was apprehended to be too weakly furnished, for a concluding Campaigne:
Yet so different are the Methods of Providence, from humane Expectations, that
nothing memorable happened any where, but only in Ireland, where little or
nothing was expected.

SHE was again at the Helm when we were threatened with a Descent, and an
Invasion: Which was conducted with that Secrecy, that we were in danger of
being surprised by it, when our Preparations at Sea were not finished, and our
Force at Land was not considerable. The struggle was like to have been
formidable: And there was a particular Violence to be done to her Self, by
reason of Him, who was to have conducted it. Then we felt new Proofs of the
Watchfulness of Heaven. What comes immediately from Causes that fall not under
humane Counsels, nor can be redressed by Skill or Force, may well be ascribed
to the Specialities of Providence: And the rather, if Nature seems to go out of
its Course, and Seasons change their ordinary Face. A long uninterrupted
continuance of boisterous Weather, that came from the Point, that was most
contrary to their Designs, made the Project impracticable. A succession of
turns of Weather followed after that, happily to us; and as fatally to them.
While the same Wind that stopped their Fleets, joined ours. It went not out of
that Direction, till it ended in one of the most glorious Actions that ever
England had: And then those who were brought together to invade us, were forced
to be the melancholy Spectators of the Destruction of the best part of that
Fleet, on which all their Hope was built. In that, without detracting either
from the Gallantry of our Men, or the Conduct of our Admiral, it must be
acknowledged that Providence had the largest share: And if we may presume to
enter into those Secrets, and to judge of the hidden Causes of them; we may
well conclude, that Her Piety and Her Prayers contributed not a little to it.

SHE bore Success, with the same Decency that appeared when the Sky seemed to
be more clouded. So firm a situation of Mind, as She had, seemed to be above
the Power of Accidents of any sort whatsoever. Clouds returned again in another
Year of Her Administration; though not with a Face that was quite so black. She
thought God was Angry with us: And it was not hard to find out a Reason to
justify the severest of his Providence.

IT seemed much more accountable, that our Affairs should have met with some
unhappy Interruptions, than that so many Blessings should have attended upon
us: She had a tender Sense of any thing that looked like a Miscarriage, under
Her Conduct, and was afraid lest some Mistake of Hers might have occasioned it.
When Difficulties grew too hard to be extricated, and that She felt an
uneasiness in them, She made God Her refuge; and though She had neither the
Principles nor the Temper of an Enthusiast, yet She often owned that She felt a
full Calm upon her Thoughts, after She had given them a free vent before God in
Prayer.

WHEN sad Accidents came from the immediate Hand of Heaven, particularly on the
occasion of a great Loss at Sea; She said, Though there was no occasion for
Complaint or Anger upon these, yet there was a juster Cause of Grief, since
God's Hand was to be seen so particularly in them. Sometimes She feared there
might be some secret Sins, that might lie at the Root, and blast all: But She
went soon off from that, and said, where so much was visible, there was no need
of Divination concerning that which might be hidden.

WHEN the Sky grew clearer, and in Her more prosperous Days, She was never
lifted up. A great Resolution was taken, which has since changed the Scene very
visibly: It has not only asserted a Dominion over those Seas, which we claim as
our own, but has for the present, assumed a more extended Empire; while we are
Masters both of the Ocean and the Mediterranean; and have out Enemies Coasts,
as well as the Seas, open to us. She had too tender a Heart to take any real
Satisfaction in the Destruction of their Towns, or the Ruin of their poor and
innocent Inhabitants. She spoke of this with true Indignation, at those who had
begun such Practices, even in full Peace; or after Protections had been given.
She was sorry that the state of War made it necessary, to restrain another
Prince, from such Barbarities, by making himself feel the Effects of them; and
therefore she said, She hoped, that such Practices should become so odious, in
all that should begin them, and by their doing so, force others to retaliate,
that for the future, they should be for ever laid aside.

WHEN Her Affairs had another Face, She grew not secure, nor went She off from
Her dependence upon God. In all the Pleasures of Life, She maintained a true
Indifference for the Continuance of them; and She seemed to think of parting
with them, in so easy a manner, that it plainly appeared how little they had
got into Her Heart: She had no occasion for these Thoughts, from any other
Principle, but a mere disgust of Life, and the aspiring to a better. She
apprehended she felt once or twice, such Indispositions upon Her, that she
concluded Nature was working toward some great Sickness; so She set her self
to take full and broad views of Death, that from thence She might judge, how
She should be able to encounter it. But She felt so quiet an Indifference upon
that Prospect, leaning rather toward the desire of a Dissolution, that she
said, Though She did not pray for Death, yet she could neither wish nor pray
against it. She left that before God, and referred her Self entirely to the
Disposal of Providence. If She did not wish for Death, yet She did not fear it.

As this was Her Temper, when she viewed it at some distance; so she maintained
the same Calm, when, in the closest struggle with it. Here Darkness and Horror
fall upon me: For who can look through that Scene, so unconcerned as She went
through it? I know if I would write according to the Rules of Art, I should
draw a Veil here; and leave the Reader to imagine that, which no Pen can
properly express. Every thing must seem flat here; upon a Subject, that gives a
Flame, too high to be either managed or described. But it is Nature and not Art
that governs me. I will therefore go through what remains, though without the
Force or Flight that it seems to command: I will do it, though but faintly, with
a Feebleness suitable to the Temper of my own Mind, without any anxious study
to manage so poor a Thing, as the Credit of writing in proportion to the
Sublimity of the Subject. Let the Matter it self speak: That will have a Force,
that will supply all Defects.

SHE only was Calm; when all was in a Storm about Her: The dismal Sighs of all
that came near Her, could not discompose Her. She was rising so fast above
Mortality, that even He who was more to Her, than all the World besides, and to
all whose Thoughts She had been upon every other Occasion entirely resigned,
could not now inspire Her with any Desires of returning back to Life. Her Mind
seemed to be dis-entangling it self from Her Body, and so She rose above that
Tenderness, that went deeper in Her, than all other earthly Things whatsoever.
It seemed all that was Mortal was falling off, when that could give Her no
uneasiness.

SHE received the Intimations of approaching Death, with a Firmness that did
neither bend nor soften, under that, which has made the strongest Minds to
tremble. Then, when even the most Artificial grow Sincere, it appeared how
established a Calm and how sublime a Piety possessed Her. A ready Willingness
to be dissolved, and an entire Resignation to the Will of God, did not forsake
Her one Minute: nor had any thing been left to be dispatched in her last Hours.
Her Mind was in no hurry, but soft as the still Voice, that seemed to be
calling her Soul away to the Regions above. So that She made Her last Steps,
with a Stability and Seriousness, that how little ordinary soever they may be,
were indeed the natural Conclusions of such a Life, as she had led.

BUT how quiet soever She was, the News of her Danger struck the whole Nation,
as well as the Town, with so astonishing a Terror, as if Thunders and
Earthquakes had been shaking both Heaven and Earth. Blackness then dwelt on
every Face: A silent Confusion of Look, bursting out often into Tears and
Sighs, was so Universal, and looked with so solemn an Air, that how much soever
She deserved the Affections of the Nation, yet we never thought that She
possessed them so entirely, as appeared in those Days of Sorrow. It was a
Season of great Joy: We were Celebrating that Blessed Nativity, that gave us
all Life, and the Hopes of a Blessed Immortality. But it was a sad
Interruption, to that Sacred Festivity, when we were alarmed with those
frightful Apprehensions. We were once revived, with the Hopes of a less
formidable Sickness. This spread a Joy, that was as high and universal, as our
Grief had been. We were easily enough brought to flatter our selves with the
belief of that, which was so much wished for. But this went soon off: It was an
ill-grounded Joy; the Clouds returned so much the blacker, by reason of that
mistaken Interval. Then all that prayed upon any Account whatsoever, re-doubled
their Fervor, and cried out, Spare thy People, and give not thy Heritage to
reproach. We prayed for our Selves more than for Her, when we cried to God for
her Life and Recovery: Both Priest and People, Rich and Poor, all Ranks and
Sorts joined in this Litany. A universal Groan was Echoed to those Prayers,
through our Churches and Streets. We were afraid to ask after that Sacred
Health; and yet we were impatient to know how it stood. It seemed our Sins
cried louder than our Prayers: They were heard, and not the other.

BUT how severely soever God intended to visit us, She was gently handled; She
felt no inward depression nor sinking of Nature. She then declared that She
felt in Her Mind the Joys of a good Conscience, and the Powers of Religion,
giving her Supports, which even the last Agonies could not shake: Her constant
Softness to all about her never left Her. That was indeed natural to Her, but
by it, all saw visibly that nothing could put Her Mind out of its natural
Situation, and usual Methods. A few Hours before She breathed her last, when He
who ministered to Her in the best Things, had continued in a long Attendance
about Her, She was so free in her Thoughts, that apprehending he might be
weary, She commanded him to sit down: And repeated Her Orders till he obeyed
them. A thing too mean in it self to be mentioned, but that it showed the
Presence of her Mind, as well as the Sweetness of her Temper. Prayer was then
Her constant Exercise, as often as She was awake: And so sensible was the
Refreshment that her Mind found in it, that She thought it did her more good,
and gave even her Body more ease, than any thing that was done to Her. Nature
sunk apace: She resolved to furnish Her self with the great Viaticum of
Christians, the last Provisions for Her Journey: She received the Blessed
Sacrament with a Devotion that inflamed, as well as it melted all those who saw
it: After that great Act of Church Communion was over, She delivered her self
up so entirely to Meditation, that She seemed scarce to mind any thing else.
She was then upon the Wing. Such was her Peace in Her latter end, that though the
Symptoms showed that Nature was much oppressed, yet She scarce felt any
uneasiness from it. It was only from what She perceived was done to Her, and
from those Intimations that were given her, that She judged her Life to be in
danger: But She scarce knew Her self to be sick, by any thing that She felt at
Heart. Her bearing so much Sickness with so little Emotion, was for a while
imputed to that undisturbed Quiet and Patience in which She possessed her Soul:
But when She repeated it so often, that She felt her self well inwardly, then
it appeared that there was a particular Blessing in so easy a Conclusion of a
Life, that had been led through a great variety of Accidents, with a constant
equality of Temper.

THE last and hardest Step is now to be made: Our Imaginations, which must
still be full of the Noblest and Augustest Idea's of Her, may be apt to
represent Her to our Thoughts, as still alive, with all those Graces of Majesty
and Sweetness that always accompanied Her. But, alas! we are but too sure, that
all this is the illusion of Fancy. She has left us; She is gone to those
Blessed Seats above: Where even Crowns and Thrones are but small Matters,
compared to that brighter Glory, which rises far above the Splendor of
Triumphs, Processions, and Coronations.

THE measuring of so great a Change, and so vast an Advancement in its full
Latitude, as it is the properest Thought to mitigate our Sorrows, so it seems
to be too lively a one for us now, and above what we are capable of, in our
present Depression. This may make us conclude with a sudden Transport of Joy,
that She is Happy, unspeakable Happy, by the Change: And has risen much higher
above what She her self was a little while ago, than She was then above the
rest of Mortals.

BUT black and genuine Horror still returns, and seems to wrap us, and all
things about us, with so thick a Mist, that so bright a Thought, as that of Her
present Glory, cannot break through it. While we are persuaded of her
Happiness, and that She has gained infinitely by the Change, yet Self-love is
so strong, and Sense makes so powerful an Impression, that when we consider,
what we have lost, in losing Her, we sink under our Burden: Dispirited, as if
our Life and Joy were gone with Her, as if black Night, and lasting Winter had
chilled all our Blood, and damped all our Powers.

IT may seem a needless Severity to aggravate all this, as if we were not
enough loaded already: But that a further black Scene must be opened: And that
we must be filled with the gloomy Prospect of that which we may but too justly
and too reasonably look for. God seems to be making a way for his Anger: And to
be removing that Interposition which we have reason to believe did effectually
stop those Miseries, for which we may well fear, that we are more than ripe.

WE are not quite abandoned: God does still preserve Him to us, by whose Means
only, considering our present Circumstances, we can hope either to be Safe or
Happy. That Duty and Respect which was before divided, does now Center all in
Him. All that we paid Her, does now devolve to Him, by a Title that becomes so
much the juster, because we have all seen (I wish we may not feel it,) how deep
a Wound this made on Him, whose Mind has appeared hitherto Invulnerable, and
where Firmness seemed to be the peculiar Character. It is indeed but natural
that He who knew Her best should value Her most. The best Tribute that we can
offer to the Ashes of our Blessed Queen, is to double our Duty and our Zeal to
Him, Whom She loved so entirely, and in whom Her Memory is still so fresh, that
though for our own sakes we must be concerned to see it sink so deep; Yet for His
sake, we cannot but be pleased to see, how much His Character rises, by the
just Acknowledgments He pays Her, and by that deep Affliction for Her loss,
which has almost overwhelmed a Mind, that had kept its Ground in the hardest
shocks of Fortune, but lost it here.

IF our Apprehensions of His Sacred Life, grow now more tender, and we feel
more sensibly than formerly, that it is He who makes us Safe at home, as well
as Great abroad; if we do now see, what is that Interposition that is now left,
and that keeps off Misery and Destruction from breaking in upon us, as the Sea,
to swallow us up; if that Life it self is so often exposed, that this creates a
new Cloud upon our Minds; gloomy and black, as if charged with Storm and
Thunder; If all this gives us a melancholy Prospect; we know that nothing can
divert or dissipate it, but our turning from our Sins, which lay us so naked,
which have brought one severe Stroke already on us, and by which God may be yet
further provoked to visit us again. Another Stroke must make an end of us.

To conclude.

THE truest as well as the usefullest way of lamenting this Loss, is, after
that we have given somewhat to Nature, and have let Sorrow have a free course,
then to recollect our Thoughts, and to study to imitate those Virtues and
Perfections which we admired in Her; and for which her Memory must be ever
Precious among us: Precious, as Ointment poured forth, ever Savoury and
Fragrant.

HER Death has indeed spread a melting Tenderness, and a flowing Sorrow over
the whole Nation, beyond any thing we ever saw; which does in some measure bear
a Proportion to the just occasion of it: How dismal soever this may look; yet
it is some Satisfaction to see that just Respects are paid Her Memory, and that
our Mournings are as deep as they are universal. They have broke out in the
solemnest as well as in the decentest manner: Those August Bodies that
represent the whole, began them: And from them they have gone round the Nation,
in genuine and native Strains, free and not emendicated. But if this should
have its chief and best Effect, to drive the Impressions of Religion and the
Tetrours of God, deeper into us, than we might hope, that even this fatal
Stroke, as terrible and threatening as it now looks, might produce great and
even happy Effects: So different may Events be, from the Causes, or at least
from the Occasions of them.

HOW lowering soever the Sky may now seem, a general Repentance, and a sincere
Reformation of Manners, would soon give it another Face: It would break through
those Clouds that seem now to be big, and even ready to burst: If this is too
much to be expected; yet if there were but a few, that did heartily go into
good Designs, even they, might procure to us a lengthening out of our
Tranquillity, and a mitigation of our Miseries: and that, though they were fixed
on us, by irreversible Decrees. A number of true Mourners might hope at least
to stop their Course, till they themselves should die in Peace; or they might
look for a milder Fate, if they should happen to be involved in a common
Calamity.

Mark the Perfect, and behold the Upright, for their End is Peace.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Chiswell.
DR. THOMAS TENISON, now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, his Sermon concerning
Discretion in giving Alms. 1668.

-- His Sermon against Self-love, before the House of Commons. 1689.

-- His Sermon of doing Good to Posterity, before Their Majesty's. 1690.

-- His Sermon concerning the Wandering of the Mind in God's Service, before the
Queen: Feb. 15. 1690.

-- His Sermon of the Folly of Atheism, before the Queen: Feb. 22. 1690.

-- His Sermon preached at the Anniversary Meeting of the Clergy-mens Sons:
December. 3. 1691.

-- His Sermon concerning the Celestial Body of a Christian, before the Queen
on Easter Day. 1694.

-- His Sermon concerning Holy Resolution, before the King at Kensington:
December. 30. 1694. on Psalm. 119. 106.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of the Queen, in the Abby-Church in Westminster:
March 5. 1694/5.

Dr. BURNET, Lord Bishop of Sarum, his Discourse of the Pastoral Care. 8vo.

-- His Four Discourses delivered to the Clergy of the Diocese of Sarum:
Concerning, I. The Truth of the Christian Religion. II. The Divinity and Death
of Christ. III. The Infallibility and Authority of the Church. IV. The
Obligations to continue in the Communion of the Church. 8vo. 1694.

-- His Sermon at the Funeral of Archbishop Tillotson. 1694.

-- His Sermon Preached before the King at St. James's Chapel, on the 10th. of
February 1694/5 being the first Sunday in Lent, on 2 Cor. 6. 1.

Dr. PATRICK (now Lord Bishop of Ely) his Heart's-Ease; or, a Remedy against
all Troubles: With a consolatory Discourse, particularly directed to those who
have lost their Friends and Relations. To which are added Two Papers, printed
in the time of the late Plague. The Sixth Edition corrected. 12mo. 1695.

-- His Answer to a Book spread abroad by the Romish Priests, entitled, [ The
Touchstone of the Reformed Gospel] wherein the true Doctrine of the Church of
England, and many Texts of the Holy Scripture, are faithfully explained. 8vo.
1692.

-- His Eight several occasional Sermons since the Revolution. 4to.

-- His Exposition of the Ten Commandments. 8vo.

A Vindication of Their Majesty's Authority to fill the Sees of the deprived
Bishops: In a Letter occasioned by Dr. B -- 's Refusal of the Bishopric of
Bath and Wells. 4to.

A Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a new Separation, on Account of
the Oaths to the present Government. With an Answer to the History of Passive
Obedience, so far as relates to them. 4to.

A Vindication of the said Discourse, concerning the Unreasonableness of a new
Separation, from the Exceptions made against it in a Tract called, [ A brief
Answer to the said Discourse, etc.] 4to.

Rushworth's Historical Collections. The Third Part, in Two Volumes. Containing
the principal Matters which happened from the meeting of the Parliament, Nov.
3. 1640 to the end of the Year 1644. Wherein is a particular account of the
Rise and Progress of the Civil War, to that Period. Fol. 1692.

The Letters of the Reverend Father Paul, Counselor o State to the most Serene
Republic of Venice, and Author of the Excellent History of the Council of
Trent. 1693.

An Impartial History of the Wars of Ireland. In Two Parts. From the Time that
Duke Schomberg landed with an Army in that Kingdom, to the 23d. of March 1692.
when their Majesty's Proclamation was published, declaring the War to be ended.
Illustrated with Copper Sculptures, describing the most important Places of
Action. By George Story, an Eyewitness of the most remarkable Passages. 4to.
1693.

Dr. John C^nant's Sermons, Published by Dr. Williams, 1693. 8vo.

Of the Government of the Thoughts. The 2d. Edition, By Ge^. Tully, Sub-Dean of
York. 8vo. 1694.

Origo Legum: Or, a Treatise of the Origin of Laws, and their Obliging Power;
as also of their great Variety; and why some Laws are immutable, and some not,
but may suffer change, or cease to be, or be suspended, or abrogated. In seven
Books. By George Dawson, Fol. 1694.

A brief Discourse concerning the Lawfulness of Worshipping God by the
Common Prayer: In answer to a Book entitled, [ A Brief Discourse of the
Unlawfulness of Common Prayer-Worship.] By John Williams, D. D. 4to. 1694.

A true Representation of the absurd and mischievous Principles of the Sect
commonly known by the Name of Muggletonians. 4to. 1694.

Memoirs of the most Reverend THOMAS CRANMER, Archbishop of Canterbury: Wherein
the History of the Church and the Reformation of it during the Primacy of the
said Archbishop, are greatly illustrated, and many singular Matters relating
thereunto, now first published. In Three Books. Collected chiefly from Records,
Registers, Authentic Letters, and other Original Manuscripts. By John Strype.
M. A. Fol. 1694.

A Commentary on the First Book of Moses called Genesis. By the Right Reverend
Father in God Simon Lord Bishop of Ely. 4to. 1695.

The History of the Troubles and Trial of the most Reverend WILLIAM LAUD Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury; wrote by himself during his Imprisonment in the
Tower. To which is prefixed the Diary of his own Life faithfully and entirely
published from the Original Copy; and subjoyned a Supplement to the preceding
History; The Archbishop's last Will; His large Answer to the Lord Says Speech
concerning Liturgies ^ His Annual Accounts of his Province delivered to the
King, and some other things relating to the History. Published by Henry
Wharton, Chaplain to Arch-bish. Sancroft, and by his Grace's Command. Fol.

The Possibility and Expediency and Necessity of Divine Revelation. A Sermon
preached at St. Martin's in the Fields, January 7, 169^, at the beginning of
the Lecture for the ensuing Year, Founded by the Honorable Rob. Boil, Esquire by
John Williams, D. D.

-- The Certainty of Divine Revelation, being his Second Sermon preached at the
said Lecture, Feb. 4* 1695.

-- His Vindication of the Sermons of his Grace John Archbishop of Canterbury,
concerning the Divinity and Incarnation of our Blessed Savior, and of the Lord
Bishop of Worcester's Sermon on the Mysteries, if the Christian, Faith, from
the Exceptions of a late Socinian Book entitled [ Considerations on the
Explications of the Doctrine of the Trinity]. To which is annexed a Letter from
the Lord Bishop of Sarum, to the Author of the said Vindication on the same
Subject.

Historia de Episcopis and Decanis Londinensibus necnon de Episcopis and
Decanis Assavensibus a prima utriusque fundatione ad (...) MD XL. Accescit
Appendix instrumentorum quorundam insignium duplex Autore Henrico Whartono, A.
M.

Advertisement.
THere will be published Several Sermons and Discourses of the Most Reverend
Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, by order of his
Administratrix, faithfully transcribed from his own Papers, by Dr. John Barker
Chaplain to his Grace. Which are disposed of to Richard Chiswell and his
Assigns. If Any pretend to publish any other, (except those already Printed,)
they are to be looked upon as Spurious and False. And the Publishers will be
proceeded against according to Law.

The first that will be published, are his Sermons of Sincerity and Constancy
in the Faith and Profession of the True Religion, which are in the Press, and
will be finished this Easter Term 1695.


