THE Infallibility OF THE CHURCH OF ROME Examined and Confuted.

IN A LETTER TO A Roman Priest,

By GILBERT BURNET.

LONDON: Printed by M. Clark, and are to be Sold by H. Brom and B. Took in S.
Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

A Letter to a Priest of the Roman Church, wherein the Grounds of their
pretended Infallibilities are called for and examined, in some Queries.
SIR,
WHatever our differences be in many points of Religion, we agree in this, That
it is the great concern of Mankind to examine well the grounds that lead him to
his belief in matters of so high a nature. You always tell me, That out of the
true Catholic Church there is no salvation; adding, That this Catholic Church
is the Roman: though this seems to be a Bull as plainly as a general
particular. Indeed so severe a Certificate makes me look to my self: I confess
this method of dealing with me seems not so fair nor rational. For if any man
study to draw me into a design, by telling me, That as I must engage in it all
I am Master of; so I must surrender up the conduct of it to others, of whose
honesty, industry, and discretion I must not doubt; I presently apprehend a
trappan, and you will not dispute it much that he deserves to be cosened, who
suffers himself to be imposed upon so grossly. But certainly if my soul be more
valuable than my estate, and if eternity be preferrable to the vanishing
shadows here below, then I have great reason to be strongly prejudiced against
those, who would oblige me to hazard my soul in a tame and blind subjection to
the Dictates of any man, or Society of men; Reason being the only part of our
Nature that was born to Liberty, and can defy all the severe rigours of
Tyranny. You will easily believe I cannot be induced on slight grounds to forgo
this dearest and most essential piece of my brother-right. And believe me it
was enough that the Roman Church for a Succession of some Ages was Mistress of
the Crowns and Empires of her Vassals, and had the dispose of the Lives and
Goods of the better part of Europe. This was highly severe though Conscience
had been left free. The Law makes my House my Sanctuary, but if I stir abroad I
must be at my hazard: So whatever Power the Civil Magistrates, or the Guides of
the Church may have over my Actions, or profession of my Faith, yet as long as
it keeps within my head and breast, its natural dwelling place, it is a
violation of the sacredness of that Sanctuary to invade it there, or make it
prisoner. And when I further consider that Reason is nothing but a
communication of Divine Light, to make me understand those Propositions, of
which some hints were born with my Soul, and the rest are offered to me in
Sacred Writings; if I throw off this, and betake my self to the Dictates of
others, I exchange the Sun for the Moon, and the Day for the Twilight; and
renounce the liberty of the servants of God for a bondage that excludes the
freedom of a thought. And, at least, if I were to come under so heavy a yoke, I
must beforehand be well assured of the sacredness of the Masters of my Faith.
No man can be wheedled to trust himself to any, of whose fidelity and good
conduct he is not well assured; but he that commits himself to noted and known
Impostors, is the object of all men's scorn. He must therefore have a great
opinion of his own Rhethorick, and of my easiness that attempts to persuade me
to subject my belief to the Verdict of a Succession of men, who do not so much
as pretend to high learning, much less to be eminent Saints; and in whom I can
discern no great Characters, but of Temporal Authority, and high pretensions to
an uncontrouled Jurisdiction; and neither of these can with any reason
determine my belief for one unerring Judge. But since I observe both from my own
knowledge, and what I hear by others, that you of the Mission place your
greatest strength in the Authority and Infallibility of your Church, and ply
every body most with it, I have therefore considered this with all the
application of mind I am Master of, as the fundamental Article of your belief.
For if your Church be privileged from error, all her Decrees must certainly
pass for Oracles, and there is no disputing them: but if she be subject to
error, she is the boldest Imposturess that ever appeared in the World, who
dares pretend to an unerring assistance in all her decisions, without good
ground. Suffer me therefore to offer you a few Queries, of which when I am
satisfyingly resolved, I will be brought so much nearer a belief, from which as
long as these difficulties lie in my way, I must confess my self at a great
distance.

1. And first let me ask you, What necessity there is of an Infallible Judge, to
whose Decrees all must yield absolute obedience? If you convince me this is
necessary, I shall without difficulty yield to you that there is such a
Judicatory, since I am persuaded our blessed Savior who loved his Church so
dearly as to die for her, would certainly provide her with all that was
necessary for her preservation. But here I know you triumph in the supposed
necessity of such a Judge, without whom there is no preserving either Truth or
Peace: For if there be not a Court to whose Award all must stand, then every
man is at liberty to believe as he will, and there is no end of errors: Which
appears plainly in the Churches that have thrown often the Roman Authority, but
are subdivided into many fractions, which are the natural results of their
opinions; for if every man must search the Scriptures, and believe what he
thinks is the sense of them, then, according to the variety of men's
complexions, educations, or inclinations, there shall be a numberless variety
of opinions. And if none have authority over the persuasions of others, they
cannot be blamed, much less condemned for their opinions. This seems such an
inconvenience, that the Church must be in a very bad condition, if there be no
remedy for it. This, Sir, I suppose is in short the strength of all you will
allege on this head: but all this does not prevail with me to acknowledge an
Infallible Iudicatory: for to live well is the chief end of Religion, and to
think and believe aright is a necessary mean for that end: from which I infer,
That if there be no necessity of an Infallible Power to make men live well,
neither is there any for making us think aright; and certainly vice and
immorality is as opposite to the designs of the Gospel as error: now it is
confessed there are no certain and infallible ways of restraining vice. And if
it must needs be a defect in the Constitution of the Church, if there be no
infallible means to restrain error, what must I conclude if there be no
infallible restraint on vice; but that the Church wants a main and necessary
complement, without which she cannot be perfect, and well secured; and you know
St. Paul reckons Heresies among the works of the Flesh. Now what reason is it,
that of all the works of the flesh, provision should only be against Heresy?
Therefore I freely acknowledge, that as God has left the Will at liberty, that
so the glory of his Saints might be the greater, serving him not by constraint,
but willingly; so he has also left our Reasons free to judge of things
proposed to us, whether they be true or false. Nor indeed can we believe but as
our Reasons are convinced, for we cannot put a force on our persuasion. And
since our Savior told us it was impossible but that Offenses must come, so I
allow it impossible but that Errors should come for the greater trial of sound
and true Believers. And I must add, that Religion consists in a few plain
things, in which if a man bring along with him a sincere and pure mind, he is
sure not to err mortally. He may be mistaken in some particular opinions, which
though they pass for matters of Religion, yet are as extrinsick to it as the
various Hypatheses in Philosophy are. I acknowledge every body ought to have
that humble mistrust of themselves, and reverence to the Church wherein they
were born, as not to be easily engaged in new opinions, and ought to be very
well assured both of the truth and importance of any new Doctrine, before they
receive it; and much more before they broach and vent it, to the disturbance of
the peace of the Society they live in. And who so without a very clear
assurance, after the diligent application of his thoughts, having purified his
mind in the exercise of mortification and self denial, does obtrude new
Doctrines on the World is highly guilty in the sight of God, for renting the
body, and breaking the unity of the Church: But if one after a severe inquiry,
and all due preparation be clearly convinced of any truth, how generally soever
it be either unknown, or derived, he may, nay, cannot choose but must believe
it. But though this assurance may warrant his private departing from the
received opinion, yet his assurance must be full, and his Call clear before he
offer his opinion to others. But in that case I acknowledge the Guides of the
Church may, and ought to consider such opinions, and pass a Censure on them
according to the Scriptures; which (flowing from persons whose Character makes
them both more particularly devoted to God, and more conversant in Sacred
Writings; and, as it is to be supposed, are by the purity of their minds
qualified for a higher sense of divine truth, and by their exemplary lives are
possessed of the esteem of those over whom they are set) will undoubtedly have
great influence on all serious and sober persons, yet such as are convinced
that their decisions are contrary to the Scriptures must still believe God
rather than man. But in that case the Magistrate may secure the peace of the
Society, by obliging them either to rest quiet with their Opinions, or to go
out of his Dominions. The Church may also by excommunicating them preserve
others from being infected by their misperswasions. And thus, except you give
me better proof, I am not convinced there is a necessity of any Infallible
Judge for deciding Controversies; and neither for the salvation of souls, nor
for the peace of the Society of Christians. Not for the first, since no
Proposition is clearer than this, That every Christian who studies to be well
informed in divine matters, and sincerely follows his Conscience, shall
certainly be saved. Nor is this Infallible Judge necessary for the Society
since those who have the Legislative Power, whether Civil, or Ecclesiastic,
may govern a Society well though they be not Infallible, so that the Church may
have an Authority, though not infallible, and yet sufficient to secure her
peace.

2. My second Question shall be, Whether there be really such an Infallible
Judge on Earth? For though this be not necessary, yet I shall not deny but our
Savior, according to that overflowing love he bears his Church, may have
provided Her with this security against Error. But herein I must crave your
pardon to tell you, I am very apt to think there is no such Court on Earth, for
in all extraordinary things, to which our assent is craved, the means of
conveying, or rather imposing, such belief (since no man of a strong mind will
easily credit an extraordinary thing, especially that which subjects to it the
very freedom of his thoughts) must have an Evidence and Authority proportioned
to the Greatness and Importance of that they recommend to our Faith. And
therefore when God sent Moses to deliver his People, and be their Guide, he
gave him a power of working such mighty Works, which, being done in the sight
of both Egyptians and Israelites, might convince both one and the other that
there was an extraordinary Authority communicated to him, he also told the
Israelites to demand a Sign or Wonder from every pretender to Prophecy, or
Divine Mission; And because the power of evil Spirits is undoubtedly far beyond
ours; so that many extraordinary things may be performed by Magic and evil
Arts, therefore Moses ( Deuteronomy. xiii.) allows even the People of Israel a
previous judgment of the Doctrine of any Pretender to Prophecy, before they
acknowledged his Authority, or were wrought on by his Sign or Wonder. We find
also the Prophets, either by Miracles or Predictions, proving their Divine
Authority. And though the History of all the Prophets is not so full, as to
give us an account of the Signs or Wonders of each of them, yet we have no
reason to doubt but they did follow the Rule prescribed by Moses, which indeed
natural Religion teaches all men. Therefore when our Savior appeared, as he
proved himself the Messiah, by the completion of the Prophesies in his Person,
he made it also appear by the purity of his Doctrine, and the Authority of his
Miracles, wrought in the sight of his Enemies as well as Followers. The same
Method was observed by the Apostles, as appeared from their Acts and Epistles.
And it is certain that as no man can be witness in his own cause, so no man's,
or company of men's pretense to an infallible Jurisdiction, must engage me to
believe it, otherwise there were no end of Impostors. Therefore I must
conclude, That except you can show me a Succession of men who, by some clear
demonstrations of an unerring Spirit and divine Authority, prove themselves
Infallibly directed, and uncontroulably assisted by God, I am not obliged to
submit my self to any as such. Nor is it to any good purpose to say, That
because there was a Succession of High Priests under Moses Law, who, by the
Oracle in the Pectoral, did authoritatively decide all Controversies, therefore
we may be well assured that under the clearer illumination of the Gospel, we
are not left to the uncertainties of our own conjectures. But there must be a
great High Priest of Christendom for judging all Controversies. But if this be
well considered it will not advance your pretenses a whit; for the Jews were in
all their Political Affairs, in their Commerce and Treaties with Foreiners, in
their Government at home, and in the matters of Peace and War, to be determined
by the Judiciary Laws Moses gave them; and as they enjoyed the Land of Canaan
by that Law, which was then Magna Charta, so they were in all Civil matters to
be judged by the Law of Moses. Now since no Law can give provisions for all
emergents, there was a necessity of a constant Exposition of that Law in all
dubious cases. And therefore God was pleased to continue this among them by the
Urim and Thummim. Their Worship was also made up of a multitude of particular
Rites, and many cases occurring in these of great intricacy, God continued that
extraordinary Presence among them. But nothing of this was necessary under the
Gospel, in which the policy of the several States is left to be determined
according to the Laws of Nature, and the several Humors, Customs and Interests
of Nations. Our Belief is also plain, and our Worship simple, so that none of
these things remain that made an Infallible decision necessary under the Old
Testament. And besides, the mysteriousness of the Communication, and the plain
express words of the Institution, do show the difference betwixt that, and any
thing can be pretended to under this new and more perfect dispensation. Moses
plainly told them what that series of men should be, and of whom descended; he
also declared how they were to inquire Counsel from God, and how all must
submit to their Sentence. Nor was the High Priest by his Character vested with
this Authority, but when he put on the Ephod, and went in before the cloud of
glory, and brought back the sacred response. Now the exactness Moses observed
in delivering, that seems convincing, that when God intended to bring any part
of mankind under that subjection, he delivered his Commission to these so
empowered, in so formal and solemn a manner, that it was not to be disputed but
by one that rejected the Law of Moses. From which I presume I may infer, That
if God had set up such Anthority in the Christian Church, the Institution had
been express, the persons clearly designed their Succession as plainly pointed
out, to have put so great a matter beyond dispute. So that the manner of the
divine emanations of unerring direction had been as clear as it was of old. Now
since I meet nothing of this in the whole New Testament, I see no reason to
make me believe it is as you pretend: For what you infer from our Saviors
words to St. Peter from his saying, Tell the Church, and from his promises of
the Holy Ghost, will never conclude that you pretend to: For before you can
oblige me to believe any thing from these Premises, you must allow me to
acknowledge the sacredness of the Books wherein these words are, so that my
belief of the Scriptures shall not depend on the decision of the Church, but
shall rather lead me to acknowledge its Authority. You must also allow me to
believe these Scriptures are to be so expounded, before I own the Authority of
the Church to be absolute; since from them you bind me to believe it. Therefore
I must expound them so as may agree best both with the plain literal sense of
the words, and the design on which they are set down, by all which you allow me
the Exposition of Scripture. Now if I may expound it in some places, why not in
all that is indispensably necessary to salvation? And your Churches claiming
that Authority to her self must not oblige me to believe it a whit the more,
unless by some other cogent reasons I be bound to it: for none must be both
Judge and Party, and no man's assertion must pass for proof in his own case; and
yet the very places you alledg come far short of what seems requisite on such
an occasion: for whatever may be said of St. Peter, which I shall not now
inquire into, where have we any formal account who shall be his Successors,
what shall be necessary to make any such, and by what means they shall come by
these infallible directions. And indeed I can see no reason to think that had
there been such an Institution in the Gosspel, the same goodness which moved
our blessed Savior to provide so well for his Church, should not likewise have
drawn from him such an explicit account of it in all circumstances, as was
necessary for setting the thing beyond dispute, and securing any such Court in
their Authority by an express constitution of it in its Members, and a
Declaration of their power, such as Moses gave the People of Israel in the
obedience due to the responses of Urim and Thummim.

3. My third Question shall be, supposing an Infallible Church, How shall I be
directed in my search for it, so as to find it out? For the several Societies
that name the name of Christ, being so broken off from one another, to which of
all these must I address my self for a decision in all Articles of Faith? When
I consider the beginings of Christianity, that it first arose in Jerusalem, and
did spread most in the East: when I also consider that the Eastern Churches had
most Confessors and Martyrs in the Ages of persecution; and had also the
greatest interest in the four first and best General Councils, as appears from
the Subscriptions, where the Western Bishops were scarce the twentieth part.
When I add to this how undisputed their Succession is, and how long they have
kept the prosession of the Christian Faith, amidst all the severities and
cruelties of the Saracens and Mahometans, under whose bondage they continue to
this day, I am tempted to seek this Judge there: but when I see in what
ignorance they live, and how the pressures they groan under, though they have
not prevailed on them to renounce the name of Christ, yet have brought them to
a degenerate means, which I love not to dwell on, nor aggravate, since the
circumstances they are in plead pity rather than scorn or disdain; I am forced
to turn away from them: but if I look Western, I see a Church triumphing indeed
in outward splendour, their Worship is solemn and magnificent, their Priest in
great esteem, and their High Priest culminates in Glory and Power; but after
all this I cannot see what must oblige me to an implicit belief to every thing
this Church imposes on me, since the Piety to which she pretends, is either
immured in her Cloisters, or appears only in faces and outward postures of
devotion: but after my most impartial inquiries, I can see no reason to esteem
the Head of this Church a Saint, or such a Clerk, that I must adore his person,
and submit to his Decrees. And if there be not some strange charm in his Chair,
I cannot force on my self a belief of his being inspired. How then I must be
directed to find this infallible Umpire of all differences? If you send me to a
Succession, you give me a hard task to labor in, and when I have found it, it
is no more but what all must allow to be in the Greek Church. And I cannot see
any thing in the Scriptures of the Bishops of Rome: so I am at a loss for want
of some good directions and clear characters of this Infallible Judge.

4. My fourth question is, In what person or persons of the Roman Church this
Infallibility does rest? If you tell me in a Council, then I must ask you,
Where this Council is to be found? for all your arguments persuade the
necessity of a living speaking Judge; therefore I would gladly be satisfied in
what City or corner of the World this Council sits; for if you send me to the
Decrees of the Councils, this overthrows all your own grounds, from which you
plead against the Authority of the Scriptures; and if I go to any Writings, why
not to the Scriptures, rather than the Decrees of Councils: for every one that
has compared them will find a plain simplicity in the one, and much of the
subtlety of Metaphysics, and the nicety of School terms in the other.

5. My fifth Question is, What grounds there are for believing this supposed
Infallibility, tied to the collective Body of the Church, and that it is not
rather spread over the whole diffusive Body of the Christian World? For if the
Church be only infallible when gathered in a Council, then as there was no
Infallibility in the Church for three Ages, so it was afterward subject to the
pleasure of the Emperors, who called Councils when they would, and is now
wholly in the Popes hands: And as it was in the power of the Emperor, so it is
now in the Popes, to suppress this infallible Authority, which is thus subject
to outward accidents; and must live or die at the pleasure of the Popes and
Emperors. And indeed the Popes have taken up such jealousies of general
Councils, that the World is not like to be troubled with more of them.

6. If this Infallibility be spread among all Christians, I am not a whit
nearer the resolution I desire; for when they differ in so many opinions, how
shall I know which of them are in the right? must I travel all the Christian
World over to examine of which side the greatest number is? This is our endless
labor, therefore I must have a shorter way to work.

7. Who of all the Societies of Christians must have the interest to meet and
give vote in a Council? must all the Lays be excluded, and only the Clergy be
admitted? I must tell you I see no reason for throwing out the Laity. You know
the Epistles wherein St. Paul gives the Rules for the Order and Government of
the Churches, are directed to all the Saints and faithful in the Churches: by
which it seems they were to have an interest in the Government, as well as
their Pastors. We are sure among the Jews the Sanhedrim that judged in all
things Civil and Ecclesiastical, was not only made up of Priests, and that the
High Priest himself was no Member of it by his Office, unless he were chosen to
be of the number: nor can I find any thing in the New Testament, that excludes
the Laity. On the contrary, the Promises of the Holy Ghost are made to all that
believe without exception, and all Christians are called a Royal Priesthood:
and in the first Council at Jerusalem, the Brethren concurred in the Decision
and Synodal Epistle, with the Apostles and Elders.

8. Supposing none but these in Orders be admitted to a General Council, then
what interest must they have there, shall all be alike, or must the Bishops
only have a Suffrage? You must give good authority for this before all must
submit to it. It is not determined in Scriptures, in the Council of Jerusalem
the Presbyters had a Suffrage; so it continued in the first Ages of the Church.
We find the Presbyters subscribing in many Provincial and National Councils:
Why must they be allowed there, and excluded in a General Council, it being
only an Assembly of all National Councils? But if Bishops only must vote in
Councils, by what warrant do Cardinals as such vote in your General Councils,
since as Cardinals they are only the Presbyters and Deacons of Rome. Abbots
also, though but Priests, get a Vote in the Western Councils: for as Abbots
they cannot pretend to a Divine Character or institution, and if as Priests
they vote in your Councils, why are not all Priests allowed the same privilege.

9. How shall I be assured a Council thus constituted is infallible, especially
if I see or be told by the Historians of both sides, that all things are
managed in this Council by factious Parties and intrigues? each Party studying
to wait opportunities when they may carry a Vote, and bringing all of their
faction to the Council. This was plainly the case at Trent, as even Pallavicini
represents it. And you will hardly prevail on any who has considered a little
what the direction of the Holy Ghost is, to make him believe that in a packt
Meeting, where all is full of cunning and design, the Holy Ghost must be ever
ready to direct them when they go to the Vote, and that this shall only be when
the Bishops are in their Formalities at a Session, and not in a Congregation,
which is the Council resolved in a Grand Committee. I know, Sir, our House of
Commons understands this distinction; but what grounds have you to pretend to
it, where all are acted by an infallible direction.

10. Whether must the whole Council agree in a Decision, or the major part
determine? I know you choose the latter; but it is not easy to make any body
hope that the greater part of any Assembly must be the better and wiser part,
since we see it is most commonly otherwise. I know this must be the rule in a
Court, that determines any thing by equal Suffrages; but if a Jury must all
agree in the disposal of my life, it were but reason that all should also agree
in the determining my faith, which upon the matter is the disposal of my soul.
And I know no reason to believe the Holy Ghost will certainly assist the major
part more than that he will assist every person that is allowed a Suffrage in
the Council.

11. How shall I know what is a General Council, what not? for I find great
numbers of Bishops have run together, and flatly contradicted one another. The
Nicene Council decreed, the Son was of the same substance with the Father: this
was rejected by many other Councils, some decreeing he was of a like substance
with the Father, others that he was of a different substance from the Father;
how shall I know to which of these Decisions I must submit my self. The
Histories give account of these Councils as called by the same Authority, for
all were summoned by the Emperors Writ, all are represented to have been
General Councils, and we are told of a greater appearance of Bishops in some of
them than were at Nice: which of these must therefore determine my faith?

12. What reason have I to believe any Council is general, from which all the
Greek and Eastern Bishops are excluded upon so slight a pretense, as that they
believe the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father by the Son, and not from the
Father and the Son, and that in their rooms then are substituted a great many
mock Bishops, who are neither Canonically elected for these places, nor perform
any part of the Pastoral charge in their pretended Diocesses, but are only
named by the Popes, and brought to Councils to make so many Votes?

13. Suppose the Pope give out a general summons for all Bishops, can this be
more than a Meeting of all within his Patriarchate? for on what grounds can he
pretend a right to summon his fellow Patriarchs, who by the Councils of Nice,
Constantinople, and Chalcedon are declared equal to him: and therefore since
the Emperors in the primitive times summoned their whole Empire to a General
Council, they did it by their own Authority, as appears by all the Acts and
Synodal Epistles of the first General Councils. What power then has the Pope
to call this great Meeting of the Church. And even these General Councils the
Emperors called seem only to have been the Councils of the Roman Empire,
called Oecumeneal, as the Romans called their Empire, (...). For the Christians
of India, and the more remote parts of Asia were called to none of these
Councils, nor could the Emperors Writ reach them.

14. Suppose the Popes Writ goes over all Christendom, must all the Bishops
come to the Council or not? Or what number is necessary? If we examine the
Subscriptions of the first Councils, what ever reverence we justly have for
their decisions, we cannot call them Ecumenical, since there were so few
Bishops from the Western Churches in them. Nor do I see a reason to convince me
that a whole Province or Nation can depute a few to represent them; such
Plenipotentiaries may do well in Political matters, but in a Judicatory that
pretends to Infallibility, you must give me a good Warrant before I believe
such a deputation can inspire one with more degrees of Infallibility. The
Bishops of a Province can indeed send their decisions by any of their number,
but this is not the method of Councils, where every Bishop has but one
suffrage, though but one from a Nation, though another Method was used at
Basil. But in the case that a Prince is so dissatisfied with the Pope, that he
will suffer none of his Bishops to appear at the Council, as it was in the
Translation of the Council of Trent to Bologna, to which the Emperor would
suffer none of his Bishops to go; and after that in the next Session at Trent,
to which the French King would permit none of his Bishops to go; Whether can
such a meeting be called a general Council, or not? No man can be obliged to
that which is not in his power, and he cannot forfeit his right because of a
force on his Person: Nor can it be a free Council to which all have not free
access. Those also who live at a great distance from the place where the
Council sits, and either through Infirmity, or Poverty, cannot perform the
Journey, are in a hard case: For that which is morally impossible cannot be
overcome. If then the meeting must be of all the Bishops, I do not see such a
Constitution is practicable, or how all the Bishops can be brought together.
And if the Infallibility be spread among all, no reason can persuade me that a
packt Meeting can have the power of the whole because the Writ was general.

15. The Bishops in their decisions either go upon immediate Inspiration, or
judge, as men, according to the Premises laid before them. I know you do not
pretend to the former, but if you did, I would ask you what grounds there were
to believe this? For if you gave any good ones I should submit to the suffrage
of every single Bishop, since every person Inspired must be Master of my
belief. And why should this Inspiration rest on some, and not on all, since all
bear the same Character? But I insist no longer on this, because I know you
reject it. If then they judge as rational men from the reasons that are laid
before them, why may not other persons examine those Reasons as well as they?
If an Inspired person speak to me in the name of God, I must submit to him* but
if he speak not by Commandment, but by permission, then it is not the Lord, but
he that speaks: And though I owe great reverence to him, as to one that has
obtained grace to be faithful, yet I may examine what he says in that style.
Therefore if they proceed according to the Rules of Discourse and Reason, I
presume I may make bold to examine both the truth of the Premises, and the
Conclusions they drew from them: Since as there can be no more strength in the
Conclusion than was in the Premises, so the light of Nature and Reason directs
me to know what is a well deduced Conclusion.

16. Whether can that be called a free Council where the Bishops have sworn
obedience to the Bishops of Rome, contrary to their Liberties, and the
Primitive practice? In which time all the Bishops pretended an equality in
their Character, and called the Bishops of Rome their Colleagues, their
Brethren, and fellow-Bishops, and treated them as Equals in their freedom with
them, as appears from the Instances of Irenius, Cyprian, and the Contest of the
Affrican Bishops concerning Appeals to the Sea of Rome. Nor did they yield him
any other subjection but what practice had brought in by reason of the eminence
of that City, which was then Mistress of the World; and because they also
believed St. Peter and St. Paul had founded it with their Labors and Blood.
But these Bishops who have so sordidly and meanly given up their rights to that
high Pretender, and have sworn obedience to him, cannot be the proper Judges
and Representatives of a Church, whose Liberties they have abandoned, I had
almost said betrayed.

17. Whether must I believe the Decrees of a General Council before they are
approved by the Pope, or not? If the Council be infallible in her Decrees, then
I am bound to submit to them, for all the Popes rejecting them: But if the
Council be fallible, then the Popes ratification cannot make the Decrees of the
Council Infallible. For things cannot change their natures, and if the Vote of
the Council was by an Infallible direction, then there is no absolute necessity
of a ratification; and if it was fallible, the Authority of the Decree must be
resolved simply into the Popes insallibility. For the ratification that is
subsequent to the Councils Vote puts no more authority in the Council than it
had when it passed the Vote. It is true in matters of Policy I know there be
such Constitutions, which is the case of the Votes of our two Houses of
Parliament, that have no force without the Le Roy le veut; but if the Council
be infallibly directed, then it is not in the Popes power to reject their
Decisions. And if the Council be fallible, then the Infallibility rests in the
Pope alone, and who shall expect I can think the Council of Constance
infallible in taking the Chalice from the Laity, and fallible in subjecting the
Pope to the Council. Certainly, the Authority was the same in both, but because
the Pope was a party in the one particular, he was sure not to ratify it.

18. Who must be the Infallible Expounder of the Decrees of Councils? If you
will leave this to every private person, then all these inconveniences will
follow that you object against private persons expounding Scripture. For they
may be drawn to several meanings and opinions. And we know that at Trent, when
the Divines differed in many Points of Religion, the great business was to find
a temper, and to contrive the Decree in such general terms, as might displease
neither Party. And thence it was that two of the Divines that were in the
Council, and disputed in the Points defined, but differed in their Opinions,
after the Council had passed the Decree, did publish Treatises for their
Opinions, both of them pretending the Council decreed of his side: And though
this was done before the dissolution of the Council, yet the Council took no
notice of it. By which it seems they designed their Decrees should be Oracles,
as well for their misterious Ambiguity, as for their Authority. Where then
shall we find a Judge of Controversies concerning the true meaning of the
Decrees of Councils? If you put this in the Popes hands, you give all up to
him, and so the Decrees of the Council shall signify no more than he is
pleased to allow them.

19. When new Controversies arise among Christians, to whom must they go for
decision? Must they rest on the Popes definition? Then all the power is in his
Person. Or must they stay for a decision from the Council? If this last be
settled on, then I am afraid you Romanists are in as great a hazard as we are to
have your Controversies endless. For ever since the Council of Constance the
Popes have such mortal jealousies of Councils, that the World is not like to
see more of them. We have seen none now above a hundred years, and the very
thoughts of one are laid to sleep; and yet this is not for want of reason to
call a Council: For there be great Controversies that do very much divide you,
but in these you must not expect a decision. As whether the Infallibility rest
in the diffusive Church, or in the Council, or in the Pope, which is a great
thing to be resolved in, and hot Contests have been about it. It is also of
great concern whether Grace be efficacious of it self, or only when the Will
chooses to make good use of it; and about this there have been sharp disputes.
Great complaints are also made by men of much learning and worth in your
Church, against a corruption of Morals, and all Political Government, which
approved Doctors and Casuists in your Church have publicly taught and printed,
with license: which deserves to be condemned by public authority as well as
confuted by private Doctors, and Censured by some Civil Judicatories. But for
all these reasons we are not like to see another general Council in this Age.
Suffer me therefore to ask you in this long interval of Councils, whether there
be any Infallible Judge of Controversies, or not? If not, then all your high
pretenses vanish; if there be one, he can be no other than the Pope, and if you
make the Popes Infallible in the interval of Councils, as there is no necessity
of them, since we have already an Infallible Judge, so it were an inexcusable
folly in the Popes to call a Council if the world acknowledge them Infallible.

20. I must ask one Question more about this general Council: you tell me, None
but Bishops have a decissive Vote in it; How then shall I know when there is a
general Council? For the Intention of the Priest is by your Doctrines necessary
to the Sacrament, how then shall I know if the pretended Bishops were baptized
by one that intended to do it, or not? And how shall I know that they received
Orders from one that gave them with a right Intention? And yet all this is
necessary before I can acknowledge them Bishops: Nor must this be known only in
this one Instance, though even that depending on the sacred thoughts of the
Priest, which are known to God alone, is a thing wherein I can never hope to
arrive at any certainty; but I must drive up the same question through the
whole succession to the very days of the Apostles, for if one Link of the Chain
fails, the whole falls asunder: Since any one that was either baptized, or had
orders from any who did not intend it is neither a Christian, nor a Bishop, by
your Doctrines. And all who are either baptized, or ordained, by one who is
neither Christian, nor Bishop, are neither Christians nor Clergy men. Here is a
difficulty in my way, that were all the other removed, I cannot see how it can
possibly be cleared.

21. Having now tried your patience with some troublesome questions about your
Church in general, I came to be satisfied in some particulars that stick with
me concerning the Pope, to whom I see you must either yield an absolute
Authority, or be without an Infallible Judge of Controversies. And let me first
apply my last Question to the Pope, and ask how you know that all your Popes
have been Christians, Priests, and Bishops? Since this depends on the
Intention. So that for ought appears to me you may acknowledge for the head of
your Church, one who is neither a Christian, nor in Orders. If then my Faith
must be resolved into the Popes Authority I am sure it rests on a sandy
foundation, since I cannot be assured he is truly Pope. And let me ask you, Do
you think that with any color of reason it can be doubted, that there was
never an Atheistical Priest or Bishop in the Christian Church, whose Intention
went not along with the Sacrament? I am told that in Spain many pretended
Priests are discovered to be Jews; and sure these when they baptize will be far
from joining their Intention with that Sacrament. So here I stick in the first
step, and must do so still except you can help me forward.

22. How shall I know who is Canonically Elected? The Canon Law declares all
Symoniacal Ordinations to be null; and Pope Julius the Second, by a Bull de
symoniaca Papae Electione, declares him no Pope that is so elected. How then
shall I know that in the Elections there was no Symony? For except I be sure
there was none, I cannot be sure the Pope is Canonically elected. Now the
secret transactions of the Conclave cannot be so clearly known as to free all
people from scruples in this particular. On the contrary, we have the shrewdest
grounds can be, for suspecting foul dealings in these Elections. Does not all
the world know what interest the Factions of the two Crowns, of the Nephews,
and the Squadrone Volante have in the Election of the Popes? And all have seen
the Intrigue of that Affair, so that the very pretense of any Infallibility
after such an Election is baffled out of the World. Shall any body that
understands mankind imagine these Elections go upon any other grounds but
Interest, Faction, Expectation, or some such base thing? And that after the
Pope is thus chosen, to imagine the Holy Ghost is tied to all his Decrees, is
such a monstrous piece of Impudence that I cannot have so little charity for
you as to think any of you believe it.

23. How shall I know in the case of a Schism who is Canonically Elected? Many
of those Schisms there have been, and all the Pretenders have put in a fair
plea for themselves. How then shall I be satisfied to which of them I must
offer up my obedience? And you know there are not three Ages past since for
above forty years the Church of Rome was a Monster of two or three heads. The
several States of Europe being as divided in their Obedience, as the Cardinals
were in their Elections. And it is little to be doubted but in many other
Counter Elections, had the Anti Popes been as strongly supported as the Popes
at Avignon were, they had been longer lived than they were. Let me also ask
you, What right have the Cardinals to the Election of the Pope? Which by the
Primitive Constitution should belong to the Presbiters of Rome, and the Bishops
of the Province. But that Bishops of other Nations shall be made Titulars to
the Churches of Rome, and so carry the Election, as it is a very recent
Constitution, so can it pretend to no Divine Warrant. And if the Election
belong to the Cardinals, you can give no reason why two thirds are necessary to
make a Pope; for in such cases either the whole must agree, or the major Vote
carry it; and if the last be true, then many a Pope is cast who is canonically
elected, having the majority of the Votes for him. I confess in Political
Constitutions men may mould matters as they will; but in Divine things,
especially in choosing the Head of the Church and the Infallible Judge, I must
expect a better warrant.

24. The Popes, if infallible, must either be such by immediate Inspiration, or
by a direction of the Divine Grace, in considering what is proposed to them. To
the former they do not pretend, nor do they wait for Enthusiasms, but proceed
as other men upon all emergents. Now how can I be persuaded that a man who is
wholly possessed with affairs of State, who minds nothing more than intrigues,
who has no education in any part of litterature, but the Canon Law, can upon a
slight hearing a Controversy, which puzles the most refined speculative heads,
judge exactly and truly, when I plainly see he does not understand the points in
debate. And that this must be expected at Rome, I remit to all who know that
Court: and it was truly the case of the Propositions of Iansenius, which P.
Innocent condemned, though he confessed he understood not the matter, and never
gave the Iansenists a hearing but once: nor can any body read the Bulls of the
Popes, but he must see the grossest misapplications of Scripture, the falsest
conclusions, and the weakest reasons imaginable. It were easy to instance this
in a thousand particulars, which must needs occur to every one that reads them.
Now a man may as soon believe day is night, and night day, as think that man
infallible in his Decisions, whom he finds plainly mistaken in many easy
obvious things.

25. What reason have I to think he has the Holy Ghost certainly going along in
all his Decrees, who seems plainly to have little or no sense of piety or
virtue in all his actions and whole deportment. The Divine Spirit purifies as
well as enlightens: it is true in immediate Inspirations this is not a constant
Maxim; but in one who expects the direction of the Holy Ghost by Prayers,
Fastings, Applications of mind, and other such means, which is acknowledged to
be the Popes case, he must have prepared his mind to a right sense of Divine
things by the previous purifying his soul, otherwise a false Judgment is to be
expected from a corrupt mind. And the Prayers of the wicked and their Fastings
too are abomination to God. Now what men many of your Popes have been, I rather
refer you to your own Historians than rake such a puddle: and since it is not
to be disputed, but vices of all sorts have been eminently lodged in the
persons of not a few Popes, who can force himself to think them a race of men
that hold so near and close correspondence with Almighty God, as to have his
Spirit always at command, and yet have not by all that intimacy learned to
escape the grosser and more common pollutions of the flesh. Though St. Peter
tells us that is the way to become partakers of the Divine Nature.

26. How can I think the Popes infallible, when it is certain, if any thing in
History be so, that many of them have been guilty of opinions which General
Councils have condemned and anathematised? The Stories of Liberius and Honorius
are too well known to be much contested, the one having consented to
semi-Arrianism against the Nicene Creed, the other being anathematised by a
General Council (where another Popes Legates were consenting) for a Heretic. I
suppose you are acquainted with the History, and therefore give but a hint of
these passages, which are well known to learned men. I name not many other
Popes whom Historians accuse of Heresy, but stand upon these two as more noted
and signal: And if one Pope be a Heretic the whole Infallibility falls to the
ground: and when I see Pope Innocent the First, and Pope Innocent the Tenth
differing so widely in their Decrees, the one confirming St. Austin's Doctrine
in the matter of grace, and the other condemning Propositions, which all who
ever read St. Austin, and are ingenious, must see to be plainly consonant to
his opinions; I cannot forbear thinking neither one nor the other infallible;
for of two that contradict other, I am sure one is in the wrong, and if either
of them be in the wrong, neither of them is infallible.

27. Is the Pope infallible in all he says, or only when he gives out of his
Chair his Decision of Controversies? I know you choose the latter: but then let
me ask you what is necessary to put him in his Chair, Must the Cardinals
concur, then you share the Infallibility among them, without any colors either
from Scripture or Antiquity: Nor do I believe your Popes will allow this in
their Decisions, what ever they may do in the Political Government of the
Ecclesiastical State: By what means therefore shall I be assured the Pope
speaks from his Chair, that so I may acknowledge him infallible: and if in any
thing I must submit to his sentence, then most especially when he according to
the Decree of a Council, takes care to publish a Bible, which must be by all
Christians submitted to as the Rule of Faith, and set up as the Standard by
which all other Translations, Copies, nay, and the Originals of the Hebrew and
Greek are to be compared. This is a weighty and considerable business as any
can be, and yet we have seen Sixtus the Fifth publish a Bible with all the
assurances could be, that it was an authentical and true Edition, requiring all
Christians to receive it as the Rule of their Faith; but upon this he dies, and
his Successor Clement the Eighth gives the World another Edition of the Bible,
and imposes it with the same Authority Sixtus did, and took all care to
suppress the Copies of the former Edition, yet some escaped his industry. The
difference of those two Editions is such, that the Catalogue of them makes up a
Book; and any that has compared them will find that in many places the whole
sense is varied in these Editions. This is as clear an evidence as may be, that
the Chair cannot make them infallible, who do so flatly contradict one another,
and that in a matter of so high and so general concern.

28. What reason have I to believe the Bishops of Rome infallible, or that they
have an absolute Jurisdiction over Christendom, since I can find no traces of
this in the beginning of Christianity, though the defining it was then of great
necessity? I find the Apostles all acting by an equal Commission, as indeed it
must be where all were inspired with infallible Illumination: And why must I
think that St. Peter left none of this Infallibility at Antioch, or Alexandria,
but brought it all entire with him to Rome? And why was he so sullen as not to
name his Successor, when our Savior showed him that he was to put off his
Tabernacle shortly? Certainly it is hard to imagine that when he was writing
his second Epistle as his last Will and Testament, that though he had concealed
till then who must succeed him, he should not then have named him. I deny not
but the Faith of the Roman Church was spoken of throughout the whole World, and
that a Series of blessed and glorious Martyrs governed that See; yet even then,
what ever reverence the eminence of the Imperial City, and their own more
eminent qualities, procured them, the absolute submitting all things to their
Decision, was not thought of. It is true the Fathers gloried much in the first
Founders of that See, and in the worthy succession derived down from them, but
thought of nothing less then subjecting Christendom to their Authority: Nor did
the other Patriarchs pay any homage or subjection to them, but still pleaded an
equality of Jurisdiction, yielding them nothing but a bare precedence. It is a
thing I will not here attempt to show by what steps that See did degenerate
from its first purity* nor how it mounted to that height of Authority in which
it glories at present: but any who is acquainted with the Histories and
Writings of the first six Ages, must needs confess that the Scene of the Church
is quite altered from what it was then in this obedience which the World does
now pay the Bishops of Rome.

29. What reverence can I pay a Succession of men who have plainly trampled on
all Laws Divine and Humane? Who have pretended to an absolute Temporal Power,
who have deposed as well as excommunicated Emperors, Kings, and other Princes,
who have animated their Subjects to rebel against them, who have set on their
neighboring Princes to invade their Dominions, which they had rent by Civil
Wars and Rebellions, and did for a Succession of many Ages fill Christendom
with war, and cover it with blood? Nor are these excesses to be only charged
on some particular Popes as their personal faults, but they founding them on a
pretense to an absolute Temporal Authority to which they laid claim, either
they erred in that Decision, or not; if they erred, then they are not
infallible; if they erred not, then though the Reformation has made them a
little more cautious, yet still they are vested with the same power, and all
these Decretals of Pope Gregory the Seventh are still in force, so that the
Princes of Cristendome are at the Popes mercy for their Crowns and Dominions,
and are more obliged to the Reformation than they apprehend or acknowledge for
the peaceable possession of their rights. But it is apparent the Popes still
retain the same high thoughts, and only wait an opportunity of executing them,
as appeared from the attempts of Pope Paul the Fifth on the State of Venice.

30. In the interval of the Sede vacant, who is Head of the Church? Is it a
dead body without a head, or is it a Monster of many heads? Does the Authority
li edivided among the Cardinals, or have they none at all? You know the
Conclave have been sometimes very tedious in their Elections, the last
continued diverse months, and others have been shut up much longer; pray then
satisfy me who has the Supreme Power of the Church all that while? If you vest
the Cardinals with it, then you set up a Presbytery to govern the Church: For
the Cardinals as such are the Presbyters of Rome: and thus before we are aware
Geneve is translated to Rome, and the Scottish Presbytery culminates in the
Vatican, and governs the whole World.

31. If after these difficulties about the Authority of Pope and Council, you
tell me the Infallibility of the Church rests in the whole body, and is to be
taken from the universally received Opinions, then what had become of me if I
had lived when the whole World was become Arrian, and Athanasius alone
withstood the stream? Certainly, I must have run with the Current, and may be
should not have known what to have answered those who should have asked me,
Where was your Faith before Alexander and Athanasius?

32. But upon the whole matter how shall I know what is either decreed by
Councils, or Popes, or received by the body of Christians? It is not to be
expected I can go over the World to examine the belief of all Christians: Nor
can I examine all the Canons and Decrees of Councils, much less all the Popes
Decretals: Into what therefore must I resolve my Faith? You tell me, a living
speaking Judge is necessary: but such a one is not to be had in every part of
the World, therefore I must languish under great and constant uncertainties;
otherwise I must resolve my faith into the Testimony of my Priest and
Confessor. And thus all these pompous high sounding expressions of the
Infallible Catholic Church do at length dwindle into this, that every one of
your Communion must in all things believe what their Priest tells them, without
inquiry. And in what a perplexity must they be when one Priest assures them one
Opinion is the Doctrine of the Church, another tells them the plain contrary is
the Doctrine of the Church. And this has fallen out in not a few cases betwixt
the Molinists and Iansenists. So that upon the whole I cannot see how private
persons can be satisfied what is the belief of the Church.

And now, Sir, after I have led you through a great many Thickets and
Enclosures, I am afraid I leave you in a labyrinth, out of which I protest I
cannot help you, but by advising you to break through or leap over these banks
and hedges within which you have entangled your self. And therefore you must
forgive me if I cannot follow you, unless I see you furnished with some thread
to lead you out of that intricate Maze of difficulties, that must follow on
your Opinions in these particulars. And I choose rather than engage in so
dangerous a passage to take the sacred Writings which you and I both
acknowledge to be divine, and *peruse them with all serious care, hoping that
God will so direct me, that if I be not wanting to my self, I shall not err in
any matter of salvation. You will find I have treated these Opinions I have
considered with all possible fairness and modesty of Style; and indeed, the sad
prospect I have of Christendom, which is abused by such colors into so many
and great mistakes, raises in me thoughts full of pity and commiseration, and
not of insulting and scorn. If you send me any return to this, I shall expect
the like fair dealing from you; and if you give me satisfying answers to these
difficulties, you shall find that you deal with one over whom reason has more
Power, than either Education, Humor, or Interest. And so I bid you farewell.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1. line 3. read Infallibility. page 2. l. 6. birth*right. page 3. l. 9.
for one r. an. page 6. l. 3. for derided r. decried. page 9. l. 6. for then r.
their. page 12. l. 13. for means r. meanness; l. 17. r. Westward. l. 19. r.
Priests. p. 24. l. 8. for sacred r. secret. l. 25. r. come.


