A LETTER Occasioned by the second LETTER to Dr. BURNET, Written to a Friend.
SIR,
I Saw another nameless Paper directed to me two days ago; and indeed it was so
dull, and so little to the purpose, that I laid it aside as unworthy of an
Answer: But you have persuaded me once more to put Pen to Paper, tho not to
satisfy such a Trifler, who would pretend to Wit, if he knew how to lay his
Claim to it; but it is so course, and his good Nature and Candor are so
conspicuous, that I did not wonder to hear a witty Gentleman say, That I had
certainly hired one to write it; but I scarce know where I could have found out
such another. I do not trouble my self to ask after his Name; for till he gives
himself one, I must let all lie where I laid it before, since his
Protestations, without a Name set to them, are things of as little weight as he
that makes them, and must go for nothing, as certainly he that writ them, is
one of the next things to nothing.

But since I understand, that some who have read the Papers that have passed in
this matter, desire to see the whole thing fairly stated, which, in such Points
of Fact, is of more force than all other Discourses can possibly be; I will set
it in a clear light, and then it will appear what a sort of Men I have to do
with, who will so obstinately keep up a Noise where there is no Cause or Color
given for it. The state of the whole thing is this:

In King Henry the eighth's time, the method that was taken* while the Points
of Religion were under Consideration, was this: A Matter was put into Queries,
and these were given out to some Bishops, and other Divines, who by a set day
were required to bring in their Answers to those Queries under their hands; and
then these being examined and compared, they went on to determine it. So when
the Sacraments came to be enquired into, there were seventeen Queries drawn up,
and given out to a ^ number of Bishops and Doctors, the last of these happens
to be concerning Extreme Union. Some of these relate to Church Power; as,
Whether the Apostles lacking a higher Power, as in not having a Christian King
among them, made Bishops by that necessity, or by Auhority given by God?;
Whether Bishops or Priests were first? Whether a Bishop has Authority by the
Scripture to make a Priest, or no? And whether any other, but only a Bishop may
make a Priest? Whether in the New Testament be required any Consecration of a
Bishop and Priest, or only appointing to the Office be sufficient? And whether,
if it fortuned, that a Christian Prince, having none but temporal learned Men
with him, conquered Infidels, if it was forbid by the Law of God, that he and
they should preach and teach the Word of God there, or no? And also make and
constitute Priests, or no? The like Question is put in Case that all the
Bishops and Priests of a Kingdom were dead; Whether the King of that Region
should make Bishops and Priests to supply the same, or no?

To these Queries Cranmer gave Answers, that show he then thought That Bishops
and Priests derived their Authority from the King, as much as Officers of
State, Mayors and Sheriffs do; That Ordination was only a decent Form of
Admission; that Princes might dispense with it, and that no Grace was given in
it, any more than in the committing Civil Offices; and that what the Apostles
did, was only by reason of the extraordinary Measure of the Spirit of God, that
was in them; to which the People that had then no Christian Prince to govern
them, did freely submit, considering the Apostles not as Men that had any
Empire or Dominion over them, but as good Counselors. So he thought Bishops
and Priests were at first the same thing, and one Office; and that Princes as
well as Bishops, might make Priests; and that Consecration was not necessary by
Scripture to make one a Bishop, or a Priest, but that Election, or Appointing
thereto was sufficient: And that in Cases of Necessity, Christian Princes might
make Bishops and Priests.

The Archbishop of York differed from Cranmer, and argued these Points
copiously, considering the Nature of those Papers, and proved, That the
Apostles had Power from Christ to ordain Bishops and Priests; and that no other
Authority was required for doing that, but that which they derived from God;
and that a Bishop is the Overseer of the Priests, who are the Shepherds of
particular Flocks; which distinction he said was derived from the Apostles and
the primitive Church; and asserted, That none but Bishops or Priests could make
a Priest: And by a great many Arguments both from the Old and New Testament, he
prove that Consecration was necessary, and that Appointment without it was
neither convenient nor sufficient; and that tho in cases of necessity any
Christian, tho a Layman, might preach and baptize, yet he could not make a
Priest; for no Authority that comes from the Holy Ghost can be used by any Man,
unless he has a Commission for it grounded in Scripture; Tradition, or ancient
Use; and that this Authority was only committed by Scripture to the Apostles,
and was from them derived to their Successors;

All the other Bishops and Divines, except the Bishop of St. David's, whose
Paper is lost, agreed with the Archbishop of York in most of his Opinions; only
some of the Divines, Leighton in particular, thought, that a Christian Prince's
Consent ought to have been asked by the Apostles, if there had been any at that
time, before they had gone, to make Bishops and Priests. In the Point of
Bishops and Priests being the same thing, or a distinct Office at first,
Leighton it seems, was doubtful, for he says nothing to it. Robertson thinks,
that a Priest may consecrate a Bishop, if a Bishop cannot be found. The Bishop
of St. David's, Thirleby the elect Bishop of Westminster, Cox and Redmoyn
thought that Bishops and Priests were all one in the beginning; and both
Bonner, Bishop of London, and Edgeworth agreed with Robertson in this, That a
Priest might consecrate a Bishop, if a Bishop could not be found. As to the
necessity of Consecration, Robertson yields it, but thinks the Office so given
can never be used without the Consent or Permission of the Magistrate; which
Limitation is not added by Leighton. In Cases of Necessity both Leighton and
Robertson, as well as many others, think the Prince may make Bishops and
Priests.

After they had all given their Answer to the seventeen Queries, every Man,
except the Bishop of Rochester, signed his Paper; and Cranmer not only set his
Hand to his own Paper with that modest Qualification, That he did not
temerariously define, but referred the Judgment of it wholly to his Majesty;
But set his Name likewise to Leighton's Paper, which has given the Rise to all
this Noise; and set it also to Robertson's, which the late Scribblers have not
thought fit to observe, tho they could not but see it; for it is in the same
Page with the other. Upon this, some have hastily inserred, that because
Cranmer's Name is at Leightoun's Paper, therefore he retracted his own Paper,
and subscribed to his Opinions. I have by other clear and unexceptionable
Evidences proved, That Cranmer, did indeed change his Opinion in those tender
Points: but as if there were a Spirit of Contradiction in some People, they
will not accept of this, but will lay hold of this slight Color of his signing
Leighton's Paper, on which I laid no weight; and therefore tho I printed the
Papers to a Tittle as I found them in the Manuscript, yet I took no notice of
this in my History: so howsoever I might be accused for passing it over in my
Discourse concerning it, there was no reason to accuse me for Unfaithfulness in
my Collections: but that Part of my Book galls some People, as giving a Credit
to the whole History, and therefore they must accuse my Fidelity in that, upon
which the Credit of the Book is founded, otherwise there were no considerable
Service done; And it would give a specious Color Beyond Sea to disparage that
Work, to say, that Divines of (or rather in) the Church of England, have
detected my Unfaithfulness in publishing the Records, for that strikes at all;
So a Man that was resolved to have a Coach and six Horses at any Rate, at last
found out a Journey-man to do this Piece of Work for him; and he has, very
probably, entered it into the particular of his Merits.

Cranmer's subscribing these Papers, cannot be understood to be his assentting
to all the Opinions contained in them, for they differ in several particulars
from one another; and he could not subscribe Contradictions: And tho he had
assented to their Opinions, it does not clear him of that for which the
Presbyterians, or the Erastians may vouch him, for in the main Point that
relates to Presbytery, concerning Bishops and Priests being at first the same
Office, which Cranmer had asserted, Leightoun says nothing to it (See Collect.
p. 225.) so Cranmer retracts nothing upon this Head; and Robertson thinks, that
where a Bishop cannot be had, a Priest may consecrate a Bishop, which is also a
main Point: He likewise thinks, that a Churchman ought not to use or exercise
his Function, without the Consent or Permission of the Magistrate, which is all
that most Erastians plead for: so if this Subscription is a good Argument,
Cranmer is theirs still; and both Robertson and Leightoun think, that in Cases
of Necessity Princes may make both Bishops and Priests, and I know few
Erastians that plead for more.

Thus it is plain, that suppose it were granted that Cranmer had by signing
these Papers subscribed to the Opinions contained in them, he may still be
cited both by Presbyterians and Erastians, so that is it were not for the other
Evidences that I gave of his changing his Mind, which no person had ever
observed before me, he might still be cited by them, notwithstanding these
Subscriptions. All that I can make of the Subseriptions is, that he might
according to a Rule that some Ministers of State have observed, set his Hand to
those Papers, as a mark that they might not be altered: and as to Leightoun's
Paper, there may be this particular reason for it, that Leightoun not being in
the Commission, of which I take notice in my History, p. 289. Cranmer, who it
seems ordered him to write Answers to those Queries, might have set his hand to
his Paper, as a warrant to him for having writ them, I confess these are but
conjectures; but to guess somewhat probably, is all that can be done at this
distance.

I have now opened this matter so particularly, that I hope I have satisfied
the desires of those who complained that the thing was left too much in the
dark.

As for the method in which I published them, I could make a short defense for
it, since it is well known that a very eminent Person took the direction of
that whole Work into his particular care; but since I am not so near him as to
obtain his leave for naming him, and that I will not do it without his leave, I
shall tell the reasons that were suggested, for following the method in which I
have published them; The method in which they lie in the Manuscript is this,
first the Queries are set down, then every Man's Paper comes, first Archbishop
Cranmer's, then the Archbishop of York's, and so forward according to the
order in which they are under every Query: All these Papers are Signed at the
end of them, except the Bishop of Rochester's, but there is but one Signing for
all, and there are no special Subscriptions to any particular Articles (as some
have fancied,) so that the Subscription to the last Article belongs to the
whole Paper, and to every Article in it: After these come two Papers, the one
in Latin and the other in English, in which the agreement or disagreement of
them all is marked; Cranmer's only excepted; so that it seems these were for
his private use: Now, since every Paper relates to the Queries without
repeating them, the Queries must either have been repeated to every Paper, or
the Reader must have been always turning Leaves to find them out; and if any
Man had the curiosity to examine their agreement or disagreement, he could find
it out much readier in the way in which they are put than if I had followed the
method in which they lie in the Manuscript; and these Papers in which they are
already compared, come in more naturally at the end of every Query; and can be
more easily examined when one has under his eye at one view all their Opinion,
than if they had come in at the end of all after all the Papers had been set
down; so that this Method very well becomes the exactness and the true Judgment
of him that advised it. On the Margents every Man's Name is set over against
every Article of his Paper; so that if one will read a whole Paper in an entire
Thread as it lies in the Original, he has an easy work, and is only to seek
Canterbury, York, or any other, all through the 17 Queries, and he finds it
without any confusion or difficulty.

And now, what is to be said to all this? Is there any thing here left out, or
mangled, or disguised, or any thing else done sufficiant to justify a small
part of the Clamor that is raised? The reflections made in this last Letter on
the Dean of St. Paul's, are too visible to be carried off with the good words
that introduce them; if he had writ his Book after my History, it might have
been pretended that I had misled him, though these Gentlemen's Friends know to
their Cost that he is not apt to mistake in his Quotations; but he who writ his
Book almost Twenty years before mine, and had the Manuscript so long in his
hands, saw it as it is; and therefore all that is said from this against the
Method that I took in publishing these Papers, is mere fooling: But the truth
is, the Dean saw well enough, that there was nothing in all this matter that
deserved to be taken notice of.

His Arguments, such as they be, is a Civility that he had no reason to expect
from any on this side the Water. A Man may differ from him both in Opinion and
Argument; and yet none but he that can Drawcansir like, kill both Friend and
Foe, and arraign a whole Nation, would treat a Man of his worth in so rude a
manner: but as the Devil is known by his Cloven-Foot, so the attacking such Men
is a little too early and too barefaced. If I was guilty of a mistake in my
last Letter, I will acknowledge it as soon as the Author of this gives himself a
Name; and if ever he on whom I laid it, finds but half the reason to lay any
Paper to my charge, that I have here, I will allow him all the liberty he shall
be pleased to take: but I will say nothing upon an Anonymous Paper. I confess I
acquit him freely of any accession to this; for I believe, though he would set
about it, he could not bring his style so low, nor write so ill. I do not
trouble my self to find out the Author. Dull and pert are such common
Characters, that without a more particular mark I cannot trace him. I confess a
sit of kindness he falls into upon my naming the Blessed Martyr, leads me a
little nearer, for I remember I saw a Dedication to the second Peer of England,
that began MY DEAR LORD; upon which one asked if the Author was Married to him:
but if he will be as good as his Word, and pay me the Ten Thousand Thanks in
full tale for every time that he finds the Blessed Martyr in my Writings, he
will be very hoarse long before he gets through them.

As for his bringing himself off from that crude, not to call it profane
reflection on a whole Kingdom, it is ill nature in me to take notice of it,
since I hear all cry shame on him for it; for his contracting what he laid
indefinitely on a whole Kingdom, to a few persons, is a Figure well becoming
his Wit and Candor. His ranking me with a Man whose Face I do not so much as
know, is another of his Flowers; he may perhaps hear more of him than I can
tell him, from one that Lodged so long at Not. Thompson's, if he happened to be
in his House when he Printed the Appeal from the City to the Country, in which
I have been told Ferguson had a hand.

As for the Zeal that all this sort of Men pretend for the Crown, the Book that
is the foundation of this Stir, is a good Indication of it, which without any
straining, falls so evidently within a Praemunire, as I hear an Honorable
Person has observed, that the Writer owes his not being questioned for it to
His Mejesties Clemency, and to the neglect that both he and his Book are under.
There is another Sect beside Presbytery, that has first degraded Kings wholly
from their Ecclesiastical Supremacy, and after that point was gained, made them
reign at the Mercy of the Church, and at the Pope's Courtesy: It were too bold
to attempt both at once, and it is ingeniously enough done, to seem to yield up
the one wholly, till the other is gained. But in all this matter their Honest
Mr. Lowth is quite forsaken, since his false charging me for leaving out that
passage of Leighton's is not so much as pretended to be justified: it seems
this Writer is very scant of Epithets, or thinks there are few that can fit Mr.
Lowth, that he has no other for him in both his Letters but Honest, so that one
would think it is a part of his Christened Name. Epithetes are chosen with
relation to the matter in hand: Now, though he may be a very honest Man in all
other things for ought I know, yet I am sure he was neither Wise nor Honest in
this particular; but seems his Friends that set him on, think they are bound in
honor fetch him off.

I confess this Trifler is modester than he was, for whereas he, Sir Hubras
like, valued himself, that the King of Israel was not to go out (...) against a
Flea; this Writer more humbly compares his Letter to (...) Flea in my Ear: but
how Fleas are so much in their favor, I (...) not know; the last was a truer
Figure for an Animal of a higher form had suffered by the comparison: But, with
my Readers Pardon I will venture to take it a little lower, and assure him it
is as (...) as if it had been shut up in a Microscope a Week. I do not blame
him (...) rising a little higher in another Figure taken from the Marble; it
(...) his top-flight, and it were pity to see a whole Sheet without (...) touch
that can be calumniated with Wit. So far have I complied with your desires, in
contradiction to my own Inclination: I am (...) this matter is at an end, so
let the whole Pack bark as long as (...) will, I will not write one word more
on this subject. I am with (...) possible respect and duty,

Jan. 24. Sir, Your most humble Servant G. Burnett.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwyn, at the Old Bailey Corner. 1685.


