A VINDICATION OF THE AUTHORITY, CONSTITUTION, AND LAWS OF THE CHURCH AND STATE
OF SCOTLAND.

IN FOUR CONFERENCES.

Wherein the Answer to the Dialogues betwixt the Conformist and the
Nonconformist, is examined.

By GILBERT BURNET, Professor, of Theology in Glasgow.

GLASGOW, By ROBERT SANDERS, Printer to the City, and University.

M. DC. LXXIII.

TO HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF LAUDERDALE, etc. HIS MAJESIES HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR
SCOTLAND.
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR GRACE.
The noble Character which you do now so worthily bear, together with the more
lasting and inward Characters of Your Princely mind, did set me beyond doubting
to whom this Address was to be made: For to whom is a vindication of the
Authority and Laws of this Kingdom so due, as to Your Grace, to whom His
Majesty has by a Royal Delegation, committed the administration of Affairs
among us; and under whose wise and happy conduct, we have enjoyed so long a
tract of uninterrupted tranquillity? But it is not only Your illustrious
quality that entitles You to this Dedication. No, Great Prince, greater in Your
mind, than by Your fortune; there is somewhat more inward to You, than the
gifts of fortune; which, as it proves her not blind in this instance, so
commands all the respect can be paid Your Grace, by such who are honored with
so much knowledge of You, as has fallen to the happy share of Your poorest
servant.

But, My Lord, since all I can say either of the vast endowments of Your Mind,
or of the particular engagements I lie under to honor You, must needs fall
short of my sense of both; and what is just to be said, is not fit for me to
express; the least appearances of flattery being as unpleasant to You, as
unbecoming one of my Station: I must quit this Theme, which is too great for me
to manage; and only add, that I know Your understanding, in such debates as are
here managed, to be so profound, and your judgment so well balanced, that as
You deservedly pass for a Master in all learning; so, if these Sheets be so
happy as to be well accounted of by You, I shall the less value or apprehend
the snarlings of all Censurers. I pretend not by prefixing so great a Name to
these Conferences, to be secure from Censure by Your Patrociny, since these
Enemies of all Order and Authority (with whom I deal) will rather be provoked
from that, to lash me with the more severity.

I shall not to this add my poor thoughts of what this time and the tempers of
those with whom we deal, seems to call for, since by so doing, I should become
more ridiculous than Phormio was, when he entertained the redoubted Hannibal,
with a pedantick discourse of a Generals conduct. It is from Your Graces deep
judgment and great experience, that we all expect and long for a happy
settlement, wherein that success and blessings may attend Your endeavors,
shall be prayed for more earnestly by none alive, than by,

May it please YOUR GRACE, Your Graces most humble, most faithful, and most
obliged servant. G. BURNET.

TO THE READER.
HOW sad, but how full a Commentary does the age we live in, give on these
words of our Lord, Luke 12.49. I am come to send fire on the earth: suppose you
that I am come to give peace on the earth; I tell you, nay; but rather
division: for from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided. Do we
not see the Father divided against the Son, and the Son against the Father, and
engaging into such angry heats and mortal feuds, upon colors of Religion, as if
the seed of the Word of GOD, like Cadmus teeth, had spawned a generation of
cruel and bloodthirsty men: But how surprising is the Wonder, when Religion
becomes the pretense, and seems to give the rise to these animosities, since
the wisdom and goodness of GOD has devised nothing more proper and powerful
for overruling all the secret passions of the mind, and for mortifying of all
boisterous disorders? The Doctrine delivered by our meek and lowly Master,
teaches us the great Lessons of humility, of self-diffidence, and
self-contempt, guards against the undervaluing of others, and the overrating of
our selves, gives check to wrath, anger, emulation and envy; hatred and malice,
railing and censuring: And in a word, designs the moulding our natures into a
conformity with its blessed Author: who when he was reviled, reviled not again;
but practiced without a blemish, those great Lessons he taught his Disciples,
of doing good for evil, loving his Enemies, and praying for such as
despitefully used him. But how far have we fallen from that lovely Pattern? And
how is the serene and peaceable visage of Christianity transformed into a sour
cankered and surly temper, as if that which obliged us to love all men, should
engage us to look morose on all but a handful of a party: and that which should
dilate our love to all mankind, is given for a ground of contracting it to a
few as ill natured as our selves.

Is there not a generation among us who highly value themselves, and all of
their own form? but whosoever differs from them, is sure of their fiercest spite,
and bitterest Censures. Are the lives of such as differ from them virtuous,
then they say they are good moral men: But, alas! they know not what it is to
be spiritual. Again, are they devout and grave, then they are called Monastic
people, Juglers, or Papists. And if nothing can be fastened on them, the charge
of hypocrisy is the last shift of malice: Or if they have been guilty of any
failings and mistakes, they are so far from covering or disguising of them;
that on the contrary, the relating, the aggravating, and the commenting on
these, is the main subject of all their discourses. And if they go on a Visit,
the first Civilities are scarce over, when these Stories (true or false, all is
to one purpose) come to make up their conversation. Who can have the least
tincture of the Christian Spirit, and look on without sad regrates, and see
this bitter, fierce, and cruel venom poisoning the several Sects and divisions
of Christendom? The root and spring whereof is no other than a carnal, proud,
and unmortified temper: for few are so Atheistical, but they desire to pass,
both in their own account, and in the opinion of others, for good Christians:
but when they find how hard a thing it is to be a Christian indeed, and that
they must mortify all their carnal appetites, their fierce passions, and
swellings of pride, despise the world, and be resigned in all things to the
Will of GOD, before they can deserve that noble Character, then they pursue
another method more grateful to their corrupt minds, which is to list
themselves under a party, to cherish and value the Heads and Leaders of it, and
to divide their kindness to all of their stamp: they stiffly adhere to the
forms, and maintain all the humors and opinions of that Party to which they
have associated themselves, and they whet their Spirits and sharpen their
Tongues against all of another mould, which some do with an undisguised
fierceness: Other with a visage of more gravity, by which they give the deeper
wounds. What sad effects flow from this Spirit is too visible; and I love not
to play the Diviner, or to presage all the mischief it threatens: but certain
it is that the great business of Religion lies under an universal neglect,
while every one looks more abroad on his Neighbor, than inwardly on himself;
and all st^dy more the advancement of a Party, than the true interest of
Religion.

I deny not but zeal for GOD must appear, when we see indignities done to his
holy Name, in a just indignation at these who so dishonor him; but what
relation have little small differences about matters which have no tendency for
advancing the Image of GOD in our Souls, to that; since both sides of the
debate may be well maintained without the least indignity done to GOD, or his
holy Gospel? What opposition to the Will of GOD, or what harm to Souls can flow
from so innocent a practice, as the fixing some Churchmen over others, for
observing, directing, reproving, and coercing of the rest, that this should
occasion such endless brawlings, and such hot contentions? But supposing the
grounds of our divisions, as great as any angry Disputer can imagine them, then
certainly our zeal for them should be tempered, according to the Rules and
Spirit of the Gospel. Is it a Christian temper that our spirits should boil
with rage against all of another persuasion, so that we cannot think of them
without secret commotions of anger and disdain, which breaks often out into
four looks, ridiculous ^earings, bitter scoffings and invectives, and in
attempts at blood and cruelty? How long shall our Nadabs and Ab^hus burn this
wildfire on the Altar of GOD, whose flames should be peaceful, and such as
descend from Heaven? When we see any endangering their Souls by erroneous
Opinions, or bad practices, had we the divine Spirit in us, it would set us to
our secret mournings for them: our hearts would melt in compassion toward
them, and not burn in rage against them: and we would attempt for their
recovery, and not contrive their (...). The ^ne bears on it a clear impress of
that nature which is Love, in which none can have interest, or union, but such
as dwell and abide in Love: but the other bears on it the lively signature of
him that was a murderer from the beginning: and all that is mischievous or
cruel, is of that evil one, and tends to the subversion of mankind; as well as
the ruin of true Religion.

Another great Rule by which the Peace and Order of all human Societies is
maintained and advanced, is obedience to the Laws, and submission to the
Authority of these whom GOD has set over us, to govern and defend us; to whose
Commands if absolute Obedience be not paid, ever till they contradict the Laws
of GOD, there can be neither peace nor order among men, as long as every one
prefers his own humor or inclination to the Laws of the Society in which he
lives. Now it cannot be denied to be one of the sins of the age we live in,
that small regard is had to that authority GOD has committed to his
Vicegerents on earth: The evidence whereof is palpable, since the bending or
slackening of the execution of Laws is made the measure of most men's Obedience,
and not the conscience of that duty we owe the commands of our Rulers: for what
is more servile and unbecoming a man, not to say a Christian, than to yield
Obedience when overawed by force; and to leap from it when allured by gentler
methods? If Generosity were our principle, we should be sooner vanquished by
the one, than cudgelled by the other: Or if Conscience acted us, the Obligation
of the Law would equally bind, whether backed with a strict Execution, or
slackened into more impunity. Hence it appears how few there are who judge
themselves bound to pay that reverence to the Persons, and that Obedience to
the Commands of these GOD has vested with his Authority, which the Laws of
Nature and Religion do exact. And the root of all this disobedience and
contempt, can be no other, but unruly and ungoverned pride, which disdains to
submit to others, and exalts it self above these who are called Gods. The
humble are tractable and obedient; but the self willed are stubborn and
rebellious. Yet the height of many men's pride rests not in a bare disobedience,
but designs the subverting of Thrones, and the shaking of Kingdoms, unless
governed by their own measures.

Among all the Heresies this age has spawned, there is not one more contrary
to the whole design of Religion* and more destructive of mankind, than is that
bloody Opinion of defending Religion by Arms, and of forcible resistance upon
the color of preserving Religion. The wisdom of that Policy is ^^^hly, sen^^al
and devilish, favoring of a carnal unmortified and impatient mind, that cannot
bear the Cross, nor trust to the Providence of GOD: and yet with how much zeal
is this doctrine maintained and propagated, as if on it hung both the Law and
the Prophets? Neither is the zeal used for its defense only meant for the
vindicating of what is past, but on purpose advanced for reacting the same
Tragedies: which some late villainous attempts have too clearly discovered, some
of these black Arts (tho written in white) being by a happy providence of GOD
(by the intercepting of R. Mac his Letters which contained not a few of their
rebellious practisings and designs) brought to light.

Indeed the consideration of these evils should call on all to reflect on the
sad posture wherein we are, and the evident signatures of the Divine
displeasure under which we l^e: from which it appears that GOD has no pleasure
in (...), nor will be glorified among us: that so we may discern the signs of
the times, and by all these sad indications may begin to appehend our danger,
and ^o turn to GOD with our whole hearts; every one repenting of the works of
his hands, and contributing his prayers and endeavors for a more general
Reformation. It is not by Political Arts, nor by the execution of penal Laws,
that the power of Religion can be recovered from these decays, under which it
has so long suffered. No, no, we must consider wherein we have provoked GOD to
chastise us in this fashion, by letting loose among us a Spirit of
uncharitableness, giddiness, cruelty and sedition: And the progress of these
and other great evils, we ought to charge on our own faultiness, who have
provoked GOD to plead a Controversy with us in so severe a manner. This is the
method we ought to follow, which if we did, we might sooner look for the Divine
protection and assistance: and then we should experience it to be better to put
our confidence in GOD, than to put our confidence in men.

Indeed surh a Reformation of our lives and hearts, would more strongly plead
our cause, and advance our interest, than the most learned Disputes, or the
severest Laws, tho followed with a most vigorous execution: Let us not
therefore repine at the contempt we lie under, or the hazard we are exposed to;
nor complain of the non-execution of Laws; but let us examine wherein we have
walked contrary to the Laws of CHRIST in his Gospel, by which we have provoked
GOD to render us base and contemptible before the people. In a word, till we
condemn our selves more, and others less, and think more of reforming our
selves, and less of punishing others, we look not like proper Objects of Mercy,
or fit for a deliveranee.

But I shall quit this purpose to give some account of the following
Conferences. Some years ago, a small Book of Dialogues betwixt the Conformist
and Nonconformist was published, and received with the general applause and
good liking of all, who were so far unprepossessed as to consider the plain and
simple reasonings were there laid open; but presently all the mouths of the
enraged Zealots were set a yelping and snarling at it, and at its suspected
Author: some laughed at it, others despised it, and all of them were angry:
some threatened a speedy answer, others doubting of the performance, said, it
deserved none. At length diverse Pens were said to have undertaken the Task; but
in end we had an answer from beyond Sea to it, which was received with an
universal shout of victory and triumph: the Answerer acting his part with so
much confidence, and edging his smatterings with so much bitterness, as if he
had engaged with a compound of Ignorance and Atheism. At first reading I could
not but pity one who triumphed so confidently with so little reason, and
regrate the bitterness of his spirit, who belched up gall and wormwood upon
every occasion. Yet in some matters of fact and History, I deny not but his
confidence made me imagine truth might be on his side; but when I examined
things from their Fountains, I know not wha verdict to pass on him, who fell in
so many mistakes, and stumbled at every step. Most of his errors I imputed to
his second-hand reading, for he seems to have risen no higher in his learning
than the reading of Pamphlets: and it is like, has that quarrel with
Antiquity, that there is not a forty year old Author in his Closet; and so much
is he beholden to the labors of others, that if one unplume him of what is
borrowed, nothing will remain but scoldings, and nonsense. For when he meets
with anything out of the Road, it is not unpleasant to see how browillied he
is; and so unequal in his style, that sometimes he flies high on borrowed
wings, and immediately he halts and crawls when on his own legs. I was not soon
resolved whether such a Scribler deserved an Answer, since all he said that was
material, had both been printed and answered full often; yet the confidence of
the Author, and the value which others, much about his own size of knowledge and
modesty, did set on his labors, made me think it necessary to say a little more
on these things, which were perhaps too overly glanced at by the Conformist in
the Dialogues: and my interest in that Person secured me from apprehending his
mistakes of my interposing in this quarrel; for indeed what he said was so far
from being shaken by this pretended trifling Answer, that as a Person of great
judgment and worth, said, No more pains was needful for refuting the Answer,
but the reading over the Dialogues, whose strength remained entire after all
his attempts against them.

I was doubtful what method to pursue in the following sheets, since I ever
loathed the answering of Books by retail, as an endless and worthless labor:
for when should I have done, did I call him to account for all his
incoherencies and impertinencies, and examine all his simpering distinctions,
and whiffling answers? I resolved therefore at one dash to wave all that, and
to examine the matters of greater and more public concern, with that clearness
of expression which befits such Subjects, and with so much brevity, as might
not frighten away the more superficial Readers, nor surfeit the more laborious.
Therefore I have not stayed to make good all the Conformists Opinions or
arguments, hinted in these short Dialogues, but have left the examining of
them, and the Answers made to them, to the consideration of the unprejudged
Reader, and so have considered nothing of what he answers to the fifth and
sixth Dialogues. To the fifth Dialogue, wherein set forms for Worship are
pleaded for, he answers by confessing their lawfulness, arguing only against
the imposing them; but this I meet with in my second Conference, wherein I
assert the binding Authority of Laws in all things lawful. And for his Answers
to the sixth Dialogue, they concern me not, being made up of reflections: It is
true, to show his Common place reading, he gives a long discourse of
Justification, but to very little purpose, since upon the matter the Conformist
differs nothing from him: And for the justifying or condemning some phrases or
modes of speech, they are not worth the while to debate about them: All my
quarrel at these long winded Common places, being, that by a pretense of making
matters clearer, they darken them with a multiplicity of words, and an
intricacy of phrases. And as this is justly censurable on every head about
which it is employed, so it is more particularly in the matter of
Justification, which being the ground of our hope and joy, should be so
cleared, that no difficulty, nor nicety get into our conceptions about it. What
then can be clearer than that GOD in consideration of his Sons sufferings,
offers free pardon to all sinners, on the terms of their forsaking their sins,
their accepting his mercy through his Son, and their obedience to the rules of
his Gospel, which whosoever do, are actually in the ^avor of GOD, made
partakers of his Grace, and shall in due time be admitted to his Glory? This
being the Co^f^rmists sense on that head, I leave it with all to consider what
reason there was for making such ado about it, or for charging him with so
heavy imputations. But he shrouds himself under his own innocence, and will
patiently bear all the insultings and ungodly rage of that Adversary, without
recriminating or answering him in his own style and dialect.

I pursue the method of a Conference, as being both more suitable to the
purposes here canvassed, and more agreeable to the Dialogues, only I furnish
the Scene with more persons; and I am much mistaken if the Answerer himself
shall have ground to accuse me of not laying out the strength of his reasonings
faithfully, since upon every occasion I put in Isotimus his mouth the substance
of his arguings, as far as I could reach them. But to make this unpleasant
peace of contention go the more easily off, I have subjoyned to it an account
of the form and rules of Church Government, as I found them to have been
received in the first and purest ages of the Church: But I add no more for
Preface to that work, since in the end of the last Conference enough is said
for introduction to it.

I have divided my work in four parts and Conferences: The first examines the
opinion of resisting lawful Magistrates upon the pretense of defending
Religion. The second considers the Authority of Laws, and the obedience due to
them, together with the Kings Supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical. The third
examines the spirit that acted during the late times and Wars, and continues
yet to divide us by Schism and faction. And the fourth examines the lawfulness
and usefulness of Episcopacy.

I must now release my Reader from the delay this Introduction may have
occasioned him, without the usual formality of Apologies, for the defects the
following papers are guilty of, since I know these generally prevail but little
for gaining what they desire: but shall only say, that this morose way of
writing, by engaging into Controversies, is as contrary to my Genius as to any
man's alive: For I know well how little such writings prevail for convincing of
any, and that by them the most part are rather hardened into more wilfulness,
and exasperated into more bitterness: Yet for this once I was prevailed on to
do violence to my own inclinations, by this Patrociny of the authority and laws
of that Church and Kingdom wherein I live.

I am so far from thinking my self concerned to make Apology for the slowness
of this Piece its appearance in public, that I incline rather to make excuses
for its coming abroad too soon. That it was ready near a twelvemonth ago, can
be witnessed by many who then saw it. Yet I was willing to let it lie some time
by me, and my aversion from the motions of the Press, put it often under debate
with me whether I should stifle it, or give it vent: at length I yielded to the
frequent importunities of my friends who assaulted me from all hands, and told
me how much it was longed for, and what insultings were made upon the delay of
its publication.

And by what is near the end of the third Conference, it will appear that it
was written before the discovery of these who had robbed and wounded the
Ministers in the West of Scotland. I let what is there said continue as it was
written, before the discovery, but shall add somewhat here. In September last,
after a new robbery had been committed on another conformable Minister, whose
actors no search could discover; some few days had not passed over, when by a
strange Providence one of them was catched on another account by a brave
Soldier, and being seized, such indications of his accession to the robbery
were found about him, that he to prevent torture, confessed not only his own
guilt, but discovered a great many more: most of them escaped, yet three were
taken, and had Justice done on them, with him who had been their chief Leader:
and who continued to cant it out highly after he got his Sentence, talking of
his blood as innocently shed, and railing against the Prelates and Curats;
though before Sentence he was basely sordid, as any could be. One of his
accomplices who died with more sense, acknowledged, when he spoke his last words,
that bitter zeal had prompted him to that villainy, and not covetousness, or a
design of robbing their goods. Yet I shall not conceal what I was a witness to,
when a Minister of the Presbyterian persuasion being with them (for two of them
would willingly admit of none that were Episcopal) after he had taken pains to
convince the chief Robber of the atro^iousness of his crimes, which was no
^asie task, he charged him to discover if either Gentlemen, or Ministers, had
prompted or cherished him in it, or been conscious to his committing these
robberies, he cleared all, except a few particular and mean persons who went
sharers with him. And by this fair and ingenuous procedure, the Reader may
judge how far the Author is from a design of lodging infamy on these who differ
from him, when of his own accord he offers a testimony for their vindication.
But I shall leave this purpose, and the further prefacing at once.

If my poor labors be blessed with any measure of success, I humbly offer up
the praise of it to him from whom I derive all I have, and to whom I owe the
praise of all I can do. But if these attempts bring forth none of the wishedfor
effects, I shall have this satisfaction, that I have sincerely and seriously
studied the calming the passions, and the clearing the mistakes of these among
whom I live: so that more lies not on me, but to follow my endeavors with my
most earnest prayers, that the GOD of Peace may in this our day, cause us
discern and consider these things which belong to our Peace.

THE HEADS TREATED OF in these Conferences.
THe first Conference examines the origin and power of Magistracy, and whether
Subjects may by arms resist their Sovereigns on the account, or pretense of
defending Religion against Tyranny, and unjust oppression? And whether the King
of Scotland be a Sovereign Prince, or limited, so that he may be called to
account, and coerced by force?

The second examines the nature of humane Laws, and of the obedience due to
them, and the Civil Magistrates Right of enacting Laws in matters
Ecclesiastical.

The third examines the grounds and progress of the late Wars, whether they
were Defensive or Invasive, and what Spirit did then prevail? And the grounds
of our present Schi^m are considered.

The fourth examines the origin, lawfulness, and usefulness of Episcopal
Government, which is concluded; with an account of the Primi^ive Constitution
and Government of the Churches that were first gathered and planted.

The COLLOCUTORS.
Eudaimon. A Moderate man. Philarchaeus. An Episc^pal man. Isotimus. A
Presbyterian. Basilius. An Asserter of the Kings Authority. Criticus. One well
studied in Scripture. Polyhistor. An Historian.
The FIRST CONFERENCE.
Eudaimon. YOU are welcome, my good Friends, and the rather that you come in
such a number, whereby our converse shall be the more agreeable. Pray, sit down.


Philarcheus. The rules of Custom should make us begin with asking after your
Health, and what News you have.


Eud. Truly the first is not worth enquiring after; and for the other, you know
how seldom I stir abroad, and how few break in upon my retirement, so that you
can expect nothing from me; but you have brought one with you who uses to know
every thing that is done.


Isotimus. I know you mean me: the truth is, I am very glad to hear every thing
that passes; and think it no piece of Virtue to be so unconcerned in what
befalls the Church of GOD, as never to look after it: but you are much wronged,
if notwithstanding all your seeming abstraction, you be not deeper in the
knowledge of Affairs than any of us: however since you expect News from me, I
was just now reading some Books lately printed at Holland, and particularly an
accurate and learned Confutation of these virulent Dialogues you were wont to
magnify so much: and it does my heart good to see how he baffles the writer of
them on every occasion; for he has answered every word of them so well, and so
home, that I believe we shall not see a reply in haste.


Philarcheus. I suppose we have all seen the Book, but it is like you are
singular in your opinion of it: I shall not deny its Author his deserved
praises: he has been faithful in setting down most of the Arguments used in
the Dialogues, and no less careful to gather together all the vulgar answers to
them, and truly has said as much as can be said for his Cause. Neither writes
he without art; for when he is pinched, he drives off the Reader with a great
many preliminary things, to make him forget the purpose, and to gain a more
easy assent to what he asserts. I confess his Style is rugged and harsh, so
that it was not without pain I wrestled through it: but of all I have seen, he
has fallen on the surest way to gain an Applause from the Vulgar; for he acts
the greatest Confidence imaginable, and rails at his Adversary with so much
contempt, and malice, that he is sure to be thought well of, by these who judge
of a man more by his voice, and the impresses of earnestness, and passion he
discovers, than by the weight of what he says.


Eud. These things may well take with the ignorant Rabble, with whom it is like
he designs to triumph: but truly such as understand either the civilities of
good Nature, or the meekness of a Christian, will be little edified with them.
Indeed I am amazed to see so much indiscretion and bitterness fall from any
man's Pen who has read S. Paul, condemning railings, evil surmisings, and
perverse disputings.


Isot. Who begun the scolding? The truth is, there are some who think they may
rail with a privilege, and if any in soberness tell them of their faults, they
accuse them of bitterness: but was there ever any thing seen more waspish than
these Dialogues? whose design seems to have been the disgracing of a whole
Party, and all their actions for many years: If then the Atheism, the
blasphemy, the mockery, the enmity to GOD and Religion, the ignorance, the
malice, the folly and arrogance of such a confident Babbler be discovered, you
are so tender der hooffed forsooth, as to complain of railings.


Eud. It seems these writings have made a deep Impression on you, you have got
so exactly into their style: b^t this is a place where Passion is seldom
cherished, therefore we will expect no more of that strain from you. But to
deal freely with you, there were some Expressions in these Dialogues with which
I was not well satisfied; but the whole of them had such a visage of Serenity,
that I wonder how they are so accused. It is true the Conformijt deals very
plainly, and yet ere we part, I can perhaps satisfy you: he said but a little
of what he might have said: But withal, remember how severely, he that was
meekness it self, treated the Scribes and the Pharisees, and he having charged
his Followers to beware of their leaven, it is obedience to his Command to
search out that leaven, that it may leaven us no more. And when any of a Party
are so exalted in their own conceit, as to despise and disparage all others,
the love, Ministers of the Gospel owe the Souls of their Flocks, obliges them
to unmask them. As to these poor simple Reproaches that are cast on the Person
of that Author, as they are known to be false and unjust, so they are done in a
strain that seems equally void of Wit and Goodness. But we shall meddle no more
in these ^^^sonal difference^, afte^ I have told you what I heard the Author of
that Conference say upon this subject: he said, He was so far from being
displeased with the Author of this Answer, that he was only sorry he knew not
who he was, that he might seek an opportunity of obliging him. For the things
charged on him, if he was guilty of them, he needed very many prayers; but if
innocent, the other needed no fewer who so unjustly accused him: but a day
comes wherein a righteous judge will judge betwixt them: and this was the
utmost displeasure he expressed; adding, That he had another sense of the
account he must give for his hours, than to engage in a Counter scuffle, or to
play at such small game, as a particular examen of that Book would amount to:
And he judged it unworthy of him to turn Executioner on that man's Reputation,
by enquiring into all the escapes of his Book which are too obvious. But he is
willing to stand or fall by the decision of rational and impartial Minds, only
where he was either too short, or where the Answerer has raised so much Mist
as might obscure a less discerning Reader: he will (when he gets out of the
throng wherein his Employment does at present engage him) offer a clearer
account of the matters in question, without tracing of that p^or Creature, who,
it is like, expects to be recorded among the Learned Writers of the Age, and
the Champions of Truth.


Bas. We have nothing to do with what is personal among these Writers: But
since so many of us have met so happily, and seem a little acquainted with
these Questions, let us according to our wonted freedom, toss these debates
among us, without heat or reflections: which signify nothing but to express
the strength of his Passions, and the weakness of his Reasons who makes use of
them. And indeed the matter of the greatest Importance is, the point of
Subjects resisting their Sovereigns, in the defense of Religion, which deserves
to be the better cleared, since it is not a nicety of the School, or a
speculation of Philosophers, but a matter of Practice, and that which (if
received) seems to threaten endless Wars and Confusions.


Crit. I am no great Disputer, but shall be gladly a witness to your debate,
and upon occasions shall presume to offer what I have gleaned among the
Critical Writers on Scripture: and I hope Ij^timus's Memory is so good, that he
will carefully suggest the Arguments used by the Patrons of defensive Arms.


Isot. I will not undertake too much, but shall take care not to betray this
good Cause, yet I will not have the Verdict passed upon my defense of it;
however I shall not sneak so shamefully as the Nonconformist did in the
Dialogues.


Eud. I hope I shall not need to caution you any more against reflections: but
as for the alleged treachery of your friend the Nonconformist, it may be
referred to all Scotland, if what he says be not what is put in the mouths of
all the People about these matters, and truly this Answer adds so little to
him, that nothing can free him so well of that treachery, as the reading of
this new Book. But to our purpose: The Question is first in general, If
Subjects under a lawful Sovereign when oppressed in their established Religion,
may by Arms defend themselves, and resist the Magistrates? Let this be first
discussed in general, and next it shall be considered how far this will quadrat
with our present Case, or our late Troubles.


Isot. I like your method well, and that we may follow it, consider ( see page
20. of the Answer, and Ius populi all over) if their can be any thing more
evident from the Laws of Nature, than that men ought to defend themselves, when
unjustly assaulted? And since the Law of Nature teaches men not to murder
themselves, it by the same force binds them to hinder another to do it, since
he that does not hinder another from committing a Crime, when it is in his
power so to do, becomes guilty of the crime committed; he is then a
self-murderer who does not defend himself from unjust force. Besides, what is
the end of all Societies, but mutual Protection? Did not the People at first
choose Princes for their Protection? Or do you imagine it was to satisfy the
Pride and Cruelty of individual persons? It was then the end of Societies, that
Justice and Peace might be maintained: so when this is inverted, the Subjects
are again to resume their own conditional surrender, and to coerce the
Magistrate, who, forgetful of the ends of his Authority, does so corrupt it.
And since the great design of man should be to serve GOD, and to worship him in
spirit and in truth, this is to be preferred to all things else, as being of
the greatest Importance. If then Magistrates, whom S. Peter (1 Pet. 2.13.)
calls the Ordinances of men, or humane Creatures, do force there Subjects from
the true Worship of GOD, they ought to be restrained, and the Cause of GOD must
be maintained, notwithstanding their unjust Laws or cruel Tyranny.


Bas. You have indeed put such colors on your Opinion, that I should be much
shaken from mine, were not my persuasion well grounded. But to examine what you
have said, you must distinguish well betwixt the Laws of Nature, and the Rights
or permissions of Nature: the first are unalterable Obligations, by which all
men are bound, which can be reversed by no positive Law, and transgressed by no
Person, upon no occasion: for the Law of Nature is the Image of GOD yet
remaining in some degrees on the Souls of men, and is nothing else save certain
notions of Truth, impressed by GOD on the Souls of all men that enjoy the
exercise of Reason. Now self-defence cannot be a Law of Nature, otherwise it
could never be dispensed with without a Sin; nay, were a man never so criminal:
For as in no case a man may kill himself, were he never so guilty; so by that
reasoning of yours, he ought not to suffer himself to be killed, neither should
any Malefactor submit to the Sentence of the Judge, but stand to his defense by
all the force he could raise. And it will not serve turn, to say, that for the
good of the Society he ought to submit; for no man must violate the Laws of
Nature, were it on never so good a design: and since the utmost standard of our
love to our Neighbors, is to love them as our selves, no consideration of the
good of others can oblige one to yield up his Life, if bound by the Law of
Nature to defend it.


Crit. If I may interrupt you, I should tell you that as among all Nations it
has been counted Heroical to die for ones Country, or for the good of others,
so the Apostle speaks, ( Romans 5.7.) of those who for good men would dare to
die. But chiefly CHRIST'S dying for us, shows that self-defence can be no Law
of Nature: otherwise CHRIST who filled all Righteousness, had never
contradicted the Laws of Nature.


Bas. I thank you for your remark, which was pertinent. But next, consider
there are some rights or permissions of Nature, which are allowed us, but not
required of us, as propriety of goods, marriage, and other such like things,
which whose does not pretend to, he cannot be said to violate the Laws of
Nature, only for some greater consideration he forgoes these Privileges it
allows. And take men out of a Society, I acknowledge forcible Resistance of any
violent Assailant, to be one of the rights of Nature, which every man may make
use of without a Fault, or dispense with likewise at his pleasure: But
Societies being Associations of People under a Head, who has the power of Life
and Death, that sets it beyond doubt, that the Head must only judge, when the
Subjects do justly fore-seal their Lives or not: which before I go about to
evince, I must remove that vulgar Error, of a Magistrate's deriving his power
from the surrender of the People. None can surrender what they have not: take
then a multitude of People not yet associated, none of them has power of his
own Life, neither has he power of his Neighbors, since no man out of a Society
may kill another, were his Crime never so great, much less be his own murderer;
and a multitude of People not yet associated, are but so many individual
Persons; therefore the power of the Sword is not from the People, nor any of
their Delegation, but is from GOD.


Isot. You will pardon me to tell you, that the People must give the power,
since GOD did it never by a Voice from Heaven, or by a Prophets command, except
in some Instances among the Israelites, where even that was not done, but upon
the previous desire of the People. And for what you say of the Peoples having
no right to kill themselves, they only consent to submit to the Magistrates
Sentence, when guilty.


Basil. This will then infallibly prove, that forcible self-defence cannot be a
Law of Nature, but only a Right; otherwise we could not thus dispense with it.
But if though guilty, I ought not to kill my self, neither can I so much as
consent that another do it: Hence it is, that the original of Magistracy must
be from GOD, who only can invest the Prince with the power of the Sword.


Polyb. I could say much in Confirmation of that, from the universal Sense of
all Nations, who ever looked on the Magistrates power, as Sacred and Divine:
but these things are so copiously adduced by others, that I may well spare my
labor.


Crit. Nay, a greater authority is St. Paul's, Romans 13.1. who says, That the
powers that were then, were ordained of GOD: which on the way says strongly,
for asserting the right of a Conqueror, after some prescription, since if
either we consider the power of the Roman Empire over the world, or of their
Emperors over them, both will be found to have no better title than Conquest,
and yet they were ordained of GOD, and not to be resisted, but submitted to,
under the hazard of resisting the Ordinance of GOD, and receiving of damnation,
( p. 2.) And it is like, the sacredness of the Magistrates power, was a part of
the traditional Religion conveyed from Noah to his posterity, as was the
practice of extraordinary Sacrifices.


Basil. It is not to be denied but a people may chase their own form of
Government, and the persons in whose hands it shall be deposited: and the
Sovereignty is in their hands, of whom they do thus freely make choice: so that
if they expressly agree, that any Administrators of the power, by what name
soever designed, Kings, Lords, or whatever else, shall be accountable to them;
in that case, the Sovereignty lies in the major part of the people, and these
Administrators are subject to them, as to the Supreme. But when it is agreed in
whose hands the Sovereign power lies, and that it is not with the people; then
if the people pretend to the sword, they invade GODS right, and that which he
has devolved on his Vicegerent. And as in marriage either of the parties make
a free choice, but the Marriage-bond is of GOD, neither is it free for them
afterward to refile upon pretense of injuries, till that which GOD has
declared to be a breach of the bond, be committed by either party: so though
the election of the Sovereign may be of the people, yet the tie of subjection
is of GOD, and therefore is not to be shaken off, without we have express
warrant from him. And according to your reasoning, one that has made a bad
choice in his marriage, may argue that marriage was intended for a help and
comfort to man, and for propagation; therefore when these things are missed in
a marriage, that voluntary contract may be refiled from; and all this will
conclude as well to unty an ill chosen marriage, as to shake off a Sovereign.


Philarch. To this reasoning I shall add what seems from rational conjectures,
and such hints as we can expect of things at so great a distance from us, to
have been the rise of Magistracy. We find no warrant to kill, no not for murder
before the Flood, as appears from the instances of Cain and Lamech, so no
Magistracy appears to have been then: Yet from what GOD said to Cain, Genesis 4.7.
we see, the elder brother was to rule over the younger. But the want of
Magistracy before the Flood, was perhaps none of the least occasions of the
wickedness which was great upon earth; but to Noah was the Law first given of
punishing murder by death, Genesis 9.6. and he was undoubtedly clothed with that
power. So his eldest Son coming in his place by the right of representation,
and being by the right of primogeniture asserted before the Flood to be over
his Brethren, was clothed with the same power, and so it should have descended
by the order of Nature still to the firstborn. But afterward Families
divided, and went over the world to people it, whereby the single jurisdiction
of one Emperor, could not serve the end of Government, especially in that rude
time, in which none of these ways of correspondence, which after Ages have
invented, were fallen upon. These Families did then, or at least by that Law of
GOD of the elder Brothers power, ought to have been subject to the eldest of
their several Families.

And another rise of Magistracy, was the poverty of many who sold themselves to
others that were Richer, and were in all Nations subject to them, both they and
their children: and this was very early begun, for Abraham's family consisted
of 318. persons, and the many little Kings at that time seem to have risen out
of these Families: for the posterity of these servants were likewise under the
Masters Authority: and these servants were by their Masters pleasure to live or
lie; nor had they any right to resist this unjust force: But afterward
emancipation was used, some dominion being still reserved: and it is highly
probable, that from these numerous Families, did most of the little Kingdoms
then in the world spring up; afterward the more aspiring came to pretend over
others, and so great Empires rose by their Conquests.


Crit. I know it is strongly pretended, that the state of servitude, or such a
surrender of ones life, or liberty, as subjects it to the tyranny of another,
is not lawful: but this will be found groundless: for though even the Law of
GOD counted the servants a Man's money, so that he was not to be punished,
though he had smitten them with a rod, so that they died, provided they lived a
day or two after it, Exodus 21.20, 21. Yet in that dispensation it was not
unlawful to be a servant; nay, nor unlawful to continue in that state for ever,
and not accept of the emancipation which was provided to them in the year of
Iubily. Neither is this state declared unlawful under the Gospel, since S. Paul
says, 1 Cor. 7.21. Art thou called being a servant, care not for it: but if
thou may be free, use it rather: By which we see the Gospel does not
emancipate servants, but places that state among things which may be lawfully
submitted to, though liberty be preferable.


Basil. From this it may be well inferred, that if a Society have so entirely
surrendered themselves that they are in no better case than were the servants
among the Romans or Hebrews, the thing is not unlawful; nor can they make it
void, or resume the freedom without his consent whose servants they are: and as
S. Peter tells, 1 Pet. 2.18. The servants to submit to their Masters, tho
punishing them wrongfully. By whom all know that he means not of hired, but of
bought servants: so if a people be under any degrees of that state, they ought
to submit, not only to the good, but to the froward: and still it appears that
the Sword is only in the Magistrates hand, and that the people have no claim to
it. It is true, in case the Magistrate be furious, or desert his right, or
expose his Kingdoms to the fury of others, the Laws and Sense of all Nations
agree, that the States of the Land are to be the Administrators of the power,
till he recover himself: But the instance of Nebuchadn^zzar, Dan. 4.26. shows,
that still the Kingdom should be sure to him when he recovers.


I^^t Now you begin to yield to truth, and confess, that a Magistrate, when he
grossly abuses his Power, may be coerced: this then shows that the People are
not slaves.


Basil. The Case varies very much when the abuse is such that it tends to a
total Subversion, which may be called justly a Frenzy, since no man is
capable of it till he be under some lesion of his mind; in which case, the
Power is to be administered by others, for the Prince and his Peoples safety:
But this will never prove that a Magistrate governing by Law, though there be
great errors in his Government, ought to be coerced: otherwise you must open a
door to perpetual Broils, since every one by these Maxims becomes Judge; and
where he is both Judge and Party, he is not like to be cast in his Pretensions:
And even few Malefactors die, but they think hard measure is given them. If
then forcible self-defence be to be followed, none of these should yield up
their Lives without using all attempts for res^uing them.


Eud. Whatever other Cases allow of, certainly the defense of Religion by Arms
is never to be admitted: for the nature of Christian Religion is such, that it
excludes all carnal Weapons from its defense. And when I consider how expressly
CHRIST forbids his disciples to resist evil, Matthew. 25.39. how severely that
resistance is condemned by S. Paul, and that condemnation is declared the
Punishment of it, I am forced to cry out, Oh! what times have we fallen in* in
which men dare against the express Laws of the Gospel, defend that practice
upon which GOD has passed this condemnation, If whosoever break the least of
these Commandments, and teach men so to do, shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of GOD: What shall their portion be who teach men to break one of the
greatest of these Commandments, such as are the Laws of Peace and Subjection?
And what may we not look for from such Teachers, who dare tax that glorious
Doctrine of patient Suffering, as brutish and irrational, and though it be
expressly said, 1 Pet. 2.21. That CHRIST by suffering for us, left us his
Example how to follow his steps, which was followed by a glorious Cloud of
Witnesses? Yet in these last days, what a brood has sprung up, Of men who are
lovers of their own selves, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures,
more than lovers of GOD: having a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof; who creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sin? It
is our sins that provoke GOD to open the bottomless pit, and let loose such
locusts; but were we turning to GOD, and repenting of the works of our hands,
we might hope that their power should be taken from them, and that their folly
should be made known to all men.


Isot. Who talk bigly now? But let Reason and Scripture take place, and you
shall find good warrants in the Old Testament for coercing the Magistrate, and
subjecting the power in the Peoples hands, ( see p. 12.) for the People were
warranted to punish Idolaters, Deuteronomy. 13.12. And from the beginning of
Deuteronomy, it appears that Book was directed to all Israel, therefore any
might have punished Idolaters; therefore the power of Reforming is with the
People: And again ( see p. 13.) the Law of the King is set down, Deuteronomy. 18.14.
which gives a clear Evidence, that the People might coerce him: Otherwise why
was that Law delivered to the People?


Crit. I am much deceived if these Instances do conclude for your design, since
the utmost they can prove, is, that some share of the executive power lay in
the hands of the People among the Jews; but that proves nothing: where by Law
and Practice it is clear the power is wholly in the hands of Superior
unaccountable Magistrates. But that the Law of the King, or of punishing
Idolaters was delivered to the People, proves not that they must execute it:
For the Law of Sacrifices, and all the Temple worship was also delivered to
them: but I hope you will not from that infer, that the People were to judge in
these matters, or to give Laws to their Priests; neither will the Law, because
addressed to the People, prove themselves to be the executors of it; otherwise
the Epistle to the Corinthians addressed to all the Saints in Corinth, will
prove the People the Judges of Excommunication, and of the Rules of
Church-worship, which are there delivered: so that though the Law was directed
to all the People, yet that proves not that every precept of it concerned all
the People, but that the whole of the Law was addressed to the whole People,
and the respective parts of it, to all the individuals, according to their
several stations: And after all this, you are to consider that some things were
allowed by that Law to private Persons, which ought never to be made
precedents: for the Law allowed the Friends of one that was killed by chance,
to avenge the Blood on the Person that slew him, if he kept not within the City
of Refuge: but that being a particular provision of their Judicial and
Municipal Law, will be no warrant for such revenge in other States.


Isot. But what say you to the revolt of Libnah, 2 Chronicles. 21.10 which revolted
from Iehoram, because he forsock the LORD GOD of his fathers: And of Amaziab, 2 Chronicles. 25. 27. who when he turned away from following the LORD, his being
killed by a Conspiracy of these in Jerusalem, and the fourscore valiant Priests
who withstood ^zziah, when he went to offer incense? 2 Chronicles. 26.17. See p. 13,
14


Crit. As for your instances, consider that many things are set down in the Old
Testament, that are undoubted faults, and yet so far are they from being taxed,
that they rather seem to be applauded: so it is in the case of the Midwives
lie, not to mention the Polygamy of the Patriarchs; therefore it not being
clear to us by what special warrants they acted, a Practice of that
Dispensation will be no precedent to us. But for that of Libnah, it may be
justly doubted if the Libnah there mentioned, be that City which was assigned
to the Priests: for Numbers 33.20. we meet with a Libnah in the journyings of
Israel; and both the Syriack and the Arabic version, have understood the place
of that City; for they render it, the Idumeans that dwelt at Libnah. But
whatever be in this, the particle because, does not always import the design of
the doer: which if you examine the Hebrew, will be very clear; and I shall name
but one place to satisfy you, 1 Samuel 2.25. Elies sons hearkened not to the
voice of their father, because the LORD would slay them. But, I doubt not, you
will confess this was not their motive to such disobedience: so this will
import no more, but that GOD in his Providence permitted that revolt for a
Punishment of Iehoram's Apostasy: neither will fair Pretenses justify bad
Actions: so the utmost that place can prove, is, that they made that their
pretense. But that their revolt could not be without they had also revolted
from GOD, will appear from this, that the Priests were bound to give attendance
by turns at the Temple, so none of them could have revolted from the King
without their rejecting of GOD'S Service, as long as the King was Master of
Jerusalem, whither no doubt they would not have come during their revolt.

As for your instance of Amaziah, I confess it is plain dealing, and you
disclose the Mystery of defensive Arms that it is but lamely maintained, till
the Doctrine of murdering of Kings be also asserted: And indeed your Friend by
this ingenuity of his, has done that Cause a prejudice, of which many are
sufficiently sensible; for this was a secret Doctrine to be instilled in
corners, in the hearts of Disciples duly prepared for it, but not to be owned
to the World: For if that place prove any thing, it will prove that when a King
turns from following the LORD, his Subjects may conspire and slay him; how this
would take among the Fifth^Monarchy Men, I know not; but I am sure it will be
abhorred by all Protestants: and particularly by these who made it an Article
of their Confession of Faith, That infidelity or difference of Religion, does
not make void the Magistrates just power: Therefore this being a direct Breach
of both fifth and sixth Commands, though it be neither marked as condemned, nor
punished in that short account there given, yet it will never warrant the
resisting the Ordinance of GOD, upon which GOD has entailed Damnation. And
whereas your Friend alleges the justice of this may be evinced from
Scripture, it shows that in his Judgment, not only Tyranny, but the turning
from following GOD, is a just cause for conspiring against, and killing of
Kings: But I cannot see where he finds what the cause of this Conspiracy was,
since the Text taxes only the time, but not the cause of it.

And for the instance of Uzziah, the Priests indeed withstood him, as they
ought to have done, as the Ministers of the Gospel ought yet to do, if a King
would go and consecrate the LORD'S Supper: but their withstanding of that,
imports no violent Opposition; the strict signification of the word being only,
that they placed themselves over against him, and so it is rendered by the LXX.
Interpreters; and remember that S. Paul withstood S. Peter to his face, Gal.
2.11. Yet I do not apprehend you will suspect he used force. As for what
follows, that the Priests did thrust him out, it will not prove they laid hands
on him, that word signifying only, that they made him haste out of the Temple:
and is the same word which Esther 6.14. is rendered, hasted, where none will
think that the Chamberlains laid violent hands on Haman: so all that the
Priests did, was to charge Uzziah, when his Leprosy appeared, to get him
quickly out of the Temple: and some Copies of the LXX. have it so rendered: and
the following words show there was no need of using force, since himself made
haste. And for the word rendered valiant, or sons of valor, that word is not
always taken for valor, but sometimes for activity; so Genesis 47.6. sometimes for
riches, so Ruth 2.1. It is also rendered wealth, Genesis 34.29. so this will not
prove that Azariah made choice of these men for the strength of their Body, but
for the Resolution of their Mind, that they might stoutly contradict Uzziah;
and thus you have drawn a great deal more from me than I intended, or these
misapplied places needed, for clearing of them from the design you had upon
them.


Isot. But is it not clear from 1 Samuel 14.45. that the people of Israel rescued
Jonathan from his fathers bloody sentence against him, and swore he should not
die? See p^^. ^.5.


Crit. That will prove as little; for no force was used in the matter, only a
solemn Protestation was made. Next, the word rendered, rescued, is, redeemed,
which is not used in a sense that imports violence in Scripture: but rather for
a thing done by contract and agreement: And the LXX. Interpreters render it,
the people entreated for Jonathan: nor need we doubt but Saul was easily
prevailed upon to yield to their desire. Besides any King that would murder his
eldest Son and heir of his Crown upon so bare a pretense, after he had
signalized his courage so notably, as Jonathan did, may well be looked upon as
one that is furious; and so the holding of his hands, is very far different
from the case of defensive Arms.


Isot. But David, a man according to GODS heart, gathered four hundred Men
about him, and stood to his defense, when cruelly persecuted by Saul, 1 Samuel
22.2.


Basil. Many things meet in this instance to take away any color of an
argument might be drawn from it: for David was by GODS command designed
successor to the Crown, and so was no ordinary Subject. Next, Saul was become
furious, and an evil spirit seized on him, so that in his rage he threw
Javelins, not only at David, but at his Son Jonathan. Now all confess* that
when a Sovereign is frenetick, his fu^y may be restrained. Further, we see how
far David was from resistance, he standing on a pure defense, so that when he
had Saul in his power twice, he would do him no hurt; yea, his heart smote him
when he cut off the hem of his garment, 1 Samuel 24.4, 5. This was not like some
you know of, who set Guards about their King (for the security of his Person
forsooth) when he had trusted himself into their hands. And it is very doubtful
if David's gathering that force about him was lawful; for these who came to him
were naughty Men, and discontented and broken with debt; whereas had that been
a justifiable practice, it is like he should have had another kind of
following. And his offering his service to the Philistines, who were Enemies to
GOD, to fight for them against the people of GOD, is a thing which can admit of
no excuse. But after all this, if the actions even of renowned Persons in the
Old Dispensation be Precedents, you may adduce the instances of Ehud, to prove
that we may secretly assassinate a Tyrant; and of Iael, to prove that after we
have offered protection to one who upon that trusts to us, we may secretly
murder him.


Isot. But what say you to the resistance used by Mattatb^as, and his Children,
who killed the Kings Officers, and armed against him? which resistance, as it
was foretold by Daniel, so it is said by the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, That by faith they waxed valiant in fight, and turned to flight the
Armies of Aliens: which by all is applied to the Maccabees. And who are you to
condemn that which the holy Ghost calls the work of faith in them? See p. 18,
19.


Basil. I see Criticus is weary of speaking, and therefore will relieve him for
this once, and tell you, that the title Anti^^hus had to command the Jews, is
not undoubted: for Josephus lib. 12. cap. 7. and 8. shows how the Jewish Nation
was tossed betwixt hands, and sometimes in the power of the Kings of Egypt, and
sometimes of Syria; and that the factions among the Jews, gave the occasion to
their being so invaded; for ambitious pretenders to the High Priesthood, sought
the favor of these Kings, and so sacrificed the interests both of Religion,
and their Country to their own base ends: which was the case in Ant^ochus
Epiphanes his time, who after his attempt upon Egypt, came against Jerusalem,
to which he was admitted by the men of his party, who opened the gates to him:
after which, he polluted their worship and Temple, and fell on the cruellest
persecution imaginable. Now his title over them being so ill grounded, their
asserting their freedom and Religion against that cruel and unjust Invader, was
not of the nature of Subjects ^esist^ng their Sovereign. Besides, what is
brought from the Epistle to the Hebrews chapter 11. for justifying these Wars,
seems ill applied: for from the end of the 32. verse, it appears he only speaks
there of what was done in the times of the Prophets, and none of these being
during the time of the Maccabees, that is not applicable to them. Next, as for
Mattathias, I must tell you that GOD often raised up extraordinary persons to
judge I^rael, whose practices must be no rule to us: for GOD sets up Kings and
Rulers at his pleasure: and in the Old Dispensation he frequently sent
extraordinary Persons to do extraordinary things, who were called Zealots: and
such was Samuel's hewing Agag in pieces before the Lord, Elijah's causing to
kill the Priests of Baal, which was not done upon the peoples power to kill
Idol^te^s: but Elijah having by that signal Miracle of fire falling from
heaven, proved both that GOD was the LORD, and only to be worshipped, and that
he was his Prophet, and commanding these Priests to be killed, he was to be
obeyed. Of the same nature was his praying for fire from heaven on the Captains
who came to take him, and Eli^ha his c^r^ing of the Children who reproached
him. From these Precedents we see it is apparent that often in the Old
Dispensation, the power of the Sword, both ordinary and extraordinary, was
assumed by persons sent of GOD, which will never warrant private and ordinary
uninspired Persons to do the like.


Isot. I acknowledge this has some ground; but the first instance of these
Zealots, was Ph^nehas, in whom we find no vestige of an extraordinary mission,
and yet he killed Zimri and Cosbi, for which he was rewarded with an
everlasting Priesthood: So a zeal for GOD in extraordinary cases, seems warrant
enough for extraordinary practices. Page 382. to 405.


Basil. If you will read the account of that action given by Moses, it will
clear you of all your mistakes: since Phinehas had the warrant of the
Magistrate for all he did; for Moses being then the Person in whose hands the
Civil Power was committed by GOD, did say to the Judges of Israel, Numb. 25.5.
Slay ye every one his men that were joined to Baal Peor. Now that Phinehas was
a Judge in Israel at that time, is not to be doubted; for Eleazer was then High
Priest, and by that means exempted from that Authority, which when his Father
Aaron lived, was in his hand, Numb. 3.32. and he being now in his Fathers
place, there is no ground to doubt but Phinehas was also in his, and so as one
of the Judges, he had received command from Moses to execute judgment on these
impure Idolaters, which he did with so much noble zeal, that the Plague was
stayed, and GOD'S wrath turned away. But if this conclude a Precedent, it will
prove too much, both that a Churchman may execute judgment, and that a private
person in the sight of a holy Magistrate, without waiting for his Justice, may
go and punish Crimes. From the instances adduced, it will appear how Zealots
were ordinarily raised up in that Dispensation: But when two of CHRIST'S
Disciples lay claim to that privilege of praying for fire from heaven, he gives
check to the fervor of their thundering zeal, and tells them, Luke 9.55, 56. You
know not what spirit you are of: adding, that the Son of man was not come to
destroy men's lives, but to save them: whereby he shows that tho in the Old
Dispensation, GOD having by his own command given his people a title to invade
the Nations of Canaan, and extirpate them, having also given them Political
Laws for the administration of Justice, and order among them, it was proper for
that time that GOD should raise up Judges to work extraordinary deliverances to
his People, whose Example we are not now to imitate: GOD also sent Prophets,
who had it sometimes in Commission to execute Justice on Transgressors; yet in
the New Dispensation, these things were not to take place, where we have no
temporal Canaan, nor Judicial Laws given us; and consequently none are now
extraordinarily called in the Name of GOD, to inflict ordinary and corporal
punishments.

Having said all this, it will be no hard task to make it appear that
Mattathias was a Person extraordinarily raised up by GOD, as were the Judges.
And though no mention of that be made, neither by Josephus, nor the Book of
Maccabees, that is not to be stood upon; for we have many of the Judges of
Israel, of whose call no account is given, and yet undoubtedly they were
warranted to act as they did, otherwise they had been Invaders. But if that
practice of Mattathias conclude any thing by way of Precedent, it will prove
that Churchmen may invade the Magistrates Office, and kill his Officers, and
raise War against him.


Crit. I wonder we hear not Isotimus alleging the practice of the ten Tribes,
who rejected Rehoboam, and made choice of Jeroboam, which uses to be very
confidently adduced, for proving it to be the peoples right to give Laws to
their Princes, and to shake them off when they refuse obedience to their
desires. But to this and all other instances of this nature, it is to be
answered, that the Jewish State being a Theocracy, as it is called by their own
Writers, their Judges, and many of their Kings had their title from GOD's
designation, and the possession was only yielded to them by the People,
according to the command, Deuteronomy. 17.15. To set him King over them whom the LORD
their GOD did choose: So when they sought a King, they came to Samuel, as the
known Prophet of GOD, and desired him to give them a King, which he afterward
did. In like manner was David designed to succeed Saul, by the same Prophet;
and upon Sau^'s death, the Tribe of Judah came and aknowledged, and anointed
him King, which was the solemn investiture in that to which he had formerly a
right.

Jeroboam being by the same authority designed King over the ten Tribes by the
mouth of Ahijab in the name of GOD, 1 Kings 11. Chapter from v. 28. he derived his
Title from that: and there was as good warrants for the people to reject
Rehoboam, and follow him, as was formerly to quite Ishbosheth, and follow David.

Another instance of this nature is Elisha his sending one to Iehu, where that
young Prophet says, 2 Kings 9.6. Thus says the LORD GOD of Israel, I have
anointed thee King over the people of the LORD, even over Israel: Upon the
notice whereof, v. 13. he is declared King. These instances will sufficiently
prove what I have alleged, that the Kings of the Hebrews having their right
from GOD, were to be changed when the most High who rules in the Kingdom of
men and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it the basest of
m^n, interposed his authority and command. One word more, and I have done. When
the Law of the Judge is set down, Deuteronomy. 17.12. all who do presumptuously, and
hearkened not unto the Judge, are sentenced to death, That evil might be put
away from Israel, whereby the people might hear, and fear, and do no more
presumptuously. This shows that absolute Submission was due to the Judges,
under the pain of death; whereby all private men's judging of their Sentence is
struck out. It is true the other Laws that prefer the Commands of GOD to the
Laws of men, do necessarily suppose the exception of unlawful Commands: but
since no Law warrants the resisting their Sentence, it will clearly follow that
absolute Submission was due to these Judges.


Basil. Truly these things as they seem to be well made out from Scripture, so
they stand with Reason, since no order can be expected among men, unless there
be an uncontrollable Tribunal on Earth. Our Consciences are indeed only within
GOD'S Jurisdiction: but if there be not a Supreme Power to cognosce and
determine about our Actions, there must follow endless Confusions, when any
number of People can be got to mutiny against Laws: therefore there must be a
Supreme Court. But the Laws and settled Practices of Kingdoms, must determine
in whose Person this lies, whether in a single Person, the Nobility, or the
Major part of the People? Yet I desire to hear what decisions the New Testament
offers in this Question.


Crit. Truly that will be soon dispatched; consider then how our LORD, Matthew.
5. forbids us to resist evil; where it is true, he enumerates only small
Injuries: so I shall not deny but that place will amount no farther, than that
we ought to bear small Injuries, rather than revenge or oppose them; but you
must yield to the doctrine of Submission, if afterward you consider how our
LORD tells us, Matthew. 11.20. To learn of him, for he was meek; and that he
condemns the thundering fervor of his Disciples, who called for fire from
Heaven, showing the nature of the New Dispensation to be quite different from
the Old, in that particularly, that the Son of man came not to destroy men's
lives, but to save them: And chiefly that when he was to give the greatest
instance wherein we should imitate him, he refused the defense of the Sword,
and commanded S. Peter to put up his sword, Matthew. 26.52.


Isot. If you urge this too much, then must I answer, that by the same
Consequence you may prove we must cast our selves on dangers, and not flee from
them: since we find CHRIST going up to Jerusalem, though he knew what was
abiding him there: neither did he fly, which yet himself allowed. Besides, you
may as well urge against all Prayer to GOD for deliverance, his not praying for
Angels to assist him. But the clear account of this is given by himself, that
the Scriptures were to be fulfilled which foretold his death. See page 24. and
Answer to the Letter about Ius popul^.


Crit. I must confess my self amazed at this Answer, when I find S. Peter
saving expressly, 1 Pet. 2.21. That CHRIST suffered, leaving us an example that
we might follow his steps, and applying this to the very Case of suffering
wrongfully; and that notwithstanding of that, you should study to pervert the
Scripture so grossly besides: consider that CHRIST was to fulfill all
righteousness; if then the Laws of Nature exact our defense in case of unjust
Persecution for Religion, he was bound to that Law as well as we; For he came
not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law, both by his Example and Precepts. If
then you charge the Doctrine of Absolute Submission, as brutish and stupid, see
you do not run into blasphemy, by charging that ^^oly One foolishly: for
whatever he knew of the secret Will of GOD, he was to follow his revealed Will
in his Actions, whereby he might be a perfect Pattern to all his followers: for
GOD'S revealed Will was his Rule, as well as ours. But I dwell too long on
things that are clear. As for your ^nstances, they will serve you in no stead.
For his coming to Jerusalem was a duty, all the Males being bound to appear
three times a year before the Lord at Jerusalem, at the three Festivals, the
Passover being the first of them, Deuteronomy. 16. And this being a duty, our LORD was
to perform it, what ever hazard might follow. So we find S. Paul on a less
obligation, going to Jerusalem, notwithstanding the bonds were foretold to
abide him there. And as for your other pretended Consequence against Prayer,
from his not praying for legions of Angels, it bewrays great Inadvertency: for
you find our LORD a few minutes before, praying in the Garden, Matthew. 26.42.
over and over again, that if it were possible that cup might pass from him. And
there is our warrant from his Practice, to pray for a deliverance from Troubles
or Persecutions, if it may stand with the holy will of GOD: But for a
miraculous deliverance by the ministry of Angels, that our Lord would not pray
for, lest thereby the Prophesies should not be accomplished: and by this, our
praying for a miraculous Deliverance, is indeed from his example condemned: but
still we are to pray, that if it be possible, and according to the Will of GOD,
any bitter cup is put in our hands, may pass from us. Next, let me desire you
to consider the reason given S. Peter for putting up his Sword, Matthew. 26.52.
For they that take the sword, shall p^^^sh by the sword.


Isot. You ^i^apply this place palpably, it not being designed as a threatening
against S. Peter, but for the encouragement of his Disciples, and being indeed
a Prophecy that the Jews who now come against him with Swords and Staves,
should perish by the sword of the Romans, who should be the avengers of
CHRIST'S death. See page 25.


Crit. You are beholden to Grotius for this Exposition, who is the first of the
latter Writers that has given that sense to these words, tho he voucheth for
his opinion some elder Writers; and he designing to prove that a private Person
may resist another private Assaillant by force, being a little pinched with
this place, which seems to condemn simply the use of the Sword, escapes o^t of
it by the answer you have adduced. But though this were the genuine scope of
these words, still remember that our LORD rejects the use of the Sword for his
defense: and if his foretelling the Destruction of the Jews, was of force to
bind up S. Peter's hands, why should not also that general promise, Rev. 13.10.
He that kills with the sword, must be killed by the sword, also secure our
Fears, and sheath our Swords, and the rather that it is there subjo^ned, Here
is the faith and patience of the Saints? Which seems to imply, that since
retaliation will be g^ven out by God upon unjust Murderers, therefore Faith and
Pat^ence must be the Exercise of the Saints, which to all unprejudged Minds,
will sound a discharge of the use of Weapons of War. But after all this, the
phrase of taking the sword, seems only applicable to S. Peter; for the Band
being sent out by a Magistrate, could not properly be said to have taken the
Sword, it being put in their hands by these who were invested with it, though
they now tyrannically abuse their power: but the phrase agrees much better with
S. Peter's drawing it, who had no warrant for it, and so did indeed tak^ it.
Next, we hear no mention of the Band of Soldiers their using their Swords;
therefore this Prediction seems fitted for S. Peter, and all such as mistaking
the nature of the Chr^^stian Dispensation, do take the Sword. But next,
consider CHRIST'S words to Pilate* John 18.36. M^ Kingdom (...) not of th^^
world: if my Kingdom were of this (...), then w^ul^ my servants fight, that I
should not be ^^l^v^r^d to the ^^ws; but now is my Kingdom not from ^ence. And
this being said upon the Accusation the Jews had given against him to Pilate,
that he called himself a King, charging him upon his friendship to Caesar, to
put him to death, CHRIST*S answer shows that earthly Kings need apprehend no
prejudi^^ from his Kingdom, since it not being about worldly things, was not to
be ^ought for.


Isot. Speak plainly, do you mean by this that CHRIST should have no Kingdom
upon Earth? which I fear too many of you desire, since you press this so
warmly. But consider you not that by this CHRIST only means he was not to set
up a Temporal Dominion upon Earth, to ^ustle Caesar from his Throne, such as the
Jews expected from their Messiah; and therefore this place is indeed strong
against the pretenses of some Carnal Fifth-Monarchy Men, but is ill adduced to
condemn defense, when we are unjustly assaulted by a persecuting Tyrant. See p.
25.


Crit. It is no new thing to find the sincere Doctrine of the Gospel
misrepresented by Sons of Belial; but learn the difference betwixt a Kingdom of
the World, and in the World, and so temper your Passion. CHRIST must have a
Kingdom in the World, but not of it. And the greatest hazard of a pretending
King, being the raising of Wars and Commotions upon his Title, CHRIST'S words
are not truly commented on by the practice of his Servants, unless they sec^re
Princes from their Fears of their raising Wars upon his ^itle: Therefore as the
sighting at that time, for preserving CHRIST from the Jews, had been contrary
to the nature of his Spiritual Kingdom; to the Rule of the Gospel binding all
the succeeding Ages, of the Church, no less than these to whom it was first
delivered, what was then contrary to the nature of CHRIST'S Kingdom, will be so
still. And to this I might add the Doctrine of Peace so much insisted on in the
New Testament it being the Legacy CHRIST left to his Disciples, which we are
commanded to follow with all men, as much as is possible, and as in ^s lies.
And if with all men, ^^re much more with the Magistrate. And S. Paul's words in
the xiii. to the Romans are so express, that methinks they should strike a
terror in all men from resisting the Superior Powers, le^t they resist the
ordinance of GOD, and receive damnation. And it is observable, that S. Paul,
who, as a Zealot, had formerly persecuted the Christians, does now so directly
contradict that Doctrine, which was at that time so horridly corrupted among
the Jews. This place is so express, that it needs not the advantages may be
given to it, either from the consideration of the power the Roman Empire had
usurped over the World, or from the Emperor who then reigned, who must have
been either Claudius or Nero: and if the former, we find* Ac^s 18.2. that he
banished all the Jews, from Rome, and with them the Christians, not being
distinguish^d by the Romans from the Jews, were also banished: and here was a
driving of Christians from Rome, which you will not deny to have been a
Persecution. But if it was Nero, we know very well how the Christians were used
by him. But these words of S. Paul being as at first addressed to the Romans,
so also designed by the holy Ghost to be a part of the Rule of all Christians,
do prove, that whoever has the Supreme Power, is to be submitted to, and never
resisted*


Isot. If you were not in too great a haste, you would not be so forward,
consider therefore the reason S. Paul gives for s^bmission to Superior Rulers,
is, because they are the Ministers of GOD for good. If then they swe^ve from
this, they forsake the end for which they are raised up, and so fa^l from their
power and right to our obedience.


Basil. Truly what you have said makes me not repent of any haste I seemed to
make; for what you have alleged p^oves indeed that the Sovereign is a Minister
of GOD for good, so that he corrupts his power grossly when he pursues not that
design: but in that he is only accountable to GOD, who^e Minister he is. And
this must hold good, except you give us good ground to believe that GOD has
given authority to the Subjects to call him to account for his trust; but if
that be not made appear, then he must be left to GOD, who did empower him, and
therefore can only ^oerce him. As one having his power from a King, is
countable to none for the administration of it, but to the King, or to these on
whom the King shall devolve it: so except it be proved, that GOD has warranted
Subjects to call their Sovereigns to account, they being his Ministers, must
only be answerable to him. And according to these Principles of yours, the
Magistrate^ authority shall be so enervated, that he shall no more be able to
serve these designs, for which GOD has vested him with Power: every one being
thus taught to shake off his Yoke when they think he acts in prejudice of
Religion. And here I shall add one thing which all Casuists hold a safe Rule in
matters that are doubtf^l, that we ought to follow that side of the doubt which
is freest of hazard; here then damnation is at least the seeming hazard of
resistance; therefore except upon as clear evidence you prove the danger of
absolute submission to be of the same nature that it may ba^^ance the other;
then absolute submission, as being the securest* is to be followed. Next, we
find Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 2.13. etc. who being ^et infecte^ with the spirit of a
Iewi^h zealot, had drawn the Sword; afterward when ind^e^ with power from on
High, at length pressing the doctrine of Obedience adding that the p^et^nce of
the Christian freedom should not be made a Cloak of maliciousness. And this
submission he recommends not only to Subjects, whose obedience was more easy,
but to servants who were under a heavier Yoke, according to the Laws of
servitude, both among the Jews and the Romans: and he tells them, That when
they did well, and suffered for it, and took it patiently, that was acceptable.
Withal adding, For even hereunto were you called; because CHRIST also suffered
for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps. Further, it is
to be considered how the Iew*s d^d upon the first prea^hing of the Gospel
persecute the Ch^isti^^s every where: S. Stephen was stoned, and Saul got
Commissions for making havoc of the Church^ b^^ because this was done by the
autho^ity of the San^^drim, no resistance was made them, though since at two
Sermons we hear of (...) Converts, we may be induced to believe their number
was great. And from hence sub^^me that the case of persecution being then not
only imminent, but also present* besides the grievous persecutions were abiding
the Churches for three Centuries) it must be confess^^ to be strange, that the
matter of resistance being at least so dubious, no decision should be given
about it in the New Testa^^nt; nothing being alleged from it that has any
aspect that way. And indeed I cannot conceal my wonder at them who plead so
much the authority and fullness of Scripture, to reach even the rituals of
Worship and Government, and yet in so great a matter adventure on a practice
without its warrant. Truly Isotimus, if these things prevail not with you,
beyond your little small shufflings, I doubt it is because you have lost the
Standard to measure Reason by, and have given up your J^dgment to your passions
and interests.


Isot. I am far from denying the Doctrine of the Cross to be a great part of
these duties we are bound to in the Gospel; but this must not be stretched too
far, lest it infer an obligation on us to submit to a foreign Prince, the Turk,
or any other, if he come by force to impose on us the Alcoran, under a pretense
of suffering for Religion. See page 27, and 28.


Basil. Truly when I hear how much weight is laid on what you have now said, as
if it amounted to a demonstration against all has been hitherto adduced; I am
in doubt whether to pity their weakness, or blame their perv^^sness, who dare
adventure on that, the punishment whereof the holy Ghost has made damnation,
upon such mistakes: for God has put the Sword in their hands who have the
Sovereign Power, which they bear not in vain; for they are the Ministers of
God, and his Revengers, to execute wrath on him that does evil: The Magistrates
then are both by the Laws of God, and of all Nations, the Protectors of their
Subjects, and therefore Tributes and Customs are due to them, for defraying the
expense to which that must put them; and Prayers are to be offered up for them,
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. If
then a foreign Prince invade a Country, under whatever pretense, the Sovereign
is bound to defend his Subjects, with the Sword GOD has put in his hand, which
comes to be a most lawful War on his side; nay such, as he were a betrayer of
his trust, if he omitted it.


I^ot. But what if our Prince should consent to such an Invasion, and expose
his Subjects to be a prey to such an Invader, must they look on and see
themselves destroyed, upon the pretense that GOD has not put the Sword in
their hands, and therefore they must not take it; and because Christ's Kingdom
is not of this World, therefore they must not fight for him?


Basil. You suppose a Case not like to fall out in haste; but were it real,
that Invader having no Title to that peoples obedience, they may make use of
the right of Nature which allows to one out of a Society forcible self-defence,
if violently assaulted: and therefore such hostile invasion, be it upon what
pretense soever, may be as lawfully resisted, as one private Man may resist
another in his own defense, if he threaten to kill him, unless he renounce GOD.
If then one Man may resist another, so may more men resist a great force coming
against them: for to us who live here, the Grand Seignior is but a fellow of
our nature, and has no right over us, no more than one private person has
over his Neighbor. And if you do not acknowledge a great difference betwixt
such an asserting of our Liberties, from one that has no Title to them, and
the resisting of a lawful Magistrate, though unjustly persecuting his Subjects,
you must be set to your horned book again.


Isot. But at least you will confess that private Men living in a settled
Society, have no title to the Sword, according to your Principles; must we then
yield out Throats to a Robber that assaults us on the High way? Or to come
nearer you, if one threaten to kill us. if we yield not to their Religion, must
we give way to their fury?


Basil. Remember still how I told you, that Men living out of Societies have a
^ight to self-defence, and when they come under Societies, they retain all
their former rights, such only excepted as are by the law^ of the Society
judged inconsistent with its order and peace: therefore resisting of the
Supreme Powers, or those having their authority, being only discharged, the
right of self defense against equals still remains entire, so that a private
person may claim it or not, as he will: and therefore in the case of such an
Aggressor, the Laws of Nature and Nations do warrant me to use force when
assaulted; yet if a greater consideration appear, and it be evident that my
giving way to such unjust force will be more for the honor of the Gospel, if I
resist, I do not sin, but do well; but if I resist not, certainly I do better.


End. I have been a witness to this Discourse, not without much pleasure, and
do acknowledge my self fully convinced of the necessity of obedience, and
submission to the Supreme Power, since without that be once established, as the
foundation of Societies, I see not what peace or order can be looked for, but
every one will take on him to judge the Lawgiver: and if he have so much power
or policy as to make a party, he will never want pretenses, chiefly about
Religion, considering in how many various opinions the Christian world has
divided about it. And it is a poor Answer to say, it must be the true Religion
that we should defend, since it is to be supposed every one judges the
Religion he is of to be the true one: If then according to that Doctrine,
Religion be to be defended; certainly though the Religion be wrong, yet every
one oppressed in his Cons^i^nce, and judging it to be according to truth, is
bound to defend it; since even an erring conscience does at least tie, if not
oblige. For the common resolution of Casuists being that a Man under an
erroneous Conscience, is yet to follow its dictates, though he sin by so doing:
then all parties that are oppressed, ought to vindicate what they judge to be
the truth of GOD. And by this you may see to what a fair pass the peace of
mankind is brought by these Opinions.

But mistake me not, as if I were here pleading for s^^mission, to patronize
the tyranny or cruelty of persecuting Princes, who shall answer to God for that
great trust deposited in their hands; which if they transgress, they have a
dear account to make to him who sits in heaven and laughs at the raging and
consultings of these Kings or Princes, who design to throw off his Yoke, or
burst his bonds in sunder. He who has set his King upon his holy H^ll of Zion,
shall rule them with a rod of Iron, and break them in pieces as a Potter's
Vessel. And he to whom vengeance does belong, will avenge himself of all the
injuries they do his truths, or followers: but as they sin against him, so they
a^e only countable to him.

Yet I need not add what has been often said, that it is not the name of a
King, or the ceremonies of a Coronation, that clothes one with the Sovereign
Power; since I know there are, and have been titular Kings, who are indeed but
the first Persons of the State, and only Administrators of the Laws, the
Sovereign Power lying in some Assembly of the Nobility, and States, to whom
they are accountable. In which Case, that Court to whom these Kings must give
account, is the Supreme Judicatory of the Kingdom, and the King is but a
Subject.


Isot. But does not the Coronation of a King, together with his Oath given, and
the consent of the People demanded at it, prove him to have his Power upon the
Conditions in that Oath? And these Oaths being mutually given, his Coronation
Oath first, and the Oath of Allegiance next, do show it is a Compact; and in
all mutual Agreements, the nature of Compacts is, that the one party breaking,
the other is also free. Further, Kings who are tied up, so that they cannot
make, nor repeal Laws, nor impose Taxes without the consent of the States of
their Kingdom, show their Power to be limited, and that at least such
Assemblies of the States share with them in the Sovereign Power, which is at
large made out by Ius populi.


Basil. It is certain there cannot be two coordinate Powers in a Kingdom; for
no man can serve two Masters: therefore such an Assembly of the States must
either be Sovereign or subject; for a middle there is not. As for the
Coronation of Princes, it is like enough that a^ first it was the formal giving
their Power to them; and the old Ceremonies yet observed in it, prove it has
been at first so among us: But it being a thing clear in our Law, that the King
never dies, his Heir coming in his place the very moment he expires, so that he
is to be obeyed before his Coronation, as well as after; and that the
Coronation is nothing but the solemn inaugurating in the Authority which the
King possessed from his Father's death, shows, that any Ceremonies may be used
in it, whatever the original of them may have been, do not subject his Title to
the Crown to the Peoples consent. And therefore his Coronation Oath is not the
condition upon which he gets his Power, since he possessed that before; nor is
it upon that Title that he exacts the Oath of Alegiance, which he likewise
exacted before his Coronation. This being the practice of a Kingdom passed all
Prescription, proves the Coronation to be no compact betwixt the King and his
Subjects: And therefore he is indeed bound by his Coronation Oath to God, who
will be avenged on him, if he break it, so the matter of it were lawful: but
the breaking of it cannot forfeit a prior Right he had to the Peoples
Obedience. And as for the limitations Kings have consented to pass on their own
Power, that they may act nothing but in such a form of Law, these being either
the King's free Concessions to the People, or restraints arising from some
Rebellions, which extorted such Privileges, will never prove the King a
Subject to such a Court, unless by the clear Laws and Practices of that
Kingdom, it be so provided, that if he do malverse, he may be punished; which
when made appear, proves that Court to have the Sovereign Power: and that never
weakens my design, that Subjects ought not to resist their Sovereign.


Philar. You have dwelt, methinks, too long on this, though considering the
nature of the thing, it deserves indeed an exact discussion: yet this whole
Doctrine appears so clear to a discerning Mind, that I cannot imagine whence
all the mist is raised about it can spring, except from the corrupt Passions or
Lusts of men, which are subtle enough to invent excuses, and fair colors, for
the blackest of Crimes. And the smoke of the bottomless pit may have its share,
in occasioning the darkness is raised about that, which by the help of the
light of God, or of reason, stands so clear and obvious. But when I consider
the instances of sufferings under both Dispensations, I cannot see how any
should escape the force of so much evident proof as hangs about this opinion.
And if it had been the Peoples duty to have reformed by the force of Arms under
the Old Dispensation, so that it was a base and servile Compliance with the
Tyranny and Idolatry of their Kings, not to have resisted their subverting of
Religion, and setting up of Idolatry, where was then the fidelity of the
Prophets, who were to lift up their voices as Trumpets, and to show the house
of Jacob their iniquities? And since the watchman who gave not warning to the
wicked from his wicked way, was guilty of his Blood, I see not what will exc^se
the silence of the Prophets in this, if it was the Peoples duty to reform: For
it is a poor refuge to say, because the People were so much inclined to
Idolatry, that therefore it was in vain to exhort them to reform; ( See page
10, 11.) since by that Argument you may as well conclude it to have been
needless to have exhorted their Kings to Reformation, their inclination to
Idolatry being so strong: but their duty was to be discharged, how small soever
the likelihood was of the Peoples yielding obedience to their warnings. If then
it was the Peoples duty to reform, the o^ission of it was undoubtedly a Sin;
how then comes it that they who had it in commission to cause Jerusalem to know
her abominations, under so severe a Certificate, do never charge the People for
not going about a popular Reformation, nor co^rcing these wicked Kings who
enacted so much Idolatry, backing it with such Tyranny, nor ever require them
to set about it? I know one has picked out some Expressions, ( See Answer to
the Letter to the Author of Ius populi) which to his thoughts sound that way:
but truly they are so remote from the sense he stretches them to, that I should
wonder much at his Glosses, did I not know that the Bell seems often to ring
the hearer's fancy. From these, let us pass to the instances of the first
Christians, who endured the sharpest Persecutions with the greatest patience.


Polyh. Here is a large Theme for much discourse, if I should adduce all might
be said on this head. Indeed the Persecutions the Christians groaned under for
three hundred years, are such, that scarce can they be read without horror; the
last especially, which continued for about twenty years under Dioclesian, and
his Colleagues and Successors; and by the number that suffered, we may easily
guess what the strength of the Christians was. But this can be doubted by none
who have ever looked upon History. Pliny lib. 10. Ep. 97. writes to Trajan
(which is reckoned to have been the 104. year of Christ) that in Pontus and
^ithynia, where he was then Pro^onsul, there were many Christians of all Ages,
Ranks and Sexes: and that not only in the Cities, but through the Villages and
Country Places: that the Temples were almost desolate, the Sacrifices long
intermitted, and that none almost were found to buy the Victims. The number of
the Christians being so early risen to that height, we may easily imagine to
what it swelled before Constantine's times: not long after that, we find a
whole Legion of Marcus Aurelius his Army to have been Christians. And if we
believe Tertullian, their numbers were formidable in his time; for after he had
purged the Christians of his times from the designs of doing mischief to their
Enemies by stealth, he adds, Apol. cap. 37. Should we carry toward you not as
secret avengers, but as open enemies, would we want the strength of numbers and
armies? Are the Maurs, the Marcomans, or the Parthians themselves, or any
Nations shut up within their own Country or bounds, more than the whole World?
We are strangers to you, and yet we fill all your places, your Towns, your
Islands, your Castles, your Villages, your Councils, your Camps, your Tribes,
your Decuries, your Palaces, your Senate, and your Market place: Only we come
not to your Temples, but abandon those to you. To what War had we not been both
fit and ready, even tho our Forces had been fewer, who are butchered so
willingly, if our Discipline did not allow us rather to be killed than to kill?
And he goes on, telling that such was the number of the Christians, that would
they but change their dwellings, and leave the Roman Empire, it would have
thereby become an amazing Solitude, since almost all their Citizens were
Christians. And the same writer says elsewhere, ad Scap. cap. 2. That tho the
Romans who were Idolaters, were found guilty of many Conspiracies against their
Emperors, yet never were any Christians found guilty of these Practices. And
adds, That a Christian was no man's enemy, much less the Emperors; but knowing
him to be constituted by God, he does find himself bound to love, reverence,
honor, and wish well to him, with the whole Roman Empire, as long as the World
lasts. Therefore, says he, We worship the Emperor so as befits him, and is
lawful for us, as a man next God, who has obtained all he has from GOD, and
is inferior to none, but God only. And a little after, Cap. 5. he tells us of
the numbers of the Christians, and how undaunted they were at the Persecution;
so that when one Arrius Antoninus in Asia, was persecuting the Christians, the
whole City ran to his Tribunal, declaring themselves Christians. And he adds,
If the like were to be done at Carthage, what would become of all the thousands
were there, of every Sex, Age and Rank? From this we may guess both of the
strength and numbers of the Christians of that time, and yet there was not the
least inclination among them to resistance. If any doubt the truth of what
Tertullian says, as is p. 30. he must charge him with very much Impudence, who
durst offer such writings to the Heathens, in matters of fact, which could not
but be notoriously enough known: Neither do I adduce these places, because I
lay so much weight on Tertullian's opinion in this matter, but because he shows
us what was the sense of the Christians of his time. A little after him Cyprian
lived, who also tells us, ad Demetrianum, That none of the Christians when
apprehended, struggled with those who seized on them, nor avenged themselves of
that unjustice, though their number was great and copious: But their belief of
the Vengeance should follow on their Persecutors, made them patient, so that
the Innocent yielded to the Guilty. And we may judge of the number of the
Christians of that Age, by what Cornelius who was Bishop of Rome, anno 254. in
Eusebius. 6. Book, cap* 43. tells of the State of the Roman Clergy in his time,
how there were in it 46 Presbyters, 7 Deacons, 42 Acolyths, 52 Exorcists,
Lectors and Porters, and of Widows and poor Persons 150^, and where so many
Poor were maintained, you must confess the number of the Christians was very
great. But if we go to D^^clesian's time, we find the number of the Christians
incredible; and the Cruelties used against them to have been such, that ^ell
could devise nothing beyond them. Some were burnt alive, others had boiling
Lead poured on them, others had their flesh and joints to^n off them by burning
Pince^s, others were broken to pieces, others stretched all out of joint,
others hanged up by the Thumbs and cut in slices, others hanged up by-the
heels. And this was universal through the whole Empire, and to such a degree,
that it continued for many years; and in Egypt alone they were often killed by
hundreds a day, as Eu^ebius tells, who was a witness to much of it. And Godean
reckons, that in one month there were seventeen thousand Martyrs killed: and
during that persecution in the Province of Egypt, there were an hundred fo^ty
and four thousand, who died by the violence of their Persecutors, and seven
hund^ed thousand who died through the fatigues of Banishment, or of the public
works, to which they were condemned. I had almost forgot one sort of
persecution, which as it was the most dreaded, so has in it that which could
not but provoke all to the utmost of horror and despair, which was the
prostituting of their Virgins, more dreaded than any death. But among all these
vast numbers, none offered to resist with the Sword^: and yet they were so
marvellously assisted by God, that in their sufferings they expressed the
greatest joy in God, by their Hymns and Psalms, and the most of mildness to
their Persecutors. And dare you say, Isotimus, that these were a stupid
self-murdering Crew? Or do you think that had they been guilty of such a Crime,
as you seem to fasten on the Doctrine of absolute submission; God had appeared
for them in such a signal manner, to the conviction and horror of their
Persecutors?

I confess there is no piece of Story I read with such pleasure as the accounts
are given of these Martyrs; for methinks they leave a fervor upon my mind,
which I meet with in no study, that of the Scriptures being only excepted. Say
not then they were not able to have stood to their own defense, when it appears
how great their numbers were: Or shall I here tell you the known Story of the
Thebean Legion, which consisted of 6666. who being by Maximinus Herculeus, an.
287. pressed in the Oath they gave the Emperor to swear upon the Altars of the
Idols, withdrew from the Camp eight miles off; and when he sent to invite them
to come and swear as the others had done; they who commanded them answered in
all their names, That they were ready to return and fight stoutly against the
Barbarians; but that being Christians, they would never worship the Gods.
Whereupon the Emperor caused tith them, which they received with such joy, that
every one desired the lot might fall on himself. And this prevailing nothing on
them, he tithed them a second time; and that being also without effect, he
caused to murder them all, to which they submitted without resistance. And it
is not to be denied, but such a number being driven to such despair, and having
so much courage as to dare to die in cold blood, might have stood to their
defense a great while, and at least sold their lives at a dear rate, especially
they having got off eight miles from the Army.

Were it my design to back these instances with the great authorities of the
most eminent Writers of the Church in these times, I should grow too tedious:
but this is so far from being denied, that the only way to escape so strong an
assault, is to study to detract from these holy Men by enquiring into any
over-reachings, to which their fervor might have engaged them.


Isot. All their practices are not binding upon us, for many of them did
precipitate themselves into hazards, others were against flight, and others
against resisting of private assailants, who without warrant came to murder
them; therefore the Spirit that acted in them, tho it produced effects highly
to the honor of the Gospel, is not to be imitated by us: yet on the other
hand, I acknowledge we ought to be slow to judge them. One thing is observable,
that Maximinus was resisted by the Armenians, when he intended to set up
Idolatry among them. Constantine also invaded Licinius when he persecuted the
Christians in the East: and the Persians, when persecuted by their King,
implored the help of the Roman Emperor. Besides, I have seen a Catalogue of
many instances of resistance used in some Cities, when their good Bishops were
forced away from them, which shows they were not so stupid as you design to
represent them. See page 29, etc. and Ius popul^ at length.


Basil. It is certain all Christians have one Law and Rule; and the Laws of
Nature are eternal and irreversible: if then the Law of Nature engage us to
self-defence, it laid the same ties on them: therefore except you turn
Enthusiast, you must say, that what is a Duty, or a sin now, was so then
likewise; and so you must either charge that Cl^ud of Witnesses with brutish
stupidity, otherwise acuse our late forwardness of unjust resistance, since one
Rule was given to both; and contradicting practices can never be adjusted to
the same Rule. And for these invidious aspersions you would fasten on them, as
if they had not unde^stood their own Liberties, they are but poor escapes; for
it being already made out that violent resistance even of an equal, is not a
Law, but a ^ight of Nature; if they thought it more for the glory of the Gospel
to yield even to private injuries, who are we to tax them for it? But for
flying from the Persecutors, it is true Tertullian condemned it, but that was
neither the opinion nor practice of the Ch^istians in these Ages.

As for what you alledg about the resistance made by the Armenians to
Maximinus, I wish your friend had vouched his Author for what he says of them;
for I am confident he is not so impudent as to prove a matter of fact done
twelve Ages ago, by a Writer of this Age. All I can meet with about that, is
from Euschius, lib. 9. cap. 6. who tells, That in these times the Tyrant made
War against the Armenians ( men that had been of old Friends and Auxiliaries to
the Romans) whom because they were Christians, and were pious, and zealously
studious about divine matters, that hater of GOD, intending to force to worship
the false Gods and Devils, made to become Enemies instead of Friends, and
Adversaries instead of Auxiliaries. And in the beginning of the next Chapter,
he tells how in that War he and his Army received a great defeat. Now how you
will infer from this, that Subjects may resist their Sovereign for Religion, I
see not: for these Armenians were his Confederates, and no^ his Subjects: and
it is clear by the account Eusebius gives, that Armenia was not a Province, nor
governed by a Prefect, as were the Provinces. Besides, consider how Maximinus
came in the fag-end of that great persecution begun by Dioclesian and
Herculius, continued by Gal^rius, and consummated by Maximinus himself, in
which for all the numbers of the Martyrs, and the cruelty of the Persecution,
there was not so much as a Tumult: which makes it evident the Christians at
that time understood not the Doctrine of Resistance. But the Armenians case
varying from that of Subjects, it was free for them to resist an unjust
Invader, who had no Title to their Obedience.

For your Story of Licinius, the true account of it will clear mistakes best (
as it is given by Eus. 10. cap. 5.) Constantine after he turned Christian,
being then Emperor of the West, called for Licinius, whom Galerius had made
Emperor in the East, and they both from Millain gave out Edicts in favor of
the Christians, giving them absolute liberty, and discharging all persecution
on that account, which is reckoned to have been in the year 313. afterward he
allied with Licinius, and gave him his Sister in marriage, and acknowledged him
his Colleague in the Empire. But some years after that Wars arose betwixt them,
which Zosimus and Eutropius impute to Constantine's ambition, and impatience of
a Rival: but if we believe the account Eusebius gives of it, Licinius provoked
with envy at Constantine, and forgetting the Laws of Nature, the bonds of
Oaths, alliance and agreement, raised a pestiferous and cruel War against him,
and laid many designs and sna^es for his destruction, which he attempted long
by secret and fraudulent ways, but these were always by GOD's Providence
discovered, and so Constantine escaped all his designed mischief: At length
Licinius finding his secret Arts did not succeed, he openly made War against
Constantine. And as he was preparing for it, he made War likewise against GOD,
and persecuted the Christians, because he apprehended they all prayed for
Constantine, and wished him success; whereupon he made severe Laws against the
Christians, forbidding the Bishops ever to meet among themselves, or to
instruct any Women: afterward he banished all that would not worship the Gods,
and from that he went to an open Persecution; and not content with that, he by
severe Laws discharged any to visit and relieve such as were in Prison for the
Faith. Yet notwithstanding all this, none that were under his part of the
Empire did resist him; nay, not so much as turn over to Constantine against
him, for ought that appears: But upon these things a War followed betwixt
Constantine and him, wherein Licinius was defeated, and forced to submit to
what conditions Constantine was pleased to give; who took from him Greece and
Illyricum, and only left him Thrace, and the East. But Licinius returning to
his old ways, and breaking all agreements, a second war followed, wherein
Licinius was utterly defeated, and sent to lead a private life at Thessalonica,
where he was sometime after that killed, because of new designs against
Constantine. This being the true account of that Story, I am to divine what
advantage it can yield to the cause of Subjects resisting their Sovereign; for
here was a Superior Prince defending himself against the unjust attempts, and
hostile incu^sions of his Enemy, who was also inferior to him, as Eusebius
states it: whom consult. 10. Book, 8. ^^. and 1. Book of Constable. life, chapter 42.
and 2. Book, chapter 2, etc.

And for your instance of the Persians imploring the aid of the Romans, I am
afraid it shall serve you in as little stead: for the account Socrates gives of
it ( lib. 7. cap. 18.) is, that Baratanes King of Persia, did severely
persecute the Christians, whereupon the Christians that dwelt in Persia, were
necessitated to fly to the Romans, and beseech them not to neglect them who
were so destroyed, they were kindly received by Aticus the Bishop of
Constantinople, who bent all his care and thoughts for their aid, and made the
matter known to Theodosius the second then Emperor: but it happened at that
tune the Romans had a quarrel with the Persians, who had hired a great many
Romans that wrought in Mines, and sent them back without paying the agreed
hire; which quarrel was much heightened by the Persian Christians complaint; for
the King of Persia sent Ambassadors to remand them as fugitives: but the
Romans refused to restore them, and not only gave them Sanctuary, but resolved
by all their power to defend the Christian Religion, and rather make War with
the Persians, than see the Christians so destroyed. Now it will be a pretty
sleight of Logic, if from Subjects flying from a Persecution, and seeking
shelter under another Prince, you will infer that they may resist their own
King. And for Theodosius his War, we see other grounds assigned by the
Historian: and the Politics even of good Princes in their making of Wars, must
not be a Rule to our Consciences: neither know I why this instance is adduced,
except it be to justify some who are said (during the Wars betwixt their own
Sovereign and the Country where they lived) to have openly prayed for Victory
against their Country, and to have corresponded in opposition to their native
Sovereign.

But I must next discuss that Catalogue of Tumults in the fourth and fifth
Century, which are brought as Precedents for the resisting of Subjects: and
here I must mind you of the great change was in Christendom after Constantine's
days, before whom none were Christians, but such as were persuaded of the truth
of the Gospel, and were ready to suffer for its profession; so that it being
then a Doctrine objected to many Persecutions, few are to be supposed to have
entered into its discipline without some Convictions about it in their
Consciences: but the case varied much after the Emperors became Christian; so
that what by the severity of their Laws, what by the authority of their
Example, almost all the World rendered themselves Christian; which did let in
such a swarm of corrupt men into the Christian Societies, that the face of them
was quickly much changed, and both Clergy and Laity became very corrupt, as
appears from the complaints of all the Writers of the fourth Century: what
wonder then if a tumultuating Humor crept into such a mixed multitude? And
indeed most of these instances which are alleged, if they be adduced to prove
the corruption of that time, they conclude but too well: But, alas! will they
have the authority of Precedents, or can they be looked upon as the sense of
the Church at that time, since they are neither approved by Council or
Church-Writer? And truly the Tumults in these times were too frequent upon
various occasions; but upon none more than the popular elections of Bishops, of
which Nazianzen gives diverse instances, and for which they were taken from the
People by the Council of Laodicea, Can. 13. It is also well enough known how
these Tumults flowed more from the tumultuary temper of the People, than from
any Doctrine their Teachers did infuse in them. And therefore Socrates lib. 7.
cap. 13. giving account of one of the Tumults of Alexandria (made use of by
your Friends, as a Precedent) tells how that City was ever inclined to Tumults,
which were never compesced without blood. And at that time differences falling
in betwixt Orestes the Prefect, and Cyril the Bishop, who was the first that
turned the Priesthood into a temporal Dominion, they had many debates: for
Orestes hating the power of the Bishops, which he judged detracted from the
Prefect's authority, did much oppose Cyril; and Cyril having raised a Tumult
against the Jews, wherein some of them were killed, and the rest of them driven
out of the City, Orestes was so displeased at that, that he refused to be
reconciled with him; whereupon 500 Monks came down from Nitria to fight for
their Bishop, who set on the Prefect, and one of them named Ammonius, wounded
him in the head with a stone; but the People gathering, they all fled, only
Ammonius was taken, whom the Prefect tortured till he died; but Cyril buried
him in the Church, and magnified his Fortitude to the degree of reckoning him a
Martyr, of which he was afterward ashamed. And their being in Alexandria at
that time a learned and famous Lady, called Hyppatia, whom the People suspected
of inflaming the Prefect against the Bishop, they led on by a Reader of the
Church, set on her, and dragged her from her Chariot into a Church, and stripped
her naked, and most cruelly tore her body to pieces, which they burnt to ashes.
And this, says the Historian, brought no small Infamy, both on Cyril, and on
the Church of Alexandria, since all who profess the Christian Religion, should
be strangers to killing, fightings, and such like. Truly, Sir, he that will
found the Doctrine of Resistance on such grounds, has a mind on very easy
terms to run himself upon Condemnation. And yet such like are the warrants your
Friends bring from Church History. Therefore I see there is yet good ground to
assert that Doctrine was unknown in the Christian Church, till the times
wherein the Popes pretended to the Temporal Power over Princes: all whose plea
was managed upon the grounds of the great Importance of Religion to be
preferred to all human Interests, and that Christ had told his Disciples to buy
a sword; and that Princes being the Ministers of God, were to be no longer
acknowledged, than they observed that design for which they were set up. Only
in one particular, less disorder may be apprehended from the pretensions of the
Roman Bishops, than from these Maxims that put the power of judging and
controuling the Magistrate in the Peoples hands, which opens a door to endless
confusions, and indeed sets every private Person on the Throne, and introduces
an Anarchy, which will never admit of order or remedy; whereas these who had
but one pretender over them, could more easily deal with him, and more
vigorously resist him.


Isot. You have said very many things from History, which I shall not at this
time undertake to examine: but I am sure it has been both the Practice and
Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, that in case of unjust Tyranny, the States
of a Kingdom may put a stop to the fury of a King: and therefore where the
Reformation was opposed by Cruelty, it was also defended by Arms. And let me
add, that I believe your great quarrel at this Doctrine, is, because the
practice of it was so great a mean of preserving the Reformation, which though,
in good manners, you must commend, yet I am afraid you hate it in your heart.


Philar. Whether you or we be greater friends to the Reformation, let the world
judge by this one Indication, that you study to draw all can be devised for the
staining it with blood, which is the constant calumny of its adversaries,
whereas we offer with the clearest evidences to evince its Innocence. But let
me premise the distinction of Doctrine from Practices; and tho some
unjustifiable Practices appear, these must never be charged on the Reformed
Churches, unless it be made appear they were founded on their Doctrine.
Besides, the Reformers coming out of the corruptions of Poper^, in which the
Doctrine and Practice of Resistance upon pretenses of Religion were triumphant,
it will not be found strange tho some of that ill-tempered Zeal continued still
to leaven them. But for their Doctrine, I take the Standart of it to be in the
Confessions of the several Churches; all which being gathered in one harmony,
we are in the right scent of their Opinions, when we search for them there. Now
the Doctrine of resisting of Magistrates is by diverse of their Confessions
expressly condemned, but in none of them asserted.

It is true, there were some ambiguous expressions in our Scots Confession,
registered in Parliament Anno 1567, for Art. 14. among the transgressions of the
second Table, they reckon to disobey or resist any that God has placed in
authority, while they pass not over the bounds of their office; which seems to
imply the lawfulness of Resistance when they so transgress: but besides that it
is not clearly asserted, and only inferred, this does not determine what the
bounds of the Magistrate's Office are: And if it be found that his Office is to
coerce with the Sword, so as to be accountable to none but to God, then no
Resistance will follow from hence, except of a limited Magistrate who is
accountable to others. The same Explication is to be given to that part of the
24. Art. where all such are condemned who resist the Supreme Power, doing that
thing which appertains to his charge. But in the same Article the Magistrate
is called God's Lieutenant, in whose Sessions God himself does sit and judge.
But with this, it is to be considered, when that Confession was ratified in
Parliament, even when no Sovereign was to look to the clearing of any
ambiguities, which might have-been upon design by some, and through the neglect
of others, let pass. The Confessions of the other Churches are unexceptionably
plain, and without restriction in the point of subjection: For what seems like
a Restriction in the French Confession ( that the yoke of subjection is
willingly to be born, though the Magistrates were Infidels, provided that God's
Sovereign authority remain entire and uncorrupted) imports nothing, but that
our subjection to them, which takes in both Obedience and Suffering, is not to
strike out the great Dominion God has over our Souls, whom we should obey
rather than man. And even the Confession of the Assembly of Divines, ratified
by the Scots General Assembly, speaks of submission to Authority in absolute
terms, without the exception of Resistance in case of Tyranny, Cap. 22. art. 4.
It is the duty of People -- to be subject to their authority for Conscience
sake. Infidelity or difference in Religion, does not make void the Magistrate's
just and legal Aurity, nor fr^e the people from their due obedience to him. If
then the Doctrine of Resistance be to be owned as a Law of Nature, and as a
part of the Christian Freedom, how came it that it was not more expressly owned
in this Confession, especially since it is known to have been the opinion of
most of both these Assemblies? But on the contrary, it seems condemned, and
only the undiscerned reserves of just, legal, and due, are slip^ in for the
defense of their actings. Truly this seems not fair dealing, and such an
asserting of Subjection at that time, looks either like the force of truth
extorting it, or intimates them afraid, or ashamed to have owned that as their
Doctrine to the World. And by this time, I suppose it is clear that the
Reformed Churches ought not to be charged with the Doctrine of Resistance.


Poly. Nay, nor the Reformed Writers neither, with whose words I could fill
much Paper, and show how they do all generally condemn the resistance of
Subjects: and when any of them gives any Caveat to this, it is not in behalf of
the People, but of the States of the Kingdom, who, they say, perhaps are
empowered with authority to curb the tyranny of Kings, as the Ephori among the
Lacedaemonians, the Tribuns of the people, and the Demarchs in Rome and Athens.
Now it is acknowledged, that if by the Laws of the Kingdom it be found that the
King is accountable to the States, then their coercing of him is not the
resistance of Subjects, but rather the managing of the Supreme Power which lies
in their hands. If then you will stand to their decision in this Point, of the
Peoples resisting of their Sovereigns, though Tyrants, the debate will not run
long, they being so express. And this will be nothing shaken by any thing you
may allege in some corner of a Peter Martyr, or some other Persons of less
name; for as from the same Writers, other places may be brought to the
contrary; so what can these serve to enervate so much evident proof? Besides,
we are not to consider the Writings of some particular Persons, so much as what
has been the generally received opinion among the Protestant Writers, and most
taught in their Pulpits and Schools. And whoever will attempt the contradicting
that this has been for absolute submission, it must be confessed to be hard to
determine, whether his ignorance be most to be pitied, or his confidence most
wondered at. By these things all may guess, if there be not strong grounds to
apprehend the Reformed Churches must be innocent of that, which both their
Confessions disown. and their Writers condemn.


Isot. I confess the Author of the Dialogues did with great confidence
undertake the refuting of what is generally acknowledged about resistance used
by the Reformed Churches: but his Answerer has so refuted all he alleges
from History, that I am confident he repents of his undertaking: and were it to
be done again, perhaps he would think on other tasks, than to attempt what has
miscarried so in his hand, that truly I cannot but pity him in my heart.


Eud. It will be strange if he be so much mistaken as your Author represents
him, yet his design in that was so good to deliver the Reformation from such a
Challenge, that methinks he deserved a little better usage than your Friend
bestows on him. But I am much deceived if he be not able to make good all was
asserted by him: let us therefore hear what Polyhistor says on these matters.


Isot. Begin then with the matter of the Albigenses, where force was used
against Simon Montfort, who had not only the permission of the French King, as
is acknowledged, but was assisted by him by 15000. men, which is vouched by
some Authors: Besides, that the cruelties then used (which are made use of to
aggravate their not resisting the King of France) if pertinently adduced, prove
the King of France guilty of accession to them. And the Kings Son, Prince
Lewis, coming with an Army afterward, shows all to have been done by the Kings
Command. And what is alleged from the Count of Tolouse, his being a Peer of
France, by which he was a Vassal, and not a Subject, is to no purpose; since by
the Feudal Law, Vassals are Subjects; and whatever authority they may have
within their own Dominions, they are still Subjects to the Lord of the Feud.
See p. 418.


Poly. I shall not with big words blow away what you alledg; but shall examine
it from the accounts are given of that War. It is true, the Writers of that
time do so strangely misrepresent these Innocents, that little credit is due to
most of the Histories about them: but thus much is clear, that the Waldenses
were every where persecuted, both in Dauphine, Provence, Piedmont, Calabria,
Boheme, and other places, to which they scattered themselves, and fled for
shelter: and notwithstanding all the Persecutions they lay under, from the
Inquisition in France, they never armed against the King's authority. These
about Alby embracing the same Doctrine with the Waldenses, and called from the
Country they lived in Albigenses, were thundered against by the Pope, and a
Iacobin Monk being killed in their Country, Pope Innocent proclaimed a
Crotsade, promising Paradise to all who came and fought against these
Heretics, and avenged the blood of that Monk: and in particular suspecting
Raymond Count of Tolouse, he Excommunicated him, and absolved his Subjects from
their obedience, permitting any to pursue his Person, and possess his Lands;
with which he wrote to all Christian Princes to come into his Croisade. But the
King of France was employed in Wars both with the Emperor and King of England,
and so could not join in it, but gave way to his Barons to take the Cross: And
here the King consenting to so cruel an Invasion, did undoubtedly shake much of
his right to these Provinces, since he thus exposed them to the fu^y of an
unjust Invader; so that tho they had absolutely rejected his Authority, this
had quadrated with the case of a Kings deserting of his Subjects. However the
War went on, all managed by the Legate, as the Popes war. But Raymond came and
submitted himself to the Pope, yet the Legate went on against Beziers and
Carcasson, who had a great deal of reason to resist such an unjust Aggressor.
Afterward the Legate gaping for the County of Tolouse, picked another quarrel
with Raymond, and did excommunicate him of new, tho he had got the Popes
absolution: whereupon he armed, with the assistance of the King of Arragon,
against the Legate, and his General Simon Montfort: but afterward the King of
Arragon was defeated, yet all this while the King of France lay neutral, and
would not permit his Son to go against the Albigenses, because he had promised
to the King of Arragon to be neutral; but the King of Arragon being dead, he
gave way to it, and so his Son came to the Army: and this must be that which
Gulielmus Brito confounds with the beginning of the War. This also is that
Affair which the Centuriators say Philippus Augustus had with the Albigenses.
But the Legate fearing the numbers Prince Lewis brought with him, and
apprehending he might have possessed himself of the other places which belonged
to the Albigenses, granted them all absolution, with the protection of the
Church; and assumed the confidence to tell the Prince, that since he had taken
the Cross, he was to depend on his Orders, he representing the Pope, and not to
command in that Army as the Kings Son; reproaching him, because his Father had
given no assistance to the destruction of the Albigenses when there was need of
it: but that after the miraculous Victories had been obtained, he was now come
to reap the Harvest of what was due to them who had hazarded their lives for
the Church. And for all this, I refer you to the History of the Albigenses,
compiled by M. Perrin lib. 1. cap. 12, etc. But what if by an overplus I should
justify the Count of Tolouse, tho he had armed against the King of France,
upon the account of his being a Peer of France, which exempted him from the
condition of ordinary Subjects, of whom Pasquier Recherches de France, lib. 2.
cap. 8 says. It was the vulgar Opinion, that they were constituted by Charles
the Great, who is believed to have given them almost as much authority as
himself had, reserving only to himself the principal voice in the Chapter: but
he refutes that vulgar Error, and shows how in the end of the Carolovingian
Race, great confusions were in France, partly through the various Pretenders,
but more through their folly: at which time, the Crown of France did likewise
become Elective: and he shows how Eude, Robert, Raoul, Lewis, surnamed beyond
the Sea, Lot hair, and another Lewis, were chosen Kings of France; and the
chief Persons who at that time were most active, were these Dukes, Counts, and
Bishops, who afterward were made Peers. Hugo Capet therefore taking possession
of the Crown, for securing himself peaceably in it, did confirm those Peers in
that great Authority they had assumed; which if he had not done, they had given
him more trouble. And their constitution was, that if any difference arose,
either betwixt the King, and any of the Peers, or among the Peers themselves,
it should be decided by the Council of the whole twelve Peers. And he proves
from an old Placart, that they would not admit the Chancellor, Connestable, or
any other great Officer of France to judge them; they being to be judged by
none, but their fellow Peers. These were also to be the Electors of the King.
But Hugo Capet apprehending the danger of a free Election, caused, for
preventing it, Crown his Son in his own time, which was practiced by four or
five succeeding Kings. And Lewis the Gross not being crowned in his Fathers
time, met with some difficulty at his entry to the Crown; which to guard
against, he crowned his Son in his own time, and so that practice continued,
till the pretense of electing the King was worn out by prescription. Yet some
vestigies of it do still remain, since there must be at all Coronations of
France twelve to represent the Peers: and by this time, I think it is well
enough made out, that the Count of Tolouse was not an ordinary Subject. And as
for your confounding of Subject and Vassal, Bodinus lib. de Rep. cap. 9. will
help you to find out a difference betwixt them, who reckons up many kinds of
Vassals and Feudataries who are not Subjects: for a Vassal is he that holds
Lands of a Superior Lord, upon such conditions as are agreed to by the nature
of the Feud, and is bound to protect the Superior, but may quit the Feud, by
which he is free of that subjection: so that the dependence of Vassals on their
Lord, must be determined by the Contract betwixt them, and not by the ordinary
Laws of Subjects. And from this he concludes, that one may be a Subject and no
Vassal, a Vassal and no Subject, and likewise both Vassal and Subject. The
Peers of France did indeed give an Oath of homage, by which they became the
Liege^men of the King, but were not for that his S^bjects: for the Oath the
Subjects swore, was of a far greater extent. And thus I am deceived if all was
asserted by the Conformist in the Dialogues on this head, be not made good.


Isot. But since you examine this instance so accuratly, what say you to those
of Piedmont, who made a League among themselves against their Prince, and did
resist his cruel Persecutions by Armies. See page 423.


Poly. Truly, I can say little on this Subject, having seen none of their
Writings or Apologies, so that I know not on what grounds they went: and I see
so much ignorance and partiality in accounts given from the second hand, that I
seldom consider them much.


Isot. The next instance in History, is, from the Wars of Boheme, where because
the Chalice was denied, the People did by violence resist their King, and were
headed by Zisca, who gained many Victories in the following War with Sigismund;
and in the same Kingdom fifty years ago, they not only resisted first Matthias,
and then Ferdinand their King, but rejected his authority, and choosed a new
King: and the account of this change, was, because he would not make good what
Maximilian and Rodolph did grant about the f^ee exercise of their Religion: and
thus when engagements were broken to them, they did not judge themselves bound
to that tame submission you plead for. See p. 424.


Poly. Remember what was laid down as a ground, that the Laws of a Society must
determine who is invested with the Sovereign Power, which does not always
follow the Title of a King: but if he be accountable to any other Court, he is
but a Subject, and the Sovereign Power rests in that Court. If then it be made
out that the States of Bohemia are the Sovereigns, and that the Kings are
accountable to them, this instance will not advance the plea of defensive Arms
by Subjects. That the Crown of Bohemia is elective, was indeed much
contraverted; and was at length, and not without great likelihoods on both
sides, of late debated in diverse Writings: but among all that were impartial,
they prevailed who pleaded its being elective. Yet I acknowledge this alone
will not prove it free for the People to resist, unless it be also apparent
that the Supreme Power remained with the States, which as it is almost always
found to dwell with the People, when the King is elected by them. Bodin does
reckon the King of Bohemia among these that are but Titular Kings: and the
Provincial Constitutions of that Kingdom do evidently demonstrate, that the
King is only the Administrator, but not the fountain of their Power: which is
made out from many instances, by him who writes the Republic of Bohemia, who
shows how these Kings are bound to follow the pleasure and Counsel of their
States: and in the year 1135, it was decreed, that the elected Prince of
Bohemia should bind himself by his Coronation Oath to rules there set down;
which if he broke, the States were to pay him no Tributes, nor to be tied to
any further Obedience to him, till he amended. See Hagecus ad ann. 1135. And
this Oath was taken by all the following Dukes and Kings of Bohemia; which is
an evident proof that the States had authority over their Kings, and might
judge them. To this also might be added diverse instances of their deposing
their Kings, upon which no censure ever passed. These being then the grounds on
which the Bohemians walked, it is clear they never justified their Resistance,
on the account of Subjects fighting for Religion, but on the liberties of a
free State, asserting their Religion when invaded by a limited Prince. The
account of the first Bohemian War, is, that John Huss and Jerome of Prague,
being notwithstanding the Emperors Safe Conduct burnt at Constance, the whole
States of Bohemia and Moravia met at Prague, and found that by the burning of
their Doctors, an injury was done to the whole Kingdom, which was thereby
marked with the stain of Heresy: and they first expostulated with the Emperor
and Counsel about the wrong done them; but no reparation being made, they
resolved to seek it by force, and to defend the Religion had been preached by
Huss; and did declare their design to Winceslaus their King (whom the States
had before that time made prisoner twice for his maleversation) but at that
very time he died in an Apoplexy, some say through grief at that. After his
death, Sigismund his Brother pretended to the Crown of Bohemia: but not being
elected, was not their righteous King: so in the following Wars that were
betwixt him and Zisca, the resistance was not made to the King of Bohemia, and
therefore all that time was an Interregnum, and is so marked by their
Historian, who tells, that the Bohemians could not be induced to receive him to
be their King: he indeed invaded the Kingdom, and crowned himself, but was not
chosen by the States till fifteen years after that a Peace was concluded, and
he with great difficulty prevailed upon the States to ratify his Co^onation,
and acknowledge him their King. See Dub. lib. 24. and lib. 26. And by all this,
I doubt not but you are convinced that the Wars of Zasca were not of the nature
of Subjects resisting their Sovereign. And for the late Bohemian War, besides
what was already alleged of the Power of the States, their War against
Ferdinand, and the reason why by a solemn decree they rejected him, was,
because he invaded the Crown without an Election, contrary to the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom: hereupon they choosed the Prince Elector Palatine to be
their King. It is true, they rose also in Arms while Matthias lived, though he
did not long survive these Tumults: but in all their Apologies they founded
their plea on the Liberties of the Kingdom of Bohemia. And yet though this say
much for their defense, I am none of the Patrons of that War, which had very
few defenders among the Protestants.


Isot. At length you must yield there was War for defense of Religion: but if
without the enclosure of Bohemia we examine the History of Germany, there we
meet with that famous Smalcaldick War, in opposition to Charles V. who was
designing the overthrow of the Protestant Doctrine, which the Elector of
Saxony, with the Landgrave of H^ssen, and other free Cities, managed against
him. See p. 427.


Poly. If any of the Passions of men have mingled in the actions of
Protestants, must these therefore be fastened on them as their Doctrine;
especially when they went not upon Principles of Religion, but of Provincial
Law^? As for Germany, let me first tell you how far the Protestants were
against Rebellion, upon p^etence of Religion. At first the Rustic War had
almost kindled all Germany, which indeed began upon very unjust Causes; but
Sleydan lib. 5. tells, That some troublesome Preachers had been the cau^ers of
that great and formidable War. Now it is to little purpose to say they were in
many errors, and so fought not for the true Religion; since it was before made
out, that if Religion be to be fought for, every man believing his own Religion
to be true, is bound to take Arms in its defense, since even an erring
Conscience binds: B^t as these Tumults did ^p^ead through Germany, Luther
published a Writing, desiring all to abstain from Sedition, though with ^l h^
told he apprehended some strange ^udgment was hanging over the Churchmen: but
that was to be l^ft to God. After which he explains the duty of the
Magistrates: And adds, That the People should be severely charged not to stir
without the command of their Magistrates, and that n^thing was to be attempted
by private Persons: that all Sedition was against the command of God, and that
Sedition was nothing but private Revenge, and therefore hated by God. Adding,
That the Seditions then stirring, were raised by the Devil, who stirred up
these who professed the Gospel to them, that thereby the truth might be brought
under hatred and reproach, as if that could not be of God which gave occasion
to so great evils. Then he tells what means were to be used for advancing of
the Gospel, That they were to repent of their sins, for which God had permitted
that tyranny of the Churchmen. Next, That they should pray for the Divine aid,
and publicly assert the truth of the Gospel, and discover the Impostures of
the Popes. And he adds, That this had been his method, which had been much
blessed of God. In a word, the whole strain of that first Paper shows, that the
great bait used to train all into that Rebellion, was the pretense of the
liberty of Religion, and the tyrannical oppression they were kept under by the
Ecclesiastics.

But upon this the Beures published a Writing containing their Grievances: The
first whereof was, That they might have liberty to choose Ministers, who might
preach the Word of God purely to them, without the mixture of men's devises. The
other particulars related to their Civil Liberties. And upon these Pretensions
they appealed to Luther, who wrote again, Acknowledging the great Guilt of
these Princes who received not the purity of the Gospel; but he warns the
People to consider what they did, lest they lost both Body and Soul in what
they attempted. That they were neither to consider their own strength, nor the
faultiness of their Adversaries, but the justice and lawfulness of the Cause;
and to be careful not to believe all Men's preachings; for the Devil had raised
up many Seditions and bloody Teachers at that time. Wherefore he forbids them
to take God' s Name in vain, and pretend that they desired in all things to
follow his Laws: But minds them who threatened, that they who took the Sword,
should perish by the Sword: and of the Apostle, who commands all to be obedient
to Magistrates, charging on them, that though they pretended the Laws of God,
yet they took the Sword, and resisted the Magistrate. But he adds, You say, the
Magistrates become intolerable, for they take the Doctrine of the Gospel from
us, and oppress us to the highest degree: But be it so, stars and seditions are
not therefore to be raised, neither must every one coerce crimes, that belongs
to him to whom the power of the Sword is given, as is express in Scripture. And
besides, this is not only according to the Laws, but is by the light of Nature
impressed on all men's minds: which shows, that no man can cognosce and judge in
his own Cause, since all men are blinded with self-love: And it cannot be
denied, but this Tumult and Sedition of yours, is a private Revenge: But if you
have any warrant for this from God, you must make it out by some signal
Miracle. The Magistrate indeed does unjustly, but you much more so, who
contemning the Command of God, invade another Jurisdiction. And he tells them,
That if these things take place, there will be no more Magistracy, nor Courts
of Justice, if every man exercise private Revenge. And if this be unlawful in a
private Person, much more is it so in a multitude gathered together. Whe^efore
he counts them unworthy of the name of Christians, nay worse than Turks, who
thus violate the Laws of Nature. Then for proof of his opinion, he adduceth
that of our Lord's, resist not evil; as also his r^proving of S. Peter for
smiting with the Sword. These steps were to be f^llowed by you, says he, or
this glorious Title must be laid down. And if you followed his Example, God' s
power would appear, and he would undoubtedly have regard to you. And he adds,
How far he had been always from such Practices, and how God had blessed his
wo^k in his hands: but for you, you advert not how much you obstruct that which
you think to promove. These are a few of Luther's words, by which it will
appear both upon what pretenses the^e B^ures went, and what his sense of them
was. But I know it will be said, that as in the first ages of the Church, these
good simple men understood not their Liberties nor Privileges, but were
whee^led into a sheepish tameness: so likewise when the Re^o^mation was first
sp^inging, they ^^d not in that infancy understand the heroic doctrine, that
the following ripeness of some Martial Spirits did broach and maintain. Alas!
Luther, poor Man! he had been bred in his Monastery, and understood not the
brave Achievements of Christian Chivalry.

But who would bear with such disingenuity, as to say, that because he defines
Sedition to be private revenge, and afterward condemns private revenge,
therefore he must be understood as only condemning that? page 432. But as none
that reads Sleydan da^e say that I have alleged one word in Luther's name, but
what is faithfully translated out of these Writings: so the parcels I have here
inserted, will clearly discover that Rebellion to have been colored over with
the p^etence of Oppression, Persecution, and hindering the Doctrine of the
Gospel: and Luther's opinion in that must not be looked upon, as only his
private sense, but that which was undoub^e^^y received by the rest of the
Protestants in Germany, as appears by the series of the Story. And whatever
passion Luther might have expressed, that will no more brangle what I say, than
any of his other unjustifiable f^rv^^s will shake the rest of his Doctrine. For
I do not adduce him here only as a private Doctor speaking his single thoughts,
but as the Head of the Protestants, delivering a Doctrine which was then
received among them.


Isot. But he afterward changed his Opinion when the League of Smalcald was
entered into, and then we find the Protestants in another tune; for upon
apprehensions of mischief designed against them, they entered into a defensive
League among themselves: tho the Constitution of the Empire being feudal, the
Emperor was their Sovereign: yet both Princes and free Cities entered into this
League, which afterward broke out into War. See p 433.


Poly. Before I examine that Affair, I must first clear the way by removing a
mistake, which truly I judged none capable of that had ever read any thing of
the Constitution of the German Empire, or of the Power of the Electors,
Princes, and free Cities. I must therefore since I have to do with so much
ignorance or perverseness, show that the Emperor is not Sovereign in Germany;
though the thing is so plain, that I am almost ashamed to go about it. The
German Empire was hereditary from the days of Charles the Great till Henry the
Fowler, and then it begun to be Elective: and as is usual in all such cases,
they who had the right of Election, got by degrees the authority transferred
upon themselves: but the particular time when this begun, is not so clearly
defined by the German Writers. It is true, the Diet of Germany is not like the
League of the United Provinces, or of the Cantons of Switzerland, where the
Authority remains with the several States and Cantons, and they only meet for
Counsel: but the Diet has the supreme Authority, both of deposing of Emperors,
as was practiced in the case of Adolphus and Wenceslaus, and of fining,
banishing, and forfeiting, either Princes or Cities. And the Princes declare
after the Emperor is Crowned, that they are the Vassals of the Empire, and not
of the Emperor. and when the Diet sits not, all things are judged by the
Imperial Chamber, whose President must be a Prince of the Empire, who has six
Assessors from the Emperor, seven from the seven Electors, twenty from the ten
Circles, two from each of them; and by them all the differences among the
Princes or Members of the Empire are decided. Upon greater occasions, the Diet
is called, which Thuan compares to the Assembly of the Amphictyons in Greece,
that was made up of Princes, who had no dependence one upon another. The Diet
is not called by the Emperor, but by the Decree of a former Diet: or if the
Emperor call one, the Princes are not bound to come to it. And so the Princes
refused to come Anno 1554. and An. 1506. By the Diet Laws are given to the
Emperor, as well as to the other Princes: and any Money is ^^^sed for the use
of the Empire, is not put in the Emperors hands, but in the bank of some Town,
as shall be agreed on. Bodin tells he saw Letters from a German Prince to
M^nmorancy, telling him, that the King of France had reason to complain of
Charles the Fifth, and of his Brother, to the Duke of Saxony, and the Count
Palatine, who were the Vicars of the Empire, because they had, contrary to the
Laws of the Empire, and former Customs, suppressed the Kings Letters to the
States of the Empire. And Maximilian the first in a Diet at Constance, Anno
1507. acknowledged, that the Majesty of the German Empire consisted in the
Princes, and not in the Emperor himself. I might here add much from the way of
the Emperors treating with the Princes, by sending and receiving of Ambassadors
that go betwixt them, by the state in which he receives Visits from them, and
returns them to them, by the Princes treating and being treated with, by all
foreign Princes, who write to them Brother, and not Cousin, by their making of
Peace and War among themselves: and should indeed run out into a long
dig^ession, if I adduced all might be alleged for proving the Princes of the
Empire to be none of the Emperors Subjects: but I have no mind to engage in a
vain show of reading upon so plain a Subject. One thing I shall only add, that
by the 12. Chapter of the Bulla Aurea, it is expressly provided, that the
Electors shall meet together yearly in the four weeks that follow Easter, for
consulting about the Affairs of the Empire: and this is thus explained in the
4th Article of the Cesarean Capitulation, That it shall be free for the six
Electors by the vigor of the Bulla Aurea, to meet together as often as they
please, for consulting about the Commonwealth, and that the Emperor shall make
no hinderance to it, nor take it in ill part. And hence it is that these who
give account of the state of the Empire, laugh at their ignorance, who through
a childish mistake ascribe the Sovereign Power to the Emperor. The same may be
added of the free Cities united together by a League at least 500 years old,
called the Hanse-towns, who came under the protection of the Master of the
Teut^^^^k Order, that possessed Prusse: and an. 1206, they were so free, that
they sent a Navy to Henry III. of England, and got great privileges from him
for their traffic in England. There were then 72. Cities in the League, who
renewed their League every tenth year, and consulted whom to receive, or whom
to exclude from their friendship, and choosed a P^o^^^tor to themselves. And
one of the Conditions on which any City might be of this League, was, that they
were free Towns: and therefore it was that some Towns in the Netherlands being
of this League, their Princes were by Oath to confirm their freedom, otherwise
they could not be comprehended within that League; the end whereof was to
defend one another in any necessity they might fall in. Let these things then
declare whether Germany be a Monarchy or not, and it will never prove the
Emperor to be the Sovereign, because the Empire is feudal, and the Emperor
gives the Investitures to the Princes; for they are not the Feudato^ies of the
Emperor, but the Empire: and the Emperor by giving the Investiture becomes not
their Lord: for in the Interregn of the Empire, the Electors of Palatine and
Saxe are the Vicars of the Empire, and give the Investitures, who are not
clothed with any authority over the rest, but only as they are the Vicars of
the Empire, and not of the Emperor. And most of the Princes of Itair receive
still their Investiture from the Emperor, but are far from concluding
themselves his Subjects upon that account. And who thinks the King of Naples
the Popes Subject, tho he receive his Investiture in that Crown from him? These
things being thus cleared, it will be evident that the Wars betwixt Charles V.
and the Duke of Saxony, will never be a Precedent for Subjects resisting their
Sovereign. And having said so much, it will be to no purpose to examine the
rise and progress of the Smalcal^^ League and War, only thus much is clear,
that the leaguing of the Princes and Cities together among themselves, or with
other Princes, was not held contrary to the Laws of the Empire: for after the
Smalcaldic League, both the Emperor and other Kings, as France and England,
treated with them, and sent Ambassadors to them: Yea, the Pope sent a Nuncio to
the Elector of Saxe, and Landgrave of Hessen at Smalcald, and yet never were
they accused by the Emperor for entering into that League of mutual defense:
which shows it was not judged contrary to the duty of these Princes to
associate among themselves, or with others. And the City of Strasburg, and
after them the Landgrave of Hessen, made a League with the Switzer Cantons that
received the Reformation, for mutual defense against any Invasion upon the
account of Religion. At Ausburg the Emperor did on the 11. of November 1530.
declare, that since the Protestants did reject the Decree made about Religion,
he had entered in an agreement with the rest of the Diet, not to offend any, but
to defend themselves, if any force were used against these who owned that
Religion. And in the following December the Protestant Princes met at Smalcald,
and made an agreement among themselves in the same strain: neither were they
ever condemned for so doing, but continued in a good correspondence with the
Emperor many years after that, till being invaded by the Duke of Brunswick the
War took its rise, which is all along proved to have been according to the Laws
and Liberties of the Empire. And thus this Case does vary exceedingly from the
matter of our Debates.


Eud. If I may glean after your Harvest, I could add, that the Divines of
Germany were notwithstanding of all the immunity of the Princes, and injuries
they met with, very much against all warlike preparations. Many vestigies of
this appear through Melanclon's Letters, particularly in his 71. Letter to
Camerarius an. 1528. where he gives account of the inclinations many had to
War, and with how much diligence he had studied to divert them from it, though
great injuries had been done them; and that it was believed that many of the
Princes had signed a conspiracy against them. And Scultet Exer. Evang. lib. 2.
cap. 5. tells how Grumbachius and Iustus Jonas animated the Elector of Saxe to
the War, assuring him of the Empire of Germany, if he wo^ld adventure for it:
which, he adds, the Elector did: and his so doing, he compares to his throwing
himself over the Pinnacle of the Temple; but all quickly repented them of the
attempt, the Elector being defeated, taken, and kept Prisoner many years, and
his ill Counselors were well served for their advice, Grumbachius was
quartered, and Jonas was beheaded. Thus you see how that war is censured by one
of the best of the late German Divines. By this time, I think no scruples can
dwell with any about the German War, and that it agrees with the case of a
Prince defending his Religion and Subjects, against the unjust invasion of
another Prince, to whom he owes neither obedience nor subjection: and this will
easily satisfy all that know either Law or History, whether the Author of the
Dialogues deserved to be treated as his Answerer does: But it is no new thing
to find ignorants full of confidence, and cowards full of boastings.


Isot. But for Sweden, you yield it, and acknowledge, that because their King
came against them in an unjust invasion, designing to subvert their Religion,
they not only armed against him, and resisted him, but deposed him, and put his
Uncle in his place, than which nothing can be more express. See p. 441.


Poly. The design of the Conformist was to prove that the first Reformers did
not teach the doctrine of Subjects their resistance upon the account of
Religion; but he meant not to make good all that followed after that: therefore
left the more inconsiderat when they heard of the S^ares of Sweden their
deposing of Sig^smund, might have mistaken that, as he knows some have done,
and confounded it with the Reformation, he gave the true account of that Affair
as it was: and it being seventy years after the Reformation was first brought
thither, cannot be fastened on the Reformation. Besides the whole Tract of the
Swedish History proves, that the Estates, as they elected, so also coerced, and
frequently deposed their Kings: and therefore Bodin reckons Sweden among these
divided States, where the Supreme Power lay betwixt the King and the Nobility:
and tells how in his own time Henry King of Sweden having killed with his own
hand, one that presented a petition to him, the States forced him to quit the
Kingdom to his Brother: and that he had been for seventeen years a prisoner
when he wrote his Books de Republica: It being thus frequent in Sweden upon
malversation, not only to resist, but to depose their Kings, it was no wonder
if when Sigismund came against them with an army of Polanders, whose Sovereign
he was not, (for none are so ignorant to think the King of Poland is a
Sovereign) they resisted him: since that was a subjecting of Sweden to foreign
force, and so did totally overturn the whole Foundation of the Kingdom. But
after all this, I may add, that Charles Duke of Sud^rman, was not too well
reported of, for that abrogation of his Nephew, it being generally imputed to
his ambition. And thus you see upon how many Accounts that Action of the
Swedish State will not serve your turn.


Isot. But these of Zurich resisted the other five Cantons, and being provoked
by their injuries, they stopped the Pass^ges of Victuals to them, upon which a
War followed. As also at Basel, the people did maintain and assert the
Reformation by Arms against their Superiors, and brake the Images, and burnt
them: they also made the Senate turn off some of their number who favored the
Mass. See p. 443, 444.


Poly. As for the War among the Cantons, it is undeniable that it was not of
Subjects against their Sovereigns, since the Cities of Helvetia have no
dependence one upon another; nor can any one City be tied to the opinion or
decree of the rest, without their own consent: which shows that every Canton is
a free State within it self, and therefore their warrings among themselves,
makes nothing for subjects resisting of their Sovereigns. And what is alleged
from the tumult of Basel, is as little to our purpose: for these free Cities
being Democratical, it was no wonder if the people off^nded with the Senate,
did raise that Commotion: and the Historian expressly asserts, that what they
did, they openly declared, was not for defense of Religion, but for vindicating
of their own liberty. And in the end of the Story it appears what they
designed, for they made the Senate receive 260. out of the Companies of the
Citizens, whose counsel should be carried along in the greater concernments,
that might be either for GOD's Glory, or the Good of the Commonwealth. But if
you lay claim to this Story as a Precedent, you must acknowledge that a
Reformation may be not only maintained by force, but that Magistrates may be
removed from their Office, if they go not along with it; and that the people
may in their own Authority, without waiting for the Magistrates concurrence, go
by violence and break down Images, and throw out an established Religion. But
this belongs not to the case of Subjects, since in these free Cities the power
is certainly with the people, and so they are not S^bjects to the Senate. And
for Geneve, it is so fully proved, that it was a free Imperial City, that I
need add nothing to make it out One instance will abundantly suffice to prevail
upon the belief of any who can doubt whether the Bishop of Geneve was their
Prince, which is, that the Bishops of Geneve did frequently become Burgesses in
it: In particular, Peter de Baul^, the last who sat there, was received a
Citizen by the Senate of Gen^ve 15. July 1527. which does fully prove that he
could not be their Lord. But as for the Reformation of Geneve, it is true
Sleydan hints as if the Bishop and Clergy had left the City, being angry at the
Reformation: but in that he was mistaken, for their Bishop left the City an.
1528. and made war against it upon some disputes were betwixt him and them
about their privileges: for though he was not Lord of the City, yet the
Country about it belonged to him. But an. 1533. he returned to the City, and
left it in the July of the same year, fearing some seditious Tumults, which he
had the more reason to apprehend, because of his Transactions with the Duke of
Savoy, whereby he made over to him his interest in the City. And it was two
years after this before the Reformation was received by that City. For after he
left them, they passed a Decree for preserving the old Religion, and
discharging of the Lutheran, and banished two of the Ministers of that
Religion. And on the first of January 1534. after the Bishop was gone, his
Vicar published an Edict, discharging all Assemblies f^r Divine Worship,
without the Bishops permission; and all Bibles in the French or German Tongues,
were condemned to be burnt. And for the Duke of Savoy his invading them, and
being resisted by them, it makes nothing for your design, this being a free
Imperial City, resisting an unjust Invader. For all this, see Geneva restituta.


Isot. But at least the States of the United Provinces did maintain their
Religion by Arms, when Philip the Second was introducing the Inquisition among
them: and tho these Wars were upon mixed grounds, so that Papists as well as
Protestants concurred in them, yet it is undeniable that Religion gave the
chief rise to them, and was the main consideration that engaged the Protestants
into that War. See page 446.


Poly. One error runs through all your smatterings, which is, that you never
distinguish betwixt a State governed by a Monarch, where subjection is due to
him by the constitution of the State, and a limited Prince, who by the Laws of
that Society is accountable to, and censurable by the Nobility and people;
which states so great a difference, that he must be very purblind who does not
observe it; And therefore I will first show you, that the Prince of the
Netherlands was but a precarious Prince, governing a free people at their
pleasure and precariously, as Heuterus and Grotius de Ant. Re^p. Batav. call
him: And among the Laws of the Government of Batavia, one was, that the old
Customs and Laws should be sacred; and that if the Prince decreed ought against
them, he was not to be obeyed: and so it was usual among them upon a
t^an^gression, to depose their Princes, of which many instances are reckoned by
Grotius, and therefore he compares their Princes to the Lacedemonian Kings,
upon whom the Ephori and the Senate might have cognosced. The Brabantins had
indeed looked better to their liberty than the rest, and so had guarded against
the deceit of their Princes (who might have broken their Laws upon the pretense
of a public good) by an express agreement, that if their Prince should violate
the Laws, they should not be tied to obedience nor fidelity to him, till their
injuries were removed: and this was confirmed by the examples of their
Ancestors, Gr. An. lib. 2. And a little after, he adds, That the other
Provinces in Belgium, had by practice that same privilege, and that the rather,
that being all united to Brabant, by Maximilian, they were to enjoy the same
privileges with them. The Brabantins had also a privilege of choosing a
Conservator in any great hazard, called Ruart, Strada tom. 1. lib. 9. whose
power was equal to the Roman Dictators: this they had by the privileges of the
Laetus introitus. And upon this they chused the Prince of Orange their Ruart,
anno 1577. And to run no further for proofs of this, when Philip was
inaugurated their Prince, he expressly provided, that if he broke their
privileges, they should be free from obedience and fidelity to him: and this
was the ground on which they deposed him, as appears by their Decree, St. tom.
2. lib. 4. By these indications it is apparent, that the Prince of the
Netherlands was not Sovereign of these Provinces, since they could cognosce
upon him, and shake off his authority. But I shall next make out, that Religion
was not the ground upon which these Wars were raised: The Reformation came unto
the Provinces in Charles the V. his time, who cruelly persecuted all who
received it, so that these who were butchered in his time, are reckoned not to
be under 100000. Gr. Annal. lib. 1. All this Cruelty did neither provoke them
to Arms, nor quench the Spirit of Reformation; whereupon Philip designed to
introduce the Inquisition among them, as an assured mean of extinguishing that
Light. But that Court was every where so odious, and proceeded so illegally,
that many of the Nobility, among whom diverse were Papists, entered in a
Confederacy against it, promising to defend one another, if endangered: Upon
this, there were first petitions, and after that tumults; but it went no
further till the Duke of Alva came, and proceeded at the rate of the highest
Tyranny imaginable, both against their Lives and Fortunes, particularly against
the Counts of Egment and Horn, suspect of favoring the former disord^^s. But
(it being needle^s to make a vain show of reading in a thing which every boy
may know) after the Duke of Alva had so transgressed all Limits, the Nobility
and Deputies of the Towns of Holland, who were the Depositaries of the Laws and
Privileges of that State, met at Dort, anno 1572. Gr. de Ant. Bat. cap. ^. and
on July 19, decreed a War against the Duke of Alva, and made the Prince of
Orange their Captain, which was done upon his e^^cting the twentieth penny of
their Rents, and the tenth of their movables, in all their transactions and
merchandises. Yet all this while the power was in the hands of Papists, Gr.
An^al. lib. 3. No^ wa^ the Protestant Religion permitted till the year 1578.
that in Amster^^^, Utrecht and Harlem, the Magistrates who were addicted to the
Roman Religion, were tu^ne^ out, which gave great offense to some of then
Confederates who adhered to Poperv. And upon this the Protestants petitioned
the A^c^ Duke Matthias, whom the States had chosen for their Prince, that since
it was known that they were the chief object of the Spanish hatred. and so
might look for the hardest measure, it they prevailed: it was therefore just
they who were in the chief danger, might now enjoy some share of the Liberty
with the rest; wherefore they desired they might have Ch^rch^s allowed them,
and might not be barred from public trust, which after some debate was
granted. And let this declare whether the War was managed upon the grounds of
Religion* or not. The year after this, the States of Holland, Geldres, Zeland,
Utrecht, and Friesland, met at Utrecht, and entered in that Union which
continues to this day: by which it was provided, that the Reformed Religion
should be received in Holland and Zeland, but the rest were at liberty, either
to choose it or another, or both, as they pleased. So we see they did not
confederate against Spain upon the account of Religion, it not being the ground
of their ^eague; but in opposition to the Spanish Tyranny and Pride. And in
their Letters to the Emperor, Ian. 8, 1578. Str. tom. 2. lib. 2. they declared,
that they never were, nor ever should be of another mind, but that the
Catholic Religion should be still observed in Holland: and in the end of the
year 1581. they decreed, that Philip had forfeited his Title to the
Principality of Belgium, by his violating their Privileges, which he had sworn
to observe: whereupon they were (according to their compact with him at his
inauguration) free from their obedience to him; and therefore they chus^^ the
Duke of Alenson to be their Prince. And now review all this* and see if you can
stand to your former assertion, or believe these Wars to have proceeded upon
the grounds of subjects resisting their Sovereign, when he persecutes them upon
the a^count of Religion, and you will be made to acknowledge, that the States
of Holland were not subjects, and that their quarrel was not Religion.


Isot. All this will perhaps be answered in due time: but from this let me lead
you to France, where we find a long Tract of Civil Wars upon the account of
Religion, and here you cannot pretend the King is a limited Sovereign; neither
was this War managed by the whole States of France, but by the Princes of the
Blood, with the Nobility of some of the Provinces; and these began under
Francis the Second, then about sixteen years of Age, so that he was not under
Nonage: and tho they were prosecuted under the Minority of Charles the Ninth,
yet the King of Navarre, who was Regent, and so bore the King's Authority, was
resisted: and after Charles was of age, the Wars continued, both during his
Reign, and much of his Brother's, and did again break out in the last King's
Reign. The Protestants were also owned and assisted in these Wars, not only by
the Princes of Germany, but by the three last Princes who reigned in Britain.
So here we have an undeniable instance of Subjects defending Religion by Arms.
See page 454.


Poly. I must again put my self and the company to a new penance by this ill
understood piece of History, which you have alleged: and tell you how upon
Henry the Second's death, Francis his Son, was under age by the French Law,
(for which see Thuan. lib. 16.) which appointed the Regents power to continue
till the King was 22 years of age at least, as had been done in the case of
Charles the 6. which yet the History of that time says, was a rare privilege,
granted him because of his Gracefulness, and the love was generally born him,
whereas the year wherein the Kings were judged capable of the Government was
25. But Francis, tho under age, being every way a Child, did for away both the
Princes of the Blood, the Constable and the Admiral from the Government, which
he committed to his Mother, the Cardinal of Lorrain and the Duke of Guise. Upon
this the Princes of the Blood met, and sent the King of Navarre who was the
first Prince of the Blood, to the King, to complain of their ill usage: but tho
he was much neglected at Court, yet his simplicity was such, that he was easily
whedled out of his pretensions. Upon this the Prince of Conde having a greater
spirit, and being poor, thought upon other Courses, and as it is related by
Davila, lib. 1. gathered a meeting at Ferte, where he p^^posed the injury done
the Princes of the Blood, who in the minority of their King were now excluded
the Government: which, contrary to the Salick law, was put in a woman's hand,
and trusted to Strangers: wherefore he moved that (according to the practices
of other Princes of the Blood, in the like Cases, which he adduced) they might
by arms make good their right, and assume the Government in the Kings minority.
But the Admiral considering well the hardiness of the enterprise, said, that
another way must be taken to make it succeed, which was, that since France was
full of the followers of Calvin, who through the persecutions they had lain
under, were now almost desperate, and had a particular hatred at the Brethren of
Lorrain as their chief enemies, therefore it was fit to cherish them, and make
a party of them, by which means assistance might be likewise hoped for from the
Princes of Germany, and the Queen of England: and to this advice all present
did yield. Upon this, says Thuan, lib. 16. many Writings were published,
proving the Government of the Kingdom in the King's minority to belong to the
Princes of the Blood, and that by the Laws of France, the Regents power was not
absolute, but to be regulated by the Assembly of the States, wherein many
instances of the French Law were adduced: and whereas it was alleged that the
King was major at 15. which was proved from an Edict of Charles the Fifth, this
was fully refuted; and it was showed that notwithstanding of the Edict of
Charles the Fifth, his Son was not admitted to the Government till he was full
22 years of age, and that in his minority the Kingdom was governed by a Council
of the Princes and Nobility, which was established by an Assembly of the
States. I shall not meddle further in the debate which was on both hands about
the year of the King's majority, or the Power of the Princes of the Blood in
his minority, but shall refer the Reader to the sixth Book of the voluminous
History of France, for that time, whose Author has suppressed his Name, where
a full abstract of all the writings that passed on both sides about these
matters is set down: but this shows how little your Friends understand the
History of that time, who take it for granted that Francis the Second was then
Major, since it was the great matter in controversy. But to proceed in my
Accounts.

These grounds being laid down for a war, the Prince of Conde, as Thuan
relates, would not openly own an accession to any design, till it should be in
a good forwardness, but trusted the management of it to one Renaudy, who tho a
Catholic by his Religion, yet drew a great meeting of Protestants to Nantes,
in the beginning of February, anno 1560. where he stirred them up to arm: and
in his Speech, after he had represented all the grievances, he added, that the
greatest scruples that stuck with many, was the King's Authority, against which
whos^ rose^he did rebel: and he answered, acknowledging the obedience due to
Kings, notwithstanding their wicked Laws; and that it was without doubt, that
all who resisted the Power constituted by GOD, resisted his Ordinance: but
added, their resistance was of these Traitors, who having possessed themselves
of the young King, designed the ruin both of King and Kingdom. This then will
clear whether they walked on the Principles of Subjects resisting when
persecuted by their Sovereign, or not.

Upon this they designed to have seized on the King, but as it was to be
executed, though it had been long carried with a mavelous secrecy, it was at
length discovered, and the King conveyed to Amb^i^e: and as the Protestants
were gathering to a Head, the Kin^'s Forces came upon them, and defeated and
scattered them. But a little after this the King died, in good time for the
Prince of Conde; for his accession to these Commotions being discovered, he was
s^ised on and sentenced to death; but the King's death as it ^^livered him, did
also put an end to the questions about the King's majority, his Brother Charles
the Ninth, being a child, so that the Regency was undoubtedly the King of
Navarre his right; yet not so entirely but that the other Princes were to share
with him, and the Assembly of the States to direct him, as the Lawyers proved
from the French Law. The consultation about the Protestants took them long up,
and a severe Edict passed against them in July 1561. But in the January of the
next year a solemn meeting was called of all the Prin^es of the Blood, the
Privy Counselors and the eighth Parliament of France, in which the Edict of
January was passed; giving the Protestants the free exercise of their Religion,
and all the Magistrates of France were commanded to punish any who interrupted
or hindered this liberty, which Edict you may see at length, Hist. d' A^big.
lib. 2. c. 32. But after this, as Davila, lib. 3. relates how the Duke of Guise
coming to Paris did disturb a meeting of the Protestants, so that it went to
the throwing of Stones, with one of which the Duke was hurt, upon which he
designed the breach of that Edict, and so was the Author and Contriver of the
following Wars. After this the Edict was every where violated, and the King of
Navarre united with the Constable, and the Duke of Guise for the ruin of the
Protestants: upon which the Prince of Conde, as the next Prince of the Blood,
asserted the Edicts, so that the ^aw was on his side: neither was the Regents
power absolute or Sovereign: and the Prince of Conde in his Manifesto declared,
he had armed to free the King from that captivity these stranger Princes kept
him in, and that his design was only to assert the authority of the late Edict,
which others were violating. Upon this the Wars began, and ere the year was
ended, the King of Navarre was killed: after which the Regency did undoubtedly
belong to the Prince of Conde. And thus you see upon what grounds these Wars
began: and if they were after that continued during the majority of that same
King, and his Successors, their Case in that was more to be pitied, than
imitated: for it is known that Wars once beginning, and Jealousies growing
strong, and deeply rooted, they are not easily settled.

And to this I shall add what a late Writer of that Church Sieur d'Ormegrigny
has said for them, in his reflections on the Third Chapter of the Politics of
France: wherein he justifies the Protestants of France from these Imputations.
What was done that way, he does not justify, but charge it on the despair of
a lesser Party among them, which was disavowed by the greater part. And shows
how the first Tumults in Francis II. his time, were carried mainly on by
Renaudy a Papist, who had Associates of both Religions. He vindicates what
followed from the Interest the Princes of the Blood had in the Government in
the minority of the Kings. And what followed in Henry III. his time, he shows,
was in defense of the King of Navarre, the righteous heir of the Crown, whom
those of the League designed to seclude from his right. But after that Henry
IV. had settled France, he not only granted the Protestants free Exercise of
their Religion, but gave them some Towns for their security, to be kept by them
for twenty years: at the end whereof, the late King remanding them, the
Protestants were instant to keep them longer, to which he yielded for three or
four years: in the end, he wisely determined (says that Gentleman) to take
them out of their hands. Upon which they met in an Assembly at Rochel; and most
imprudently, he adds, and against their duty, both to God and the King, they
resolved to keep them still by force. But at that time there was a National
Synod at Alais, where M. du Moulin presided, who searching into the posture of
Affairs in that Country, where many of these places of strength lay, he found
the greater and better part inclined to yield them up to the King: upon which
he wrote an excellent Letter to the Assembly at Rochel, dissuading them from
pursuing the Courses they were engaging in: where he shows, it was the general
desire of their Churches, that it might please God to continue peace by their
giving Obedience to the King: and since his Majesty was resolved to have these
Places in his own hands, that they would not on that account engage in a War.
But that if Persecution was intended against them, all who feared God desired
it might be for the Profession of the Gospel, and so be truly the cross of
Christ: and therefore assured them the greater and better part of their
Churches desired they would dissolve their meeting, if it could be with
security to their Persons. And presses their parting from that Assembly, with
many Arguments, and obviates what might be objected against it: And craves
pardon to tell them, They would not find inclinations in those of the Religion
to obey their resolutions, which many of the best quality, and greatest
capacity avowedly condemned, judging that to suffer on that account, was not to
suffer for the Cause of God. And therefore exhorts them to depend on God, and
not precipitate themselves into Ruin by their Impatience. And he ends his
Letter with the warmest and serventest language imaginable for gaining them
into his opinion. It is true, his Letter wrought not the desired Effect, yet
many upon it deserted the meeting. Upon the which that Gentleman shows, that
what was then done, ought not to be charged on the Protestant Churches of
France, since it was condemned by the National Synod of their Divines, and
three parts of four who were of the Religion continued in their dutiful
Obedience to the King, without engaging in Arms with those of their Party.
Amirald also in his incomparable Apology for those of the Reformed Religion,
Sect. 2. vindicates them from the imputations of disloyalty to their Prince:
and after he has asserted his own opinion, that Prayers and Tears ought to be
the only weapons of the Church, as agreeing best with the nature of the Gospel,
and the practice of the first Christians, he adds his regrates, that their
Fathers did not crown their other Virtues with invincible Patience, in
suffering all the Cruelty of their Persecutors without resistance, after the
Example of the Primitive Church, by which all color of reproaching the
Reformation had been removed. Yet he shows how they held out during the Reign
of Francis I. and Henry II. notwithstanding all the Cruelty of the Persecution,
though their Numbers were great. What fell out after that, he justifies, or
rather excuses ( for he says, he cannot praise, but blame it) on the Grounds
we have already mentioned, of the minority of their Kings, and of the Interest
of the Princes of the Blood. And for the business of Renaudy in Francis II. his
time, he tells how Calvin disapproved it: and observes from Thuan, that he who
first discovered it was of the Reformed Religion, and did it purely from the
Dictate of his Conscience. He also shows that the Protestants never made War
with a common Consent, till they had the Edicts on their side, so that they
defended the King's Authority, which others were violating. But adds withal,
that the true cause of the Wars, was reason of State, and a Faction betwixt the
Houses of Bourbon and Guise: and the defense of the Protestants was pretended,
to draw them into it. And for the late Wars, he charges the blame of them on
the ambition of some of their Grandees, and the factious Inclinations of the
Town of Rochel. And vindicates the rest of their Church from accession to them,
whatever good wishes the common Interest of their Religion might have drawn
from them, for these whose danger they so much apprehended. And for the Affaus
of our Britain, which was then in a great Combustion, for which the Protestants
were generally blamed, as if the Genius of their Religion led to an opposition
of Monarchy, he says, strangers could not well judge of matters so remore from
them; but if the King of England was by the constitutions of that Kingdom a
Sovereign Prince (which is a thing in which he cannot well offer a dicision)
then he simply condemns their raising a War against him, even though that
report which was so much spread of his design to change the Reformed Religion
settled there, were true. Neither are these opinions of Amirald to be looked on
as his private thoughts; but that Apology being published by the approbation of
these appointed to license the Books of the Religion, is to be received as the
more common and received Doctrine of that Church.

And what ever approbation or assistance the neighboring Princes might have
given the Protestants in the latter or former Wars, it will not infer their
allowing the Precedent of Subjects resisting their Sovereign, though persecuted
by him, since it is not to be imagined many Princes could be guilty of that.
But the Maxims of Princes running too commonly upon grounds very different from
the Rules of Conscience, and tending chiefly to strengthen themselves, and
weaken their Neighbors, we are not to make any great account of their approving
or abetting of these Wars. And thus far you have drawn from me a great deal of
Discourse for justifying the Conf^rmists design of vindicating the Reformed
Churches from the Doctrine and Practice of Subjects resisting their Sovereign,
upon pretexts of Religion.


Isot. A little time may produce an Answer to all this, which I will not now
attempt, but study these accounts more accurately. But let us now come home to
Scotland, and examine whether the King be an accountable Prince, or not? You
know well enough how Fergus was first called over by the Scots, how many
instances there are of the States their coercing the King, how the King must
swear at his Coronation to observe the Laws of the Kingdom, upon which
Allegiance is sworn to him, so that if he break his part, why are not the
Subjects also free, since the Compact seems mutual? I need not add to this,
that the King can neither make nor abrogate Laws, without the consent of the
Estates of Parliament, that he can impose no Tax without them. And from these
things it appears that the King of Scotland is a limited King, who as he
originally derived his Power from their choice, so is still limited by them,
and liable to them. All which is at large made out by the Author of Ius populi.


Basil. Now you are on a rational Point, which I acknowledge deserves to be
well discussed, for if by the Laws of Scotland the King be liable to his
People, then their coercing him will be no Rebellion. But this point is to be
determined not from old Stories, about which we have neither Record, nor clear
account for giving light how to direct our belief, nor from some tumultuary
Practices, but from the Laws and Records of the Kingdom: and here the first
word of our Laws gives a shrewd Indication that the King's Power is not from
the People, (which is anno 1004, according to Sir John Skeen's Collection of
them:) King Malcome gave and distributed all his Lands of the Realm of Scotland
among his men, and reserved nothing in property to himself but the Royal
Dignity, and the Mure-hill in the Town of Scone.

Now I dare appeal to any Person whether this be not the Style of a Sovereign,
and if this prove not the King's Title to the Crown to be of another nature,
than that of a voluntary Compact? The next vestige is to be found in the Books
of Regiam Majestatem, held to be published by King David I. Anno 1124, and
declared authentical by following Parliaments, where the third Verse of the
Preface is, That our most glorious King having the Government of the Realm, may
happily live both in the time of Peace and of warfare, and may ride the Realm
committed to him by God, who has no Superior but the Creator of Heaven and
Earth, ruler over all things, etc. And let the plain sense of these words tell
whether the King of Scotland, has his power from the People, and whether he be
accountable to any but to God? It is also clear that all were bound to follow
the King to the Wars, and punishment was decreed against those who refused it,
see the Laws of Alexander II. Cap. 15. and Iac. 1. Parl. 1. Cap. 4. Iac. 2. p.
13. Cap. 57. And this shows they were far from allowing War against the King.
The Parliaments were also originally the Kings Courts, at which all his Vassals
were bound to appear personally, and give him Counsel, which proving a burden
to the small Barons, they were dispensed with for their appearance in
Parliament, 1. Iac. Parl. 7. cap. 101. which shows that the coming to the
Parliament was looked on in these days rather as an homage due to the King,
than a privilege belonging to the Subjects, otherwise they had been loath to
have parted with it so easily. And 2. Fac. 6. Parl. cap. 14. It is ordained
that none rebel against the King's person nor his Authority, and whosoever makes
such Rebellion is to be punished after the quality and quantity of such
Rebellion by the advice of the three Estates. And if it happens any within the
Realm openly or notoriously to rebel against the King, or make war against the
King's Laeges, against his forbidding; in that case the King is to go upon them
with assistance of the whole Lands, and to punish them after the quantity of
the trespass. Here see who has the Sovereign power, and whether any may take
Arms against the King's command: and the 25. Chapter of that same Parl. defines the
points of Treason. It is true by that Act those who assault Castles, or Houses
where the King's person was, without the consent of the three Estates, are to
be punished as Traitors: From which one may infer that the Estates may besiege
the King; but it is clear that was only a provision against these who in the
minority of the Kings used to seize upon their Persons, and so assumed the
Government: and therefore it was very reasonable that in such a case provision
should be made, that it were not Treason for the Estates to come and besiege a
place where the Kings Person were for recovering him from such as treasonably
seized on him. And this did clearly take its rise from the confusions were in
that King's minority, whom sometimes the Governor, sometimes the Chancellor got
into their keeping, and so carried things as they pleased having the young King
in their hands. The King is also declared to have full Jurisdiction and free
Empire within his Realm, 3. Fac. Parl. 5. cap. 30. And all along it is to be
observed that in asserting his Majesty's Prerogative Royal, the phrases of
asserting and acknowledging, but never of giving or granting, are used, so that
no part of the King's Prerogative is granted him by the Estates, and Iac. 6.
Parl. 8. cap. 129. his Majesty's Royal Power and Authority over all Estates, as
well spiritual as temporal, within the Realm, is ratified, approved, and
perpetually confirmed in the person of the King's Majesty his Heirs and
Successors. And in the 15. Parl. of that same King, Chap. 251. these words are,
Albert it cannot be denied, but his Majesty is a free Prince, of a Sovereign
Power, having as great liberties and Prerogatives by the Laws of this Realm and
privilege of his Crown, and Diadem, as any other King, Prince, or Potentate
whatsoever. And in the 18. Parl. of the same King, Act. 1. The Estates and
whole body of that present Parliament, all in one valuntary, faithful and
united heart, mind and consent, did truly acknowledge his Majesty's Sovereign
Authority, Princely Power, Royal Prerogative, and privilege of his Crown over
all Estates, Persons and Causes within his said Kingdom By this time I suppose
it is past debate, that by the Tract of the whole Laws of Scotland, his Majesty
is a Sovereign unaccountable Prince, since nothing can be devised more express
than are the Acts I have cited. For what you objected from the Coronation Oath,
remember what was said a great while ago, that if by the Coronation the King
got his Power, so that the Coronation Oath, and Oath of Allegiance were of the
nature of a mutual stipulation, then you might with some reason infer that a
failing of the one side, did free the other; but nothing of that can be
alleged here, where the King has his Authority, how soon the breath of his
Father goes out, and acts with full Regal power before he be crowned; so that
the Coronation is only a solemn inauguration in that which is already his
right. Next, let me tell you, that the King's swearing at his Coronation, is
but a late practice; and so the Title of the Kings of Scotland to the Crown, is
not upon the swearing of that Oath: And here I shall tell you all that I can
find in our Laws of the King's swearing or promising. The first instance that
meets me is, Chap. 17. of the Statutes of King Robert the Second, where these
words are, For fulfilling and observing of all the premises, the King so far as
concerns him in his Parliament, has obliged himself in the word of a Prince,
and his Son the Earl of Carrict (afterward Robert the third) being constituted
by the King for fulfilling of the premises, so far as touches him, gave and
made his Oath, the holy Evangils being touched by him, and then the States of
Parliament did also swear to maintain the Earl of Carrict, made then Lieutenant
under the King. Now the reason why these mutual Oaths were then given, is well
known, since the King's S^ccession was so doubtful. But after that, no Oath
seems to have been given: and tho King James the Second his Coronation be set
down in the Records of Parliament, there is not a word of an Oath given by any
in his Name. It is true in the 11. Parl. of that King, cap 41. for securing of
the Crown Lands from being alienated, it is appointed, That the King who then
was, should be sworn; and in like manner all his Successors, Kings of Scotland
into their Coronation, to the keeping of that Statute, and all the points
thereof. But this is not such an Oath as you alledg. Likewise in King James the
Fourth his Reign, 2. Parl. Chapter 12. where the Council was sworn, it is added,
And our Sovereign Lord has humbled his Highness to promit and grant in
Parliament, to abide and remain at their Counsels while the next Parliament.
But it is to be observed, the King was then but 17 years old, and so not of
full age: this promise was also a temporary provision. Besides, the very style
of it shows, that it was below his Majesty to be so bound. But the first Act
for a Coronation Oath I can meet with, is Cap. 8. of the 1. Parl. of King James
the Sixth, An. 1567. where the style wherein the Act runs, shows it was a new
thing, it bearing no narrative of any such former Custom: the words of the Act
are, Item, because that the increase of Virtue and suppressing of Idolatry
craves, that the Prince and the people be of one perfect Religion, which of
GOD'S mercy is now presently professed within this Realm; Therefore it is
statute and ordained by our Sovereign Lord, my Lord Regent, and the three
Estates of this present Parliament, that all Kings and Princes, or Magistrates
what (...), holding their place, which hereafter may happen to Reign, and bear
Rule over this Realm, at the time of their Coronation, and receipt of their
Princely authority, make their faithful promise by Oath, etc. Now you see the
beginning of the Coronation Oath, and I need not here reflect on the time when
that Act passed, it being so obvious to every one. But I suppose it is made
out, that the Kings of Scotland have not their Authority from any stipulation
used at their Coronation. The next thing you alledg to prove the King of
Scotland a limited Prince, is, because he must govern by Laws, which cannot be
enacted without the Authority of the three Estates in Parliament: But this will
not serve turn, unless you prove that the Estates can cognosce on the King, and
coerce him if he transgress: for which there is not a tittle in our Laws. I
acknowledge the Constitution of Parliaments to be both a rational and excellent
Model, and that the King becomes a Tyrant when he violates their Privileges,
and governs without Law: But tho his Ministers who serve him in such tyrannical
ways are liable to punishment by the Law, yet himself is subject to none but
GOD. And from our Kings their Justice and goodness in governing legally by the
Councils of their Parliaments, you have no reason to argue against their
absolute Authority; for their binding themselves to such Rules, and being tied
to the observance of Laws enacted by themselves, will never overthrow their
Authority, but rather commend it, as having such a temperature of Sovereignty,
Justice, and Goodness in it.


Isot. But was not King James the Third resisted and killed in the Field of
Striveling, and afterward in his Sons first Parl. Act. 14. all who were
against him in that Field, were declared innocent, and his slaughter was
declared to be his own fault, which was never rescinded? As also Cap. 130. of
Iac. 6. Parl. 8. the Honor and Authority of Parliament upon the free Vote of
the three Estates thereof is asserted. And are not you an impugner of the
Authority of the three Estates, who plead thus for the King's Sovereign Power?
See Answer to the Letter written to the Author of Ius Populi.


Basil. I shall not engage far in the Story of King James the Third, which even
as it is represented by Buchanan, lib. 11. (no friend to Monarchy) is very far
from being justifiable on the side of those who fought against him: nor was it
the least part of their guilt, that they forced his Son, being then but fifteen
years old, to own their Rebellion: And what wonder was it, that they who had
killed the Father, and kept his Son in their power, passed such an Act in their
own favors? But King James the Fourth quickly discovered what a sincere
Penitent he was for his Accession to that Rebellion, as appeared by the Iron
Belt he wore all his life, as a penance for this sin: yet the meekness of his
Spirit, and the power of that Faction, made that things continued in the
posture they formerly were in. It is true, that Act was not expressly repelled,
which perhaps was not safe at that time to have attempted: but it was really
done by his Revocation ratified in his 6. Parl. cap. 100. wherein with consent
of the three Estates, He annuls and revokes all Statutes and Acts of Parliament
which he had enacted in his former years, that tended either to the prejudice
of the Catholic Church, his Soul, or of the Crown, declaring them to have no
force, but to be deleted, and cancelled out of the Books. And it is not to be
doubted, but in this he had an eye to that former Act: but for your Act
asserting the Authority of Parliament, look but what immediately precedes it,
and you will find the King's Authority and Supremacy fully established: and I
acknowledge, that whosoever impugns the Authority of Parliament, as the King's
Great Council, does incur a very high punishment; but this will never prove an
Authority in the States to coerce and resist the King. One thing I must mind
you of from that Act, which is, That none of the Lieges must presume to impugn
the dignity and Authority of the said three Estates, or to seek or procure the
innovation, or diminution of the Power and Authority of the same three Estates,
or any of them in time coming, under the pain of Treason. And can you be so
ignorant of our Laws, as not to know that the Church was one of these Estates:
for the small Barons which some called the Third Estate, came not in till three
years after? Iac. 6. Parl. 11. cap. 113. And now from all these premises, I
think we may fairly infer with Sir John Sheen, Title 8. of the heads of our
Laws drawn up by him, That all Jurisdiction stands and consists in the King's
Person by reason of his Royal Authority and Crown, and is competent to no
Subject, but flows and proceeds from the King, having Supreme Jurisdiction, and
is given and committed by him to such Subjects as he pleases.


Eud. I must confess my self pleased with this discussion of these points you
have been tossing among you: and though I have sat silent, yet I have followed
the thread of all your discourse with much close attention; and was mightily
confirmed in my former Persuasion, both by the evidence of Reason, the
authorities of Scripture, and these instances of History were adduced. But
there are many other things yet to be talked of, though I confess this be of
the greatest Importance: and the satisfaction I have received in this, makes me
long to hear you handle the other matters in debate.


Phil. I suppose we have forgot little that belonged to this question: but for
engaging further at this time, I have no mind to it, it being so long passed
Midnight: we shall therefore give some truce to our debates, and return upon
the next appointment.


Eud. I were unworthy of the kindness you show me, did I importune you too
much: but I will presume upon your friendship for me, to expect your company to
Morrow at the same hour you did me the favor to come here to day.


Isot. I shall not fail to keep your hour, tho I be hardly beset in such a
crowd of Assailants; but Truth is on my side, and it is great, and shall
prevail, therefore good night to you.


Basil. I see you are not shaken out of your confidence for all the foils you
get, yet our next days discourse will perhaps humble you a little more; but I
refer this to the appointment wherein we hope to meet again, and so, Adieu.


Eud. Adieu, to you all, my good Friends.


THE SECOND CONFERENCE.
Eudaimon. YOU are again welcome to this place, and so much the more, that your
staying some minutes later than the appointment, was making me doubt of your
coming: and indeed this delay proved more tedious, and seemed longer to me than
the many hours were bestowed on your yesterdays Conference: but methinks,
Isotimus, your looks, though never very serene, have an unusual Cloud upon
them; I doubt you have been among the Brotherhood, whom your ingenious Relation
of what passed here, has offended. Their Temper is pretty well known to us
all, some of them being as the Pestilence that walks in darkness, with the no
less zealous, but scarcely more ignorant, Sisterhood, they vent their pedling
stuff: but of all things in the World shun most to engage with any that can
unmask them, and discover their follies. And their safest way of dealing with
such Persons, is, to laugh at them, or solemnly to pity them with a disdainful
Brow. And that is the best refutation they will bestow on the solidest Reason,
or if any of them yelp out with an Answer, sense or nonsense, all is alike; the
premises are never examined, only if the conclusion be positively vouched, as
clearly proved from Scriptures and Reason, the sentence is irreversibly past,
and you may as soon bow an Oak of an hundred years old, as deal with so much
supercilious Ignorance. Tell plainly, have you been in any such Company?


Isot. What wild extravagant stuff pour you out on better men than your self?
but I pity your ignorance who know not some of these precious Worthies, whose
Shoe Latchets you are not worthy to unloose. But the truth is, you have got me
here among you, and bait me by turns, either to ease your own Galls, or to try
mine; yet it is needless to attempt upon me, for as I am not convinced by your
Reasons, so I will not be behind with you in Reflections: and I will ^^ow and
fight both, as a Co^k of the Game.


(...). Hold, hold, for these serve to no use b^t t^ (...) p^^vish hum^rs, I
will therefore engage you in another subject about the Civil Authority, which
our yesterdays debate left untouched; which is the obedience due to their
Commands: let us therefore consider how far Subjection obliges us to obey the
Laws of the Civil Powers.


Isot. Had you not enough of that yesterday? Is it not enough that the
Magistrate be not resisted? but will not that serve turn with you? or do you
design that we surrender our Consciences to him, and obey all his Laws, good or
bad, and follow Leviathan's Doctrine of embracing the Magistrates Faith without
enquiry? which is bravely asserted by the Author of Ecclesiastical Policy. This
is indeed to make the King in God'^ stead, and to render Caesar the things that
are God's, which is a visible design either for P^pe^^ or Atheism.


Phil^r. Truly, Sir, you consider little, if you ^u^ge submission to the
Penalties of the Law^, to be all the duty we owe Superiors. It is true, where
the Legislators leave it to the Subjects choice, either to do a thing enacted,
or to pay a Fine; in that Case, Obedience is not simply required; so that he
who pays the M^lct, fulfils his Obligation. But where a Law is simply made, and
Obedience en^oined, and a Penalty fixed on Disobedience, in that Case, n^thing
but the sinfulness of the Command can excuse our disobedience: neither can it
be said, that he sins not who is content to submit to the punishment, since by
the same method of arguing you may prove that such horrid Atheists, as say they
are content to be damned, do not sin against God, since they are willing to
submit to the threatened punishment. The right of exacting our Obedience is
therefore to be distinguished from the power of punishing our faults. And as we
have already considered how far the latter is to be acquiesced in, it remains
to be examined what is due to the former. But here I lay down for a Principle,
That whatever is determined by the Law of God, cannot be reversed, nor
countermanded by any humane Law: For the Powers that are, being ordained of
God, and they being his Ministers, do act as his Deputies: and the tie which
lies on us to obey God, being the foundation of our subjection to them, it
cannot bind us to that which overthrows it self: Therefore it is certain God is
first to be obeyed; and all the Laws of men which contradict his Authority or
Commands, are null, and void of all obligation on our Obedience: but I must
add, it is one of the arts of you know whom, to fasten Tenets on men who judge
these Tenets worthy of the highest Anathema. For if it be maintained, that the
Magistrate can bind obligations on our Consciences, then it will be told in
every Conventicle, that here a new Tyranny is brought upon Souls, which are
God's Prerogative, though this be nothing more than to say we ought to be
subject for Conscience sake. If again it be proved that the determining of the
externals of Government or Worship, falls within the Magistrate's Sphere, then
comes in a new Complaint, and it is told, that here Religion is given up to the
Lusts and Pleasure of men, though it be an hundred times repeated, that command
what the King will in prejudice of the Divine Law, no Obedience is due. If
again it be proved that Church Judicatories, in what notions soever, are
subjects, as well as others, and no less tied to obedience than others; upon
this come in vehement outcries, as if the Throne and Kingdom of Christ were
overturned and betrayed, with other such like Expressions in their harsh Style.
What is become of Mankind and of Religion, when Ignorants triumph upon these
ba^ren Pretenses, as if they were the only Masters of Reason, and directors of
Conscience? You know what my Temper is in most differences: but I acknowledge
my mind to be f^ll of a just disdain of these ignorant, and insolent Pedlers;
which is the more inflamed, when I consider the Ruins, not only of sound
Learning, but of true Piety, and the common rules of Humanity, which follow
these simple Contests they make about nothing.


Basil. To speak freely, I cherish Reflections no where, therefore I shall not
conceal my mislike of these Invectives, which though I am forced to confess,
are just; yet I love to hear truth and peace pleaded for with a calm serene
Temper: and though the intolerable and peevish railings of these Pamphlets do
justify a severe Procedure, yet I would have the softer and milder methods of
the Gospel used, that so we may overcome evil with good. To take you therefore
off that angry engagement, let me invite you to a sober Examen of the
Magistrates Authority in things Divine. But before this be engaged in, let it
be first considered whether ^^ere be any Legislative Power on Earth about
things Sacred: and next, with whom it is lodged.


Isot. I will so far comply with your desires, that for this once without
retaliating, I quit to Philarcheus the last word of scolding. But to come to
the purpose you have suggested, consider that Christ has given us a complete
Rule, wherein are all things that pertain to Life and Godliness. It is then an
Imputation on his Gospel, ^o say any thing needs be added to it, and that it
contains not a clear direction for all things; therefore they accuse his Wisdom
or Goodness, who pretend to add to his Laws, and wherein he has not burdened
our Consciences: what tyranny is it to bind a yoke upon us which our Fathers
were not able to bear? Whereby as our Christian liberty is invaded, so
innumerable Schisms and Scandals spring from no other thing so much, as from
these oppressions of Conscience, which are so much the more unjust, that the
imposers acknowledging their indifferency, and the refusers scrupling their
lawfulness, the peace of the Church is sacrificed to what is acknowledged
indifferent: neither can any bounds be fixed to those impositions; for if one
particular may be added, why not more and more still, till the ^oak become
heavier than that of Moses was? which is made out from experience: For the
humor of innovating in divine matters having once crept into the Church, it
never stopped till it swelled to that prodigious bulk of Rites, under which the
Roman Church lies oppressed. And besides all these general considerations,
there is one particular against significant Rites, which is, that the
instituting of them in order to a particular signification of any Grace, makes
them Sacraments, according to the vulgar definition of Sacraments, that they
are the outward signs of an inward Grace: but the instituting of Sacraments, is
by the confes^ion of all, a part of Christ's Prerogative, since he who confers
grace, can only institute the signs of it. Upon all these accounts, I plead the
Rule of Scripture to be that which ought to determine about all divine matters,
and that no binding Laws ought to be made in divine things wherein we are left
at liberty by GOD, who is the only Master of our Consciences. See from page
172. to page 180.


Phil. You have now given me a full Broadside, after which I doubt not but you
triumph as if you had shattered me all to pieces: but I am afraid you shall
find this Volley of chained Ball has quite missed me, and that I be aboard of
you ere you be aware. No man can with more heartiness acknowledge the
compleatness of Scripture than my self: and one part of it is, that all things
which tend to Order, Edification and Peace be done, and the Scene of the World
altering so, that what now tends to advance Order, Edification, and Peace, may
afterward occasion disorder; destruction and contention, the Scripture had not
been complete, if in these things there were not an Authority on Earth, to make
and unmake Laws in things indifferent. I acknowledge the adding of new pieces of
worship, has so many inconveniences hanging about it, that I should not much
patronize it: but the determining of what may be done, either in this or that
fashion to any particular Rule, is not of that nature: Therefore, since Worship
must be in a certain posture, a certain habit, in a determinate place, and on
such times, all these being of one kind; Laws made about them upon the accounts
of order, edification, or peace, do not pretend to prejudg the perfection of
Scripture, by any additions to what it prescribes; since no new thing is
introduced: Indeed did humane Lawgivers pretend that by their Laws these
things became of their own nature more acceptable to GOD, they should invade
GOD's Prerogative; but when they are prescribed only upon the account of
Decency and Order, it is intolerable peevishness to call a thing indifferent of
its nature, unlawful, because commanded: For the Christian liberty consists in
the exemption of our Consciences from all humane yoke, but not of our actions,
which are still in the power of our Superiors, till they enjoin what is sinful,
and then a greater than they is to be obeyed. I acknowledge, the simplicity of
the Christian Religion is one of its chief Glories, nothing being enjoined in
it but what is most properly fitted for advancing the Souls of men toward that
wherein their blessedness does consist: And therefore I never reflect without
wonder, on that Censure Ammian Marcellin, a Heathen Writer, gives of
Constantius, That he confounded the Christian Religion, which was of it self
pure and simple, with doting superstitions: So I freely acknowledge that
whosoever introduce new parts of Worship, as if they could commend us to GOD,
do highly encroach on GOD's Authority, and man's Liberty. But as for the
determining of things that may be done in a variety of ways into one particular
form, such as the prescribing a set form for Worship, the ordering the posture
in Sacraments, the habit in Worship, determinate times for commemorating great
mercies, the time how long a Sinner must declare his penitence, ere he be
admitted to the use of the Sacraments, and the like (which is all in question
among us) they are quite of another nature. And it is a strange piece of
nicety, if in these things, because Superiors command what seems most proper
for expressing the inward sense we ought to have of things, that therefore
these injunctions become criminal, and not to be obeyed. For the significancy
alleged to be in them, is only a dumb way of expressing our inward thoughts;
and as we agree to express them by word, so some outward signs may be also
used: as by sackcloth the penitent expresses his sorrow, and by a Surplice a
Church man expresses his purity; so those habits are only a silent way of
speaking out the sense of the heart. Only here on the way, if you have a mind
to ease your spleen a little, read what that late Pamphlet says, to prove a
distinction betwixt these two Ceremonies, page 111. That vulgar Sophism of
making Sacraments, is the poorest Cavil imaginable: for a Sacrament is a
federate Rite of stipulating with GOD, wherein as we plight our faith to GOD,
so he visibly makes offer of his Gospel to us, which he accompanies with the
gracious effusions of his Spirit: and indeed to institute any such Rite, were
the highest encroachment on the divine Authority: But what Sophistry will
fasten a pretension to this on the institution of a Right, which shall only
signify that Duty a creature ows his Maker and Redeemer, tending both to
quicken the person that performs it to a sense of it, as also to work upon
Spectators by such a grave solemn Rite? To say Men can institute means of
conveying the divine Grace, is justly to be condemned; but how far differs it
from that, to use signs, as well as words, for expressing our duty to GOD? Thus
you see how ill founded that pompou^ Argument is, with which we have heard many
triumphing among Ignorants, or where none could contradict them.


^rit. If I may have liberty to add a little, I would suggest somewhat of the
true Notion of Christian Liberty, and how it is to be made use of or
restrained. For the clearing whereof, we are to call to mind how upon t^^ ^^st
p^o^^lg^tion of the Gospel, a Contention did early rise about the observation
of Moses Law, the stipulation whereto was given in Circumcision; the Iudaizers
pleaded its continuance, and the Apostles asserted the Christian Liberty: the
Iudaizers pretended a divine Obligation from Moses his Law; the Apostles proved
that was now vacated by the death of CHRIST, which freed all from that Yoke,
and that therefore to be circumcised, as a stipulation to Moses's Law, was to
continue subject to that Yoke, and so to deny the Messiah was yet come, by
which CHRIST should profit them nothing. But the authority of Paul and Barnabas
not being great enough to settle that Question, they were sent from Antioch to
the Apostles, and Presbyters at Jerusalem, who determined against the necessity
of Circumcision, and consequently of the observation of the Mosaical Law, and
appointed that these who were proselyted from Gentilism to the Christian Faith,
should be received, not as Proselytes of Justice, but as Proselytes of the
Gates, who were only bound to obey the seven Precepts of the Sons of Noah;
which I stand not to make out, it being sufficiently cleared already by others.
Here then the Christian Liberty was stated in an exemption from the Law of
Moses. But for all this, we see into what compliances the Apostles consented,
for gaining upon the Jews by that condescension, they Circumcise, they Purify
(which was done by sprinkling with the ashes of the red Cow) they take the Vows
of Nazarism, they keep the Feasts at Jerusalem (which I wonder how that
Pamphleteer could deny, page 301. it being mentioned expressly, Acts 18.21.) and
upon the whole matter Saint Paul gives the following Rules and Assertions.

The first was, that these things did not commend a Man to GOD: For the Kingdom
of GOD consisted not in meat and drink, (which clearly relates to the Mosaical
differencing of Meats, clean and unclean) that neither Circumcision nor
uncircumcision availed any thing. And if neither branch of that Controversy
did of its own nature commend men to GOD; what judgments may we pass on our
trifling wranglings? Whence we may infer, that we ought to instruct all
Christians in the Faith, but not in these doubtful Disputations.

The next Assertion is, That even in these matters men might be acceptable to
GOD, on which side soever they were, so they judged what they did was done to
GOD. He that made distinction of Days, or Meats, made it to the LORD, and he
that regarded them not to the LORD, he regarded them not. So that GOD may be
acceptably served by several men doing things contrary one to another.

Another Rule is, That in these things every Man must be fully persuaded in his
own mind, and proceed out of a clear conviction in his Conscience.

A fourth Rule is, That in these matters none ought to prescribe or dictate to
another: such as had a liberty in them, were not to despise the scrupulous, as
unreasonable; neither were these who scrupled at them, to judge such as acted in
a higher Sphere of Liberty, as profane or licentious: so that all were to be
remitted to GOD's Judgment Seat.

Another Rule is, That for the Peace of the Church, many things which are
otherwise subject to great inconveniences, may be done for the gaining our
Brethren: but if such compliance harden people in their imperious humor, what
was formerly to be done for gaining upon them, becomes unfit when so abused by
them; and therefore if after we have complied with the weak exceptions of
others, in matters indifferent, they become so hardy as to presume upon our
goodness to invade our Liberty, by enjoying such things as necessary,
pretending to an authority over us; ^re are not to give place by subjection to
such, ^^ not for an hour.

The last Rule is, That in matters of indifferency, we are to postpone our own
inclination, or desires, when the hazard of our brother's stumbling, or of the
Peace of the Church lies in our way.

All these are so clearly asserted by S. Paul, and withal are so opposite to
our present Heats, that I wish they were more minded by the troublers of our
Israel, and they would certainly give a speedy decision to these Feuds about
doubtful disputations, which have so long preyed on the Peace of the Church.


Basil. And I am sure if so great a Compliance may be given to the weakness of
our brethren, much more is due to the commands of our Superiors; except you
say, we are more subject to equals than to Superiors, or that the weakness of a
Brother should weigh more than the authority of Father: And in fine, that the
Obligations of Charity should be more prevalent than those of Justice;
Obedience being a debt we owe, whereas Compliance is a Benevolence given. I do
not deny but great caution and tenderness must be used in making of such Laws,
and that their fitness for attaining the ends of order, edification and peace,
should be well considered, and they no longer adhered to, than these effects
can be drawn from them: so that if the nature of Circumstances which vary all
things indifferent, come to change, the same reason that exacted their being
first imposed, will plead a change. I also acknowledge, that great abuse has
followed upon the innovating and prescribing in Divine matters, and that
nothing has occasioned more divisions among Christians, than the overstraining
an Uniformity. But if because of abuses you overturn all Legislative Power in
matters sacred, nothing that is humane shall escape your fury, since every thing
is subject to abuse. And nothing will curb ones Career till he turn Quaker,
that follows these Maxims. But one thing is still forgotten, that the dictates
of Reason are in their kind the Voice of God; Reason being nothing, save an
impress of the Image of God on the Soul of man; which because much obliterated
by the Fall, was to be supplied by Revelation: but wherein it remains clear,
its directions not contradicting any positive or revealed Law, are still to be
followed as the Laws of God.


Poly. For proving all this, I shall not run so far back as to examine the
nature of the Priesthood, and Sacrifices were before Moses, to consider whether
these flowed from a Revelation conveyed by Tradition, or from the dictates of
Reason? But after Moses his Law was given, wherein all was modelled by Divine
prescript, yet what a vast heap of additions did flow upon that worship before
our Savior's days, all that have written on the Temple service do abundantly
discover. Here is a Field spacious enough for any that designed a vain show of
much reading; but a view of Doctor Lightfoot's Temple-Service will quickly
convince any, that the whole Service of the Temple was interpalated by many
Additions, whose first Author cannot be traced. They also used Baptism to all
who were proselyted from Gentilism. And in the Paschal Festivity alone, how
many new Rites do we find? Every Schoolboy may know that they had a Dish,
called Charaseth, which was a thick Sauce of Dates, Figs, Almonds, etc. pounded
together, which looked like Clay, to mind them of the Clay in which their
Fathers wrought in Egypt, which was a significative Ceremony; and was the Dish
wherein they dipped their hand, which we find was not wanting in our Lord's
Passover; which proves significant Rites, tho of humane appointment, cannot be
criminal. And if to this I should add the several Cups of Wine, the diverse
removes of the Table, and covering it of new, the frequent washing of their
hands, and diverse other things, I should grow tedious. But our Lord never
reproves these things; nay, on the contrary he symbolized with them. It is
true, when their Zeal for their Traditions made them break the Commandments of
God, or adhere so stiffly to them, as to judge the Consciences of such as did
not comply with them in the use of them, then he checks their Hypocrisy, and
accuses them, not for the use of these things, but because they placed all
Religion in them, and imposed the Precepts of men as doctrines. To this I might
add the whole frame of the Synagogues, both as to Government, Discipline and
Worship: for whatsoever scraps may be brought which may seem to prove there
were Synagogues before the Captivity, which yet is much controverted; yet the
form of Government in them, the rules of Excommunication, and its degrees,
together with their Philacteries, and set forms of Worship, will never be
proved from Scripture. Now since the Law of God was no less perfect in the Old
Dispensation, than the Gospel is now, it will follow that Additions in things
purely external and ritual, do no way detract from the Word of God: For nothing
can be brought to prove the New Testament a complete Rule for Christians, which
will not plead the same full authority to the Old Testament, during that
Dispensation; since though the Dispensation was imperfect, yet the Revelation
of God to them was able to make them perfect and thoroughly furnished foe every
good work: and the Scriptures which S. Paul says, were able to make wise to
salvation, can be no other than the Old Testament writings. For besides that by
Scriptures nothing else is understood in the New Testament, there could be no
other Scripture known to Timothy of a Child, but these of the Old Testament. If
then they trespass upon the authority of the New Testament, and its blessed
Author, who assert a Power to determine about Rituals in Worship, or other
matters of Religion; they committed the same Crime who pretended to add to what
Moses prescribed, since he was also faithful in all his house. Or if any plead
a Divine Warrant for these Institutions which were traditionally conveyed, this
will open a door for all the pretenses of the Roman Church, since the
Expressions that cancel Traditions, are as full in the Old Testament, as in the
New. And thus far I think I have evinced, that there were great additions in
Rituals made by the Jews, and that these were not unlawful, since complied with
by him who never did amiss, and yet these could have no higher o^iginal than
humane Authority. I go on to the New Dispensation, wherein I doubt not to
evince, that as for rituals, most of these they found in the Synagogue were
retained, without any other change than what that Dispensation drew after it,
and that they took both the Rules of Government, Worship and Discipline from
the Synagogue. Therefore the Epistles do not, when treating of these matters,
speak in their Style, who are instituting new things; but of those who are
giving directions about what was already received and known: For if new Rules
had been to be delivered, the Institution had been express, either in the
Gospels, Acts, or Epistles. Now if any will read these without prejudice, no
such thing will appear: of which manner of Style, no account can be given; but
that things, as to Rituals continued as they were, the use of the Sacraments
being only instituted by Christ, where the Language of an Institution is
express.

About two hundred years after Christ, outward Penitence was brought into the
Church, and scandalous Persons were, according to the nature of Scandals,
debarred from the Sacrament for a long space, and were by degrees, and
according to the height of their Penitence, received to the Communion of the
Church, but not after some years had passed in outward professions of
Penitence: and the modelling of this became after that, the chief Care of
Synods for diverse Centuries. Now if one will argue, that though it be true a
scandalous Person should be excommunicated; yet since God has mercy at
whatsoever time a Sinner repents, so should the Church (which only judges of
the Profession) forgive at whasoever time one professes Penitence. It will not
be easy in your Principles to answer this: and see how you will clear this
practice of Discipline from Tyranny, since to debar men from the Sacraments, is
a greater dominion over Consciences than the determining about Rituals.

But to come nearer home, there was a certain Society you have heard of ycleped
the Kirk, which had diverse Books of Discipline containing rules for that, and a
Directory for Worship, which had no few rules neither: they had also a frame of
Government, the Supreme Judicatory whereof was composed of three Ministers, and
one ruling Elder from each Presbytery, a ruling Elder beside from each
Borough, two being allowed the Metropolis, and a Commissioner was sent from
each University; and in this High Court the King came in with the Privilege of
a Burgh: for though the Metropolis had two, he was allowed to send but one with
a single Suffrage to represent him; and this Court pretended to an Authority
from Christ, and their Authority was Sacred with no less certificate, than he
that despises you, despises me. Now how a Power can be committed to delegates
without any Commission for it from the Superior, will not be easily made out.
And they will search long ere they find a Divine Warrant for this Court, unless
they vouch Mary Mitchelsons Testimony for it, whose hysterical Distempers were
given out for Prophesies. And whereas they are so tender of Christian Liberty,
that no Law must pass about the Rituals of Religion, yet their Books of
Discipline and Model of Government, were not only settled by Law, but afterward
sworn to be maintained in the Covenant, wherein they swore the Preservation of
the Reformed Religion in Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government. These were the tender Consciences that could not hear of any Law in
matters indifferent, and yet would have all swear to their Forms, many of which
they could not but know were indifferent: which was a making them necessary at
another rate, than is done by a Law which the Legislator can repeal when he
will: and never were any in the world more addicted to their own Forms than
they were. An instance of this I will give, which I dare say will surprise you:
When some designers for popularity in the Western parts of that Kirk, did begin
to disuse the Lord's Prayer in Worship, and the singing the Conclusion or
Doxology after the Psalm, and the Minister's kneeling for private Devotion when
he entered the Pulpit, the General ^ssembly took this in very ill part, and in a
Letter they wrote to the Presbyteries, complained sadly, Of a Spirit of
Innovation was beginning to get into the Kirk, and to throw these laudible
practices out of it, mentioning the three I named, which are commanded to be
still practiced; and such as refused obedience, are appointed to be conferred
with in order to the giving of them satisfaction: and if they continued
untractable, the Presbyteries were to proceed against them, as they should be
answerable to the next general Assembly. This Letter I can produce
authentically attested. But is it not strange, that some who were then zealous
to condemn these Innovations, should now be carried with the herd to be guilty
of them? I am become hoarse with speaking so long, and so I must break off,
having, as I suppose, given many great Precedents from History for the using of
Rites in divine matters, without an express Warrant, and for passing Laws upon
these, and have cleared the one of Superstition, and the other of Tyranny.


Eud. Truly, all of you have done your parts so well, that even Isotimus
himself seems half convinced: It is then fully clear, that as nothing is to be
obtruded on our Belief without clear revelation; so no sacred duty can be bound
on o^r Obedience without a Divine Warrant: but in Rituals, especially in
determining what may be done in a variety of ways to one particular Form, there
has been, and still must be, a Power on Earth; which provided it balance all
things right, and consider well the fitness of these Rites, for attaining the
designed end, does not invade God's Dominion by making Laws about them: Nor
will the pretense of Christian Liberty warrant our Disobedience to them. It
remains to be considered, who are vested with this Power, and how much of it
belongs to the Magistrate, and how much to the Church.


Basil. I now engage in a Theme which may perhaps lay me open to censure, as if
I were courting the Civil Powers by the asserting of their rights: but I am too
well known to you to dread your jealously much in this; and I am too little
known to my self, if flattery be my foible. I shall therefore with the greatest
frankness and ingenuity, lay open my sense of this matter, with the Reasons
that prevail with me in it: but I desire first to hear Isotimus his opinion
about it.


Isot. I do not deny the King has Authority and Jurisdiction in matters
Sacred: but it must be asserted in a due line of Subordination: First, to
Christ the King of Kings, and the only Head of his Church. And next, to the
Rulers and Office-bearers of the Church, who are entrusted by Christ, as his
Ambassadors, with the Souls of their Flocks, and who must give him an account
of their Labors; therefore they must have their Rules only from him who
empowers them, and to whom they are subject: They must also have a Power among
them to preserve the Christian Society; in order to which, they must, according
to the practice of the Apostles, when difficulties emerge, meet together, and
consult what may be for the advancement of the Christian Religion; and whosoever
refuses to hear the Church when she errs not from her Rule, he is to be
accounted no better than a Heathen and a Publican. And since the Church is
called one body, they ought to associate together in meetings, seeing also they
have their Power of Christ, as Mediator, whereas the Civil Powers hold of him
as he is God, they have a different Tenor, distinct Ends, and various Rules;
therefore the Authority of the Church is among the things of God, which only
belong to him. And indeed Christians were very ill provided for by Christ, if
they must in matters of Religion be subject to the pleasure of secular and
carnal Men, who will be ready to serve their own Interests at the rate of the
Ruin of every thing that is Sacred. It is true, the Civil Powers may and ought
to convocate Synods to consult about matters of Religion, to require Churchmen
to do their duty, to add their Sanctions to Church Laws, and to join with the
sounder part for carrying on a Reformation But all this is cumulative to the
Churches intrinsic Power, and not privative; so that if the Magistrate fall
short of his duty, they are notwithstanding that, to go on as men empowered by
Jesus Christ, and he who desp^seth them (be his quality what it will) despises
him that sent them. See p. 105. to p. 109. and p. 467. to p. 486.


Basil. In order to a clear progress in this matter, I shall first discuss the
nature and power of the Church, by which a step shall be made to the Power the
Magistrate may pretend to in matters Sacred. The Apostles being sent by Jesus
Christ, did every where promulgate the Gospel, and required such as received
it, to meet often together for joint Worship, and the free profession of the
Faith, wherein they were particularly obliged to the use of the Sacraments. The
Apostles, and after them, all Churchmen, were also endued with a double Power:
The one was declarative for promulgating the Gospel: the other was directive,
which properly is no power; and by this they were to advise in such matters
wherein they had no warrant to command: So S. Paul wrote sometimes his own
sense, which he did by permission, and not by commandment, only he advised, as
one that had obtained mercy to be faithful. But because Christ was to be in his
Church to the end of the World, the things they had heard were to be committed
to faithful men, that they might be able to teach others. All Church men being
thus the Successors of the Apostles, they are vested with a Divine Authority,
for solemn publishing the Gospel; but with this odds from the Apostles, That
whereas they were infallible, their Successors are subject to error. And the
power of Churchmen consists formally in this, that they are Heralds of the
Gospel: and by their preaching it, a solemn offer of it is made to all their
hearers, which to despise, is to despise him that sent them. But in this power
they are bound up to the Commission they have from God, so that what they say
beyond that, is none of the divine Message. Yet because many particulars may
fall in, about which it was impossible Rules could be given, they have a
directive Authority, which if it be managed as S. Paul did, we need fear no
tyrannical imposition from it. And therefore in these matters their definitions
are not binding Laws, but Rules of advice: for in matters wherein we are left
at liberty by God, if Churchmen pretend to a Dominion over our Souls, they
make us the servants of Men. And indeed it is the most incoherent thing
imaginable, for these who lay no claim to Infallibility, to pretend to absolute
obedience. It is true, the Laws of peace and order bind us to an association,
if we be Christians: and therefore we ought to yield in many things for peace:
but since we are all a Royal Priesthood, why Churchmen should pretend to
Authority or Jurisdiction, except in that which is expressly in their
Commission, wherein they are purely Heralds, I do not see. It is true,
Christians ought to assemble for Worship, but for the associations of Churches
in Judicatories, I cannot imagine in what corner of the New Testastament that
shall be found: In which I am the more confirmed, since all the labor of that
Pamphleteer from p. 126. to 144. could not find it out. For it is a strange
Method to prove a divine Warrant, because some reasons are brought to prove it
must be so: to have cited the words, where a shorter and clearer method of
proof; since to prove that such a thing must be, and yet not to show that it
is, is only to attempt against the Scripture, for being defective in that which
it ought to have contained. But if the phrase of one body conclude a proof for
Associations, then since the Body includes all Christians, the whole faithful
must meet together in Councils. For where have you a difference in that betwixt
the Clergy, and the faithful Laics? But here yielding your Laick Elders of
divine Institution, and to have from GOD an Authority of Ruling, as well as the
Ministers have, then why do they not all come to Presbyteries? And why but one
deputed from them? Was not this an Encroachment on them? For if they have from
CHRIST a power to Rule, as well as Ministers, why should not all the Elders
meet in Presbyteries and Synods, as well as Ministers? And why but one Elder
from every Presbytery, when three Ministers go to the National Synod? For it is
folly to say, because Ministers have a power of teaching, therefore in
Presbyteries and Synods the Elders must only equal their number, and in
National Synods be near half their number: for that will only say that in
matters of doctrine the Elders should be quite silent, but in matters of
discipline, why all should not come if any have a right from Christ, will not
be proved. And is not this to Lord it over your Brethren? And do not your
Ministers thus tyrannize over their Elders? But the reason of it was visible,
lest the Elders had thereby got the power in their hands, had they been the
plurality in the Judicatories: which was well enough foreseen and guarded
against by your Clergy, who though they were willing to serve themselves of
them for a while, yet had no mind to part with their beloved Authority. But for
Synods, if the obligation to them be from the unity of the Body, then nothing
under an Ecumenical one will answer this, which yet is simply unpracticable.
Now as for your National Synods, it is visible they are and must be framed,
according to the divisions of the World in the several Kingdoms: for according
to the Rules are pretended from Scripture (tell the Church, the binding and
loosing of sins, or the like) it follows that Parochial Congregations, and the
Pastors in them, are vested with an authoritative power: now why they should be
made to resign this to the plurality of the Churchmen of that Kingdom, will be
a great Achievement to prove in your Principles. For why shall not a Parochial
Church make Laws within it self? And why must it renounce its privilege to such
a number of Churchmen cast in such a Classis by a humane power? As likewise,
where find you a divine Warrant for your delegating Commissioners to Synods?
For either they are Plenipotentiaries, or such as go upon a restricted
deputation, but so as their Votes beyond their Commission shall signify
nothing, till they return and be approved by those who sent them; if they go
with a full power, assign a Warrant for such a delegation, or that many
Churchmen may commissionate one in their name, and that what shall be agreed
to by the major part of these delegates, shall be a binding obligation on
Christians: and yet I know you will think the Independents carry the Cause, if
it be said that the appointments of these superior Courts have no authority
till ratified by the inferior, which will resolve the Power into the inferior
Courts. By all which I think it is clear abundantly, that the associations of
Churches into Synods, cannot be by a divine Warrant. But I must call in some
relief, for I grow weary of speaking too long.


Eud. I suppose none will deny the association of Churches to be an excellent
mean for preserving unity and peace: but to assert a divine original for them,
methinks, is a hard task; and truly to assert the divine Authority of the major
part which must be done according to the principles of Presbytery, is a thing
fuller of Tyranny over Consciences, than any thing can be feared from
Episcopacy; since the greater part of mankind being evil, which holds true of
no sort of people more, than of Churchmen, what mischief may be expected if
the plurality must decide all matters; And to speak plainly, I look on a potion
of Physic as the best cure for him, who can think a National Synod, according
to the model of Glasgow, is the Kingdom of Christ on Earth, or that Court to
which he has committed his Authority, for he seems beyond the power or
conviction of Reason.


Crit. The Scripture clearly holds forth an authority among Churchmen, but
visibly restricted to their Commission, which truly is not properly a power
residing among them, for they only declare what the Rule of the Gospel is;
wherein if they keep close to it, they are only Publishers of the Laws of
CHRIST: and if they err from it, they are not to be regarded: It is true, the
administration of Sacraments is appropriated to them, yet he that will argue
this to have proceeded more from the general rules of Order, the constant
practice of the Church, and the fitness of the thing, which is truly suitable to
the dictates of Nature, and the Laws of Nations; than from an express positive
Command, needs much Logic to make good his attempt. It is true, the ordaining
of Successors in their Office belongs undoubtedly to them, and in trying them,
Rules are expressly given out in Scripture, to which they ought to adhere and
follow them: but as for other things, they are either decisions of opinions, or
rules for practice. In the former their authority is purely to declare, and in
that they act but as Men, and we find whole Schools of them have been abused;
and in the other, they only give advices and directions; but have no
Jurisdiction. It is true, much noise is made about the Council of Jerusalem, p.
106, as if that were a warrant for Synods to meet together. But first, it is
clear no command is there given, so at most that will prove Synods to be
lawful, but that gives them no authority, except you produce a clear Command
for them, and obedience to them. Next, what strange wresting of Scripture is
it, from that place to prove the subordination of Church Judicatories? for if
that Council was not an Ecumenical Council, nor a Provincial one, which must
be yielded, since we see nothing like a Convocation; then either Paul and
Barnabas were sent from Antioch, as from one sister Church to ask advice of
another; and if so, it proves nothing for the authority of Synods, since
advices are not Laws: or Antioch sent to Jerusalem, as to a Superior Church by
its constitution, which cannot be imagined: for what authority could the Church
of Jerusalem pretend over Antioch? And indeed had that been true, some vestige
of it had remained in History; which is so far to the contrary, that the Church
of Jerusalem was subordinate to the Church of Cesarea, which was Metropolitan
in Palestine, was subject to Antioch, the third Patriarchal Sea. It will
therefore remain that this was only a reference to the other Apostles, who
besides their extraordinary endowments and inspiration, were acknowledged by
all to be men of great eminency and authority: and therefore the authority of
Paul and Barnabas not being at that time so universally acknowledged, they were
sent to Jerusalem, where S. James was resident, and S. Peter occasionally
present. Now the Authority of the Decree must be drawn from their infallible
spirit; otherwise it will prove too much, that one Church may give out decrees
to another. But will the Apostles mutual consulting or conferring together,
prove the National constitution, and authority of Synods or Assemblies?


Poly. All that has been said illustrates clearly the practice of the Jews,
among whom as the High Priest was possessed with a Prophetical Spirit, which
sometimes fell on him by illapses, as apears from what is said of Caiaphas; and
sometimes from the shining of the Stones in the Pectoral, called the Urim and
Thummim; so the Priests and Levites being the chief Trustees and Depositaries
of the Law, Their lips were to preserve knowledge, and the Law was to be sought
at their mouth, yet they had no Legislative Authority: they had indeed a Court
among themselves, called the Parhedrim, made up of the heads of the Orders, and
of the Families; but that Court did not pretend to Jurisdiction, but only to
explain things that concerned the Temple-worship: nay, the High Priest was so
restricted to the King and Sanbedrim, that he might not consult the Oracle
without he had been ordered to do it by them: neither do we ever hear of any
Laws given out, all the Old Testament over, in the name of the Priests. And in
the New Testament, the Power (it seems) was to be managed by the body of the
faithful, as well as by Churchmen. It is true, the Apostles were clothed with
an extraordinary power of binding and loosing of sins; but no proofs are
brought to justify the pretenses to Jurisdiction that are found among their
Successors. For in the Epistle to Corinth, the Rules there laid down, are
addressed to all the Saints that were called to be faithful: so also is the
Epistle to the Thessalonians, where he tells them to note such as walked
disorderly, and have no fellowship with them; which are shrewd grounds to
believe that at first all things were managed Parochially, where the faithful
were also admitted to determine about what occurred: but for Synods, we find
not the least vestige of them before the end of the second Century, that Synods
were gathered about the Controversy concerning the day of Easter; and the
following Associations of Churches, show clearly, that they took their model
from the division of the Roman Empire, and so according as the Provinces were
divided, the Churches in them did associate to the Metropolitans, and became
subordinate to them, and these were subordinate to the Patriarchs; by which
means it was that the Bishops of Rome had the precedence, not from any
imaginary derivation from St. Peter: for had they gone on such Rules, Jerusalem
where our Lord himself was, had undoubtedly carried it of all the World: but
Rome being the Imperial City, it was the Sea of the greatest Authority. And no
sooner did Bizantium creep into the dignity of being the Imperial City, but the
Bishop of Constantinople was made second Patriarch, and in all things equal to
the Bishop of Rome, the precedence only excepted. Much might be here said for
proving that these Synods did not pretend to a divine Original, though
afterward they claimed a high Authority, yet their appointments were never
called Laws, but only Canons and Rules, which could not pretend to a
Jurisdiction.


Basil. But that I may not seem to rob the Church of all her Power, I
acknowledge that by the Laws of Nature it follows, that these who unite in the
service of GOD, must be warranted to associate in Meetings to agree on generals
Rules, and to use means for preserving purity and order among themselves, and
that all Inferiors ought to subject themselves to their Rules. But as for that
brave distinction of the Churches Authority, being derived from CHRIST as
Mediator, whereas the Regal Authority is from him as GOD, well does it become
its inventors, and much good may it do them. For me, I think, that CHRIST's
asserting, that all power in heaven and in earth was given unto him; and his
being called, The KING of Kings, and LORD of Lords, make it as clear as the
Sun, that the whole Economy of this World is committed to him as Mediator: and
as they who died before him, were saved by him, who was slam ^^om the
foundation of the world: so all humane authority was given by virtue of the
second Covenant, by which mankind was preserved from infallible ruin, which
otherwise it had incurred by Adams fall. But leaving any further enquiry after
such a foolish nicety, I go now to examine what the Magistrates Power is in
matters of Religion: And first, I lay down for a Maxim, That the externals of
Worship, or Government, are not of such importance, as are the Rules of Justice
and Peace, wherein formally the Image of GOD consists. For CHRIST came to bring
us to GOD: and the great end of his Gospel, is, the assimilation of us to GOD,
of which, justice, righteousness, mercy and peace make a great part. Now what
sacredness shall be in the outward of Worship and Government, that these must
not be meddled with by his hands; and what unhallowedness is in the other, that
they may fall within his Jurisdiction, my weakness cannot reach. As for
instance, when the Magistrate allows ten per cent of in^^rest, it is just to
exact it; and when he bring^ i^ down to six per cent, it is oppression to
demand ten per cent; so that he can determine some matte^s to be just or unjust
by his Laws: now why he shall not have such a power about outward matters of
Worship, or of the Government of the Church, judge you; since the one both in it
self, and as it tends to commend us to God, is much more important than the
other. It is true, he cannot meddle with the holy things himself; for the
Scripture rule is express, that men be separated for the work of the Ministry:
And without that separation, he invades the Altar of GOD, that takes that
honor upon him, without he be called to it. But as for giving Laws in the
externals of Religion, I see not why he may not do it, as well as in matters
Civil. It is true, if he contradict the divine Law by his commands, GOD is to
be obeyed rather than man. But this holds in things Civil, as well as Sacred.
For if he command murder, or theft, he is undoubtedly to be disobeyed, as well
as when he commands amiss in matters of Religion. In a word, all Subjects are
bound to obey him in every lawful command. Except therefore you prove that
Churchmen constituted in a Synod are not Subjects, they are bound to
obedience, as well as others: Neither does this Authority of the Magistrate any
way prejudge the power Christ has committed to his Church: For a Father has
power over his Children, and that by a divine Precept, tho the Supreme
Authority have power over him, and them both: so the Churches authority is no
way inconsistent with the Kings Supremacy. As for their Declarative Power, it
is not at all subject to him, only the exercise of it, to this or that person,
may be suspended: For since the Magistrate can banish his Subjects, he may well
silence them: Yet I acknowledge if he do this, out of a design to drive the
Gospel out of his Dominions, they ought to continue in their duty,
notwithstanding such prohibition; for GOD must be obeyed rather than man. And
this was the case of the Primitive Bishops, who rather than give over the
feeding their Flocks, laid themselves open to Martyrdom. But this will not hold
for warranting turbulent persons, who notwithstanding the Magistrates
continuing all encouragements for the public Worship of GOD, choose rather than
concur in it (tho not one of an hundred of them has the confidence to call
that unlawful) to gather separated Congregations, whereby the flocks are
scattered.


Phil. Nay, since you are on that Subject, let me freely lay open the mischief
of it: It is a direct breach of the Laws of the Gospel, that requires our
solemn assembling together, which must ever bind all Christians, till there be
somewhat in the very constitutions of these Assemblies, that renders our
meeting in them unlawful: which few pretend in our case. Next, the Magistrates
commanding these public Assemblies, is certainly a clear and superadded
obligation, which must bind all under sin, till they can prove these our
Meetings for Worship unlawful. And as these separated Conventicles are of their
own nature evil, so their effects are yet worse, and such as indeed all the
ignorance and profanity in the Land is to be charged on them: for as they
dissolve the union of the Church, which must needs draw mischief after it, so
the vulgar are taught to despise their Ministers, and the public Worship, and
thus get loose from the yoke. And their dependence on these separated Meetings,
being but precarious, as they break away from the order of the Church, so they
are not tied to their own order: and thus betwixt hands, the vulgar lose all
sense of Piety, and of the Worship of GOD. Next, in these separated Meetings,
nothing is to be had but a long preachment, so that the knowledge and manners of
the people not being looked after, and they taught to revolt from the settled
Discipline, and to disdain to be c^techised by their Pasto^s, ignorance and
profanity must be the sure effect of these divided Meetings. And in fine, the
disuse of the LORD's Supper is a guilt of a high nature; for the vulgar are
taught to loath the Sacrament from their Ministers hands, as much as the Mass:
and preaching is all they get in their Meetings: so that what in all Ages of
the Church has been looked on, as the great cherishing of Devotion and true
Piety and the chief preserver of Peace among C^^^ti^ns, is wearing out of
practice with our new modelled Christians. These are the visible effects of
separating practices: But I shall not play the uncharitable Diviner, to guess
at the secret mischief such courses may be guilty of.


Basil. Truly, what you have laid out is so well known to us all, that I am
confident Isotimus himself must with much sorrow acknowledge what wicked Arts
these are that some use to dislocate the Body of Christ, and to sacrifice the
interests of Religion to their vanity, humor, or perhaps their secular
interests. But I hold on my design, and add, that if the Magistrate encroach on
God's Prerogative, by contradicting or abrogating divine Laws, all he does that
way, falls on himself. But as for the Churches Directive Power, since the
exercise of that is not of obligation, he may command a surcease in it. It is
true, he may sin in so doing; yet cases may be wherein he will do right to
discharge all Associations of Judicatories, if a Church be in such commotion,
that these Synods would but add to the flame: but certainly he forbidding such
Synods; they are not to be gone about, there being no positive command for them
in Scripture, and therefore a discharge of them contradicts no Law of God, and
so cannot be disobeyed without sin: and when the Magistrate allows of Synods,
he is to judge on whether side in case of differences, he will pass his Law:
neither is the decision of these Synods obligatory in prejudice of his
authority; for there can be but one Supreme; and two Coordinate Powers are a
Chymaera. Therefore in case a Synod and the Magistrate contradict one another
in matters undetermined by GOD, it is certain a Synod sins if it offer to
countermand the Civil Authority, since all must be subject to the Powers that
are, of which number the Synod is a part; therefore they are subject as well as
others. And if they be bound to obey the Magistrates commands, they cannot have
a power to warrant the subjects in their disobedience, since they cannot secure
themselves from sin by such disobedience. And in the case of such countermands,
it is indisputable the Subjects are to be determined by the Magistrates Laws,
by which only the Rules of Synods are Laws, or bind the consciences formally;
since without they be authorized by him, they cannot be Laws; for we cannot
serve two Masters, nor be subject to two Legislators. And thus, methinks,
enough is said for clearing the Title of the Magistrate in exacting our
obedience to his Laws in matters of Religion.


Crit. Indeed, the congesting of all the Old Testament offers, for proving the
Civil Powers their authority in things sacred, were a task of time: And first
of all, that the High Priest might not consult the Oracle, but when either
desired by the King, or in a business that concerned the whole Congregation, is
a great step to prove what the Civil Authority was in those matters. Next, we
find the Kings of Judah give out many Laws about matters of Religion: I shall
wave the instances of David and Solomon, which are so express, that no evasion
can serve the turn, but to say they acted by immediate Commission, and were
inspired of GOD. It is indeed true, that they had a particular direction from
GOD. But it is as clear, that they enacted these Laws upon their own Authority,
as Kings, and not on a Prophetical Power.

But we find Iehoshaphat, 2 Chr. 17. v. 7. sending to his Princes to teach in
the Cities of Judah, with whom also he sent Priests and Levites, and they went
about and taught the people. There you see secular men appointed by the King to
teach the people: he also, 2. Chr. 19. v. 5. set up in Jerusalem a Court made
up of Levites, Priests, and the chief of the Fathers of Israel, for the
judgment of the LORD, and for the controversies among the people; and names two
Presidents, Amariah the chief Priest to be over them in the matters of the
LORD, and Zebadiah for all the Kings matters. And he that will consider these
words, either as they lie in themselves, or as they relate to the first
institution of that Court of seventy by Moses, where no mention is made but by
one Judicatory, or to the Commentary of the whole Writings, and Histories of
the Jews, shall be set beyond dispute, that here was but one Court to judge both
of sacred and secular matters. It is true, the Priests had a Court already
mentioned, but it was no Judicatory, and meddled only with the Rituals of the
Temple. The Levites had also, as the other Tribes, a Court of twenty three for
their Tribe, which have occasioned the mistakes of some places among the Jewish
Writings: but this is so clear from their Writings, that a very overly knowledge
of them will satisfy an impartial Observer. And it is yet more certain, that
from the time of Ezra, to the destruction of the Temple, there was but one
Court, that determined of all matters both Sacred and Civil; who particularly
tried the Priests, if free of the blemishes which might cast one from the
service, and could cognosce on the High Priest, and whip him when he failed in
his duty. Now this commixtion of these matters in one Judicatory, if it had
been so criminal, whence is it that our LORD not only never reproved so great a
disorder, but when convened before them, did not accuse their constitution, and
answered to the High Priest when adjured by him? Likewise, when his Apostles
were arraigned before them, they never declined that Judicatory, but pleaded
their own innocence, without accusing the constitution of the Court, though
challenged upon a matter of doctrine. But they, good men, thought only of
catching Souls into the Net of the Gospel, and were utterly unacquainted with
these new coined distinctions. Neither did they refuse obedience, pretending
the Court had no Jurisdiction in these matters, but because it was better to
obey GOD than Man; which says, They judged Obedience to that Court due, if it
had not countermanded GOD.

But to return to Iehoshaphat, we find him constituting these Courts, and
choosing the persons and empowering them for their work, for he constituted
them for Judgment and for Controversy; so that though it were yielded, as it
will never be proved, that two Courts were here instituted, yet it cannot be
denied, but here is a Church Judicatory constituted by a King, the persons
named by him, a President appointed over them, and a trust committed to them.
And very little Logic will serve to draw from this, as much as the Acts among
us, asserting the King's Supremacy yield to him.

Next, We have a clear instance of Hezekiah, who, 2 Chronicles. 30. ver. 2. with the
Counsel of his Princes, and of the whole Congregation, made a decree for
keeping the Passover, that year on the second Month, whereas the Law of GOD had
affixed it to the first Month, leaving only an exception, Numb. 9.10. for the
unclean, or such as were on a journey, to keep it on the second Month. Npon
which Hezekiah with the Sanhedrim and people, appoints the Passover to be
entirely cast over to the second Month for that Year. Where a very great point
of their Worship (for the distinction of days was no small matter to the Jews)
was determined by the King, without asking the advice of the Priests upon it.
But that you may not think this was peculiar to the King of Israel, I shall
urge you with other instances: When Ezra came from Artaxerxes, he brings a
Commission from him, Ezra chapter 7. ver. 25, 26. impowering him according to the
wisdom of his GOD, that was in his hand, to set up Magistrates and Judges, who
might judge them that knew the Laws of his GOD, and teach them that knew them
not: and a severe certificate is passed upon the disobedient; and one of the
branches of their punishment, which is by the Translators rendered banishment,
being in the Chaldaick, rooting out, is by some judged to be Excommunication;
which is the more probable, because afterward, Chap. 10. ver. 8. the Censure
he threatens on these who came not upon his Proclamation, is, forfeiture of
goods, and separation from the Congregation. Here then it seems a Heathen King
gives authority to Excommunicate: but be in that what will, Ezra upon his
return acted in a high Character, he makes the Priests, Levites, and all
Israel, to swear to put away their strange Wives: he convenes all the people
under the Certificate of separation from the Congregation, and enjoins
Confession of their sins and amendment: and we find both him and Nehemiah
acting in a high Character about the ordering of divine matters, which could
only flow from the King's Commission, for neither of them were Prophets, nor
was Ezra the High Priest but his Brother, and so no more than an ordinary
Priest. Mordecai likewise instituted the feast of Purim, for which nothing
could warrant him, but the King's authority, committed to him, who gave him his
Ring for sealing such Orders, since he was neither King, Priest nor Prophet.
And on the way, let me observe what occurs from that History, for proving what
was yesterday pleaded for, The Subjects ought not to resist, no not the tyranny
of their Superiors, since a Writing was procured from Ahasuerus for warranting
the Jews to avenge themselves, and to stand for their lives, and to destroy and
slay all that would assault them, which says they might not have done this
before that writing was given out, and yet their killing of 74000 of their
Enemies shows, what their strength was. But all I have said will prove that the
Civil Powers under the Old Testament did formally judge about matters of
Religion; and that that privilege belongs to Kings by virtue of their Regal
dignity, and not as they are in Covenant with GOD, since even Heathen Kings
give out Orders about divine matters.


Poly. If from Sacred you descend to humane practices, nothing was more used
than that the Emperors judged in matters of Religion, neither was this yielded
to them only after they became Christians, but Eusebius, lib. 7. cap. 30.
tells, how they made application to Aurelian a Heathen Emperor, for turning
Samosatenus out of the Church of Antioch, who decreed that the Houses of the
Church should be given to those Bishops, whom the Christians of Italy and the
Roman Bishops should recommend to them. Constantine also, when not baptized,
did all his life formally judge in matters both of Doctrine and Discipline: and
for the Laws they made about Church matters, they abound so much, that, as
Grotius says, One needs not read them, but look on them to be satisfied about
this. And indeed I know not how to express my wonder at the affrontedness of
that Pamphleter, who denies this, page 483. Pray ask him, was the determining
about the age, the qualifications, the Election, the duties of Churchmen, the
declaring for what things they should be deposed, or excommunicated, a formal
passing of Laws in Church matters, or only the adding Sanctions to the Church
determinations? And yet who will but with his Eye run through either the first
six Titles of the Code, or the 123. Novel, besides many other places, all
these, and many more Laws about Church matters will meet him. But should I take
a full Career here, I am sure I should be tedious, and Grotius has congested
so many instances of this, that I refer the curious Reader to him for full
satisfaction. The Elections of Bishops which had been formerly in the hands of
the people and Clergy, with the Provincial Synods that judged of them, became
so tumultuary, that popular Elections were discharged by the Council of
Laodicea, Can. 13. and the Emperors did either formally name, as Theodosius did
Nectarius, or reserve the ratifying their Election to themselves. And I must
confess, it is a pretty piece of History, to say the Bishops consented to this,
either as diffident of their Office, or out of ambition. See p. 485. Tell your
Friends that they must either learn more knowledge, or pretend to less; for can
they produce the least vestige for the one branch of this alternative, that the
Bishops their allowing the Emperor such an interest in their Elections, flowed
from a distrust of their Office? Let them give but one scrap of proof for this,
and let them triumph as much as they will. Is it not a pretty thing to see one
talk so superciliously of things he knows not?


Isot. But all you have brought will never prove that a King may at one stroke
subvert a Government established in the Church, and turn out all who adhere to
it, and set up another in its place; neither will this conclude that the King
may enact all things about Ecclesiastical matters, and Persons, by his own bare
authority, which is a surrender of our consciences to him: certainly, this is
to put him in CHRIST's stead, and what mischievous effects may follow upon
this, if all matters of Religion be determined, by the pleasure of secular and
carnal men, who consider their interests and appetites more than God's glory,
or the good of the Church and of Souls: Truly my heart trembles to think on the
effects this both has produced, and still may bring forth. See page 483.


Phil. It is charity to ease your Lungs sometimes by taking a turn in the
Discourse, though you need none of my help. But what you say, Isotimus, does no
way overturn what has been asserted: for either the change that was made was
necessary, sinful, or indifferent: the two former shall not be at this time
debated, but shall be afterward discussed: but if it be indifferent, then the
Kings Laws do oblige us to obedience, and the mischief has followed on the
change falls to their share, who do not obey the King's Laws, when the matter
of them is lawful. And as for the thrusting out Churchmen when they are
guilty, Solomon's precedent is convincing, who thrust out Ab^athar from the
High Priesthood; neither can the least hint be given to prove that he acted as
inspired, and not as a King: and Nehemiah tho but commissionated by Artaxerxes,
thrust one out from the Priesthood, for marrying a strange Woman.

For your prying into Acts of Parliament, truly neither you nor I need be so
much conversant in them. Neither were it any strange matter, if some
expressions in them would not bear a strict Examen. But that you now challenge
about the King's enacting of all matters, will never infer a surrender of
conscience to him; for certainly that must relate to what goes before, of the
outward Government and Policy of the Church. Besides, none will quarrel the
phrase of the Kings authority in all things that are Civil; yet that will not
infer that he can enact the lawfulness of murder and theft. So these
expressions must carry with them a tacit exception. Yea, even without that
allowance, the phrase may be well justified, since it only imports that the
Kings enacting any thing in these matters, makes them legal, which differs much
from lawful; and says only that such Orders issued forth by the King, are de
facto Laws, which will not conclude they must be obeyed; but only that his
authority is to be acknowledged, either by obedience, if the command be just,
or by suffering, if unjust. As for the effects this may produce, I am sure they
cannot prove worse than these which have followed upon the pretenses of the
Churches absolute authority, and intrinsic Sovereign Power. And indeed since
there is so much corruption among men, nothing that falls into the hands of
men, can escape the mixtures of abuse at long run. But I must add, that the
passions and pride of many Churchmen in all Ages have been such, that the
decision of the plurality of Churchmen, seems the model of the World that is
fullest of danger.


Isot. Three things yet remain to be discussed: The one is, if obedience be due
to the Laws, when they command things contrary to our consciences? For sure you
cannot pretend in that case, to give a preference to humane Laws beyond
conscience, which is the voice of GOD. The next is, when the Magistrate
commands things just of themselves, but upon unjust motives and narratives,
whether my obedience does not homologate his bad designs? And finally, where
the commands of the Magistrate are manifestly unlawful, how far should the
Church, and Church men, oppose and contradict them? For a bare non-obedience
seems not to be all we are bound to, in that case. When I am satisfied in these
things, I will quit this purpose.


Basil. To engage in a particular discussion of what is now moved by you, would
draw on more discourse than our present leisure will allow of; yet I shall
attempt the saying of what may satisfy a clear and unprejudged mind. And to
the first, I shall not fall on any longer enquiry into the nature and
obligation of conscience, than to tell that conscience is a conviction of our
rational faculties, that such or such things are suitable to the nature and Will
of God. Now all Religion is bound upon us, on this account, that there is such
evidence offered for its truth, which may and ought to satisfy the strictest
Examen of Reason. And all certainty is resolved in this, that our rational
faculties are convinced of the truth of the objects that he before us: which
conviction when applied to divine matters, is called Conscience. But there may
be great mistakes in this Conviction: for either the prejudices that lie on our
minds from our senses, the prepossessions of Education, interest, or humors,
the want of a due application of our faculties to their objects, or chiefly the
dullness and lesion of our Organs, the corruption of our minds through sin and
lust, occasion many errors: so that often without good reason, often contrary to
it, we take up persuasions, to which we stiffly adhere, and count such
convictions evidences of the Will of GOD. I acknowledge, when a Man lies under a
persuasion of the Will of GOD, he ought not to go cross to it: for this opens a
door to Atheism, when that is contradicted of which we are convinced. But if
this persuasion be false, it cannot secure a Man from sinning in following of
it. For it is a Man's own fault that he is thus imposed upon, since if his
rational faculties were duly applied, and well purified, they should prove
unerring touchstones of truth. If therefore through vanity, wilfulness,
rashness, or any other bias of the mind, it be carried to wrong measures, a
Man is to blame himself, and thus his error ought to aggravate, and not lessen
his guilt. If then a Man's conscience dictate to him the contrary of what GOD
commands, in that case, he is in a visible hazard: for his error can never t^ke
away GOD's Autho^ity, and so his wrong informed conscience does not secure him
from guilt, if he be disobedient. On the other hand, nothing in Scripture can
bind a Man to act aagainst the convictions of conscience, since we are bound to
believe the Scriptures, only because of the evidence of their authority to our
rational faculties: If then our belief of the Scriptures rest on that
foundation, no part of Scripture can bind us to walk contrary to that evidence,
for then it should destroy that Principle on which our Obligation to believe it
self is founded, which is the evidence of reason; and so in that case, a Man
sins whatever he do. Neither is this to be accountd strange, since that
erroneous conscience is from man's own fault. And that which some alledg to
escape this, that in such cases a Man ought to forbear from acting, will not
serve turn, to excuse a Man from sin: For in these Precepts which exact a
positive obedience, such a ^orbearance and surceasing from action, is a sin.

Upon these Evidences then it will follow, that if the conviction of our
conscience run contrary to the Magistrates commands, these convictions are
either well grounded, or ill: If the former, then the Magistrates command being
contrary to the nature and Will of GOD, a^e not to be obeyed: If ill grounded,
then that mistaken persuasion cannot secure us from sin, no more than in the
case of conscience contradicting the Law of GOD: for the Laws of the
Magistrates in things lawful, are the Laws of GOD, being the application of his
general Laws unto particular instances, by one clothed with authority from
him. Therefore tho I do not say the Laws of the Magistrate can warrant our
counteracting an erroneous conscience; yet on the contrary, a misinformed
conscience will not secure us when we disobey the Magistrates lawful commands.
And thus I think your first Question is clearly answered.


End. You have a great deal of reason to say so, your discourse being so
closely rational, that I cannot see any escape from any part of it; yet I must
add, that certainly it is a piece of Christian tenderness, which obliges all
in Authority, to beware of laying gall-traps and snares in the way of tender
consciences. And the best way to get an undisputed obedience, is, that their
commands be liable to as few exceptions as is possible; and that the good of
any such Laws be well balanced with the hazards of them, that so the Communion
of the Church in all outward, particularly in the Sacraments, may be had on as
easy terms as is possible, whereby nothing be enacted that may frighten away
weak^r minds from the f^llowship of the Saints. But on the other hand, great
caution must be had by all Subjects on what grounds they refuse obedience to
the Laws, that so they be not found following their own designs and interests,
under a color of adhering firmly to their consciences. They must deliver
themselves from all prepossessions, and narrowly examine all things, ere they
adventure on refusing obedience to the Laws. But now consider if an unjust
motive or narrative in a Law, deliver tender consciences from an obligation to
obey it, or not?


Basil. If the Magistrate do couple his motive and narrative with our
obedience, so that we cannot do the one without a seeming consent to the other,
then certainly we are not to obey: For actions being often signs of the
thoughts, an action how indifferent soever, if declared a sign of concurring in
a sinful design, makes us guilty, in so far as we express our concurrence by a
sign enjoined for that end. But if the motive or narrative be simply an account
of the Magistrates own thoughts, without expressing that obedience is to be
understood as a concurrence in such intentions, then we are to obey a lawful
command, tho enacted upon a bad design: For we must obey these in Authority,
ever till they stand in competition with GOD. If then their Laws contradict not
GOD's Precepts, neither in their natural nor intended si^nification, they are
to be obeyed, whatever the grounds were for enacting them, which is only the
Magistrates deed, for which he shall answer to GOD.


Poly. This calls me to mind of two Stories not impertinent to this purpose:
The one is of Julian the Apostate, who to entangle the Christians, that never
scrupled the bowing to the Emperors Statue, as a thing lawful, caused to set up
his with the Images of some of the Gods about it, that such as bowed to it,
might be understood, as (likewise) bowing to the Images: which abused some of
the simpler: but the more discerning refused to bow at all to those Statues,
because he intended to expound that innocent bowing to his Statue, as an
adoration of the Gods about it. A Christian likewise being brought to the King
of Persia, did according to the Law bow before him; but when he understood that
to be exacted as a divine Honor to the King, he refused it.


Eud. This is clear enough that all actions are as they are understood, and
accordingly to be performed, or surceased from. But it seems more difficult to
determine what is to be done in case a Magistrate enact wicked Laws: Are not
both his Subjects bound to refuse obedience; and the Heads of the Church, and
the watchmen of Souls likewise to witness against it? And may they not declare
openly their dislike of such Laws or practices, and proceed against him with
the censures of the Church? since as to the Censures of the Church, we see no
reason why they should be dispensed with respect of persons, which S. James
condemns in all Church Judicatories.


Basil. I shall not need to repeat what has been so often said, that we must
obey GOD rather than man: if then the Magistrates enjoin what is directly
contrary to the divine Law, all are to refuse obedience, and watchmen ought to
warn their Flocks against such hazards; and such as can have admittance to
their Princes, or who have the charge of their Consciences, ought with a great
deal of sincere freedom, as well as humble duty, represent the evil and
sinfulness of such Laws: but for any Synodical Convention, or any Declaration
against them, no warrant for that does appear; and therefore if the Magistrate
shall simply discharge all Synods, I cannot see how they can meet without sin.
But for Parochial meetings of Christians for a solemn acknowledgment of GOD,
such Assemblings for divine Worship, being enjoined both by the Laws of Nature,
and Nations, and particularly commanded in the Gospel, no consideration can
free Christians from their Obligation, thus to assemble for Worship: if then
the Magistrate should discharge these or any part of them, such as Prayer,
Prais^s, and reading of Scriptures, preaching the Gospel, or the use of the
Sacraments, they are notwithstanding all that to be continued in. But for the
consultative or directive Government of the Church, till a divine Command be
produced for Synods or Discipline, it cannot lawfully be gone about without or
against his authority.


Crit. For refusing obedience to an unjust command, of surceasing visible
Worship, the instance of Daniel is signal: who not only continued his
adorations to GOD, for all Darius his Law; but did it openly, and avowedly,
that so he might own his subjection to GOD. But for reproving Kings, we see
what caution was to be observed in it; since GOD sent Prophets with express
Commissions for it in the Old Testament: and Samuel notwithstanding this severe
message to Saul, yet honored him before his people. It is true, there should be
no respect of persons in Christian Judicatories: but that is only to be
understood of these who are subject to them: and how it can agree to the King
who is Supreme, to be a Subject, is not easily to be comprehended. Since then
honor and obedience is by divine precept due to Magistrates, nothing that
invades that honor, or detracts from that obedience, can be lawfully attempted
against them: such as is any Church-censure or excommunication. And therefore I
cannot see how that practice of Ambrose upon Theodosius, or other later
instances of some Bishops of Rome, can be reconciled to that, Render fear to
whom fear, and honor to whom honor is due.


Phil. I am sure their practice is far less justifiable, who are always
preaching about the Laws and times to the people, with virulent reflections on
King, Parliament and Council: much more such as not content with flying
discourses, do by their writings, which they hope shall be longer lived, study
the vilifying the persons, and affronting the authority of these GOD has set
over them. And how much of this stuff the Press has vented these thirty years
by past, such as knew the late times, or see their writings, can best judge.


Eud. Now our discourse having dwelt so long upon generals, is to descend to
particulars: That we may examine whether upon the grounds hitherto laid down,
the late tumults, or the present Schisms and divisions can be justified, or
ought to be censured? I know this is a nice point, and it is to be tenderly
handled, lest all that shall be said be imputed to the suggestions of passions
and malice. Wherefore let me entreat you who are to bear the greater part of
that discourse, to proceed in it calmly, that it may appear your designs are
not to lodge infamy on any party or person, but simply to lay out things as
they are: hoping withal, that you will not take your informations of what you
say from the tatles of persons concerned, but will proceed on true and sure
grounds. And that we may return to this with the greater composedness of
spirit; let our serious thoughts be interrupted with some chearfuller
diversions: for our spirits are now too far engaged to fall upon such a Head.


Isot. You have a great deal of reason to guard your Friends well when they are
to fall upon such matters, lest they sin against the generation of GOD's
Children. For my part, I am not afraid to enter on a discussion of these
things, and doubt not to make it appear how the LORD's work was signally
carried on by his faithful Servants, and that he himself appeared in it, even
to the conviction of all beholders. If there were any either of the Church or
State, who covered their own bad designs, under these pretenses, that makes not
the cause a whit the worse: for CHRIST chose twelve, and one of them had a
Devil.


Phil. Were I at present to fall a canvasing these things, I doubt not I should
quickly make all your Plumes fall off: but I am willing at this time to break
off our Conference: for this point will neither be soon dispatched nor easily
mananaged; therefore we shall now part with an appointment to meet next day in
this same place after Dinner.


Basil. I believe none of us are so weary of another, or of the Discourses we
have tossed these two days, that it is needful to apprehend any will fail of
being here at that hour: therefore, good night to you all.


Isot. Be sure, I shall keep it, if an unavoidable excuse detain me not. Adieu.


Crit. For me and Polybistor, though it is like we shall not have great
occasion of bearing our share in your Discourse, yet we will not fail to be
here.


Eud. I cannot express my sense of the Honor you do me, in making this place
still happy with so many good Company, and so much pleasant Discourse: and
therefore you may assure your selves, I will wait for your return, not without
impatience. And so I bid you all, good night.


THE THIRD CONFERENCE.
Isotimus. WE are again as good as our word in keeping this appointment, and I
hope we shall be no less exact in observing the Rule we concluded last night of
tempering our passions; only I must guard you against the mistaking my zeal I
may express for passion: remember who said, The zeal of thy house has eaten me
up, who also scourged the buyers and sellers out of the Temple.


Eud. I confess, I want not my fears of some heat and excess in this days
Discourse: but I will crave leave to check it on what side soever it appear, I
know there is a holy zeal for GOD, which will inflame a devout mind. But its
fire (...) mild and gentle, free of blustering and disorder: and that rage
which is in many, for some Parties or Opinions, and against others, being as
void of knowledge as of Charity, ought not to pretend to Christ's Example,
unless they be likewise acted by his Spirit. A diligent search will quickly
discover, if our motives and maxims have a tincture of his lowly meek and
self-denying spirit in them. And certainly if our zeal be for GOD, it will take
its degrees from the proportion of its Objects. It is therefore a Pharisaical
pretense to own a zeal for some smaller matters, which have scarce been thought
upon by the whole series of Christians in all Ages, till of late, when we are
so cold in the defense of Peace, Charity, obedience to those over us, and the
Unity of the Church: which are great, certain, and indispensible Duties. That
zeal likewise which transports a man unto unjustifiable heats of railing
against particular persons, and appears in a bitter humor of dull jeering, and
bold detraction, has no reason to shroud it self under the Example of CHRIST's
holy zeal; who tho in the spirit of a Zealot, having proved his divine Mission
and authority by Miracles, he whipped the defilers of the Temple out of it; yet
that dispensation wherein such practices were not unusual from extraordinary
persons, being now changed into the new one, whose distinguishing Character is
Charity, we are to bridle all the motions of distempered heat, left the effects
of it be as unjustifiable as it self is. For it is to be considered, that the
proper characters of the Gospel Spirit, are not devotion toward GOD, or zeal
for his truths, which were common both with the Religion traditionally conveyed
from Adam, and Noah, and that which was delivered to Moses; but that which
CHRIST has made the cognizance of his Disciples, is, That they love one
another, whereby all must know them to be such. And therefore all these who
discover a spirit of hatred, rage, and malice at these, of whom they cannot
deny but they may be Christ's Disciples, prove themselves to be void of his
Spirit. Now, Isotimus, what endless complaints could I here make of some you
know of, who are perpetually trafficking to make all who differ from them
odious, who catch up every Tattle they hear that may defame them, and are sure
to spread it as far as either their Tongue or Pen can reach: nor are they
Niggards of their additions to them, to make them swell bigger. With what
mavelous joy do they suck in an ill report? and tho it be but dubiously
related, they will be sure to vent it as the greatest truth in the World. And
when the stock of Reports fails them, then they break in upon their Magazins of
Forgeries: and here is an endless Trade. Sometimes they will piece up things as
incoherent as the Rags of a Beggars Cloak, and show either their pretended
intelligence, or profound sagacity, to smell out bad intentions. If they can
fix nothing on their Adversary, then that he is an Hypocrite, or a Dissembler,
comes well to serve all purposes, and to defeat the best intentions: And, oh!
but the jealousies of Popery and Jesuitical practices, work wonders on their
Belief! Indeed, Sir, I must tell you freely, I see a Spirit stirring among us,
which I look upon as tinctured with the deepest dye of Antichristianism, and so
void of the common impressions of good nature and civility; but much more of
his Image, who will have us learn of him, in that he is meek and lowly, that
really a Man had as well live among Scythians and Barbarians, as among such
Wasps and Vipers. Every thing is alike for their malice. Do some that differ
from them live in a franker way, these are sure to be called licentious and
profane. Are others more severe, silent, an^ retired, who express a contempt of
the world with all its enjoyments, these must pass for Papists, Juglers and
Hypocrites; and their best ac^ions must be lashed with the worst Censures.
Again, if we treat them softly with gentleness and respect, then they are
insolent, and impute such usage to ou^ distrust of our own Opinions, and a
forced value of their way. And if we use a little more freedom to speak home,
and discover their weakness and perverseness to them, then they rage and some,
and call us Blasphemers; and apply all the threatenings against mockers of GOD
and Piety, to such as shall offer to unmask them, or disclose any of their
follies. If these in Authority coerce them, nothing is to be heard but
complaints of persecution, and revilings, and evil surmisings: But will gentle
courses mollify their hearts? No, not so much as to be grateful or civil to
those to whom they ow them: but they will be sure to observe how GOD binds up
the hands of the wicked, and how marvellously he protects his own: and all the
favor showed them will have no better character than a very mean and scant act
of Justice, ^licite by a visible State convenience, if not necessity. See p.
493. You know of whom I mean, and how justly applicable these Characters are to
them: and that they are not the dreams of an e^travagant fancy; but true,
though imperfect descriptions of what every one sees to be among us.


Isot. I am heartily sorry to find you the first that swerves from your own
Rule, and to hear you engage in a Discourse so unlike your self, at least so
different from the character is conceived of you: these invectives being fitter
for the Author of the friendly Debate, the Scribl^r of the Dia^ogues, or the
Asserter of Ecclesiastical Policy, who have mortally wounded Religion, and all
the professions and expressions of it, under a pretense of unvailing the
Pharisaical spirit. And indeed you are now in the same Tract, your design being
to charge all the faithful servants of CHRIST, with this tatling, whispering,
and censorious temper; because perhaps some idle people who own a kindness for
these Opinions, but really are of no principles, may be guilty of these ways.


Eud. I beseech you, wrest not my words beyond my design, and their meaning. I
charge not the whole Party with these Arts: yet that there is too great
compliance given to them, and too little freedom used against them, by too
many, may without unjustice, or breach of Charity, be averred: but the
disclosing of these is so far from injuring Religion, that I know nothing so
proper for recovering the World from the jealousies these Arts have occasioned
at it, as the unmasking of that Spirit; that so the amiable and lovely visage
of true Religion may appear in its own luster, and free of these false Colors
some unjust pretenders to it, h^ve cast over it: and therefore these Writings
you mention, seem to have pursued a noble Design, which shall not want its
reward. B^t remember I make a vast difference betwixt the being of an Opinion,
and the pursuing all these crooked and wicked practices for its defense, which
I have laid before you. At the former, I have no quarrel: for knowing how
subject my self is to mistakes, I censure and judge none for their Opinions,
till they strike at the foundations of Faith, or a good life: And so do not
only not charge all your Party with these imputations, but know a great many of
them who are very free of them: but that many are too guilty of them, is what
your self dares not deny. And how much of that temper appears in the late
Pamphlets, I leave with every rational Reader to conside^: for it is not worth
the while for any of us to sit down, and canvass them all. But how guilty are
most of you in this which you here blame me unjustly for, which is the charging
a Party with the escapes, how great or signal soever, of some individuals. For
to undertake the Patrociny of every man in every Party, is that which none in
his right wits will do: To deal therefore equally with you, I neither think
your Party nor ours, culpable for the faults of some particular persons. B^t,
Sir, when a perverse detracting Spirit gets in to these who pretend highly,
certainly they ought to be told it, and that roundly too. For you know the
greatest danger to Religion, is to be apprehended from the leaven of the
Scribes and Phari^^ecs; since open and discernible faults do not so much
prevail for infecting the Christian S^creties, as these secret and more easily
palliated errors. Consider therefore a little what was the righteousness of the
Pharisees, and what was their leaven, and search for it; left it yet leaven
you, and lest your righteousness exceed not theirs. The Pharisees prayed often,
and long, both in the Synagogues, streets, and widows houses: they studied the
Law exactly, and had a great reverence for Moses and the Prophets, and much
zeal against blasphemers, false teachers and heretics: They were strict
observers of the Sabbath, and were careful to prepare for their Passover
solemnities: They had great respect for the opinions of their Ancestors: They
looked grave and solemn: They fasted often, and gave tithes of all they had:
Their outward deportment was not only clean, but beautiful: They were zealous
to gain Proselytes, and expressed a tenderness of conscience, even in the
smallest matters: They were careful to avoid all converse with profane or
wicked persons. In a word, they had many things, which to a vulgar and less
discerning eye, made a fair show in the flesh. But with all this, they were
proud, and exalted in their own conceits, so that they despised all other
persons: They were Magisterial, and desired to prescribe to every body: They
were full of empty boastings, and assumed to themselves big and swelling
Titles: and all their opinions they obtruded as Oracles. They did all to be
seen of men, and loved salutations in the market places, and the uppermost
rooms at feasts. They envied any they saw outstrip them in true worth; and
hated and contemned all that followed these. They studied to calumniate and
revile every person that opposed them, with the most unjust and cruel
reproaches, excommunicating all who adhered to them: Neither would they yield
to the clearest evidences were offered for their conviction: and nothing but
the blood of the most innocent could satisfy their revenge. They were
covetous, and devoured widows houses, with their pretenses of devotion. They
were false and subdolous, studying to ensnare others in their speeches, or
wrest what they said to a contrary and mischievous sense. They were traitors to
these in Authority, though when it might serve their ends, they spared not to
pretend much zeal for them: and the fervor of their zeal made them often
attempt the murde^^ng of those who opposed them, and discovered their false
pretexts, and mischievous designs. And from this, let all J^dge how much of
that Pharisaical leaven does yet lurk, and leaven among us. I know the
application would be thought as invidious, as it is obvious. And, I pray GOD,
those g^ilty of these evils, may charge them home upon themselves: For I
confess, I love not that part of the Surgeons trade so well, as to dwell
longer on the cutting of ulcers, or the searching of sores: and these whom this
general hint will not help to some conviction, would be little prevailed upon
by a closer discovery of the parallel. But m^stake me not, as if I charged one
party only with this leaven, which is, alas! too visible among many of all
sides and parties. But to dwell no longer on generals, which every one will
drive off himself, and lodge on others, let us now come to a closer review of
our late times. And here, Philarcheus, I quit the Theme to you, who I know can
manage it better.


Phil. Truly, when I reflect on the late times, and the spirit which did then
act in the Judicatories both of Church and State, I wonder much how any can be
guilty of the error of thinking it was the cause of GOD was then fought for. I
deny not but a great many, yea, I am willing to hope the greater part, were
misled and abused, and did imagine it was Religion and Liberties they fought
for; and so went out as they were called, in the simplicity of their heart, and
knew not any thing of the secret designs of their Leaders: As in the case of
Absoloms rebellion, two hundred went from Jerusalem with him, which might well
a little excuse their fault, but could not alleviate the guilt of that
unnatural rebellion: so whatever may be said for excusing the multitudes, who,
I doubt not, meant well, yet that will never serve for vindicating the course
was followed. I confess, if I saw any remorse or shame for bypast
miscarriages; if I found these people we speak of, either humbled for them
before GOD, or ashamed of them among men, I should be the last on earth who
would upbraid them with them: and that the rather, that His Majesty has buried
the remembrance of them by a gracious oblivion. But when they continue so
insolent, as still to bear up so high in their pretentions, as if GOD had been
visibly with them: and when they think it an injury to their innocence to tell
them of an indemnity, who would not be tempted to take them to task, and
examine all their vain boastings, and empty pretenses? to which I am both
provoked from their arrogance, and invited from the evident proofs of all I
shall allege, which I can lay before you from authentical Papers and
Registers: and I shall freely tell you, that if any of these Pamphleteers had
but the half to say of these who yield a compliance to the present
Establishment, which I can say of them, the world would ring with it. But I
count the defaming of men a wo^k as mean, as it is cruel. Yet I look upon my
self as obliged to give some accounts of the spirit and ways of these people,
which I shall do with all the reserve and caution that becomes a Christian.


Eud. Hold, hold, I pray you, run not too far in your carreer, lest you lay
open things were better hid: I confess these Writers do justly draw it from
you; but for the faults of two or three, be not cruel to a multitude. And what
will all you shall say avail? for we know well enough how little the clearest
evidence will prevail upon their belief: And though I in particular, know upon
what grounds you can go, for verifying all you undertake, and that they are
unexceptionably clear; yet it is a dunghill not to be searched too much.
Wherefore let me, with my most earnest entreaties, divert you from the
discourse you have threatened Isotimus with. But because all these men's defenses
of the resistance Subjects may make to their Sovereigns, go upon the principles
of maintaining Religion and Liberties, when invaded by the Magistrate; we will
therefore be beholden to you, if you satisfy us, whether the late wars, as
they were begun and carried on, were defensive or not?


Phil. Your authority over me is so entire, that your commands never fail of
determining my obedience, therefore for this once I shall yield to your desire,
but with this declaration, that if Isotimus cannot prevail among his friends,
for conjuring that pamphleting spirit into silence, I will be forced on more
freedom than I either design or desire: and be made to tell name and surname of
the Actors of many things, which they may wish lay dead: and be made to prove
them from authentic papers and records, and discover a mystery of iniquity,
which has lien long hid under fair pretenses: and in a word, let you
understand what were the arts, caballings, and intrigues of these who pretended
so much to the interest of CHRIST, when they sought their own: and if in doing
this, I be forced on much round and plain dealing, the blame of it will fall to
their share who extort it from me. But I come now to satisfy your desire, and
doubt not to convince you, that the late wars were an invasion of the Kings
Authority, and of the established Laws, and were not for defense of any part of
the established Religion and Liberties.

In the year 1938. His Majesty having understood, that the authorizing of the
Service Book, and Book of Canons, and the establishment of the
High-Commission-Courts were illegal; did upon the representation of those
grievances, not only retract what he had formerly done, but in the fullest
manner discharged them, and though the Articles of Perth stood settled by Law,
yet upon their petitions, who counted them grievances, he warranted their
disuse: and for securing the fears of his Subjects of the change of Religion,
(with which some factious spirits had poisoned them;) he appointed the National
Covenant, as King James had signed it, to be taken by all his Subjects with a
bond of mutual defense and adherence to it: He also summoned an Assembly and
Parliament, for satisfying all the just demands and grievances of his Subjects.
But did this satisfy the zeal of that party? No, for when all colors of
grounds were removed from those malicious imputations, with which his Majesty's
actions were aspersed; then did they flee to their safe and sure refuge of
jealousies and fears, out of which there was never any storming of them, as if
all had been only offered to trepan and deceive them. And after His Majesty had
called a Synod at Glasgow, then came in the Lay Elders, who were all of the
Nobility, and men of the greatest eminence of the Kingdom, and carried the
elections of the members of the Assembly in the most arbitrary manner
imaginable: many instances whereof I can yet prove from authentic papers, one
general I shall only name, (for did I stand to reckon up all, I should never
get to an end:) the ruling Elders who came from every Pa^och to the
Presbyteries, for electing the Commissioners to the Assembly, were men of
power, and of one knot; and so when it was voted what Ministers should be
chosen, they who were listed, being at least six, were set to the door, and
thus the Elders who stayed within, carried the election as they pleased. And
when the commissionated ruling Elder was chosen, they were all so associated,
that they could not choose wrong. And thus it was, that the secular men did
entirely choose the members of the Assembly of Glasgow. But before they went to
it, a written citation of the Bishops was ordered to be read through all the
Churches of Scotland; wherein they were changed, as guilty of all the crimes
imaginable, which as an Agape after the Lords Supper, was first read after a
Communion at Edinburgh: and upon it, orders were sent every where, for bringing
in the privatest of their escapes. (And you may judge how consonant this was to
that Royal Law of charity, which covers a multitude of sins) nor was the Kings
Authority any whit regarded all this while. Was ever greater contempt put on
the largest offers of grace and favor? And when at Glasgow His Majesty offered
by his Commissioner, to consent to the limiting of Bishops, nothing would
satisfy their zeal without condemning the order, as unlawful and abjured. But
when many illegalities of the constitution and procedure of that Assembly were
discovered, their partiality appeared, for being both Judge and Party, they
justified all their own disorders. Upon which His Majesty's Commissioner was
forced to discharge their further sitting, or procedure, under pain of Treason:
but withal published His Majesty's Royal intentions to them, for satisfying all
their legal desires, and securing their fears. But their stomachs were too
great to yield obedience, and so they sat still, pretending their authority
was from CHRIST, and condemned Episcopacy, excommunicated the Bishops, with a
great many other illegal and unjustifiable Acts. And when His Majesty came with
an Army to do himself right by the Sword GOD had put in his hands, they took
the start of him, and seized on his Castles, and on the houses and persons of
his good Subjects, and went in a great body against him. Now in this His
Majesty had the Law clearly of his side: For Episcopacy stood established by
Act of Parliament. And if this was a cause of Religion, or a defense of it,
much less such as deserved all that blood and confusion which it drew on, let
all the World judge.

It is true, His Majesty was willing to settle things, and receive them again
into his grace, and upon the matter granted all their desires: but they were
unsatisfiable; upon which they again armed. But of this I shall not recount the
particulars, because I hope to see a clear and unbyassed narration of these
things ere long. Only one Villainy I will not conceal, at the pacification at
Berwick, seven Articles of Treaty were signed; But the Covenanters got a paper
among them, which passed for the conditions of the agreement; though neither
signed by his Majesty, nor attested by Secretary or Clerk: and this being every
where spread, his Majesty challenged it as a Forgery: and all the English Lords
who were of the Treaty, having declared upon Oath, that no such paper was
agreed on, it was burnt at London by the hand of the Hangman, as a scandalous
paper. But this was from the Pulpits in Scotland, represented as a violation of
the Treaty, and that the Articles of it were burnt. These and such were the
Arts the men of that time used to inflame that blessed King's native Subjects
against him.

But all these were small matters to the following invasion of England, An.
1643. For his Majesty did An. 1641. come to Scotland, and give them full
satisfaction to all, even their most unreasonable demands; which he consented
to pass into Acts of Parliaments. But upon his return into England, the woeful
rupture betwixt him and the two Houses following; was our Church-party
satisfied with the trouble they occasioned him? No, they were not: for they did
all they could to cherish and foment the Houses in their insolent Demands,
chiefly about Religion: and were as forward in pressing England's uniformity
with Scotland, as they were formerly in condemning the design of bringing
Scotland to an uniformity with England.

I shall not engage further in the differences betwixt the King and the two
Houses, than to show that His Majesty had the Law clearly of his side, since he
not only consented to the redress of all grievances, for which the least color
of Law was alleged; but had also yielded to larger concessions for securing
the fears of his Subjects than had been granted by all the Kings of England
since the Conquest. Yet their demands were unsatisfiable without His Majesty
had consented to the abolishing of Episcopacy, and discharge of the Liturgy,
which neither his Conscience, nor the Laws of England allowed of: so that the
following War cannot be said to have gone on the principles of defending
Religion; since His Majesty was invading no part of the established Religion.
And thus you see, that the War in England was for advancing a pretense of
Religion. And for Scotlands part in it, no Sophistry will prove it defensive:
for His Majesty had settled all matters to their hearts desire, and by many
frequent and solemn protestations, declared his resolutions of observing
inviolably that agreement: neither did he so much as require their assistance
in that just defense of his Authority, and the Laws, invaded by the two Houses:
though in the explication of the Covenant, An. 1039. it was agreed to, and
sworn, That they should in quiet manner, or in Arms, defend His Majesty's
Authority, within or without the Kingdom, as they should be required by His
Majesty, or any having his Authority. But all the King desired was, that
Scotland might lie neutral in the quarrel, enjoying their happy tranquillity:
yet this was not enough for your Churches zeal, but they remonstrated that
Prelacy was the great Mountain stood in the way of Reformation, which must be
removed, and they sent their Commissioners to the King with these desires,
which His Majesty answered by a Writing yet extant under his own Royal hand,
showing, That the present settlement of the Church of England was so rooted in
the Law, that he could not consent to a change, till a new form were agreed to,
and presented to him: to which these at Westminster had no mind: but he offered
all ease to tender Consciences, and to call a Synod to judge of these
differences, to which he was willing to call some Divines from Scotland, for
bearing their opinions and reasons. At that time, Petitions came in from
several Presbyteries in Scotland, to the Conservators of the Peace, inciting
them to own the Parliaments quarrel: upon which many of the Nobility, and
others, signed a Cross Petition, which had no other design, but the diverting
these Lords from interrupting the Peace of Scotland, by meddling in the English
quarrel: upon which Thunders were given out against these Petitioners, both
from the Pulpits, and the Remonstrances of the Commission of the General
Assembly; and they led Processes against all who subscribed it. But His Majesty
still desired a neutrality from Scotland; and tho highly provoked by them, yet
continued to bear, with more than humane patience, the affronts were put on his
Authority. Yet for animating the people of Scotland into the designed War, the
Leaders of that Party did every where study to poison the people with damnable
jealousies of the King's inclination to Popery, of his accession to the
Massacre of Ireland, and of his designs to subvert by force the late agreement
with Scotland, if his Armies were blessed with success in England. It were an
endless work to tell all the ways were used for rooting these wicked jealousies
in the peoples hearts: neither were all His Majesty's protestations able to
overcome them: yet in end, when His Majesty finding what their inclinations
were, did refuse to admit the Commissioners from Scotland to mediate betwixt
himself and the Houses, they returned home; and immediately upon that, contrary
to all the Laws of Scotland, a great meeting of Counselors, Conservators, and
Commissioners for the public burdens, ordained a Convention of Estates to be
summoned, which was never before done without the King's command, except in the
minority of the Kings: neither did they so much as wait for the King's
pleasure, but only signified their resolution to him, and desired His Commands
against the day prefixed. Here was an invasion of the King's Prerogative, which
deserved a high Censure: yet so far did His Majesty's clemency, and love to his
native Kingdom lead him, that he dispensed with this transgression, and allowed
their sitting in a Convention, provided they meddled not in the business of
England, nor raised an Army in order to it: But notwithstanding this, they
voted themselves a free Convention, and not restricted to the bounds prescribed
in the King's Letter, which they refused to registrate. And after this, they
leagued with England. But having spoke my self out of breath, I quit the giving
account of what follows to Basilius.


Basil. I have observed one defect in your Narration, for which I will be very
favorable to you, beca^se I ^ntend to be guilty of that ^ame fault my self;
which is, that you have spoken nothing of the National Covenant, and I mean to
say as little of the L^ague. And I am apt to gues^ that your silence was
designed upon the same grounds that mine is: for indeed I can satisfy my self
with nothing I can say upon the League, except I told all I know of the Arts
and manner of its contrivance. And truly, I cannot prevail upon my self at
present, for the saying of that. Therefore I will draw a vail over it, and say
nothing, till I see further reason for a more full discovery; and then I am
afraid Isotimus shall confess, it was not prudently done to h^ve extorted it
from me. But to quit this, and pu^sue the Narration Philarcheus has devolved
on me, I shall tell you how Commissioners come from England to treat for an
Army from Scotland, for their assistance in the War they were then engaged in
against the King: Upon which all Articles being agreed to, and a League ^wo^n,
an Army was sent into England, which turned the seals that did then hang in an
even balance, to the King's ruin. And truly, my invention cannot reach an
argument, or color, for proving these to have been defensive Arms, they being
the effect of a combination with the Subjects of England against our common
King. B^t shall I next tell you what followed after the fatal revolution of
things in England, upon his Majesty's trusting himself to the Scots Army, I am
sure I should ^ill your minds with horror. For though His Majesty offered
Concessions, justly to be wondered at, he having been willing to quit the
Militia for diverse years, and to set up Presbytery for three years; and that in
the mean while there should be a free Synod, in order to a final settlement
with other great diminutions of Royal Authority; which show how willing he was
at his own c^st to have redeemed the peace of his Kingdoms: only he added, that
his Conscience could not allow him to take the Covenant, nor authorize it by
Law, nor consent to the abolition of Episcopacy, or the Liturgy; protesting
that how soon he could do these things with a good Conscience, he should yield
to all the desires of his Subjects: in the mean while, he entreated for a
personal Treaty, in order to mutual satisfaction. Yet with how much fury did
that Party press the settling of the Government without him, the di^owning his
interest, and the abandoning of his Person to his Enemies; tho at that very
time, the designs of the Sectarian Party, against both Monar^hy and His
Majesty's Person, were breaking out, and had been made known to them by those
who understood them well? What followed upon this, I wish my silence could bury
from the knowledge of all the World. But, al^s! it is too well known what infamy
these Men brought upon themselves, and their Count^y: which in the Opinion of
the World, was generally held guilty of that which was the Crime of the
prevailing Party, whom the Leaders overawed and influenced. But after that,
when His Majesty was made Prisoner; when he was carried up and down by the
Army; when the Army forced both the Houses, and the City of London; when the
Treaties of Scotland were violated in all their Articles; when the Propositions
agreed on by both Kingdoms, were laid aside, and the four Bills set in their
place, wherein the Covenant was not mentioned; when upon His Majesty's refusing
of these he was made Prisoner, and the Vote of Non-addresses passed against
him, then did the Loyalty of the Scots Nation begin again to revive: and what
through the sense of duty, what through the remorse of their former actings,
every one was forward to real resentments of these unworthy indignities put
both on their King and Country: but when the Parliament of Scotland had voted
the Country to be put in a posture of War for the defense of their S^vereign,
then where should I end, if I told all the seditious Papers, Preachings, and
Discourses of some of the Clergy, who contradicted and countermanded the
Parliament to a height of unparalelled boldness, even after all their desires,
which they gave in a large Remonstrance, were granted? But did that satisfy?
No: they then took refuge in their common Sanctuary of jealousies and fears.
They threatened all who obeyed the commands of the Parliament, not only with
their Church Censures, but with damnation. They did every where incite the
people to rise in Arms against the Parliaments Forces: and at a Communion at
Matchlin, they did so work upon the Vulgar, that they prevailed to get them
draw up in a Body, promising them great assistance both from GOD and men. They
kept a correspondence with the Sectarian Army, and continued by many Letters to
press their speedy march unto Scotland; and after the Scots Army marched unto
England, and was by the wise judgment of GOD defeated, then did many of the
Ministers, with all the vehemence imaginable, infl^me the people to Rebellion,
and got them to rise, and the^ marched before their Parishes like Captains.
They also called for the help of the Sectarian Army to them. And thus did they
stand to the Covenant, in maintaining the Privileges of Parliament, and
preserving the King's Person and Authority. And when His Majesty was murdered,
what attempts made they for the preservation of His Person, or for the
resenting it after it was done? This was the Loyalty of that Party; and this is
what all Princes may expect from you, unless they be absolutely at your
Devotion. Let these things declare whether these Wars went upon the grounds of
a pure defense. But if next to this, I should reckon up the instances of
Cruelty that appeared in your Judicatories for several years, I should have too
large a Theme to run through in a short Discourse. What cruel Acts were made
against all who would not sign the Covenant? They were declared Enemies to GOD,
the King, and the Country. Their persons were appointed to be seized on, and
their goods confis^ated. And in the November of the year 1643. when some of the
most eminent of the Nobility refused to sign the Covenant, Commissions were
given to Soldiers to bring them in Prisoners, warranting them to kill them if
they made resistance. And, pra^, whether had this more of the cruelty of
Antichrist, or of the meekness of JESUS? Or shall I next tell you of the bloody
Tribunals were at S Andrews, and other pl^ces after Philips-haughs? And of the
c^uelty against those Pri^oners of War, who bore Arms at the King's command,
and in defense of his authority? What bloody Stories could I here tell, if I
had not a greater horror at the relating them, tha^ many of these high
Pretenders had at the a^ting of them? And should I here recount the procedure
of the Ki^k Iudicatories, against all who were thought disaffected, I would be
looked on as one telling Romances, they being b^yond credit. What Processes of
Ministers are yet upon Record, which have no better foundation than their not
preaching to the times: their speaking with, or praying before My Lord
Montrose: their not railing at the Engagement, and the like? And what cruelty
was practiced in the years 1649. and 1650? None of us are so young, but we may
remember of it. A single death of one of the greatest of the Kingdom, could not
satisfy the bloud^thirsty malice of that Party, unless made formidable and
disgraceful, with all the shameful pageantry could be devised. Pray, do you
think these things are forgotten? Or shall I go about to narrate, and prove
them more particularly? I confess, it is a strange thing to see men who are so
obnoxious, notwithstanding that so exalted in their own conceits: and withal
remember that the things I have hinted at, were not the particular actings of
single and private persons, but the public and owned proceedings of the Courts
and Jud^catories. These are the grounds which persuade me that with whatsoever
fair colors some may va^ni^h th^s^ things, yet the spirit that then acted in
that Party, was not the Spirit of GOD.


Isot. Truly, you have given in a high charge against the proceedings of the
late times, which as I ought not to believe upon your assertion, so I cannot
well answer; those being matters of fact, and done most of them before I was
capable of observing things: And therefore when I see men of great experience,
I shall ask after the truth of what you have told me. But whatever might be the
design of some Politicians at that time, or to whatever bad sense some words of
the League may be stretched, yet you cannot deny, but they are capable of a
good sense, and in that I own them, and so cleave to that Oath of GOD, which
was intended for a solemn Covenanting with GOD: and the people meant nothing
else by it, but a giving themselves to Christ: to whose truths and Ordinances
they resolved to adhere at all hazards, and against all opposition: and in
particular to oppose every thing might bear down the power and progress of
Religion, which was the constant effect of Prelacy: therefore we are all bound
to oppose it upon all hazards. And indeed when I remember of the beauty of
holiness was then every where, and consider the licencious profanity, and
^coffing at Religion, which now abounds: this is stronger with me than all
arguments, to persuade me that these were the men of GOD, who had his Glory
before their eyes in all they did, or designed: whereas now I see every one
seeking their own things, and none the things of JESUS CHRIST. And all these
plagues and evils which these Kingdoms do either groan under, or may apprehend,
ought to be imputed to GODS avenging wrath for a broken Covenant, which though
taken by all from the highest to the lowest, is now condemned, reviled,
abjured, and shamefully broken. These things should afflict our souls, and set
us to our mournings, if happily GOD may turn from the fierceness of his anger.


Phil. As for these Articles that relate to the combination for engaging by
arms in prejudice of the Kings Authority, or may seem to bind us to the
reacting these Tragedies, they being founded on the lawfulness of Subjects
resisting their Sovereigns, if the unlawfulness of that was already evinced,
then any obligation can be in that compact for that effect, must be of it self
null and void: and therefore, as from the beginning it was sinful to engage in
these wars; so it will be yet more unlawful, if after all the evils we have
seen, and the judgments we have smarted under, any would lick up that vomit: or
pretend to bind a tie on the Subjects Consciences to rise in arms against their
Lawful Sovere^gn. And let me tell you freely, I cannot be so blind or stupid,
as not to apprehend that GODS wrath has appeared very visibly against us now,
for a tract of thirty years and more; neither does his anger seem to be turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still. But that which I look on as the
greater matter of his controversy with us, is that the Rulers of our Church
and State did engage the ignorant multitude, under the colors of Religion, to
despise the LORDS anointed, and his Authority, and by Arms to shake off his
yoke, and afterward abandon his Person, disown his interest, refuse to engage
for his rescue, and in the end look on tamely, and see him murdered. Do you
think it a small crime that nothing could satisfy the Leaders in that time,
without they got the poor people entangled into things which they knew the
vulgar did not, and could not understand, or judge of, and must implicitly rely
upon the Glosses of their Teachers? For whatever the General Assembly declared,
was a duty following upon the Covenant (which was an easy thing for the
leading men to carry as they pleased) then all the Ministers must either have
preached and published that to their people, with all their zeal, otherwise
they were sure to be turned out. The people being thus provoked from the
Pulpits, they were indeed to be pitied, who being engaged in an oath (many of
them, no doubt in singleness of heart, having the fear of an oath upon their
consciences) and not being able to examine things to the bottom, were entangled
thus, and engaged which way the leading Churchmen plea^ed, and the guilt of
this, as it was great in those who without due consideration engaged in those
oaths, so it was most fearful in them; who against the clear convictions of
conscience, were prevailed upon by the thunders of the Church, or the threats
of the State, to swear what they judged sinful. I confess, their crime was of a
high and crying nature, who did thus for the love of this present world, not
only make shipwreck of a good conscience, but persisted long in a tract of
dissembling with GOD, and juggling with men. But the wickedness of this comes
mainly to their door, who tempted them to prevarication by their severities
against all refused a concurrence in these courses. And the sin of all this was
the greater, that it was carried on with such pretenses, as if it had been the
cause and work of GOD, with fasting, prayers, tears, and shows of devotion. For
these things the Land mourns, and GOD continues his controversy against us. To
which I must add the great impenitence of those who being once engaged in that
course of Rebellion, have not yet repented of the works of their hands. For
even such as own a conviction for it, do not express that horror and remorse at
their bypast crimes which become penitents: But think if by rioting, drinking
and swearing, they declare themselves now of another mind than formerly they
were of, that they are washed free of that defilement. In a word, none seem
deeply humbled in the presence of GOD, for the sinfulness of these practices,
into which they entered themselves, and engaged others. And till I see an
ingenuous spirit of confessing and repenting for these great evils, for all
that rebellion, that blood, oppreson, and vastation which these courses drew
on, I shall never expect a National pardon, for that National guilt. For when
on the one hand, many are still justifying these black Arts, and not humbled
for them, nor owning their penitence as openly as they committed their sins:
And on the other hand, these who confess the faultiness of their courses, do it
in a spirit of traducing others, of railing, and reviling, perhaps not without
Atheistical scoffings at true Religion; but not in a spirit of ingenuous
horror, and sorror for their own accession to these courses, it appears we are
still hardened, either into a judicial blindness of the one hand, or of
obduration of heart on the other. That profanity does much abound, I must with
sorrow confess it, in the presence of my GOD: And I know there are many who
roll themselves in the dust daily before GOD, and mourn bitterly for it: But
when I enter in a deeper inquiry what may be the true causes of it, those that
occur to me are, first, a judicial stroke from GOD upon us, for our bypast
abominations: and chiefly for our hypocritical mocking of GOD, fastening the
designs or humors of a Party on him, as if they had been his Ordinances,
interests, and truths. And therefore because we held the truth of GOD in
unrighteousness, his wrath has been revealed against us. Next, the frequent
involving the Land in reiterated Oaths, subscriptions, and professions of
repentance, under severe Censures, which prevailed with many to swallow them
over implicitly, and made others yield to them against their Conscience, has
so debauched and prostituted the Souls of people, that it is no wonder, they be
now, as seared with a hot Iron, and incapable of reproofs or convictions.
Besides, is it any wonder that these whose hearts naturally led them to
Atheism, when they see what juggling was used about some pretenses of Religion,
and how the whole Land was involved in so much blood, about such trifling
matters, come thereupon to have a jealousy of Preachers and preaching, as if
all they said, was but to maintain and advance their own interests and
greatness, and thereupon turn Scoffers at all Religion, because of the base and
irreligious practices of some, who yet vouched GOD and CHRIST for all they did?
And on remark I shall offer on the way, that the sin of your Church was legible
in your judgment: their sin was the animating the people to Rebellion, upon
colors of Religion; and their judgment was, not only to be subdued, and
oppressed by another rebellious Army, who were not wanting to pretend highly to
the cause of GOD in all their actings: but that they brake in pieces among
themselves about a decision, who might be employed to serve in the Army, which
at first disjointed, and afterward destroyed your Church: and the schism is
still among us, which is like to eat up the power of Religion, is but the dreg
and genuin effect of these courses, and so all the prejudice it produces to
Religion, and the true interests of Souls is to be charged upon that same score.


Isot. Really, I am much scandalized with this Discourse, which if it were
heard abroad, I know would much offend the hearts of the LORD's people. And
indeed, I think it ought not to be answered, no more than Rabshaketh's railings
were by Eliakim. I wish I could with good Hezekiah spread it out before the
LORD, and mourn over it, and for you who do so blaspheme GOD, and his Cause.
But whatever you may say in the point of Resistance, yet you cannot deny, but
we are all from the highest to the lowest bound in our stations (at least) to
withstand Prelacy, against which we did so formally swear in that Oath of GOD,
which most of you are not only content to break, but must needs despise and
mock at.


Phil. GOD is my witness, how little pleasure I have in this severe Discourse,
into which the petulancy of these Writers has engaged me: but examine what I
said from Religion and Reason, and you will perhaps change your verdict of it.
For my part, I say none of these things in a corner, neither do I expect that
they shall not fly abroad, and if they do, I will look for all the severities
which the censures and malice of many can amount to. But I will cheerfully bear
that cross, and will be content to be yet more vile, for declaring freely what
I judge to be GOD's Controversy with the Land I live in. If for this love to
Souls, many be my Adversaries, I will betake my self to prayer: and shall only
add this, that few who know me suspect my temper guilty either of flattery or
bitterness. And the searcher of hearts knows, that I neither design by this
freedom, to commend my self to any, nor to disgrace others, but merely to
propose things as they are. If this produce any good effect, I have my design;
if not, I have discharged my conscience, and leave the issue of it with GOD,
who can out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, ordain strength and perfect
praise.

As for any obligation you may suppose the Covenant brings upon us to oppose
Episcopacy, I shall discuss it with all the clearness I am master of. I shall
not tell you, how much many who took that Covenant, and do still plead its
obligation have said (from the words of the second Article, and the explication
given in it to Prelacy) for reconciling as much of Episcopacy as is settled
among us, to it, according to the declared meaning of its first imposers, when
they took it, and authorized it. But leaving you and them to contend about
this, upon the whole matter consider, that Episcopacy is either necessary,
unlawful, or indifferent: if the first be true, then you will without much ado
confess that no Oath in prejudice of a necessary duty, can bind any tie upon
our conscience. If it be unlawful, I shall freely acknowledge that from the
oaths of the Covenants, there is a supervenient tie lying on us for its
extirpation. But if it be indifferent, then I say it was a very great sin for a
Nation, so far to bind up their Christian liberty, as by Oath to determine
themselves to that to which GOD had not obliged them: for the circumstances of
things indifferent, may so far vary, that what is of it self indifferent, may
by the change of these become necessary, or unlawful. Therefore, in these
matters, it is a great invasion of our Christian liberty, to fetter consciences
with Oaths. And though the Rulers and chief Magistrates of a Society, have
either rashly or out of fear, or upon other unjustifiable accounts, sworn an
Oath, about indifferent things, which afterward becomes highly prejudicial to
the Society, then they must consider that the Government of that State is put
in their hands by GOD, to whom they must answer for their administration.
Theeefore they stand bound by the Laws of Nature, of Religion, and of all
Societies, to do every thing that may tend most for the good of the Society.
And if a Case fall in where a thing tends much to the good and peace of a Land,
but the Prince stands bound some way or other by Oath against it, he did indeed
sin by so swearing; but should sin much more, if by reason of that Oath he
judged himself limited from doing what might prove for the good of the Society.
Indeed when an Oath concerns only a man's private rights, it ties him to
performance, tho to his hurt; but the administration of Government is none of
these rights a Magistrate may dispose of at pleasure; For he must conduct
himself so, as he shall be answerable to God, whose Vicegerent he is: and when
these two Obligations interfere, the one of procuring the good of the Society,
the other of adhering to an Oath, so that they stand in terms of direct
opposition, then certainly the greater must swallow up the lesser. It is
therefore to be under consideration, whether the Obligation of procuring the
good of the Society, or that of the Magistrates Oath be the greater? But this
must be soon decided, if it be considered that the former is an Obligation
lying on him by GOD, who for that end raised him up to his power, and is indeed
the very end of Government: whereas the other is a voluntary engagement he has
taken on himself, and can never be equal to that which was antecedent to it,
much less justle it out. But if it contradict the other, the Magistrate is
indeed bound to repent for his rash swearing; but cannot be imagined from that
to be bound to go against the good of the Society, for the procuring whereof,
he has the Sword and power put in his hands by GOD. And so much of the tie can
lie upon a Magistrate by his Oath about things indifferent, in ordering or
governing the State that is subject to him: in which he must proceed as he
shall answer to GOD in the great day of his accounts: and ought not to be
censured or judged for what he does by his Subjects.

But he enacting Laws in matters indifferent, they become necessary Obligations
on his Subjects, which no private oath of theirs can make void. Indeed the late
Writer his arguing against this, is so subtle, that I cannot comprehend it so
far as to find sense in it; for he confesses, Page 232. That the Magistrate is
vested with a power proportional to the ends of Government, so that no Subject
may decline his lawful commands, or bind himself by any such Oath, as may
interfere with a supervenient rational command. All this is sound, and indeed
all I pleaded; only his explication of rational, I cannot allow of: For tho a
Magistrate may proceed to unreasonable commands, yet I see no limits set to our
obedience, but from the unlawfulness of them. But in the next page, he eats all
this up by telling, That there are many things still left to our selves, and
our own free disposal, wherein we may freely vow: and having vowed, must not
break our word. And for instance, he adduceth a man's devoting the tenth of his
substance to the Lord, from which no countermand of the Magistrates can excuse.
But still he concludes, Page 334. That the Magistrates Power may make void such
vows as are directly, or designedly made to frustrate its right or to suspend
the execution of others, in so far as they do eventually cross its lawful
exercise. This last yields to me all I pretend in this case: For the Covenant
being made on purpose to exclude Episcopacy, though at that time settled by Law:
if Episcopacy be not unlawful, but lawful, which I now suppose, then the King's
authority enjoining it, and it being a great part likewise of the Government of
the Subjects, it is to be submitted to, notwithstanding the Oath made against
it. So that your Friend yields without consideration, that which he thinks he
denies: and therefore the reasoning in the Dialogues holds good, that the Oath
of a Subject in a matter indifferent, cannot free him from the obedience he
owes the Laws. It is true, his private vows in matters of his own concern, are
of another nature, and so not within the compass of this Debate, which is only
about the obedience we owe the Laws, supposing their matter lawful,
notwithstanding our Compacts made in opposition to them: and therefore I shall
not discourse of them, but stick close to the purpose in hand. But my next
undertaking must be to free Children from any tie may be imagined to lie on
them from the Fathers Oath: which was a matter so clear to my thinking, that I
wonder what can be said against it.


Isot. Indeed here your Friend the Conformist bewrayed his ignorance notably,
not considering the authority Parents have over their Children by divine
command, which dies not with them; their commands being obligatory even after
their death: for God commends the Rechabites for obeying Ionadabs command some
ages after his death: Therefore Parents adjuring Children they are obliged by
it, as the people of Israel by Readiness adjuring them not to eat food till the
evening, were obliged to obedience. And such adjurations may not only bind the
Children adjured, but all their posterity after them: as did the Oath for
carrying Ioseph's bones out of Egypt. And further, a Society continuing still
under the same notion, is bound through all ages to make good the compacts of
their Progenitors, they continuing to be the same Society. And this is not only
the ground on which the obligation of all alliances among Kingdoms is founded;
but is also the basis on which our tie to the Allegiance due to our Sovereign
is grounded. Therefore as we find GOD in Scripture covenanting with Men, and
their posterity, as in Abraham's case, and Fathers likewise engaging to GOD for
themselves and their Children, as did Joshua for himself and his House; so our
Covenants being unanimously sworn by almost the whole Nation, and confirmed by
all the authority in it, must have a perpetual obligation on all the subsequent
Generations. See from page 205. to page 219.


Phil. I suppose, if it hold good that the Covenant binds not these who took
it, to oppose or extirpate Episcopacy when settled by Law, all this reasoning
will of it self evanish in smoke: But to give your Discourse all advantage, and
to yield its obligation on these who took it, what you infer will never be made
out; since it is foun^ed on the supposition of a Parents authority to adjure
his Child, that ties him after his Fathers death, which you apply to the
Covenant. But in this there is a triple error committed by you: one of fact,
and two of right. That of fact, is, that you suppose that in the Covenant the
subsequent generations are adjured to its observance: whereas not a word of
this is in the Covenant. On the contrary, in the end of the Preface to the
League, it is said, that every one for himself does swear: Neither is there a
word in it all that imports an adjuration on posterity. It is true, in the 5.
Article, every one is bound according to their place and interest, to endeavor
that the Kingdoms may remain conjoined in a firm peace and union to all
posterity. But he that will draw an adjuration on posterity from this, must
have a new Art of Logic, not yet known. And in the National Covenant, as it
was taken by King James, there is not a word that imports an adjuration on
^osterity. It is true, in the addition was made to it, Ann. 1^38. it is
declared, That they are convinced in their minds, and confess with their
mouths, that the present and subsequent generations in this Land, were bound to
keep that National Oath and subscription inviolable. But this was only their
opinion who signed it: Yet for all that, there is no adjuration on posterity
for observing it, no not in that Addition then sworn to. The next error of your
Hypothesis, is, that the Parents commands can bind the Childrens confidence, in
prejudice of the Magistrates authority: for you must either suppose this,
otherwise your arguing is to no purpose, since the King's authority is in this
case interposed, and therefore all our Fathers commands must yield to it: which
because none deny, I shall not stand to evince. For if my Father be bound to
obey the King, as well as I am; both he sins, if he enjoin me disobedience, and
I am likewise guilty, if upon that I disobey. For he that has no warrant for
his own disobedience, can be imagined to have none for securing me in mine. And
in end, you suppose a Parents command or authority can bind the Conscience
after his death: which is manifestly absurd; for certainly his authority must
die with himself. It is true, a piety and reverence is due to the memory of our
Parents: and so much reverence should be paid to their ashes, that without a
very good reason, the things they enjoined should be religiously observed: but
this is not a necessary Obligation: for circumstances may so vary things, that
we may be assured, that as our Parents enjoined such a thing, so had they seen
the inconveniences of it, they had not done it. Now while a Father lives, a
Child has this liberty to argue with him: where it is not to be doubted, but
the affection of a Parent, together with the reasons adduced would make him
change his Commands: but indeed did their Commands tie us after their death, we
should be more in subjection to our Parents, when dead, than we were when they
lived: which goes against the sense of all mankind. And what equality is there
in such men's reasons, who will deny absolute obedience to Magistrates, tho we
be allowed to petition, and represent the grievances their Laws bring upon us,
and yet will assert an absolute and blind obedience due to the commands of our
Parents, tho dead? Your instance of the Rechabites makes against you, for their
Progenitors had appointed them to dwell in Tents, yet the fear of
Nebuchadnezzar had driven them to Jerusalem: and consider if the incurring our
lawful Sovereigns displeasure, together with the hazard such obedience may draw
after it, be not a juster ground of excusing our selves from obedience to any
such Command, suppose it were real. The Rechabites did indeed abstain from
Wine, upon Ionadab's command, for which they are commended, and blessed; and so
I acknowledge it a piece of piety to obey the commands even of a dead Father;
yet in that place, it is not asserted, that that Command tied their Conscience;
but on the contrary, the blessing passed upon their obedience, seems rather to
imply that it was voluntary, though generous and dutiful. The same Answer is to
be made to Ioseph's adjuring the Children of Israel to carry up his bones;
which ought to have obliged even the Children of these that were so adjured,
out of the gratitude due to the memory of so great a Man, especially nothing
intervening that rendered obedience to it, either unexpedient or unlawful.

But in general, consider that when a contract is made, either of an
Association under a form and line of Magistracy, or of alliance betwixt two
States, and confirmed by Oath; there is an obligation of Justice that arises
from the Compact, whereby such rights were translated unto the person compacted
with: and thereby he and his posterity according to the Compact, are to enjoy
these Rights, because translated unto his person by the Compact: but being once
legally his, with a provision that they shall descend to his Heirs, then his
Heirs have a right to them formally in their persons after his death, to which
they have a title in justice, and not by the fidelity to which the posterity of
the first compacters are bound by their Fathers deed, but because the right is
now theirs: so that though the first Compacters were bound by promise and Oath,
their Successors are only bound by the rules of justice, of giving to every man
that which is his right: therefore whatever our Ancestors may be supposed to
have compacted with the King's Progenitors, or whatever by Treaty one State
yields over to another, that Promise, Donation and Oath is indeed the ground on
which the Kings right may be supposed to have been first founded. But now his
Title to our Obedience proceeds upon the rules of Justice, (of giving him what
is his, by an immemorial Possession, passed all prescription, so many ages ago,
that the first vestiges of it cannot be traced from Records, or certain
Histories) and not of fidelity of observing the promises of our Ancestors to
him, though I do not deny a pious Veneration to be due to the Promises and
Oaths of Parents, when they contain in them adjurations on their Childern. And
thus the Gibeonites having a right to their lives, confirmed to them by the
Compact of the Princes of Israel: they and their Posterity had a good title in
Justice to their lives, which was basely invaded by Saul, and had this
aggravation, that the compact made with them was confirmed by oath, for which
their posterity should have had a just veneration: But though that Oath did at
first found their title to their Lives, and their Exemption from the forfeiture
all the Amorites lay under; yet afterward their title was preserved upon the
rules of Justice, and the Laws of Nature, which forbid the invading the lives
of our Neighbors, when by no Injury they forfeit them. Thus your confounding
the titles of Inheritance and presc^iption, with the grounds upon which they
first accresced, has engaged you into all this mistaking. But from all this,
you see how ill founded that reasoning of the Answerer of the Dialogues is, for
proving the posterity of these who took the Covenant, tied by their fathers
oath, which yet at first view, promised as fair colors of reason, as any part
of his Book, had he not intermixed it with shameful insultings and railings at
the Conformist: which I suppose do now appear as ill grounded, as they are
cruel and base. But I am not so much in love with that style, as to
recriminate: nor shall I tell you of his errors that way of which I am in good
earnest ashamed upon his account: For it is a strange thing, if a man cannot
answer a discourse without he fall a fleering and railing. To conclude this
whole purpose, I am mistaken, if much doubting will remain with an ingenuous
and unprejudged Reader, if either we or our posterity lie under any obligation
from the Covenants, to contradict or counteract the Laws of the Land, supposing
the matter of them lawful: which being a large Subject, will require a
discourse apart. But I will next examine some practices among us, and chiefly
that of Schism and separation from the public worship of GOD; to which both
the unity of the Spirit, which we ought to preserve in the bond of peace, and
the lawful commands of these in authority, do so bind us, that I will be glad
to hear what can be alleged for it.


Isot. A great difference is to be made betwixt separation and noncompliance:
the one is a withdrawing from what was once owned to be the Church: the other
is a withholding our concurrence from what we judge brought in upon the Church,
against both Reason and Religion: and any thing you can draw from CHRIST's
practice or precept, in acknowledging the High Priests, or commanding the
people to observe what the Pharisees taught them, is not applicable to this
purpose: For first, these were Civil Magistrates, as well as Ecclesiastics,
and Doctors of the Civil and Judicial Law, which is different from the Case of
Churchmen with us. Further; the Jewish Church was still in possession of the
privileges given them from GOD, and so till CHRIST erected his Church, they
were the Church of GOD: and therefore to be acknowledged, and joined with in
Worship. But how vastly differs our Case from this? See from p. 189. to p. 204.


Phil. You have given a short account of the large reasonings of the late Book
on this head, only he is so browilled in it, that there are whole pages in his
Discourse, which I confess my weakness cannot reach. But to clear the way for
your satisfaction in this matter, which I look upon as that of greatest
concernment, next to the Doctrine of Non-resistance, of any thing is debated
among us; since it dissolves the unity of the Church; and opens a patent door
to all disorder, Ignorance and Profanity. I shall consider what the unity of
the Church is, and in what manner we are bound to maintain and preserve it.

All Christians are commanded to love one another, and to live in peace
together: and in order to this, they must also unite, and concur in joint
Prayers, Adorations, and other acts of Worship, to express the harmony of their
love in Divine matters: Sacraments were also instituted for uniting the body
together; being solemn and federal stipulations, made with God, in the hands of
some who are his Ambassadors and Representatives upon Earth: by whose mouths
the Worship is chiefly offered up to God, and who must be solemnly called and
separated for their Employment. Now these Assemblings of the Saints are not to
be forsaken, till there be such a Corruption in the Constitution of them, or in
some part of the Worship, that we cannot escape the guilt of that, without we
sepa^ate our selves from these unclean things. Wherefore the warning is given,
Come out of Babylon, that we be not partakers of her sins, and so receive not
of her plagues. But though there be very great and visible corruptions in a
Church; yet as long as our joining in Worship in the solemn Assemblies, does
not necessarily involve us into a Consent or Concurrence with these; we ought
never to withdraw, nor rent the unity of the body, whereof CHRIST is the head.
Consider, how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity. And our
Savior shows of what importance he judged it to his Church, since so great a
part of his last and most ravishing Prayer, is, That they might be one: And
this he five times repeats, comparing the unity he prayed for, to the undivided
Unity was betwixt him and his Father. How shall these words rise up in
Judgment, against those who have broken these bonds of perfection upon slight
grounds! With the same earnestness do we find the Apostles pressing the Unity
of the Body, and Charity among all the members of it: which is no where more
amply done than in the Epistles to the Corinthians, whom the Apostle calls, the
Churches of GOD; and yet there were among them false Teachers, who studied to
prey upon them, and to strike out the Apostles authority: Some among them
denied the resurrection, there were Contentions and Disorders among them in
their meetings: such confusions were from the strange Tongues some spoke, that
had one unacquainted with them, come in upon them, he had judged them mad: some
were drunk when they did receive the LORD's Supper: they had an incestuous
Person in their Society; and it seems he was of quality, and much accounted of,
since they were puffed up with him: they were also a scandal to the Gospel with
their litigious Law suits. These were great evils, and I hope beyond what you
can charge on us: and yet though the Apostle commands them to be redressed, and
rectified, does he ever allow of these in Corinth, who were pure and holy, to
forsake the solemn Assemblies, till these things were amended? Or does he not
highly commend Charity and Unity to them? Next, consider what Teachers these
were who preached CHRIST of envy and strife, out of contention, and not
sincerely, that they might add affliction to the Apostles bonds: And yet of
these S. Paul's verdict is, What then? notwithstanding every way, whether in
pretense, or in truth, CHRIST is preached, and I therein do rejoice, yea, and
will rejoice. Now if he rejoiced that Christ was preached at any rate, what
Spirit have they, who because they suppose some preach out of Envy, or design
to add to their affliction, do thereupon study to blast their reputation, and
to withdraw first the Hearts, and then the Ears of all from them? Certainly,
this is not the Spirit of CHRIST, or of his Apostles. And though we see what
corruptions had crept into the Churches of Asia, yet in the Epistles to them in
the Revelation, they are still called the Churches of GOD, in the midst of whom
the Son of GOD walked. They are indeed commanded to reform any corruptions were
among them; but such as had not that doctrine, and knew not the depths of
Satan, but had kept their garments clean, are not commanded to separate from
the rest; on the contrary, no other burden is laid upon them; nor are they
charged for not separating from the rest. From which premises I may infer, that
as long as the Communion of Saints may be kept in, without our being polluted
in some piece of sinful concurrence, all are bound to it, under the hazard of
tearing Christ's Body to pieces. And this stands also with the closest Reason;
for since Unity is that which holds all the body firm, whereas division
dislocates and weakens it; nothing does more defeat the ends of Religion, and
overturn the power of Godliness, than Scisms and Contentions; which give the
greatest offense to the little ones, and the fullest advantages to the common
enemy imaginable. If therefore the Worship of GOD among us continue undefiled,
even in the confession of all; if the Sacraments be administered as before; if
the Persons that officiate be Ministers of the Gospel, then certainly such as
separate from our public Meetings, do forsake the Assemblies of the Saints,
and so break the unity of the Spirit, and the bond of Peace. And what you said
of a noncompliance as distinct from separation, has no relation to this
purpose, where nothing of a compliance is in the case, but only a joining with
the Saints in solemn Worship. And does the change of the Government of the
Church, in so small a matter as the fixing a constant President, with some
additions of power over your Synods, in stead of your ambulatory Moderators,
derive a Contagion into our Worship, so that without a Sin it cannot be joined
in? Indeed if a Concurrence of Worship required an owning of every particular
in the Constitution of the Church, a man must go to the New Atlantis to seek a
Society he shall join with, since few of clear unprepossessed minds will find
such Societies in the known Regions of the World, against all whose
Constitutions they have not some just exceptions: and the World shall have as
many parties as persons, if this be not fixed as the rule of Unity, that we
cleave to it, ever till we be driven to do somewhat which with a good
Conscience we cannot yield to. And even in that case, except the corruption be
great and deep, a bare withdrawing, without a direct opposition, is all we are
bound to. You are therefore guilty of a direct separation who forsake the
Assemblies of the Saints, they continuing in their former purity, unchanged and
unmixed, even in your own Principles.


Isot. But one thing is not considered by you, which is a main point, that we
had our Church settled, according to CHRIST'S appointment, and ratified by Law.
And a change of that being made, all our faithful Ministers were turned out by
the tyranny of the present Powers; who in stead thereof, have set up a new form
of Government, of none of CHRIST'S appointment: and to maintain it, have thrust
in upon the LORD's People, a company of weak, ignorant, scandalous and godless
Men, called Curates; who instead of edifying, study to destroy the flock: of
whom I could say much, had I a little of your virulent temper: But their own
actions have so painted them out to the world, that I may well spare my labor
of making them better known, it being as unnecessary as it is unpleasant. Now
if the true seekers of GOD do still stick to their old Teachers, and seek
wholesome food from them in corners, and are afraid of your false Teachers,
according to CHRIST's command, of being aware of such men; call you this a
separation? which is rather an adherence to the true Church, and the keeping of
our Garments clean from the contagion of these men. And indeed these who do
join with your Curates, do profit so little by their Ministry, that no wonder
others have no heart to it. And I have known some whose consciences are so
tender in this matter, that their having at sometimes joined with these Curates
in Worship, has been matter of mourning to them, even to their graves. And
this may serve to clear us of the guilt of Schism in this matter, when our
withdrawing is only a noncompliance with your corruption.


Phil. All this says nothing for justifying your separation. As for the
turning out of your Ministers, if the Laws to which their obedience was
required were just (which shall be next considered) then their prejudices,
misinformed consciences, or peevis^mess, and not the tyranny of the Rulers,
must bear the blame of it. And for these set in their places, if upon so great
a desertion of the Church by so many Churchmen, all their charges could not be
of a sudden supplied with men so well qualified, or of such gifts and worth as
was to be desired; it is nothing but what might have been expected upon such an
occasion. And for your revilings, they well become the spirit which appears too
visibly in the rest of your actings; but we still study to bear these base and
cruel reflections, with the patience becoming the Ministers of the Gospel, and
of these who study to learn of him, who when he was reviled, reviled not again;
but stood silent at those unjust Tribunals, when he was falsely and
blasphemously reproached by his enemies; and therefore I shall leave answering
of these fearful imputations you charge on our Clergy, to the great day of
reckoning, wherein judgment shall return to the righteous, and all the upright
in heart shall follow it. And in the mean while shall study to bless when you
curse, and pray for you who do thus despitefully use us. We trust our witness
is on high, that whatever defects cleave to us, and though, may be, we have not
wanted a corrupt mixture (as you know among whom there was a son of Perdition)
yet we are free of these things you charge on us promiscuously, and that these
imputations you charge us with, are as false as they are base. But all this
will not serve the turn of many of your dividers, whose Ministers continue with
them as formerly, and merely because they hold themselves bound in Conscience
to obey the Laws they are separated from. Truly if you can clear this of
separation, you are a Master at subtle reasoning. For you know it is not the
third part of this Church which was abandoned by the former Ministers upon the
late change, and yet the humor of separating is universal. And though some few
of your own Ministers have had the honest zeal to witness against this
separation, yet how have they being pelted for it by the censures and writings
of other Schismatics? which have prevailed so much upon the fear or prudence
of others, that whatever mislike they had of these separating practices, yet
they were willing either to comply in practice, or to be silent spectators of
so great an evil. But if separation be a Sin, it must have a guilt of a high
nature, and such as all who would be thought zealous watchmen, ought to warn
their people of. And what shall be said of these (even Churchmen) who at a
time when the Laws are sharply looked to, do join in our Worship; but if there
be an unbending in these, they not only withdraw, and become thereby a scandal
to others, but draw about them divided Meetings; are not these time-servers?
For if concurrence in our Worship be lawful, and to be done at any time, it
must be a duty which should be done at all times: and therefore such Masters of
Conscience ought to express an equality in their ways, and that they make the
rules of their concurrence in worship, to be the Laws of GOD, and not the fear
of civil punishments. Finally, such as think it lawful to join in our Worship,
and yet that they may not displease the people, do withdraw, show they prefer
the pleasing of men to the pleasing of GOD: and that they make more account of
the one than of the other. For if it be lawful to concur in our worship, what
was formerly said, proves it a duty: Are not these then the servants of men,
who to please them, dispense with what by their own concession must be a duty?
Besides, such persons withdrawing, gives a great and real scandal to the
vulgar, who are led by their Example, and so a humor of separating comes to be
derived into all: whereby every one thinks it a piece of Religion, and that
which will be sure to make him considerable, and bring customers to him, if he
be a Merchant or Tradesman, that he despise the solemn Worship, and rail at
his Minister: and if he but go to Conventicles, and be concerned in all the
humors of the Party, he is sure of a good name, be he as to other things what
he will.


Eud. Much of this we know to be too true: and certainly, nothing deserves more
blame for all the disorders are among us than this separation. Discipline goes
down, Catechizing is despised, the Sacraments are loathed, the solemn Worship
deserted. I know the poor Curates bear the blame of all, and all of them must
be equally condemned, if a few of them have miscarried; for which when ever it
was proved, they were censured condignly: In end, you charge their gifts, and
that their People are not edified by them: But I pray you, see whether the
prejudices you make them drink in against them, occasion not that. For it is a
more than humane work, to overcome prejudices. Read but the complaints of the
Prophets, and you will confess a Churchmans not being profitable to his People,
will be no good argument to prove him not sent of GOD, And when I consider,
that even the Apostles call for the help of the Churches Prayers, that
utterance might be given to them, yea and desire them to strive together in
their Prayers for them; I must crave leave to tell you, that the defect of that
utterance, and power in preaching you charge on the present Preachers, may be
well imputed to the want of the concurrence of the Peoples Prayers, whom
prepossessions have kept from striving together with them in Prayer, that they
might come among them with the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel. And if
there be any of such tender and mi^led Consciences, who have been smitten with
remorse for such concurrence in Worship, as their tenderness is to be valued,
so their ignorance is to be pitied: and they who thus misled them, deserve the
heavier censure, since they have involved simple and weak Consciences with
their pedling Sophistry into such straits and doubts. In fine, you cannot say,
that a Minister is by a Divine right placed over any particular flock. If then
it be humane, it with all other things of that nature, is within the
Magistrates cognizance; so that when he removes one, and leaves a legal way
patent for bringing in another, upon which there comes one to be placed over
that flock, what injustice soever you can fancy in such dealing, yet certainly,
it will never free that Parish from the tie of associating in the public
Worship, or receiving the Sacraments from the hands of that Minister, whom they
cannot deny to be a Minister of the Gospel: and therefore no irregularity in
the way of his entry, though as great as can be imagined, will warrant the
peoples separating from him. Neither can they pretend that the first Incumbent
is still their Minister, for his relation to them being founded merely on the
Laws of the Church, it is (as was proved in the Second Conference) subject to
the Magistrates authority, and so lasts no longer than he shall dissolve it by
his commands: unless it appear, that he designs the overthrow of true Religion;
in which case, I confess Pastors are, according to the practice of the first
Ages of the Church, to continue at the hazard of all persecutions, and feed
their flocks. But this is not applicable to our Case, where all that concerns
Religion continues as formerly: only some combinations made in prejudice of the
Supreme Authority are broken: and order is restored to the Church, instead of
the confusions and divisions were formerly in it. And if this change have
occasioned greater disorders, wherever the defect of Policy or Prudence may be
charged, yet certainly, if the change that is made, be found of its own nature
both lawful and good, the confusions have followed upon it, are their guilt,
who with so little reason, and so much eagerness, have not only refused
obedience themselves, but hindered such as were willing to have yielded it.


Crit. Indeed this point of withdrawing from the public worship, for their
faul^iness who officiate, or for the errors are supposed to be in the way of
their entry, does so contradict the whole series of the Sacred Rule, that
nothing can be more expressly condemned in it. The Sons of Eli made the People
abhor the offering, and they defiled the Tabernacle of GOD; yet for all that,
the people continued to come and offer their Sacrifices. The Prophets do also
tell us what kind of People the Priests in their times were, and yet never a
word of the peoples withdrawing from the Worship. Now this must by the parity
of reason, hold good under the New Dispensation; except you say, we are not so
much obliged to worship GOD in the unity of the Spirit, as they were; the
contrary whereof will be found true. Next, the High Priesthood being entailed
on the line of Aaron, was certainly to descend (as all other rights did among
the Jews) by the right of representation and primogeniture; and so did Eleazer
and Phinebas follow in a line from Aaron. It is true, the High Priesthood was
afterward in Ithamar's line, but it does not appear by what conveyance it went
to them, which certainly must have been Divine, if lawful: And none can limit
GOD from dispensing with his own positive Laws. But the High Priesthood was
again set in its own channel by David, and so continued downward, till after
the second Temple, it becoming the chief Secular Power, was exposed to sale:
and this appears from a passage cited by Doctor Lightfoot out of the Talmud of
Jerusalem, in the first Temple the High Priests still served, the Son
succeeding the Father, and they were 18 in number: but in the second Temple
they got the High Priesthood by money. And some say, they destroyed one another
by witchcraft: so that some say, there were 80 Priests in that space; some 81,
some 82, some 83, some 84, and some 85. And that Learned Doctor reckons 53 in
order, till he brings the Succession down to the time of the Wars, after which
it was so confused, that he pursues it no further. And in the beginning of the
3 chap. of his Temple-service, he proves the High Priesthood to have descended
to the firstborn, as the Priesthood, before the Law, belonged to the
firstborn of every Family. And therefore it was that when Simeon the Just
would have put Onias his second Son in the Priesthood, he could not do it. But
Simeon the eldest Brother obtained his right, and Onias was put to fly to
Egypt, where he built a famous Temple. This will prove that the High Priests in
our Savior's time had no just title to their office; and yet our Savior,
being by his humiliation in the character of a private Person, never questioned
it, no not when he was upbraided, as if he had answered GOD's High Priest
irreverently, which looks like a case of Confession. And S. Paul did the same.
Now as to what is said of the High Priests being a Civil Magistrate, it will
not serve to deliver you; for his title to the Civil Power flowed from his
office: therefore the owning him in that, did also acknowledge his office,
since he had no other right to the Civil Power, but because he was High Priest,
and yet subjection was given him by our LORD, who acknowledged the High Priest.
Did he not also continue in the Temple Worship, and go thither on their
festivities? where you know he must have offered Sacrifices by the hands of
these Priests: and yet we know well enough what a sort of People they were. If
then we are no less bound under the Gospel to the rules of Order and Unity,
than they were under the Law, it will follow that no personal corruption of
Churchmen, can warrant a separation from Worship, even though their Opinions
were erroneous, and their practices naughty: for the impertinency of the
distinction of Noncompliance and separation was already proved. But next to
the Temple-worship, was the service of the Synagogue, which was for the most
part in the hands of the Scribes and Pharisees, who expounded the Law to the
people: And Christ's commanding the people to observe what they taught, shows
clearly his pleasure was, that they should not forsake the Synagogues where
they taught: And his own going to the Synagogues, in which it is not to be
doubted but he concurred in the Prayers and Hymns, proves abundantly that their
Worship was not to be separated from. As for your Friends involved discourse,
about the declining of Churches, Page 193. I must let it alone, till I can make
sense of it: For if he intend to compare our Lord and his Apostles, their
joining in the Jewish Worship, with the misguided, though sincere devotion, of
some holy Souls who worshipped God with all the corrup^ions of the Roman
Church, I hope he will repent the blasphemy of such a mistake. And as for what
is alleged, Page 198. that the Jewish Dispensation being mixed, and their Law
made up of matters Political, as well as Spiritual, therefore these Scribes
were the Oracles of the Civil Law, and so to be gone to, it is as weak as the
rest: For the Law being to be sought from the Priests lips, as to all the parts
of it, any power the Priests had of pronouncing about the questions of the Law,
was because they were Priests, or as they were men separated for officiating in
the Synagogues: so the receiving their decisions in matters judicial, did
acknowledge their Office, which was purely Ecclesiastical and sacred.

From all this I may infer, that as long as any Society continues to be the
Church and people of GOD, and has the service and worship of GOD performed in
it by men solemnly separated, according to GOD's appointment, whatever
irregularities be either in their entry to such charges, or of their opinions
or practices, these should indeed be cognosced upon, and censured by the
Supreme Powers in the Society; but will never warrant private persons to
separate from the Worship, unless it be so vitiated in any part of it, that
without sin they cannot concur in it: in which case, they are indeed to keep
themselves clean, and to withdraw, but not to divide until the Worship be so
corrupted, that the ends of public Worship can no more be answered by such
Assemblies.


Poly. I know it is thought a piece of noble gallantry among our new modelled
people, to despise the sentiments of the Ancient Church; and therefore whatever
I could adduce from them, would prevail little for their conviction: otherwise
many things could be brought to this purpose from these two great Assertors of
the Unity of the Church against Schisms and Divisions, S. Cyprian, and S.
Augustine: the latter especially, who by many large Treatises studied the
conviction of the Donatists, who maintained their separation from the Church,
much upon the same grounds which are by your Friends asserted. But I shall
dismiss this point with one Sentence of S. Augustine, lib. 2. contra Parmen.
Quisquis ergo vel quod potest arguendo corrigit; vel quod corrigere non potest,
salvo pacis vinculo excludit, vel quod salvo pacis vinculo excludere non
potest, aequitate improbat, firmitate supportat, hic est pacificus. And let me
freely tell you, that when I consider the temper, the untractableness, the
peevish complainings, the railings, the high cantings of the Donatists, which
are set down by him, and others, I am sometimes made to think I am reading
things that are now among our selves, and not what passed twelve Ages ago. And
indeed some late practices make the parallel run more exactly betwixt our
modern Zealots and the Circumcellions, who were a Sect of the Donatists, that
was acted by a black and a most desperate spirit. For St. Augustine tells us,
how they fell on these who adhered to the Unity of the Church, beating some
with Cudgels, putting out the Eyes of others, and invading the lives of some,
particularly of Maximinus Bishop of Hagaia, whom they left several times for
dead. And what instances of this nature these few years have produced, all the
Nation knows. How many of the Ministers have been invaded in their Houses,
their Houses rifled, their goods carried away, themselves cruelly beaten and
wounded, and often made to swear to abandon their Churches, and that they
should not so much as complain of such bad usage to these in Authority: their
Wives also escaped not the fury of these accursed Zealots, but were beaten and
wounded, some of them being scarce recovered out of their labor in Childbirth.
Believe me, these barbarous outrages have been such, that worse could not have
been apprehended from Heathens. And if after these, I should recount the
Railings, Scoffings and floutings which the Conformable Ministers meet with to
their Faces, even on streets, and public Highways, not to mention the
contempt is poured on them more privately, I would be looked on as a forger of
extravagant Stories. But it is well I am talking to men who know them as well
as my self. From these things I may well assume that the persecution lies
mainly on the Conformists side, who for their Obedience to the Laws, lie thus
open to the fury of their Enemies.


Isot. Now, I dare say, you speak against your conscience: For do you think any
of the LORD's people have accession to so much wickedness, which is abhorred by
them all: and this is well enough known to you, though you seem to disguise it.
For you have often heard our honest Ministers express their horror at such
practices; do not therefore sin against the generation of the Lord's Children
so far, as to charge the guilt of some murdering Rogues, upon these who would
be very glad to see Justice done upon such Villains.


Phil. You say very fair, and I am glad to hear you condemning these Crimes so
directly: and I am as desirous as any living can be, to be furnished with clear
evidences of believing as much good as is possible of all mankind. But let me
tell you plainly, that the constant concealing of these murderers, whom no
search which those in Authority have caused to make, could discover, tho the
Robbers carried with them often a great deal of furniture, and other goods,
which must have been conveyed to some adjacent Houses, but could never be found
out, after so many repeated facts of that nature, forces upon the most
charitable, a suspicion which I love not to name. Next, let me tell you that
these things are very justifiable from the principles your Friends go upon: for
if we be by Oath bound to discover all Malignants or evil instruments, that
they may be brought to condign punishment; and if our Conformity be so
notorious a wickedness, and such a plain breach of Covenant, in the punishment
whereof the Magistrate is supine and backward, then let every one compare the
doctrine of the late Pamphlets, from p. 282. to p. 408. chiefly 404. and 405.
and declare whether by the Rules laid down in them, any private persons upon
heroical excitations may not execute vengeance on these who are so guilty of
gross and notorious backsliding and defection: and what may not be expected of
this nature from him who hesitates to call the invading of the Bishop with a
Pistol, an accursed act; and will only condemn it, as rash, precipitant; and of
evil example: and that not simply neither, but all circumstances being
considered, and their exigences duly balanced? Which makes me apprehend his
greatest quarrel with that deed was; that it misled the designed effect, and so
was done inadvertently, or too publicly, or upon some such particular ground,
which may have occasioned its miscarriage. But to deal roundly with you, I
shall freely acknowledge, if the Doctrine of Resistance by private Subjects
against these in Authority be lawful, I see no ground to condemn such
practices: For if we may rise in Arms against those in Authority over us, and
coerce and punish them; why not much rather against our fellow Subjects, and
those to whom we owe no obedience, especially when we judge them to have
transgressed so signally, and to have injured us to a high degree? which is the
case, as most of you state it, with the Ministers that are conformable. And
from this, let me take the freedom to tell you, that the whole Mystery of
Iesuitism does not discover a principle more destructive of the peace and order
of mankind, than this doctrine of the lawfulness of private persons executing
vengeance on gross offenders, where the transgression is judged signal, the
Magistrate is judged remiss, and the actors pretend an heroic excitation. This
puts a Sword in a mad man's hands, and arms the whole multitude, and is worse
than theirs, who will have such deeds warranted by some supreme Eccl^^^astical
Power, or at least by a Confessarius and Director of the Conscience. Indeed
this may justly possess the minds of all that hear it with horror, it being a
direct contradiction of the Moral Law, and an overturning of all the Societies
of Mankind, and Laws of Nature.


Eud. I am more charitable than you are: for though I must acknowledge what you
have alleged to be the native consequence of what is asserted in that Book,
yet I am inclined to believe he intended not these things should be drawn from
it, since he in plain terms, page 402. condemns these outrages. I confess, his
zeal to defend all Naphthali said, and to refute every thing the Conformist
alleged, has engaged him further than himself could upon second thoughts
allow of. And as for the instances of Phine^as, Elijah, or other Prophets, the
argument from them was so fully obviated in our First Conference, that I am
confident little weight will be laid upon it. But now, methinks, it is more
than time we considered the importance of that difference about which all this
ado is made: for one would expect it must be a very concerning matter, which
has occasioned so much blood and confusion, and continues still to divide us
asunder, with so much heat and bitterness. I confess, my discerning is weak,
which keeps me from apprehending what importance can be in it to exact so much
zeal for it, that it should be called the Kingdom of CHRIST ^^^n Earth, his
Interest, Cause, and Work, which therefore should be ^a^nestly conten^ed for.


I^ot. The natural man receives not the things of GOD, and the^ are (...), to
him: but Wisdom (...) of (...) ^^^^dren. That we plead for, is CHRIST's
Kingdom, which is in opposition both to the proud aspirings of the Prelates,
and to the violent invasions of the Civil Powers: We are therefore on CHRIST's
side, asserting that none in earth can institute new Officers in his House, but
those he has appointed: and that he has appointed none higher than ordinary
preaching Presbyters, among whom he will have an equality observed: which
whosoever contradict, with Diotrephes, they l^ve the preeminence, and Lord it
over GOD's inheritance.


Phil. Though I will not fly so high with my pretensions in big words, yet the
issue of our Discourse will declare if I have not better grounds to assert
Episcopacy to have descended from the Apostles, and Apostolical time^, into all
the Ages and corners of the Church who received it: and that there is nothing
in Scripture that contradicts ^uch an Institution. But I shall ^efer the
deci^ion of thi^ to all impartial minds.


Basil. Truly, when without a particular Examen, I consider the whole matter in
general, I can see little to except against Episcopal Government, that I cannot
avoid the severe thoughts of suspecting the great ave^sion many have at it, to
be occasioned from the ^^^rit of contradiction is in many which lus^^th to
(...), or from their opposition to these in A^thority: ^or I doubt not but if
Presbytery had the same countenance from the Laws, it should meet with the same
contradiction from these who seem to adhere to no principle so firmly, as to
their resisting the Powers that are ordained of GOD. But the handling of this,
with that fullness and clearness which the noise made about it requires, will
take up more of our time than we can be now Masters of, and may well claim a
new Conference: Therefore we shall remit any further discourse about it to our
next meeting.


Isot. It is agreed to: and I shall let you see, that for all the Railings of
these days Discourse, my patience is yet strong enough to allow of another
enterview, though I confess my self weary of so much bad Company, whose evil
Communications are designed to corrupt my good Principles.


Phil. I confess, my weariness is as great as yours, though upon a very
different account: For I am ^urfeited of the Contention and heat has been
among us, and long for an end of our Conferences upon these Heads, which I
shall now go through once for all, being encouraged to meet with you again,
because this penance is near an end: out of which if I were once extricated, I
am resolved to meddle in such contentious Themes no more.


Eud. Having swallowed the Ox, we must not stick on the Rump. It is true, your
Converse is extremely agreeable, yet my stomach begins to turn at so much
disputing: But, I hope, to morrow shall put an end to it: And therefore I doubt
not of your return, to finish what you hitherto carried on. And so a good night
to you.


THE FOURTH CONFERENCE.
Isotimus. I COME now upon our last Nights appointment, to pursue this
Conference to its end, and to examine what these grounds are which endear
Episcopacy to you so much, especially considering the great disorders and
con^usions its re-establishment among us has occasioned. For my part, I cannot
see what can reconcile the World to it, much less what should enamour you so of
it, as to make you adhere to it, notwithstanding all the evils spring from it,
and all these black Characters of GOD's displeasure are upon it: which really
appear so signally to me, that it seems a fighting against GOD, to adhere
longer to it.


Phil. Truly, you and I enter on this S^bject with an equal surprise, though
upon very different accounts: For I must tell you freely, that after I have
with all the application of mind, and freedom of thoughts imaginable,
considered what could engage so many in this Island, into so much zeal and rage
against the Order, I am not able to satisfy my self about it. That venerable
Order having such a native tendency for advancing of true Religion, Peace,
Order, and every thing that is excellent: that the aversion and prejudices so
many have drunk in against it, seem as unjust, as unconquerable, and look like
a part of GOD's controversy with us; whereby we are blindly carried into so
much unjustifiable zeal against that, which if well managed, might prove an
excellent mean for reviving the power of Religion, that has suffered so great
decays. I shall not deny, but on our part there have been great failings, for
which GOD's anger hangs over our heads: and that he permits all this opposition
we meet with for punishing us for our sins, which have justly provoked GOD to
make us base and contemptible in the sight of the people. And this I hope shall
be an effectual mean of humbling us, and of purging us from our dross: whereby
this holy Order being again managed with the ancient Spirit, may appear into
the World in its P^imitive luster; and be attended with the blessings that then
followed it, to the wonder and conviction of all men. But let me add, the
opposition some fiery spirits have given the establishment of Episcopacy,
deserves much of the blame of its being so little succesful in the great work
of the Gospel: for always bitter envy and strife produce confusion and every
evil work: therefore when you are to view Episcopacy in its amiable and lovely
colors, let me send you back to that cloud of witnesses, who for the testimony
of JESUS endured all manner of torments, were torn by beasts, slain by the
sword, burnt in the fire; and in a word, who preached the everlasting Gospel
through the World. How many Churches did these Bishops found with their labors
in preaching, and water not only with their tears, but their blood? how sublime
was their piety? how frevent were their Sermons? how constant were their
labors? how strict was their discipline? how zealous were they against
heresies? and how watchful against vice? In a word, read but the Histories and
Writings of those great Worthies, who were by the confession of all men,
Bishops, and had more absolute Authority over the Inferior Clergy, than is
pretended to among us? and then tell me, if you have not changed your verdict
of that order. Have there been such men in the Christian World, as were
Ignatius, Polycarp, I^^naeus, Cyprian, Thaumaturg, Athanasius, Basil,
Nazianzen, Martin, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Augustine, and a thousand more? These
were, after the Apostles, the greatest glories of the Christian Church: and
were burning and shining lights. It is in their lives, writings and decrees,
that I desire you to view Episcopacy: and if it have any way fallen from that
first and fair Original, direct your thoughts and zeal to contrive and carry on
its recovery to its former purity and servor: but take it not at the
disadvantage, as it may have suffered any thing from the corruptions of men, in
a succession of so many ages; for you know the Sacraments, the Ministry, and
all the parts of Religion have been soiled, and stained of their first beauty
by their corrupt hands, to whose care they were committed. But he were very
much to blame, who would thereupon quarrel these things. I shall therefore
entreat you will consider that Order, either in it self, or as it flourished in
the first ages of the Church, and not as prejudices or particular escapes may
have represented it to you.


Eud. That you may both understand one another better, let me suggest to you
the right stating of that you differ about, that you be not contending about
words, or notions of things, which may appear with various shapes, and faces;
one whereof may be amiable, and another ugly: give therefore a clear and
distinct account of that Episcopacy you own and assert.


Poly. Since Philarcheus has appealed to the ancient Church, for the true
pattern of Episcopacy, I shall faithfully represent to you, what the office and
power of their Bishops was, and how it took its first rise and growth among
them; and then I shall leave it to be discussed, how lawful or allowable it is
of it self. The Jews had among them, beside the Temple-worship, which was
Typical, their Synagogues, not only over the land, but through all the corners
of the World into which they were dispersed; which were called their Prosenchae
among the Greeks, and Romans. Thither did they meet for the daily worship of
GOD; there did they likewise meet on their Sabbaths, and recited their
Philacteries, or Liturgies, and heard a portion of the Law read: which was
divided in so many Sections, that it might be yearly read over: there was also
a word of exhortation used, after the Law was read: and there were in these
Synagogues, Office-Bearers separated for that work, who were to order the
Worship, and the reading of the Law, and were to censure sins, by several
degrees of Excommunications, casting them out of the Synagogue: they were
likewise to see to the supplying the necessities of the Poor. Now if we
consider the practice of our Savior, and his Apostles, we shall find them
studying to comply with the forms received among the Jews, as much as was
possible, or consistent with the new Dispensation; which might be instanced in
many particulars, as in both Sacraments, the forms of Worship, the practice of
Excommunication, and these might be branched out into many instances. And
indeed since we find the Apostles yielding so far in compliance with the Jews
about the Mosaical Rites, which were purely typical, and consequently
antiquated by the death of CHRIST, we have a great deal of more reason to
apprehend they complied with their forms in things that were not typical, but
rather moral, such as was the order of their Worship: these things only
excepted, wherein the Christian Religion required a change to be made: And this
the rather, that wherever they went promulgating the Gospel, the first offer of
it was made to the Jews; many of whom believed, but were still zealous of the
Traditions of their Fathers. And so it is not like, that they who could not be
prevailed upon to part with the Mosaical Rites, for all the reasons were
offered against them, were so easily content to change their other forms, which
were of themselves useful and innocent. Now since we see the Apostles retained,
and improved so many of their Rites and customs, why they should have innovated
the Government of their Synagogues, will not be easily made clear: especially
since they retained the names of Bishop, Presbyter, and Deacon, which were in
use among the Jews, and since they did bless and separate them by the
imposition of hands, which had been also practiced among the Jews: and all this
will appear with a clearer visage of reason, if we consider the accounts given
in the Acts, or rules prescribed in the Epistles of the Apostles, about the
framing and constituting their Churches. All which speak out nothing of a new
Constitution, but tell only what rules they gave for regulating things; which
from the style they run in, seem to have been then constituted: and is very far
either from Moses's Language in the Pentateuch, or from the forms of the
Institution of the Sacraments: And except the little we have of the Institution
of Deacons, nothing like an Institution occurs in the New Testament; and yet
that seems not the Institution of an Order, but a particular provision of men
for serving the H^llenists in an office already known and received. Now let me
here send you to the Masters of the Jewish learning, particularly to the
eminently learned, and judicious Doctor Lightfoot, who will inform you, that in
every Synagogue there was one peculiarly charged with the Worship, called the
Bishop of the Congregation, the Angel of the Church, or the Minister of the
Synagogue: and besides him, there were three, who had the Civil Judicatory; who
judged also about the receiving Proselytes, the imposition of hands, etc. And
there were other three, who gathered, and distributed the alms. Now the
Christian Religion taking place, as the Gospel was planted in the Cities, where
it was chiefly preached, these forms and orders were retained, both name and
thing: for we cannot think that the Apostles, whose chief work was the gaining
of Souls from Gentilism or Judaism, were very sollicitous about modes of
Government; but took things as they found them. Only the Elder and greater
Christians they separated for Church Offices, and retained an inspection over
them themselves. And abstracting from what was said about the Synagogues, it is
natural to think, that when the Apostles left them, and died, they did appoint
the more eminent to be Overseers to the rest; which why not every where, as
well as was done by S. Paul to Timothy and Titus, is not easily to be proved.
But this is yet more rational from what was premised about the Synagogue
Pattern; only they did not restrict themselves to that number, for the number
of the Presbyters was indefinite; but the Deacons were according to their first
original, restricted to the number seven. Thus the first form was, that there
was one whose charge it was to over-see, feed, and rule the flock: and where
the number of the Christians was small, they met all in one place for Worship,
and it was easy for the Bishop to overtake the charge. But for the spreading
of the Gospel, he had about him a company of the elder, and more eminent
Christians, who were designed and ordained for diffusing the Gospel through the
Cities, Villages, and Places adjacent: and these Presbyters were as the
Bishop's Children educated, and formed by him, being in all they did, directed
by him, and accountable to him, and were as Probationers for the Bishopric:
one of them being always chosen to succeed in the seat when vacant through the
Bishop's death. Now all these lived together, as in a little College, and were
maintained out of the charitable Oblations of the People, which were deposited
in the Bishop's hands, and divided in four parts; one falling to the Bishop,
another to the Clergy, a third to the Widows and Orphans, and other poor
Persons, and a fourth to the building of edifices for Worship. Thus the
Churches were planted, and the Gospel was disseminated through the World. But
at first every Bishop had but one Parish, yet afterward when the numbers of
the Christians increased, that they could not conveniently meet in one place;
and when through the violence of the Persecutions they durst not assemble in
great multitudes, the Bishops divided their charges in lesser Parishes, and
gave assignments to the Presbyters of particular flocks, which was done first
in Rome, in the beginning of the Second Century: and these Churches assigned to
Presbyters, as they received the Gospel from the Bishop, so they owned a
dependence on him as their Father, who was also making frequent excursions to
them, and visiting the whole bounds of his Precinct. And things continued thus
in a Parochial Government, till toward the end of the Second Century, the
Bishop being chiefly entrusted with the cure of Souls, a share whereof was also
committed to the Presbyters, who were subject to him, and particularly were to
be ordained by him; nor could any Ordination be without the Bishop; who in
ordaining, was to carry along with him the con^urrence of the Presbyters, as in
every other act of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. But I run not out into more
particulars, because of an account of all these things which I have drawn with
an unbiased ingenuity, and as much diligence as was possible for me to bring
along with me to so laborious a work: and this I shall send you when our
Conference shall be at an end. But in the end of the Se^ond Century, the
Churches were framed in another mould from the division of the Empire: and the
Bishops of the Cities did, according to the several divisions of the Empire,
associate in Synods with the chief Bishop of that Division or Province, who was
called the Metropolitan, from the dignity of the City where he was Bishop. And
hence sprang Provincial Synods, and the Superiorities, and Precedencies of
Bishoprics, which were ratified in the Council of Nice, as ancient Customs,
they being at that time above an hundred years old. In the beginning of the
Third Century, as the purity of Churchmen begun to abate, so new methods were
devised for preparing them well to those sacred Functions, and therefore they
were appointed to pass through several degrees before they could be Deacons,
Presbyters, or Bishops. And the Orders of Porters, Readers, Singers, Exorcists
(or Catechists) Acolyths (who were to be the Bishops attendants) and
Subdeacons, were set up; of whom mention is made first by Cyp^ian: and these
degrees were so many steps of probationership to the supreme Order. But all
this was not able to keep out the corruptions we^e breaking in upon Church
Office^s, e^pe^^ally after the Fou^th Century, that the Empire became
Christian: which as it broug^t much riches and splendour on Church Emp^oyments,
so it let in great swarms of corrupt men on the Christian Assemblies: And then
the election to Church Offices, which was formerly in the hands of the people,
was taken from them, by reason of the tumults and disorders were in these
elections: which sometimes ended in blood, and occasioned much faction, and
schism. And Ambitus became now such an universal sin among Churchmen, that in
that Century, Monasteries were founded in diverse places by holy Bishops, as by
Basile, Augustine, Martin, and others; who imitated the Example of those in
Egypt, and Nitria; whose design was the purifying of these who were to serve in
the Gospel. It is true, these Seminaries did also degenerate, and become nests
of superstition and idleness: yet it cannot be denied, but this was an
excellent Constitution, for rightly forming the minds of the designers for holy
O^ders; that being trained up in a course of Devotion, Fasting, Solitude,
abstraction from the World, and Poverty, they might be better qualified for the
discharge of that holy Function. And thus I have given you a general draught
and perspective of the first Constitution of Churches, together with some steps
of their advance^, and declinings: But I despair not to give you an ampler
account, and plan of their rules and forms. Mean while, let this suffice.


Phil. From what you have told us, I shall propose the notion I have of
Episcopacy, that the work of a Bishop, as it is chiefly to feed the flock, so
it is more particularly to form, educate, and try these who are to be admitted
to Church Employments; and to over-see, direct, admonish, and reprove these who
are already settled in Church Offices: so that as the chief trial of those who
are to be ordained, is his work, the Ordinations ought to be performed by him;
yet not so as to exclude the assistance and concurrence of Presbyters, both in
the previous trial, and in the Ordination it self. But on the other hand, no
Ordination ought to be without the Bishop. And as for Jurisdiction, though the
Bishop has authority to over-see, reprove, and admonish the Clergy; yet in all
acts of public Jurisdiction, as he ought not to proceed without their
concurrence, so neither ought they without his knowledge and allowance,
determine about Ecclesiastical matters. As for the notion of the distinct
Offices of Bishop and Presbyter, I confess, it is not so clear to me: and
therefore since I look upon the ^acramental Actions, as the highest of sacred
Pe^formances; I cannot but acknowledge these who are empowered ^or them, must
be of the highest Office in the Church. So I do not allege a Bishop to be a
dis^inct Office from a Presbyter; but a different degree in the same Office, to
whom for order and unities sake, the chief inspection and care of
Ecclesiastical Matters ought to be referred, and who shall have authority to
curb the Insolences of some factious and turbulent Spirits. His work should be
to feed the flock by the Word and Sacraments, as well as other Presbyters; and
especially to try and ordain Entrants, and to over-see, direct, and admonish
such as bear Office. And I the more willingly incline to believe Bishops and
Presbyters, to be the several degrees of the same Office, since the names of
Bishop and Presbyter, are used for the same thing in Scripture; and are also
used promiscuously by the Writers of the two first Centuries. Now Isotimus,
when you bring either clear Scripture, or evident Reason, for proving this to
be unlawful, or unexpedient, you shall shake my kindness to this Constitution,
whose venerable Antiquity has conciliated so much reverence from me to it,
that it will be a great attempt to change my value of it.


Isot. These are all brave Stories well contrived for triumphing among
ignorants. But these pretenses from Antiquity have been so bat^led by the
learned Assertors of Pre^byterial Government, that I wonder how you can so
confidently vouch them, ^ince there is not a vestige of any dispa^ity before
the 140th year after CHRIST. And we know the Mystery of Iniquity wrought in the
days of the Apostles, and that then there was a Diotrophes who loved the
preeminence, and the darkness and obscurity of the rise and progress of
Prelacy, does the more confirm me, that it was the Mystery of Iniquity. The
pretense from Ignatius's Epistles, has been often overthrown; and there are
words in these Epistles which clearly prove them to be the contrivance of some
Impostor, they being so inconsistent with the strain of Religion, and truth of
the Gospel, not to speak of the Orthodoxy and Piety of Ignatius, and the
simplicity of these times, which demonstrate their interpolation evidently, for
all the pains Doctor Hamond has been at to assert their faith: and therefore
these c^n furnish you with no argument. See page 145. and 151.


Poly. I confess I can hear you tell over the arguments of these Pamphlets with
some pa^ience: But truly in this instance, I know ^ot how to treat you, or
rather him in whose name you speak, who yet would earnestly persuade the World
of the great skill, he and his friends have in these things. Surely they are
the men of Wisdom! And one may as securely pull the hairs out of a Lion's
beard, as twit them with the least deg^ee of igno^ance. But, pray, tell your
Learned Friend, that in his next public appearance, he meddle no more with
Antiquity before he know it better, and discover not so much ignorance, that
one of a months standing in that study may laugh at him.

Pray, Sir, are you in earnest, when you tell me that for 140 years after
CHRIST, there is no vestige of Prelacy on record? Will you not believe
Irenaeus, who lived at that time, though he wrote some years after, and reckons
the succession of the Bishops of Rome from the days of the Apostles? Or if the
Writings and Records of that time be lost, will you give no credit in a
Historical matter to those who followed that time, and drew their accounts from
Writings then extant, though now lost, such as Tertullian, Cyprian, but
especially Eusebius, who gives the succession of the Bishops, in the several
great Sees, from the Apostles days? Certainly, he who was born but about an
hundred years after the time you mark, would have had some knowledge of so
great a change. But if there was no vestige of Prelacy before the year 140 in
which it first appeared, what time will you allow for its spreading through the
World? Or was it in an instant received every where? Were all the pretenders so
easily en^lamed to this Paroxism of Ambition? And were all the other Presbyters
so tame, as to be so ^asily whed^ed out of their rights, without one
protestation on the contrary? How came the Eclipse of the Church to a total
Obscuration in one minute? What charm was there in Prelacy at that time, that
the World was so enchanted with it; and that so soon after S. John's death,
when Polycarp, and many more of the Apostolical men did yet survive? And how
came it, that all the Churches did so unanimously concur in the defection, and
not so much as two witnesses appeared to fight against this Beast? Let me tell
you freely, there is not a ravery in Don Quixot's Adventures, or Amadis de
Gaul, but is liker to prevail on my belief, than this Romance. But for
Ignatius's Epistles, the hazard of the issue of the debate about them is very
unequal: for if these Epistles be his, then he dying so near S. John's days,
the Cause of Presbytery will be undone. But though they be not his, the
Episcopal Party sustain small prejudice: For from other traces of Antiquity, it
can be made as clear, that Episcopacy was in the Church from the days of the
Apostles, as any historical thing which is at so great distance from our time.
But for your friends exceptions at these Epistles, they betray his great skill,
and tell clearly, that he understands not the question, and that he h^th never
read a Page of Doctor Hamond, though with his usual arrogance, he slights all
he says: For had he read any part of his dissertation, he would have made a
difference betwixt the old vulgar Edition of these Epistles, whose
Interpolations that learned Doctor acknowledges, and the late Edition of them
by the learned Vossius, according to the Medicean Codex, whose authority he
only voucheth. Now had he known this, would he have cited words out of them,
which are not of the true Edition asserted by Doctor Hamond, but are of the old
vulgar and rejected one? Certainly, had he read any thing of that debate, which
has been truly managed with much subtle critical learning on both sides, he
could not have stumbled unto such a mistake. But his reading, it is like,
rises not above Pamphlets; and finding these words cited on the same design,
before the late Editions of Ignatius came out; he, without examining, took them
upon trust from second hand. But I shall not run out farther upon Ignatius's
Epistles, than to recommend their perusal to you, and then I am confident you
will discern such a native, simple, and sincerely pious, and devout strain in
them, so unlike the swelled Style, or purposes of interpolated Writings, that
they will be their own testimony for convincing you of their genuineness: but
the exceptions against them being so fully, and so lately, with an amazing
diligence, answered by Doctor Pearson, I shall remit you to his Labors, if you
intend to examine this matter accurately.


Isot. Your Conformist did likewise allege the 40, but he should have said the
38 Apostolical Canon, with a hint, as if fifty of these might have been the
Apostles appointments: though the heap of them is so full of novelties, that
their Antiquity cannot be pleaded by any who knows the state of the ancient
Church; as appears from the 3, 17, and 25 Canons: and were these Canons
received, they would prejudge more than advance the cause you maintain, as will
appear from the 4, 33, 36, and 80 Canons, not to mention the 24, 26, 28, 41,
53, 57, and 75. And in a word, these Canons do only allow of a precedence of
Order, but not of your Prelatick power and superiority, that claims the sole
power of Ordination and Jurisdiction: See page 148.


Poly. Truly, Sir, if the former exceptions did prove your Author a second hand
writer, who voucheth Antiquity upon the testimony of others, this does it much
more. For I am sure had he but read over those Canons, which might be done in
half an hour, he had argued this point at another rate: and had he seen the
Edition of Dionysius Exiguus, he had not accused the Conformist for citing that
Canon, as the fortieth, since it is so in his division, who was their first
publisher in the Latin Church, tho it be the thirty ninth in the Greek
division. But I will deal roundly in this matter, and acknowledge that
collection to be none of the Apostles nor Clement's, since all that passed
under Clement's name was accounted spurious, except his first Epistle to the
Corinthians. Nor was this a production of the first two ages. For the silence
of the Writers of those Centuries gives clear evidence for their novelty: They
not being cited for the decision of things then in controversy, wherein they
are express, as in the matter of Easter, the rebaptizing Heretics, and diverse
other particulars. Yet in the Fourth and Fifth Century, reference is after made
to some Elders rules of the Church, which are to be found no where but in this
Collection. The Apostolical Canons are also sometimes expressly mentioned: and
this gives good ground to believe there were from the Third Century and
forward, some rules general received in the Church, and held Apostolical, as
being at first introduced by Apostolical men. This was at first learnedly made
out by De Marca Concord. lib. 3. c. 2. and of late more fully by that most
ingenious and accurate searcher into Antiquity Beveregius in his Preface to his
Annotations on these Canons. Yet I am apt to think, they were only preserved by
an oral tradition: and that no collection of them was agreed on, and published
before the fifth Century. It is certain, the Latin Church in Pope Innocent's
days acknowledged no Canons but those of Nice. And many of the Canons in this
Collection, we find among Canons of other Councils, particularly in that of
Antioch; without any reference to a preceding authority that had enjoined them:
which we can hardly think they had omitted, had they received the collection (I
speak of) as Apostolical. And that of the triple immersion in Baptism, looks
like a Rule, no elder than the Arrian Controversy. They began first to appear
under the name of the Apostles Canons in the Fifth Century, which made Pope
Gelasius with a Synod of seventy Bishops condemn them as Apocryphal; though I
must add, that the authority of that pretended Council and Decree, though
generally received, be on many accounts justly questionable: And yet by this we
are only to understand, that he rejected that pretended authority of the
Apostles prefixed to these Canons. In the beginning of the Sixth Century they
were published by Dionysius Exiguus, who prefixed fifty of them to his
translation of the Greek Canons; but he confesses they were much doubted by
many. At the same time they were published in the Greek Church with the
addition of thirty five more Canons, and were acknowledged generally. Justinian
cites them often in the Novels, and in the sixth Novel calls them, the Canons
of the holy Apostles, kept and interpreted by the Fathers. And the same
authority was ascribed to them by the Council in Trullo. These things had been
pertinently alleged if you had known them, but for your Friends niblings at
them, if you will but give your self the trouble of reading these Canons, you
will be ashamed of his weakness, who manageth his advantage so ill. And to
instance this but in one particular, had he read these Canons himself, could he
have cited the eighty which is among the latter additions, and passed by the
sixth, which is full to the same purpose? But for that impudent allegation, as
if a bare precedence had been only ascribed to Bishops by these Canons, look
but on the 14. the 30. 37. 40. 54. and 73. and then pass your verdict on your
Friends ingenuity, or his knowledge. By the 14. No Churchman may pass from one
Parish to another without his Bishop's sentence, otherwise he is suspended from
Ecclesiastical Functions: and if he refuse to return, when required by his
Bishop, he is to be accounted a Churchman no more. By the 30. A Presbyter, who
in contempt of his Bishop gathers a Congregation apart, having nothing to
condemn his Bishop of, either as being unholy or unjust, he is to be deposed,
as one that is ambitious, and tyrannous; and such of the Clergy or Laity as
join with them, are likewise to be censured. By the 37. The Bishop has the
care of all Church matters, which he must administrate as in the sight of God.
By the 39. The Bishop has power over all the goods of the Church; and the
reason given is, that since the precious souls of men are committed to him, it
is much more just he have the charge of the goods of the Church. By the 54. If
a Clergyman reproach their Bishop, he is to be deposed, for it is written,
Thou shall not curse the Ruler of thy people. And by the 73. A Bishop, when
accused, is only to be judged of by other Bishops. Now from these hints, judge
whether there be truth in that Assertion, that only a precedence is asserted in
these Canons: and if all the power is now pleaded for, be not there held out;
not to mention the Canon was cited by the Conformist, that Presbyters or
Deacons might finish nothing without the Bishop's Sentence, since the Souls of
the people are trusted to him. As for the sole power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction, I am sure none among us do claim it, but willingly allow the
Presbyters a concurrence in both these. And as to what your friend says of
Cyprian, it is of a piece with the learning and ingenuity that runs through
the rest of his Discourse, from page 150 to page 160. where for diverse pages he
belabours his Reader with brave shows of Learning and high invention, so that
no doubt he thinks he has performed Wonders, and fully satisfied every scruple
concerning the rise and progress of Episcopacy.


Isot. I pray you, do not fly too high, and make not too much ado about any
small advantages you conceive you have of my Friend: but upon the whole matter
I am willing to believe there was a precedence pretty early begun in the
Church, which I shall not deny was useful and innocent, tho a deviation from
the first pattern: Neither shall I deny, that holy men were of that Order: but
when it is considered what a step even that Precedence was to Lordly Prelacy,
and how from that the son of perdition rose up to his pretense of Supremacy; we
are taught how unsafe it is to change any thing in the Church, from the first
institution of its blessed Head, who knew best what was fit for it, according
to whose will all things in it should be managed.


Poly. It has been often repeated, that nothing was ever so sacred, as to
escape that to which all things, when they fall in the hands of Mortals, are
obnoxious. And may not one that quarrels a standing Ministry, argue on the
same grounds, a Ministers authority over the people, gave the rise to the
authority Bishops pretend over Ministers, and so the Ministry will be
concluded the first step of the Beast's Throne? Or may not the authority your
Judicatories pretend to be at the same rate struck out, since from lesser
Synods sprung greater ones, from Provincial rose Generals, and from these
Ecumenical ones with the pretense of infallibility? But to come nearer you,
that whole frame of Metropolitans and Patriarchs was taken from the division of
the Roman Empire, which made up but one great National Church: and so no wonder
the Bishop of the Imperial City of that Empire, was the Metropolitan of that
Church: yet he was not all that neither, since he had no authority over his
fellow Patriarchs, being only the first in order, which truly were the Bishops
of that Church: what they were for the first four Ages, it was never judged an
absurdity to grant to them still: tho the ruin of the Roman Empire, and its
division into so many Kingdoms, which are constituted in various National
Churches, do alter the present frame of Europe so entirely, from what was then;
that with very good reason what was then submitted to, on the account of the
Unity of the Empire, may be now undone by reason of the several Kingdoms, which
are National Churches within themselves; and need not to own so much as the
acknowledgment of Primacy to any, but to the Metropolitan of their own Kingdom.
And it seems the interest of Princes, as well as Churches, to assert this. But
for the pretense of the Pope's supremacy Episcopacy was so far from being
judged a step to it, that the ruin of the Episcopal authority over Presbyters,
and the granting them exemptions from the Jurisdiction of their Ordinary, was
the greatest advance the Roman Bishop ever made in his tyrannical usurpation
over Churches. I need not here tell so known a matter, as is that of the
exemption of the Regulars, who being subject to their own Superiors and
Generals, and by them to the Pope, were sent through the World in swarms; and
with great shows of piety, devotion, and poverty, carried away all the esteem
and following from the secular Clergy; who were indeed become too secular, and
these were the Pope's Agents and Emissaries, who brought the World to receive
the mark of the Beast, and wonder at her. For before that time, the Popes found
more difficulty to carry on their pretensions, both from secular Princes and
Bishops: But these Regulars being warranted to preach and administer the
Sacraments without the Bishop's license, or being subject and accountable to
him; as they brought the Bishops under great contempt, so they were the Pope's
chief confidents in all their treasonable plots against the Princes of Europe.
And when at the Council of Trent, the Bishops of Spain being weary of the
insolences of the Regulars, and of the Papal yoke, designed to get free from
it. The great mean they proposed, was to get Episcopacy declared to be of
divine Right, which would have struck out both the one and the other. But the
Papal Party foresaw this well, and opposed it with all the Artifice imaginable:
and Lainez the Jesuit, did at large discourse against it; and they carried it
so, that it was not permitted to be declared of divine Right. And by this, judge
if it be likely that the Papacy owes its rise to Episcopacy, since the
declaring it to be of divine Right, was judged one of the greatest blows the
Papal Dominion could have received, as the abusing of the Episcopal authority,
was the greatest step to its Exaltation.


Isot. Be in these things what may be, I am sure from the beginning it was not
so, since Christ did so expressly prohibit all dominion and authority among his
Disciples, when he said, But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will
be great among you, let him be your minister, Luke 22.26. Whereby he did not
only condemn a tyrannical domination, but simply all Authority, like that the
Lords of the Gentiles exercised over them. See page 88.


Crit. I confess, the advantages some have drawn from these words of CHRIST,
for deciding this question, have many times appeared strange to me, their
purpose being so visibly different from that to which they are applied. But if
we examine the occasion that drew these words from CHRIST, it will furnish us
with a key for understanding them aright: and that was the frequent contentions
were among the Disciples about the precedence in the Kingdom of CHRIST: for
they were in the vulgar Iudaical Error, who believed the Messiah was to be a
temporal Prince, and so understood all the pompous promises of the New
Dispensation liberally, and thought that CHRIST should have restored Israel in
the literal meaning: therefore they began to contend who should be preferred in
his Kingdom: and the Wife of Zebedee did early bespeak the chief preferments
for her Sons. Yea, we find them sticking to this mistake even at CHRIST's
Ascension, by the question then moved, concerning his restoring the Kingdom at
that time to Israel. Now these Contentions, as they sprung from an error of
their judgments, so also they took their rise from their proud ambition. And
for a check to both, our Savior answers them, by telling the difference was to
be betwixt his Kingdom, and the Kingdoms of the Nations: these being exercised
by Grandeur and temporal Authority, whereas his Kingdom was Spiritual, and
allowed nothing of that; since Churchmen have not by CHRIST a Lordly or
Despotick dominion over Christians committed to them, but a paternal and
brotherly one; by which in commanding, they serve their Flock; so that it is
both a Ministry and an Authority. Therefore the words of Christ, it shall not
be so among you, relate nothing to the degrees or ranks of Churchmen, but to
the nature of their power and jurisdiction over their flock, and not to their
degrees among themselves, which appears evidently from the whole contexture of
the words. And that he is not speaking of any equality among Churchmen in their
Church power, appears from the mention is made of the greatest, and the chief;
He that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and he that is chief,
as he that does serve: which show he was not here designed to strike out the
degrees of superiority, when he makes express mention of them; but to intimate
that the higher the degrees of Ecclesiastical Offices did raise them, they were
thereby obliged to the more humility, and the greater labor. All which is
evidently confirmed by the instance he gives of himself, which shows still he
is not meaning of Church power (since he had certainly the highest
Ecclesiastical a^thority) but only of Civil dominion; nothing of which he would
assume. And if this place be to be applied to Church power, then it will rather
prove too much, that there should be no power at all among Churchmen over other
Christians: For since the parallel runs betwixt the Disciples, and the Lords of
the Gentiles; it will run thus, that tho the Lords of the Gentiles bear rule
over their people, yet you must not over yours: so that this must either be
restricted to Civil Authority, or else it will quite strike out all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. But how this should be brought to prove that there
may not be several ranks in Church Offices, I cannot yet imagine. And as it is
not thought contrary to this, that a Minister is over your Lay Elders and
Deacons, why should it be more contrary to it, that a rank of Bishops be over
Ministers? In a word, since we find the Apostles exercising this paternal
authority over other Churchmen, it will clearly follow they understood not
Christ, as hereby meaning to discharge the several ranks of Churchmen, with
different degrees of power. But to tell you plainly what by these words of
CHRIST is clearly forbidden, I acknowledge that chiefly the Pope's pretense to
the Temporal Dominion over Christendom, whether directly or indirectly, as the
Vicar of CHRIST, is expressly condemned. Next, all Churchmen under what notion,
or in what Judicatory soever, are condemned, who study upon a pretense of the
Churches intrinsic power, to possess themselves of the authority, to determine
about obedience due to Kings or Parliaments, and who bring a tyranny on the
Christians, and pr^cure what by Arts, what by Power, the secular Arm to serve
at their beck. Whether this was the practice of the late General Assemblies, or
not, I leave it to all who are so old, as to remember how squares went then;
and if the leading Men at that time, had not really the secular power ready to
lacquay at their commands, so that they ruled in the spirit of the Lords of the
Gentiles, whatever they might have pretended. And the following change of
Government did fully prove, that the obedience which was universally given to
their commands, was only an appendage of the Civil Power, which was then
directed by them: For no sooner was the power invaded by the Usurper, who
regarded their Judicatories little, but the Obedience paid to their Decrees
evanished. Thus, I say, these who build all their pretenses to parity on their
mistakes of these words, did most signally despise and neglect them in their
true and real meaning. Now think not to retort this on any additions of Secular
Power, which the munificence of Princes may have annexed to the Episcopal
Office; for that is not at all condemned here: CHRIST speaking only of the
power Churchmen, as such, derived from him their Head, which only bars all
pretensions to Civil Power on the title of their Functions; but does not say
that their Functions render them incapable of receiving any Secular Power, by a
secular conveyance from the Civil Magistrate. And so far have I considered this
great and pompous argument against precedence in the Church; and am mistaken if
I have not satisfied you of the slender foundations it is built upon: all which
is also applicable to St. Peter's words, of not Lording it over their flocks.


Isot. You are much mistaken, if you think that to be the great foundation of
our belief of a parity among Churchmen, for I will give you another, ( page
91.) which is this, that JESUS CHRIST the head of his Church, did institute a
settled Ministry in his Church, to feed and over-see the Flock, to preach, to
reprove, to bind, loose, etc. It is true, he gave the Apostles many singular
things beyond their Successors, which were necessary for that time, and work,
and were to expire with it: But as to their Ministerial Power which was to
continue, he made all equal. The Apostles also acknowledged the Pastors of the
Churches, their fellow-laborors, and Brethren. And the feeding and overseeing
the Flock, are duties so complicated together, that it is evident none can be
fitted for the one, without they have also authority for the other. And
therefore all who have a power to preach, must also have a right to govern,
since Discipline is referable to preaching, as a mean to its end: preaching
being the great end of the Ministry. These therefore who are sent upon that
work, must not be limited in the other: neither do we ever find CHRIST
instituting a Superior Order over preaching Presbyters, which shows he judged
it not necessary: And no more did the Apostles, though they withheld none of
the Counsel of GOD from the flock. Therefore this Superior Order usurping the
power from the preaching Elders, since it has neither warrant, nor institution
in Scripture, is to be rejected, as an invasion of the rights of the Church. In
fine, the great advantage our Plea for parity has, is, that it proves its
self, till you prove a disparity. For since you acknowledge it to be of divine
Right, that there be Office^s in the House of GOD, except you prove the
institution of several Orders, an equality among them must be concluded. And
upon these accounts it is that we cannot acknowledge the lawfulness of Prelacy.


Phil. I am sure, if your Friends had now heard you, they would for ever
absolve you from designing to betray their cause by a faint Patrociny; since
you have in a few words laid out all their Forces: but if you call to mind what
has heen already said, you will find most of what you have now pleaded, to be
answered beforehand. For I acknowledge Bishop and Presbyter, to be one and the
same Office; and so I plead for no new Office-Bearers in the Church. Next, in
our second Conference, the power given to Churchmen was proved to be double.
The first branch of it, is their Authority to publish the Gospel, to manage the
Worship, and to dispense the Sacraments. And this is all that is of divine
right in the Ministry, in which Bishops and Presbyters are equal sharers, both
being vested with this power. But beside this, the Church claims a power of
Jurisdiction, of making rules for discipline, and of applying and executing the
same; all which is indeed suitable to the common Laws of Societies, and to the
general rules of Scripture, but has no positive warrant from any Scripture
precept. And all these Constitutions of Churches into Synods, and the Canons of
discipline, taking their rise from the divisions of the World into the several
Provinces, and beginning in the end of the second, and beginning of the third
Century, do clearly show they can be derived from no divine Original; and so
were, as to their particular form, but of humane Constitution: therefore as to
the management of this Jurisdiction, it is in the Churches power to cast it in
what mould she will: and if so, then the constant practice of the Church for so
many ages should determine us, unless we will pretend to understand the
exigencies and conveniences of it better than they who were nearest the
Apostolical time. But we ought to be much more determined by the Laws of the
Land, which in all such matters have a power to bind our consciences to their
obedience, till we prove the matter of them sinful. Now discover where the
guilt lies of fixing one over a Tract of ground, who shall have the chief
inspection of the Ministry, and the greatest Authority in matters of
Jurisdiction, so that all within that Precinct be governed by him, with the
concurring votes of the other Presbyters: if you say, that thereby the
Ministers may be restrained of many things, which otherwise the good of the
Church requires to be done: I answer, these are either things necessary to be
done by divine precept, or not: if the former, then since no power on earth can
cancel the Authority of the divine Law, such restraints are not to be
considered. But if the things be not necessary, then the Unity and Peace of the
Church is certainly preferable to them. I acknowledge a Bishop may be
tyrannical, and become a great burden to his Presbyters; but, pray, may not the
same be apprehended from Synods? And remember your friends, how long it is,
since they made the same complaints against the Synods: and the hazard of an
ill Bishop is neither so fixed, nor so lasting, as that of a bad Synod. For a
Bishop may die, and a good one succeed: but when a Synod is corrupt, they who
are the major part, are careful to bring in none, but such as are sure to their
way; whereby they propagate their corruption more infallibly than a Bishop can
do. And what if the Lay ruling Elders should bend up the same plea against the
Ministers, who do either assume a Negative over them directly, or at least do
what is equivalent, and carry every thing to the Presbytery, Synod, or General
Assembly, where they are sure to carry it against the Lay Elders, they being
both more in number, and more able with their learning and eloquence to
confound the others? But should a Lay-Elder plead thus against them, We are
Office-Bearers instituted by CHRIST, for ruling the flock, as well as you, and
yet you take our power from us; for whereas in our Church Sessions, which are
of CHRIST's appointment, we are the greater number, being generally twelve to
one; you Ministers have got a device, to turn us out of the power: for you
allow but one of us to come to your Synods, and Presbyteries, and but one of a
whole Presbytery to go to a National Synod; whereby you strike the rest of us
out of our power: and thus you assert a preeminence over us, to carry matters
as you please? Now Isotimus, when in your principles you answer this, I will
undertake on all hazards to satisfy all you can say, even in your own
principles. Next, may not one of the Congregational way, talk at the same rate,
and say, CHRIST has given his Office-Bearers full power to preach, feed, and
oversee the flock; and yet for all that, their power of overseeing is taken
from them; and put in the hands of a multitude, who being generally corrupt
themselves, and lusting to envy, will suffer none to outstrip them: but are
tyrannical over any they see minding the work of the Gospel more than
themselves? And must this usurpation be endured and submitted to? And let me
ask you freely, what imaginable device will be fallen upon, for securing the
Church from the tyranny of Synods, unless it be either by the Magistrates
power, or by selecting some eminent Churchmen, who shall have some degrees of
power beyond their brethren? In a word, I deny not, but as in Civil
Governments, there is no form upon which great inconveniences may not follow;
so the same is unavoidable in Ecclesiastical Government. But as you will not
deny, Monarchy to be the best of Governments, for all the hazards of tyranny
from it; so I must crave leave to have the same impressions of Episcopacy.


Crit. But suffer me to add a little for checking Isotimus his too positive
asserting of parity from the New Testament; for except he find a precept for
it, his Negative Authority will never conclude it: and can only prove a parity
lawful, and that imparity is not necessary. I shall acknowledge that without
Scripture warrants, no new Offices may be instituted; but without that, in
order to Peace, Unity, Decency, and Edification, several ranks and dignities in
the same Office, might well have been introduced: whereby some were to be
empowered either by the Churches choice, or the Kings Authority, as Overseers,
or inspectors of the rest: who might be able to restrain them in the exercise
of some parts of their functions, which are not immediately commanded by GOD.
And you can never prove it unlawful, that any should oversee, direct, and
govern Churchmen, without you prove the Apostolical function unlawful: for what
is unlawful, and contrary to the rules of the Gospel, can upon no occasion, and
at no time become lawful: since then both the Apostles, and the Evangelists
exercised Authority over Presbyters; it cannot be contrary to the Gospel rules,
that some should do it. To pretend that this superiority was for that exigent,
and to die with that age, is a mere allegation without ground from Scripture:
for if by our LORD's words, it shall not be so among you, all superiority among
Churchmen was forbid, how will you clear the Apostles from being the first
transgressors of it? And further, if upon that exigent such superiority was
lawful, then upon a great exigent of the Church, a superiority may be still
lawful. Besides, it is asserted, not proved, that such an authority as S. Paul
left with Timothy and Titus, was to die with that age: for where the reason of
an appointment continues, it will follow, that the Law should also be coeval
with the ground on which it was first enacted: if then there be a necessity
that Churchmen be kept in order, as well as other Christians; and if the more
exalted their office be, they become the more subject to corruption, and
corruptions among them be both more visible, and more dangerous than they are
in other persons; the same parity of reason that enjoins a Jurisdiction to be
granted to Churchmen over the faithful, will likewise determine the fitness of
granting some excrescing power to the more venerable and approved of the Clergy
over others; neither is this a new Office in the House of GOD, but an eminent
rank of the same Office.


Isot. You study to present Episcopacy in as harmless a posture as can be, yet
that it is a distinct Office, is apparent by the sole claim of Ordination and
Jurisdiction they pretend to, and by their consecration to it, which shows they
account it a second Order: besides, that they do in all things carry as these
who conceit themselves in a Region above the Presbyters.


Phil. I am not to vindicate neither all the practices, nor all the pretensions
of some who have asserted this Order, no more than you will do the opinions or
actings of all your party: which when you undertake, then I allow you to charge
me with what you will. But it is a different thing to say, that no Ordination,
nor greater act of Jurisdiction, should pass without the Bishop's consent, or
concurrence (which is all I shall pretend to, and is certainly most necessary
for preserving of Order and Peace) from asserting that the sole power for these
s^ands in the Bishops person. And though I do hold it schismatical to ordain
without a Bishop, where he may be had, yet I am not to annul these Ordinations
that pass from Presbyters, where no Bishop can be had: and this lays no claim
to a new Office, but only to a higher degree of inspection in the same Office;
whereby the exercise of some acts of Jurisdiction are restrained to such a
method; and this may be done either by the Churches free consent, or by the
King's authority. As for the consecration of Bishops by a new imposition of
hands, it does not prove them a distinct Office: being only a solemn
benediction and separation of them for the discharge of that inspection
committed to them: and so we find Paul and Barnabas (though before that they
preached the Gospel, yet when they were sent on a particular Commission to
preach to the gentiles) were blessed with imposition of hands, Acts 13.3. which
was the usual Ceremony of benediction. Therefore you have no reason to quarrel
this, unless you apprehend their managing this oversight the worse, that they
are blessed in order to it: nor can you quarrel the Office in the Liturgy, if
you do not think they will manage their power the worse, if they receive a new
effusion of the holy Ghost. And thus you see, how little ground there is, for
quarrelling Episcopacy upon such pretenses.


Eud. I am truly glad you have said so much for confirming me in my kindness
for that Government: for if you evinces its lawfulness, I am sure the
expediency of that Constitution will not be difficult to be proved, both for
the trial of Entrants, and the oversight of these in Office: for when any thing
lies in the hands of a multitude, we have ground enough to apprehend what the
issue of it will prove. And what sorry overly things these t^yals of Entrants
are, all know. ^ow little pains is taken to form their minds into a right sense
of that function, to which they are to be initiated at one step, without either
previous degree, or mature trial? And here I must say, the ruin of the Church
springs hence, that the passage to sacred Offices lies so patent, whereby every
one leaps into them out of a secular life, having all the train of his
vanities, passions, and carnal designs about him: and most part entering thus
unpurified, and unprepared, what is to be expected from them, but that they
become idle, vain and licentious, or proud, ambitious, popular and covetous? I
confess, things among us are not come to any such settlement, as might give a
provision against this: But devise me one like a Bishop's Authority, who shall
not confer Orders to any, before either himself, or some other select and
excellent persons, on whom he may with confidence devolve that trust, be well
satisfied not only about the learning and abilities, but about the temper, the
piety, the humility, the gravity, and discretion of such as pretend to holy
Orders: And that some longer trial be taken of them by the probationership of
some previous degree. Indeed the poverty of the Church, which is not able to
maintain Seminaries and Colleges of such Probationers, renders this design
almost impracticable. But stretch your thoughts as far as your invention can
send them, and see if you can provide such an expedient for the reforming of so
visible an abuse, as were the Bishop's plenary authority to decide in this
matter. For if it lie in the hands of a Plurality, the major part of these, as
of all mankind, being acted by lower measures, the considerations of Kindred,
alliance, friendship, or powerful recommendations, will always carry through
persons, be they what they will, as to their abilities and other
qualifications: And a multitude of Churchmen is less concerned in the shame can
follow an unworthy promotion; which every individual of such a company will be
ready to bear off himself, and fasten on the Plurality. But if there were one
to whom this were peculiarly committed, who had authority to stop it, till he
were clearly convinced that the person to be ordained, was one from whose
labors good might be expected to the Church, he could act more roundly in the
matter: and it may be presupposed that his condition setting him above these
low conside^ations, to which the inferior Clergy are more obnoxious, he would
manage it with more caution; as knowing that both before GOD and Man, he must
bear the blame of any unworthy promotion.

And as for these in Office, can any thing be more rational than that the
inspection into their labors, their deportment, their conversation, and their
dexterity in Preaching and Catechizing, be not done mutually by themselves in a
parity, wherein it is to be imagined, that as they degenerate, they will be
very gentle to one another? And when any inspection is managed by an equal, it
opens a door to faction, envy, and emulation: neither are the private rebukes
of an equal, so well received, nor will it be easy for one of a modest temper
to admonish his fellow-Presbyter freely. And yet how many things are there, of
which Churchmen have need to be admonished, in the discharge of all the parts
of their function, especially when they set out first, being often equally void
of experience and discretion? But what a remedy for all this, may be expected
from an excellent Bishop: who shall either, if his health and strength allow
it, be making excursions through his Diocese, and himself observe the temper,
the labors, and conversation of his Clergy? or at least trust this to such as
he has reason to confide most in, that so he may understand what admonitions,
directions, and reproofs are to be given, which might obviate a great many
indiscretions, and scandals that flow from Churchmen. And the authority of such
a person, as it would more recommend the reproofs to these for whom they were
meant, so it could prevail to make them effectual, by a following Censure if
neglected. If the confusion some keep matters in, have hindered us for coming
at a desired settlement, the Office of Episcopacy is not to be blamed, whose
native tendency I have laid out before you, and in a fair idea, but in what was
both the rule and practice of the ancient Church, and wants not latter
instances for verifying it. In a word, I must tell you, I am so far from
apprehending danger to the Church, from Bishops having too much power, that I
shall fear rather its slow recovery, because they have too little: which might
be managed with all the meekness and humility imaginable, and indeed ought to
be always accompanied with the advice and concurrence of the worthiest persons
among the inferior Clergy. But till you secure my fears of the greater part in
all Societies becoming corrupt, I shall not say by the major part of them, but
by the better part.


Isot. I see you run a high strain, and far different from what was the
discourse of this Country a year ago, of an accommodation was in^ended,
wherein large offers seemed to be made: but I now see by your ingenuous
freedom, that though for a while you (who were called a great friend to that
design) were willing to yield up some parts of the Episcopal Grandeur, yet you
retain the ^oot of that Lordly ambition still in your heart: and so though for
some particular ends, either to deceive, or divide the LORDS people, you were
willing to make an appearance of yielding; yet it was with a resolution of
returning with the first opportunity, to the old practices and designs of the
Prelates, of enhansing the Ecclesiastical Power to themselves, and a few of
their associats. And this lets me see, what reason all honest people have to
bless GOD that these arts and devices took not; for an Ethiopian cannot change
his skin.


Phil. I confess to you freely, I was a little satisfied with these
condescentions as any of you; and though they gave up the Rights of the Church
to a peevish and preverse party, whom gentleness will never gain: and therefore
am no less satisfied than you are, that they did not take: and so much the
more, that their refusing to accept of so large offers, gave a new and clear
character to the World of their temper: and that it is a faction, and the
servile courting of a party which they design, and not a strict adherence to
the rules of conscience, otherwise they had been more tractable.


Eud. Let me crave pardon to curb your humor a little, which seems too near a
kin to Isotimus his temper, though under a different character. For my part, I
had then the same sense of Episcopacy which I have just now owned. But when I
considered the ruins of Religion which our divisions occasioned among us, and
when I read the large offers S. Augustine made on the like occasion to the
Donatists, I judged all possible attempts even with the largest condescentions
for an accommodation, a worthy and pious design, well becoming the gravity and
moderation of a Bishop to offer, and the nobleness of these in authority to
second with their warmest endeavors: for if it was blessed with success, the
effect was great, even the settling of a broken and divided corner of the
Church: if it took not, as it fully exonered the Church of the evils of the
Schism; so it rendered the enemies of Peace and Unity the more unexcusable.
Only I must say this upon my knowledge, that whatever designs men of various
sentiments fastened upon that attempt, it was managed with as much ingenuity
and sincerity, as mortals could carry along with them in any purpose. I know it
is expected and desired that a full account of all the steps of that affair be
made public, which a friend of ours drew up all along, with the progress of
it. But at present my concern in one, whom a late Pamphlet, (as full of
falsehoods in matters of fact, as of weakness in point of reason) has
mirepresented ( the case of Accommodation, Page 31) shall prevail with me to
give an account of a particular pas^ed in a Conference, which a Bishop and two
Presbyters had with about thirty of the Nonconformists, at Pasley, on the 14th
of December in the year 1670. When the Bishop had in a long Discourse
recommended Unity and Peace to them, on the terms were offered; he withal said
much to the advantage of Episcopacy as he stated it, from the rules and
practices of the ancient Church: offering to turn their Pro^elyte immediately,
if they should give him either clear Scripture, good reason or warrant from the
most Primitive Antiquity against such Episcopacy. And with other things, he
desired to know whether they would have joined in Communion with the Church, at
the time of the Council of Nice, (to carry them no higher) or not? for if they
refused that, he added he would have less heartiness to desire communion with
them, since of these he might say, Let my soul be with theirs. But to that, a
general answer was made by one, who said, He hoped they were not looked upon,
as either so weak, or so wilful, as to determine in so great a matter, but upon
good grounds: which were the same, that the asserters of Presbyterian
Government had built on, which they judged to be conform both to Scripture and
Primitive Antiquity. But for Scripture, neither he nor any of the meeting
offered to bring a Title: only he alleged some differences betwixt the anci^nt
Presidents, as he called them, and our Bishops. But this was more fully
enlarged by one who is believed to be among the most learned of the Party:
whose words with the answer given them, I shall read to you, as I take both
from a Journal was drawn of that affair, by one whose exactness and fidelity in
it, can be attested by some worthy spectators, who read what he wrote after the
Meeting was ended, and Judged it not only faithful, but often verbal: And that
he was so careful to evite the appearances of partiality, that he seemed rather
studious to be more copious in proposing what was said by these who differed
from his opinion, whereas he contracted much of what was said by these he
favored. The account follows.

Mr. -- said, That he offered to make appear, the difference was betwixt the
present Episcopacy, and what was in the ancient Church, in ^ive particulars.
The first was, that they had n^ Archbishops in the Primitive Church. It is
true, they had Metropolitans; but in a Council o^ Ca^thage, it was decreed,
that no Bishop should be ^all^d ^ummus Sacerdos, or Princeps Sacerdo^um, sed
primae sedis Episcopus. 2. The Bishops in the ancient Church were Parochial,
and not only (...), but in every Village (...); for even in Bethany we find
there was a Bishop. 3. Two Bishops might be in one Church, such was (not to
mention Alexander and Narcissus at Jerusalem) Augustine, who with Valerius, was
ordained Bishop of Hippo. 4. Bishops were elected by their Presbyters, so
Jerome tells us, that in Alexandria the Presbyters choosed one of their number
to be Bishop: and finally, the Bishops were countable to and censurable by
their Presbyters: for either this must have been, otherwise they could not have
been censured at all. For though we meet with some Provincial Synods in Church
History, as that of Carthage in Cyprians time, for the rebaptizing of
heretics; and that at Antioch against Samo^atenus, yet these instances were
rare, and recurred seldom; therefore there must have been a power in Presbyters
to have censured their Bishops, otherwise it could not have been done, which is
absurd to imagine. And upon all these accounts, he judged the present
Episcopacy differed much from the ancient (...).

Upon this discourse, the Bishop being weary of speaking much, looked to one of
his Presbyters, whom that Pamphlet in derision, calls, a worthy Doctor: who
said, He found the ancient writings were so clear for a disparity among
Churchmen, and so full of it, that he was assured none could doubt it, after he
had looked but overly upon them: But as to what was alleged, he first assumed
the five particulars, and spoke to them in order. To the first, he said, It was
true, the term Archbishop, was not used in the first Centuries* but in the
Council of Nice, mention is not only made of Metropolitans; but the Canon says
of them, (...), let the ancient customs have their force: which shows the
superiority of Metropolitans to have been pretty early begun. And the Canon
that was cited, calling him, Primae Sedis Episcopum, makes him Primate: now we
are not to contend about words, when the thing is clear: neither will ^any
Archbishop judge himself injured, if instead of that name, he be called
Metropolitan, or Primate. Besides, Archiepiscopus, does not import Prince of
the Bishops; but that he is the chief and first of them. And this prefixing of
(...) to (...), was not so odious: for Nazianzen calls a Bishop (...), and the
Areopagite (...).

For the second particular, it is true, Bishops were in many places very thick
set; for in S. Augustin' s time it appears from the journals of a Conference he
had with the Donati^ts, that there were about 500. Bishoprics in a small tract
of ground, but this was not universal: for Theodoret tells he had 800. Parishes
in his Diocese: and Sozomen tells of great Countries where there were very few
Bishops. And to prove this, the Canons of Ancyra make a difference betwixt the
Presbyters of the Country from those of the City: and over the former there was
a Chorepiscopus; which sh^ws that the whole Diocese was not within the City.
But this was not much to our purpose, since the more or the less did not vary
the kind. And if a Bishop might be over the Ministers of the City, it cannot be
unlawful that he be likewise set over more in the Country: which can be no more
essential to this matter, than it is, whether a Parish be great or small. So
that this difference may well make the one unexpedient, but unlawful it cannot
be, if the other be lawful.

For the third particular, there was a Canon of the Council of Nice, that there
might be but one Bishop in a City. And he was amazed to hear the instance of S.
Augustine alleged, who was indeed ordained Coadjutor to Valerius; but himself
in his I 10. Epist. condemns that, telling that he did it ignorantly, not
knowing it to be contrary to the Nicene Rules: And therefore he tells how he
designed Eradius to be his Successor, but would not ordain him in his own time,
because of that Canon. Other instances of more Bishops in one City, might have
be^^ more pertinently adduced to this purpose: but they were either Coadjutors,
such as Nazianzen the son was to his father, or it was agreed to for settling a
Schism, as was done in the Schism betwixt Meletius and Paulinus of Antioch. And
so S. Augustine and the African Bishops with him, offered to the Donatists, that
would they agree with them, these schismatical Bishops should be continued as
conjunct Bishops with those already settled in those Sees where they lived. It
is true, some will have both Linus and Clemens to have succeeded S. Peter at
Rome, and Evodius and Ignatius ^o have succeeded him at Antioch: But for this,
none assert that both succeeded to S. Peter; some being for one, and some for
another: and so in a historical matter, the testimonies of these who lived
nearest that time should decide the question. But the Constitutions of Clemens
offer a solution to this, that at first there were in some Cities two Churches,
one for those of the Circumcision, and another for those of the Uncircumcision:
and after the destruction of Jerusalem, this distinction was swallowed up. This
is rational, and not without ground in Scripture: besides, that that Book,
though none of Clements, yet is ancient. And from all this it was clear, that
there might be but one Bishop in a City.

As for the fourth particular, it is true, the ancient elections of Bishops and
Presbyters were partly by Synods, partly by Presbyters, and partly popular. But
as none would say it made any essential alteration of the Constitution of a
Church, if instead of these elections, Patrons had now a right of presenting to
Churches; so though instead of these elections the King were Patron of all the
Bishoprics, it did not alter the nature of Episcopacy, much less justify a
Schism against it. But beside this, it was known the Capitular elections were
still continued.

And for the fifth particular, he desired they might give one instance in all
Antiquity, where a Bishop was censured by Presbyters: it being clear that they
could finish nothing without the Bishops sentence, (...), was the words of the
Canon: And if they could finish nothing without the Bishop, much less could
they censure himself. Provincial Synods were begun in the second Century, which
appears from many Synods were held about the day of observing Easter. Another
expedient they had, when a Bishop was heretical, that the neighboring Bishops
used to publish it in their Cicular Letters, which went around, and so they did
excommunicate or d^pose them. But the regular way of procedure against Bishops
was in Provincial Synods, which were now offered to be se^ up. Yet even this
exception could be no ground for separating, no more than in their principles
Lay Elders had to separate from their Ministers, who were their fixed
President, and yet did not judge themselves censurable by these Lay Elders; tho
as to the power of ruling, they held them to be equal. With this he ended,
saying, He had now proposed what occurred of a sudden to his tho ughts on these
heads, though he believed much more might be adduced; but he supposed there was
enough said to clear these particulars. And it seems the Person who had engaged
him to this, judged so; since neither he, nor any of his brethren, offered a
reply. And by this account (of the truth whereof I am willing all there present
bear witness) let the company judge of the ingenuity of these Writers. But I
shall pursue the discourse of the accommodation no further.


Basil. I am sure it has left this conviction on all our Consciences, that
that Party is obstinately fixed to their own humors, without the least color of
reason. But now, I think, enough is said for justifying both the lawfulness and
usefulness of Episcopacy, and that there is nothing in it contrary either to
the nature or rules of the Gospel, or of right Reason. And for any occasional
evils may have risen from the restitution of this Government, they are with no
justice to be fastened on it. I know, many accuse their revenues and honors,
thus the spirit that is in us lusts to 'envy: and the eyes of many are evil,
because the eyes of our pious Progenitors were good. But indeed the ravenous
Appetites of some Ostriches among us, have swallowed down so much of the
Churches Patrimony, that what remains of it, can scarce provoke envy. And truly
Churchmen bestowing their Revenues well, for Alms-deeds, relieving the Widows
and Orphans, and such modest hospitality and decency, as may preserve them from
the disesteem of the vulgar, who measure their value of men much from these
externals, there were no ground of quarrelling at them were their riches
sevenfold increased. I am far from the thoughts of patronizing the German
Bishops, on whom I look as the disgrace of that Order, who live in all things
like other Princes, making Wars, and leading out Armies: nor do they once
consider their Dioceses, or what they owe them as Bishops, being wholly
immersed in secular affairs. But for all this, I cannot see cause for blaming
Churchmen, their being either upon the public Councils of the Kingdom in
Parliaments, or on His Majesty's Secret Councils, and that both because
Ecclesiastical matters are often in agitation, both in the one, and the other,
in which none are so properly to be advised with as Churchmen. Occasion may
also be frequently given to those who should be presupposed to understand the
rules of equity and conscience best, to lay them before others, who either know
them not, or mind them too little. And finally, they are Subjects, as well as
others, and by the clearness is to be expected in their Judgments, and the
calmness of their minds, together with their abstracted and contemplative
manner of life, they may upon occasions be very prudent Counselors: And why a
Prince shall be deprived of the Councils of that which should be the wisest and
best part of his Kingdom, no reason can be given. But for all this, I
acknowledge there is great hazard from humane Infirmity, lest by such meddling
they be too much entangled in matters extrinsick to them, whereby their
thoughts may be drawn out from that inward, serene, and abstracted temper
wherein their minds should be preserved; both for more spiritual Contemplation,
and for a more close pursuing the work of the Gospel, which ought still to be
their chief labor. But I must touch this string no more, lest you say that the
Fox preaches, and methinks our discourse is now near its period.


Isot. A great many things do yet remain which are untouched, and deserve to be
better considered: for these crude Dialogues poured out a great deal of stuff,
which it is like the writer never examined: And in these, you who are his
friends, must either vindicate him, or leave him to the mercy of every severe
censurer.


Eud. His temper is well enough known to us, that he is very little sollicitous
about the esteem or censures of men: and therefore, if all the particulars in
his Book, cannot maintain themselves to the judgments of rational and
unprepossessed Readers, he thinks them not worthy of his Patrociny. And for
that little trifling way of writing, by tracing every word in a Book, or of
making good all a man has said, it is a task equally mean, unpleasant, and
laborious: and looks like one contending for victory more than truth. Were it a
worthy thing for us to go and reckon how often and comes about in any of that
Pamphleteers long periods, or how often he writes false Grammar, how harsh his
Phrases, and how tedious his Periods are? or make other such like remarks:
Alas, did we that, there were no end! and yet such like are many of his
reflections. But then how beautiful were our discourse, if interwoven with
those elegancies of poor wretch, babbler, impertinent, confident, ignorant,
atheist, scoffer, and many more of that same strain? I know well enough why he
used those, his design being to make his gentle and simple Readers stand
gravely, and turn up the white, and look pale, and affrighted with all those
black Imputations he charges on that poor wretch. Methinks I hear the censures
of the herd, when they first read over his Book, to this purpose: Oh, here is a
worthy piece, full of deep learning; and believe me, he speaks home: he is a
sweet man that wrote it, be he who he will, and was marvellously born through
in it all. And oh, but it is seasonable! and well t^ned: for he has answered
the whole Book to a word. And where we thought it str^ngest, he sh^ws its
weakness most. But I wish the poor wretch r^pentance, yet it is a proud
Companion, and full of disdain; but I hope he is humbled for once: it were a
pity of him, for they say he has some abilities: but they are all wrong set:
and he will, may be, study to heal the beast of the wound, which one of our
Champions has given it; but had he any sparks of grace, I could yet love him
for his good -- sake.

It were a worthy attempt to go and satisfy such a gang of Cattle: therefore
the cavils on the fifth and sixth Dialogue are so poor, that it were lost time
to consider them; and so groundless, that he who from reading over the
Dialogues themselves, is not able to withstand all those tricks of Sophistry,
would be little bettered by all we could add: and therefore we may well quit
the Theme, and that the rather, that we have examined all that is of public
concern in these debates: and for any thing that was started, which lies out of
the way, we will leave the discussing of these to the Conformist himself; since
our design in this Conference was to get mutual satisfaction to our
Consciences, in these things which the Laws enjoin: and if we have gained this,
we are to leave contending about other things, which relate not to us. Only if
in these greater points it be found that what the Conformist said in the
Dialogues, was grounded on so much clear and strong reason, as we have
discovered since our first meeting; it is to be presumed that in other things
he was not so rash or irrational as to utter such absurdities or errors, as the
late Pamphlets do charge upon him.

Phil. Our work was to consider, whether absolute subjection was due to the
Civil Authority, and how far its dominion over our obedience did reach, and
whether the Principles and Practices of the late times, had such evident
characters of GOD's acceptance on them, that it was an unpardonable crime to
reverse that building, which they prepared with so much noise, and cemented
with so much blood; and by consequence whether Episcopacy was that accursed
thing which provoked GOD's Jealousy so much against us, that it was unlawful
to unite with it, or so far to comply with its adherents as to unite with them
in Worship? If these things be made clear to us, we need not amuse our selves,
nor entertain one another with farther janglings, and therefore may break off
our Conference.


Isot. Since you will break off, I shall not struggle about it: for it is a
confession of your weakness, that you pass over so many things with this slight
silence.


Basil. This is the genuine Spirit of the party which you now express to the
life; but when ever the Author of the Dialogues undergoes the penance of
examining what you desire, it will perhaps appear, you have as little ground
for this as for your other boasting. But I am sure no scruple sticks with me
about these great heads we have examined, so that upon a narrow survey of these
matters, it appears he had more reason for what he asserted, than he then
vented: And I have as little doubt of his being able to clear himself about
other matters, which are snarled at by these Pamphlets. But one thing I have
not forgot, about which I am more sollicitous: which was a promise Polyhistor
made of sending when our Conference were ended, an account of the model and
forms of the ancient Government: which I desire with such earnestness, that I
wish we we^e gone, that he might be as good as his word.


Poly. I know not if it shall answer your hopes, but your curiosity shall be
quickly satisfied, after I have given you some account of my design in it. When
I considered the ruins of Religion, and the decays of Piety through the World,
I have often bent my thoughts to seek out the most proper remedies and means
for the Churches recovery: and that which seemed the most promising, was to
consider the constitution, the rites and forms of the Church in her first and
purest ages; and to observe the steps of their dec^ning from the primitive
simplicity and purity, which being once fully done, great materials would be
the^eby congested for many use^ul thoughts, and overtures in order to a
Reformation. And this is a work, which for all the accurate enquiries this age
has produced, is not yet performed to any degree of perfection, or ingenuity:
therefore I resolved to pursue this design as much as my leisure and other
avocations could allow of. But as I was doubtful what method to follow in
digesting my observations, the Canons vulgarly called Apostolical, offered
themselves to my thoughts: I thereupon resolved to follow their tract, and to
compile such hints as I could gather on my way for giving a clear view of the
state of the Church in the first ages. As for the opinions of the ancient
Fathers, these have been so copiously examined by the Writers of Controversies,
that scarce any thing can be added to those who went before us: bet few have
been at such pains for searching into their practices, and rules for
Discipline, and Worship, wherein their excellency and strength lay. In this
inquiry I have now made good advances, but at present I will only send you my
Observations on the two first Canons: and as you shall find this task has
suc^eeded with me, I will be encouraged to break it off, or to pursue it
farther. Only on the way, let me tell you, that I am so far from thinking these
Canons, Apostolical, that nothing can be more evid^nt, than that they were a
collection made in the Third Century at soonest: for the matter of almost every
Canon discovers this when well examined, and therefore that Epistle of
Zephir^us the Pope, who lived about the year 20, that mentions ^^ ^or as others
cite it 70.) of the Apostles sayings, is not to be considered: that Epistle
with the other Decretals, being so manifestly spurious, that it cannot be
doubted by any who reads them: and the number sixty agrees with no Edition; for
they are either fifty or 85. Tertullian is also cited for them, but the words
cited as his, are not in his Book contra Praxeam, from which they are vouched.
Nor can they be called the work of Clemens Romanus, though they were vented
under his name. For Athanasius in his Synopsis, reckons the work of Clemens
Apocryphal. And Eusebius tells us that nothing ascribed to Clement was held
genuine, but his Epistle to the Corinthians. But the first Publishers of these
who lived, it is like in the Third Century, have called them Apostolical, as
containing the earliest rules which the Apostolical men had introduced in the
Church. And afterward others to conciliate more veneration for them, call led
them the Canons of the Apostles, compiled by Clement. And this drew Pope
Gelasius's censure on them, by which the Book of the Canons of the Apostles is
declared Apocryphal: which some who assert their authority and antiquity, would
foolishly evite, by applying that censure only to the 35. added Canons: whereas
the censure is simply passed on the Book, and not on any additions to it. And
this shall serve for an Introduction to the Papers I will send you how soon I
get home.


Phil. I doubt not but all of us, except Isotimus, will be very desirous to
understand the particular forms of the Primitive Church: but he is so sure,
that they will conclude against him, that I believe he is not very curious of
any such discovery.


Isot. You are mistaken, for I doubt not, but much will be found among the
Ancients for me; but if otherwise, I will lead you a step higher, to let you
see that from the beginning it was not so: For Antiquity, when against
Scripture, proves only the error ancient. And if you quit the Scriptures to us,
we will yield those musty Records to you.


Eud. Pray, speak not so confidently, after all your pretenses have been so
baffled, that we are ashamed of you: for you are like the Spaniard, who
retained his supercilious Looks and Gate, when he was set to beg. But I will
not be rude in a place which owns me for its Master, though really your
confidence extorts it.


Isot. You are a proud company, and so elevated in your own eyes, that you
despise all who differ from you, and think you censure them gently, if you call
them no worse than ignorants and fools. Is there any arrogance in the World
like this?


Phil. Pray, let us not fall out, now that we are to part: but I confess it is
no wonder the smart of all the foils you have got, provoke some passion in you,
and so I pity you; for I know none of your Party who would have carried so
discreetly. Therefore, Adieu, I must be gone, and leave this good company.


Isot. You will have the last word of scolding, but I perhaps will find out one
that will be too hard for you all, and will call you to account of all you have
both argued and boasted.


Basil. I will break of^ next, since the design of your meeting is finished:
only, Polyhistor, mind your promise.


Poly. I go about it, and therefore, Eudannon, I beg your pardon to be gone.


Eud. Though Retirement and Solitude be ever acceptable to me, yet it will not
be without some pain that I return to it, when I miss so much good company, as
have relieved me these four days: but the truth is, on the other hand, I am
glad to see an end put to this painful Eng^gement of which I suppose we are all
weary. It remains only that I return you my sincere and hearty thanks for the
favor you have done me, which I wish I could do so warmly* as might engage you
frequently to oblige me with the like civilities. Adieu, my good friends.


FINIS.

