REFLECTIONS On Mr. VARILLAS's HISTORY Of the Revolutions that have happned in
Europe in matters of Religion.

And more particularly on his Ninth Book that relates to England.

By G. BURNET, D. D.

Amsterdam, Printed for P. Savouret in the Warmoes-street near the Dam. 1686.

REFLECTIONS On Mr. VARILLAS's HISTORY of the Revolutions that have happned in
Europe in matters of Religion, and more particularly on his 9th Book that
relates to England.
MR. Varillas has within a few Years given the World so many-Books of History,
and these have been so much read and so well received, that it seems he thinks
he is now so far possessed of the esteem of the Age, that he may venture to
impose upon it the falsest coin that can be struck, not doubting but that the
name Varillas stamped upon it will make it pass current, and this being a time
in which some have thought that they might do whatsoever they pleased against
those of the Religion, he it seems thinks he may likewise say whatsoever he
pleased against them, that so there may be a due proportion between the
injuries that he does them with his pen, and those that others make them feel
with severer tools, and perhaps he thought the severities that are now
exercised upon them, are so contrary to that tenderness with which the humane
Nature, not to say the Christian Religion, is apt to inspire all that are not
transported with such violent Passions that they drown the Motions of our
bowels toward the miserable, that nothing could divert the World from those
merciful inclinations but the dressing up the first beginnings of the
Reformation in such odious representations as might possess the Age with so
much fury against them, that none of the miseries that they suffer, might
create the least Compassion for them.

It is true, Princes have their Prerogatives with which they take great
liberties as their several passions are excited and dexterously managed, the
desire of glory mixing with a heat of blood, at one time can produce a w^r, as
terrible in its consequences, as it was injustifiable in its first beginnings,
and the same ambition mixing with a superstitious disposition of mind, and
working upon colder Blood, can at another time produce a violation of Edicts
that have been solemnly sworn to, and often confirmed, and accompany that with
a sequel of Severities, that are more easily lamented than expressed; yet an
humble regard to the sublime character of a Crowned Head lays a restraint on
those Groans, which we would rather stifle than give them their full scope,
least the language of our Sorrows look like an accusing of those, whom, after
all that our brethren have suffered at their hands, we would still force our
selves to reverence, and therefore we choose rather to support our grief, than
to vent it at their cost. But small Scriblers, who have set a price upon their
pens, and sacrifice our reputation, that they may merit a pension at the hands
of the chief Instruments of our Brethrens sufferings, are not to look for such
respect: he that fights against the Laws of War ought to expect no quarter when
he is taken.

A Historian that favors his own side, is to be forgiven, tho he puts a little
too much life in his colors, when he sets out the best sides of his party, and
the worst of those from whom he disfers: and if he but slightly touches the
failings of his Friends, and severely aggravates those of the other side, tho
in this he departs from the laws of an exact Historian, yet this biass is so
natural, that if it lessens the credit of the Writer, yet it does not blacken
him, but if he has no regard either to truth or decency, if he gives his
imagination a full scope to invent, and his pen all the liberties of foul
language, he ought not to think it strange, if others take some pains to expose
him to the World. And tho their Conscience and Religion obliges them to take
other measures with relation to Truth, and their Breeding engages them to a
strict modesty of Style, yet if the things that are said are as severe as they
are true, and as wounding as they may appear soft, it is nothing but what a
Zeal for Truth, and an Indignation at so much illmanaged injustice draws from
them.

It is not to be denied that Mr. Varillas has an art of writing that is
entertaining he pretends to discover many Secrets to give pictures of Men to
the life, and to interweave the Histories that he relates with a thread of
Politiques that is very agreeable, only this appears to be overdone, and those
who have had much practice in humane Affairs see that the conduct of the World
is not so steady and so regular a thing as he loves to represent it, unlookt
for Accidents, the caprices of some Tempers, the secrets of Amors and
Jealousies, with other particular Passions are the true sources of almost all
that is transacted in the World; even Interest it self does not always govern
Mankind, but Humor and Passion have their turns, and often times the largest
share in humane affairs. So that I ever thought that his books had too much of
the air of a Romance, and seemed too fine to be true. He does indeed now and
then, to maintain his Reputation in his Reader's mind, vouch some letter or
narrative, but he neither tells whither it is in Print, or in Manuscript, or
where he had it, and where others may find it: so this way of Citation looked
suspicious, yet I could not easily take up such hard thoughts of him as to
imagine, that all this was his own Invention: but being in Paris last Summer, I
had the good fortune to become acquainted with some men of great probity, and
that had particularly applied themselves to examine the History of France with
great exactness; they were of the Church of Rome, and seemed to have no other
dislike at Mr. Varillas, but that which was occasioned by the liberty, that he
had given himself, to writ his own Imaginations for true Histories they assured
me there was no regard to be had to any thing that he writ, that he had
gathered together many little stories, which he knit together as he pleased,
and that without any good Authority: and they told me that the greatest number
of the pieces he cited were to be found now here but in his own fancy. In a
word, they spoke of all his books with a sharpness of style, and a degree of
contempt, that I will not repeat, least I seem to come too near his forms of
speech, which are the worst Patterns that one can follow.

I found he was generally so much decried in Paris, that he has reason to say
in his Preface, that when the Archbishop of Paris thought on him, all the World
had abandoned him, for I did not find any Man under a more universal Contempt
than he was, and the esteem in which his Works were held in Foreign Parts far
beyond what was paid them in France, was imputed to his Method of Writing,
that wants none of the beauties of History except that of Truth, and to the
Ignorance in which Strangers live as to the Particulars of their History. It is
true, at last he has found a Patron and a Pension, and now he has given us an
Essay of his Merits; but if this Work is examined severely, he will very
probably soon lose his appointments; since mercenary Pens are seldom paid
longer than they can be useful. Here one finds so much occasion for censure,
that whereas in other Books one must run up and down to find matter for a
Critical Judgment, here it occurs so copiously that a Man must take care not to
surfeit his Reader with too much of it; and therefore must choose out the more
remarkable Errors and there are even so many of these, that it is to be feared
that the World will not think him not his Writings worth the time and the pains
that must be bestowed on them.

Mr. Maimbourg has set a Pattern to the World, that tho few will care to
imitate, yet it has taken so much with the present Age, that it is no light
indication of its degeneracy, when surch books are so much read and sold, in
which the Writer seems to have so broken loose from all the common measures
either of honesty or shame, that one would wonder of what composition he were
made, if they did not know that he has lived 50* years the in Jesuit Order:
for as he has no regard to truth, or likelihood in what he writs, so he seems
to be proof against the evidentest discoveries of his prevarications that are
possible; and when they are laid open in a manner capable of making any man
besides himself to blush, he neither has the conscience to confess his errors,
nor the sense of honor to justify himself: but he finds out still new matter
to writ on, and a new stock of Champaigne wine, as I have been told, that he
has often said, to make his blood boil till he has spoild an other piece of
History; and he thinks a scornful period or two in a Preface is enough to
carry off all the shame to which his errors ought to condemn him. He has also
the Impudence to dedicate his books to the King, and the world is still willing
to be cosened by him. This trade has succeeded so well with him, that it seems
Mr. Varillas vies with him in it, and as he has the chaster style, and the more
natural way of misleading his Reader, so he has resolved not to be behind him
in a bold quality that I love not to set down by its proper Name. But tho Mr.
Varillas has the art to refine upon the pattern that Mr. Maimbourg set him, yet
Mr. Maimbourg is the Author of the Invention, and therefore he deserves the
better Pension.

History is a sort of Trade in which false Coin and false Weights are more
criminal than in other Matters; because the Error may go further and run
longer: tho these Authors color their copper too slightly to make it keep its
credit long. If Men think there are degrees of Lying, then certainly those that
are the most loudly told, that wound the deepest, that are told with the best
grace, and that are transmitted to Posterity under the deceitful colors of
Truth, have the blackest Guilt; but some Men have arrived at equal degrees in
hardening their Consciences and in steeling their Forheads, and are without the
reach either of inward Remorses or public Discoveries; so that as Augustus
fancied there was a charm in the Pillour of a Roman, that died hugely indebted,
since without an extraordinary saporiferous composition he could not fancy how
such a Man could sleep securely; so if humane Nature did not often produce some
very irregular Individuals, a Man that feels the Authority that Truth and
Modesty have ever a pure mind, can not easily imagine by what secret others can
quite extinguish those Inclinations which he finds are so prevalent in himself.
But I will now by Mr. Varillas's leave take the liberty to set before him some
of his most conspicuous errors, and tho I do not expect much sincerity from
himself, yet I hope the world will be juster than he has showed himself to be.

Mr. Varillas begins his History with a view of the progress of that which he
calls Heresy, in a Prophetic style, setting, forth what effects it was to
produce, as if he were foretelling what was to fall out, and that for 11. pages
(according to the Impression of Amsterdam) this has so little of the air of a
Historian, and is so full of the figures of a Declaimer, that it looks liker
the strain of a heated and angry Friar, than of a grave and serious Writer of
History, who ought to be always in cold blood, and ought not to let the heats
of a vicious Rhetoric transport him. But this is so like one of the forced
raptures of some Missionary, that one would think it was writ either by one of
them, or for one of them. It is much a safer thing to prophecy concerning
matters that are past, than concerning those that are to come, and one is less
in danger of committing errors; yet when heat enters into matters of History,
and meets with so vast a deal of Ignorance as is that of Mr. Varillas, no
wonder if it carries him into great errors.

If Mr. Varillas had gathered the History of the last Age out of any Books or
out of those Letters tha^ he so often vouches, page 5.
he could not have said that Edward the 6th's Tutor or Governor was the Duke
of Northumberland, since there is not any one Book writ concerning that Time,
that does not show the contrary. The Duke of Somerset was his Governor, and
for the Duke of Northumberland, tho the last two Years of that Reign, in which
that King was past the Age of Tutelage, he bore the chief sway of affairs, yet
he had neither the Character of the King's Tutor or Governor, nor any other
whatsoever, but only that of a Privy Counselor, that was much considered by
him, and he at his Death professed that he had been always a Catholic in his
Heart, so that his pretending to be of the Reformed Religion to serve his
interests, shows that he belongs no more to our Church, than the now forced
Converts belong to that of Rome.

In the same page he says that Mary Queen of Scotland did by her Bastard
Brother's persuasions marry a single Gentleman, and on the Margent he gives his
Name Henry d' Arley; this is a new proof how little he knows the Books of the
last Age. This Henry whom he calls d' Arley was Henry Lord Darly, eldest Son to
the Earl of Lenox, which was one of the chief Families of Scotland, and a
Branch of the Family of the Stewarts. It is true it came off from it before the
Crown came into it by Marriage, yet the Grandfather of this Henry had matched
with one that was very near the Crown, and Cosen German to K. James the 4th's
and Sister to Hamilton Earl; of, Aran this Lord Darly's Mother was also Uterine
Sister to K. James the 5. being the Daughter to the Queen Dowager of Scotland
that was K. Henry the 8th's Sister, who by her second marriage with the Earl of
Angus (Dowglass) had Lady Isabel Dowglass, who was bred in the Court of
England, and whom K. Henry the 8. married to the Earl of Lennox, that had by her
this Lord Darly, who as he was the Queen of Scotland's Cousin German, was also
the next Heir to the Crown of England after her, and might have been a
dangerous Competitour to her in that Succession, having been born and bred in
England, so that this marriage was so far from making her contemptible to her
Subjects, that it was considered as the wisest act of her life: and Mr. Var.
could not Imagine any thing more honorable to the Earl of Morny's memory, than
to make him the adviser of so wise a choice. It is no wonder to see Mr. Var.
make so bold with meaner persons, when he takes so much liberty wiht the Royal
Family of England, as to stain their descent, for which if the consideration of
the Crowns they wear, did not restrain him, yet the particular regard to the
King that now reigns, ought to have taught him so much respect as not to have
ventured to blot his Scutcheon so far as to call his Great Grandfather a single
Gentleman and if he had paid the respect he owed to the Memory of that
unfortunate Princess, he had no^ enlarged so much on her Story, but I know what
is due to the Memory of a crowned Head, even when it is laid in ashes, and tho
he makes an easy weakness to be her prevailing Character, upon which he would
discharge all her Misfortunes, this Picture is so different from the Truth that
she was certainly one of the wittiest and highest spirited Women that ever
lived.

But it seems Mr. Varillas has pretended to some Pension from the Crown of
England, and in revenge for the disappointment he has resolved to debase the
Race all he can. Here he affords our Kings the honor to be descended at least
from a Gentleman, Lib. 9.
tho one of the ordin ariest sort; Page 249.
but upon another occasion he is not so liberal, for in his History he says
that Henry the 8th had reasons to desire the marriage of his Bastard Son the
Duke of Richmond with his Daughter Mary, that were too well known, for libels
had been spread over all Europe, reproaching him that his Great Grandfather was
not a Gentleman, but that by his credit at Court, and by the vast riches that
he had acquired, he had obtained leave to marry a Daughter of the Family of the
Plantaganets, that was then 16. degrees distant from the Crown, and yet by that
means his Grandchild came to reign; upon which he makes a long speculation
concerning the King's Reflections on that matter, and the reasons that
restrained him from writing on that subject, as if it were an ordinary thing
for Princes to become their own Heralds. He also tells us how he comforted
himself by the remembrance of the meanness of Arbaces K. of Persia, that was
the Son of a Locksmith, whose Posterity had reigned so long, and with so much
glory, and therefore he says he designed to marry his Natural Son and his
Daughter together. Here is such a mixture of Impertinencies, that it is not
easy to know at what one is to begin, and if there were but this one period, it
is enough to let the World see, how incapable Mr. Varillas is of writing
History. I shall not in this place show the falsehood of that Imputation on
Henry the 8th, that he designed this incestuous Match, for that will come in
more property upon another occasion; only if his Birth was defective on his
Great Grandfathers side, it was an odd method for the correcting of it, to
think of adding a new blot, and of bringing a Bastard into the 5th Succession;
so the reason is as foolish as the matter of fact is false, and the Ignorance
that Mr. Var. shows here is the more remarkable, because this matter belongs to
the most extraordinary transaction that is in the whole French History, in
which he pretends to be so conversant. I need not say any more to prove the
Tudors to be Gentlemen, but to tell that they are Welshmen, of the Race of the
Ancient Britons, who do all pretend to the highest Birth of any in the English
Nation, and do run up their Pedigrees to Julius Cesar's time; among whom is the
Race of the the Ap Theodore's or the Sons of Theodore, that by a corruption of
some Ages were called Tudors: but knows Mr. Varillas so little of the French
History, as to have forgot that the Daughter of France, that was married to
Henry the 5th of England, in whose right both Henry the 5th, and her son Henry
the sixth were crowned Kings of France in Paris, did after King Henry the 5th's
death marry Owen Tudor, by whom she had 3. Sons the two eldest were made the
Earls of Richmont and Pembroke, being the Kings Uterine Brothers, and the next
heirs to that Title, that he claimed to the Crown of France, in the right of
his Mother (which I am far from thinking was a good one.) This being the case,
it was no extraordinary thing for a man of the Earl of Richmont's rank to marry
a Lady that was then at such a distance from the Crown, tho it was only in the
6th and not the 16th degree; but I do not insist on this, because it may be
only the fault of the Printer, and I will not descend to a doubtful fault, when
I have such material ones in my way. I know there are a sort of men that are
much more ashamed when their Ignorance is discovered, than when their other
vices are laid open, since degenerate minds are more jealous of the reputation
of their understanding, than of their honor. And as Mr. Varillas is very like
to be of this temper, so if a simpathy with Mr. Maimbourg has not wrought him
up to the like pitch of assurance* such discoveries as these ought to affect
him a little; and here a man is apt to lose his patience, when he finds such a
Scribler pretend to defame the Noblest blood in the world.

There is nothing else in the first Prophetic Rhapsody that relates to our
matters, so I was inclined to go from hence to a more particular enquiry into
our English affairs, Page 6.
only the Ignorance that he discovers in the next paragraph is so surprising
that I will bestow a short remark on it. He says, that the Switzers were so
prevailed on by this pretext, that their separating themselves from the Roman
Communion was the best expedient to preserve them from falling under the
Dominion of the House of Austria (tho it is certain they were then in no sort
of fear of that) that the four chief Cantons were seduced in less than a years
time; but that the seven little Cantons continued in the belief of their
Fathers, and the two middle sised Cantons tolerated equally both the Religions.

One would have thought that a man that had pretended to the name of a
Historian, would have at least begun his studies with some small taste of
Cosmography, and would have taken some pains to know the Map; and as the
Switzers are in the neighborhood of France, so they have been so long the
Allies of that Crown, that the Ignorance of the Importance of the Cantons is a
fault in one that pretends to be such an illuminated Historian, that deserves a
worse correction than I think fit to give it. To reckon Basle and Shaff housen
among the great Cantons, and Lucern among the small Cantons, Solohern and
Fribourg being also so considerable that some reckon them with the great
Cantons; and to put Glaris and Appeuzel in a superior order to them that are
among the smallest of the least is such a Complication of errors that it is
not easy to imagine how he had the luck to fetch in so many into one period.
But this is not all the Ignorance that is in it; for whereas he pretends, that
the four Cantons, that received the Reformation did it in less than a year,
this is so false that Zwinglius having begun to preach the Reformation in the
year 1519. the whole matter was examined in a course of several years, and at
last Zurich received the Reformation in the year 1525. Bern three years after
in the year 1528. and Basle a year after in the year 1529. as for Schaff house
I must confess my Ignorance, but there was at least 10 years interval in this
matter; and if Lucern is not so much in his favor, because it is the Residence
of the Spanish Ambassador, yet I cannot imagine what has made him degrade
Solohern into the number of the small Cantons, which is the Residence of the
French Ambassador, and is reckoned by many among the greater. But it is likely
that he knew nothing of all this matter, except by report, and perhaps he
thought the period would run smoother to range the Cantons thus in the great,
in the small, and the midle-sised Cantons, and that it would also reflect on
the Reformation as a precipitated change to say that 4 Cantons turned in one
year.

But tho Impertinence is a fault scarce to be named, when one has so many of a
more criminal nature in his way, yet such as are more signal and more
advantageously situated for the Reader's eye deserve to be viewed in our
passage, with the scorn that they deserve. Mr. Varillas begins his 3. book
which opens the progress of Luther's affairs with a Preamble of 38. pages, in
which he sets out the state of Europe at that time, so copiously and with so
little judgment, that he bestows 14. pages on the Conquests that Selim the
Turk had made, and on his defeat of the Mamelucks. This whole tedious ramble
signifies nothing to Luther's matters; but in short it was a secret to swell
the Volume, and to raise the price of the book, as well as it must lessen the
price of the Author, who shows, how little he understands where he ought to
place his digressions. What notions does that view of every State of Europe
give the world, that do any way prepare the Readers mind; for what was to come
after, unless it be that Mr. Var. being to present a piece of as arrant Poetry
as any that ever possessed the Stage, he thought it necessary to fill it at
first with many Actors, and to make a great appearance, tho none of them were
to act any part in his Play? But since he will needs be writing, tho he
understands not the common-Elements, I will take the pains for once to instruct
him a little how he ought to have made this introduction, since he it seems was
resolved to begin with one.

He ought then to have opened the State of Europe with Relation to Religion and
Learning; he to have showed what scandals the Popes and the Court of Rome had
given, what was the State of the secular Clergy, the Ignorance, Irregularity,
and vices of the Bishops, and Curates; what were the ^isorders and dissolutions
of the Monastic Orders, both of those that were endowed and of the Mendicants.
He ought to have showed in what sort of Studies they employed their time, and
with what sort of Sermons they entertained the People: and to this he ought to
have added somewhat of the State of the Universities of Europe; and of the
beginnings of Learning that were then arising. He ought to have showed the
different Interests, in which the several Nations of Europe were engaged, after
the times of the Councils of Constance and Basle; and to this he might have
added the State of the Courts of Europe with Relation to Religion, upon all
which he might have found matter for a long, and a much more pertinent
Introduction. And to conclude, he ought to have told the Dispositions, in which
the Peoples minds were, as to those matters: and if he would needs make a vain
show of his faculty of telling of tales, he might have set out the State of the
Eastern Churches, after the Treaty at the Council of Florence, and of its
effects; of the ruin of those Churches; and of the Ignorance, as well as
misery to which they were reduced by the rigor of the Mohammedan yoke. It is
true this was not a necessary preliminary to the bringing Luther on the Stage,
but it had been much less impertinent, than a long recital of Sultan Selim's
Conquests.

But I am carried too far, and hereafter I will confine my self to that, which
does more immediately belong to me. He begins that part of his Advertisement,
that relates to the affairs of England, with a sort of an Apophthegme worthy of
him: he says, it is without comparison more difficult to be exactly true in
matters of Religion, than in other matters; since in those others, it is only
Interest and Passion that make Men lie; but in matters of Religion Conscience
does so entirely conquer all the powers of the Soul, and reduces them to such a
Slavery, that it forces a man to write, that which it dictates, without
troubling himself to examine whither it is true or false. Here is such a view
of his Notion of Religion, that how false soever this proposition is in it
self, yet it gives us a true light of his Ideas of Religion. Good God shall
that principle, which does elevate, and illuminate our natures, be considered
as a more powerful depravation of them, than that which flows either from
Interest or Passion? shall that which is the Image of the God of Truth, and
that reduces the Soul to a chaste purity of Spirit, be made the Author of the
enslaving of all our powers, and the emancipating us from all scrupulosity
concerning truth or falsehood? this perhaps is the character of Mr. Varillas's
Religion, tho those that know him well assure me, that Religion makes very
little impression on him; and if that is true, then his Apophthegme fails in
himself, since the Interest of a Pension, and the passion of making himself
acceptable in the present time, have as entirely freed him from all regard to
Truth, as ever any false Principle of Religion did an enraged Zealot. It is
matter of horror to see Religion, and Conscience set up as the violentest
Corrupters of Truth: but we know out of what school this has sprung, and it
seems Mr. Varillas has so devoted himself to the Order of the Jesuits, that he
is resolved to speak aloud, that which they more prudently think fit to whisper
in secret, and indeed if we may judge of him by this character, that he gives
of Religion, we must conclude him to be entirely possessed with it, since never
Man seemed to be less solicitous, than he is, concerning the truth, or
falsehood of the things, that hoavers.

He accuses me of favoring my own side too much, and that if I confess some of
King Henry's faults, it is only that I may have an occasion to excuse the
wretched Cranmer. This is some Intimation, as if he had read my Book, but I do
not believe he has done it: for tho I have no great opinion either of his
Virtue, or of his Understanding; yet I do not think, he is so forsaken of
common-sense, and of all regard to his reputation, as to have adventured to
have advanced so many notorious falsehoods, if he had seen upon what
Authentical grounds I had so exposed them, that I do not think it possible
even for Mr. Maimbourg himself after all his 50 years Noviciat, to arrive at a
confidence able to maintain them any longer, if he had once read my Book, and
what I had writ was at least so important, that he ought to have weakened the
credit of my History, by some more evident proofs, than that of saying barely,
that I was extremely partial to my own side. My book was so much read, and so
favorably spoken of in France these three Years past, that in common decency
he ought to have alleged somewhat, to have justified his Censure; but this
manner of writing was more easy, as well as more imperious. And if a large
Volume of History supported with the most Authentic proofs, that has ever yet
perhaps accompanied any Book of that sort, is to be thus shaken off, it is a
vain thing to write Books for Men of Mr. Varillas's temper.

This had been more pertinent, if he had voucht for it a report, which was so
spread over Paris, that I had received advices of it from several hands, of a
design in which, as was reported, a Clergyman was engaged that has many
excellent qualities, to which Mr. Varillas seems to be a great Stranger, for he
has both great application, and much sincerity. He has searched with great
exactness that vast Collection of Mss. that relate to the last Age, which are
laid up in the King's Library, and he had found so many things relating to
England, that he intended to publish a Volume of Memoires relating to our
Affairs: he had also said, that in some things he would enlarge himself more
copiously than I had done, and that in other things he must differ from me.
Matters generally grow bigger by being often told, so this was given out as a
design to write a Counter-History, which should overthrow all the credit that
my Work had got. But upon my coming to Paris, I found some sincere enquirers
into truth, and who by consequence are Men that have no value for Mr. Varillas,
who intended to bring us together that we might in an amicable manner reason
the matter be foresome of our common Friends* and both of us seemed to be so
well disposed to sacrifice all to truth, that two Persons of such Eminence,
that they can receive no honor by the most advantageous Characters that I can
give them, who were Mr. Thevenot and Mr. Auzont, did procure us a meeting in
the King's Library, and in their presence. In which the Abbot as he discovered
a vast memory, great exactness and much sincerity, so he confessed that he had
no exceptions to the main parts of my History; he mentioned some things of less
moment, in all which I gave not only our two learned Arbiters, but even himself
full satisfaction, so that I quickly perceived I had to do with a man of
honor. He insisted most on the judgment of the Sorbonne against K. Henry's
Marriage, which is not in their Registers. But I was certainly informed by a Dr.
of the Sorbonne that their Registers are extremely defective, and that many of
their Books are lost. He alleged a letter to K. Henry that he had seen,
telling him, that it was to be feared that he might be displeased with the
decision of the Sorbonne, and that it might do him more hurt than good, which
Letter bearing s after the decision that I have printed, does not seem to agree
with it. To this I answered, that all the other decisions of Universities being
given simply in the King's favors, and that of the Sorbonne bearing only, that
the Majority had declared for him, this left ablot upon the matter, since when
the opposition is inconsiderable, decisions are given in the Name of the whole
Body; but the mention of the Majority imported, that there was a great
opposition made, which, tho it was not supported by a number equal to the
other, yet was so considerable, as to lessen very much the credit of the
Decision. To this I added, that K. Henry's printing this the Year after it was
given, and none ever accusing that piece of Forgery, Card. Pool on the contrary
acknowledging that he was in Paris when it was obtained, these were undeniable
Evidences of its genuinness, to which he answered by a hearty acknowledgment,
that he had seen another Letter, in which the detail of the whole Proceeding of
the Sorbonne is set down; and, as I remember, there were but one or two more
than the Majority, that opined on the King's side; but the rest were in
different Classes. Some suspended their opinions: others, tho they condemned
the Marriage, yet did not think it could be broken, since it was once made: and
some were positively of the Pope's side. In end, after some hours discourse, in
which all the Company was fully satisfied with the Answers that I gave, he
concluded, that as he had seen many more Letters relating to that matter than I
had done, so if I thought fit, he would furnish me with a Volume of Authentical
proofs for what I had writ, greater than that which I had already printed. And
these were the Letters of the French Ambassadors, that were in King Henry the
8th's Court, that are in the King's Library; but I did not stay long enough in
Paris to procure this.

Now what those Letters of Cardinal Bellays are, upon which Mr. Varillas
pretends to found his Relation, I cannot imagine. For as he came not to act in
this matter till the last step of it; so his Letters cannot carry any long
Series of this affair in them, and they must be far from giving those long
excursions, into which Mr. Varillas always delights to wonder. And, as I
remember, I was in particular told, that those Letters were in the King's
Library, and so, since all that was there, agreed with my History, this must
pass among those hardy Citations of Authors, that Mr. Varillas is apt to make,
to give credit to his Inventions.

He flourishes a little to show some small reading, but he is as unhappy in
that, as in other things. He mentions Cambden, as having writ the History of
that Revolution with some more moderation, than he is pleased to allow me; but
he says, he does so constantly favor the Calvinists, in prejudice of those
that he calls Catholics, that one needs only read the first page, that turns
up to him, in any part of his History, to be convinced of it. This is a very
good proof that Mr. Varillas never opened any one page of Cambden; Since he
does not write of that Revolution. For he begins his History with Q.
Elisabeth's Reign, and says no more of what went before her time, than what
amounts to a very short hint of her Birth and Education, and a general
Introduction into her Reign; and that History is writ with so much judgment and
impartiality, that as it acquired the Author the friendship and esteem of that
eminent Historian Mr. du Thou; so he after Cambden's Death published the second
Volume, from the Manuscript that the Author had sent him. If the discovery of a
great many Rebellions and Conspiracies against the Person of that famous Queen
is that, which disgusts Mr. Varillas at that History, it is because his
Religion has so enslaved his Conscience, that he is so little concerned in
Truth or Falsehood, as not to be able to endure one of the gravest Writers,
that this Age has produced, because he could not avoid the Recital of those
many Crimes, that some of the Men of Mr. Varillas's principles as to Religion
were not afraid to commit. After this he mentions another of our Historians,
whom he calls Dr. Morton, and to make his Reader know that he is acquainted
with the History of his Life, he tells us he was afterward a Bishop; but this
is one of the Authors of his invention, for tho we had a Doctor Morton, that
was Bishop of Durham, and that died about 30 years ago; yet he writ no History.
By the Character that Mr. Varillas gives this pretended Author, that he was
more moderate than Cambden, I fancy he is mistaken in the Name, and that he
would say Dr. Heylin, tho this Name and Morton have no affinity; but Heylin was
no Bishop: it is true, Dr. Heylin has writ so moderately, that some have been
severe upon him for it; but I will make no other Reflections on this, unless it
be to show the slightness of Mr. Varillas's way of writing, who it is likely
had heard one talk at the same time both concerning Dr. Morton and Dr. Heylin,
and he in his assuming way, pretends upon this to give a Character of that
History, putting the Name Morton for Heylin; but he never read a Word of Dr.
Heylin, tho in his daring way, he pretends to give his Character; and repents
himself of the praise of Moderation that he had given in preference to Cambden,
and sets it out as an artifice, since whereas Cambden blames always the
pretended Catholics without any mitigations, Morton in blaming them
counterfeits some pity for them, that is to say, he had some degrees of Mr.
Varillas's Character of Religion. But Dr. Heylin's History being writ only in
English, and it having never been translated either into Latin or French, Mr.
Varillas cannot give a Character of it from his own knowledge.

From our side he goes to the Writers of the Roman side, and begins with
another essay of his exactness to his principles of Religion. For he says,
Sanders writ so violently, that it was no vvonder if the Protestants carried
their revenge so far, as to force him to die of hunger, in the Mountains of the
North of England, to which he had retired. Here are only three capital
Errors: for 1. Sanders's Book, concerning the English Schism, was not
published till after his Death, so that this could give no occasion for so
severe a revenge. 2. Sanders did not die in the North of England, but in
Ireland. 3. Sanders was sent over by the Pope to raise and conduct a Rebellion
in Ireland, for which he had immediate powers from the Pope. He was so
active, that he brought an Army together, which was defeated by the Queen's
Forces: and upon that he fled into a Wood, where he was, some days after, found
dead. So that having received no Wounds, it was believed he died of Hunger.
This being the state of that affair, as it is related of all sides, is not Mr.
Varillas a very creditable Author, who has the brow to report it as he does?
For the Character that he gives of Ribadeneira, it is so embroiled, that I do
not think it worth the while to examine it. It is enough to say that
Ribadeneira is a Jesuit, that is to say, a Man true to Mr. Varillas his
Character of Religion, and his History is nothing but Sanders dressed up in
another Method. I speak of that which is in Latin, for the Spanish, I have
never seen it. For Lesley he is generally a grave and wise Writer, but Mr.
Varillas names him, because some body had told him, that one of such a name had
writ of those matters, otherwise he had never cited him with relation to
English Affairs, which he scarce ever mentions, but as they happned to be
intermixed with the Scotsh.

In conclusion, Mr. Varillas pretends to depend upon Cardinal Bellay's Letters,
and so he thinks here is enough to settle, in the spirit of his Reader, a firm
belief of all that he intends to write; but let him tell the World where they
are to be found, since the printed Volume contains nothing of the matters, that
he pretends to cite from him. And since I have printed so many of the Original
Letters of that Time, and have told the Reader where they are to be found, I
will expect the like from him, otherwise let him cite them as long as he will,
I will take the liberty to tell him that I do not believe him. And I think,
that by this time I have given him sufficient reasons for excusing my
Incredulity, in matters that he gives us upon his own word. Here is enough for
a preliminary. But I am afraid I grow heavy to my Reader; and that by this
time he is so fully satisfied concerning the principles both of Mr. Varillas's
Religion, and his morals, that he begins to lose patience, when he sees how far
I am like to carry him in a more copious discovery. But there are a sort of
men, that must be severely repressed: and there are some times, in which even a
fool is to be answered according to his folly. Yet I will so far manage my
Reader, as not to overcharge him too much: therefore as to many of those
Political digressions, that Mr. Var. makes upon the Interest of England, France
and Spain, I will pass them quite over, as the whipped cream that he sets
before his Reader. Some of them are not unpleasant, if they were proposed as
considerations, which might perhaps have had their weight: but his averring
them confidently is not to be excused, they might pass in a kind of a Book of
Politics as a refining upon the actions of Princes; but this way of writing is
by no means to be allowed in History, since it is without any sort of evidence,
and History ought to relate things as we find they really were designed, and
transacted; and not as we imagine they ought or might have been. I am now
entering upon a subject, in which it will be much more easy for me to say too
much, than too little: for Mr. Varillas commits so many Errors, that tho I am
resolved to let lesser matters pass unregarded, yet I find so many in my way,
which require a discovery, that I am engaged in a task as ungrateful to my
self, as it must be severe upon him.

1. He begins with an assurance, p. 226.
that all the rest of Wiclef's Heresy were so entirely rooted out of England,
that the whole Nation, without excepting one single Person, was of the same
Religion during the Reign of Henry the 7th.

I am not now near the Records of that time, but in my History I have showed by
the Records of K. Henry the 8th's Reign, that in the year 1511. which was but
two years after Henry the 7th's Death, there remain yet in the Registers of the Sea of Canterbury the Processes of 41 Persons, of whom 7 were condemned for
Heretics, and delivered to the Secular Arm, and the rest had the weakness to
abjure: and from this hint one must conclude, that Mr. Varillas had no knowledge
of our Affairs; but he thought the Period was rounder, and the air of writing
was more assuming, when he asserted that the whole Nation, without excepting
one single Person, was of the same Religion. The Opinions, objected to those
Persons, show, that the Reformation found a disposition in the Nation, to
receive it by the Doctrines which were entertained by many in it: For the chief
of them are, that the Sacrement of the Altar was not Christ's Body, but
material Bread: That Images ought not to be worshipped: That Pilgrimages were
neither necessary nor profitable: and that we ought not to address our Prayers
to Saints, but only to God.

But since this may be thought only a flourish of Mr. Varillas's Pen, I go to
other matters, in which it cannot be denied that a greater exactness was
necessary.

2. He lays down for a foundation to all that was to come after, 228. ^
that P. Arthur was very unhealthy, when he was married. That he was recovering
out of a great Disease, of which he died 5 Months after. It is true, he does
acknowledge, that three Words in the Bull, that was granted for the subsequent
Marriage, seem to import, that this Marriage was consummated: yet he takes the
Word of the other Historians, and repeats this of P. Arthur's ill Health so
often, that he hoped, it seems, by that means to make his Reader swallow it
down easily.

Here he had writ a little more artificially, if he had set over against this,
on the Margent some citation of a Letter, or Recital, which would have cost
him nothing, and have been full as true, as his other citations are. Many
Witnesses that were examined upon Oath, deposed before the Legates, when this
matter was examined, that P. Arthur was of a good Complexion, vigorous and
robust, when he was married; that he bedded with his Princess every night:
and the Decay of which he died, was ascribed to his too early Marriage. And of
this Mr. Varillas takes some notice, without reflecting on the consequence,
that the Reader might naturally draw from it; 240.
for he says, K. Henry the 7th delayed the marrying of his second Son 6 years
after he had obtained the Bull, and that the Death of his eldest Son made him
apprehend the loss of his second Son; if he married him so young. And tho he
intervveaves a Politic reflection, according to his way, that is to say
impertinently, and says, if this fear was not altogether just; yet since K.
Henry the 7th had no other Son, it was not altogether unreasonable. But it is
obvious that this is altogether impertinent, if P. Arthur's Marriage went no
further than a public Ceremony. But there are other circumstances that
overthrow this, as much as a thing that is of its nature secret, is capable of
being disproved. It is said by our Historians, who writ at that time, that the
Spanish Ambassador took proofs of the consummation of the Marriage. And in the
Bull of dispensation, for the subsequent Marriage, this was also supposed as a
thing that was perhaps done. But tho our Author set on the Margent the precise
Words, p. 239.
in which he says that was conceived; yet either he never read the Bull,
Illudqu^ carnali ^^^pula for^ consummavi Etiamsi Matrim^nium f^rit per
^^^^nalem ^^^pulam ^^^^summa^^
and so took this upon trust, or he was in a fit of his Religion, which was so
violent, that it made him not only take no care of what he said, whither it was
true or false; but made him advance a deliberate falsehood. For whereas in the
Preamble of the Bull of Dispensation for the younger Brother, it is set forth,
that P. Arthur and the Princess had been lawfully married, and had perhaps
consummated their Marriage, where the matter of fact is set down in a dubious
manner, he makes that the Dispensation had allowed their Marriage, even tho the
former had been consummated. And as the Words that he cites are not the Words
of the Bull, so they give a different notion of the matter; since as he gives
the Words, they seem only to be a clause put in, to make the Bull more
unquestionable; whereas in truth they are a part of the matter of fact
represented to the Pope. And tho this doubtful way of representing this matter
of fact, that is in the Bull, was all that could be decently said upon this
case, yet it seems the Spaniards, who knew the Marriage was consummated,
resolved to set the matter past dispute, for they either procured at that time
a Breve, of the same date with the Bull, or they forged one afterward, in
which in the Preamble this matter is asserted, without any perhaps, or other
limiting Word, it being positively set forth, that the Marriage was consummated.
If Mr. Varillas's Religion sets him at liberty from the scrupulosity of writing
truth, yet that profound Policy, to which he always pretends, should oblige him
to take a little care, that the falsehoods that he advances, may not be easily
discovered.

3. He says, p. 232.
Henry the 8th was 12. year old, when his Brother died; and that his Father had
designed him for the Ecclesiastical State.

This was taken up by the Writers of the last Age, to make the Parallel between
Julian the Emperor and him seem to agree: that as Julian had been a Reader in
the Church; so King Henry should be represented as an Abbot with a little band.
But as King Henry was not 12 year old, when his Brother died, for he wanted
some Months of 11: and as at that Age young Princes, considering the respect
that is paid to them in their Education, have seldom been found far advanced
in Learning; so it does not appear, that he had then any other Education
different from what was given his Brother, who understood Latin, and some of
the beginnings of Learning. Learning was then in great reputation, and K. Henry
the 7th engaged his Children to study, either to raise their Authority the
higher by that means, or perhaps to amuse them with Learning, that they might
not think of pretending to the Crown during his Life, since the undoubted Title
to it resting in the Person of their Mother, it had devolved upon them by her
Death, tho they did not think fit to claim their Right.

4. He says, Ibid.
that when K. Henry the 7th intended to marry his younger Son to P. Arthur's
Widow, the Privy Council of England approuved it the more easily, because of
the precaution that had been taken to hinder the consummation of the former
Marriage: and to confirm this, he cites on the Margent the Petition, that the
Parliament of England offered upon this matter to P. Alexander the 6th.

But as the Depositions are yet extant of the Duke of Norfolk, that was then a
Privy Counselor, and of two others, that there was no precaution used to
hinder the consummation; so Warham, that was at that time Archbishop of
Canterbury, opposed the second Marriage, as being neither honorable, nor
well-pleasing to God, as he himself did afterward depose upon Oath. The
Parliament took no cognizance of the matter, nor did it make any address to the
Pope; so that this citation is to be considered as an effect of Mr* Varillas
his notion of Religion.

5. He runs out, p. 235.
in his manner, into a long speculation concerning the different interests of
England and Spain, that made the Spaniards go backwards and forwards, in the
agreeing to the Match, that was proposed for P. Henry and the Princess; whom by
an extravagant affectation he calls always Duke of York: and makes the
Princesse's Parents represent to K. Henry the 7th, the danger of his Son's
growing weary of the Princess, since he was 4 year younger than she was, and
that in order to the procuring of a dissolution of the Marriage from the Court
of Rome, he might pretend that his Father had forced him to marry her, whenever
he should grow weary of her.

All the other Writers of that time put K. Henry the 7th's desiring this second
Marriage merely on his covetousness, which made him equally unwilling to repay
the Portion, or to send a great jointure yearly after the Princess: and the
Prince of Wales was too great a Match to be so uneasily admitted by the King
and Queen of Spain. He whom he calls by the Title of the Duke of York, was
indeed only Duke of York, for some Months after his Brother's Death, during
which time it was supposed, that the Princess might be with child by his
Brother; which proves beyond exception, that it was believed, that the first
Marriage was consummated. But when there was no more reason to apprehend that,
then he carried the Title, that belongs to the Heir apparent of our Crown. But
it seems the King and Queen of Spain were more easily satisfied in this matter,
than Mr. Varillas would make us believe they were: for two years after the Bull
was granted, when P. Henry came to be of Age, he instead of entering into any
engagement to marry the Princess, made a solemn protestation in the hands of
the Bishop of Winchester, by which he recalled the consent that he had given
during his Minority, and declared that he would never marry her. But it is very
likely Mr. Varillas had never heard of this, tho the instrument of that
Protestation was not only mentioned, but printed by many of the Writers of that
Age: and it is confessed by Sanders himself, who, after all Mr. Varillas's
flourish with his Letters, is his only Author. And for this foresight, that he
thinks he may justly ascribe to the King and Queen of Spain, because they are
represented by the Writers of that time, to have had an extraordinary Sagacity,
the reason that he makes them give, shows it was a contrivance of his own:
since a moral force, such as the Authority of a Father, was never so much as
pretended to be a just ground to annul a Marriage, after it was made and
consummated; otherwise most of the Marriages that have been made, might have
been dissolved.

6. He adds to this another speculation, p. 2^6.
that is worthy of him, he pretends that the King and Queen of Spain
apprehended, that K. Henry the 7th had acquired the Crown of England, and by
consequence had a right to dispose of it at his pleasure; upon which the Crown
of Spain was afraid, least he should have disinherited his Son, and given the
Crown to the Duke of Suffolk, that was then at Brussels, and was preparing an
Invasion of England, from which they did not know, but K. Henry the 7th might
save himself, by declaring Suffolk his Successor, and that upon those fears
they were unwilling to consent to the Match.

Here is such a mixture of Follies, that it is not easy to tell which of them
is the most remarkable. This Doctrine of the Crown of England's being alienable
at the King's pleasure, might have passed well with those, that some years ago
thought to have shut out the next Heir, and yet even these did not pretend that
it could have been done by the King alone. But here is a new Theory of
Politics, for which we are sure Mr. Varillas can cite no Authorities from the
Laws and Constitutions of England. K. Henry the 7th had indeed acquired the
Crown, by defeating that Tyrant and Usurper Richard the 3d: but as he pretended
to be Heir of the Lancastrian Race himself, so by marrying to the Heir of the
House of York, that was the right Heir, he by a conjunction of all Titles, made
the matter sure. But this gave him no right to alienate the Crown at his
pleasure, and to fancy, that a King might be induced to give away his Crown
from his own Son, to the Person in the World that he hated most, and whom at
his Death he ordered his Son never to forgive; who, by the way, was not Duke
but only Earl of Suffolk, is a Dream better becoming so slight a brain as is
that of Mr. Varillas, than the consummated wisdom of the King and Queen of
Spain. But thus it falls out when a Library Keeper turns Statesman; and when
from being a teller of tales, he will turn a Writer of Histories, which he
composes out of his own Imaginations, he must needs fall into childish errors.
When do Kings fall under those weaknesses, as to disinherit an only Son, to
cover them from a remote fear: and a very remote one it was; for the Archduke
needed at that time the assistance of England against France too much, to be in
a condition to raise a Civil War in England, and to support a competition to
the Crown, which could have no other effect, as to him, but to give France an
opportunity, during the distractions of England, to come and destroy him. In
short, here is a Vision of a poor-spirited Pedant, which is too much
considered, when it named and laughed at.

7. He pretends to enter into the reasons that were alleged at Rome, p. 237*
both for and against the granting of the Bull; but at last he concludes, that
Pope Alexander the 6th would not consent to it; that he might not give occasion
to accuse him, of having broken the Discipline of the Church.

But here is such a false representation of the Court of Rome at that time, and
in particular of P. Alexander the 6th, that since Mr. Varillas will needs write
Romances, I must put him in mind of one Rule; that as Painters show their
Judgment and Learning, in that which is in one Word called le Costume,
observing the Air, Manners, and Habits of the Ages and Scenes to which their
Pieces belong; so Poets, when they bring unknown Names into their Plays, they
may clothe them with what Characters they please; but if they represent Men,
whose Histories are known, they must not confound Characters, nor represent a
Nero as a grave Philosopher, or as a good natured Prince; nor a Marcus Aurelius
as a wanton Stage Player, or as a bloody Tyrant. And therefore, tho Mr.
Varillas may show his pretended discoveries, concerning Men that are less
known, yet when he brings in an Alexander the 6th on the Stage, it is too bold
a violation of Poetry, to lay a strictness of Conscience, or a sense of Honor
to his charge: and tho there is one part of this Period true, that there had
never been any dispensation of this sort formerly granted, to serve as a
Precedent for it: yet that exactness, in which he represents the Enquiry, that
the Divines of Rome made concerning this matter, agrees ill with the State of
the Court of Rome at that time; and a Painter may as justly represent the old
Romans in Pantalaons, and with Hats in their hands.

8. He says, p. 240, 24^
K. Henry the 7th was preparing all things for the Marriage of his Son, to the
Princess, when he died. And a little before that he had said, that her Parents
sacrificed the Interest of their Family to the satisfaction of the King of
England, by consenting to it.

A Match with the Heir of the Crown of England, was no very costly Sacrifice:
and for his vision concerning the design of marrying her to the Duke of
Calabria, and by that means of restoring the Kingdom of Naples, it does so ill
agree with the Character of the King of Arragon, that since there is no proof
brought of this, I must look on it as one of those Imaginations, with which Mr.
Varillas loves to entertain his Readers. But for K. Henry the 7th, he was so
far from making any preparations for the Marriage, ^orison.
that one of the Writers of that Age assures us, that at his Death he charged
his Son to break it, apprehending perhaps a return of a new civil War, upon the
issue of a doubtful Marriage.

9. He gives us a new taste of his unskilfulness in ordering his Scenes. p. 244.
He had found that when Henry the 8th's Divorce came to be started, there was
some discourse of a Match between him and Francis the first's Sister,
afterward the Queen of Navarre, and therefore he thought a proposition for
her, might come in before the Marriage, as a pretty ornament to his Fable.

But the silence of all the Papers of that Time, which I have seen, is a much
better evidence against it, than his pretended negotiation of Mr. de Piennes is
for it, to which no credit is due. It is well known that in the Archives of
Venice there are Recitals laid up of all the Negotiations of their
Ambassadors, and Mr. Varillas having perhaps heard of this, he fancied it
would have a good grace, to cite such Recitals as to French Affairs, tho all
that know the State of France, know, that this has not been the practice of
that Court. But as there is no proof to show that there was any such
Proposition made at that Time, so the State of K. Lewis the 12th's Court
differs extremely from it, in which the Count of Angouleme, afterward Francis
the first, and his Sister, were not so favorable, as to give us reason to
think that pains was taken to raise that Lady to the Throne of England.

10. He tells us, p. 245.
that King Henry the 8th calling a Parliament in the beginning of his Reign,
they thought themselves bound in point of Honor, to oblige to execute his
Father's Orders, relating to his Marriage; who had not only made it the chief
Article of his Testament, and charged his Son to do it upon his last Blessing;
but had laid the same charge on the Men of the greatest Credit in England, as
he spoke his last Words to them: upon which the Parliament being careful to
maintain this Authority, to which they pretended, over their Master, did oblige
him, by repeated Remonstrances to marry the Princess.

Here he goes to show how implacably he is set against the Crown of England:
formerly he had debased their Birth, but he thought that was not enough; now he
will degrade them of their Dignity, and give the Parliament a Superiority over
them. But it is a fatal thing for an ignorant Man to write History: for if Mr.
Varillas could have so much as opened our Book of Statutes, he would have
found, that the first Parliament, that K. Henry the 8th held, was assembled the
21. of January 1510. almost 8. Months after the Marriage, which was celebrated
six Weeks after he came to the Crown, in which time, if Mr. Varillas had
understood any thing of our Constitutions, he would have known, that it was
impossible for a Parliament to have met, since there must be 40. Days between a
Summonds and a Meeting of Parliament; so that if the new King had summoned one,
the Day after his Father's Death, it could not have met sooner, than the day
before the Marriage.

11. He says, Ibid.
the Queen bore five Children, the first three, Sons, and the other two, Girls;
but the eldest Son lived only 9 Months, the other two Sons, and the eldest
Girl, died immediately after they were born, only the youngest, that was born
the 8 of February 1515, was longer lived.

Mr. Varillas has a peculiar talent of committing more Errors in one single
Period, than any Writer of the Age: and here he has given a good essay of his
art; for the Queen bore only three Children, the first was a Son, born the 1.
of January, that died the 22 of February thereafter, which was not two full
Months, much less 9 Months: the second Son died not immediately, but about a
Fourtnight after he was born: and the Daughter, afterward Q. Mary, was born
the 9th of February 1516. So that tho by chance he has hit the Month right, yet
he is mistaken, both as to the Year, and the Day of the Month. So unadvised a
thing it is for an ignorant Writer, to deliver matters of fact so particularly:
for tho this may deceive others, that are as ignorant as himself, by an
appearance of exactness; yet it lays him too open to those, that can find the
leisure and the patience, to expose him: and the last is no easy matter.

12. He runs out into a very copious account of K. Henry's Disorders, p. 246.
and dresses up Q. Katherine's Devotions in a very sublime strain.

It does not appear, that in all that time he had any other Mistress, but
Elisabeth Blunt: and during all that while, he had the highest Panigyriques
made him by all the Clergy of Europe, upon his Zeal for Religion and Piety;
possible so, that if we did not live in an Age, in which Flattery has broke
loose from all the restraints of Decency, they would appear very extravagant
Commendations; and if the sublimities of Flattery were not rather a just
prejudice against a Prince, which give a character of a swelled Ambition, and
an imperious Tyranny, that must be courted by such abject methods, so that it
is hard, whither we ought to think worse of the Flaterers, or the Flatered, we
would be tempted to judge very advantageously of K. Henry the 8th, by the
Dedications, and other fawning Addresses that were made him. As for Q.
Katherine, it does appear, that she was indeed a virtuous and devout Woman; but
Mr. Varillas being more accustomed to Legends, than to true Histories, could
not set out this, without a considerable addition of his own: for the half of
it is not mentioned by any Author, that ever I saw, nor by any quoted by
himself: but a Poet must adorn his matter, and if he has not judgment, he
overdoes it.

13. He says, p. 248.
the King designed to marry his natural Son the Duke of Richmont, to his
Daughter Mary; upon which he makes that long digression, concerning the Names
of the Race of Tudors, that was formerly considered.

When a Man affirms a thing, that is so notoriously injurious to the Memory of
a Prince, he ought at least to give some sort of proof of its truth: for tho in
the accesses of Mr. Varillas's Religious Fits, he does not think fit to trouble
himself with those inconsiderable matters of Truth and Falsehood; yet all the
World is not of his mind, and some colors of Truth are at least looked for. It
is true, a Negative is not easily proved, so a bold Affirmer fancies, he has
some advantages; but in this case it is quite otherwise, for the whole series
of the Original Instructions, Messages and Letters, that passed between Rome
and England, in that matter, are still extant, in all which there is not the
least tittle, relating to this Proposition. And there are some things of such
indecency, that nothing but a temper like Mr. Varillas's can bring them
together. For when K. Henry was pretending a scruple of Conscience, at his own
marrying his Brother's Wise, it is very improbable, that he would have asked a
Dispensation for a Marriage in a much nearer Degree. For Sanders, that is Mr.
Varillas's Author, says, that both Propositions were made at the same time.
There were many Libels printed against K. Henry, about that time; but the
strongest, and the best writ, was that of Cardinal Pools, in which it is
visible, that he spares nothing that he could alledg with any color of Truth;
yet he says nothing of this matter, tho it had more weight in it to discover
the King's Hypocrisy, in pretending to scruples of Conscience, than all the
other things he alleges: and I never could find any other Author for this
Story, before Sanders, whose Book was printed 60 years after.

14. He gives another essay of his skill in History, P. 250.
and that he is equally ignorant of the Histories of all Kingdoms, when he
represents to us the endeavors of the King of Scotland, for the obtaining of a
Marriage with the Princes Mary, in favors of his Son, upon whose Person he
bestows a kind dash of his Pen, and he enters into a speculation of the danger,
that King Henry apprehended from this Proposition; and that if he had rejected
it, the King and Prince of Scotland might have addressed themselves for it to
the Parliament, and that the Parliament would have raised a general Rebellion,
rather than have suffered King Henry to reject it.

The dislike that Mr. Varillas has conceived against the Crown of England,
seems deeply rooted in him; for it returns very often. Here he represents
foreign Princes complaining to Parliaments, when the Kings do not accept of
Propositions for their Children; as if our Princes were less at liberty in the
disposal of their Children, than the meanest of their Subjects are: but he
knows our Constitution as little as he does the History of Scotland, otherwise
he could not have represented the King of Scotland, as pretending to the
Marriage of the Princess Mary for his Son; since K. James the fourth, that had
married King Henry's Sister, was killed at the Battle of Floddun the 2
September 1513, above three years before the Princess was born, he left an
infant Son, between whom and the Princess a Treaty of a Marriage was once
proposed, but no progress was made in it, for K. Henry neglected it. And he had
always his Parliaments so subject to him, to apprehend any of those vain
Schemes, with which Mr. Varillas would possess his Reader. There are many that
make no great progress in History, but yet know somewhat of the Death of Kings,
and that carry some small measure of Chronology in their Head. Yet since Mr.
Varillas has not yet got so far, he had best buy some common Chronological
Tables, and have them always before him, when he writes; and this will at least
preserve him from such childish Errors.

15. He tells us, p. 2^1.
that there were many Pretenders to the young Princess; and to make a full
Period, he tells us, that all the Souverains of Europe courted her, both the
Emperor, the Kings of France, Spain and Scotland; and so he gives us a
fantastical speculation of King Henry's balancing those Propositions one
against another.

But since for a round Periods sake he will needs split Charles the 5th in two,
and name both the Emperor and the K. of Spain as two Pretenders, he might have
as well subdivided him into the King of Arragon and Castile, Sicily and Naples,
and the very Titular Kingdom of Jerusalem, might have come in for its share.

16 He tells us that tho the match of Scotland was the most for the Interest of
the Nation; P. 252.
yet King Henry was so angry with his Nephew the King of Scotland, for taking
part against him, in his last war with France, that he resolved never to give
him his Daughter.

Here Mr. Varillas will see again the necessity of purchasing a Chronological
Table; for tho that will cost him some money, which as I am told, goes very
near his heart; yet it will preserve him from some scurvy errors, they may
spoil the sale of his books: for any one of those Tables, even the worst and
cheepest, would have showed him, that it was not his Nephew that took part with
France against him; but his Nephew's Father: for King James the 4th, that was
King Henry's Brother-in-Law, made war on that occasion, and was killed in it,
leaving an Infant Son behind him; but it is pleasant to see the Ignorance of
this Scribler, that makes in one place King James the 4th to court the Princess
for his Son, tho he died several years before she was born, and then makes King
James the 5th to be making war with his Uncle, during his Father's life, and
while himself was an Infant.

17. He says, Ibid.
the Emperor came, and pretended the second to the Princess, and upon that he
sets down a large negotiation, that he had with Cardinal Wolsey.

But he shows here an ignorance of Charles the 5th's Life, tho he pretends to
have made more than ordinary discoveries concerning his Affairs, that proves,
that he has studied all History alike ill. He reckons up the series of the
Propositions for the Princess quite wrong; for she was first contracted to the
Dolphin the 9 November 1518, by a Treaty yet extant, then Charles the 5th came
into England in Person, and contracted a Marriage with her at Windsor the 22 of
June 1522; after that there was a Proposition made for the King of Scotland,
that was soon let fall; and last of all there was a Treaty set on foot, for the
King of France then a Widdower, or for his second Son the Duke of Orleans, it
being left to Francis's option to determine that: and so remarkable a passage,
as Charles the 5th's coming to England in person, was unhappily unknown to Mr.
Varillas; otherwise he would have dressed up a mighty Scene of Politics to
adorn it.

18 He gives us the character and the History of Card. Ibid.
Wolsey, with his ordinary colors, in which truth comes very seldom in for an
ingredient, he tells us how he was Bp. of Tournay, or rather Oeconome of that
See, and how many journeys he made between Tournay and London; and that he
being enriched at Tournay, he got the Bishopric of Lincoln, after that, upon
the Bp. of Winchester's death, he had that See, from that he was raised to be
Archbishop of York; then he was made Chancellor of England, then Cardinal and
Legate a Latere, and last of all, he was made Chief Minister of State; and to
show our Author's deep Judgment, this last Article seemed so doubtful a point
to him, that he must needs bestow a proof on it, and he sends us to P. Leo the
10th's Register, tho the advancements that he had already reckoned up, may well
make this pass without a more particular Proof; nor is P. Leo's Register a
place likely to find it in.

Here is a great deal to let his Reader see, how entirely he was possessed with
the History of that time; since he could run out so far with the Character and
History of that Minister; but for the strain, in which he sets out his
Character, one must see, it is only Mr. Varillas's fancy: for how came he to
know Cardinal Wolsey's air and manner of deportment, even in the smallest
thing. I that have seen much more of him in his Letters, Dispatches and
Instructions than Mr. Varillas can pretend to have done, dare not go so far,
because I have not arrived at Mr. Varillas his pitch of Religion; but if his
character is no truer than the History that he gives of Wolsey, I know what
name is due to it. He was made Bishop of Tournay in October, and Bp. or Lincoln
in the March thereafter, or rather in February, for the Temporalty was given
him the 4th of March, which is always restored after the Consecration, so that
here was not time enough to make such journies between Tournay and London, nor
to enrich himself with the former: he had not Winchester but 15 years after
that; but he was made Archbishop of York two year after he had Lincoln; he was
also made Cardinal and Legate, before he was made Chancelour; for Warham
Archbishop of Canterbury was Chancelour while he was Legate, and had some
disputes with him, touching his legative power; upon which he obtained that
Dignity, for putting an end to all disputes; and in stead of his being last of
all Minister of State, he was first of all Minister of State, while he was only
the Lord Almoner, and all his other dignities came upon him, as the natural
effects of that Confidence and favor into which the King had received him.

19. He cannot assent to some Historians, Ibid.
that imagine he was the Confident of K. Henry's Pleasures, since he thinks, if
that had been true, he could not have been so cheated afterward, as he was.

Here is a Demonstration that he never read my History, into which I have put,
besides other Evidences of his being on the secret of Anne Boleyn's matter, two
letters, that she writ to him, which are undeniable proofs of it. But as for
the long Story into with he runs out, concerning Charles the 5th's Intrigues
with him, and his way of writing to him, in the style of Son and Cousin, for
which he cites on the Margent the Emperor's Letters to Wolsey, that lie in his
fancy, that is the greatest Library in the World, but the hardest to be come
at, all this is so loosely writ, that it is plain Mr. Varillas had no light to
direct him in it, since he says not a word of the most important circumstance
of it, which was the Emperor's coming in person to England, which was believed
to have been done chiefly to gain Wolsey entirely, and in which it is certain,
that he had all the success that he had wished for.

20. He says, p. 257.
Wolsey being alienated from the Emperor, engaged the King of France, after he
was set at liberty, to treat for a Match between the Dauphin and the Princess
of England, upon which they were contracted with great Magnificency; but that
was not enough, for the Cardinal's malice.

I have formerly showed, that the proposition of a Marriage between the Dauphin
and the Princess was in the year 1518, long before Francis the first's
Imprisonment; but the Treaty set on foot after his Liberty, was either for
himself, or his second Son, and this sort of a Treaty being somewhat
extraordinary, where the alternative lay between the Father and the Son for the
same Lady, Mr. Varillas shows his great ignorance of the Affairs of that Time,
since he says nothing of it; for this would have given him occasion enough to
have entertained his Reader with many Visions and Speculations.

21. He says, p. 258.
that Wolsey dealt with Longland the King's Confessor, to possess him with
scruples concerning the lawfulness of his Marriage, that Longland refused to do
it, but engaged Wolsey to begin, and he promised to fortify the scruples, that
the Cardinal should infuse into the King's mind. Upon which the Cardinal did
open the matter to the King, and the King being shaken by his proposition, laid
the matter before his Confessor, who seconded the Cardinal.

In this he has taken the liberty to depart from Sanders, tho he is the Author
whom he generally copies; but it is easy to pretend to tell secrets, but not so
easy to prove them. The King himself did afterward in public not only deny
this, but affirmed that Wolsey had opposed his scruples all he could, and that
he himself had opened them in Confession to Longland, and the King himself said
to Grineus, that he was disquieted with those scruples ever from the year 1529,
which was three years before the matter was made public.

22. He says, p. 259.
the King upon that consulted the Divines of England, concerning the validity
of the Marriage, and that all those that were Men of probity and disinteressed,
answered in the affirmative; but some that did aspire, or that were corrupted,
thought it doubtful, others, who were very few in number, affirmed it was
unlawful.

This is so false, that all the Bishops of England, Fisher only excepted,
declared under their Hands and Seals, that they thought the Marriage unlawful.

23. He gives a Character of Anne Boleyn, P. 260.
in which he takes up the common Reports of her ill shape, her yellow color,
her gag tooth, her Lump under her chin, and her hand with six fingers: but
because all this agrees ill to the Mistress of a King, he, to soften that, adds
a long Character of her Wit, her Air and Humor, in which he lays her charms,
and here he takes all the licenses of a Poet, as well as of a Painter.

But as several of her Pictures, yet extant, show the folly of those Stories,
concerning her Deformity, so the other particulars of this Picture are for most
part fetched out of that Repository of false History, that lies in Mr.
Varillas's Imagination.

24. He says, Ibid.
the English Historians, and some other Catholics, agree to those things, and
for his Vouchers he cites on the Margent, Sanders, Ribadeneira and Remond; but
they add many other particulars, tho they differ concerning them, and tho he
will not affirm them to be true; yet he thinks it worth the while to set them
down. They say, that Anne Boleyn's true Father was not known: that she was born
in England, while he was Ambassador in France: that Henry the 8th, being in
love with the Mother, had sent away her Husband, that so he might satisfy his
Appetites more freely; but that he soon quited the Mother for her eldest
Daughter Mary: that Sr. Thomas Boleyn at his return to England, finding his
Wife with Child, begun a Suit against her, but that the King forced him to be
reconciled to his Wife, and to own the Child that she bore some time after, who
was Anne Boleyn: that this Daughter at the Age of 15, was dishonored by two of
her Father's Domestics, upon which she was sent to France, where she was so
common a Prostitute, that she went by the Name of the English Hackney: that she
was a common subject of Raillery: that she became a Lutheran, tho she made
still profession of the other Religion. He says, others make her pass for a
Heroine, that cannot be enough commended, yet he acknowledges there are not
Authentical Evidences left, to discover their imposture.

Here is a way of writing, that agrees well with Mr. Varillas's other
Qualities: he was here in a cold fit, and so his Religion did not operate so
strong, as to disengage him quite from all regard to truth, only it produces
one start, that is sufficiently extravagant, for he accuses all that is said in
favors of Anne Boleyn of imposture, tho at the same time he acknowledges,
there are not Authentic Evidences to disprove it; but how then came he to
know, that those Commendations were Impostures? He answers that in the
beginning of this Paragraph, and cites in general the Historians of England and
other Catholic Writers: and for the Historians of England he gives us Sanders
alone, tho he can hardly make a plural out of him, unless he splits him into
three or four subdivisions, as he had done Charles the 5th, when he reckoned up
the Emperor and the King of Spain as two of the Pretenders to the Princess
Mary. But tho I have in my History demonstrated the falsehood of all this
Legend so evidently, that I had perhaps wearied my Reader, by prooving that too
copiously, yet since I see that nature can crowd so much impudence in Mr.
Varillas alone, as might serve even the whole Order of the Jesuits, and that
he is resolved to keep up the credit of the blackest falsehoods, as the Church
of Rome preserves still in her Breviary a great many Lessons with Prayers and
Anthems, relating to them, that are now by the consent of learned Men exploded
as Fables, I must again lay open this matter, tho I thought I had so fully
confuted those Lies, that even a Pension could not have engaged a Man to
support them any more.

It may seem enough to an impartial Mind, that Sanders was the first, that ever
published those Stories, above 50 years after Anne Boleyn's Death: that tho
Card. Pool, and the other Writers of that Time, had left nothing unsaid, that
could blacken K. Henry; yet none of them had brow enough to assert Sanders's
Fictions: and that after Anne Boleyn's Tragical Fall, when her Misfortunes had
made it a fashionable thing to blacken her, yet these impostures were reserved
for Sanders, and for an Age, in which he and many others of his Church were
setting on many Rebellions and Conspiracies against Q. Elisabeth, they were so
powerfully acted by Mr. Varillas's Spirit of Religion, tho they had not the
folly to own it, as he has done, as to give themselves the liberty to say the
foulest things against the Mother, without giving themselves the trouble to
enquire, whither they were true or false: and the things here advanced are of
such a nature, that either they must be evidently true, or they are notoriously
false; for an Embassy into France of such a continuance, a Suit moved upon Sr.
Tho. Boleyn's return, were public matters, and must have lien open to a
discovery. The whole Recital is impossible, as it is told; for if she was born
after Sr. Tho. Boleyn returned from an Embassy, to which King Henry had sent
him, that he might enjoy his Wife, and in which he staid two years, as Sanders
says; then since King Henry came to the Crown in the year 1509, she must be
born in the year 1511, and then the 15th year of her Age will fall in the year
1526, and it being certain that the King began to court her in the year 1527,
here is not time enough for her Leudness and her long stay in France. But it is
certain that she was born in the year 1507, two years before K. Henry came to
the Crown, and when he was but 14 years old, and that at 7 years old she went
over to France with K. Henry's Sister, when she was married to Lewis the 12th;
and tho upon that King's Death the Queen Dowager of France came soon after back
into England, yet Anne Boleyn staid still in France, and was in the service of
Claud Francis's the first's Queen, and after her Death the King's Sister, the
Duchess of Alencon, took her into her service, and these two Princesses were
so celebrated for their Virtue, that this alone is enough to show, that she was
then under no infamy, since she was of their Family. She was also Maid of
Honor to our Queen Katherine, who, even by Mr. Varillas's Character, was of
too severe a Virtue to admit a common Prostitute to that degree of Honor. So
that here is more than enough to discredit all those Calumnies.

25. He says, P. 261.
tho there is not Evidence enough in the former Reports, yet there is a certain
proof for K. Henry's disorders with the Elder of the two Sisters, Mary Boleyn,
since in the demand, that K. Henry made for a permission to marry Anne, he
confessed his disorders with her Sister, and offered to do Penance for them:
and to vouch for this, he cites King Henry's Petition to P. Clement the 7th.

Here Mr. Varillas shows, how little he understands the advantages that he has,
to maintain his Assertions, since there is an Authority for this last, that has
more appearance of truth in it, than all his other Citations put together, tho
his ignorance made him incapable of finding it out. For Cardinal Pool, in his
Book against K. Henry, objects this to him, and this has a fair appearance:
whereas the Petition, that he cites, is a Dream of his own, that was never
before heard of. But tho I have said more for the honor of Cardinal Pool, than
all the Panegiricks that have been given him, amount to, yet I am very well
assured, that in this particular he was abused by Reports, to which he gave too
easy a belief: for as all the Original Instructions and Dispatches, that were
made upon that Affair, are yet extant, in which there is not one Word relating
to this matter; so it is plain, that the Affair was never so far advanced, as
to demand a permission for a second Marriage, since that could never be so much
as asked, till the first was dissolved, and that not being gained, there was
not room made for it. If the King had given such advantages against himself, as
to have put such a Confession in a Petition to the Pope, is it to be imagined,
that the Popes would not have discovered this in some Authentical manner, and
even have put it in the Thundering Bull, that was afterward published against
him? for this alone proved his Hypocrisy of pretending scruples of Conscience
at his Marriage beyond exception; and if the King acted in this matter without
any regard to Conscience, it is unreasonable to represent him as so strictly
Conscientious, and that he would have confessed so scandalous a secret, and so
to have put himself in the power of those, of whom he could not be well assured.

26. He gives us a long account of Wolsey's design, p. 263, etc*
to engage the King to marry the Duchess of Alencon. Of the Bishop of Tarke's
being sent over to bring the English Princess into France, upon her being
contracted to the Dauphin. And of Wolsey's prevailing with him, to let that
Proposition fall, and to set on another, for a Marriage between the King of
England and the Duchess of Alencon. And that the Bp. of Tarke was cheated by
Wolsey; and being in the interests of the Duchess of Alencon, he demanded a
public Audience of the King, in the presence of the Council, in which he
employed all his Eloquence to persuade him to divorce his Queen, and to marry
the most Christian King's Sister.

In all this matter Mr. Varillas is only the Copier of Sanders, yet he cannot
tell another Man's Lie, without mixing some additions of his own; for the Bp.
of Tarke's being sent over, to demand the Princess, is one of the fruits of his
own Religion. But tho a Pedant of a Priest, such as Sanders, had told so
improbable a Story; yet it ill became a Man, that pretends to know Courts, and
the Negotiations of Ambassadors, as Mr. Varillas does, to assert such
improbabilities, as that an Ambassador sent express to demand a Princess for
his Master's Son, which was the greatest advantage that France could have
possibly hoped for, should be so far wrought on by the Minister of the Court,
to which he was sent, as not only to let all this fall; but to make a new
Proposition for the illegitimating of the young Princess, and for offering his
Master's Sister to King Henry, and all this without any Instructions from his
Master, and thereby exposing the Duchess of Alencon to the scorn of being
rejected, after she was so publicly offered to the King of England; tho every
Body knows, that the first offers of Princesses are made in secret. And after
all this, that the Bishop of Tarke, who not only exceeded his Instructions, but
acted contrary to them in so important a matter, was neither recalled, nor
disgraced; but on the contrary, he was afterward promoted to be a Cardinal by
the recommendation of the Court of France; and he being a Cardinal, and seeing
afterward how he was abused, if we may believe this Fable, is it to be
supposed, that he, either out of his own Zeal for the Court of Rome, or by the
Accusations that naturally such a Proposition, begun by him, must have brought
on him, would not have told all this secret afterward? In short, as this
Relation contains many particulars in it, that are not according to the Forms
of our Court, such as his demanding an Audience in the presence of the Council
(for it seems, as Mr. Varillas set our Parliaments above our Kings, he will
make the Privy Council equal to them) so the whole is so contrary to all the
Methods of Ambassadors, that this would scarce pass, if it related to the
transactions of the Courts of China or Iapan; but it is so gross an imposition
on such as know the Methods of the Courts of Europe, that Mr. Varillas presumed
too much on the credulity of his Readers, when he thought that this could be
believed: and si non e vero, il e ben trovato, is so necessary a Character for
a Man to maintain, that would have his Books sell well, which I am told is Mr.
Varillas's chief Design, that he had best find out some Judge of his Pieces,
that has a true Understanding, since it is plain, that he has not sense enough
himself to make a right Judgment in such matters.

27. He says, P. 266.
when Cardinal Wolsey went over into France he carried a Commission to consult
the Universities of France, touching the King's Divorce; but that the change of
Affairs in Italy, made the King to recall him; who was strangely surprised, when
he found that the King had no thoughts of marrying the Duchess of Alencon, and
that he was become so much in love with Anne Boleyn, that he was resolved to
marry her on any Terms.

It is an unfortunate thing for a Man, to have heard too much, and to have read
too little of History: for as the one gives him much confidence, so the other
exposes him to many Errors. Mr. Varillas had heard, that K. Henry had
consulted many Universities; but not knowing where to place this, he fancied,
that it must be the first step in the whole Matter. But he knew not, that this
was not thought on, till after a Suit of above two Years continuance, in which
the King saw, how he was deluded by the Court of Rome; and upon that, he took
the other Method of consulting the Universities. All his speculations
concerning Card. Wolsey, are built on the common Mistake, that supposes him
ignorant of the King's intentions for Anne Boleyn, the falsehood of which I
have sufficiently demonstrated.

28. He tells us, p. 278.
that Card. Wolsey having once several Bishops to dine with them, the King
knowing of it, went to them after Dinner, and made a Writing to be read to
them, that set forth the Reasons against his Marriage: the Bishops did not
approve it quite; yet they were so complying, as to say, that if those things
were true, his scruples were well grounded.

This was too important a thing, not be made appear probable by some of his
pretended Vouchers, tho it is most certainly false; for a Resolution, signed by
all the Bishops of England, except Fisher, was produced before the Legates, to
show how well the King's scruples were grounded.

29. He says, Ibid.
the Privy Council acted more steadily, and intended to give the King an
undeniable proof of his Mistresses Lewdness; for Sr. Thomas Wiat, that had
obtained of her the last favors, was willing to let the King know it; and so
being of the Privy Council, he not only owned the matter to the rest of that
Board, but was content to let the King know it; and when he found that the King
would not believe it, he offered to make the King himself an Eyewitness to
their Privacies; but tho the Duke of Suffolk made this bold Proposition to the
King, he was so far from harkening to it, that Wiat was disgraced upon it, and
by this means the Mistress was covered from such dangerous Discoveries for the
future.

Such a Story as this might have passed from a Sanders, that knew the World
little; but in earnest, it seems the fits of Mr. Varillas's Religion are strong
even to Ecstasy, since they make him write as extravagantly of humane Affairs,
as if he had passed his whole Life in a Desert. A Man that knows what humane
Nature is, cannot think that Wiat would have either so far betrayed Mrs.
Boleyn, or exposed himself, as to have made such a Discovery; it being more
natural for a Man, that was assured of a young Lady's Favor, to contribute to
her Elevation, since that must have raised himself, than to contrive her Ruin.
And K. Henry, whose imperious temper gave him a particular Disposition to
Jealousy, must have been of different composition from all the rest of Mankind,
if he could have rejected a Discovery of this nature. And when the secrets of
Jealousies are opened to Princes, it is too gross, even for a Romance, to make
the Discoverer to begin with the Councelboard, and to procure a Deputation from
them, to acquaint the King with them. But as Wiat does not appear to have been
a Privy Councelour, till near the end of K. Henry's Reign; so it is plain
enough, he was never disgraced, but continued to be still employed by the King
in some foreign Embassies, to the end of his Life.

30. He says, ^. 269, and ^70.
Anne Boleyn endeavored, tho in vain, to engage Sr. Thomas More to negociate
her Affair; but he being proof against all corruption, Gardener, that was a
Canonist, was made Secretary of State, and was sent to Rome with My-Lord Brian,
who scandalized all Rome with his lewd behavior; and had the impudence to
assure the Pope, that the Queen desired to be divorced, that so she might
retire into a Monastery. And made other offers of great advantage to the Pope,
in case he would allow the Divorce.

Mr. Varillas cannot say too much in Sr. Thomas More's commendation; but since
he was a Man of so much Sincerity, it is certain, that he approved of the
Divorce: for in a Letter, that his own Family printed among his other Works, in
Q. Mary's Reign, he, writing to Cromwell, owns, that he had approved of the
Divorce, and that he had great hopes of the King's success in it, as long as it
was prosecuted in the Court of Rome, and founded on the defects that were
pretended to be in the Bull; and after that most of the Universities and of the
learned Men of Europe had given their Opinions in favors of the Divorce, four
years after it was first moved, he being then Chancellor, went down to the
House of Commons and made those Decisions to be read there, and upon that he
desired the Members of Parliament to report in their Countries, that which they
had heard and seen; and added these very Words, and then all Men will openly
perceive, that the King has not attempted this Matter for his Will and
Pleasure, but only for the discharge of his Conscience. Upon Wolsey's Disgrace,
he was made Chancellor, and continued in that high trust almost three years;
which is an evident sign that he did not then oppose the Divorce; nor did he
grow disgusted of the Court, till he saw that the King was upon the point of
breaking with the Sea of Rome. So that he would have liked the Divorce, if the
Pope could have been prevailed with to allow it; but he did not approve of the
King's procuring it another way. Mr. Varillas is no happier in the other parts
of this Article: for Gardener was not sent first to Rome, to negotiate this
matter. Knight that was Secretary of State, was first employed; and Gardener
was not made Secretary of State, till near the end of this Negotiation: nor was
he ever sent to Rome with Brian: nor was Brian a Lord, but only a Knight; and
it was a year after this Suit was first begun, before Brian was employed in it;
so that he could carry no such deluding Message to the Pope, concerning the
Queen's desiring the Divorce. And for this pretension of the Queen's desiring
to retire to a Monastery, it was never made use of by the English Ambassadors.
It was on the contrary a notion of the Pope's, who thought, that if that could
be put in her Head, it would be the easiest Method of getting out of this
uneasy matter: and therefore he ordered his Legate Card. Campegio, to advise
the Queen to it. And for the scandals of Brian's Life, they must have been very
great, if they gave offense at Rome at that time: but as I can not answer much
for Brian, so I will not trouble my self to vindicate him; but he could not
behave him more indecently at Rome, than Campegio did in England, when he came
over Legate, who scandalized even the Court with his lewd behavior.

31. He says, p. 272.
the Pope was sensible of his obligations to the King, and resolved to do all
he could to gratify him, and so ordered Cajetan to examine the matter, who did
it in his manner, after the Method of the Schools. And here he gives us an
abstract of his Book. He laid this down for a Maxim, that the High Priest
under the N. Testament had no less Authority, than the High Priest had under
the Law of Moses, who had power to allow of such Marriages, to good ends and in
good Circumstances; and that the end of this Marriage was noble: that the Crowns
of England and Spain being united, might send their Fleets to block up
Constantinople. And that by this Marriage, as Italy was to be set at Peace, so
K. Henry was diverted from marrying into Families suspect of Heresy: and that
therefore the Pope could not grant a Dispensation for annulling it. And with
his usual Confidence, he cites on the Margent Cajetan's Consultation. And this,
he says, confirmed the Pope in his Resolution, not to grant the Dispensation
for breaking the Marriage upon any Terms whatsoever.

I have given such Authentic Demonstrations of the Falsehood of this
Particular, that I am sure the strongest Fit of Mr. Varillas's Religion can not
resist them. For the Pope, upon the first Proposition, franckly granted the
Dispensation, and only consulted with some Cardinals about the Methods of doing
it: and afterward he sent one over to England, and promised, that he would do,
not only all that he could grant either in Law or Justice; but every thing else
that he could grant out of that plenitude of Power, with which he was vested in
the King's favor. The Pope also proposed a Method, that perhaps would have
brought the matter to an easier issue, which was, that if the King was
satisfied in his own Conscience concerning the Divorce, in which he did not
think that there was a Doctor in the whole World, that could judge so well as
himself, then he might put away his Queen, and marry another, and then the Pope
would confirm all. For the crafty Pope thought, it would be easier for him to
confirm it, when it was once done, than to give Authority to do it: and in
short, the Pope made the King still believe, that he would do it, till by that
means he brought the Emperor to grant him all he desired. And as for Cajetan's
opinion, I am now in a Country where I cannot find his Works, so I cannot be
so positive in this matter; but as far as my Memory serves me, Cajetan writ
nothing with relation to this matter: but only in the body of his
School Divinity, that he had published long before this Suit began, he had set
on foot a new Opinion, touching the Prohibitions of marrying in near Degrees,
which the Church by a constant Tradition had in all Times looked on as Moral
Laws; whereas he asserted, they were only Positive Precepts, that did not bind
under the Christian Religion, and by consequence, that there was no Law now
against Marriages in those Degrees, but the Law of the Church, with which the
Pope might dispense. In all the Books that I have seen, that were writ for the
Queen's Cause, Cajetan's Authority is brought, as a thing already abroad in the
World, and not as a Consultation writ upon this Occasion: and by what I
remember of that Cardinal's Life, it is said, that in his reasonings with
Luther he had found himself so defective in the knowledge of the Scripture, that
whereas formerly he had given himself wholly to the Study of School Divinity,
he after that gave himself entirely to the Study of the Scripture, in which,
making allowances for his Ignorance of the Original Tongues, he succeeded to
admiration. But tho I cannot procure a Sight of his Treatise concerning the
Degrees of Marriage, the Idea that I retain of his solid way of writing, makes
me conclude, that he was not capable of writing in so trifling a manner, as Mr.
Varillas represents the Matter. For what Man of sense could say, that the
Highpriest under the Jewish Religion could dispense with a Brother's marrying
his Brother's Widow, in some cases: in case that a Brother died without
Children, his Brother, or the next of Kin, might have married the Widow, by
the Dispensation that the Law gave, and not by a Dispensation of the
Highpriest. And for the Ends that he pretends of those two Princes, going to
block up Constantinople with their Fleets, a Man must be ignorant in History to
the Degree of Mr. Varillas, to imagine this, since as the Kings of those Times
had no Royal Fleets, but were forced to hire Merchant Vessels, when they had
occasion for them; so the blocking up of Constantinople was too bold a project
for those Days, and does not seem to have been so much as once thought on. And
for the other Ends that he mentions, tho the procuring such a Peace to Italy,
as was for the Interest of the Popes, was a thing for which they would have
sacrificed any thing; yet this differs much from P. Julius the second's
Character, who granted the Dispensation, since his whole Reign was a continued
Imbroilment of Italy. Nor does it appear that K. Henry's Marriage could have any
influence on the Peace of Italy, unless it were very remote. And as for the
other Reason alleged for the Marriage, that it diverted K. Henry from marrying
into Families suspect of Heresy, this is too great a violation of the Costume;
for it seems Mr. Varillas had the present State of Europe in his Head, when he
writ it: but Cajetan could not write this, for in the year 1503 there were no
Families in Europe suspect of Heresy: so that all this reasoning, that is here
entitled to Cajetan, is a mass of Mr. Varillas's crude Imaginations, which do
equally discover both his Ignorance, and his want of Judgment.

32. He accuses Mr. Beaucaire, p. 274.
for saying a thing, that was no way probable, when he affirms, that Card.
Campegio carried over to England a Bull annulling the Marriage, which he was
allowed to show both to the King and to Card. Wolsey, but that this was only an
artifice to procure him the more credit for drawing out the Process into a
great length.

But when a Writer rejects what he finds affirmed by another, that lived in the
Time concerning which he writs, he ought at least to give some reasons to
justify his being of another mind; since it is a little too bold for any Man,
of a temper more modest than that of Mr. Varillas, to deny a matter of fact,
merely because he thinks it is no way probable: but it is not only probable,
but evidently true, as I have made it appear beyond all possibility of
contradiction: for after that Campegio had, according to his Instructions,
showed the Bull, both to the King and to Wolsey, great endeavors were used at
Rome to procure an Order for his showing it to some of the King's Ministers;
but the Pope could not be prevailed on so far: and I have printed an Original
Letter of John Castalis, that contains a long conference that he had with the
Pope on this head; by which it appears, that the only consideration that the
Pope had before his Eyes in this whole matter, was the Emperor's Greatness,
and his Fears of being ruined, if he had made any further steps in that Affair.

33. He says, p. 277.
that the Queen having thrown her self at the King's Feet, and made a very
moving Speech, the King was so far melted with it, that he said, he was
contented to refer the matter to be judged by the Pope in Person, upon which
she went out instantly, that so the King might not have time to recall that,
which perhaps he had said a little too suddenly: and that she always claimed
this Promise, tho the King had no regard to it.

Here is a new Fit of his Religion, for it seems Sanders felt not those
vigorous motions, that were necessary to furnish out his Scenes: and therefore,
tho Mr. Varillas adds no Discovery as to matters of fact, beyond what Sanders
had made, yet he has the more copious Inventions of the two. But he does not
place his contrivances judiciously, for it is much safer to dress up the
secrets of the Cabinet, than public Courts of Judicature with such
garnishings: and as that was the most solemn Trial, that ever England saw, in
which a King and Queen appeared as Delinquents, to be tried for Incest, so the
matter is not only particularly related by those that lived in that Time, or
soon after it; but the Journals of the Court are yet in being, and by all these
it appears, that as soon as the Queen made that moving Speech, she immediately
rise and went out, without staying for one Word of Answer. And in all that long
Suit that followed afterward, for obliging the King to carry on the Suit at
Rome, that depended for three years, this offer of the King's, if it had any
other being but that which Mr. Varillas's Fiction gives it, would have been
certainly alleged, for obliging the King to continue the Process at Rome; but
it was never so much as mentioned, so the honor of it belongs to Mr. Varillas.

34. He says, Ibid.
that in the Process, as the King's Advocates produced a Letter, that Card.
Hadrian had writ at the time of the granting the Bull for the Marriage, that he
had heard P. Julius the second say, that he could not grant it, the Queen's
Advocates produced likewise a Letter of Pope Julius to the King of England,
that assured him, that tho he had not granted the Bull as soon as it was
demanded, that was not out of any intention to refuse it; but that he had only
waited for a favorable conjuncture, that so he might do it the more
deliberatly.

This is of no consequence; but some Men get into ill habits, that engage them,
even when there is no advantage to tell Lies. The whole Journals of this Suit
mention neither the one nor the other of these matters: there is somewhat like
the second, of which some, it seems, had in discourse given Mr. Varillas a dark
Hint, and he resolved to garnish it up the best he could. There was a Breve of
P. Iulius's produced, but not writ to the King of England, for it was addressed
to the Kings of Spain, and was indeed believed to be forged in Spain. It was
conceived in the very Words of the Bull for the Marriage, and was of the same
date, and the only difference between it and the Bull was, that whereas the
Bull mentioned the Queen's Marriage with P. Arthur, as having been perhaps
consuminated, this spoke of the consummation of that Marriage less doubtfully,
and without a perhaps: and the inference that was made upon this was, that the
Spaniards foreseeing that the consummation of P. Arthur's Marriage would be
proved, he forged this Breve, to make it appear, that the Pope was informed of
that as of a thing certain, tho it was decent in the public Bull to mention it
doubtfully. But Mr. Varillas shows how dangerous a thing it is to write History
upon flying Reports, helped up a little with the dull Invention of an ill Poet.

35. He runs out into a high commendation of the Zeal and Fidelity that some of
the English Bishops, ^. 278.
who were named to be the Queen's Advocates, showed in pleading her Cause.

But in this he shows, how little he understands the common forms of Law: for
since the Queen declined the Court, and appealed to the Pope, there was no more
occasion given to her Advocates, to speak to the merits of her Cause. And
whereas he pretends, that this was done, not only by Bp. Fisher, but by the
Bishops of London, Bath and Ely, that was impossible, since all the Bishops had
signed a Writing, which was produced before the Legates, in which they all
declared themselves against the Lawfulness of the Marriage.

36. He says, the Pope recalled the Cause, to be heard before himself, on this
pretense, that the King had by Word of Mouth consented to it.

This is a flight of our Author's, to color that shameful secret: for when the
Emperor had agreed to put Florence into the hands of the Medici, the Pope who
had seemed to favor the King's cause till that time, did then admit of the
Queen's Appeal: and tho he had signed a formal Promise, never to recall the
Cause, yet he being as little a Slave to his Word, as Mr. Varillas is to Truth,
broke his faith. But he never so much as once pretended this consent of the
King's.

37. He says, Ibid.
Wolsey being disgraced, was sent to York, where he languished some time, being
reduced almost to Beggary.

This comes in as a dash of his Pen, to set out K. Henry's Severity: but one of
Wolsey's Domestics, that writ his Life, tells us, in how great State he went
to York, with a Train of 160 Horse, and an Equipage of 72 Carts following him
with his Houshold-stuf; for the King restored him not only his Archbishopric
of York, but also his Bishopric of Winchester, which Mr. Varillas fancies he
took from him: and it was impossible for a Man, that had those two great
Benefices, to be reduced to any degrees of Want.

38. He says, p. 2^1.
Anne Boleyn raised Cranmer to the Dignity of chief Minister of State, who was
one of the profligatest Men of England, that had nothing of Christianity in
him, but the outward appearances, being ambitious, voluptuous, bold, turbulent
and capable of all sorts of Intrigues. He had studied long in Germany, where he
was infected with Lutheranisme, tho he did not outwardly profess it. He took a
Concubine in Germany, whom he afterward married by the King's permission. He
had been Chaplain long in the Family of Boleyn, so when the Sea of Canterbury
fell vacant, Anne Boleyn presented him.

The Fit here is extreme hot and long, and shows, how entirely Mr. Varillas was
subdued by it, since it is hardly possible for a Man to spit out more Venom
and Falsehood at once. Cranmer was never in the Affairs of State, much less
chief Minister. And any Ignorance less than Mr* Varillas's would have found,
that Cromwell succeeded Wolsey in the Ministry. As for Cranmers Ambition, as he
had passed the greatest part of his Life in a secret Retirement, so he was in
Germany when the Sea of Canterbury fell vacant, and when he understood that the
King intended to raise him to that Dignity, he excused himself all he could,
and delaied his Return to England some Months, that so the King might have time
given him to change his Mind. He was so far from being turbulent and hardy, and
from being a Man of Intrigues, that his plain Simplicity made him to be
despised by his Enemies, till they found that there was a wise Conduct under
all that Mildness and Slowness. And it was this simplicity, and his keeping
himself out of all Intrigues, that preserved him in K. Henry's esteem. He never
went to study in Germany, but was sent into Italy and Germany to reason with
the learned Men in the Universities concerning the King's Divorce. He married a
Wife in Germany, and was so far from obtaining the King's Permission to marry
her, that upon a severe Law, that was afterward made against the Marriage of
the Clergy, he sent her into Germany for some time, yet he franckly owned his
Marriage to the King, when he questioned him upon it, and there was never the
least imputation laid upon his Chastity, except this of his Marriage, which we
think none at all. He was never Chaplain in the Boleyn Family, but lived
private in Cambridg, when the King came to hear of him, and to employ him in
the Prosecution of the Divorce. And so far was he from being presented by Anne
Boleyn, upon the Vacancy of Canterbury, that he was then in Germany. And now it
appears what a secret Mr. Varillas has, of making as much Falsehood go into one
Period, as would serve another to scatter up and down a whole Book; but we know
the Society that has this secret, and it is certain, that Mr. Varillas has
learnt it to perfection.

39. He says, Ibid.
the King accepted Cranmer upon condition, that he would pronounce the Sentence
of Divorce between their Majesty's of England, in case that the Pope ratified
their contested Marriage: and thus by a way so uncanonical he was made
Archbishop of Canterbury.

There was no occasion of demanding any such Promise of Cranmer, for he had
openly declared his opinion, that the Marriage was incestuous and unlawful, so
that his Judgment was already known. But Mr. Varillas shows how little he knew
our matters, when he says, that Cranmer was made Archbishop in an uncanonical
way; for as he was chosen by the Chapter of Canterbury, so he had his Bull from
Rome, and how little soever, this is Canonical according to the Canons of the
Ancient Church, yet Mr. Varillas has no reason to except to the Uncanonicalness
of it.

40. He says, Ibid.
he was installed by another Artifice, for being required to swear the Oath to
the Pope, he had a Notary by him, who attested, that he took this Oath against
his Will, and that he would not keep it to the prejudice of the King.

He made no Protestation, that he took that Oath against his Will; but he
repeated a Protestation twice at the high Altar, that he intended not by that
Oath to the Pope, to oblige himself to any thing, that was contrary to the Law
of God, to the King's Prerogative, or to the Laws of the Land, nor to be
restrained by it from proposing or consenting to any thing, that might concern
the Reformation of the Christian Faith, the Government of the Church of
England, or the Prerogatives of the King and Kingdom. This is a different
thing from protesting, that he took the Oath against his Will, which as it had
been ridiculous in it self, so was very far contrary to that native Singleness
of Heart, in which he always acted.

41. He says, P. 2^2.
there was an ancient Law against the Subjects of England's acknowledging a
foreign Jurisdiction, upon which the King raised a Suit against his Clergy,
for owning the Pope's Jurisdiction, in that which was a mixed Court, relating
both to the Temporal and the Spiritual. And he adds, that the Clergy had an
easy Answer to this Charge, since that Law had no regard to the Spiritual
Authority.

Matters of Law are things of too delicate a nature for so slight a Man as Mr.
Varillas to look into them. He represents this as one single Law, that was very
old, and that related only to Temporals, whereas if he had known any thing of
our Laws, he would have seen, that there was a vast number of Laws made in the
Reigns of many of our Kings, such as Edward the first, Edward the third,
Richard the second, Henry the 4th, and Henry the 5th, all relating to this
matter, and these Laws were made in express Words against all that brought
Bulls and Provisions from Rome to Ecclesiastical Benefices.

42. He says, Ibid.
the motions of the Clergy in their own defense, could not but be feeble, since
they had two such treacherous Heads, as Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Lee Archbishop of York, so they made a submission to the King, but he would not
receive it, unless they would acknowledge, that he had the same Authority over
the Ecclesiastical Body, that he had over his other Subjects: and thus, without
thinking on what they did, they furnished the King with a pretense of calling
himself, Head of the Church of England.

Cranmer was so little concerned in this matter, that it was past two years
before he was Archbishop, while Warham was Archbishop of Canterbury; for the
Submission was made in March 1531, and he was consecrated in March 1533. And
Lee of York was so far from consenting to it, that he strugled long against it,
after Warham and his Synod had past it. And whereas he pretends, that the King
drew his pretense, to be Head of the Church of England, from a general
acknowledgment that they had made of the King's Authority over Churchmen, this
is so far from true, that the whole Clergy, even his admired Fisher not
excepted, did in the Title of the Submission, to which they all set their
hands, call the King in so many formal Words, supreme Head of the Church and
Clergy of England, in so far as was agreeable to the Law of Christ: and this was
done during More's Ministry, who continued Chancellor 15 Months after this.

43. He says, P* 283.
that upon More's laying down his Office, the King gave the Seals to another
Churchman, that was no less devoted to him than Granmer, whose name was Andley,
on whom he bestows a character, tho he knows nothing concerning him.

Andley was no Churchman, but a common Lawyer as More was, that had been
Chancellor before him, and the Gentlemen of that Robe being raised upon Merit,
and not by their Birth, his low Extraction was no extraordinary matter.

44. He says, Ibid.
the King finding that the Pope was ofraid, that he should contract a secret
Marriage with Anne Boleyn, resolved to do it, on design to do the Pope a Spite;
so the Day being set, one Polland a Priest, being appointed to do the Office,
demanded the Pope's Bull for the Marriage, which he was made believe that the
King had procured; but the King swore to him, that he had it in his Closet, and
that nothing made him not go immediately to fetch it, but his unwillingness to
retard that Action.

This is so ill told, that Mr. Varillas ought to have employed a little of his
Religious Zeal, to make it more plausible; for it was then so well understood,
that the Pope was entirely united to the Emperor, that Polland Lee could not
imagine there was any Bull granted; and he was all his Life of too complying a
Temper, to need such Artifices to oblige him to do any thing, that might serve
to advance him. Mr. Varillas represents the King here too much like a private
Gentleman, that keeps his Papers in his own Closet, (...) of several Popes, the
Canons of many Synodes and Councils, and by the concurring Testimonies of
almost all the Greek and Latin Fathers, both Ancient and Modern, and by the
agreeing Doctrines both of Schoolmen, Canonists and Casuists; and if Tradition
was the true Expounder of Scripture, and the sure Conveyance of Doctrine, the
Marriage was certainly incestuous; so that according to the fundamental Doctrine
of the Church of Rome, the Marriage was unlawful: and by the same Authorities it
was also proved, that the Pope's Dispensation could not make void the Law of
God, and that the Clergy of England were the proper Judges of what fell out in
England. This being the State of that Matter, and almost all the Universities
of Europe, that of Bologna it self not excepted, tho it was the Pope's own
Town, having declared in the King's Favors, it was no wonder, if Cranmer, upon
such Grounds, proceeded to give Sentence.

47. He dresses up a Speech for Card. p. 286.
Bellay, all out of his own Fancy; but one thing is remarkable: he makes the
Cardinal represent to the King, that if he went to separate himself from the
Communion of the Church of Rome, either he would succeed in it, or not; if he
succeeded in it, besides that he put himself in a state of Damnation, there
would be no place found that would be safe for his sacred Person, against the
attempts of zealous Catholics, who would endeavor to kill him, that they
might preserve their ancient Religion; and if he succeeded not, he might be
assured, that he would lose both his Crown and his Life in a general Revolt.

Mr. Varillas is now in a Fit of Religion of another sort, for as there are hot
and cold Fits of Agues* so if some of his Fits make him forget the obligations
of speaking truth, this makes him speak out a Truth indeed, but of that nature,
that if he had been long practiced in the Secrets of the Court of Rome, or of
the Jesuit Order, he would have known, that tho during the Minority of a King,
a Cardinal Perron might speak it boldly, or during the confusions of a Civil
War, the whole Sorbonne might declare in Favors of it, yet under such a Reign,
and in the present Conjuncture, it was to be denied boldly. And one would not
have thought, that at this time a Clement or a Ravilliae would have had no
worse character, but that of zealous Catholics. So we have now an entire
notion of a zealous Catholic from Mr. Varillas: he does not trouble himself to
examine what he says, whither it is true or false, nor will he stick at any
Crime, if it may tend to preserve his Religion. And if a Prince goes about to
change his Religion, and to depart from the Communion of the Sea of Rome, he
must at first look for a general Revolt, which must end in his Deprivation and
Death, and if that fails, there is a reserve of zealous Catholics, who will
pursue him into every corner, and never give over, till they have sacrificed
him to the interest of their Religion. This is the severest thing that the
greatest Ennemy to their Church could possibly object to it* and yet Mr.
Varillas has so little judgment, as to put it in the Mouth of a Cardinal. But
it is but lately that he has got his Pension, and he has not past a long
Noviciat, or perhaps he is now too old to learn the refayings, that his Pattern
Mr. Maimbourg would have taught him, who in such a Reign as this is in France,
must dress up their Religion as a Doctrine, all made up of Obedience and
Submission. But perhaps some had told Mr. Varillas, that the late Articles of
the Clergy looked like the beginning of a Separation from the Court of Rome, so
that he thought, it was fit to let the King know his Danger, if he went a step
further, either in that Matter, or in a Reformation of Religion, of which there
has been so much noise made lately in France, tho it is visible that this has
been set on foot, merely to deceive those, that had a mind to cosen themselves
by the hopes of some Amendments, to make Shipwreck of their Faith and of a good
Conscience.

48. He makes the Hopes, p. 287.
that the Cardinal Bellay had of succeeding in his Negotiation, to be chiefly
founded on the King's being weary of Anne Boleyn, and his becoming in love with
Jane Seimour; and that therefore he concluded that time, and a little Patience
might infallibly dispose him to return back again to Queen Katherine.

He makes here strange Discoveries in the matters of Love, since he fancies,
that the King's falling in love with a new Mistress, might dispose him to
return to his old and abandoned Queen. The thing is also so falsely timed, that
it was two years and almost a half after this, before there appeared any
beginnings, either of the King's Dislike of Anne Boleyn, or of his Love to Jane
Seimour. But the made up of Obedience and Submission. But perhaps some had told
Mr. Varillas, that the late Articles of the Clergy looked like the beginning of
a Separation from the Court of Rome, so that he thought, it was fit to let the
King know his Danger, if he went a step further, either in that Matter, or in a
Reformation of Religion, of which there has been so much noise made lately in
France, tho it is visible that this has been set on foot, merely to deceive
those, that had a mind to cosen themselves by the hopes of some Amendments, to
make Shipwreck of their Faith and of a good Conscience.

48. He makes the Hopes, p. 287.
that the Cardinal Bellay had of succeeding in his Negotiation, to be chiefly
founded on the King's being weary of Anne Boleyn, and his becoming in love with
Jane Seimour; and that therefore he concluded that time, and a little Patience
might infallibly dispose him to return back again to Queen Katherine.

He makes here strange Discoveries in the matters of Love, since he fancies,
that the King's falling in love with a new Mistress, might dispose him to
return to his old and abandoned Queen. The thing is also so falsely timed, that
it was two years and almost a half after this, before there appeared any
beginnings, either of the King's Dislike of Anne Boleyn, or of his Love to Jane
Seimour. But the true Account of this last Negotiation of the Cardinal de
Bellay is that at Marseilles: the Pope had promised to Francis the first, that
if K. Henry would submit the matter to him, and send a Proxy to Rome, he would
judge in his favors against the Queen, because he knew that his cause was just
and good; and the Cardinal was sent over to induce the King to make his
Submission; but the King would not upon verbal Promises make so great a step,
yet he promised that, if Assurances were sent him, that were formal and
binding, he would upon that send a Submission in full form to Rome, and when
the Cardinal procured these from the Court of Rome, the King did send over the
Submission. So that Mr. Varillas having suppressed the true Account of this
Negotiation, he thought he must make it up with somewhat of his own Invention:
and as all Liquors drawn out of a musty Barrel taste of the Calk; so there are
so many characters that belong to Mr. Varillas's imagination, that it is hard
for him to venture on inventing, without discovering, that he has full as
little Judgment as he has Sincerity.

49. He lays the blame of the slowness of the Courier, Ibid.
on the care that the Emperor's Ministers had taken, to stop the passages.

But this was a ridiculous observation: for there being a Day set for the
Courier's Return, he happened only to come two Days after his time, and it being
in the Winter, in which the Sea was to be twice past, there is no need to run
to any other speculation for a slowness of two Days in such a Voyage, and at
such a Season; but it is often observed of those, that have contracted ill
habits, as lying in particular, that their naughty customs return upon them,
even when there is no provocation lying on them, to tempt them to them; so Mr.
Varillas has given himself such a liberty, to interweave his own Fancies with
all the Transactions that he relates, that he cannot let the flightest thing
pass without bringing in a stroke of his Politics to adorn it.

50. He says, P. 288.
the Pope having past Sentence against the King, the King did upon that hold a
Parliament on the 24 of April, 1534, in which he made himself to be
acknowledged supreme Head of the Churches of England and Ireland; and got his
former Marriage to be condemned, and his second to be confirmed, upon which Q.
Katherine died of Grief.

In such public things Mr. Varillas should be wiser than to venture on the
giving of Dates, for it is at least two to one that he gives them wrong. The
Parliament, that past all these Laws, sat down on the 15th of January, and was
prorogued on the 29th of March, and Sentence was given against the King at Rome
the 23 of March: for the truth is, the King did not expect sincere dealing from
the Court of Rome, and therefore he looking on this last Proposition as a
Delusion, to divert him from passing the Acts, that he had projected for this
Session, resolved to go on with his Design, knowing that if the Pope would
grant him that which he desired, it would not be uneasy for him to get those
Acts repealed. Q. Katherine lived two years after this; so that, tho the
Melancholy, which this gave her, did very likely shorten her Days, yet it was
too Poetical, to make her just to die at the end of that Parliament.

51. He says, p. 289.
that the King upon the first informations of Anne Boleyn's Disorders, would
not believe them; but at last he found such proofs, as fully convinced him,
upon which he waited, till he found a fit opportunity, to let his Jealousy
break out.

It agrees ill with what he had said before, that K. Henry was become weary of
Anne Boleyn, to make him now so uneasy to believe ill of her; for nothing
disposes so much to Jealousy, as a Dislike already conceived, which naturally
inclines one to think ill of a Person whom he does not love; but it is certain
K. Henry never pretended, that he saw any thing, that was dishonorable in her:
and the ridiculous Tale of the Tilling at Greenwich was a ly too ill contrived,
to be again taken up; for the Queen's dropping a Handkerchief, was a favor of
too public a nature, and is not at all credible, considering that she found
the King's affections were straying from her. And even that was too slight a
matter, to have wrought her ruin, tho it had been true.

52. He says, p. 250.
her own Father was one of her Judges, but tho she made a cunning Defense, yet
she was condemned together with four of her Adulterers, and after that she went
to meet Death, with more of fierceness, than of a true greatness of Soul, and
she died as exactly in all the Maxims of the Stoical Philosophy, as if she had
studied them.

This assertion of her Father's being one of her Judges, has past so current,
that I have no reason to charge Mr. Varillas for it, because I my self yielded
to the current of Writers; yet having procured a sight of the Original Record
of her Process, I found it was a falsehood, and in the end of my first Volume I
had corrected the Error in which I had fallen: so I must at least conclude,
that Mr. Varillas never read any History. The Queen had a strange Plea, for
there was not one Witness brought against her, so that she was condemned merely
upon Testimonies that were brought in writing, which is expressly contrary to
our Law. As for her Behavior at her Death, it was far from being Stoical, for
it was rather too cheerful; and the Lieutenant of the Tower, who knew her
Behavior better than any Person whatsoever, gives a very different
representation of it, for in his Letter to Court he tells of her great
Devotion, of her cheerfulness and of the protestations that she made of her
innocence the Morning before she died, when she received the Sacrement, adding,
that her Almoner was still with her, and had been with her ever since two a
clock after Midnight. And he also says, that she had much Joy and Pleasure in
her Death. And as all this is very far from the Maxims of the Stoical
Philosophy, so it seems Mr. Varillas understands very little what they were,
otherwise, if he had remembered what a picture he had made of Anne Boleyn, he
must have known, that the amourous disposition that he had fastened on her,
agreed very ill with a Stoical Unconcernedness and equality of Temper. But this
he thought was a pretty conclusion of one of the Scenes of his Piece.

And now being as weary of this ungrateful Employment, as any Reader, or as
even Mr. Varillas himself must needs be, I find my self at great ease, being no
more obliged to turn over so very ill a Book. And since in the Survey of one of
the shortest of the ten Books, of which that Work consists, I have found so
many capital Errors, in most of which there is a complication of diverse
Mistakes in the same Period; to how much public shame must Mr. Varillas be
exposed, if those, who are concerned, examine the other Books, as I have done
this. I expect no other Justice from himself, but that he will reckon all this
scorn, that such a Discovery must bring upon him, as a meritorious Suffering at
the hands of Heretics, and that he will use it as an Argument to raise his
Pension. But it will be a great happiness if others can learn, tho at his cost,
to write with more Truth and greater Caution.

The design of all revealed Religion is, to heighten in us those Seeds of
Probity, Virtue and Gentleness, that are in our Nature, and I will not stick to
say, that it were better for Mankind, that there were no revealed Religion at
all in being, and that humane Nature should be left to it self, than that there
were such a sort of a revealed Religion received, that overthrows all the
Principles of Morality, and that instead of making Men sincere, teaches them to
be false, and instead of inspiring them with Love and Mercy, enflames them with
Rage and Cruelty, and it is likely, that M. Varillas will easily find out, what
that Society is, of which I mean. For he deserves well to be at least one of
the Laybrothers of the Order, if not to fill up Mr. Maimbourg's room, and then
the Order will not lose by the change much of a quality, that has been believed
to be almost an essential ingredient in its Constitution, which gave occasion
to a very pleasant Passage, that, as I was told, fell out at Amiens within
these 20 years.

All the Companies of Tradesmen in the Church of Rome choose a Saint for their
Patron, and the many new invented Trades have put some Bishops to hard shifts
to give proper Saints, which has produced some very ridiculous Patronages, for
the Cooks have the Assumption for their Feast, because the two first Sillables
assum signifies roasted; and when the Needle-makers at Paris asked of the
Cardinal Gondy a Patron, he could not easily find out a Saint that had any
relation to their Trade, but he advised them to take All Saints, for it could
not be thought, but that some one or other of the Saints had made Needles; but
the Bishop of Amiens gave Ignatius Loyola to be the Patron of the Packers, now
the Word emballeur, as it signifies a Packer, it passes also for a Trepan; so
the Packers being satisfied with the Bishop's nomination, had Ignatius up on
his Day in a Procession, upon which the Jesuits were offended, to see their
Patron pretended to by such a Company of Mechanics, and sued the Packers upon
it, they defended themselves upon the account of their Bishop's naming him to
them, and when the Bishop was asked why he had given him for their Patron, he
alluding to the other signification of the Word emballeur said, that he had
observed that all the emballeurs of Europe were under that Saint's Patronage.
But it is not necessary to infer from hence, that Mr. Varillas has a just claim
to his protection, for tho he seems to have very good inclinations, yet he
wants the address that is necessary to recommend him to so refined a Society,
and to a perfection in it, that cost Mr. Maimbourg a whole Jubily for a
Novitiat; for tho seven years is enough to learn an ordinary Trade, yet 50 is
necessary to furnish a Man with a sufficient stock of Impudence for so hardy an
Employment.

ADVERTISEMENT.
I Have at last found Card. Cajetan's Works, and am now confirmed in that,
which was only a conjecture, when I writ upon the 31st Article, page 141; for
it is hard even to guess wrong, when it is in contradiction to Mr. Varillas:
and as the Reasons that he put in Cajetan's Mouth, had such manifest Characters
of his own ignorance and hardiness, that I could not so much as doubt of the
Imposture, yet I was not positive, till I had taken some pains to find out
Cajetan's Works, and there I saw my conjectures were well grounded. 2da 2dae
quaest. 15 Art. 9.
That Volume in which he delivers his opinion in the matter of the obligation
of the Levitical Law concerning the degrees of Marriage, was writ long before
this Dispute of K. Henry's was started; for it is dedicated to Pope Leo the
tenth. And instead of all those impertinencies, with which Mr. Varillas
calumniates him, and of which none less ignorant than himself, is capable, all
that Cajetan says is that, whereas Thomas Aquinas was of opinion, that those
degrees were moral, and of eternal obligation, he in his Commentary declares
himself of another Mind, but takes a very backward Method to prove it, yet such
as was suitable enough to the blindness of the time in which he writ; for he
proves that they are not Moral, only because the Pope dispensed with them, who
could not dispense with the Moral Law, and he gives for instance the Marriage of
the King of Portugal, Moderna quoque Regina Angliae consummaverat prius
matrimoniu^ cum olim fratre istius Regis Angli sui marit
to which he adds these Words, The present Queen of England had likewise
consummated her former Marriage with the late Brother of the King of England her
Husband. So that Cajetan was only driven to this opinion, that he might justify
the practices of the Court of Rome. And it appears by what he says concerning
it, that it was considered at Rome as an undoubted Truth, that the Queen's
first Marriage with Prince Arthur was consummated: and so it is sufficiently
apparent, how impudent Mr. Varillas is in the abstract, that he charges on
Cardinal Cajetan's Memory, it was far from his way of reasoning, to talk of
Fleets blocking up Constantinople; but Mr. Varillas, who knows little of the
past Time, and fancies that matters went formerly as they go now, had perhaps
the low Estate in which the Otthoman Empire is at present, or the Bombarding of
Genoa in his Eye, when he thought of the sending Fleets against Constantinople
above 180 year ago; but this speculation was as much out of Cajetan's way, as
it is suitable to Mr. Varillas.

Page 250 he says, King Henry the eighth had opposed the Marriage of his Sister
to the King of Scotland with so much violence, that it brought on him several
Fits of an Ague. But that Marriage being made in August 1502, the young Prince
was not then 11 years old, and this is too early even for a Poet to make
matters of State to have gone so deep into his thoughts, as that they
endangered his Health. But as the Legends of Saints represent them in Ecstasies,
before they have past their Childhood, so Mr. Varillas thought it suitable to
the rest of his Poem, to represent K. Henry even in his Infancy as transported
with the violence of impetuous passions. But I am afraid I lay too much to his
charge, since I do not believe that he had examined the History of his Life so
Critically, as to know even his Age; but it is a sad thing for an ignorant Man,
not to have a Chronological Table always before him.

FINIS.

