Licensed and Entered according to Order.

A SERMON PREACHED In the Chapel of St. James's, Before His HIGHNESS the
Prince of Orange, the 23d of December, 1688.

By Gilbert Burnett, D. D. Chaplain to His Highness.

Printed by His Highness's Special Command.

LONDON; Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1689.

Dr. BVRNET's SERMON before the PRINCE of ORANGE.

Psalm cxviii. v. 23. It is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelvellous in our
Eyes.
Things do sometimes speak, and Times call aloud; and as all Men are
beforehand with me, in the choice of this Text, at least in applying it to the
present time, so that amasing Concurrence of Providence, which have conspired
to hatch and bring forth, and perfect this extraordinary Revolution, would lead
one very naturally to use these words, even tho we had no such Verse in
Scripture; for we have before us a Work, that seems to our selves a Dream, and
that will appear to Posterity a Fiction: a Work about which Providence has
watched in so peculiar a manner, that a Mind must be far gone into Atheism,
that can resist so full a Conviction as this offers us in favor of that Truth.
And if a thread of happy steps of the one hand, and of mistaken ones on the
other, can upon any occasion be made an Argument, we have it here in its utmost
force.

It is the Lord's doing, not as the Heavens and the Earth, as the Revolutions
of Day and Night, and the whole Chain of Second Causes are his Work: The whole
Springs of Nature are wound up by him, so that all things are in some sort his
doing: He gives also a secret Direction to all second Causes to accomplish his
Eternal Purposes. He knows all the foldings of our Hearts, and the composition
of our Natures so well, that without putting us under a force, he can bring
about whatsoever pleases him. He also on some great occasions does Violence to
Nature, and puts her out of her Channel in those extraordinary Productions that
are called Miracles. But besides all these, there are times in which the great
Governor of Heaven and Earth will convince the World, that he is not an
unconcerned Spectator of Human Affairs: But because Men are apt to be so
partial to themselves, and to their own Opinions, as to look on every
favorable Accident as a Smile from Heaven, and that Sanguine People are as
ready on the one hand to think themselves God's Favorites, and the special
Objects of his Care, as Melancholy Men on the other, in the sourness of thought
that oppresses them, construe every thing that succeeds not according to their
Wishes, as the effect of some cross Aspect on them; it is necessary to find the
true Temper between flattering our selves too much, and the charging our selves
too severely; and to examine Providence by such equal and just measures, that
we may neither put too much on the common course of Second Causes, nor ascribe
too much to such Specialties as our Partialities may incline us to imagine
appear in our favors: for because we are always kind to our selves, we are
very apt to believe that Heaven is so too. But to come closer.

1. All signal and eminent things are by the common Phrase of Scripture
ascribed to God; and therefore every Event that is great in its self, and may
become yet much greater in its Consequences, ought to be imputed to an
immediated Hand of Heaven: some that have judged that a special Direction of
all things was too great a Distraction to his Divine Being, and a trouble
unworthy of it, have yet thought that its care extended to great matters. If
then this may be laid down for a Rule, we must conclude that this Transaction
now before us, is God^s doing, since the vast importance of it is so visible,
that it may be perhaps lessened rather than aggravated, if one would attempt to
set it forth. You all know what you both felt and feared: The over-turning this
Church, and the subverting of this Government, must in consequence have brought
on the Ruin both of the Protestant Religion and the public Liberty all Europe
over. When all this is stopped, and a happy Crisis appears, that gives us the
fairest hopes not only of the securing our Religion, together with our other
Temporal Concerns, but of putting a check to the Spirit of Persecution, which
has of late raged so furiously against our Brethren in so many different places
of Europe, and that the Persecutor of Religion, and the Ravisher of Liberty,
and the Scourge of the Age, after his having been so long a Plague to all his
Neighbors, may probably be brought to feel a little of those Miseries which he
has laid on others; so great a Transaction as this, which is perhaps the
forerunner of a greater, may upon very just grounds be called the Lord's
doing, if every thing that is great is so.

2. Those Things in which God's Honor is most particularly concerned, may be
well reckoned his doing; for if he has a Providence that extends it self to all
Things, we have much more Reason to conclude, that Mankind has a more special
Title to it: And among Men, that Christians are under a particular distinction;
and of all Christians, that those who have reduced Christianity to its
Primitive Purity and Simplicity, are its chief care; so that the reestablishing
of that Glorious Work, which God in a series of many signal Providence had set
up in the last Age, and which for the Sins and the unreformed Practices of
those who pretended to it, was brought so low in this, may be justly ascribed
to that Sovereign Wisdom that governs the Church, which was purchased by the
Blood of the Son of God.

Matters of Controversy are not proper upon this Occasion; but without entering
far into them, the common sense of Mankind, and the general Notices of Truth
that are impressed upon our Minds, may serve to determine the greatest part of
the Differences between us and our Persecutors. Whether Men ought to satisfy
themselves in the Points of Religion, or ought to take them upon trust? Whether
Men ought to put the stress of their Religion upon a real Renovation of Heart
and Life? or, if it may do full as well, to hire and pay a Priest for forgiving
our Sins in this Life, or redeeming us from the punishment of them in the next?
Whether we ought to believe our Senses and Reason in their proper Objects, or
not? And not to run out too far, Whether those Eternal Rules of Justice and
Mercy, ought to be the Measures of our Actions, or if Zeal for Holy Church, can
warrant us to break our Faith, and destroy our Neighbors? All these seem to be
so plain, that one would think the Decision should be soon made; and indeed, if
instead of that false show of Learning, and the many hard words with which
these Matters have been disguised and entangled, Men would try them in a
shorter and simpler Method, Truth would be sooner found out. In a word; The
Truth of our Religion appearing to us in so many conspicuous Characters,
especially after the noble and worthy Endeavors of so many of the Lights of
this Church, who have proposed all the Points in dispute to the World with
Advantages beyond any thing that had appeared ever since the first beginnings
of those Contests. After all this, I say, we must conclude, that this is the
Lord's doing; since a Work that is so dear to him, seems now to be again
received into his protection, in so signal a manner, after he had seemed to
hide himself from it.

3. Those Providence which seem immediately to work upon the Minds of Men, and
to engage them into the Designs of Heaven, are in a more conspicuous manner the
Work of God. For the Mind of Man being a free Agent, it is less accountable how
vast Multitudes should come all under the same Impressions, unless God did by
those secret and undiscernable Methods of his Wisdom, give them such
directions. This Psalm seems to be penned upon the making up of that Breach
that was between the House of David and the House of Saul; all Israel following
the latter, while only the Tribe of Judah adhered to the former, see 2 Samuel 2.
But all were afterward united in owning of David, who was become the Head
Stone of the Corner, that joined those two great Divisions in one. David had
felt how little either Princes or People, that is, those of the Sanhedrim; or
to speak in an English Phrase, the Peers or Commons of the Jews, were to be
depended upon: And therefore, verse. 9, and 10. he says, It is better to trust
in the Lord, than to put confidence in Man: It is better to trust in the Lord,
than to put confidence in Princes, either numerous Armies, or wise Councils.
The Reign of Saul, and the Charms that were in Jonathan, had, no doubt, given
the Family a great Root. But the Divine Designation that was upon David, had
broke through all that, and had turned the Hearts of the whole Nation as one
Man to him. David had seen a formidable opposition in his way, and he himself
had passed through great and threatening Dangers; but the right Hand of the Lord
had been of his side, and had done valiantly. And all the Force that was
brought against him, had vanished into nothing; or as a Fire of Thorns, it had
blazed and crackled a little, but was soon spent: And therefore as there was an
universal rejoicing in the Tabernacle of the Righteous, so David went into the
House. of God, this Psalm being set as the Hymn of his Triumph: which was
probably sung before him as he went into the Tabernacle in Mount Zion; for
these words, Open to me the gates of Righteousness, I will go into them and
praise the Lord, together with the answer, This is the gate of the Lord into
which the Righteous shall enter, seem to be set for his entering in at the
Gates: In a word, the centring of the whole People in him, was so particularly
a work of Providence, that in a most especial manner this was the Lords doing.
And therefore an extraordinary concurrence of all favorable Accidents, and
particularly, the disposing of all Men's minds one way, has a Character upon it,
that must force us to say, This is the Lords doing. I know how dangerous and
deceitful an Argument this form Providence will ever seem to be; and therefore
I will touch it with that caution which is requisite. It is certain, that God
for the punishing of Nations, gives sometimes such a torrent of Success to
those who are the Instruments of their Correction, that this may be rather a
mark of his displeasure against those who are to be brought low, than of his
favoring those who are lifted up. There are also such Mysteries in the whole
Conduct of the World, that though our Partiality makes us apt to Magnify all
that we like, yet if we carry it too far, we will be in danger to be often out
of countenance, when the same Argument turns against us; therefore before we
can make any Comments on so doubtful a Text, we must be first sure that the
groundwork is well laid, and that both the Cause it self, and the means used to
advance it, are good. But when we are got over that, and are satisfied both in
the one and the other, then we can hardly forbear to look on a chain of unlookt
for and unaccountable Providence, without a most sensible Joy. I will not
build too much on the Characters that have appeared in the Insensible part of
the Creation, I mean the Winds and Weather, for one does not know how far those
have been the effects of the natural series of things, yet one cross Wind which
seemed designed only to make us apprehend the hand of Heaven, without suffering
much by it, and without losing above one Man in it; and another strong and
prosperons Gale, which both preserved us from those who were appointed to wait
for us, and brought us so near our Port, but changed immediately for another to
fetch us into it; and which having executed its Commission, was immediately in
another corner, and the softness of the Weather, in a Season so far advanced,
are things so remarkable, that we are extreme insensible if they make not deep
Impressions on us. But, as I said before, the application of Providence in the
turning and bending the minds of Men, is yet a most immediate work of Heaven.
The precipitation and folly of our Persecutors in opening their ill designs so
early, the Impudent breach of Faith, and the unrelenting Cruelty that they had
put in practice in the Neighboring Kingdom, sent us over many thousands of
Witnesses, to awaken us, and to let us see what we ought to look for whenever
that bloody Religion should come to prevail among us; and of what account all
Promises and Laws were to be, whenever they could break through them. This
coming so critically, in the very time in which the Repeal of Laws was to be
asked in their favors, was a more sensible Argument against it, than all the
specious ones could ever be that were brought for it; and so much Evidence was
necessary, otherwise the good Nature of some, and the weakness and corruption
of others, had perhaps put us to a more Melancholy and Troublesome after game;
but such an apparent breach of Faith, and so furious a Persecution as they had
raised beyond Sea, were Arguments that every Man could comprehend and manage,
and out of which it was not possible to beat them. I need not enlarge on all
that chain of Errors and Violences that have followed, since the first
broaching of the Design; they were too many to be all repeated, and too visible
and well known to need that it should be done. Nor would I willingly say any
thing that might look either like Insulting or Reproaching, God has seemed to
have given them up to such a Spirit of delusion, as if the Curse of those who
Worship graven Images, had fallen on them; Like unto them are all they that
worship them: and in Conclusion God put such a Cup of trembling and
astonishment in their hands,, that he seemed to have taken away the heart of
the Counselors, and that according to another of David's Expressions, none of
the men of might have found their ands; in short, the methods that God has
suffered them to take for the alarming and awakning the whole Nation, for the
uniting of all that were so unhappily broken asunder before, and for engaging
all to center in what is now brought about, is an Eminent Character of a hand
of God in the whole matter: Why went they so fast and so barefaced? Why grasped
they at so much all at once? Why was the Hook so ill covered when the Bait was
thrown out? Why was it that few were either so weak or so corrupt, but they
have been so successful that they at last have set them right? In a word, all
this blasting of Counsels, and defeating of their designs by their own means,
was of God, and must be owned to be his doing.

The Errors also of the great Supporter of Persecution, his Quarrels with the
Head of that Mystical Babylon, and his diverting his Force to a new War, an
unjust one, to be sure, since begun by him; the Concurrence of so many Great
Princes, and above all, that happy Union that was in those Blessed Provinces,
that though composed of so many different Bodies, seemed to have but one Head and
one Heart upon this Occasion, are all conspicuous Characters. The Constitution
and the Interests of the States do always biass them against War, or every
thing that may interrupt their Trade; and the Dangers which appeared from a War
in their Frontier, seemed at least to engage them to secure themselves rather
by a strengthening than a diminishing of their Force; and yet the universal and
cheerful Concurrence of all among them, from the Highest to the Lowest, both
those that were in the Government, and those that were without doors, by which
they put their whole Strength to this Design, and put all to hazard to carry it
on, sparing neither their Fleets, their Armies, nor their Treasure; all this, I
say, made every one conclude, that this was the Finger of God. The Concurrence
of all in this Nation, and especially of that Great Body from which the chief
Opposition was expected, was no less signal. Their Numbers, and that Courage
which is so natural to this noble Nation, and many other Considerations,
concurred to give just Apprehensions of a Bloody Scene. But how strangely did
all this vanish? And how have our Hopes and even our Wishes been so far
prevented, that we are scarce yet recovered out of that surprise of Wonder into
which this threw us? When all this is laid together, we are tempted not only to
cry out, that this is the Lord^s doing, but that it is such a doing of his as
is beyond any thing that is in all the Records of past Times; and is a Scene
all of Wonders, but Wonders of Love and Mercy.

4. When Revolutions happen, that carry so many Characters of the Attributes of
God on them, that we see both Power, Wisdom, and Goodness in every step of
them, then we are yet more particularly bound to adore the Hand of God in them.
The Progress that Mihomet and his Followers made, which is indeed one of the
most amazing things in History, carried evident Marks of the Power and Justice
of God, in suffering that Scourge of the Eastern Christians to bring them under
his cruel Yoke. The Progress of the Roman State had in it Characters both of
the Power and Wisdom of God, in disposing the World for the Christian Religion,
by bringing it under one Empire, and such a Civilized Government as was a due
Preparation for so holy and so perfect a Religion. But here we have both Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness, all concurring to set forth the Glory of the Author of
it. So great an Undertaking, and the several Branches of it, all meeting so
happily together, and favored with so many prosperous Accidents, show how the
Power of God concurred in it. The Depth, the Secrecy, the prudent Management
and Execution of it, show the Wisdom of God; but above all, the sudden and
unbloody Issue to which it was so unexpectedly brought, is a Character of God's
Goodness to us, which can never be sufficiently acknowledged: If either a slow
Lingering had made us languish, or a bloody Decision had been the Price of the
Victory, we should have had reason to confess, that our Sins had rendered us
unworthy of so great a Mercy as we have now before us: But with how much
admiration must we look on and see our selves prevented with so early a
Deliverance? and that our Deliverer, as he came detesting the Imputation of
Conquest that was cast on him, so he was received in a way suitable to his own
good Intentions. And thus upon all these Reasons, as we see in general what are
the Characters from which we may conclude what things may be called the Lord's
doing, so we see in particular how fitly they all belong to that which is the
Subject of our wonder at present.

For this is mavelous in our eyes. We talk of it, both to our selves, and to
one another in this style: who can cease wondering, especially those who have
seen how the springs of this Affair have moved all along? We wonder at the
Deliverance it self, and we ought to wonder much more how such a Guilty Nation
as this is, should have been delivered in so harmless a manner. We see what a
storm has gone over, and broke out upon many of the Foreign Churches. A
Persecution that is in all its Circumstances far beyond the blackest of any
that are in History. If our Church has advantages in her Constitution, that
make her the just pride and glory of the whole Protestant Side; we have still
so much the more to answer for, if we have not walked worthy of those
Blessings, that Light, and those Advantages with which God had honored us. And
why is it then that God has only shaken the Rod over us, but has not suffered
it to hurt us? Our Enemies had rage enough to design it, and they had an abused
Authority so entirely in their hands, that they seemed to have got the
Government under as implicit obedience, as they have got over the Faith of
their Votaries. How comes it then that God did not suffer this to go farther,
that he did not punish our sins, and in particular and sharpness with which we
had treated one another, by delivering us up to those whose tender mercies are
cruel? All this is mavelous, but whether it is so in our eyes or not, I do
not know: that is, whether we make those Reflections on it, which such miracles
of mercy call for from us; or if we let it pass by us without any other
Reflection but that of talking about it, as we do concerning all other
Revolutions. In a word, as this is the Lord's doing, and mavelous in it self,
so it ought to be so in our eyes; for it is certainly so in the eyes of all the
World besides. We ought to make such pauses in thinking on it, as may lead us
up to adore and admire the great Author of it, in this his doing.

1 st, We ought in a most profound prostration, to magnify the goodness of God
to us in it: to him belongs the Glory of it, for his hand has wrought this
Salvation for us. Some may mention their Chariots, and some their Horses, but
we ought only to mention the name of the Lord our God. It will not at all
derogate from the Honor of our Great Deliverer, to consider him as the
Instrument, whom God has so highly exalted, in bringing about so great a work
by his means, and so to direct our Homage and Adoration to the Original of this
and all our other Blessings. And God has employed an Instrument in^it, who
desires that the acknowledgments may be wholly made to that Eternal Purpose,
that brings about all its Designs in so Sovereign a manner. This is indeed in
all its parts above the skill and wisdom of Man: and therefore let us offer up
the whole honor of it to God: and when that is done, this will lead us best of
all to pay all the due returns of gratitude and esteem to Him whom God has now
blessed for the second time with the greatest honor that can fall on a mortal
Man, that he seems born to be the great Blessing of the Age. His first
appearance in the World carried with it a Deliverance to those happy Provinces;
for happy they were, from the time that they came under His protection. We that
saw their Peace and Plenty, and the Order and Justice that reigned among them,
and the sense that they have of that Conduct that procures it, saw an earnest
of those Blessings that seem to be before us. And indeed the passion that they
all expressed at His leaving them, was to us the truest Indication of the joy
and confidence with which we ought to receive Him here, and of the hopes that
we may promise our selves under so glorious a Protection. Let us therefore
ponder all these Providence of God so as to admire them, not only in a lazy
and silent wonder, but in those true acts of Praise and Adoration, by which our
souls, and all that is within us, may be stirred up to bless the Lord, and not
to forget any one of all those benefits which he has bestowed on us, upon this
occasion, in which he has redeemed our life from destruction, and crowned us
with his loving kindness and tender mercies.

2 dly, If this Work of God does possess us with that veneration which is due
to it, we ought not to stop the course of it, till it has had its full effect;
nor to daub matters by slight and palliating remedies. We see now before us the
most glorious beginning of a noble Change of the whole face of Affairs, both
with relation to Religion, and the Peace of Europe, that we could have wished
for. It is so far beyond our hopes, that we durst scarce let our wishes go so
far: we may, if we are not wanting to our selves, and to the Conjuncture before
us, hope to see that which may be according to the Prophetic style, termed a
new Heavens, and a new Earth. But if a Spirit of jealousy and murmuring, of
impatience and faction, and of returning back to that out of which God has so
signally extricated us, grows up; so that instead of reaping the fruits that we
have now in prospect, we have not Souls big enough, nor Hearts good enough, to
carry this on to perfection, then we may justly fear our being delivered up to
all those Evils from which we will not be healed. But if on the other hand we
raise our minds above every narrowness of thought, and all partial regards, and
consider matters with such a naked impartiality as becomes Christians,
Protestants and Englishmen, and provide such Remedies as are requisite, then we
may hope to see this blessed morning to grow up to a perfect day. In a word,
life and death are before us, and blessing and cursing. Those who choose life,
and every thing that leads to it, secure a blessing to themselves, and entail
it on their Posterity: but if we choose death rather than life, there is no help
for it: such persons secure a curse to themselves, and do what in them lies to
entail it on their Posterity; and there is scarce any indication more certain
of the Sins of a Nation being grown up to that height, that it must be
destroyed, than the Miscarriage of so great a Deliverance as God has wrought
for us, which will be an eternal Blot on the Wisdom of the Nation; since, in
that Case the Figure of our Savior must be justly applied to us, We have piped
to you, but you have not danced; or these other words of his, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee under my wings, as the hen
gathers her brood, but thou would not: Or that of the Prophet, That while
Children were in the Womb, there was not strength to bring forth.

3 dly, But if we will carry on, and perfect this mavelous Work of God, we
must study to be such, that God may not repent him of the good which he seems
to have prepared for us. While we are under such a happy Influence of Heaven,
we must not raise up such an Interposition between it and us, as may not only
make us lose this happy opportunity, but turn it to a Curse by the ill use we
may make of it. We have not forgot the Criminal Excesses of the year Sixty, and
how that great Revolution that seemed to promise all that a Nation that had
been so long tossed with wars and changes of Government, could wish for, was so
unsuccessful; but instead of the Nations receiving that with those
Acknowledgments that were due for such a Blessing, how did all People, as it
were, conspire to defeat the ends of Providence in it? The excesses of Rioting
and Drunkenness, and the Disorders of all sorts, grew not only to be practiced,
but gloried in, as if those Abominations had been the proper distinctions of a
Loyal man; a Virtuous man looked out of Countenance, if he could not go in to
the madness of the time; and because the high Professions of Religion in the
former times, had been a disguise to many ill Designs, men not only laid aside
all the Decencies of Religion, but began to think it a piece of breeding to
decry it as an Imposture. This went so far, that perhaps in no Nation, under
Heaven, did Men treat the Religion which they professed, so familiary as we
did; and those who were not concerned any further in Religion than as it might
advance their ungodly Designs, were willing to encourage this Spirit of
Atheism, hoping that it would make way for a Religion which in some respects is
worse than no Religion at all; for tho, with relation to particular Men, there
is no Comparison indeed to be made between Popery and Atheism; yet, with
Relation to humane Society, a Religion that dissolves Faith and good Nature,
and gives Authority both to Persidy and Cruelty, is worse than none at all. As
we reflect upon these Abominations, and on the fatal Consequences of them,
which have been on us so long; so in order to the preventing the return of the
like Evils, we must avoid the relapsing into the like Sins. It is neither the
Union nor Wisdom of Councils, nor the Strength of Fleets or Armies, that will
secure us from the Judgments of God, which we may expect will fall upon us with
an extraordinary redoubling, according to the Prophetic Phrase of seven times
heavier than any thing that we have yet seen or known; if those that are
filthy, will be filthy still: If the Atheist will think that his standing up
for the Prorestant Religion, is a warrant to him to laugh at all that is
Sacred; In a word, if Men think that their Fears are over; and that, therefore
they may give themselves up to work wickedness without restraint; then we may
justly expect a return of the like, if not of greater Miseries. We despised our
Religion, and God has threatened to take it from us; yet it seems the Prayers of
the Few have prevailed over the cry of the sins of the Many. But we have no
reason to expect that it should be always so* We are certainly the happiest
Nation in the World, if we can but know and value it as we ought to do. Our
Climate, though none of the best, yet is Kind and Fruitful: and if the Sun is
less favorable to us; yet our Situation as it separates us from all the World,
so it lets the Wealth of the whole World in upon us, and keeps Danger and War
at a distance from us: We have all the Liberties of Freemen tempered with a
firm and steady Government. But which is above all, we are blessed with that holy
Religion which the Son of God revealed to the World, and we are Reformed from
those Corruptions which had defiled it, and that in so equal a manner, that we
are the chief Object of the Roman Fury, as well as the just Glory of the
Reformation: We have had the truths of Religion both in the points of
Speculation and Practice opened to us with such advantages, that if we stumble
or lose our way in the midst of so much light, we have more to answer for than
any Nation under Heaven: and to Crown all, God has put us so far into the hands
of our Enemies, as to let us clearly see what we were to expect from them. They
had devoured us in their hopes, and seemed to be as Haman's Friends casting
Lots, and watching a fit opportunity to destroy us, when of a sudden the Snare
was broken, and we have escaped out of it. I hope none of those that were here
will soon or easily forget how near they were to be swallowed up: and if they
had then grave thoughts and serious purposes, I hope this change in their
Fortunes will not make them dismiss, or forget them. And for us that saw God's
Wonders in the Deep, and that after we had past an Eminent Danger, languished
so many days in the Harbor between Hope and Despair, upon which we seemed to
put on firm resolutions, and make solemn Vows of amendment, Can we be guilty of
so heinous an Ingratitude and breach of Faith, as to forget the engagements,
into which we then entered, of a serious and universal Reformation?

4. But while we let our thoughts out to wonder at the Wisdom and Goodness of
God, let the admiration of these produce somewhat like them in our selves: we
ought to grow wise; for our Experience has cost us dear, and had almost proved
a very dreadful School to us: we now see the folly of trusting to that
Religion, and of imagining that any weight was to be laid on all the Promises
that could be made us by them. It is not to be doubted but that many were so
little acquainted with the depths of Satan that are in that Black Society, as
to believe it was possible for them to maintain Truth, Honor and Good nature,
notwithstanding the points of Speculation that are in their Schools: we
resolved to make the Experiment, and they have taken such pains to let us see
our mistake, that it is to be hoped we will never at any time hereafter relapse
into the like Error. The goodness of God, that appears now in such endearing
Characters to us, ought likewise to form the like temper in us. Our minds have
been too much embittered on all hands, by reason of some inconsiderable
differences which our Enemies have always managed, with so much address, as to
engage us to weaken our common Force, by dividing our selves into Parties: and
by a fatal series of woeful Accidents, these sparks have been blown up into such
a flame, that they had almost quite consumed us. But it is to be hoped that we
will study to be all of one mind; or, if we cannot arrive at so great a
blessing, that at least we will love one another, and remember that we are
Brethren, fellow Christians and fellow Protestants, that must have been
destroyed together, and therefore must now support and bear with one another.
But as I doubt not but the happy disposition of all peoples minds will now
produce a desired temper in those matters; so we must not bound our Charity
within so narrow a compass: No, we are Christians, and therefore we must not
only love our Brethren, but even our Enemies and our Persecutors, and so
overcome their evil with good. For how hard thoughts soever we may justly have
of the Spirit and Councils that govern that Church; yet many among them in the
simplicity of their heart, and according to the impliciteness of their
Principles follow those Opinions that have been dropped into them from their
Childhood; they have not strength of thought to look narrowly into them, nor do
their Rules allow them in so bold a thing as to examine whether they are in the
right or not: and though it is hard to imagine how any should go over to them;
yet it is easy to imagine how those who are among them should be shut up
blindfold and muffled up with the awful bonds of Authority and Infallibility.
And for such, though we are under the highest provocations that any Nation can
have; yet after all, let us still remember that we are Christians, and that as
we have declared openly against the Injustice and Cruelty of our Enemies, we
govern our selves by the Rule of doing as we would be done by. It is a presage
of Moderation in our whole proceedings, that even the less governable Part of
the Nation, I mean the unruly Multitude, has been so happily restrained from
extravagant act of fury: for without justifying what they have done, we may
well rejoice for what they have not done, and that Bloody and Outrageous
Sacrifices have not been made. It is the peculiar Character and Glory of this
Nation, That Tenderness and Compassion are so natural to it, that the
Unfortunate are always pitied by them. And if tumultuous Numbers have observed
so much temper in their wrath, how much more is to be expected from Councils
that are to be governed by Justice and Mercy, and under the directions of a
Prince who has showed that his hatred of Persecution in others, was not only
because his own side suffered in it; but from a steady and uniform Principle
which has made him not only just to those of that Religion, but even kind too,
whenever they deserved it. We, indeed, ought to study the firm securing of
our Religion, even from the remotest possibilities of hurt that can come to it
from that restless and violent spirit which has hitherto created us so much
trouble; this we owe to Almighty God, to this Glorious Church, to our Selves
and to our Posterity: but in doing this we must so govern our selves, as not to
suffer our Blood to boil too high, nor our Thoughts to run too fast; and while
we consider what we may perhaps owe our Enemies, we ought to take care not to
forget what we owe our Selves, that so we may look to the honor, as well as
the security of our Holy Religion. In a word, let us resolve to be Christians
indeed, and to act as Men that have those undefiled Rules, and that bright
Example, which our Savior has given us, ever in our Eyes, and then it is
impossible for us to miscarry. But if Revenge and Animosity prevail over the
softer and wiser Councils, that Reason and Religion may suggest, and if in all
that we do, we take not care to have God ever on our sides, it will be easy
for him to blast all Councils, and to defeat even the greatest and best-laid
Designs. We have now before our Eyes, one of the signallest Instances that is
in any History, of the Instability of all human things: on which one cannot
reflect without making a full stop in his thoughts. But the subject is so
speaking, that it needs not be insisted on, and there are particular
Circumstances in it that forbid it: but if it is not decent to speak much of
it, yet I hope none are so insensible as not to think much of it. Perhaps some
may imagine that we are safe, because we cannot be dashed on the same Rock
about which we see so great a Shipwreck; but, alas, if we provoke God to hide
his Face, and to withdraw his Protection from us, his ways are past finding
out, he can bring ruin and destruction on us from that hand from which we
perhaps apprehend it the least: If Prosperity and Success blow any up, and make
them forget God and all the Vows that they made to him, he will never want
means and methods to make them return to themselves, and to remember him.

Upon the whole matter then, since God has wrought so extraordinary a
deliverance for us, let us adore him, who is the true Author of it; and under
him let us pay all the returns possible of Respect and Gratitude to that
Blessed Instrument on whom he has laid so much Glory. Let us improve it to the
highest and noblest ends that can be thought on; let us live under it as
becomes those who take care to do nothing that may render them unworthy of the
continuance of it: and let us all, in our several Stations, study to behave our
selves so, That the Glory as well as the Safety of the Nation, and the luster
as well as the establishment of our Religion, may be raised up to that pitch,
that the Name of an Englishman and a Protestant may have a sound all the World
over, that may give Terror as well as create Esteem; and that this Work, which
is now brought to so great a forwardness, may in due time attain to its full
perfection; and that then we may all have reason to break forth in the
Triumphant words with which this Psalm begins; O give thanks unto the Lord, for
he is good, because his mercy endures for ever. Let Israel now say, That his
mercy endures for ever. Let the house of Aaron now say, That his mercy
endures for ever: and let them that fear the Lord say, That his mercy endures
for ever.

FINIS

