PUBLISHED By His MAJESTY'S Special Command.

A SERMON Preached before the KING, At WHITEHALL, On the Second of DECEMBER,
1697. BEING The Day of Thanksgiving For the PEACE.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, Lord Bishop of SARUM.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCVIII.

THE Bishop of SALISBURY'S THANKSGIVING-SERMON For the PEACE.

2 CHRONICLES. IX. 8. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee, to set
thee on his throne to be King for the Lord thy God: because thy God loved
Israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made he thee King over them, to
do judgment and justice.
THESE are the words of an Arabian Queen, who was so moved with a Noble
Curiosity, raised by the same of Solomon's Wisdom, that she undertook a Journey
from the utmost parts of the earth, furnished her self both with an Equipage
and Presents suitable to her Rank, and also with Questions, by which she might
judge whether Fame had not too much heightened this great King's Character. She
could not believe the half of what she had heard; and having probably a good
opinion of her own Understanding, she resolved to try His with those Questions
that puzzled her self.

But when she came, and found that Report, instead of magnifying matters, had
been very defective; when she observed the compass of his Knowledge, with the
depth of his Mind, and that he applied his Speculations to the Arts of
Government, as well as to the Contemplations of Nature; when she saw his vast
Designs of Buildings (his own as well as God's House) so wonderfully executed;
the Treasures he was heaping up, and the Methods of Trade he was setting on,
for procuring constant and fresh Supplies; and that he could join the
Magnificence that belonged to his Character, with the more Real Greatness of
his own Comprehensive Mind: So that while he employed his Thoughts in the
Sublimest Enquiries, he did not neglect even those Lesser ones, of External
Grandeur, which how inconsiderable soever they may seem, to a Soul capable of
vaster things, yet are necessary to maintain those Impressions of Awe and
Respect which give Authority to Government: When she saw the State in which he
was served, the Pomp of his Retinue, and his glorious Processions to the
Temple, she was overcome with Wonder; she despised her own Dignity and Kingdom:
And thought that the Subjects and Servants of such a Prince, were happier than
the Sovereigns of other Nations.

Her admiration of this being above all ordinary Expressions, she vents it in
those Raptures that I have read. She adores the Great Jehovah of the Jews, who
had taken pleasure in advancing One who so well deserved it, and who employed
it so worthily, in raising the Honor of that God who had so eminently exalted
him: From hence she concluded, That certainly God loved that Nation, whom he
had blessed with such a Prince, by whose Wisdom and Conduct they were in all
probability to be established on the firmest Basis: The best Principles and
Measures of Government, which would make them Sure and Lasting. Establish them
for ever. For she could not think but that so extraordinary a Blessing must be
designed for great Ends. Such a King would certainly govern them both with
Judgment and Justice. Two words that seem to signify the same thing; yet the
Masters of that Language put this difference, That the former relates to the
Rewarding, and the latter to the Punishing part of Justice. So wise a King
would maintain a severe Execution of Law against Offenders, and be no less
careful to find out the Men of Merit, and to trust, advance, and reward these.

Certainly such a Prince, and such an Administration are so great Blessings,
and so much the greater, because so little Common, so few Instances of them
occurring, either in the Observation of the present Age, or the Records of past
times; that wheresoever we meet them, we ought to acknowledge they are the
special Favors of Heaven, and the most distinguishing Marks of God's loving a
Nation.

The Blessings we now enjoy, and that great One which at this time we do
particularly Acknowledge, do so naturally carry us to Devotions like those in
my Text, that all my Hearers must be beforehand with me in the Application. But
in our Case there are some Specialties that give it a peculiar Exaltation:
Solomon had his Crown, his Treasures and Armies transmitted down to him;
Conquests were made for him, he himself had gone through none of those Scenes
of Horror, but had an easy Inheritance conveyed from his Father, without
Battles or Blood, Fatigue or Danger: He was Bred up to the Maxims of Government
and acquainted with all his Father's Secrets, his Designs as well as his
Conduct; so that he began upon great Advantages: David's Long and Glorious
Reign before him, had prepared Peoples Hearts to Love and Obey him, who was
God's Choice as well as his Father's. The Building so Magnificent a Temple in
the beginnings of his Quiet and Auspicious Reign, made him the Delight and
Wonder of his People. Thus the Causes of his being so Great and Prosperous,
were very visible.

If then the Queen of Sheba was so struck with seeing Solomon in all his glory,
with how much louder Accents ought we to carry on the Hallelujahs of This Day,
who see a Prince Raised and Conducted by such a special train of Amazing
Providence, without any of those Supports, that every Step he has made,
carries in it Characters of a particular Direction from Heaven! He has, indeed,
the Blood of Sovereigns in him, but his Crowns are the Gifts of Heaven. William
Prince of Orange, Gaspar de Coligny, Admiral of France.
The Two Great Heroes of the last Age, the Defenders of Religion, and the
Patrons of Liberty, were proper Sources to give Life and Descent to One, in
whom their Characters were to be Exalted, as well as their Dignity was to be
Raised.

They were Both of a Race of Sovereigns: One was of the First Form; but what
might be wanting in the Extent of their Territories, and the Luster of their
Coronets, was fully made up in those truly Royal Accomplishments of their
Minds. They were Capable of the greatest things, and Acted in a Sphere suited
to their Capacity: They Talked little, but did Wonders: They had all the
Gravity, as well as all the Virtues of Religion in them, without the
Affectations of Show or Hypocrisy: They had none of the Arts of Flattery or
Insinuation, yet could bring vast Multitudes to Depend on them, to Trust to
them, and to Obey them. They had Souls of so peculiar a Make, that they seemed
Born to Animate whole Nations to a pitch of their own Courage, to a like Zeal
for Religion, and a like Love of Liberty. They lived Great, but died Greater;
the greater for the conjunction of their Descent, the mixing those Noble
Qualities of their Minds, as well as their Blood. The Issue of such a Union was
designed to Perfect the Work which they had begun; That seemed Buried with
them, but was to have a second and nobler revival in One, whose Composition
from such Principles gave a just hope to expect all that we do now see.

One Character belonged to them both so equally, that no wonder if in the
Conjunction it is carried to a further Perfection. They wrestled through great
Difficulties, and as great Misfortunes, but with so firm a Constancy, that no
cross Adventures could ever damp them, or sink them even to the harkening to
any Propositions, other than what they had pretended to in their most
prosperous Condition. So little Power had Fortune over their Minds, unless it
was to animate them with so fresh a Courage, that they rose by Misfortunes:
They never had better Armies about them, than soon after they had met with such
Checks, that their Enemies looked on them as lost, without a Possibility of
Recovery.

The Two greatest Powers then in Europe, after they had found them too hard for
them in the Gallanter Methods of War, were not ashamed to betake themselves to
the Baser ones of Treachery and Assassination. Souls so Brave and so Candid as
theirs, were not capable of believing their Enemies so black, as they, or
rather as their Friends, felt them to be. But so entire was their Love to
Religion and their Country, that as they Both perished in the Cause, so One of
them in the Agony into which the Fatal Bullet put him, having but a Minute for
one single Thought, he ended his Life as he had led it; he died praying for
that People for whom he had lived so long: Una morientis ad Deum vox, Miserere
Popish, Grot. Annal. lib. 4.
Feeling he could live no longer, he expired with this Word in his Mouth, Have
Mercy on this People.

Yes, Great Soul, thy Prayer was heard; and from thee One springs, in whom God
signalizes his Mercy, not to that People only, but to a great many others, who
share with them in this Extraordinary Grace; the more extraordinary for this,
that it is not restrained to one single Nation, but is a Deliverance to
Mankind. These Advantages meeting in One Person, set him indeed above the
common Level.

A Greatness that passed down through Three Successors, who maintained the
Luster of the First Raiser of that State, with a Glory suitable to its
wonderful Beginnings, was at last brought under a Cloud, that so the Favor of
Heaven might shine the brighter on Him in whom it was to be revived. The
Accession of Royal Blood had indeed exalted the Race, and seemed to bring it
nearer to that Imperial Dignity, with which it had shined some Ages ago; but it
raised Jealousy, as much as it advanced their Scutcheon. The Ruins of Monarchy
here, helped to draw down a Family allied to it; but the Restoration of it did
not contribute to its Recovery. That was to be the immediate Care and Work of
Heaven.

An Inundation of Conquest and Calamity, forced a sinking State to seek for
Shelter to the Issue of that Race to which it owed its first Rise. An ordinary
Courage would have sunk at the Undertaking. It looked like the raising one up
only to bear the Burden and Reproach of their Ruin. The Prospect was on all
hands so black, that Posterity will reckon their Recovery with that of the
Romans after Cannae. If it were proper for this Place, it were easy to show
that theirs was the much more desperate State of the two: The Turn was signal,
the Effects of it were soon visible, though the Conclusion may seem to have
come on but slowly; for now we see a Career run of almost Six and twenty Years,
to which we may challenge the Histories of all Ages to give a Parallel.

A Mighty Power, Great Armies, well Commanded, an Uncontrolled Authority, full
of Treasure, and accustomed to Victory, was an Enemy, as it were marked out to
raise the Character of Him, who with unequal Forces, and feebler Assistances,
put a Stop to a Progress that amazed the World; and made the greater part even
of Princes to conclude, It was in vain to maintain the Struggle any longer; it
was better to prevent the Violence of Conquest, by submitting to what Terms
could be got, none being thought worse than what was like to be the Issue of
the War.

No Life could be of more Importance than this, which seemed the Soul of the
whole Alliance; and yet none was more freely exposed, not only in the constant
Fatigue of perpetual Journeys and Voyages, in the worst Seasons, with such an
uninterrupted Continuance of lengthened Campaigns, that these alone might have
worn out the firmest Stock of Health and Strength; but in all the Adventures of
War, in the greatest Heat of Action, and in the most desperate Posts. This was
a fair offering himself to Danger: Gallant Men knew where to find him. In this
only he seemed to forget the great Concern that others had in him, and exposed
them all too much, while with a Noble Intrepidity, as one insensible of Danger,
he past through many new Scenes of them; but in which Heaven showed so
particular a Watchfulness, that the single Relation of them all, with his
Deliverances out of them, would make a History.

The surest as well as the swiftest Messenger of Death, attacking him in the
View of Two Armies, and on the Eve of a deciding Day, seemed to be sent on
purpose to let so many Witnesses see what an Invisible Guard was about him; and
that how near soever the greatest of all Dangers might come to him, yet it was
to do him no other Hurt, than to leave so slight an Impression, as seemed only
made to prove the Truth of so unusual an Accident; that without an uncontested
Evidence it could not easily be believed.

But while Angels kept Guard about him on all Honorable Occasions, they were
no less watchful in discovering and disappointing Blacker Methods, and Baser
Designs. Those who thought not fit to venture on him in the Day of Battle,
betook themselves to the most Infamous Practices. Designs of Assassination were
pursued with such unrelenting Eagerness, that as soon as one failed, another
was set on foot. A Mind not capable of these, was almost as little capable of
believing them in others, as of practicing them himself. There was no
extraordinary Caution used, neither for penetrating into such Secrets, nor of
keeping so strict a Guard, as appeared afterward was necessary. Discoveries
were made by a Particular Hand of Heaven: Men who were thought capable of
executing the worst Designs, could not bear the Horror that This gave them.
Those who were appointed to be the Instruments of our Ruin, proved the Means of
our Preservation: I say, Our Preservation, because we owe it to the Influence
of that Sacred Life.

And now at last, after so hard a Struggle, such a lengthned War, so vast a
Consumption of Men and Treasure, we celebrate the happy Peace and Tranquillity
that we, and the greatest part of Europe do now enjoy, through his means. Have
we not reason to conclude that This is the day which the Lord has made; that
this is the Man whom he has made strong for himself, whom he has delighted to
set on his Throne? It is his doing, and it is wonderful in our eyes.

The Characters of God's Care of his Affairs have been no less Signal, than
those relating to his Person. Good Seasons and favorable Winds have attended
constantly upon him. The critical Turns of those Winds that brought him first
hither, were so amazing, that those who observed them, can never reflect on it
without a constant freshness of Admiration. All the many Passages that he and
his Forces have since that time made on the Seas, have been not only
successful, but smooth and quick.

On two great Occasions, Nature seemed to go out of its Course to cover us from
Invasion. In the first, the calmest Month in the Year was a continued Storm,
till we were ready to make use of fairer Weather, and then we had it; and by a
great variety of Circumstances, as happy to us as cross to our Enemies, we had
the most glorious Day that ever the Channel saw; Beacons of a new form; Fires
from the Sea carried the dismal Tidings to the adverse Shores, and scattered
the Army lying ready to invade us. That seemed to put an end to all Dangers
from that Element; we were restored to our Empire on this Sea, which recovered
and established our then sinking Reputation.

We found at another time, a no less unusual reversing of Seasons; we had a
Winter that seemed to anticipate the Spring; the Wind stood all the while in
the warm Corner, and broke the designs of sending a great part of our Naval
Strength from us. We little knew our danger, and that all this was stopped by a
watchful Interposition, to cover us from a second Design of Invasion; we were
uneasy to see the Season so obstinately good, so contrary to our Intentions,
and to what was to be expected at that time; but we afterward had large
opportunities to observe the kind Direction of Heaven that made the Seasons
wait on us, and as it were conspire to break their own Laws, rather than suffer
a Breach to be made upon Us.

Other favorable Circumstances showed us also how God delighted to maintain
him on the Throne, under whose Shadow we are all to sit safe. Plenty at home
made us easy under all the Charge of the War; and while our Neighbors (for we
have now no more any Enemies) were much pressed with even the extremities of
Want, under those vast Impositions that lay on them, we had enough and to
spare; to furnish the rest of the World, and to supply that great waste of
Treasure, which came back in some Years faster then it went out. And after all
the unconceivable Expense of the War, with all the Losses we made in it, yet if
it had not been for the wicked Practices of those Corrupters of our Coin at
home, with all the Train of mischievous Consequences that have followed upon
them, which was an Evil of our own growth, and that had no relation to the
Affairs abroad, we had gone through it without feeling any uneasy pressure by
it. But that we have been able to provide effectual Remedies to the one, while
at the same time we have so gloriously maintained, and now so happily finished
the other, is a secret Indication of the Power and Riches of the Nation, in
this Reign, of which perhaps the most Sanguine could not have been convinced,
if they had not seen it.

Add to all this, the noble Triumphs of Liberty. One of the Common Topics of
the Enemies of Public Liberty, is, That upon great occasions, the Divisions in
Councils, and the length of Debates that do naturally arise in Free Assemblies,
bring such a backwardness and slowness on their Deliberations, that the best
Opportunities of acting are lost while they are consulting. Here the Public
Interest was so visible, that a concurrence beyond all former Examples, has
appeared in supporting Undertakings that seemed above the Strength and Wealth
of the Nation. Nor could such a Treasure have been raised by all the Efforts of
Arbitrariness; for nothing but the Certainties of the Faith given by the Body
of the Nation, could have created the Credit that was necessary in such unusual
Supplies. These went on with that Unanimity and Heartiness, that we have reason
to put this among the great Articles of that overruling Providence that has
watched over us. If at any time insuperable Difficulties made the Public
Consultations go heavily, the Season was stopped, the Course of Nature seemed to
stand still, till we were ready for it. So wonderful a Conduct has appeared
both at home and abroad, and in all the Elements, as if every thing had been
set at Work, either to do us Good, or at least to shelter us from Evil.

I reckon not among the happy Instances of God's Care of us, our being
preserved from the restless Attempts of some wretched Incendiaries among our
selves, those Betrayers of Religion and their Country. They are too
inconsiderable, to be ranked among the Occasions for which we do now celebrate
the Blessings of Heaven. If their Power and Skill had been equal to their
Malice, we should indeed have had great reason to rejoice that we have been
preserved from a Race of Men, whose Tongues have been set on Fire, while the
Poison of Asps seemed to lie under their Lips: but the one has proved as
contemptible, as the other was odious. They ought not to be mentioned in a time
of rejoicing, in which, Objects that give Horror, ought to be kept out of
sight; yet, how little reason soever we may have either to value, or to love
them, we ought still to pity them, and to pray for them, that if possible, they
may be recovered out of the Gall of Bitterness, and the Bond of Iniquity.

Let us turn to Nobler Objects, and rejoice in the Glory of God, and in our own
Happiness, while we see who is the Man whom God delights to honor: whom by a
concurrence of many Providence he first led to his Throne, and whom he has
hitherto maintained on it by as many more: and has now given him as full an
Establishment upon it, as Humane things are capable of. He has made his Enemies
to be at Peace with him: and while the much greater half of Europe own him to
be its Recoverer and Restorer, the rest do now unanimously call him that, which
He is, Independent on all Foreign Acknowledgments, THE RIGHTFVL AND LAWFVL KING
OF THESE REALMS.

And to make the Parallel to my Text run exactly, a much greater King, lying at
a vaster Distance, leaves his Throne and Dominions in the midst of War, struck
with the Fame, and amazed at the Actions of this Prince. Instead of a little
Southern Queen, a mighty Northern Emperor, covered with Laurels, and used to
Victories, resolving to raise his Nation, and enlarge his Empire, comes to
learn the best Methods of doing it, and goes away full of Wonder, possessed
with truer Notions of Government.

But while we humbly adore those Instances of the good Pleasure of our God
toward his Anointed; let us also with the same holy Gratitude observe how he
has showed that he loved us, as well as that he delighted in him, who now sits
on the Throne. We are separate from the Continent; and were cut off from the
great Affairs of the World, till Navigation and Trade brought us into them,
with the more advantage; because our Situation keeps us at a Distance from the
Confusions of War, and secures us from the Inroads and Depredations of Enemies;
while the Sea that covers us, gives us also a Passage to let in their Wealth
among us, and to pour out our Force upon them. Our Seas and our Fleets are both
our Fences and our Mines: which others seem to work for us, and give us no
other trouble about them, but that of a safe Conveyance.

All this, how flourishing soever, yet gave us but a melancholy Prospect, while
we saw a mighty Rival so near us, rising up to an Equality with us, in that
which was our Strength as well as our Glory. The Counsels at home were then
employed in Designs of another nature: they were laying down Methods to subvert
our Constitution, to corrupt our Senate, and destroy such as were above their
Practice. The Laws of England, the Charters of our Towns, as well as the Great
Charter of the Nation, our Religion and Liberty, were all the Conquests that
were then projected: while the Safety of the Whole at home, and the Security of
our Neighbors about us, were abandoned. So the beloved Design prospered, it
seemed to be laid down for a Maxim, That it was better to Reign at the
Discretion of a mighty Prince, than under the Restraint of Laws, which was
called the Reigning at the Discretion of Subjects. So infatuated we were, that
a Competition, or rather a Superiority, in that which hitherto we claimed as a
Property, gave us no Jealousy; we seemed pleased with it, and were glad to
promote it. We had so far retired our selves from that Share which we naturally
ought to have in the Public Concerns of Europe, that we seemed to forget them:
We had so much Work at home, that there was no room for Foreign Speculations.
We had been engaged once and again into Wars with those, who, as they are our
near Neighbors, so have been in all Ages our faithfullest Allies: We fell into
Contentions at home, by the Direction of our Enemies, who played us so
dexterously one against another, that they hoped to have done the best half of
their Work, by making us first hate and then destroy one another; while they
were ever ready to support those, whose Passions and Circumstances might
contribute the most for carrying on their Designs.

All this seemed too slow, to those who thought they lost time; and therefore
began to quicken their Pace, and make a little more haste in destroying us.
Then it was fit for God to interpose, when All was struck at. There was no
Prospect of Deliverance, but from one single Corner, and even that seemed
doubtful. It was the Reverse of Elijah's Vision; one Hand breadth of a Cloud in
a clear Sky gave him the welcome Hopes of the Rain he prayed for: Here the
whole Sky seemed set for Storms and Thunder, while but one Speck of Blue
appeared in the whole Horizon: Who could have thought that this should have
conquered all the Clouds, and have given the Heavens and the Earth a new Face?
All Eyes turned that way, because it was plain there was no other Hope left us:
Yet many thought it was too great an Attempt to be expected from the cold and
cautious Counsels of a State, naturally slow, and apprehensive Danger.

The Interpositions of Providence were not wanting in this Extremity; many
favorable Accidents concurred; Popular Assemblies agreed then so unanimously
together, that there was not Opposition enough made to create Delays. The
STATES seemed to rejoice, that an Opportunity offered it self in this Age, for
them to repay what they had been owing to England ever since the last. And they
were willing to perish with us, if we could not both flourish together. An
advanced Season made the Sea less practicable: All was to be put to hazard;
because all lay at stake. A long Course of cross Winds and rough Weather in the
beginning, looked like the Frowning of Heaven. The first Attempt was
unprosperous: This would have shaken any Mind less firm than that which
animated the whole Undertaking. A Constancy was then observed so steady and
inflexible, that not so much as an Inequality of Temper could be discovered.
The Unsuccessfulness of the first Step would have damped a Mind that was either
feeble or superstitious; though our returning all safe after three Days tossing
in a Storm, was an Earnest of a particular Care even in that seeming
Disappointment. But after the Roughness of the Season had continued long
enough, to teach us all to depend a little more on Providence, and to apply our
selves more earnestly to him that rules the Seas, and the Winds at his
pleasure, and after there was a full and visible Experiment made of the
Steadiness of him, on whose Mind Seas nor Storms could make no Impression, then
God commanded the Winds, and rebuked the Seas, and after that first Rub, all
our Affairs were so conducted, that every thing succeeded, beyond our Hopes, I
had almost said, beyond our VVishes.

An orderly March of a friendly though foreign Army, an unstained Victory, an
overturning of that which had designed all our Ruin, by their own Counsels and
Practices, a sinking of Heart and a Giddiness of Head among them, made the way
smooth. Then we saw that Success, in its turn, had as little power to exalt, as
Misfortunes had to depress a Soul, raised above both. An abandoned Nation
sought for shelter to him, to whom the chief of them had before sought for
Relief. All Men were left to the Freedom that became such important
Deliberations, without any disturbance. Neither Violence nor Threatenings were
used, no not so much as the secret Arts of Practice or Insinuation. Some
thonght there was a Coldness of Behavior expressed on that occasion, that
seemed too Indifferent: but the Directions of Providence were depended on; Men
were left to themselves, or rather to that invisible Chain which encompasses
and governs all things here below.

We passed from the Extremities of Danger, to an entire Establishment, without
those Intervals of Confusion, that may be well looked for in so great a Turn.

When we reflect on all this, and on what has happened since, which must be too
present to our Thoughts to need any further Enlargement, have we not reason to
conclude, that God loved our Nation; and that because he has loved us, he has
set such a King over us? Indeed it is much easier to observe, how God has loved
us, than to find out the Reason of his doing it, When we look at our selves, at
what we were then, and what we have been ever since, and continue still to be,
we can hardly give our selves any good Account of those Distinctions of
Providence, in which we have had so large a share.

It is true, our Religion, our Doctrines, our Worship, and our Constitution are
pure: but those we owe to the last Age, and to the Laws then made about them.
All that belongs to us from them, is the Reproach of corrupting our selves
under such Advantages: and our refining upon the Immoralities that are but too
common to Mankind at all times, by the Profanations and Impieties of the
present Age. A new Species of Wickedness, that perhaps has never appeared with
such Impudence, and in such bold Instances as among us; and yet God has loved
this Nation. We must without any Compliment acknowledge, it is not for our
sake, for any Worth or previous Merit in us: but we may allow our selves to
hope, that though we have no Title to this Love, and that it did not find us
worthy of it, yet it will have those Effects on us, that may engage us to
answer its Design, so far at least that we may not quite forfeit it.

Who knows the Secrets of God's Counsels, or what lies hid under all that train
of extraordinary Circumstances that we have seen? Whether we are at last to be
reformed by them, and to be made the Instruments of spreading the Light of the
Gospel in its Purity, to other Nations, as we have been already honored to be
the Instruments in this Glorious Reign, to give the Affairs of Europe another
Face, a truer Balance, and the Prospect of a firmer Establishment? For let the
Men of Envy and Ill Nature look through our whole History, and see where they can
find, in any Age since we were a Nation, that we appeared with so much Glory,
and made so great a Figure, not only over our Neighborhood, but over the whole
World, as we do in this Reign. This disposes a Man to hope, that the whole
Designs of Heaven are not yet accomplished: but that what we have seen is a
Noble Pledge of somewhat further, that is yet hid in the Counsels of God, but
is to break out in due time.

There is no need of great Meditation, of much searching into History, and a
depth of Thought, to comprehend this, That Good and Bad Princes are among the
chief Instances, in which the Love or Anger of Heaven do discover themselves.

What greater Blessings can be hoped for on Earth, than from the Reign of
PRINCES, that have in them the true Elevations of Greatness, tempered with the
Bowels and Compassions of good Nature; that are faithful Observers of their
Promises, and are severe Lovers of Truth; that not only maintain the Sacred
Regards that are due to Equity and Justice, but do generously reward those whom
Merit distinguishes, how little soever they may press forward themselves, being
as modest as they are deserving. PRINCES, I say, who treasure up the Services
of their People, and surprise them with such Rewards as become Royal Minds: So
that the Fortunes of their Subjects are owing to the Value they set on them,
without those Abatements that will always be made in the Acknowledgments, when
Importunity or Intercessions are thought to have a large share in the Success.

A PRINCE, who observes well and thinks much, who descends often to the
Equalities of Friendship with his Subjects; who hears the Petitions of the
oppressed, and hearkens to the Suggestions of the wise and good; a PRINCE, who
has the Just and Noble Ambition of meriting Fame and Glory, without the
troublesome Vanity of showing it; who deserves all the Returns of Duty and
Gratitude from his People, without being fond of hearing or seeing it
expressed, though in the highest Forms of a Just Magnificence; who is satisfied
with this, that it is apparent what all Men must think, though it is not easy to
them to find out the properest Methods of setting that forth; which sometimes
may show greater, when Surprise does so fill the Mind, that Men must be silent,
because they feel that Language is not copious enough to furnish suitable
Expressions to such an overcoming Joy; such a PRINCE as this, will still be
owned as one of the best Gifts of Heaven.

Forced Rhetoric, and hired Panegyricks lie thick in the Lives of some Princes
who have deserved them the least. Perhaps Commodus had as many Flatterers, as
his Incomparable Father had silent Admirers. The best Princes are those who
feel the pleasure of making their People happy most sensibly, and yet are
uneasy and in pain, when in compliance with what is not only decent but almost
necessary on Solemn Occasions, they submit to hear it acknowledged, though in
Strains far below the Dignity and Majesty of the Subject.

But the Happiness of good Government is then best felt, when set in opposition
to all that Train of Blood and Cruelty, of Injustice and Rapine, of a
dissolution of Morals, and a scorn of Religion that blacken a bad Reign.
Princes who have a wrong set of Mind, wrong Notions of Government, and worse of
Religion, who are corrupted by their own Principles, and more by the Power that
they suffer others to have over them, are apt to grow to Excesses that are as
insufferable to Mankind, as they themselves are incapable of Cure. Accidents,
how unusual soever, cannot reform them, they grow rather the worse for them.

Justinian the Second, delivered himself up to Tyranny and to Favorites;
Rhinotmel.
to whom he gave such an unbounded Authority, that his nearest Relations felt a
large measure of it, and that in barbarous Instances. Cedrenus, Theophanes.
He was carried so far, as to deliver Constantinople to them to be a Scene of
Horror and Massacre. Such a pitch in Cruelty animated the World against him:
He was judged incapable of Government. He had a mark set on him indeed, but he
was sent to live in Exile, where he continued ten Years. Two Emperors reigned
in that Interval; Discontents arose at last, and a proper Season appeared for
him to attempt again. A great Party of Justinianites was formed in
Constantinople, who invited him over; when he crossed the Sea, a Storm had well
nigh saved that effusion of Blood that was occasiond by his Restoration. One
about him ventured in that Extremity, to suggest to him that he should vow,
that if God would deliver him from that imminent Danger, he would pardon all
his Enemies: But so fierce a thing is a Savage Tyrant, that even under all
those Fears, he could not be softened for one single minute, but said, may I
perish in this Storm, if I ever pardon one of them: He was as good as his Word.
After his Party had made him Master of the Empire, he discharged his first Fury
on those who had possessed the Throne: He made two of them to be brought to
him; he had the Brutality to trample on their Necks, repeating these Words of
the Psalmist, Thou shall tread upon the Lion and the Adder: And after some
other Inventions of infamous Usage, he put them cruelly to death; though they had
let him live, when he was in their Power. Next, he gave scope to his Rage
against all those who had been concerned in the Revolution; both they and their
Children were destroyed, without either Mercy or the Forms of Justice: And
because he had been ill used in the place of his Exile, the Country now
Inhabited by the Crim-Tartars, he resolved to destroy, or to use a Modern word,
to execute the whole Country. His Army thought they had obeyed his Cruel
Commands, when they had Murdered all, both Men and Women: They indeed spared
the Children; they thought they could not be within their Orders; they might be
sold for Slaves, or trained up to War. They were bloody enough, but not to the
pitch of a Tyrant's Cruelty. He resolved to satiate his Revenge, even with the
blood of Innocents; and ordered them all to be shipped and brought to him. They
were upwards of Seventy Thousand. A Storm fell upon them, they all perished in
the Euxine, where they found a milder Fate than was prepared for them: This
gave him great joy, because they had all perished; it had been greater, if he
had glutted his own Eyes with so inhumane a sight; but the Pleasure lasted not
long; he had now raised all Mankind against him, his own Army abhorred him. The
second Revolt ended more Tragically; they were not then contented to stigmatize
him as before, both he and his Son were cruelly put to death.

This Meditation may seem to go too far from the joyfulness of the present
Occasion; but perhaps nothing can make us feel it so sensibly, as the
remembering that we have been delivered from, and the considering what might
have been the Consequences of a fatal Relapse.

It remains that we look at the Ends of Government as they are expressed by the
Queen in my Text. The two great ones are in these words, with relation to God,
to be King for the Lord thy God, and with relation to the People, to establish
them for ever: Then follows the standing Maxims of a good King, in the course
of his Administration, to do Judgment and Justice; to execute Law, to punish
and reward, leaving the severer part to Just and Impartial Judges, and taking
the Nobler one of Rewarding, under his own Care and management.

To be King for the Lord his God, is plainly to Govern in God's stead: To
consider Power and Authority as a derivation from him, which will be then best
applied, when the first and chief of the Princes cares is, to Maintain and
raise the Honor of Religion. Solomon began his Reign with the Executing
David's Designs, and the employing his Treasures, in building a Temple of that
Glory and Magnificence, that it may be justly reckoned among the Wonders of the
World. This was suitable to Natural Religion, and more particularly to that
Dispensation then Instituted by God; which was to have its last Finishing, in
this great Structure, and in the exact Observance of all those Rules and Orders
that had been settled by David. In all this, he was to Reign for the Lord his
God, to reduce the People that was so fond of outward State and Solemnity, that
they were thereby much disposed to Idolatry, and to make them delight the more
in the Worship of God, by such a compliance with their Inclinations. But the
chief Instances in which he was to Rule for the Lord his God, were the
recommending Piety and Holiness by his own Example, and the encouraging it by
his Authority. His Prayer in Dedicating the Temple, gives a Noble Instance of
the Impressions that Religion had made upon his own Mind.

Certainly those who reckon the Title of Defender of the Faith one of the
peculiar Glories of the Crown, will apply their Thoughts with a particular Zeal
to every thing that may promote Religion, both in their own Dominions, and out
of them. The Decencies as well as the Solemnities of the Worship of God, will
not be thought below their Care. But above all things, the Contempt and Scorn
of Sacred matters, is that against which they will turn their indignation with
the warmest Zeal, and against those who do, as it were, attack Heaven, and make
War upon it, who Study to render Religion as Contemptible to others, as they
have made it look to themselves. What Prince could suffer a subordinate
Magistrate under him, who should bear with all the Affronts put on Majesty, as
long as the lower respects due to himself were observed. This may teach them
with how just a Zeal they should punish those bold Attempts against Heaven,
though made by some who pretend to Zeal and Affection to themselves. Such Persons
instead of Supporting the Throne, pull it down, by engaging Heaven against all
that they undertake. It is a degree of Compliance with their wickedness, to be
pleased with them, to trust them or to show them favor. But it is not enough
not t^ seem to be of the side of those who fight against God or to abett them.

Princes who Rule for God, enter into all the true Concerns of Religion, though
not indeed into the Passions and Violences of those who espouse it: While they
check these, they will promote the other in the most effectual manner. An
unblemish't Pattern set by themselves in the Purity and Probity of their own
Deportment, will give the fullest Authority to all their other Designs. Next to
their Persons, their chief Care will be the reforming of their Court and
Household, and the letting it appear that Virtue and Religion are reckoned among
the first and most indispensible Qualities of those who may pretend to Favor:
And that Vice and Impiety are insuperable bars in the way to it. Princes who
Govern so, that they Rule for God, may justly expect that he will Watch over
them and Protect them: That he will make their Crown sit sure and easy, and
their Thrones safe and fixed under them.

The Second Design for which such Kings are raised up, is, because God loves
their People, that by their means they may be established for ever, that is, in
the Jewish Phrase for a long time. A Happy tempering of Government at Home, a
subduing of Enemies abroad, and a ballancing of Neighbors so equally, that
none of them may grow beyond their pitch, are the surest Methods for arriving
at a fixed Establishment. We were so shaken at Home, that the Foundations of
our Government seemed to be undermined; not only by open and violent Attacks
upon Liberty and Property, but likewise by the more covered, though no less
dangerous Invasions, made under the pretenses of Law, but against the plainest
Intentions of it. Colors were often given to excuse that, which in it self
carried such a Face of Injustice, that without those Masks, it could not have
passed upon a free People. Success in some of these Attempts encouraged the
Contrivers to a further prosecuting of them; so that there was scarce any part
of our Law left, which those Harpies had not touched, and by touching defiled.

The happiness of this Reign is, that in it all those Attempts made on Law and
Liberty, have been stigmatized, as they well deserved to be, but with such
mildness toward those who had offended, hurried on in the Crowd, or betrayed
by their Fears, that those who understand not how boundless a thing Royal
Clemency ought to be, have, from thence, pretended to infer, That the not
punishing Offenders, was a Confession, that their actings were Legal and
Innocent: But a Government that was Merciful as well as Just, was as gentle in
punishing past: Offenses, as it intended to be exact to provide against the
like for the future. The Laws have been fortified by new Explanations, which
assure us of their true meaning. These have delivered us for the future, from
the Practices of those Corrupters* of Justice, and Enemies to Liberty; nor is
this all, but where our Ancient Constitution seemed defective, and had not
guarded enough against the Fraud of Sycophants, it has been fortified by the
addition of further Securities, which as Buttresses were judged necessary to
support the Fabric.

The bringing matters on the other side of the Sea, to juster proportions, the
raising of some depressed Princes, and the limiting others that were
overgrown, has laid the Fears that the World had fallen under, of being
overpowered by a New Monarchy, and has provided for our own quiet, by stopping
the progress that was made upon our Neighbors, by which we have secured to our
selves, all the returns of gratitude, acknowledgment, and dependence, that can
be expected in such cases.

Both Ancient and Modern Writers have thought that Theodosius Conquering
Maximus, and Restoring Valentinian the Second, not only his own share of the
Empire, but to Gratian's likewise, was a Subject fit for Rhetoric: Yet that
cost him but one Campaign, and in it there were only two days of Action,
neither the Charge nor the Danger were extraordinary. Besides, that it was a
just gratitude to Gratian's Memory, who had raised him to a Partnership with
him in the Empire, to revenge his Death, and to Restore his Brother. How much
juster is the Panegyric! when we see a Prince in a course of many Years carry
on a War through infinite Dangers, and at an inestimable Charge, and that only to
preserve the States of Neighboring Princes, without any other Advantage, but
the Pleasure of having Protected the Oppressed, and of having secured the
Neighborhood; not reserving any one Place, either as a Pledge upon his Allies,
or an increase of Dominion to himself. In all Ages Princes have been ready to
assist their Neighbors with Auxiliary Troops, and sometimes with hired Armies;
but it is the peculiar glory of this Age, that we see a King, who has
maintained a long War, led the Armies, and exposed himself to innumerable
hazards, only to maintain others in their Right. If this adds nothing to his
Crown, yet as it makes it fit the firmer, so it must be acknowledged, that it
makes it shine the brighter: The Gems of it have a peculiar Luster, a Glory of
which former Ages cannot boast. This is indeed to answer that Character to
which all Princes pretend, how few soever of them study to deserve it, of being
God's Representatives, and Vicegerents, who takes pleasure in delivering the
Oppressed, setting him at liberty from him that puffs at him.

Thus we see what are the two great Ends of Government, as they are set forth
by this Southern Queen: Next let us view the Measures to be kept in the
Administration; to do Judgment and Justice. The Generosities as well as the
Severities of Government, are believed to be employed in these two. The rigor
of Punishment being the harder part, not so natural to Minds of the best Mold,
is to be left to the Persons of that Robe, who ought to be so chosen, that they
be Men fearing God, hating Gifts, and eschewing Covetousness. They minister in
the less acceptable part; and to them it ought to be left, except when the
interposition of a just Mercy softens the rigor of strict Justice. I say a
just Mercy, for there are Mercies that are cruel. When upon false suggestions,
Blood is covered, or encouragement is given to enormous Criminals, when they
have the hopes of Favor, especially when they see that it may be purchased,
this will soon dissolve the Strength as well as the Order of Societies.
Princes, by so doing, render themselves, in some sort, accessory to all the
Crimes that happen to be committed afterward, by those whom, through a
feebleness of Grace, they have rescued from deserved Punishment.

Judgment is the more acceptable part. The Branches of this are the
distributing of Trusts and Rewards, the delivering the Oppressed, and the
relieving the Necessitous, beginning at those who are brought low by a heavy
share in common Calamities, especially those of War, which entitle them to more
special degrees of the Prince's Favor and Bounty. There is in all this such a
shadow of Divinity, that in it lies the Noblest part of a King's Prerogative.
It is not he but the Law that punishes the Bad; but the distinguishing, the
employing, the honoring and rewarding of those who deserve well of him and the
Public, is singly in him. All must owe this only to the Bounty of the Prince;
yet the whole is a Trust from Heaven; and those who Rule for God and the good
of their People, will manage this, as knowing that they must answer it to the
King of Kings.

This Subject is too tender to be enlarged on by any Person below that High
Dignity, let us then hear the Resolutions of a Good, as well as a Warlike King,
when he found himself settled on the Throne, to which his Son had, no doubt, a
particular regard. Psalm 101.
I will behave my self Wisely in a perfect Way: I will walk within my House
with a perfect Heart: I will set no wicked Thing before mine Eyes, a froward
Heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked Person. Who so privily
slandereth his Neighbor, him will I cut off; him that has a high Look, and a
proud Heart, will I not suffer* Mine Eyes shall be upon the Faithful in the
Land, that they may dwell with me: He that walks in a perfect Way he shall
serve me: He that works Deceit, shall not dwell in my House: He that tells
Lies, shall not tarry in my sight. I add not the words that follow, for they
seem too severe for the milder State of the Gospel: I will early destroy all
the Wicked of the Land: There would be little occasion for this, if the former
Resolutions were exactly maintained: Kings have a Dialect peculiar to
themselves; they will understand one another Language, and penetrate into
their Thoughts; therefore I will not presume to add to these Words either
Paraphrase or Inferences.

But now having looked over all that compass of Thoughts, to which this Noble
Devotion of the Royal Traveller led us: It remains that we conclude, in turning
the whole to Solemn Adorations, and to the Celebrating the goodness of God both
to King and Kingdoms. Our Hearts are now so full of Joy, and our Mouths so full
of Praise, that these will inflame us to Hallelujahs, equal, if not to the
Occasion, for what can rise up to that! yet to our strength, which will
naturally carry us to the highest Transports, the loudest Acclamations, and the
perfectest Harmony that we are capable of. This will go easily; we can hardly
restrain our selves from it: Our Thanksgivings must go further. We must study
to express them in more valuable, as well as more lasting Instances.

Let us remember and pay all the Vows that we made to God in our Days of
Fasting and Prayer: Let us now resolve to live as a Nation delivered and
Redeemed of God, and blessed with the most special favor of Heaven: Let us
walk suitably to that Light, and to those Advantages that we enjoy beyond all
other Nations.

Under God, the Fountain of our Life, as well as the giver of our Peace, let us
make all the humblest returns of Duty and Gratitude, of Fidelity and Zeal, to
our Great Deliverer. Let us continue our most earnest Prayers, as well as our
highest Thansgiving to God for him. I will not suggest so Melancholy a Thought,
as the change in Solomon's Reign: The difference between its bright Beginning
and dark Conclusion. None, how Great, or how Wise soever, are so established in
the ways of Virtue, as to be above Prayers, and beyond Temptations.

Let us all therefore Pray that God may long Preserve the King whom he has set
over us, and the Peace that by his means is procured to us.

May his Reign of Peace be as Glorious, as his Course in War has been, but of a
much longer continuance.

May he be long the Delight of his People, the Arbiter of Europe, the Patron of
Justice, and the Maintainer of Right all the World over.

May the Nation still Flourish, and the Church be ever Glorious, by his Conduct
and Care: And may he be as Happy in the Love of his Subjects, as he has made
them safe under his Protection.

To Conclude, in a Devotion Dictated by a Royal, as well as an Inspired Author.

The Lord hear thee in the Day of Trouble, Psalm. 21.
Send thee help from his Sanctuary, Grant thee according to thine own heart,
and fulfill all thy Councels. The Lord fulfill all thy Petitions. We will rejoice
in thy Salvation. Now we know that the Lord saves his Anointed: He will hear
him from his holy Heaven. And we will remember the name of the Lord our God,
for we are risen, and stand upright.

O Lord save the King.

And Mercifully hear us when we call upon thee.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswel.
REelections upon a Libel Lately Printed; Entitled; [ The Charge of
Socinianism against Dr. (...), (...). (...).

The Church History of Ethiopia; wherein, among other things, the two great
splendid Roman Missions into that Empire are placed in their true Light; to
which are added an Epitome of the Dominican History of that Church. And an
Account of the Practices and Conviction of Maria of the Annunciation, the
Famous Nun of Lisbon. Composed by Michael Geddes, D. D. Chancellor of the
Cathedral Church of Sarum, 8 vo.

Mr. Whitefoot's Discourse of Charity, on 1 Peter 4. 8.

Mr. Henry Wharton's 14 Sermons before A. Bp Sancroft, in 1688, 1689. with the
Author's Life.

Dr. John Conam's Sermons, in 2 Volumes. Published by Dr. Williams, now Lord
Bishop of Chichester.

The Fathers Vindicated: Or Animadversions on a Late Socinian Book, Entitled.
[ The judgment of the Fathers touching the Trinity, against Dr. Bull's Defense
of the Nicene Faith.] By a Presbyter of the Church of England, 8 vo.

Dr. William ^^ tram's 20 Sermons. Published by Dr. Gardener, now Ld. Bp. of
Lincoln.

The Present State of Germany, Written in Latin by the Learned Samuel
Puffendorss, under the Name of Severinus de Monzabano Veronensis. Made English
and continued by Edmund Bobun Esquire, 8 vo.

Four Volumes of Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons. Published from the Originals
by Ralph Barker D. D His Graces Chaplain.

A Commentary on Genesis, Exodus, and Leviticus, by the R. R. Simon, Lord
Bishop of Ely, in three Volumes, 4 to.

A Map of the Diocese of Canterbury, with an Alphabetical Table of all the
Rectories, Vicariges, Curacles, Peculiars, Chapels and Desolate Churches in
the said Diocese, with the First Fruits. Drawn by the R.R. Dr. John Williams,
Ld. Bp. of Chichester.

In the Press
A Fifth Volume of His Grace, Archbishop Tillotson's Sermons. Published by his
Chaplain Dr. Barker.

A Second Vol. of Mr. H. Wharton's Sermons before A. Bp. Sancroft, in the Year
1690. [Which with the First Vol. lately. Published, are all the Preached.]

Primitive Christianity: Or the Religion of the Ancient, Christians in the
first Ages of the Gospel. In three Parts, by William Cave, D. D. the Fifth
Edition, 8 vo.

A New Account of India and Persia in Eight Letters, being Nine Years Travel,
begun in 1672. Containing a Description of the Countries, together with the
Natural History of Vegetables; Minerals, Jewels, and also a Collection of Coins
and Weights usual in those places of Trade, By John Friar, M. D. Cantabrig.

SCRIPTORUM ECCLESIASTICORUM Historia Literaria, facili and pers icud methodo
digesta. Pars Altera. Qua plusquam....* Scriptores novi, tam Edi^ i quam
Manuscripti recensentur Prioribus plurima adduntur; breviter aut abscure dicta
illustrantur; recte asseria vindicantur. Accedit ad finem cujusois Saculi
CONCILIORUM omnium tum Generalium tum Particuliarium Historica Notitia. Ad
Calcem vero Op^ ris Dissertationes tres, (1.) De Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis
incerta aetatis. (2.) De Libris and officiis Ecclesiasticis Gracorum. Adjecti
sunt Indices utilissimi Scriptorum and Concitiorum Alphabetico-Chronologici.
Study and labor GULIELMI CAV^. S. T. P. Ganon. Windesoriersis. Fol.

* This Book will be finished in Hillary. Term next, ( or Easter Term at
farthest) and is intended to be Published by Subscription, with advantage to
the Buyer. Propo^^^^ will be shortly published. Or sometime before the Book
will be Extant.


