PRINTED By His Majesty's Special Command.

A SERMON Preached before the KING In the Chapel at Whitehall. On the Third
Sunday in Lent, Being the 7th day of MARCH, 1696/7. By the Right Reverend
Father in God, GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARUM.

LONDON: Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXC VII.

THE BISHOP of SALISBVRY's Sermon before the KING, ON The Third Sunday in LENT.
1697.

A SERMON Preached before the KING.
EPHESIANS. V. VER. 2. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear children.
THERE is nothing more natural, than for every Man to form himself upon some
Pattern or other. Few have the strength of Thought, and the correctness of
Judgment that is necessary for framing a Scheme to themselves. It is much
easier, as well as much surer to work after some Oaiginal; in which we may be
better able to find out what may be Corrected or Improved, than to form an
entire Design to our selves. This is the simplest and surest way of
Instruction. Great attention to observe well, and some reflection to judge
aright, will carry us far.

But when we view Patterns given us in History, we are apt to mistrust it, both
because we flatter our selves, and so do not believe any thing that is too high
above us; and because we see Friendship or Interest dispose men to flatter
others, both living and dead, we do not believe the Heroes of former Times had
so much Good, and that with so few Mixtures, as their Lives represent them; so
that dead Patterns and written Examples move us but feebly. As for those whom
we have known, we find after much Practice, such Defects and Abatements in
them, as will much sink the high Thoughts that a slighter knowledge of them
might at first raise in us. And though Charity is willing to shade them, yet
still they are Foils which weaken the Luster of the Piece. If we follow any too
closely, we may insensibly enter into the Imitation of their Weaknesses, as
well as of their Virtues; and by too servile a forming our selves according to
such Originals, we may run into Singularity and Affectations, which are always
disagreeable. For some Native or bolder airs, that looked nobly in the Original,
show but poorly when Copied by a weak and unskilful Hand. After all, since a
Copy must needs sink below the force and grace of the Original, for Copy
imports weakness; If we take our Patterns from those who are too near our own
size, they will raise us but very little; and if we take them too far out of
our reach, they will make us despair of rising up to them.

But what mistakes soever we may commit in Copying out men like our selves, we
cannot err in endeavoring to become as like God as is possible. The word in my
Text rendered Followers, is Imitators, and is the same word from which the
Abusive Ones of Mimick and Mimichry are drawn. Genesis 1. 26.
God made man after his own image, or to be an image and resemblance of
himself. He had no other Pattern to Copy from, but his own Infinite and Eternal
Mind; he made us from that Pattern, and has obliged us to imitate it. But is
there not a boldness that seems to border on Blasphemy in this, for a Mortal
man to pretend to be like God? It seems too high an aim: A flight above our
reach, and beyond our prospect. The very Idea of God carrying Infinite
Perfection in it, declares him to be Incomprehensible: Can we then pretend to
imitate that which we cannot look at: 1 Timothy 6. 18.
No eye has seen, or can see him; and though all is light about him, yet it is
a Light to which we cannot approach; for clouds and darkness are round about
him, with relation to us. Yet if this Light is too strong for us to behold, God
has so tempered it, and has brought it so near us by dwelling in Flesh, that
while we look at him in that express image of his person, 2 Cor. 4. 6.
we see in his face the light of the knowledge of the glory of God; 2 Cor. 3.
18.
and in him with open face, as in a glass, we behold the glory of the Lord. The
brightness that would otherwise dazzle, is here so softened, as yet to lose none
of its Beauty, or its Glory; it is both more Instructive, and more agreeable,
as well as less vehement and awful.

Upon the whole matter it is certain, that this is the Great and Fundamental
Truth of all Religion, That its main Design is to raise and exalt the Nature of
man, all that is possible, into a Conformity to the Divine Nature. This is the
standing difference between True and False Religion, between Idolatry or
Superstition on the one hand, and Pure Religion and Undefiled on the other.
That whatsoever proposes any Forms or Practices, Opinions or Interests to be
espoused, that have no real tendency in them to the reforming or exalting our
Natures, but that rest in these, as things in which the Divinity will be
pleased, as in such Acts of Homage and Submission that are offered to it with
which the Deity is appeased or bribed, so as to dispense with, or forgive
greater matters. This is Superstition, and is the practice of those who study
to corrupt Religion in its vital and most important parts, and who would bring
men into Parties, and under Conceits, of which they may have the conduct, and
by which they may manage other Ends that may pass under solemn Names, but are
really the effects of Passion and Ambition, and are directed to serve the
Interests of Carnal and Designing Men.

On the other hand, The right view of True Religion is, when a Set of such
Principles and Practices is set before us, which gives us great and noble
thoughts of God, and of another Life; just and humble ones of our selves, with
a tender regard to other men, and a generous contempt of this World, with every
thing in it, and even of Life it self: And when this set of Mind breaks out
into a course of virtuous and generous Actions; When we show that our Religion
is the best of all others, because we are made much the better by it; and all
others feel such an influence in our Religion, and such effects from it, that
thereby they are both disposed to enquire after it, and prepared to believe
well of it. For the World will always think this to be as true an Argument, as
it is a short and an easy one, That that must be the best Religion which makes
the best Men. All the Rules, Forms, Practices, and Institutions in Religions,
must be such as have a tendency to raise, to feed, and to maintain those great
and noble Ideas which True Religion gives. When they are so practiced, they
contribute toward it, and so become a part of True Religion.

For instance, If one prays only as a custom, in which so much Time must be
spent, so many Forms gone through, so many Words repeated, and so many Acts
drawn out of the Mind; which being done, if he think his Duty is also done, God
is pleased, Scores are cleared, and all is set to rights; here is the
superstitious conceit of Prayer. On the other hand, If one considers Prayer as
a mean and method to raise within him high thoughts of God, and low ones of
himself; a severe sense both of his Sins and Duties; with earnest Addresses
made to God, and humble Resolutions formed in himself; and thus uses Prayer as
a real mean to humble and to purify himself, to keep him in mind of his Duty,
and to direct him by fervent Addresses to obtain Divine Assistances; he feels
this is a Practice, the continuance of which makes him really the better; and
upon such Performances he sees it is very reasonable for him to believe, that
according to the Promises made in the Gospel, of the hearing and granting our
Prayers, that God will accept of such Addresses, and will upon them make such
returns as our Necessities or Occasions do require. This in general then is
certain, That God has not imposed Religion on the World, as it were, to lay a
Tax on men, or raise a Tribute from them; he needs nothing from us, as we
cannot give him any thing; he has only commanded us to be Religious, because it
is the only possible way to exalt our Natures, to compose our Minds, and to
govern our Actions. It is that which renders us proper Objects of the Divine
Love and Complacence, and puts us in the certain way of attaining the utmost
Happiness of which we are capable; which is to see God as he is, and to be made
like unto him: Our being made like God here, is the certainest Method, as well
as the surest Earnest, of our being to enjoy him for ever, in that State of a
more and perfect Conformity to him, than we are capable of arriving at here.

What is this, to be like God! Can a mortal and finite Nature, stretch it self
so far beyond its Bounds and Capacities, as to become either Infinite or
Eternal? Can such frail and short-sighted Beings, as we are, become Omnipotent
or Omniscient? No surely: Man is but Vanity, and even men of high degree are a
lie; they are no less a Vanity than the rest; but because they seem to be
somewhat, they are a lie. The Kings and mighty Potentates of the Earth, after
all the swellings of Flattery and Vanity, are, when compared to God, as
nothing, or less than nothing, and vanity; a diminution in Speech, that wants
not its beauty. Wherein must we then resemble God, or how can we hope to become
like unto him? It must be at a great distance, and with an infinite
disproportion, that we can pretend to this Imitation.

God may be considered by us, either in an Intellectual way, as he is a Mind
perfect in himself; or in a Moral way, as he is perfect in his Dealings with
all others. In both respects we may be able to find out proper Instances of
conforming our selves to him. He is a pure and perfect Spirit, not clogged with
Matter, or any union or relation to Matter. We are indeed chained down to a
Body and locked up in it: We are encumbered with all its pressures, and drawn
down to an earthliness and lowness, by too great a commerce with sense and
sensible Objects. This captivates and depresses us, nor can we quite throw it
off, or escape from it, till the Prison can hold us no more, and our Fetters
fall off. A disturbed Imagination does now viciate our Thoughts; violent
Passions and inflamed Appetites do strangely, by a sort of Magic, transform
our Souls: They become heavy and dull, feeble and unactive, and almost as Low
and Insensible as Matter it self. Then do we rise up to resemble God in the
Intellectual way, when we raise our Minds as much out of our Bodies and above
them as we can; when we deny our selves all commerce with those viciating
Objects, that corrupt our Minds, and war against our Souls: And when we reduce
our selves to short allowances, with relation to those more Innocent amusements
and delights; which may be necessary to the support of the Body, and to the
keeping it in such tune, as to answer the occasions that our Souls may have
with it; or to give our Minds such easy and lively intervals between severer
exercises, a continuance in which would quickly wast or overset us, that so we
may return to them with greater advantage, and prosecute them with more force.
But besides this, a Man who would raise his Mind to be the greatest and noblest
sort of Being to which it can be exalted, ought to break himself all he can to
all eagerness and vehemence, and to a quick pursuit of his Passions or
Pleasures. He ought to shake off all those additional fetters which he has
added to those under which he is put by the state of Life he is now made
subject to. He gives wings to his Soul, who raises it often above Sense and
Interest, above the views of Pleasure or Advantage, who directs it to
Contemplate and to Meditate; and by such practices is, as it were, making
escapes from his Body and Bodily Objects, who grows even ashamed of that
necessary commerce which he must hold with this material World, and therefore
he not only prepares to leave it, but is daily looking and longing for it. In a
word, do not all Men feel that when then they let their Minds go far into
Voluptuous, Covetous, or Ill-natured designs, their Souls are, as it were,
steeped and soaked into Matter, they are depressed and debased by it, and made
capable of nothing that is high or generous. By a long continuance in these
things they lose their relish of better things, as they become incapable of
them. Their Minds grow down to Earth, and become little better than what the
Libertines allow them to be, mere sluggish and unactive Matter. Is not this a
Degeneracy and a Debasing of our Natures, and a sinking them deeper and deeper
into Matter and Corruption? Whereas those, and those only, feel that they have
Souls indeed, who rise to the higher Regions of Thought and Meditation: Who
break themselves to Appetite and Passion, to Humor and Interest, and live in
Thought and Reflection; who awaken all those noble Seeds that are in their
Natures, and Exercise and Improve them, and make themselves to become as much
Minds as they can possibly be. The Clog of the Body will be often taking them
down, yet they will rise up again, and aspire after as much of Intellectual
Light and Life as this state of Matter and Mortality will allow of.

A Second thing in the Intellectual way, in which the considering God as our
Pattern will direct us to raise and exalt our selves, is when we consider him
as Acting eternally upon a true and full view of all things, and upon the
purest and clearest Light, with a perfect and unerring Wisdom. It is true we
are not capable of this sort of Perfection. God sees all things past, present,
and to come, in one single view. Yet in this we see what is the Perfection of a
Rational Nature. It is Thought, Acting with Liberty, and Guided by Knowledge.
The better we know things, the more we examine their Nature, Causes, and
Effects; the more we examine what is past, and look into what may be before us;
the deeper we go into our selves, to consider our Capacities, and to examine
our Defects, the greater views we give our selves of Truth in general, the more
we open our Minds to know the Works of God, the Courses of the Heavenly Bodies,
the Structures of this Earth, with all the varieties with which it is both
Beautified and Enriched; but above all, the more we consider this strange
mixture of Light and Darkness, of Soul and Body which meet in Man, the
wonderful Capacities of his Mind, and the amusing Texture of his Body; and when
from all this we accustom our selves to think much of God and his Attributes,
when from mere Speculative views we descend to more Practical ones, and view
our selves, and compare our Obligations and our Actions, and from a strict
review of what we have seen, form a wise prospect of what may be before us; and
above all, when a Man brings those more general Thoughts to an exact knowledge
of himself, and a strict rule of Life, then does he become truly Wise, and so
grows up to be as sublime, and as exalted a sort of Being, as he can work
himself up to.

Then a Man grows up to the height of his Nature, when he is often turning his
Thoughts toward some useful Piece of Knowledge or Observation: when he
reflects much, and judges slowly, but sedately and truly, and frames his whole
Life to a constant Pursuit of that which is the effect of so much Consideration
and Care. A Man needs but reflect a very little on what he feels within
himself, to be convinced of the truth of all this. The more Ignorant and
Implicit, the more Rash and Inconstant, the more Headstrong and Wilful he is,
he feels that he is the lamer and imperfecter sort of Creature: He whose
Knowledge is only employed in the mean Business of Life, or in the meaner Arts
of Cozenage and Deceit; he who is led or driven blindfold, and who neither
knows, nor is concerned to know how he ought to conduct himself, but leaves
himself to Chance or Fate, to sudden Thoughts, or unlook'd-for Accidents, and
is not the wiser for what is past, nor the carefuller of what may be before
him; this Man, I say, is with all his Shows of Wealth and Greatness, with all
his Gilding and Trappings, but a poor, a blind, and a miserable Creature: a
Slave to Humor or Interest, to Envy or Ill Nature. But he is of a much Nobler
Order, one is almost tempted to say, of another sort of Beings, who has opened
his Mind, and spread his Faculties wide, to the acquiring of true and useful
Knowledge; who imploys his Thoughts and Time to the digesting of what he knows,
and the rendering it useful to himself and others, and who makes it the study of
his whole Life, to reduce those his Theories to Practice, and so lives by
Thought and Reflection. Souls so raised, are aspiring to imitate that Original
Perfection; they are on a true Scent, and in the right Way; they may perhaps
make some wrong Steps, but it is impossible that those who take this Method can
miscarry. All must end happily with those who begin so well.

As God is Pure and Perfect in Himself, so he is Holy in all his Ways; and all
those who arrive at good degrees of this Intellectual Purity, are at the same
time very exactly careful in observing the Moral Order of Things, that Rule of
their Actions and Deportment toward others. These are reduced to Two general
Heads, of Truth and Goodness. Truth is the Virtue which of all others Nature
puts on us with the most forcible Impression. It is indeed no other but the
speaking and acting according to the Sense that we have of Things. It is that
which Nature always suggests; it shoots it self ever first into our Thoughts
and Words. It is simple and uniform, ever the same, maintained without Care,
and managed without Study. It requires a good degree of study to carry on false
and deceitful Designs, with proper Disguises, with that contrivance and
presence of Mind, and with that Memory and Attention that are necessary to
indirect Practices. Whereas if a Man has but the Virtue and the Courage to be
Honest, he goes on with little anxiety, trusting to his Integrity, for that
will both support and conduct him. Truth is the first and the most
indispensable of all the Obligations among Men. It is the Basis of Society, and
the Foundation of all the Confidence and Security that can be in the World.
Many Nations have differed much in their Notions concerning the other Virtues,
but all have agreed, that within Society, at least, Truth ought to be
maintained sacredly; and the more open and free, the more unreserved and hearty
this Sincerity is, it tends to establish Nations and Neighbourhoods upon a
surer Bottom. It is the same Virtue that makes us true in our Words, just in
our Dealings, faithful to our Promises, and exact in our Payments: all arise
from the same Root, from an Integrity of Heart, and a candid Sincerity in all
that one professes, says, or does. This is the speaking the Truth as one thinks
and intends it, and the maintaining the Truth as it has been spoken or
promised. This is the conforming our selves to the Divine Being, 9 Dan. 4.
who is true and faithful, keeping his Covenant and Promises; who is the God of
Truth, 51 Psalm. 6.
and who desires Truth in the inward parts: Whereas the Men of Falsehood and
Deceit, who love and tell Lies, who lie in wait to deceive, who give themselves
to Oppression and Extortion, who take Advantages from the simplicity and
credulity of other Persons, to impose on them the more dexterously; and who make
Lies their refuge and their Strength, and are not wanting to fortify them with
Oaths and Imprecations, that they may vent them with the better Grace, and give
them the more Credit; these are fallen from the Resemblance of the true and
righteous God, and are lapsed into the state of the Apostate and fallen.
Spirit, 8 John 45.
whose Character is, That he abode not in the truth, because there is no truth
in him, who when he speaks a Lie, speaks of his own; that is, his natural
Style and Dialect, for he is a Liar, and the Father of it. Here we must begin
our Conformity to God, as to our Morals. It is a vain thing to pretend to make
any farther Progress in Religion, 'till we have learnt to practice this which
is the first Element of Virtue. There is no going further 'till we enter upon
the diligent Practice of this: as a careful Master will not carry his Scholars
over the first Elements 'till they are once fully the Masters of these. It is
the deceiving them to pretend to lead them further, before these are well
understood by them; so Truth is of so ^ndispensable a Nature, both with
Relation to Religion and Humane Life, that without it we can neither be Happy
nor secure in this Life, nor have any Hope in the next. Since Liars are
reckoned in almost in every Catalogue, that is given us, of those who are
adjudged to endless Miseries.

Next Truth is Goodness and in this we find that Nature has also made very deep
Impressions on us: We feel Dispositions to Kindness and Compassion, to Acts of
Mercy and Pity, and to Love and Friendship, laid in our Natures. We feel that
the more these are shut up, and restrained in us, the feebler their Influence
and the fain^er their Power is, that we are thereby the lower, the meaner, and
the deader in every thing that is either Great or Generous: whereas the more we
awaken and open these Seeds in us, the greater Compass they take, and the
stronger that they work upon us, we become thereby a nobler Sort of Creatures:
We have greater Thoughts, better Designs, with a more generous Exaltation of
Nature and a further enlargment of our Faculties.

Goodness is not mere Pity; much less a feeble Disposition to pardon too
easily, or to carry Compassion beyond all Rules or Measures: such a Goodness as
this, would too much encourage the wickedest Race of Men, they would presume
too much upon it. If Princes were too easy in this way, Society would become
an impracticable Thing: The worst Sort of Men would be too bold, if the best
were too merciful. The chief Acts of Goodness are, the endeavoring to make
others truly Good. He who feels in himself the Power and Excellence of the
Principles of Religion and Virtue, endeavors to spread and communicate these
all he can: He is so sensible of his Happiness, in being under their Influence,
that he takes all the Methods he can, to infuse the like Sense into all others.
Love and Compassion are the Root of this Disposition in him: all the other
Offices and Acts of Charity, are Acts only of a Lower Order, though they are
all necessary in their Kind: those which tend to make Men truly Good, are of
the Nobler Sort. This we find in the Manifestations of the Divine Goodness.

God is perfect in himself, and from that fullness there is a perpetual
emunation to all Rational Beings, while they are capable of being made truly
Good. In Order to that End even the Pardon of Sin is offered but as an
Encouragement to our becoming truly Good: our Faculties are made capable of it:
all Knowledge is set before us in Order to that End: and the Blessings of Life
are given us like so many Largesses, which make it easy and convenient, to
give us the more freedom of Thought, and the better to dispose us to enter upon
wise and good Methods. So the whole Design of God in all his Dealings with us,
is to make us really Good. Other Things are only collateral, and are directed
to this end.

Here then is the true Idea of perfect Goodness; a real Desire and hearty
Endeavor to make Men good, by all the Means and Methods that we can think on.

HAPPY THEY who have their Power to do much Good; who ought to consider this as
the Noblest Character of Divinity, by which they do shine with a Glory that is
much Brighter than all the Attire of Majesty. They are born to be public
Blessings to Mankind, not only as they protect and defend them, as they rescue
them from Oppression and Tyrany, and as they do Justice and spread their Royal
Bounty among their People. This is no small Degree of Honor, but it is not all
their Dignity. They can make the World not only the safer and the happier, but
the better by their Means. They can set such an Example that will bring many to
endeavor to imitate it. What they do is much observed; they are ever in view,
and always narrowly looked to. Many for Interest, and others for Decency, will
follow the Patterns that they set, especially if all is Uniform and of a Piece;
and if they join with it, the Influences of their Favor, and the Force of
their Authority, to encourage and promote Virtue and Religion, and to
discourage and disgrace Vice and Impiety.

The bare Practice of Virtue, and giving good Examples, is all that the lower
sort of Men are capable of doing, in order to the reforming the World. But for
those who are fortified with Power and Authority, who have Rewards and
Punishments in their Hands, besides that, which in other Persons is of little
Force, but has in them a mighty Influence, their good or ill Looks which carry
Life, or give Death, or at least a Damp that will put boldest to a stand. For
them, I say, to be silent Observers of the Vices of others, is to give them
Impunity, if not Protection. When these are of the side of Nature, and give it
scope, then they are very successful: little Labor, with bad Examples in those
set on high, will soon corrupt a Nation. But when they work against the
Current, though the Foundation of all that they can hope to effect, must be laid
in their own good Example; yet this will work slowly and feebly, if not
followed with a mighty Influence. Practices that have got possession, when they
have Nature on their side, will be stubborn, and are not easily conquered. But
Rewards and Encouragements, with some few Severities, when extorted, will turn
the Tide at last.

Are not those then born for the Noblest Ends, and exalted to the best
Purposes, who live and govern so, that the World grows the better by their
means. But as this is the Top of their Honor, and a high one it is indeed, so
they must remember that they must give an Account of it to him by whom Kings
reign. The greater Opportunities and Advantages that are put in their Hands,
they have so much the more to answer for, since to whom much is given, of them
much will also be required.

Here then is our Pattern, and this is our Lesson; 1 Pet. 2. 9.
we must be the followers of God, and show forth the virtues of him who has
called us from darkness to his mavelous light. But if we think this is too
far out of sight, let us view it a little, as it is brought nearer us, and set
before us in more sensible Idea's. In the Person of our Blessed Savior, we see
those Characters of the Divinity, in a Light, that is more accommodated to our
Faculties. If we view him with relation to the Particulars that have been
hitherto insisted on, we find that though he was clothed with our Nature,
together with all its innocent Infirmities, yet he not only kept at a perfect
distance from all the Defilements of Sense, but he despised Wealth and
Greatness, Ease and Pleasure, and fled even from the Offers of a Crown: He
neglected his Person, and spent many Days in Fasting, and the Nights in Prayer:
He lived in Contemplations that were indeed above us, because he saw Truth in a
Light superior to our Capacities: He was neither led by Partialities nor
Humors, but was ever delighted to do the Will of God in all things. 1 Pet. 2.
22.
There was no guile in his mouth: He would not save his Life by the concealing
or disguising of Truth, 1 Timothy 6. 23.
but freely confessed that upon which his Enemies were resolved to take it
away: He was ever open and sincere, though he knew that all his Words were
wrested to the worst Sense possible. He was ever doing good, as his Life was a
perfect Pattern of it: His Time was chiefly employed in instructing the
Multitudes that gathered about him: he taught them plainly, suitably to their
Capacities, with great Tenderness and Patience: only he showed a just
Indignation, which he has thereby recommended to us, against the proud, the
bloody, and the hypocritical Corrupters of Religion in his Time: He bore all
the Contempt that was put upon him, and all the Injuries that were done him,
with silence and patience, and was ever ready not only to forgive them, but to
render Good for Evil; while an unaffected Humility, and a decent Modesty run
thro^ all he either said or did. Thus he lived, and thus he died. He died that
he might reconcile us to God; but he lived to set us a Pattern, to show us what
true Religion was, how to be attained, and how practiced. This was that which
gave the Christian Religion its chief Authority, after the Miracles with which
it was at first proved, had ceased. The shining Lives, the Purity, the
Sinceri^y, and the Charity of those who professed it, recommended it so
effectually to the World, that even the most malicious of all its Enemies, Jul.
Ep. 49.
Julian the Apostate, in a Letter to one of his Priests, in which he laments
the small Progress he was making in restoring Heathenism, and confesses the
Disorders that were among them, says, The Christians, (whom he in derision
calls usually the Galileans) had gained their Credit by their Charity to the
Poor, and by the Gravity or Purity of their Lives. It is true, his Malice made
him put in the Word counterfeit Gravity, but the virulence of that is very
plain. In the same Letter, speaking of relieving the Poor, he does it by this
Gradation; he reproaches the Gentiles with their neglect of them; he says none
of the Jews did beg; but of the Christians, he says they not only take care of
their own Poor, but of ours likewise. It was by the force of such Patterns,
that the Christian Religion prevailed so much as it did in the World.

But what made the Stand? what put a Stop to its Progress, and has brought it
under so fatal a Reverse, that now it is losing Ground instead of gaining any?
We that are called Christians, are chiefly to be blamed for this: Our bad
Practices, and the ill Examples we set the World, have given it deep, and, with
relation to us, just Prejudices. It amazes a Man to think, what it can be that
should possess the World so much against a Religion that is so Pure and Holy in
all the parts of it, but chiefly in its Precepts, and that particularly tends
to make all Mankind both safe and happy. The first and great Reason, is the
corruption of Men's Natures; that stands it out in a stiff opposition to that
which is so contrary to them, to their Ends, their Interests, their Appetites,
and their Passions. This they are willing to fortify by all the ill-natured
Observations, whether true or false, that they can make, of those who are of
any Form, or bear any Character in this Religion. But suppose all were true
that they suggest, and that we were as bad as they wish we were, or study to
make us appear to be; we are certainly so much the more to blame, since our
Practices will have a more certain Influence than our Discourses; yet whatever
we may be, though we may have the Defects and Infirmities of Humane Nature
hanging about us, and returning too often on us, 2 Cor. 4. 7.
yet we have this treasure put in earthen vessels. How contemptible soever the
Pot or Vessel may be, that makes not the Treasure found in it to be of less
Value. It is so tempered, and was so from the very beginning, that the
excellency of the power may appear to be of God, and not of Man. Let Men say of
us what they please, and let us defend us from it the best we can, yet what can
the whole Tribe of Libertines say against the Virtues and Rule of Life, that
Temper of Mind, and Course of the whole Conversation, that this our Religion
prescribes: Let us bear our own Burden, but let no part be cast on that Faith
which we believe, and that Doctrine in which we instruct the World: Nor ought
Judgments to be made too rashly: for Men may have weak Sides and frail Minutes,
and yet upon the whole they may sincery believe, and faithfully follow this
form of Doctrine, even though Humane Nature may be so strong, as to make them
give Ground sometimes, and start aside but too often. Yet certainly this is so
strong a Prejudice to those who seek for it, and study to fortify themselves
by it, against the Power of Conviction, that it ought to have a great effect on
all Persons, in whom, or by reason of whom the Honor of Religion may be
concerned; to oblige them to a great attention to themselves, and to a strict
watchfulness over all they do; for they are watched and observed by others, who
wait for their halting, and will not fail to improve all the advantages that
are given in this manner, with a most industrious spite. But after all, we
cannot pretend to go further than St. Paul did, 1 Cor. 11. 1.
Beye followers of me, as I also am of Christ. Then indeed our Words will have
the utmost Force, that can be put in Words, when our Lives are of a piece with
them: but when it is otherwise, it is the worse for our selves; but our Cause
has still the same truth and the same force in it, how ill soever it may be set
out, or supported by us. God be thanked for it, we are not so destitute of
Patterns, but that some remain; and some we have known, who are now enjoying
the Rewards of their Religion and Virtue, who have signally edified the World,
and whose Name and Fame do still live.

We are to do all this as dear Children, under deep Impressions of the Love and
Goodness of God: for these are the powerfullest Motives to a generous and
lively Obedience. The Glory and Majesty of God strike us, but his Goodness
overcomes all those that are capable of a just sense of things; we receive a
great deal in common with the rest of Men, or of Christians, and those
Blessings are of such a Nature, that if we but let them in upon our Thoughts,
in their true value, we will feel a mighty force in them, to determine us to a
sincere Obedience. The Blessings that go to all Mankind in common, or at least
to a great part of it, will not perhaps make such Impression on some, as those
that are more special, or that having more immediately and particularly to
themselves. In such every Man who examines the whole conduct of Providence
toward himself, from his first setting out to the present time, will be able
to collect such a train of kind and tender, happy and indulgent Instances of
the Goodness of God toward him, preserving him from Evil, rescuing him out of
Dangers and Inconveniences, conducting him through Difficulties, and following
him with many Blessings; that he will soon find Matter enough, if he but
believes and observes Providence, to raise within himself a grateful Sense of
it, and humble Acknowledgments for it. In this no Man's Life is so barren, but
that it will afford him great occasions of Praise and Thanksgiving: for all Men
share more or less in the Watchfulness of Providence.

SOME have indeed had a larger measure of it: happy and great Accidents, have
as it were by a Combination, led them through Difficulties that seemed
insuperable, they have rescued them out of Dangers, that have been of so
extraordinary a Nature, as if They had been directed on Design, to show the
wonderful Interpositions of Providence, for their Preservation. Friends and
Enemies, Seasons and Winds, and Heaven and Earth, have seemed as it were to
conspire to their Elevation, and cross Accidents have seemed to be interspersed
through their Lives, only to make the unlookt-for happy Crisis, come with the
greater surprise upon themselves, and upon all others, as if they were the
special Favorites of Providence, and marked out to be among the most amazing
Instances that can occur in History. If such things have happened to any, and
have set them as much above the rest of Mortals by the Distinctions of
Providence, as they are by the Elevation of their Fortunes, then what Returns
do they owe to that Goodness and Love that has been so very bountiful to them,
in such a copious Distribution of its Favors? What returns of Praise and
Gratitude ought they to make? How ought they to distinguish themselves from the
rest of Mankind, by their Zeal and Activity, and by their Influence and
Authority, to promote the Glory of that God who has laid so much Honor on
them, and to employ their thoughts and time chiefly in contriving and executing
the best Designs they can think of, or that can be suggested, for the greatest
Good of Mankind; which, if they sincerely pursue, this will be, after all, the
greatest of all the Blessings of Heaven to them; it will make them Blessings
indeed to this World, and advance them to the highest degrees of Happiness in
the next.

Here is then the design of Religion* the chief Aim to which all the rest is
directed, to raise and perfect our Natures, to make them as great and as pure,
as wise and as good as is possible to raise them above the Depressions of
Interest and Sense, above the Intanglements of Appetite and Passion, above
little, low, and narrow things, to an enlargement of their Capacities, to an
exaltation of their Thoughts and Tempers, and, in a word, to make them become
like God, that is, the perfectest kind of Beings possible. Can a greater
Thought enter into the Mind of Man, or can he pursue a nobler Design? which
carries Greatness and Majesty in very Sound of it. It is plain this must be the
greatest Design of Religion; it is* the primary End of the Creation, and the
chief Business of the whole Christian Religion. Every Man must feel there is
somewhat in the bare Proposition of it, that strikes his Faculties, which
presently yield to it, and dispose him to close with it.

Oh happy they who do really set about, and do sincerely prosecute it: It shows
a nobleness of Mind to be capable of so great a Thought, which could not move
an abject Soul. This is none of those vain Speculations that set Men on to a
fantastical Pursuit of unattainable things. The Design is solid and
practicable, as well as it is generous and great: It does not swell the Mind
with Air and Vanity, on the contrary it seasons it with Modesty and Humility.
How difficult soever the Performance may be, there are Aids proportioned to the
Labors of it; which will both increase our Force, and render all those
Difficulties the more easy to us.

Our sincere Endeavors will be both accepted and assisted: and how small a
Progress soever we may make here, how often soever we may be taken down from so
high a Flight, and how much soever we may feel our Bodies and our Senses, and
the necessary Commerce that we are engaged in with sensible Objects, depress
and distract us; yet as there is a secret Pleasure in great Undertakings, even
though our Success does not answer our Hopes, so we are sure we shall master all
at last, and in Conclusion arrive at that State of a more perfect Conformity,
whereas our Bodies shall be made like unto the glorified Body of the Son of
God, and shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of our Father, so in our Minds
we shall become like unto God; for we shall see him as he is, and the sight of
these infinite Perfections shall transform our Minds, into as near a
Resemblance of them, as is possible: and as in this we shall ever feel a true
Joy and real Happiness, following us, in proportion to those Advances we make
in our Conformity to God: so when that Conformity shall be carried as far as
our created and limited Capacities can go, then we shall with it partake of a
proportioned fullness of Joy: as great a fullness as our Faculties can receive:
and we shall be ever with the Lord, in those Pleasures that are for evermore.
In this our being now the followers of God will certainly end; we who study to
follow him here, shall follow him into those Mansions of Glory, where with
Angels and Saints we shall be unspeakably happy to all Eternity.

Thither God of his infinite Mercy lead us through all the Changes and Chances of
this mortal Life; for the sake of Jesus Christ our Savior, to whom with the
Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory both now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 12. Line 15. for amusing read amazing. p. 26. l. 1. for us r. our selves.
p.27. l. ult. for (...)


