PUBLISHED, By Their Majesty's Special Command.

A SERMON PREACHED at WHITE HALL, Before the KING and QUEEN, On the 29 th of
April, 1691. BEING THE FAST DAY.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, Lord Bishop of SARVM.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCI.

The Bishop of SARVM's FAST-SERMON BEFORE THE KING and QUEEN. APRIL 29. 1691.

PSALM. xii. 1. Help, Lord, for the godly man cease; the faithful fail from
among the children of men.
THE unlooked-for Turns of David's Life afford us one of the most diversified
and noblest Scenes of History; From the lowest condition of following the Ewes
great with young, which yet was the most Innocent, as well as perhaps the
Happiest part of his life; he was advanced to be the Glorious Champion and
Deliverer of his Country; he was raised to be the People's Favorite, as well
as the King's Son-in-law: He had a secret Intail of the Crown settled on him by
a Divine Appointment; and saw the Affections of his Country concurring with
the Prophet's Designation: He was by their indiscreet Applauses, set so far
above Saul, as to give him just cause of Jealousy; and he found, that Blessing
and Success followed him in every thing that he went about. But a Reverse of
Fortune quickly overtook him; he was pursued by a violent and a jealous Tyrant;
forsaken by his Friends and informed against by Flatterers; and at last forced
to secure himself, by entertaining about him such a company as ran to him for
Shelter and Protection; who when they found themselves in great distress, were
sometimes talking of Stoning him* Only the Great and Generous Jonathan, who of
all others was the most concerned to have destroyed him, gave upon this
occasion, the perfectest Pattern of Heroic Friendship, and was ready even to
sacrifice himself for him, whose Fortunes and Family could not rise, but upon
the ruins of his own. In this cloudy Revolution of David's Affairs, it is
probable that this Psalm was Penned, when all the Prospect that he once had,
seemed to fail; which obliged him to fly to the Divine Help, since he found
neither Piety nor Truth left among men, to which he could trust. It was no
faintness of heart, nor want of Courage, that brought him under this dejection
of Mind: His heart was as the heart of a Lion; yet he could expect little from
a Body of men, that had neither Religion nor Virtue among them: It is true,
they flattered him, and boasted perhaps both of their Zeal and Valor; They
spoke vanity wit^ flattering lips, and with a double heart did they speak prou^
things; boasting, perhaps, their mighty Performances and their great Services.
Whatsoever they might do with their hands, they were sure, that with their
tongues they would prevail: They were also liberal in their discourses, they
thought their lips were their own, and they said, Who is lord over us? For tho
their persons might be under his Authority, they resolved their Tongues should
be under no restraint: His Enemies were insolent and fierce, oppressing the
poor and needy, adding the haughtiness of Scorn, to the cruelty of Malice: But
the poor, while thus oppressed, sighed and cried to God, who as David believed,
would at last arise, and set them at safety from (...) that puffed at them; and
in conclusion, he was neither terrified with the strength of his Enemies, nor
with the weakness of his own Party; he trusted to the Promises of God, which he
knew had not that allay of dross, that was in the words of men; they were pure
words, free from all mixture, exactly true; ^^ke Silver after it has passed
through the severest refinings; and therefore since God had promised to ^aise
him up to reign over his People, he was confident this would be performed; and
sure the Promise was made to him, and to his Posterity; he was persuaded he
should not only be preserved from that generation of his enemies, but that his
Posterity should be preserved for ever. This he concludes with a dark Phrase,
The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men reexalted; which is capable
of this sense, That when David and his Followers, who were then under much
scorn, should be exalted, according to the Promi^ that God had made, this
should so confound t^^ wicked, that had both despised them and their hope that
they should be struck with admiration and gi^diness upon it, like men that are
staring at a strang^ sight, and going round it, to view it on all sides.

I now come to consider more closely my Tex^ which is a Prayer of David's to
God for Help, on the ground, That there was little or no Religion or ^^^nesty
left among men; and that therefore he had n^ reason to trust to them, or to
expect a Blessing (...) such Instruments; on the contrary, he had all reason to
expect heavy Judgments from God upon them and therefore he prayed to him for
help. In speaking to this, I shall consider,

1. What is the Importance of the two characters here given, Godly and Faithful
men.

2. The Reasons that he might then have, an^ that we now have, to lament, That
there are men of that Character to be found.

3. The sad Consequences that are justly to be apprehended to a Nation or
Interest, that is under suc^ a destitution of Religious and Honest Men.

And 4 thly, The only Remedy to all this, which is an earnest Prayer to God for
Help.

Follow me in these things, with that closeness of Thought, and that fixed
seriousness of Mind, which the Importance of the Matter, and the Solemnities of
the Day do require.

To return to the two Characters of Men in my Text. The word rendered Godly, in
its strict signification imports a benign, gentle, and good-natured man; but
this has such a relation to Religion, and is such a disposition to it, that
among the Jews this word was in common use extended to a man that was exact to
all the duties of Religion, and strict in the performance of them. A Godly man
is not one that places his Religion in many assumed practices, that look solemn
perhaps, but in their own nature do not tend to make him better; that are
matters of mere Show and Pomp, which do begin with Superstition, that is an
over-doing and over-valuing indifferent things, and end in Hypocrisy, Faction,
and ill nature. A Godly man is not he that understands his Religion well, that
can write, speak, and argue closely for it, and that can make both himself and
others very angry about it, which is the true name for the greatest part of
that which the world calls Zeal. In a word; A Godly man is not he that is very
regular in all outward Rules, and matters of Form, and that places his Religion
in the exact performance of such a circle of things, which are the external
acts of Religious Worship, and in which a man may go the round very punctnally,
through a course of many years, and yet never deserve the Character of a Godly
man. He that is truly the Godly man, is he that has an inward sense of a
Supreme Power that is over him, that made and governs the world, and all things
in it; that is infinitely wise and good, and perfectly pure and holy; that sees
all things, and that will judge all men for every thing they do, at a great
Tribunal, where there shall be no respect of persons; where all men, even the
greatest, shall be set on the level with the meanest; and where every one shall
give an account of himself to God, and shall receive according to what he has
done in this life. A Godly man is he on whose mind the sense of these things
has so deeply seized, that he studies, above all things, to resemble that Being
as much as he can, and to raise his nature to be as perfect, as wise, and as
good, as he can make it; he endeavors to govern all his Actions in a
conformity to the Will and Laws of God; he rejoices when he does those things
that he knows are well pleasing to him; and is much troubled, when the
frailties of his Nature, and the force of Temptations, carry him to any thing
that offends God. A Godly man is he that does so firmly believe, that God by
his Providence warches over all things, that he does in all his ways resign
himself up to his Will, and submits to every thing that comes to him from that
hand: And in sum; A Godly man is he that does always acknowledge God; that rays
to him for every good thing that he desires, and chiefly for the Inward
Assistances of his Grace, to reform and purify his Nature, and that blesses
God for every good thing that he receives: When this Godly man prays to God
either in private or public, he does it with so serious a temper of Mind, and
such a bent of thoughts, that he plainly perceives in himself, that what he
does, is not the effect of habit or custom, but rises out of an apprehension of
his own necessities, and of the Fullness and Goodness of God: This is the
Character of him that is truly Godly; who considers not Religion as an Engine
to impose fears or hopes on the weaker part of mankind, as the most effectual
way of governing them; nor does amuse himself with Speculations or Disputes
about it, as a notional and dry matter; that does not consider it as the Cement
of Parties, to form and advance low or base Interest, but considers it as a
design to form in a man new Principles, out of which a new Nature may grow; but
such a nature as will make him the best, the amiablest, the usefullest, and the
perfectest creature that he can possibly be in this life, and that puts him in
a certain way to be vastly more pure and perfect in another state. This man
directs all his Studies and Practices in Religion, to the advancing of these
Principles within himself; and he gives the world so lovely a view of his
Religion, by what they see in him, that he does thereby promote it more
effectually, than all the most Learned Disputers, or most Eloquent Persuaders
can possibly do. And to advance this Character to the next Branch of it, A
Godly man is certainly a Faithful man; for he that has a true sense of Religion
in him, knows that God is true, and that in him there is no Lie nor Deceit;
that he abhors the deceitful man, and will destroy him that speaks lies. His
Religion, when it is true and unsophisticated, works him up to such a purity of
Mind, Psalm. 5. 6.
that he always speaks the Truth as it is in his heart. Psalm. 15. 2.
His belief of the Eye of God that sees through him, Eccle. 12. 14.
to which all things are naked and opened, and that will bring every secret
thing to Judgment, obliges him to a severity in the matters of Truth, that will
shut out not only plain downright Lying and Falsehood, but that will raise him
above all little and disingenuous arts and practices, to such a pitch of Candor
and Sincerity, that every man who has any concerns with him, will soon see what
he is to trust to, or to depend on. A Faithful man is he that hates both Lies
and Liars, and scorns those base and unworthy methods of Slander and Calumny;
he deceives no man; he may and often ought to use decent and prudent Reserves;
but in what he says and professes, he is exact often to keep within the Truth,
but never to go beyond it: He is true in his Actions, as well as in his words;
He is just in all the Commerce of Life, upright in all Dealings, punctual in
performing Agreements and Promises, but slow in making many, because in these
he may often forget; but the World, that cannot know that to be true, will be
apt to impute that failure rather to a want of Sincerity, than of Memory; for
when any thing is liable to two sorts of Judgments, the one mild, and the other
severe; the ill natured and false part of Mankind, which is always by much the
greatest, will ever pass the worst Construction that can be made. A man that
has either the sense of truth in himself, or the sense of the absolute
necessity of it to all Human Societies, for maintaining the Commerce and
Confidence of Mankind, will upon other Principles besides those that arise out
of Religion, soon see the beauty of Truth, and find the Indispensible
Obligations that lie on him to love, and to practice it: yet all these are but
seeble Ties, in comparison with those that arise out of true Religion, which
has a deeper and more certain operation for the belief of the Allseeing Eye of
God, and of the Judgments to come; are Restraints of another nature, than all
those which arise out of other Considerations; a Man may be true and faithful,
I confess, tho he has not much Religion; but he must be true and faithful if he
has it: Besides that, a Religious Man will be always true and faithful; whereas
he that is not so, will be, perhaps, true in the ordinary and more obvious
parts of his Life; but when he thinks Art and Management a little necessary,
and that he can avoid a discovery, he will dispense with all Obligations, and
allow himself great Liberties. Here we have in two words the Character of such
Men in whom Princes might well trust, and from whom they might expect a good
Account of all their Affairs. A truly Godly, and a sincerely honest Man, is the
Support of a Throne, and the Security of a State; and as there is a secret
Blessing about him watching over him, directing and prospering him in all his
ways; so there are Charms in him which attract the esteem and love of all that
know him: They see in him a foundation of Confidence, and they look for every
thing that is good from him When it goes well with the Righteous, Prove. 11. ^0.
the City rejoiceth; as well as when the Wicked perish there is shouting. Set
in the same light with this, the best drawn Pictures of Hero's and Conquerors
that are void of Religion and Virtue, who are the Plagues and Scourges of
Mankind, and you will soon see how Ghastly and Deform they look, compared to
those bright Characters with which the Godly and the Faithful Men shine.

I go next to a more Melancholy Subject, which is to be the second Part of my
Discourse; David's Complaint that the godly ceased, that the faithful failed
from among the children of men. Upon this Subject we find another Psalm that
lies very near this, which carries the matter much further. Not only godly men
ceased, Psalm. 14.
but the Ungodly grew to that pitch, as to say in their heart, that there was
no God; They were corrupt, they had done abominable works, there was none that
did good; by a Poetical Figure he represents God as looking down from Heaven,
to see if there was any that did understand and seek after God. It is some
comfort, to hope that even in a general Corruption, there are some Men in
corners that have have kept their garments clean, and that stand in the Breach,
and keep off God's Wrath from breaking in. Now these words shut out that secret
reserve of hope; for after God is represented as thus surveying that Nation,
the account of the Enquiry is, They are all gone aside, they are altogether
become filthy, there is none that does good, no not one. Not only they did not
call on God themselves, but they trod upon the Poor, and Oppressed them; eating
them up as one-eats bread; They also reproached the Poor because they trusted
in God, which is thus expressed; You have shamed the counsel of the poor,
because the Lord is his Refuge. I will go on further into David's Story, to
examine upon what grounds it was, that he made the Complaint in my Text: He had
the most reason to know it best, and was the most concerned at it. That Nation
was God's chosen People, upon whom he had bestowed many signal Blessings; They
were the only Nation, then in the World, that was in Covenant with God; they
had past under much severe Discipline, for their many Revoltings from God; They
were often delivered up into the hands of their Enemies, and were as often upon
their Repentance redeemed from them; God raising up many Deliverers, by whom he
wrought upon many Occasions a mighty Salvation for them: and very lately God
had delivered them out of the hands of the Philistines, and had by a happy and
well directed cast of a Sling, delivered them from the terror of a mighty
Champion, that according to the way of War in those times, was to be first
fought with, that defied the Armies of Israel; and was so formidable, that no
man could be found that was thought an equal Match to him, till the Penman of
this Psalm, being animated and assisted by God, did both undertake and succeed
in it. The People of Israel had at this time none of the best Kings indeed; but
Jonathan was their Prince: Jonathan the Wonder and the Charm of all succeeding
Ages: Jonathan, that showed that true Friendship could live in a Court; and
that even the Jealousy and Rivalry of a Crown could neither interrupt nor
cloud it. Jonathan the greatest of Men, because the best and noblest of
Friends. Next Jonathan, in the Eye of the People, tho before him in the Divine
Designation, was David, in whom there appeared even then the most Heroical
Piety, and the most shining Virtues: tho afterward the Prosperities of an
Established Reign corrupted even these: So hard a thing it is for Piety and
Virtue to maintain their Force in a flourishing Court: Yet at this time, and
during the course of those Struglings, through which he past, he was the most
extraordinary Example that any Age had produced; his Skill in Government, and
his Conduct in War, his Successes and Victories, gave him all the Reputation of
which a great Prince was capable: But his Piety is even beyond wonder; which
appears in his turning himself upon all occasions to God, and in his composing
the greatest Collection of Inspired Hymns that ever was made: in which the
flights of raised Thoughts, and the tenderness of melting Devotions, have made
a mixture, that has been the constantest and the pleasantest Entertainment of
the Pious in all Ages. No part either of the Jewish Story, or of his own, and
no accident of his Life, none of the depressions or elevations of his Fortune
have escaped him; but upon all these a Soul that was ever on the Wing, takes its
flights toward Heaven, and in these he has left us the chief Helps of raising
all that have come after him thither-ward ever since. That Nation that had so
many Advantages, and such Helps, such Laws, and such Patterns, as it had much
to answer for, so it had much to apprehend when it fell under so general a
Corruption.

And now I leave the History of that Nation to come and observe the present
State of our own. Ah, tell it not in Gath! where are the Godly and the Faithful
Men? are they all gone into the Generations of their Fathers? or are they as
invisible as the Seven thousand men were in Elijah's time; who tho they had not
bowed their Knee to Baal, yet were so hid, and so little known, that even the
Prophet thought he was the only Man that was left that had not defiled himself
with that Idolatry? Are we without a Remnant? Are there not Ten Righteous Men
left, for whose sake God may be moved to spare and deliver us? Is there not a
Man among us according to Ieremy's Words? Are all gone aside? Is there none
that does good, no not one? Where is the Piety and Devotion, the Zeal for
Religion, and the Holiness becoming it, that was was once the Strength, as well
as the Glory of this Nation? Where is the Truth and Honesty, the common
Morality and Probity that must be the Strength of every Nation? Have these
things all left us? and have we only a Name, that we live, while we are truly
dead? We are now pretending to Fast and Pray; and to humble and afflict our
Souls before God; but are any of us looking inward, and saying within our
selves, What have we done? are we those that have troubled our Israel? It is a
very easy Thought, which will give us no Pain at all, to accuse the Sins of
the Nation in general, and more particularly the Sins of others: These we may
be apt enough to aggravate both in our Thoughts and Discourses: for naturally
all Men are partial to themselves, and sharp upon others. But then do we truly
humble our selves before God, when we search our own Hearts and Ways, when we
confess our own Sins, with all the grief of Heart and confusion of Face that
belongs to us for them; with the firmest Resolutions, and the most Solemn Vows
of forsaking them. And that we may the better be directed to make a severe
Enquiry, let us reflect a little on the Two Characters in my Text, and ask our
own Hearts, which will answer us truly if the Question is right put, Whether
are we of the small and despised number of those that are truly Godly and
Faithful or not? Have we a Sense of God dwelling much upon our Hearts? Is his
Fear much before our Eyes? Does this Principle make us do or forbear many
things, that we would not do or forbear without it? Do we accustom our selves
often to reflect on the Works and Ways of God? Do we acknowledge his
Providence, depend upon it, and in all things submit to it? Do we often
consider that he sees and observes all we do, and that he will call us to give
an Account of it at the last Day? Do we often pour out our Souls before him in
earnest Prayer? Are we so sensible of our Frailty and Misery, that we cry
mightily to God for Mercy and Grace? Do we often Implore the Assistances of his
Holy Spirit, and bless him for all the good things that we receive at his
Hands? Do we often in our Prayers to him intercede for all Mankind; and more
particularly for the Church and Nation to which we do belong? Do we in our
secret Addresses to the Throne of Grace, make mention of those whom God in his
merciful Providence has set over us? Do we implore a Blessing upon their
Persons and Government, upon their Counsels and Undertakings? Do we upon these
Solemn Days join our Secret Devotions with the Public Offices? and are we
seriously affected with the State and the Dangers of our Religion? Do we
rejoice in the Public Acts of Religious Worship? Do we assist in them with our
Hearts, as well as with our Persons? Have we a Witness within us that can
answer all these Questions? or must not we, to deal truly with our selves,
acknowledge that we are Strangers to them all; and that tho Religion is a Name
of so decent a sound, that we dare not directly attack it; yet in our Hearts we
wish there were no such thing in the World: we are weary of it, and if we
cannot conveniently throw off the very Name and Appearances of it; yet we take
care to let all the World see, that in our Account it is no more than a Name.
If then the much greater part of Mankind live as if there were no such thing as
Religion in all their Thoughts, unless it be to abuse and profane it. If the
whole course of their Lives show, that they have said in their Hearts That
there is no God; then we have but too much Reason to cry out, Help, Lord, for
the Godly man cease. And alas there is but too much reason to add, and the
faithful fails from among the children of men: and that the whole Charge of
the Prophet belongs too truly to us, Hosca 4. 1.
that there is no mercy, no truth, nor knowledge of God in the land, while
every Man is ready to cheat and deceive his Neighbor, to flatter him with the
Shows and Professions; and perhaps the Oaths and Protestations of Kindness;
while in his Heart he hates him, and endeavors to undermine him; while Calumny
and Slander are the most common Heads of Discourses; while no trust can be
given to what is said, and almost as little regard to what is sworn; while it
is one of the Arts of Conversation to affirm things which are known to be
false, and to promise things which are not intended to be observed; while all
these things are so common among us, Where is that Truth in the inward Parts
which God loves? Where is the Probity and Fidelity that is practiced among many
Heathen Nations, with so Religious a Simplicity, that the very Name of
Christianity is blasphemed among them? When the Christians that go from us, and
carry with them those Qualities that they had learned in these Parts, are for
this very reason thought to have a false Religion, because they are so impudent
in the practices of Falsehood and Dissimulation. And while we reproach the
Church of Rome with the Doctrines of Equivocation, as the Arts and Disguises of
Falsehood, the greater part among our selves practice these things in so
barefaced a manner, as if they were angry only at the dressing up and
disguising of them, and resolved to practice a more honest Falsehood, would
avowedly practice that which the others teach us to do covertly. Ah, if
according to the threatening, God would cut off all lying Lips, under what a
desolation should our Cities and Countries, our Courts and Camps be quickly
brought; it would destroy us faster than Famines, Plagues, or Wars could do.

And this leads me to the Third part of my Discourse; which is to consider the
dangerous and almost desperate State of a Nation, in which Godly and Faithful
men do fail. It is dangerous by reason of the natural Effects that must needs
follow on such a Corruption, besides the Judgments of God that it must draw
down upon a Nation. Where Men are no more restrained by the Principles of
Religion, they naturally give themselves up to their Pleasures or Interests:
this makes them both feeble and effeminate, base and treacherous. When inward
Restraints are taken off, Nature must break out, and undisciplined Appetites
and Passions must work the Dissolution of Society and Government; especially
where Liberty is preserved, and Law bears sway. Absolute Governments may be
restrained and maintained at the pleasure of a severe Prince: But a legal and
free Government cannot stand long against an Inundation of Vice and Impiety. So
that here Religion becomes Indispensably necessary, even for the Preservation
of the Constitution: For how can Men live long together in any tolerable Order
and Quiet, if neither the Fear of God, nor the Awe of Man restrains them. The
censures of the Law fall only upon some enormous Crimes, but the corruption of
Men's Morals and Principles, cannot be reached in a Government that is exactly
legal. Therefore such a Constitution must either be fortified by Religion,
otherwise it must turn feeble and fall into Decay, and in Fact we see that no
free Government was overrun with Tyranny, till the Minds of the People, by the
abuse of their Liberty, were corrupted with Sensuality. This blunts Industry,
and raises the Expense beyond the income, which must quickly bring Ruin after
it. The Expense of Vice must be supported with Extortion and Oppression,
Corruption and Bribery. The ravenous Men of Pleasure, as they do little for the
Public, so they think they can never rob it enough. The Love of the Public,
and of ones Country, which is the Root of the most generous Actions, of which
the Nature of Man is capable, sinks in a Man dissolved into Pleasure, or sold
to Interest. A noble contempt of Life, which gives an Heroical Courage, that is
the chief Instrument of the Preservation of a Nation, has no true Foundation
but in Religion. Not to fear Death, in one that has reason to believe there is
a black Immortality that comes after it, is Madness, and an unthinking
Extravagance, and not a true and settled Courage. Whereas to him that has a good
Conscience, that trusts in God and serves him, and that has reason to believe
that he shall be for ever happy in another World, Death cannot be terrible, but
may be thought on, and ventured on with an undaunted firmness of Mind. The want
of Truth destroys all Confidence and Kindness among Men, without which
Societies are but as Ropes of Sand. Men can neither trust a false Man, nor love
him; and what strength can there be in any Government, where there are no
Foundations for these? It would be too invidious to bring all these things,
that have been said in general, nearer us; and to observe how far they belong
to us. Alas, the Matter is but too plain, and needs no enlargement. What pains
has been taken among us, to laugh out of our Minds the sense both of Religion
and Virtue? These have long passed for things of the old World, that are now
out of fashion. And it is but too visible, that the Heat which many showed some
time ago for preserving their Religion, flowed from any Principle rather than
Affection to it, or Zeal for it; since they do now show so little concern for
it, and live so little suitably to it. Ah, have we our Religion for no other
end, but to be laughed at and despised by some, while it is made by others only
matter of Passion and Faction? Where are the most common Virtues of ordinary
Heathens? Are Honesty and Truth, Sobriety and Chastity, Mercy and Charity,
Generosity and good Nature, only so many splendid Names of Qualities that are
to be admired in the Men of former Ages, while they are despised in the
present? And what can we think of our selves, when that which is the Root and
Spring of all other Political Virtues, the Love of our Country, and a Zeal for
the Public, is so visibly sacrificed to private Interests and Passions? These
things do as certainly dissolve the Strength of a Nation, as Palsies or Gouts
do the Strength of a Body. But as so universal a Degeneracy does by its own
Operation weaken a Nation, so it draws down heavy Judgments from Heaven upon
it. Every Man's Indignation against faulty Persons, increases in proportion to
the Favors that have been showed, but despised by the Offenders. The Judgments
of God upon the Jewish Nation, and upon the Roman Empire, are things so
generally known, that I presume it is not necessary to enlarge much upon them:
The Instances of pasttimes are perhaps at too great a distance from us to
affect us as they ought to do. But in our own Age, do not we see how God has
arisen to shake the whole Earth terribly, and that his Judgments have been
going round the whole Compass of Europe, while we, as if we had been the
privileged Corner of the World, have indeed heard of these things, and seen
them at a distance, but have not yet felt them? How many Protestant Churches
have been plucked up by the Roots? How terribly have many others been shattered
and next to ruined? What Scenes of Blood and Destruction, of Burning and
Vastation, have the Netherlands, the Rhine, and Hungary, been now in a course
of twenty Years, with very little interruption? And not to go out of the
Precincts of this Crown, What a Field of Blood, of Death and Desolation, has
Ireland been, and alas still is? And yet all this while none of these dreadful
Things have broke in upon us. We do indeed feel them a little in our Purses;
but ah, how light is this Burden compared to that which others bear, whose
Persons and Houses, their Estates and whole Stock, are every day exposed, not
only to the Fury of their Enemies, but even to the Violences of those that
ought to be their Friends; for in all Wars it is but too common, that Countries
suffer almost equally from both Sides. And if one should judge of that easy
share of Taxes which we bear in so terrible a Convulsion of all Europe, by the
Prodigality and Luxury, the Gaming, the Playhouses, and the other extravagant
Expenses that are still among us, one would conclude that Men are not much
pinched, when there is so much left for Vanity and Pleasure. A moderate
Frugality would do more than pay Taxes. And when Men grudg their Religion and
their Country, the sacrificing that to it which they had better be without, tho
that were not in the Case, it must be concluded that they have no great regard
for either the one or the other. But while we see that God's Judgments are
abroad in the Earth, why should we flatter our selves so far as to think that
they should never come near us? or rather on the other hand, why should we not
conclude, that the seeming partiality of his Providence hitherto to usward,
will be fully cleared by the severity of his Judgments, when he shall think fit
to let them loose upon us? For certainly, the longer they are delayed, they
will fall the heavier at the last: If neither the Light we enjoy, nor the
Deliverance that has been almost as miraculously, tho more slowly carried on
and maintained amongst us, as it was at first given to us; if neither the
Miseries of others, nor our own extreme Dangers; if neither the great
Instructions that are given us, nor the shining Examples that are set before us
can reclaim us, but that we will still go on, and sin with a high hand, then
what remains for us but to cry, Help Lord, for the godly Man cease, the
Faithful fail from among the Children of Men? The more reason that we have to
apprehend Judgments from God for our own Sins, we have still the more reason to
redouble our most earnest Prayers to him, Help Lord: If God do not help us, for
his own great Name's-sake, and for the sake of that small number of
Intercessors that we hope are still among us, the cry of whose Prayers may be
more effectual, than the loud Cries of the multitudes of Sinners; we see before
our Eyes, all that can be formidable to Men, who have any regard, either to
their Souls or Bodies, to their Estates or their Posterity; if God should now
withdraw his Help, and abandon us, there is nothing that the most melancholy
and afrighted Imagination can set before us, that can rise up to the Miseries
that we shall most certainly fall under. That small but much-boasted Earnest of
burning upon our Coast last Year, was the true Sample of what we may then look
for: Wasting and Destruction must walk over the Land as a Flood sweeping all
before it. And as we have no defended Cities, nor Passes to stop the Fury of a
enraged Enemies, if they can but once break in upon us; so the Interest they
have to make this Nation a heap of Ruins, and the particular Rage with which
their Spirits are whetted against us, and the Fury of their Priests, the
Outragiousness of their Soldiery, and above all the Barbarity of the Counsels
that direct them, give us the certainest grounds of apprehending utter
Destruction. If they have used the Countries of their own Religion so as they
have done, where there has been neither Faith kept, nor Mercy showed; then we
may justly apply these words of our Savior to our selves, If these things be
done in the green Tree, what shall be done in the Dry? If ever God for our Sins
deliver us up to such a devouring Calamity, then these will be the only happy
Men of the Nation, who are now thought the most impardonable; for they will
quickly fall Sacrifices to the Rage of their Enemies, and will not endure the
lingering Torment of seeing and feeling the Miseries of their Country, in which
all must perish at last; for late Instances, but feeble Ones in comparison to
those dismal things that are before us, if those black Days should come upon
us, may have taught those unnatural Protestants and unnatural Englishmen, that
would be at first insulting upon the Ruin of their Country, that they would be
very soon looked on as the worst of Enemies, if they should afterward pretend
but to think of preserving the Religion and the Laws. This is but a small part
of that dismal Catastrophe which we must look for, if God should deal with us
as our Sins have deserved at his Hands. And are not all these powerful
Arguments to press us to call on God mightily for his Help? Can we look on
tamely when so much is at Stake? Can we be indifferent, when no less than the
Destruction of our Country, the Loss of our Religion, and the Ruin of the whole
Reformed Side all Europe over, is the Judgment which threatens us, if God is
not appeased, and his Wrath turned away by a serious Repentance and a true
Reformation, without which the utmost fervor of our Prayers is but the heat of
Imagination, and can signify nothing? The barbarous hatred which we lie under,
from those who pretend to be of the same Religion with us, is somewhat
extraordinary; but the stupid and unconcerned Indifferency of those who are, or
at least seem to be, with us, is yet in some respects more amazing, who perhaps
look on all that is doing as if it were other Men's Work and not their own; as
if it were only done for the Establishing of the Throne of our Princes, and not
for the Preservation and Happiness of the Nation; and as if the Quarrel were
personal and not national. We have Princes who show us but too often how
regardless they are of their own Persons, and how much they consider the
Public: and who can neither be kept from the Danger nor the Fatigue of
Campagnes; when, to the lasting Reproach of the Youth of the Nation, so many
choose to loiter it away at Home in Luxury and Effeminacy, rather than go and
learn how to defend their Country, and show that they have the Zeal and
Affection for their Religion, their King and their Country, which becomes their
Blood, and the Rank that they hold in it. They deceive themselves, who think
that the present Quarrel is any other than Religion and England. While then all
is struck at, why are not all concerned, since every Man must bear his share in
the Issue? Shall those that go out in our Armies and Fields; and with all
dutiful Reverence be it said, shall his Majesty alone carry away the whole
Honor of preserving and saving the Nation? Have we who stay at Home no
Ambition to share with them in it? If we go on in our Sins, we are fighting
against them behind them, while they have a powerful Enemy in Head: but if we
are Fasting and Praying while they are Marching and Fighting, there will be in
this a strong Reserve, and a mighty Supply sent to them. We have on our Side
the justest Cause that ever any Nation engaged in: we have also on our Side the
Sighs of many poor and needy Persons, who have been made miserable by the
Treachery and Cruelty of our Enemies: So that according to the words of this
Psalm, we may hope that for the Oppression and Sighing of the Poor and Needy,
God will now arise and set him in safety from him that puffs at him. The Cry
of all that Innocent Blood that has been shed in a course of many Years unjust
Wars, and cruel Persecution, does all stand of our Side. If then we join to
these true Repentance and earnest Prayers, we may justly hope that they shall
be heard, that God will arise, lift up his Strength, and come and save us. It
will be but a very light part of the War, if we lay upon our selves an
Obligation of offering up every day some Petitions to God with relation to it,
if we raise our Fervor a little higher once a Week, and if we observe the
monthly Fast with that solemn strictness which becomes so important an
Occasion, this will upon the whole Matter bear a greater share in our
Preservation than our profane Libertines can understand. God is a hearer of
Prayer, and this will be a continuance in it, and a watching thereunto;
according to the Apostle's Phrase, That our Prayers may go up before God as
Incense, we must cleanse our Hearts, and wash our Hands: we must put away from
us the evil of our ways, and entertain nothing within us, by which our Prayers
may be hindered: for as the effectual fervent Prayers of the Righteous avail
much, so the Prayers of the Wicked are Sin. If we regard Iniquity in our
Hearts, God will not hear us, but both we and our Prayers shall be an
Abomination to him.

Let us then pray, and pray earnestly to God, that he may go forth with our
Fleets and Armies; and above all, that he may direct and bless, preserve and
restore to us him that is the Light of our Eyes, and the Breath of our
Nostrils, the only visible Support, not only of these Nations, but of Religion
and Liberty in general: and that has hitherto been in so peculiar a manner the
care of Heaven, that nothing but our Sins can make us doubt but that Angels
will still encamp about him, and watch over him. Let us also pray, that the
Partner of his Crown and Throne may have the same gracious Protection hovering
over Her, enlightening and prospering all her Counsels; and that this present
Separation that our common Preservation makes necessary, may be of a short
continuance, and have a glorious Conclusion; that this our Fast may end in Days
of Joy and Thanksgiving, that we may be quiet and safe at Home, and his Majesty
glorious and victorious Abroad; that instead of Wars, and Rumors of Wars,
which do so often endanger that Life, which is the best part of ours, we may
see those desirable and happy Days, in which according to the prophetic
Phrase, The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, Isa. 11. 6.
and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid; and the Calf and the young Lion
shall lie down together, and a little Child shall lead them. That so our
Princes being no more distracted with the more pressing and necessary Care of
our Preservation, may be able to attend more entirely to that which they do so
earnestly desire, the raising up the true Luster of this Church and State, by
reviving all those Virtues which were the Ancient Glories of this Nation; and
reforming all those Abuses and Disorders which the Luxury of latter Times have
let in among us. May They live and prosper, and may every Year be a new Scene
of Glory to Them, an Increase of Triumph, and a Progress of Victory, and let
all the People say, Amen.

FINIS.

