A REVIEW OF THE THEORY OF THE EARTH, And of its PROOFS: ESPECIALLY IN
REFERENCE TO SCRIPTURE.

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop'sHead in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1690.

A REVIEW OF THE THEORY OF THE EARTH.
To take a review of this Theory of the Earth, which we have now finished, We
must consider, first, the extent of it: and then the principal parts whereof it
consists. It reaches, as you see, from one end of the World to the other: From
the first Chaos to the last day, and the Consummation of all things. This,
probably, will run the length of Seven Thousand Years: which is a good
competent space of time to exercise our thoughts upon, and to observe the
several Scenes which Nature and Providence bring into View within the compass
of so many Ages.

The matter and principal parts of this Theory, are such things as are recorded
in Scripture. We do not feign a Subject, and then descant upon it, for
diversion; but endeavor to give an intelligible and rational account of such
matters of Fact, past or future, as are there specified and declared. What it
has seemed good to the Holy Ghost to communicate to us, by History or
Prophecy, concerning the several States and general Changes of this Earth,
makes the Argument of our Discourse. Therefore the Things themselves must be
taken for granted, in one sense or other: seeing, besides all other proofs,
they have the authority of a Revelation; and our business is only to give such
an explication of them, as shall approve it self to the faculties of man, and
be conformable to Scripture.

We will therefore first set down the things themselves, that make the subject
matter of this Theory: and remind you of our explication of them. Then
recollect the general proofs of that explication, from reason and nature: but
more fully and particularly show how it is grounded upon Scripture. The primary
Phenomenon whereof we are to give an account, are these Five or Six.

I. The original of the Earth from a Chaos. II. The state of Paradise, and the
Ante-diluvian World. III. The Universal Deluge. IV. The Universal
Conflagration. V. The Renovation of the World, or the New Heavens and New
Earth. VI. The Consummation of all things.
These are unquestionably in Scripture: and these all relate, as you see, to
the several forms, states, and revolutions of this Earth. We are therefore
obliged to give a clear and coherent account of these Phenomenon, in that order
and consecution wherein they stand to one another.

There are also in Scripture some other things, relating to the same Subjects,
that may be called the secondary ingredients of this Theory, and are to be
referred to their respective primary heads. Such are, for instance,

I. The Longevity of the Ante-diluvians. II. The Rupture of the Great Abyss, at
the Deluge. III. The appearing of the Rainbow after the Deluge: as a sign that
there never should be a second Flood.
These things Scripture has also left upon record: as directions and
indications how to understand the Ante-diluvian state, and the Deluge it self.
Whosoever therefore shall undertake to write the Theory of the Earth, must
think himself bound to give us a just explication of these secondary
Phenomenon, as well as of the primary; and that in such a dependence and
connection, as to make them give and receive light from one another.

This part of the Task is concerning the World behind us, Times and Things
passed, that are already come to light. The remainder is concerning the World
before us, Times and Things to come: that lie yet in the bosom of Providence,
and in the seeds of Nature. And these are chiefly the Conflagration of the
World, and the Renovation of it. When these are over 1. Cor. 15 Apoc. 20.
and expired, then comes the end, as S. Paul says. Then the Heavens and the
Earth fly away, as S. John says. Then is the Consummation of all things, and
the last period of this sublunary World, whatsoever it is. Thus far the
Theorist must go, and pursue the motions of Nature, till all things are brought
to rest and silence. And in this latter part of the Theory, there is also a
collateral Phenomenon, the Millennium, or Thousand years Reign of Christ and
his Saints, upon Earth, to be considered. For this, according as it is
represented in Scripture, does imply a change in the Natural World, as well as
in the Moral: and therefore must be accounted for, in the Theory of the Earth.
At least it must be there determined, whether that state of the World, which is
singular and extraordinary, will be before or after the Conflagration

These are the Principals and Incidents of this Theory of the Earth, as to the
matter and subject of it: which, you see, is both important, and wholly taken
out of Scripture. As to our explication of these points, that is sufficiently
known, being set down at large in four Books of this Theory. Therefore it
remains only, having seen the matter of the Theory, to examine the Form of it,
and the proofs of it: for from these two things it must receive its censure. As
to the form, the characters of a regular Theory seem to be these three; Few and
easy Postulatums: Union of Parts: and a Fitness to answer, fully and clearly,
all the Phenomenon to which it is to be applied.

We think our Hypothesis does not want any of these Characters. As to the
First, we take but one single Postulatum for the whole Theory: and that an
easy one, warranted both by Scripture and Antiquity: Namely, That this Earth
rise, at first, from a Chaos. As to the second, Union of parts, The whole
Theory is but one Series of Causes and Effects from that first Chaos. Besides,
you can scarce admit any one part of it, first, last, or intermediate, but you
must, in consequence of that, admit all the rest. Grant me but that the Deluge
is truly explained, and I Will desire no more for proof of all the Theory. Or, if
you begin at the other end, and grant the New Heavens and New Earth after the
Conflagration, you will be led back again to the first Heavens and first Earth
that were before the Flood. For St. John says, that New Earth was without a
Sea: Apoc. 21. 1. And it was a Renovation, or Restitution to some former state
of things: there was therefore some former Earth without a Sea; which not being
the present Earth, it must be the Ante-diluvian. Besides, both St. John, and
the Prophet Isaias, have represented the New Heavens and New Earth, as
Paradisiacal; According as is proved, Book the 4th. chapter 2. And having told us
the form of the New-futureEarth, that it will have no Sea, it is a reasonable
inference that there was no Sea in the Paradisiacal Earth. However from the
form of this Future Earth, which St. John represents to us, we may at least
conclude, That an Earth without a Sea is no Chimaera, or impossibility: but
rather a fit seat and habitation for the Just and the Innocent.

Thus you see the parts of the Theory link and hold fast one another: according
to the second character. And as to the third, of being suited to the
Phenomenon, we must refer that to the next head, of Proofs. It may be truly
said, that bare coherence and union of parts is not a sufficient proof; The
parts of a Fable or Romance may hang aptly together, and yet have no truth in
them. This is enough indeed to give the title of a just Composition to any
work, but not of a true one: till it appear that the conclusions and
explications are grounded upon good natural evidence, or upon good Divine
authority. We must therefore proceed now to the third thing to be considered in
a Theory, What its Proofs are: or the grounds upon which it stands, whether
Sacred or Natural.

According to Natural evidence, things are proved from their Causes or their
Effects. And we think we have this double order of proofs for the truth of our
Hypothesis. As to the method of Causes, we proceed from what is more simple, to
what is more compound: and build all upon one foundation. Go but to the Head of
the Theory, and you will see the Causes lying in a train before you, from first
to last. And though you did not know the Natural history of the World, past or
future, you might, by intuition, foretell it, as to the grand revolutions and
successive faces of Nature, through a long series of Ages. If we have given a
true account of the motions of the Chaos, we have also truly formed the first
habitable Earth. And if that be truly formed, we have thereby given a true
account of the state of Paradise, and of all that depends upon it. And not of
that only, but also of the universal Deluge. Both these we have shown in their
causes: The one from the Form of that Earth, and the other from the Fall of it
into the Abyss. And though we had not been made acquainted with these things by
Antiquity, we might, in contemplation of the Causes, have truly conceived them,
as properties or incidents to the First Earth. But as to the Deluge, I do not
say, that we might have calculated the Time, manner, and other circumstances of
it: These things were regulated by Providence, in subordination to the Moral
World. But that there would be, at one time or other, a disruption of that
Earth, or of the Great Abyss: and in consequence of it, an universal Deluge: So
far, I think, the light of a Theory might carry us.

Furthermore, In consequence of this disruption of the Primeval Earth, at the
Deluge, the present Earth was made hollow and cavernous: and by that means,
Theor. book 3 chapter 7, and 8
(due preparations being used) capable of Combustion, or of perishing by an
universal Fire: Yet, to speak ingenuously, This is as hard a step to be made,
in virtue of Natural causes, as any in the whole Theory. But in recompense of
that defect, the Conflagration is so plainly and literally taught us in
Scripture, and avowed by Antiquity, that it can fall under no dispute, as to
the thing it self. And as to a capacity or disposition to it in the present
Earth, that I think is sufficiently made out.

Then, the Conflagration admitted, in that way it is explained in the 3d. Book:
The Earth, you see, is, by that fire, reduced to a second Chaos. A Chaos truly
so called. And from that, as from the First, arises another Creation, or New
Heavens and a New Earth; By the same causes, and in the same form, with the
Paradisiacal. This is the Renovation of the World: The Restitution of all
things: mentioned both by Scripture and Antiquity: and by the Prophet Isaiah,
St. Peter and St. John, called the New Heavens and New Earth. With this, as the
last period, and most glorious Scene of all humane affairs, our Theory
concludes, as to this method of Causes, whereof we are now speaking.

I say, here it ends as to the method of Causes. For though we pursue the Earth
still further, even to its last Dissolution: which is called the Consummation
of all things: yet all, that we have superadded upon that occasion, is but
Problematical: and may, without prejudice to the Theory, be argued and disputed
on either hand. I do not know, but that our conjectures there may be well
grounded: but however, not springing so directly from the same root, or, at
least, not by ways, so clear and visible, I leave that part undecided.
Especially seeing we pretend to write no more than the Theory of the Earth, and
therefore as we begin no higher than the Chaos, so we are not obliged to go any
further than to the last state of a Terrestrial consistency: which is that of
the New Heavens and the New Earth.

This is the first natural proof, From the order of Causes. The second is from
the consideration of Effects. Namely of such effects as are already in being.
And therefore this proof can extend only to that part of the Theory, that
explains the present and past form and Phenomenon of the Earth. What is Future,
must be left to a further trial, when the things come to pass, and present
themselves to be examined and compared with the Hypothesis. As to the present
Form of the Earth, we call all Nature to witness for us: The Rocks and the
Mountains, the Hills and the Valleys, the deep and wide Sea, and the Caverns of
the Ground: Let these speak, and tell their origin: How the Body of the Earth
came to be thus torn and mangled: If this strange and irregular structure was
not the effect of a ruin: and of such a ruin as was universal over the face
of the whole Globe. But we have given such a full explication of this, in the
first part of the Theory, from Chapt. the 9th. to the end of that Treatise,
that we dare stand to the judgment, of any that reads those four Chapters, to
determine if the Hypothesis does not answer all those Phenomenon, easily and
adequately.

The next Phenomenon to be considered, is the Deluge, with its adjuncts. This
also is fully explained by our Hypothesis, in the 2d. 3d. and 6th. Chapters of
the first Book. Where it is shown, that the Mosaical Deluge, that is, an
universal Inundation of the whole Earth, above the tops of the highest
Mountains, made by a breaking open of the Great Abyss, (for thus far Moses
leads us) is fully explained by this Hypothesis, and cannot be conceived in any
other method. There are no sources or stores of Water sufficient for such an
effect: that may be drawn upon the Earth, and drawn off again, but by supposing
such an Abyss, and such a Disruption of it, as the Theory represents.

Lastly, As to the Phenomenon of Paradise and the Ante-diluvian World, we have
set them down in order in the 2d. Book: and applied to each of them its proper
explication, from the same Hypothesis. We have also given an account of that
Character which Antiquity always assigned to the first age of the World, or the
Golden Age, as they called it: namely, Equality of Seasons throughout the Year,
or a perpetual Equinox. We have also taken in all the adjuncts or concomitants
of these States, as they are mentioned in Scripture. The Longevity of the
Ante-diluvians, and the declension of their age by degrees, after the Flood. As
also that wonderful Phenomenon, the Rainbow: which appeared to Noah for a
Sign, that the Earth should never undergo a second Deluge. And we have Theor.
Book 2. chap. 5.
shown, wherein the force and propriety of that Sign consisted, for confirming
Noah's faith in the promise and in the divine veracity.

Thus far we have explained the past Phenomenon of the Natural World. The rest
are Futurities, which still lie hid in their Causes; and we cannot properly
prove a Theory from effects that are not yet in being. But so far as they are
foretold in Scripture, both as to substance and circumstance, in prosecution of
the same Principles we have ante-dated their birth, and showed how they will
come to pass. We may therefore, I think, reasonably conclude, That this Theory
has performed its task and answered its title: having given an account of all
the general changes of the Natural World, as far as either Sacred History looks
backwards, or Sacred Prophecy looks forwards. So far as the one tells us what
is past in Nature, and the other what is to come. And if all this be nothing
but an appearance of truth, it is a kind of fatality upon us to be deceived.

SO much for Natural Evidence, from the Causes or Effects. We now proceed to
Scripture, which will make the greatest part of this Review. The Sacred Basis
upon which the whole Theory stands, is the doctrine of S. Peter, delivered in
his Second Epistle and Third Chapter, concerning the Triple Order and
Succession of the Heavens and the Earth. That comprehends the whole extent of
our Theory: which indeed is but a large Commentary upon S. Peter's Text. The
Apostle sets out a threefold state of the Heavens and Earth: with some general
properties of each: taken from their different Constitution and different Fate.
The Theory takes the same threefold state of the Heavens and the Earth: and
explains more particularly, wherein their different Constitution consists: and
how, under the conduct of Providence, their different fate depends upon it. Let
us set down the Apostle's words, with the occasion of them: and their plain
sense, according to the most easy and natural explication.

Ver. 3. Knowing this first, that there shall come in the 2. Pet. 3.
last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts.

4. And saying, Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers fell
asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation.

5. For this they willingly are ignorant of, that by the word of God, the
heavens were of old, and the earth consisting of water and by water.

6. Whereby the world that then was, being over flowed with water, perished.

7. But the heavens and the earth that are now, by the same word, are kept in
store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly
men. --

10. The day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat; the earth also and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.

13. Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness.

This is the whole Discourse so far as relates to our Subject. S. Peter, you
see, had met with some that scoffed at the future destruction of the World, and
the coming of our Savior; and they were men, it seems, that pretended to
Philosophy and Argument; and they use this argument for their opinion, Seeing
there has been no change in Nature, or in the World, from the beginning to
this time, why should we think there will be any change for the future?

The Apostle answers to this, That they willingly forget or are ignorant that
there were Heavens of old, and an Earth, so and so constituted; consisting of
Water and by Water; by reason whereof that World, or those Heavens and that
Earth, perished in a Deluge of Water. But, says he, the Heavens and the Earth
that are now, are of another constitution, fitted and reserved to another fate,
namely to perish by Fire. And after these are perished, there will be New
Heavens and a New Earth, according to God's promise.

This is an easy Paraphrase, and the plain and genuine sense of the Apostle's
discourse; and no body, I think, would ever look after any other sense, if this
did not draw them into paths they do not know, and to conclusions which they do
not fancy. This sense, you see, hits the objection directly, or the Cavil which
these scoffers made; and tells them, that they vainly pretend that there has
been no change in the World since the beginning, for there was one sort of
Heavens and Earth before the Flood, and another sort now; the first having been
destroyed at the Deluge. So that the Apostle's argument stands upon this
Foundation, That there is a diversity betwixt the present Heavens and Earth,
and the Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth; take away that, and you take away all
the force of his Answer.

Then as to his New Heavens and New Earth after the Conflagration, they must be
material and natural, in the same sense and signification with the former
Heavens and Earth; unless you will offer open violence to the Text. So that
this Triplicity of the Heavens and the Earth, is the first, obvious, plain
sense of the Apostle's discourse: which every one would readily accept, if it
did not draw after it a long train of Consequences, and lead them into other
Worlds than they ever thought of before, or are willing to enter upon now.

But we shall have occasion by and by to examine this Text more fully in all
its circumstances. Give me leave in the mean time to observe, that S. Paul also
implies that triple Creation which S. Peter expresses. S. Paul, I say, in the
8th chap. to the Romver. 20, 21. tell us of a Creation that will be redeemed
from Vanity: which are the new Heavens and new Earth to come. A Creation in
subjection to Vanity: which is the present state of the World. And a Creation
that was subjected to Vanity, in hopes of being restored: which was the first
Paradisiacal Creation. And these are the three states of the Natural World,
which make the subject of our Theory.

To these two places of St. Peter and St. Paul, I might add that third in St.
John, concerning the new Heavens and new Earth; with that distinguishing
Character, that the Earth was without a Sea. As this distinguishes it from the
present Earth, so, being a Restitution or Restoration, as we noted before, it
must be the same with some former Earth: and consequently, it implies that
there was another precedent state of the natural World, to which this is a
Restitution. These three places I allege, as comprehending and confirming the
Theory in its full extent. But we do not suppose them all of the same force and
clearness. St. Peter leads the way, and gives light and strength to the other
two. When a Point is proved by one clear Text, we allow others, as auxiliaries,
that are not of the same clearness; But being opened, receive light from the
primary Text, and reflect it upon the Argument.

So much for the Theory in general. We will now take one or two principal heads
of it, which vertually contain all the rest, and examine them more strictly and
particularly, in reference to their agreement with Scripture. The two Heads we
pitch upon, shall be, our Explication of the Deluge, and our Explication of the
new Heavens and new Earth. We told you before, these two were as the Hinges,
upon which all the Theory moves, and which hold the parts of it in firm union
one with another. As to the Deluge, if I have explained that aright, by the
Disruption of the Great Abyss, and the Dissolution of the Earth that covered
it, all the rest follows in such a chain of consequences, as cannot be broken.
Wherefore in order to the proof of that explication, and of all that depends
upon it, I will make bold to lay down this Proposition, That our Hypothesis
concerning the universal Deluge, is not only more agreeable to Reason and
Philosophy than any other yet proposed to the World, but is also more agreeable
to Scripture. Namely, to such places of Scripture, as reflect upon the Deluge,
the Abyss, and the form of the first Earth. And particularly, to the History of
Noah's Flood, as recorded by Moses. If I can make this good, it will,
doubtless, give satisfaction to all intelligent Persons. And I desire their
patience, if I proceed slowly. We will divide our task into parts, and examine
them separately: First, by Scripture in general, and then by Moses his history
and description of the Flood.

Our Hypothesis of the Deluge consists of three principal Heads, or differs
remarkably in three things from the common explication. First, in that we
suppose the Antediluvian Earth to have been of another Form and constitution
from the present Earth: with the Abyss placed under it.

Secondly, in that we suppose the Deluge to have been made, not by any
inundation of the Sea, or overflowing of Fountains and Rivers: nor
(principally) by any excess of rains: but by a real dissolution of the
exterior Earth, and disruption of the Abyss which it covered. These are the
two principal points, to which may be added, as a Corollary,

Thirdly, that the Deluge was not in the nature of a standing Pool: the Waters
lying every where level, of an equal depth and with an uniform Surface: but was
made by a fluctuation and commotion of the Abyss upon the disruption: which
commotion being over, the Waters retired into their Channels, and let the dry
Land appear.

These are the most material and fundamental parts of our Hypothesis: and these
being proved consonant to Scripture, there can be no doubt of the rest.

We begin with the first: That the Ante-diluvian Earth was of another form and
constitution from the present Earth, with the Abyss placed under it. This is
confirmed in Scripture, both by such places as assert a diversity in general:
and by other places that intimate to us, wherein that diversity consisted, and
what was the form of the first Earth. That discourse of St. Peter's, which we
have set before you, concerning the past, present, and future, Heavens and
Earth, is so full a proof of this diversity in general, that you must either
allow it, or make the Apostle's argumentation of no effect. He speaks plainly
of the natural World, The Heavens and the Earth: And he makes a plain
distinction, or rather opposition, betwixt those before and after the Flood: so
that the least we can conclude from his words, is a diversity betwixt them; In
answer to that Identity or immutability of Nature, which the Scoffers pretended
to have been ever since the beginning.

But though the Apostle, to me, speaks plainly of the Natural World, and
distinguishes that which was before the Flood, from the present: Yet there are
some that will allow neither of these to be contained in St. Peter's words; and
by that means would make this whole Discourse of little or no effect, as to our
purpose. And seeing we, on the contrary, have made it the chief Scripture-basis
of the whole Theory of the Earth, we are obliged to free it from those false
glosses or mis-interpretations, that lessen the force of its testimony, or make
it wholly ineffectual.

These Interpreters say, that St. Peter meant no more than to mind these
Scoffers, that the World was once destroyed by a Deluge of Water: meaning the
Animate World, Mankind and living Creatures. And that it shall be destroyed
again by another Element, namely by Fire. So as there is no opposition or
diversity betwixt the two Natural Worlds, taught or intended by the Apostle;
but only in reference to their different fate or manner of perishing, and not
of their different nature or constitution.

Here are two main points, you see, wherein our interpretations of this
discourse of the Apostles, differ. First, in that they make the Apostle (in
that sixth verse) to understand only the World Animate, or men and brute
Creatures. That these were indeed destroyed, but not the Natural World, or the
form and constitution of the then Earth and Heavens. Secondly, that there is no
diversity or opposition made by St. Peter betwixt the ancient Heavens and
Earth, and the present, as to their form and constitution. We pretend that
these are mis-apprehensions, or mis-representations of the sense of the Apostle
in both respects, and offer these reasons to prove them to be so.

For the first point; That the Apostle speaks here of the natural World,
particularly in the 6th. Verse; and that it perished, as well as the animate,
these Considerations seem to prove.

First, because the argument or ground these Scoffers went upon, was taken from
the natural World, its constancy and permanency in the same state from the
beginning; therefore if the Apostle answers ad idem, and takes away their
argument, he must understand the same natural World, and show that it has been
changed, or has perished.

You will say, it may be, the Apostle does not deny, nor take away the ground
they went upon, but denies the consequence they made from it; that therefore
there would be no change, because there had been none. No, neither does he do
this, if by the World in the 6th. Verse, he understands Mankind only; for
their ground was this, there has been no change in the natural World; Their
consequence, this, therefore there will be none, nor any Conflagration. Now the
Apostle's answer, according to you, is this, you forget that Mankind has been
destroyed in a Deluge. And what then? what is this to the natural World, whereof
they were speaking? this takes away neither antecedent nor consequent, neither
ground nor inference; nor any way touches their argument, which proceeded from
the natural World to the natural World. Therefore you must either suppose that
the Apostle takes away their ground, or he takes away nothing.

Secondly, what is it that the Apostle tells these Scoffers they were ignorant
of? that there was a Deluge, that destroyed Mankind? They could not be ignorant
of that, nor pretend to be so; It was therefore the constitution of those old
Heavens and Earth, and the change or destruction of them at the Deluge, that
they were ignorant of, or did not attend to; and of this the Apostle minds
them. These Scoffers appear to have been Jews by the phrase they use, since the
Fathers fell asleep, which in both parts of it is a Judaical expression; And
does St. Peter tell the Jews that had Moses read to them every Sabbath, that
they were ignorant that Mankind was once destroyed with a Deluge in the Days of
Noah? or could they pretend to be ignorant of that without making themselves
ridiculous both to Jews and Christians? Besides, these do not seem to have been
of the vulgar amongst them, for they bring a Philosophical argument for their
opinion; and also in their very argument they refer to the History of the Old
Testament, in saying, Since the Fathers There was a Sect amongst the Jews that
held this perpetuity and immutability of Nature; and Maimonides himself was of
this principle, and gives the same reason for it with the Scoffers here in the
Text, Quod mundus retinet and sequitur consuetudinem suam. And as to those of
the Jews that were Aristoteleans, it was very suitable to their principles to
hold the incorruptibility of the World, as their Master did. Vid. Med. in loc.
fell asleep, amongst which Fathers, Noah was one of the most remarkable.

Thirdly, the design of the Apostle is to prove to them, or to dispose them to
the belief of the Conflagration, or future destruction of the World; which I
suppose you will not deny to be a destruction of the natural World; therefore
to prove or persuade this, he must use an argument taken from a precedent
destruction of the natural World; for to give an instance of the perishing of
Mankind only, would not reach home to his purpose. And you are to observe here
that the Apostle does not proceed against them barely by authority; for what
would that have booted? If these Scoffers would have submitted to authority,
they had already the authority of the Prophets and Apostles in this point: but
he deals with them at their own weapon, and opposes reasons to reasons; What
has been done may be done, and if the natural World has been once destroyed,
it is not hard, nor unreasonable, to suppose those Prophecies to be true, that
say it shall be destroyed again.

Fourthly, unless we understand here the natural World, we make the Apostle
both redundant in his discourse, and also very obscure in an easy argument. If
his design was only to tell them that Mankind was once destroyed in a Deluge,
what is that to the Heavens and the Earth? the 5th. Verse would be superfluous;
which yet he seems to make the foundation of his discourse. He might have told
them how Mankind had perished before with a Deluge, and aggravated that
destruction as much as he pleased, without telling them how the Heavens and the
Earth were constituted then; what was that to the purpose, if it had no
dependence or connection with the other? In the precedent Chapter, Verse 5th.
when he speaks only of the Floods destroying Mankind, he mentions nothing of
the Heavens or the Earth: and if you make him to intend no more here, what he
says more is superfluous.

I also add, that you make the Apostle very obscure and operose in a very easy
argument. How easy had it been for him, without this Apparatus, to have told
them, as he did before, that God brought a Flood upon the World of the ungodly;
and not given us so much difficulty to understand his sense, or such a
suspicion and appearance, that he intended something more; for that there is at
least a great appearance and tendency to a further sense, I think none can
deny; And St. Austin, Didymus Alex. Bid, as we shall see hereafter, understood
it plainly of the natural World: Also modern Expositors and Critics; as
Cajetan, Estius, Drusius, Heinsius, have extended it to the natural World, more
or less; though they had no Theory to mislead them, nor so much as an hypothesis
to support them; but attended only to the tenor of the Apostle's discourse,
which constrained them to that sense, in whole or in part.

Fifthly, the opposition carries it upon the natural World. The opposition lies
betwixt the (...) and (...) the Heavens that were of old, and the Earth, and
the present Heavens and Earth, or the two natural Worlds. And if they will not
allow them to be opposed in their natures (which yet we shall prove by and by)
at least they must be opposed in their date; and as This is to perish by fire,
so That perished by water; And if it perished by water, it perished; which is
all we contend for at present.

Lastly, if we would be as easily governed in the exposition of this place, as
we are of other places of Scripture, it would be enough to suggest, that in
reason and fairness of interpretation, the same World is destroyed in the 6th
verse, that was described in the foregoing verse; but it is the Natural World
that is described there, the Heavens and the Earth, so and so constituted; and
therefore in fairness of interpretation they ought to be understood here; that
World being the subject that went immediately before, and there being nothing
in the words that restrains them to the animate World or to Mankind. In the 2d
chapter ver. 5. the Apostle does restrain the word (...) by adding (...), the World
of the ungodly; but here it is not only illimited, but according to the context,
both preceding and following, to be extended to the Natural World. I say by the
following context too, for so it answers to the World that is to perish by
Fire; which will reach the frame of Nature as well as Mankind.

For a conclusion of this first point, I will set down S. Austin's judgment in
this case; who in several parts of his works has interpreted this place of S.
Peter, of the natural world. As to the heavens, he has these words in his
Exposition upon Genesis, Hos etiam aerios calos quondam periisse Diluvio, in
quadam earum quae Canonica appellantur, Epistola legimus. We read in one of the
Epistles called Canonical, meaning this of S. Peter's, that the aerial heavens
perished in the Deluge. And he concerns himself there to let you know that it
was not the starry heavens that were destroyed; the waters could not reach so
high; but the regions of our air. Then afterward he has these words Facilius
eos (coelos) secundum illius Epistolae authoritatem credimus periisse, and
alios, sicut ibi scribitur, repositos. We do more easily believe, according to
the authority of that Epistle, those heavens to have perished; and others, as
it is there written, substituted in their place. In like manner, and to the
same sense, he has these words upon Psalm. 101. Aerii utique coeli perierunt ut
propinqui Terris, secundum quod dicuntur volucres coeli; sunt autem and coeli
coelorum, superiores in Firmamento, sed utrum and ipfi perituri sint igni, an
hi soli, qui etiam diluvio perierunt, disceptatio est aliquanto scrupulosior
inter doctos. And in his Book de Civ. Dei, he has several passages to the same
purpose, Quemadmodum in Apostolica illa Epistola a toto pars accipitur, quod
diluvio periisse dictus est mandus, quamvis sola ejus cum suis coelis pars ima
perierit. These being to the same effect with the first citation, I need not
make them English; and this last place refers to the Earth as well as the
Heavens, as several other places in S. Austin do, whereof we shall give you an
account, when we come to show his judgment concerning the second point, the
diversity of the ante-diluvian and post-diluvian World. This being but a
foretaste of his good will and inclinations toward this doctrine.

These considerations alleged, so far as I can judge, are full and
unanswerable proofs, that this discourse of the Apostle's comprehends and
refers to the Natural World; and consequently they warrant our interpretation
in this particular, and destroy the contrary. We have but one step more to make
good, That there was a change made in this natural world at the Deluge,
according to the Apostle; and this is to confute the second part of their
interpretation, which supposes that S. Peter makes no distinction or
opposition betwixt the antediluvian Heavens and Earth, and the present Heavens
and Earth, in that respect.

This second difference betwixt us, methinks, is still harsher than the first;
and contrary to the very form, as well as to the matter of the Apostle's
discourse. For there is a plain antithesis, or opposition made betwixt the
Heavens and the Earth of old ( ver. the 5th) and the Heavens and the Earth that
are now ( verse the 7th) (...) and (...), and the adversative particle, but,
you see marks the (...)
opposition; so that it is full and plain according to Grammar and Logic. And
that the parts or members of this opposition differ in nature from one another,
is certain from this, because otherwise the Apostle's argument or discourse is
of no effect, concludes nothing to the purpose; he makes no answer to the
objection, nor proves any thing against the Scoffers, unless you admit that
diversity. For they said, All things had been the same from the beginning in
the Natural World, and unless he say, as he manifestly does, that there has
been a change in Nature, and that the Heavens and Earth that are now, are
different from the ancient Heavens and Earth, which perished at the Flood, he
says nothing to destroy their argument, nor to confirm the Prophetical doctrine
of the future destruction of the Natural World.

This, I think, would be enough to satisfy any clear and free mind concerning
the meaning of the Apostle; but because I desire to give as full a light to
this place as I can, and to put the sense of it out of controversy, if
possible, for the future, I will make some further remarks to confirm this
exposition.

And we may observe that several of those reasons which we have given to prove,
That the Natural World is understood by S. Peter, are double reasons; and do
also prove the other point in question, a diversity betwixt the two Natural
Worlds, the Anti-diluvian and the present. As for instance, unless you admit
this diversity betwixt the two natural Worlds, you make the 5th verse in this
Chapter superfluous and useless: and you must suppose the Apostle to make an
inference here without premises. In the 6th verse he makes an inference, (...),
per quae. Vulgat. Quamobrem, Beza, Qua de causa, Grot. Nemo interpretum
reddidit (...) per quas; subint elligendo aquas. Hoc enim argumentationem
ApoQuod suppostolicam tolleret, supponeretque illusores illos ignorasse quod
olim fuerit Diluvium; ni non posse supra ostendimus.
Whereby the World, that then was, perished in a Deluge; what does this whereby
relate to? by reason of what? sure of the particular constitution of the
Heavens and the Earth immediately before described. Neither would it have
signified any thing to the Scoffers, for the Apostle to have told them how the
Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth were constituted, if they were constituted just
in the same manner as the present.

Besides, what is it, as I asked before, that the Apostle tells these Scoffers
they were ignorant of? does he not say formally and expressly ( ver. 5.) that
they were ignorant that the Heavens and the Earth were constituted so and so,
before the Flood? but if they were constituted as these present Heavens and
Earth are, they were not ignorant of their constitution; nor did pretend to be
ignorant, for their own (mistaken) argument supposes it.

But before we proceed any further, give me leave to note the impropriety of
our Translation, in the 5th. Verse, or latter part of it; (...) (vel (...))
(...), This we translate standing in the water, and out of the water, which is
done manifestly in compliance with the present form of the Earth, and the
notions of the Translators: and not according to the natural force and sense of
the Greek words. If one met with this sentence This phrase or manner of speech
(...) vel (...) is not unusual in Greek Authors, and upon a like subject; Plato
says, (...), but he that should translate Plato, The world stands out of fire,
water, etc. would be thought neither Grecian, nor Philosopher. The same phrase
is used in reciting Heraclitus his opinion, (...). And also in Thales his,
which is still nearer to the subject, (...), which Cicero renders, ex aqua,
dixit, constare omnia. So that it is easy to know the true importance of this
phrase, and how ill it is rendered in the English, standing out of the water.
in a Greek Author, who would ever render it standing in the water and out of
the water? nor do I know any Latin Translator that has ventured to render them
in that sense; nor any Latin Father; St. Austin and St. Jerome I Am sure do
not, but Consistens ex aqua, or de aqua, and per aquam: for that later phrase
also (...) does not with so good propriety signify to stand in the water, as
to consist or subsist by water, or by the help of water, Tanquam per causam
sustinentem; as St. Austin and Jerome render it. Neither does that instance
they give from 1 Pet. 3. 20. prove any thing to the contrary, for the Ark was
sustained by the waters, and the English does render it accordingly.

The Translation being thus rectified, you see the ante-diluvian Heavens and
Earth consisted of Water, and by water; which makes way for a second
observation to prove our sense of the Text; for if you admit no diversity
betwixt those Heavens and Earth, and the present, show us 'pray, how the
present Heavens and Earth consist of water, and by water. What watery
constitution have they? The Apostle implies rather, that The now Heavens and
Earth have a fiery constitution. We have now Meteors of all sorts in the air,
winds, hail, snow, lightning, thunder, and all things engendered of fiery
exhalations, as well as we have rain; but according to our Theory, the
ante-diluvian Book 2. c. 5. p. 233.
Heavens, of all these Meteors had none but dews and rain, or watery Meteors
only; and therefore might very aptly be said by the Apostle to be constituted
of water, or to have a watery (...). Then the Earth was said to consist by
water, because it was built upon it, and at first was sustained by it. And when
such a Key as this is put into our hands, that does so easily unlock this hard
passage, and makes it intelligible, according to the just force of the words,
why should we pertinaciously adhere to an interpretation, that neither agrees
with the words, nor makes Whether you refer the words (...). separately, to the
Heavens and the Earth, or both to the Earth, or both to both, it will make no
great difference as to our interpretation.
any sense that is considerable?

Thirdly, If the Apostle had made the ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth the same
with the present, his apodosis in the 7th. Verse, should not have been (...),
but (...), etc. I say, it should not have been by way of antithesis, but of
identity or continuation; And the same Heavens and Earth are kept in store
reserved unto fire, etc. Accordingly we see the Apostle speaks thus, as to the
Logos, or the Word of God, Verse 7. (...), by the same Word of God; where the
thing is the same, he expresses it as the, same; And if it had been the same
Heavens and Earth, as well as the same Word of God, Why should he use a mark of
opposition for the one, and of identity for the other? to this I do not see
what can be fairly answered.

Fourthly, the ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth were different from the present,
because, as the Apostle intimates, they were such, and so constituted, as made
them obnoxious to a Deluge; whereas ours are of such a form, as makes them
incapable of a Deluge, Theor. I Book. c. 2.
and obnoxious to a Conflagration; the just contrary fate.

If you say there was nothing of natural tendency or disposition in either
World to their respective fate, but the first might as well have perished by
fire, as water, and this by water as by fire, you unhinge all Nature and
natural providence in that method, and contradict one main scope of the Apostle
in this discourse. His first scope is to assert, and mind them of that
diversity there was betwixt the ancient Heavens and Earth, and the present; and
from that, to prove against those Scoffers, that there had been a change and
revolution in Nature; And his second scope seems to be this, to show that
diversity to be such, as, under the Divine conduct, leads to a different fate,
and exposed that World to a Deluge; for when he had described the constitution
of the first Heavens and Earth, he subjoyns, (...). Quia talis erat, says
Grotius, qualem diximus, constitutio and Terrae and Coeli. W H E R E B Y the
then World perished in a Flood of Water. This whereby notes some kind of causal
dependence, and must relate to some means or conditions precedent. It cannot
relate to Logos, or the Word of God, Grammar will not permit that; therefore it
must relate to the state of the ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth immediately
premised. And to what purpose indeed should he premise the description of those
Heavens and Earth, if it was not to lay a ground for this inference?

Having given these Reasons for the necessity of this Interpretation; in the
last place, let us consider St. Austin's judgment, and his sense upon this
place, as to the point in question. As also the reflections that some other of
the Ancients have made upon this doctrine of St. Peter's. Didymus Alexandrinus,
who was for some time St. Jerome's Master, made such a severe reflection upon
it, that he said this Epistle was corrupted, and should not be admitted into
the Canon, because it taught the doctrine of a Triple or Triform World in this
third Chapter. As you may see in his Enarr. in Epist. Canonicas. Now this
threefold World is first that in the 6th. Verse, The World that then was. In
the 7th. Verse, The Heavens and the Earth that are now. And in the 13th. Verse,
We expect new Heavens and a new Earth, according to his promise. This seems to
be a fair account that St. Peter taught the doctrine of a triple World; And I
quote this testimony, to show what St. Peter's words do naturally import, even
in the judgment of one that was not of his mind. And a Man is not prone to make
an exposition against his own Opinion, unless he think the words very pregnant
and express.

But St. Austin owns the authority of this Epistle, and of this doctrine, as
derived from it, taking notice of this Text of St. Peter's in several Parts of
his Works. We have noted three or four places already to this purpose, and we
may further take notice of several passages in his Treatise, de Civ, Dei, which
confirm our exposition. In his 20th. Book, chapter 24. he disputes against
Porphyry, who had the same Principles with these Aeternalists in the Text; or,
if I may so call them, Incorruptarians; and thought the World never had, nor
ever would undergo any change, especially as to the Heavens. St. Austin could
not urge Porphyry with the authority of St. Peter, for he had no veneration for
the Christian Oracles; but it seems he had some for the Jewish, and arguing
against him, upon that Text in the Psalms, Coeli peribunt, he shows upon
occasion how he understands St. Peter's destruction of the Old World. Legitur
Coelum and Terra transibunt, Mundus transit, sed puto quod proeterit, transit,
transibunt aliquanto mitius dicta sunt quam peribunt. In Epistola quoque Petri
Apostoli, ubi aqua inundatus, qui tum erat, periisse dictus est Mundus, satis
clarum est quae pars mundi a toto significata est, and quatenus periisse dicta
sit, and qui coeli repositi igni reservandi. This he explains more fully
afterward by subjoyning a caution (which we cited before) that we must not
understand this passage of St. Peter's, concerning the destruction of the ante
diluvian World, to take in the whole Universe, and the highest Heavens, but
only the aerial Heavens, and the sublunary World. In Apostolica illa Epistola
a toto pars accipitur, quod Diluvio periisse dictus est mundus, quamvis sola
ejus, cum suis coelis, pars ima perierit. In that Apostolical Epistle, a part
is signified by the whole, when the World is said to have perished in the
Deluge, although the lower part of it only, with the Heavens belonging to it,
perished: that is, the Earth with the regions of the Air that belong to it. And
consonant to this, in his exposition of that hundred and first Psalm, upon
those words, The Heavens are the work of thy hands, They shall perish, but thou
shall endure. This perishing of the Heavens, he says, S. Peter tells us, has
been once done already, namely, at the Deluge; Aperte dixit hoc Apostolus
Petrus, Coeli erant olim and Terra, de aqua and per aquam constituti, Dei
verbo; per quod qui factus est mundus, aqua inundatus deperiit; Terra autem and
coeli qui nunc sunt, igni reservantur. Jam ergo dixit periisse coelos per
Diluvium.

These places show us that S. Austin understood S. Peter's discourse to aim at
the natural World, and his periit or periisse ( verse 6.) to be of the same
force as peribunt in the Psalms, when it is said the Heavens shall perish; and
consequently that the Heavens and the Earth, in this Father's opinion, were as
really changed and transformed at the time of the Flood, as they will be at the
Conflagration. But we must not expect from S. Austin or any of the Ancients a
distinct account of this Apostolical doctrine, as if they knew and acknowledged
the Theory of the first World; that does not at all appear; but what they said
was either from broken Tradition, or extorted from them by the force of the
Apostle's words and their own sincerity.

There are yet other places in S. Austin worthy our consideration upon this
subject; especially his exposition of this 3d chap. of S. Peter, as we find it
in cap. 18.
that same Treatise de Civ. Dei. There he compares again, the destruction of
the World at the Deluge, with that which shall be at the Conflagration, and
supposes both the Heavens and Earth to have perished. Apostolus commemorans
factum ante Diluvium, videtur admonuisse quodammodo quatenus in fine hujus
secult mundum istum periturum esse credamus. Nam and illo tempore periisse
dixit, qui tunc erat, mundum; nec solum orbem terrae, verum etiam coelos, Then
giving his usual caution, That the Stars and starry heavens should not be
comprehended in that mundane destruction, He goes on, Atque hoc modo (pene
totus aer) cum terra perierat; cujus Terrae utique prior facies (nempe
ante-diluviana) fuerat deleta Diluvio. Qui autem nunc sunt coeli and terra
eodem verbo repositi sunt igni reservandi; Proinde qui coeli and quae Terra, id
est, qui mundus, pro eo mundo qui Diluvio periit, ex eadem aqua repositus est,
ipse igni novissimo reservatur. Here you see S. Austin's sense upon the whole
matter; which is this, That the natural World, the Earth with the Heavens about
it, was destroyed and changed at the Deluge into the present Heavens and Earth;
which shall again in like manner be destroyed and changed by the last fire.
Accordingly in another place, to add cap. 16:
no more, he says the figure of the (sublunary) world shall be changed at the
Conflagration, as it was changed at the Deluge. Tunc figura hujus mundi, etc.
cap. 16.

Thus you see, we have S. Austin on our side, in both parts of our
interpretation; that S. Peter's discourse is to be referred to the natural
inanimate World, and that the present natural World is distinct and different
from that which was before the Deluge. And S. Austin having applied this
expressly to S. Peter's doctrine by way of Commentary, it will free us from any
crime or affectation of singularity in the exposition we have given of that
place.

Venerable Bede has followed S. Austin's footsteps in this doctrine; for,
interpreting S. Peter's Original World ((...)) 2 Pet. 2. 5. he refers both that
and this ( chap. 3.6.) to the natural inanimate World, which he supposes to
have undergone a change at the Deluge. His words are these, idem ipse mundus
est (nempe quoad materiam) in quo nunc humanum genus habitat, quem
inhabitaverunt hi qui ante diluvium fuerunt, sed tamen recte Originalis Mundus,
quasi alius, dicitur; quia sicut in consequentibus hujus Epistolae scriptum
continetur, Ille tunc mundus aqua inundatus periit. Coelis videlicet qui erant
prius, id est, cunctis aeris hujus turbulenti spaciis, aquarum accrescentium
altitudine consumptis, ac Terra in alteram faciem, excedentibus aquis,
immutata. Nam etsi montes aliqui atque convalles ab initio facti creduntur, non
tamen tanti quanti nunc in orb cernuntur universo. It Is the same World
(namely, as to the matter and substance of it) which mankind lives in now, and
did live in before the Flood, but yet that is truly called the ORIGINAL WORLD,
being as it were another from the present. For it is said in the sequel of this
Epistle that the World that was then, perished in the Deluge; namely, the
regions of the air were consumed by the height and excess of the waters, and by
the same waters the Earth was changed into another form or face. For although
some Mountains and Valleys are thought to have been made from the beginning,
yet not such great ones as now we see throughout the whole Earth.

You see this Author does not only own a change made at the Deluge, but offers
at a further explication wherein that change consisted, viz. that the Mountains
and inequalities of the Earth were made greater than they were before the
Flood; and so he makes the change or the difference betwixt the two Worlds
gradual, rather than specifical, if I may so term it. But we cannot wonder at
that, if he had no principles to carry it further, or to make any other sort of
change intelligible to him. Bid also De 6. dier. creat.
pursues the same sense and notion in his interpretation of that fountain, Genesis
2. 5. that watered the face of the Earth before the Flood. And many other
transcribers of Antiquity have recorded this Tradition concerning a difference,
gradual or specifical, both in the Ante-diluvian heavens ( Gloss. Ordin. Genesis
9. de Iride. Lyran. ibid. Hist. Scholast. c. 35. Rab. Maurus and Gloss. Inter.
Genesis 2. 5, 6. Alcuin. Quaest. in Genesis inter. 135.) and in the Ante-diluvian
Earth, as the same Authors witness in other places. As Hist. Schol. c. 34.
Gloss. Ord. in Genesis 7. Al. cuin. Inter. 118, etc. Not to instance in those that
tell us the properties of the Ante-diluvian World under the name and notion of
Paradise.

Thus much concerning this remarkable place in S. Peter, and the true
exposition of it; which I have the more largely insisted upon, because I look
upon this place as the chief repository of that great natural mystery, which in
Scripture is communicated to us, concerning the Triple state or revolution of
the World. And of those men that are so scrupulous to admit the Theory we have
proposed, I would willingly know whether they believe the Apostle in what he
says concerning the New Heavens and the New Earth to come, ver. 13. and if they
do, why they should not believe him as much concerning the Old Heavens and the
Old Earth, past; ver. 5, and 6. which he mentions as formally, and describes
more distinctly than the other. But if they believe neither past nor to come,
in a natural sense, but an unchangeable state of Nature from the Creation to
its annihilation, I leave them then to their Fellow Eternalists in the Text,
and to the character or censure the Apostle gives them, (...) men that go by
their own private humor and passions, and prefer that to all other evidence.

They deserve this censure, I am sure, if they do not only disbelieve, but also
scoff, at this Prophetic and Apostolic doctrine concerning the Vicissitudes
of Nature and a triple World; The Apostle in this discourse does formally
distinguish three Worlds (for it is well known that the Hebrews have no word to
signify the natural World, but use that Periphrasis, The Heavens and the
Earth) and upon each of them engraves a name and title, that bears a note of
distinction in it; He calls them the Old Heavens and Earth, the Present Heavens
and Earth, and the New Heavens and Earth. It Is true, these three are one, as to
matter and substance; but they must differ as to form and properties; otherwise
what is the ground of this distinction and of these three different
appellations? Suppose the Jews had expected Ezekiel's Temple for the Third, and
last, and most perfect; and that in the time of the second Temple they had
spoke of them with this distinction, or under these different names, The Old
Temple, the Present Temple, and the New Temple we expect: Would any have
understood those three of one and the same Temple; never demolished, never
changed, never rebuilt; always the same both as to materials and form? no,
doubtless, but of three several Temples succeeding one another. And have we not
the same reason to understand this Temple of the World, whereof S. Peter
speaks, to be threefold in succession? seeing he does as plainly distinguish it
into the Old heavens and earth, the Present heavens and earth, and the New
heavens and earth. And I do the more willingly use this comparison of the
Temple, because it has been thought an Emblem of the outward World.

I know we are naturally averse to entertain any thing that is inconsistent
with the general frame and texture of our own thoughts; That Is to begin the
World again; and we often reject such things without examination. Neither do I
wonder that the generality of Interpreters beat down the Apostle's words and
sense to their own notions; They had no other grounds to go upon, and Men are
not willing, especially in natural and comprehensible things, to put such a
meaning upon Scripture, as is unintelligible to themselves; They rather venture
to offer a little violence to the words, that they may pitch the sense at such
a convenient height, as their Principles will reach to. And therefore though
some of our modern Interpreters, whom I mentioned before, have been sensible of
the natural tendency of this discourse of St. Peter's, and have much ado to
bear off the force of the words, so as not to acknowledge that they import a
real diversity betwixt the two worlds spoken of; yet having no Principles to
guide or support them in following that Tract, they are forced to stop or
divert another way. It Is like entering into the mouth of a Cave, we are not
willing to venture further than the light goes. Nor are they much to blame for
this; the fault is only in those Persons that continue wilfully in their
darkness, and when they cannot otherwise resist the light, shut their eyes
against it, or turn their head another way. -- but I am afraid I have staid too
long upon this argument: not for my own sake, but to satisfy others.

You may please to remember that all that I have said hitherto, belongs only
to the first Head: To prove a Diversity in general betwixt the Ante-diluvian
Heavens and Earth, and the present: not expressing what their particular form
was. And this general diversity may be argued also by observations taken from
Moses his history of the World, before and after the Flood. From the Longevity
of the Antediluvians: The Rainbow appearing after the Deluge: and the breaking
open an Abyss capable to overflow the Earth. The Heavens that had no Rainbow,
and under whose See Theor. Book 2. chapter 5.
benign and steady influence, Men lived seven, eight, nine hundred years and
upwards, must have been of a different aspect and constitution from the present
Heavens. And that Earth that had such an Abyss, that the disruption of it made
an universal Deluge, must have been of another form than the present Earth. And
those that will not admit a diversity in the two worlds, are bound to give us
an intelligible account of these Phenomenon: How they could possibly be in
Heavens and Earth, like the present. Or if they were there once, why they do
not continue so still, if Nature be the same.

We need say no more, as to the Ante-diluvian Heavens: but as to the Earth, we
must now, according to the second Part of the first Head; enquire, If that
Particular Form, which we have assigned it before the Flood, be agreeable to
Scripture. You know how we have described the Form and situation of that Earth:
namely, that it was built over the Abyss, as a regular Orb, covering and
incompassing the waters round about: and founded, as it were, upon them. There
are many passages of Scripture that favor this description: Some more
expressly, others upon a due explication. To this purpose there are two express
Texts in the Psalms: as Psalm. 24. 1, 2. The Earth is the Lords, and the fullness
thereof: The habitable World, and they that dwell therein. FOR he has founded
it upon I know some would make this place of no effect by rendering the Hebrew
particle (...) juxta, by or near to; so they would read it thus, He has
founded the Earth by the Seaside, and established it by the Floods. What is
there wonderful in this, that the shores should lie by the Seaside; Where
could they lie else? What reason or argument is this, why the Earth should be
the Lord's? The Earth is the Lord's, for he has founded it near the Seas,
Where is the confequence of this? But if he founded it upon the Seas, which
could not be done by any other hand but his, it shows both the Workman and the
Master. And accordingly in that other place, Psalm. 136. 6. if you render it, he
stretched out the Earth near the Waters, How is that one of God's great
wonders? as it is there represented to be. Because in some few places this
particle is rendered otherwise, where the sense will bear it, must we therefore
render it so when we please, and where the sense will not bear it? This being
the most usual signification of it, and there being no other word that
signifies above more frequently or determinately than this does, Why must it
signify otherwise in this place? Men will wriggle any way to get from under
the force of a Text, that does not suit to their own Notions.
the Seas, and established it upon the Floods. An Earth founded upon the Seas,
and established upon the Waters, is not this the Earth we have described? the
first Earth, as it came from the hands of its Maker. Where can we now find in
Nature, such an Earth as has the Seas and the Water for its foundation? Neither
is this Text without a second, as a fellow-witness to confirm the same truth:
For in the 136. Psalm, ver. 4, 5, 6. we read to the same effect, in these
words: To him, who alone does great wonders: To him that by wisdom made the
Heavens: To him that stretched out the Earth above the Waters. We can hardly
express that form of the Ante-diluvian Earth, in words more determinate than
these are; Let us then in the same simplicity of heart, follow the words of
Scripture; seeing this literal sense is not repugnant to Nature, but, on the
contrary, agreeable to it upon the strictest examination. And we cannot,
without some violence, turn the words to any other sense. What tolerable
interpretation can these admit of, if we do not allow the Earth once to have
encompassed and overspread the face of the Waters? To be founded upon the
waters, to be established upon the waters, to be extended upon the waters, what
rational or satisfactory account can be given of these phrases and expressions
from any thing we find in the present situation of the Earth: or how can they
be verified concerning it? Consult Interpreters, ancient or modern, upon these
two places: see if they answer your expectation, or answer the natural
importance of the words, unless they acknowledge another form of the Earth,
than the present. Because a Rock hangs its nose over the Sea, must the body of
the Earth be said to be stretched over the waters? Or because there are waters
in some subterraneous cavities, is the Earth therefore founded upon the Seas?
Yet such lame explications as these you will meet with; and while we have no
better light, we must content our selves with them; but when an explication is
offered, that answers the propriety, force, and extent of the words, to reject
it, only because it is not fitted to our former opinions, or because we did
not first think of it, is to take an ill method in expounding Scripture. This
Foundation or Establishment of the Earth upon the Seas, this Extension of it
above the waters, relates plainly to the body, or whole circuit of the Earth,
not to parcels and particles of it; as appears from the occasion, and its being
joined with the Heavens, the other part of the World. Besides, David is
speaking of the Origin of the World, and of the Divine power and wisdom in the
construction and situation of our Earth, and these attributes do not appear
from the holes of the Earth, and broken Rocks; which have rather the face of a
ruin, than of wisdom; but in that wonderful libration and expansion of the
first Earth over the face of the waters, sustained by its own proportions, and
the hand of his Providence.

These two places in the Psalms being duly considered, we shall more easily
understand a third place, to the same effect, in the Proverbs; delivered by
WISDOM, concerning the Origin of the World, and the form of the first Earth, in
these words, Chap. 8. 27. When he prepared the Heavens I was there, when HE SET
an Orb or Sphere upon the face of the Abyss. We render it, when we set a
Compass upon the face of the Abyss; but if we have rightly interpreted the
Prophet David, it is plain enough what compass is here to be understood; not an
imaginary circle, (for why should that be thought one of the wonderful works of
God) but that exterior Orb of the Earth that was set upon the waters. That was
the Masterpiece of the Divine art in framing of the first Earth, and therefore
very fit to be taken notice of by Wisdom. And upon this occasion, I desire you
to reflect upon St. Peter's expression, concerning the first Earth, and to
compare it with Solomon's, to see if they do not answer one another. St. Peter
calls it (...), An Earth consisting, standing, or sustained by the waters. And
Solomon calls it (...). An Orb drawn upon the face of the Abyss. And St. Peter
says, that was done (...) by the wisdom of God: which is the same (...) or
wisdom, that here declares her self, to have been present at this work. Add now
to these two places, the two forementioned out of the Psalmist; An Earth
founded upon the Seas, (Psalm. 24. 2.) and an Earth stretched, out above the
waters: ( Psalm. 136. 6.) Can any body doubt or question, but all these four
Texts refer to the same thing? And seeing St. Peter's description refers
certainly to the Ante-diluvian Earth, they must all refer to it; and do all as
certainly and evidently agree with our Theory concerning the form and situation
of it.

The pendulous form and posture of that first Earth being proved from these
four places, it is more easy and emphatical to interpret in this sense that
passage in Job chapter 26. 7. He stretches out the North over the Tohu, (for so it
is in the original) and hangs the Earth upon nothing. And this strange
foundation or no foundation of the exterior Earth seems to be the ground of
those noble questions proposed to Job by God Almighty, chapter 38. Where wast thou
when I laid the foundations of the Earth? Declare if thou have understanding.
Whereupon are the foundat^ons thereof fastened, and who laid the corner stone?
There was neither foundation, nor corner stone, in that piece of Architecture;
and that was it which made the art and wonder of it. But I have spoken more
largely to these places in the Theory it self. And if the four Book 1. p. 88.
Texts beforementioned be considered without prejudice, I think there are few
matters of natural Speculation that can be so well proved out of Scripture, as
the Form which we have given to the Ante-diluvian Earth.

But yet it may be thought a just, if not a necessary appendix to this
discourse, concerning the form of the ante-diluvian Earth, to give an account
also of the ante-diluvian Abyss, and the situation of it according to
Scripture; for the relation which these two have to one another, will be a
further means to discover if we have rightly determined the form of that Earth.
The Abyss or Tehom-Rabbah is a Scripture notion, and the word is not used, that
I know of, in that distinct and peculiar sense in Heathen Authors. It Is plain
that in Scripture it is not always taken for the Sea (as Genesis 1. 2. and 7. 11.
and 49. 25. Deuteronomy. 33. 13. Job 28. 14. and 38. 16. Ps. 33. 7. and 71. 20. and
78. 15. and 135. 6. Apoc. 20. 1. 3.) but for some other mass of waters, or
subterraneous storehouse. And this being observed, we may easily discover the
nature, and set down the history of the Scripture-Abyss.

The Mother-Abyss is no doubt that in the beginning of Genesis, ver. 2. which
had nothing but darkness upon the face of it, or a thick caliginous air. The
next news we hear of this Abyss is at the Deluge, ( Genesis 7.11.) where it is said
to be broke open, and the waters of it to have drowned the World. It seems then
this Abyss was closed up some time betwixt the Creation and the Deluge, and had
got another cover than that of darkness. And if we will believe Wisdom, ( Prove.
8. 27.) who was there present at the formation of the Earth, an Orb was set
upon the face of the Abyss at the beginning of the World.

That these three places refer to the same Abyss, I think, cannot be questioned
by any that will compare them and consider them. That of the Deluge, Moses
calls there Tehom-Rabbah, the Great Abyss; and can there be any greater than
the forementioned Mother-Abvss? And WISDOM, in that place in the Proverbs,
uses the same phrase and words with Moses, Genesis 1. 2. (...) upon the face of
the Deep or of the Abyss; changing darkness for that Orb of the exterior Earth
which was made afterward to enclose it. And in this vault it lay, and under
this cover, when the Psalmist speaks of it in these words ( Ps. 33. 7.) He
gathers the waters of the Sea, as in a This reading or translating is
generally followed, (Theor. book 1. p. 86.) though the English translation read
on a heap, unsuitably to the matter and to the sense.
bag; he lays up the Abyss in storehouses. Lastly, we may observe that 'twas
this Mother-Abyss whose womb was burst at the Deluge, when the Sea was born,
and broke forth as if it had issued out of a womb; as God expresses it to Job,
chapter 38. 8. in which place the Chaldee Paraphrase reads it, when it broke forth,
coming out of the Abyss. Which disruption at the Deluge seems also to be
alluded to Job 12. 14, 15, and more plainly, Prove. 3.20. by his knowledge the
Abysses are broken up.

Thus you have already a threefold state of the Abyss, which makes a short
History of it; first, Open, at the beginning; then covered, till the Deluge.
Then broke open again, as it is at present. And we pursue the History of it no
further; but we are told, Apoc. 20. 3. That it shall be shut up again, and the
great Dragon in it, for a Thousand years. In the mean time we may observe from
this form and posture of the Ante-diluvian Abyss, how suitable it is and
coherent with that form of the Ante-diluvian Earth which S. Peter and the
Psalmist had described, sustained by the waters; founded upon the waters;
stretched above the waters; for if it was the cover of this Abyss (and it had
some cover that was broke at the Deluge) it was spread as a Crust or Ice upon
the face of those waters, and so made an orbis Terrarum, an habitable sphere of
Earth about the Abyss.

So much for the form of the Ante-diluvian Earth and Abyss; which as they aptly
correspond to one another, so, you see, our Theory answers and is adjusted to
both; and, I think, so fitly, that we have no reason hitherto to be displeased
with the success we have had in the examination of it, according to Scripture.
We have dispatched the two main points in question, first, to prove a diversity
in general betwixt the two natural Worlds, or betwixt the Heavens and the Earth
before and after the Flood. Secondly, to prove wherein this diversity
consisted; or that the particular form of the Ante-diluvian Heavens and Earth
was such according to Scripture, as we have described it in the Theory. You Will
say, then the work is done, what needs more, all the rest follows of course;
for if the Ante-diluvian Earth had such a form as we have proposed and proved
it to have had, there could be no Deluge in it but by a dissolution of its
parts and exterior frame: And a Deluge so made, would not be in the nature of
a standing Pool, but of a violent agitation and commotion of the waters. This
is true; These parts of the Theory are so cemented, that you must grant all, if
you grant any. However we will try if even these two particulars also may be
proved out of Scripture; That is, if there be any marks or memorandums left
there by the Spirit of God, of such a fraction or dissolution of the Earth at
the Deluge. And also such characters of the Deluge it self, as show it to have
been by a fluctuation and impetuous commotion of the waters.

To proceed then; That there was a Fraction or Dissolution of the Earth at the
Deluge, the history of it by Moses gives us the first account, seeing he tells
us, as the principal cause of the Flood, that the Fountains of the Great Abyss
were cloven or burst asunder; and upon this disruption the waters gushed out
from the bowels of the Earth, as from the widen'd mouths of so many Fountains.
I do not take Fountains there to signify any more than Sources or Stores of
Water; noting also this manner of their eruption from below, or out of the
ground, as Fountains do. Accordingly in the Proverbs, ( chap. 3.20.) it is only
said, the Abysses were broken open. I do not doubt but this refers to the
Deluge, as Bede, and others understand it; the very word being used here, both
in the Hebrew and (...)
Septuagint, that expressed the disruption of the Abyss at the Deluge.

And this breaking up of the Earth at that time, is elegantly expressed in Job,
by the bursting of the c. 38.
Womb of Nature, when the Sea was first brought to light; when after many pangs
and throes and dilacerations of her body, Nature was deliverd of a burden
which she had born in her Womb Sixteen Hundred Years.

These three places I take to be memorials and proofs of the disruption of the
Earth, or of the Abyss, at the universal Deluge. And to these we may add more
out of the Prophets, Job, and the Psalms, by way of allusion (commonly) to the
state of Nature at that time. The Prophet Isaiah in describing the future
destruction of the World, chap. 24. 18, 19. seems plainly to allude and have
respect to the past destruction of it at the Deluge; as appears by that leading
expression, the windows from an high are open, (...), taken manifestly from
Genesis 7. 11. Then see how the description goes on, the windows from an high are
open, and the foundations of the Earth do shake. The Earth is utterly broken
down, the Earth is quite dissolved, the Earth is exceedingly moved. Here are
Concussions, and Fractions, and Dissolutions, as there were in the Mundane
Earthquake and Deluge; which we had expressed before only by breaking open the
Abyss. By the Foundations of the Earth here and elsewhere, I perceive many
understand the Center; so by moving or shaking the foundations, or putting them
out of course, must be understood a displacing of the Center; which was really
done at the Deluge, as we have Theor. book 2. p. 194, 195.
shown in its proper place. If we therefore remember that there was both a
dislocation, as I may so say; and a fraction in the body of the Earth, by that
great fall; a dislocation as to the center, and a fraction as to the surface
and exterior region, it will truly answer to all those expressions in the
Prophet, that seem so strange and extraordinary. It Is true, this place of the
Prophet respects also and foretells the future destruction of the World; but
that being by Fire, when the Elements shall melt with servent heat, and the
Earth with the works therein shall be burnt up, these expressions of fractions
and concussions, seem to be taken originally from the manner of the World's
first destruction, and to be transferred, by way of application, to represent
and signify the second destruction of it, though, it may be, not with the same
exactness and propriety.

There are several other places that refer to the dissolution and subversion of
the Earth at the Deluge: Amos 9. 5, 6. The Lord of Hosts is he that touches
the Earth, and it shall melt, or be dissolved. -- and it shall rise up wholly
like a Flood, and shall be drowned as by the Flood of Egypt. By this and by
the next Verse the Prophet seems to allude to the Deluge, and to the
dissolution of the Earth that was then. This in Job seems to be called breaking
down the Earth, and overturning the Earth, Chap. 12. 14, 15. Behold he breaks
down and it cannot be built again, He shuts upon man, and there can be no
opening. Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dry up; also he sends
them out, and they overturn the Earth: Which place you may see paraphrased.
Theor. Book 1. p. 91, 92. We have already cited, and shall hereafter cite,
other places out of Job; And as that Ancient Author (who is thought to have
lived before the Judaical Economy, and nearer to Noah than Moses) seems to
have had the praecepta Noachidarum, so also he seems to have had the Dogmata
Noachidarum; which were delivered by Noah to his Children and Posterity,
concerning the mysteries of natural Providence, the origin and fate of the
World, the Deluge and Ante-diluvian state, etc. and accordingly we find many
strictures of these doctrines in the Book of Job. Lastly, in the Psalms there
are Texts that mention the Shaking of the Earth, and the foundations of the
World, in reference to the Flood, if we judge aright; whereof we will speak
under the next Head, concerning the raging of the Waters in the Deluge.

These places of Scripture may be noted, as lest us to be remembrancers of that
general ruin and disruption of the Earth at the time of the Deluge. But I know
it will be said of them, that they are not strict proofs, but allusions only.
Be it so; yet what is the ground of those allusions? something must be alluded
to, and something that has past in nature, and that is recorded in Sacred
History; And what is that, unless it be the universal Deluge, and that change
and disturbance that was then in all nature. If others say, that these and such
like places are to be understood morally and allegorically, I do not envy them
their interpretation; but when nature and reason will bear a literal sense, the
rule is, that we should not recede from the letter. But I leave these things to
every one's thoughts; which the more calm they are, and the more impartial, the
more easily they will feel the impressions of truth. In the mean time, I
proceed to the last particular mentioned, The form of the Deluge it self.

This we suppose to have been not in the way of a standing Pool, the Waters
making an equal Surface, and an equal height every where; but that the extreme
height of the Waters was made by the extreme agitation of them; caused by the
weight and force of great Masses or Regions of Earth falling at once into the
Abyss; by which means, as the waters in some places were pressed out, and thrown
at an excessive height into the air, so they would also in certain places gape,
and lay bare even the bottom of the Abyss; which would look as an open Grave
ready to swallow up the Earth, and all it bore. Whilst the Ark, in the mean
time, falling and rising by these gulphs and precipices, sometimes above water,
and sometimes under, was a true Type of the state of the Church in this World;
And to this time and state David alludes in the name of the Church, Psalm. 42.
7. Abyss calls unto Abyss at the noise of thy Cataracts or Water-spouts; All
thy waves and billows have gone over me. And again, Psalm. 46. 2, 3. in the name
of the Church, Therefore will not we fear, though the Earth be removed, and though
the mountains be carried into the midst of the Seas. The waters thereof roar
and are troubled, the mountains shake with the swelling thereof.

But there is no description more remarkable or more eloquent, than of that
Scene of things represented, Psalm. 18. 7, 8, 9, etc. which still alludes, in my
opinion, to the Deluge-scene, and in the name of the Church. We will ser down
the words at large.

Ver. 6. In my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God; He heard
my voice out of his Temple, and my cry came before him into his ears.

7. Then the Earth sbook and trembled, the foundations also of the hills moved
and were shaken, because he was wroth.

8. There went up a smoke from his nostrils, and sire out of his mouth
devoured; Coals were kindled by it.

9. He bowed the Heavens also and came down, and darkness was under his feet.

10. And he rode upon a Cherub and did fly, he did fly upon the wings of the
wind.

11. He made darkness his secret place; his pavilion round about him was dark
waters and thick clouds of the sky.

12. At the brightness before him the thick clouds passed, bail and coals of
fire.

13. The Lord also thundered in the Heavens, and the Highest gave his voice,
hail and coals of fire.

14. Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them: and he shot out
lightnings and discomfited them.

15. Then the Channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the World
were discovered; at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy
nostrils.

He sent from above, he took me; he drew me out of (...)
great waters.

This I think is a rough * draught of the face of the Heavens and the Earth at
the Deluge, as the last Verses do intimate; and it is applied to express the
dangers and deliverances of the Church: The Expressions are far too high to be
applied to David in his Person, and to his deliverance from Saul; no such
agonies or disorders of nature as are here instanced i^, were made in David's
time, or upon his account; but it is a scheme of the Church, and of her fate,
particularly, as represented by the Ark, in that dismal distress, when all
nature was in confusion. And though there may be some things here intermixed to
make up the Scene, that are not so close to the subject as the rest, or that
may be referred to the future destruction of the world: yet that is not
unusual, nor amiss, in such descriptions, if the great strokes be fit and
rightly placed. That there was smoke, and fire, and water, and thunder, and
darkness, and winds, and Earthquakes at the Deluge, we cannot doubt, if we
consider the circumstances of it; Waters dashed and broken make a smoke and
darkness, and no Hurricano could be so violent as the motions of the Air at
that time; Then the Earth was torn in pieces, and its Foundations shaken; And
as to thunder and lightning, the encounters and collisions of the mighty Waves,
and the cracks of a falling World, would make flashes and noises, far greater
and more terrible, than any that can come from vapors and clouds. There was an
universal Tempest, a See Philo Iudaeus his description of the Deluge, both as
to the commotions of the Heavens, and the fractions of the Earth. In his first
Treatise de Abrahamo, mihi pa. 279.
conflict and clashing of all the Elements; and David seems to have represented
it so; with God Allmighty in the midst of it, ruling them all.

But I am apt to think some will say, all this is Poetical in the Prophet, and
these are hyperbolical and figurate expressions, from which we cannot make any
inference, as to the Deluge and the natural World. It Is true, those that have
no Idea of the Deluge, that will answer to such a Scene of things, as is here
represented, must give such a slight account of this Psalm. But on the other
hand, if we have already an Idea of the Deluge that is rational, and also
consonant to Scripture upon other proofs, and the description here made by the
Prophet answer to that Idea, whether then is it not more reasonable to think
that it stands upon that ground, than to think it a mere fancy and Poetical
Scene of things: This is the true state of the case, and that which we must
judge of. Methinks it is very harsh to suppose all this a bare fiction, grounded
upon no matter of fact, upon no Sacred story, upon no appearance of God in
nature. If you say it has a moral signification, so let it have, we do not
destroy that; it has reference, no doubt, to the dangers and deliverances of
the Church; but the question is, whether the words and natural sense be a fancy
only, a bundle of random hyperboles: or whether they relate to the history of
the Deluge, and the state of the Ark there representing the Church. This makes
the sense doubly rich, historically and morally; and grounds it upon Scripture
and reason, as well as upon fancy.

That violent eruption of the Sea out of the Womb of the Earth, which Job
speaks of, is, in my judgment, another description of the Deluge; it is Chap.
38. 8, 9, 10, 11. Who shut up the Sea with doors, when it broke forth, as if it
had issued out of a Womb; When I made the cloud the garment thereof, and thick
darkness a swaddling band for it. And broke up for it my decreed place --
hitherto shall thou come, etc. Here you see the birth and nativity of the Sea,
or of Oceanus, described Uti comparatio praecedens de ortu Telluris, sumitur ab
aedificio, ita haec altera de ortu maris, sumitur u partu; and exhibetur
Oceanus, primum, ut foetus inclusus in utero, dein us erumpens and prodeuns,
denique ut fasciis and primis suis pannis involutus. Atque ex aperto Terrae
usero prorupit aquarum moles, ut proluvies illa, quam simul cum foetu
profundere solet puerpera.
Ver. 4, 5, 6.
how he broke out of the Womb, and what his first garment and swaddling clothes
were; namely clouds and thick darkness. This cannot refer to any thing that I
know of, but to the face of Nature at the Deluge; when the Sea was born, and
wrapped up in clouds and broken waves, and a dark impenetrable mist round the
body of the Earth. And this seems to be the very same that David had expressed in
his description of the Deluge, Psalm. 18. 11. He made darkness his secret place,
his pavilion round about him were dark waters and thick clouds of the skies.
For this was truly the face of the World in the time of the Flood, though we
little reflect upon it. And this dark confusion every where, above and below,
arose from the violent and confused motion of the Abyss; which was dashed in
pieces by the falling Earth, and flew into See Theor. Book 1. p. 99.
the air in misty drops, as dust flies up in a great ruin.

But I am afraid, we have stayed too long upon this particular, the form of the
Deluge; seeing it is but a Corollary from the precedent article about the
dissolution of the Earth. However time is not ill spent about any thing that
relates to natural Providence, whereof the two most signal instances in our
Sacred Writings, are, the Deluge and the Conflagration. And seeing Job and
David do often reflect upon the works of God in the external creation, and upon
the administrations of Providence, it cannot be imagined that they should never
reflect upon the Deluge; the most remarkable change of Nature that ever has
been, and the most remarkable judgment upon mankind. And if they have reflected
upon it any where, it is, I think, in those places and those instances which I
have noted; and if those places do relate to the Deluge, they are not capable,
in my judgment, of any fairer or more natural interpretation than that which we
have given them; which, you see, how much it favors and confirms our Theory.

I have now finished the heads I undertook to prove, that I might show our
Theory to agree with Scripture in these three principal points; first, in that
it supposes a diversity and difference betwixt the Ante-diluvian Heavens and
Earth, and the present Heavens and Earth. Secondly, in assigning the particular
form of the Ante-diluvian Earth and Abyss. Thirdly, in explaining the Deluge by
a dissolution of that Earth, and an eruption of the Abyss. How far I have
succeeded in this attempt, as to others, I cannot tell; but I am sure I have
convinced my self, and am satisfied that my thoughts, in that Theory, have run
in the same tract with the holy writings: with the true intent and spirit of
them. There are some persons that are wilfully ignorant in certain things, and
others that are willing to be ignorant as the Apostle phraseth it; speaking of
those Eternalists that denied the doctrine of the change and revolutions of the
Natural World: And it is not to be expected but there are many still of the same
humor; and therefore may be called willingly ignorant, that is, they will not
use that pains and attention that is necessary for the examination of such a
doctrine, nor impartiality in judging after examination; they greedily lay hold
on all evidence on one side, and willingly forget, or slightly pass over, all
evidence for the other; this I think is the character of those that are
willingly ignorant; for I do not take it to be so deep as a downright wilful
ignorance, where they are plainly conscious to themselves of that wilfulness;
but where an insensible mixture of humane passions inclines them one way, and
makes them averse to the other; and in that method draws on all the
consequences of a willing ignorance.

There remains still, as I remember, one Proposition that I am bound to make
good; I said at first, that our Hypothesis concerning the Deluge was more
agreeable not only to Scripture in general, but also to the particular History
of the Flood left us by Moses; I say, more agreeable to it than any other
Hypothesis that has yet been proposed. This may be made good in a few words.
For in Moses's history of the Deluge there are two principal points, The extent
of the Deluge, and the Causes of it; and in both these we do fully agree with
that sacred Author. As to the extent of it, He makes the Deluge universal; All
the high hills under the whole heaven were covered, fifteen cubits upwards; We
also make it universal, over the face of the whole Earth; and in such a manner
as must needs raise the waters above the top of the highest hills every where.
As to the causes of it, Moses makes them to be the disruption of the Abyss, and
the Rains; and no more; and in this also we exactly agree with him; we know no
other causes, nor pretend to any other but those two. Distinguishing therefore
Moses his narration as to the substance and circumstances of it, it must be
allowed that these two points make the substance of it, and that an Hypothesis
that differs from it in either of these two, differs from it more than Ours;
which, at the worst, can but differ in matter of circumstance. Now seeing the
great difficulty about the Deluge is the quantity of Water required for it,
there have been two explications proposed, besides ours, to remove or fatisfie
this difficulty; One whereof makes the Deluge not to have been universal, or to
have reached only Judea and some neighboring Countries; and therefore less
water would suffice; The other owning the Deluge to be universal, supplies it
self with Water from the Divine Omnipotency, and says new Waters were created
then for the nonce, and again annihilated when the Deluge was to cease. Both
these explications you see, (and I know no more of note that are not obnoxious
to the same exceptions) differ from Moses in the substance, or in one of the
two substantial points, and consequently more than ours does. The first
changes the Flood into a kind of national innundation, and the second assigns
other causes of it than Moses had assigned. And as they both differ apparently
from the Mosaical history, so you may see them refuted upon other grounds also,
in the third Chapter of the First Book of the Theory.

This may be sufficient as to the History of the Flood by Moses. But possibly
it may be said the principal objection will arise from Moses his Six-days
Creation in the first Chapter of Genesis: where another sort of Earth, than
what we have formed from the Chaos, is represented to us; namely, a Terraqueous
Globe, such as our Earth is at present. It Is indeed very apparent, that Moses
has accommodated his Six-days Creation to the present form of the Earth, or to
that which was before the eyes of the people when he writ. But it is a great
question whether that was ever intended for a true Physical account of the
origin of the Earth: or whether Moses did either Philosophize or Astronomize
in that description. The ancient Fathers, when they answer the Heathens, and
the adversaries of Christianity, do generally deny it; as I am ready to make
good upon another occafion. And the thing it self bears in it evident marks of
an accommodation and condescension to the vulgar notions concerning the form of
the World. Those that think otherwise, and would make it literally and
physically true in all the parts of it, I desire them, without entering upon the
strict merits of the cause, to determine these Preliminaries. First, whether
the whole universe rise from a Terrestrial Chaos. Secondly, what Systeme of the
World this Six-days Creation proceeds upon: whether it supposes the Earth, or
the Sun, for the Center. Thirdly, Whether the Sun and Fixed Stars are of a later
date, and a later birth, than this Globe of Earth. And lastly, Where is the
Region of the Super-celestial Waters. When they have determined these
Fundamentals, we will proceed to other observations upon the Six-days work,
which will further assure us, that it is a narration suited to the capacity of
the people, and not to the strict and physical nature of things. Besides, we
are to remember, that Moses must be so interpreted in the first Chapter of
Genesis, as not to interfere with himself in other parts of his History; nor to
interfere with S. Peter, or the Prophet David, or any other Sacred Authors,
when they treat of the same matter. Nor lastly, so, as to be repugnant to clear
and uncontested Science. For, in things that concern the natural World, that
must always be consulted.

With these precautions, let them try if they can reduce that narrative of the
Origin of the World, to physical truth; so as to be consistent, both with
Nature, and with Divine Revelation every where. It is easily reconcilable to
both, if we suppose it writ in a Vulgar style, and to the conceptions of the
People: And we cannot deny that a Vulgar style is often made use of in the holy
Writings. How freely and unconcernedly does Scripture speak of God Allmighty,
according to the opinions of the vulgar? of his passions, local motions, parts
and members of his body. Which all are things that do not belong, or are not
compatible with the Divine nature, according to truth and Science. And if this
liberty be taken, as to God himself, much more may it be taken as to his works.
And accordingly we see, what motion the Scripture gives to the Sun: what figure
to the Earth: what figure to the Heavens: All according to the appearance of
sense and popular credulity; without any remorse for having transgressed the
rules of intellectual truth.

This vulgar style of Scripture in describing the natures of things, has been
often mistaken for the real sense, and so become a stumbling block in the way
of truth. Thus the Anthropomorphites of old contended for the humane shape of
God, from the Letter of Scripture; and brought many express Texts for their
purpose: but sound reason, at length, got the upper hand of Literal authority.
Then, several of the Christian Fathers contended, that there were no Antipodes:
and made that doctrine irreconcilable to Scripture. But this also, after a
while, went off, and yielded to reason and experience. Then, the Motion of the
Earth must by no means be allowed, as being contrary to Scripture: for so it is
indeed, according to the Letter and Vulgar style. But all intelligent Persons
see thorough this argument, and depend upon it no more in this case, than in
the former. Lastly, The original of the Earth from a Chaos, drawn according to
the rules of Physiology, will not be admitted: because it does not agree with
the Scheme of the Six-days Creation. But why may not this be writ in a Vulgar
style, as well as the rest? Certainly there can be nothing more like a Vulgar
style, than to set God to work by the day, and in Six-days to finish his task:
as he is there represented. We may therefore probably hope that all these
disguises of truth will at length fall off, and that we shall see God and his
Works in a pure and naked Light.

Thus I have finished what I had to say in confirmation of this Theory from
Scripture. I mean of the former part of it, which depends chiefly upon the
Deluge, and the Antediluvian Earth. When you have collated the places of
Scripture, on either side, and laid them in the balance, to be weighed one
against another; If you do but find them equal, or near to an equal poise, you
know in whether Scale the Natural Reasons are to be laid: and of what weight
they ought to be in an argument of this kind. There is a great difference
betwixt Scripture with Philosophy on its side, and Scripture with Philosophy
against it: when the question is concerning the Natural World. And this is our
Case: which I leave now to the consideration of the unprejudiced Reader: and
proceed to the Proof of the Second Part of the Theory.

THE later Part consists of the Conflagration of the World, and the New Heavens
and New Earth. And seeing there is no dispute concerning the former of these
two, our task will now lie in a little compass. Being only this, To prove that
there will be New Heavens, and a New Earth, after the Conflagration. This, to
my mind, is sufficiently done already, in the first, second and third Chapters
of the 4th. Book, both from Scripture and Antiquity, whether Sacred or
profane: and therefore, at present, we will only make a short and easy
review of Scripture-Testimonies, with design chiefly to obviate and disappoint
the evasions of such, as would beat down solid Texts into thin Metaphors and
Allegories.

The Testimonies of Scripture concerning the Renovation of the World, are
either express, or implicit. Those I call express, that mention the New Heavens
and New Earth: And those implicit, that signify the same thing, but not in
express terms. So when our Savior speaks of a Palingenesia, or Regeneration, (
Matt. 19. 28, 29.) Or St. Peter of an Apocatastasis or Restitution, ( Act. 3.
21.) These being words used by all Authors, profane or Ecclesiastical, for the
Renovation of the World, ought, in reason, to be interpreted in the same sense
in the holy Writings. And in like manner, when St. Paul speaks of his Future
Earth, (...)
or an habitable World to come, Hebr. 2. 5. or of a Redemption or melioration
of the present state of nature, Romans 8. 21, 22. These lead us again, in other
terms, to the same Renovation of the World. But there are also some places of
Scripture, that set the New Heavens and New Earth in such a full and open view,
that we must shut our eyes not to see them. St. John says, he saw them, and
observed the form of the New Earth, Apoc. 21. 1. The Seer Isaish spoke of them
in express words, Isa. 65. 17.
many hundred years before. And St. Peter marks the time when they are to be
introduced, namely after the Conflagration, or after the Dissolution of the
present Heavens and Earth: 2 Pet. 3. 12, 13.

These later Texts of Scripture, being so express, there is but one way left to
elude the force of them; and that is, by turning the Renovation of the World
into an Allegory: and making the New Heavens and New Earth to be Allegorical
Heavens and Earth, not real and material, as ours are. This is a bold attempt
of some modern Authors, who choose rather to strain the Word of God, than their
own notions. There are Allegories, no doubt, in Scripture, but we are not to
allegorize Scripture without some warrant: either from an Apostolical
interpretation, or from the necessity of the matter: and I do not know how they
can pretend to either of these, in this case. However, that they may have all
fair play, we will lay aside, at present, all the other Texts of Scripture, and
confine our selves wholly to St. Peter's words: to see and examine whether they
are, or can be turned into an Allegory, according to the best rules of
interpretation.

St. Peter's words are these: Seeing then all these 2 Pet. 3. 11, 12, 13.
things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be, in holy
conversation and godliness? Looking for, and hasting the coming of the Day of
God: wherein the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements
shall melt with fervent heat. NEVERTHELESS, we, according to his promise, look
for New Heavens and a New Earth, wherein Righteousness shall dwell. The
Question is concerning this last Verse, Whether the New Heavens and Earth here
promised, are to be real and material Heavens and Earth, or only figurative
and allegorical. The words, you see, are clear: And the general rule of
interpretation is this, That we are not to recede from the letter, or the
literal sense, unless there be a necessity from the subject matter; such a
necessity, as makes a literal interpretation absurd. But where is that
necessity in this Case? Cannot God make new Heavens and a new Earth, as easily
as he made the Old ones? Is his strength decayed since that time, or is Matter
grown more disobedient? Nay, does not Nature offer her self voluntarily to
raise a new World from the second Chaos, as well as from the first: and, under
the conduct of Providence, to make it as convenient an habitation as the
Primaeval Earth? Therefore no necessity can be pretended of leaving the literal
sense, upon an incapacity of the subject matter.

The second rule to determine an Interpretation to be Literal or Allegorical,
is, the use of the same words or phrase in the Context, and the signification
of them there. Let Us then examine our cafe according to this rule. St. Peter
had used the same phrase of Heavens and Earth twice before in the same Chapter.
The old Heavens and Earth, ver. 5. The Present Heavens and Earth, ver. 7. and
now he uses it again, ver. 13. The new Heavens and Earth. Have we not then
reason to suppose, that he takes it here in the same sense, that he had done
twice before, for real and material Heavens and Earth? There is no mark set of
a new signification, nor why we should alter the sense of the words. That he
used them always before for the material Heavens and Earth, I think none will
question: and therefore, unless they can give us a sufficient reason, why we
should change the signification of the words, we are bound, by this second rule
also, to understand them in a literal sense.

Lastly, The very form of the words, and the manner of their dependence upon
the Context, leads us to a literal sense, and to material Heavens and Earth.
NEVERTHELESS, says the Apostle, we expect new Heavens, etc. Why Nevertheless!
that is, notwithstanding the dissolution of the present Heavens and Earth. The
Apostle foresaw, what he had said, might raise a doubt in their minds, whether
all things would not be at an end: Nothing more of Heavens and Earth, or of any
habitable World, after the Conflagration; and to obviate this, he tells them,
Notwithstanding that wonderful desolation that I have described, we do,
according to God's promises, expect new Heavens and a new Earth, to be an
Habitation for the Righteous.

You see then the New Heavens and New Earth, which the Apostle speaks of, are
substituted in the place of those that were destroyed at the Conflagration; and
would you substitute Allegorical Heavens and Earth in the place of Material? A
shadow for a substance? What an Equivocation would it be in the Apostle, when
the doubt was about the material Heavens and Earth, to make an answer about
Allegorical. Lastly, the timeing of the thing determines the sense. When shall
this new World appear? after the Conflagration, the Apostle says: Therefore it
cannot be understood of any moral renovation, to be made at, or in the times of
the Gospel, as these Allegorists pretend. We must therefore, upon all accounts,
conclude, that the Apostle intended a literal sense: real and material Heavens,
to succeed these after the Conflagration: which was the thing to be proved. And
I know not what Bars the Spirit of God can set, to keep us within the Compass
of a Literal sense, if these be not sufficient.

Thus much for the Explication of St. Peter's Doctrine, concerning the new
Heavens and new Earth: which secures the second Part of our Theory. For the
Theory stands upon two Pillars, or two pedestals, The Ante-diluvian Earth and
the Future Earth: or, in S. Peter's phrase, The Old Heavens and Earth, and the
New Heavens and Earth: And it cannot be shaken, so long as these two continue
firm and immovable. We might now put an end to this Review, but it may be
expected possibly that we should say something concerning the Millennium: which
we have, contrary to the general Sentiment of the modern Millenaries, placed in
the Future Earth. Our opinion has this advantage above others, that, all
fanatical pretensions to power and empire in this World, are, by these means,
blown away, as chaff before the wind. Princes need not fear to be dethroned, to
make way to the Saints: nor Governments unhinged, that They may rule the World
with a rod of Iron. These are the effects of a wild Enthusiasm; seeing the very
state which they aim at, is not to be upon this Earth.

But that our sense may not be mistaken or misapprehended in this particular,
as if we thought the Christian Church would never, upon this Earth, be in a
better and happier posture than it is in at present: We must distinguish
betwixt a melioration of the World, if you will allow that word: and a
millennium. We do not deny a reformation and improvement of the Church, both as
to Peace, Purity, and Piety. That knowledge may increase, men's minds be
enlarged, and Christian Religion better understood: That the power of
Antichrist shall be diminished, persecution cease, and a greater union and
harmony established amongst the Reformed. All this may be, and I hope will be,
ere long. But the Apocalyptical Millennium, or the New Jerusalem, is still
another matter. It differs not in degree only from the present state, but is a
new order of things: both in the Moral World and in the Natural; and that
cannot be till we come into the New Heavens and New Earth. Suppose what
Reformation you can in this World, there will still remain many things
inconsistent with the true Millennial state. Antichrist, though weakened, will not
be finally destroyed till the coming of our Savior, nor Satan bound. And there
will be always poverty, wars, diseases, knaves and hypocrites, in this World:
which are not consistent with the New Jerusalem, as S. John describes it. Apoc.
21. 2, 3, 4, etc.

You see now what our notion is of the Millennium, as we deny this Earth to be
the Seat of it. It Is the state that succeeds the first Resurrection, when Satan
is locked up in the bottomless pit. The state when the Martyrs are to return
into Life, and wherein they are to have the first lot and chief share. A state
which is to last a thousand years. And Blessed and Holy is he, that has a part
in it: on such the second death has no power, but they shall be Priests of God
and Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years. If you would see more
particular reasons of our judgment in this case, why such a Millennium is not
to be expected in this World: they are set down in the 8th Chap. of the 4th
Book, and we do not think it necessary that they should be here repeated.

As to that dissertation that follows the Millennium, and reaches to the
Consummation of all things, seeing it is but problematical, we leave it to
stand or fall by the evidence already given. And should be very glad to see the
conjectures of others, more lcarned, in Speculations so abstruse and remote
from common knowledge. They cannot surely be thought unworthy or unfit for our
Meditations, seeing they are suggested to us by Scripture it self. And to what
end were they proposed to us there, if it was not intended that they should be
understood, sooner or later?

I have done with this Review: and shall only add one or two reflections upon
the whole discourse, and so conclude. You have seen the state of the Theory of
the Earth, as to the Matter, Form, and Proofs of it: both Natural and Sacred.
If any one will substitute a better in its place, I shall think my self more
obliged to him, than if he had showed me the Quadrature of the Circle. But it
is not enough to pick quarrels here and there: that may be done by any writing,
especially when it is of so great extent and comprehension. They must build up,
as well as pull down; and give us another Theory instead of this, fitted to the
same natural History of the Earth, according as it is set down in Scripture:
and then let the World take their choice. He that cuts down a Tree, is bound in
reason to plant two, because there is an hazard in their growth and thriving.

Then as to those that are such rigorous Scripturists, as to require plainly
demonstrative and irresistible Texts for every thing they entertain or believe;
They would do well to reflect and consider, whether, for every article in the
three Creeds (which have no support from natural reason) they can bring such
Texts of Scripture as they require of others: or a fairer and juster evidence,
all things considered, than we have done for the substance of this Theory. We
have not indeed said all that might be said, as to Antiquity: that making no
part in this Review, and being capable still of great additions. But as to
Scripture and Reason I have no more to add. Those that are not satisfied with
the proofs already produced upon these two heads, are under a fate, good or
bad, which is not in my power to overcome.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Walter Kettilby.
H'Enrici Mori Cantabrigiensis Opera omnia, tum que Latin, tum que Anglice
scripta sunt; nunc vero Latinitate donata Instigatu and Impensis Generofissimi
Juvenis Johannis Cockshuti Nobilis Angli, 3. Vol. Fol.

-- 's Exposition upon Daniel. quart.

-- 's Exposition upon the Revelations. quart.

-- 's Answer to several Remarks upon his Expositions upon Daniel, and the
Revelations. quart.

-- 's Notes upon Daniel and the Revelations. quart.

-- 's Paralipomena Prophetica, containing several Supplements and Defenses of
his Expositions. quart.

-- 's Confutation of Judiciary Astrology against Butler. quart.

-- 's Brief Discourse of the Real Presence of the Body and Blood of Christ, in
the Celebration of the Holy Eucharist. 40. stitcht.

-- 's Reply to the Answer to his Antidote against Idolatry. oct.

-- 's Remarks upon Judge Hales of Fluid Bodies. oct.

The Theory of the Earth, etc. the two first Books, concerning the Deluge, and
concerning Paradise. Fol.

Telluris Theoria Sacra, etc. Libri duo Priores de Diluvio and Paradiso. quarto.

Libri duo Posteriores de Conflagratione Mundi, and de futuro Rerum Statu.
quart.

Dr. Goodal's Royal College of Physicians. quart.

Sydenham Opera Universa Medica. oct.

Ent. de Circuitione Sanguinis. oct.

Charleton de Causis Catameniorum and uteri Rheumatismo. oct.

Mr. L'Emery's Course of Chemistry. oct.

An Answer to Harvey's Conclave of Physicians.

Dr. Scott's Christian Life, in 3. Vol.

Dr: Falkner's Libertas Ecclesiastica. oct.

-- 's Vindication of Liturgies. oct.

-- 's Christian Loyalty. oct.

Dr. Fowler's Libertas Evangelica. oct.

Dr. Kidder's Christian Sufferer. oct.

Mr. W. Allen's Twelve several Tracts, in 4. Vol. oct. Lately Printed.

Mr. W. Allen's Nature, Series, and Order of Occurrences, as they are
prophetically represented in the 11th. Chapter of the Revelations. oct.

Mr. Raymond's Pattern of Pure and undefiled Religion. oct.

Dr. Worthington's Great duty of Self-resignation. oct. reprinted.

A Relation of the Proceedings at Charter House, upon occasion of K. Fames's
presenting a Papist to be admitted into that Hospital, by virtue of his Letters
Dispensatory. Fol. stitcht.

Mr. Mariott's Sermon, on Easter Day, before the Lord Mayor.

-- 's Sermon at the Election of the Lord Mayor.

Dr. Pellings Sermon before the K. and Q. at White Hall. Dec. 8. 1689.


