THE Bishop of SALISBURY's SERMON Preached at BOW-CHURCH, ON THE FAST DAY.
MARCH 12. 1689/90.

PILKINGTON Mayor.
Martis xviiio. Martii 1689/90. Annoque Regni Regis and Reginae Willielmi and
Mariae, Angliae, etc. Secundo.
THIS Court does desire the Right Reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of
Sarum, to Print his Sermon Preached at St. Mary le Bow, on Wednesday the 12th
Instant, before the Aldermen and Citizens of this City.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON Preached at BOW-CHURCH, Before the Court of Aldermen, On March 12.
1689/90. Being the FAST DAY Appointed by Their MAJESTY'S. By the Right Reverend
Father in God, GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARUM.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXC.

LUKE xix. 41, 42. And when he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over
it,

Saying, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which concern thy peace.


OBJECTS that raise Compassion, and beget Sorrow, cannot be looked on with
indifferent eyes by those who have a right Prospect, and a just Sense of
things. To an ordinary Spectator, Jerusalem must have appeared one of the
Glories of the World, especially as it was beautified and fortified by Herod.
Its Temple standing on an Eminence, was so August in it Self, and so Sacred in
its Use, as being dedicated to the Service of the Living God, that the very
sight of it must have begot a Reverence; and to a born Jew must have given all
the Pride which the Native of any Country may be apt to feel in himself, when
he sees the Capital City full both of People and of Wealth, shining with a
fresh Luster, and adorned with all the Beauties of Art, as well as hallowed by
the special marks of the Favor and Presence of God.

But all this must have appeared as a vain Pageant to one that could see
through that false varnish, and that likewise by reason of the treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge that were in him, saw their approaching Fate; he saw that
Misery, which tho it fell not on them till almost Forty Years after this yet
did then to him represent Jerusalem as a heap of Stones, the Temple on Fire,
and the Inhabitants destroyed by Famine, or by the Sword; nor could so Divine a
Mind find any ease in so dismal a prospect, from this, That the Jews rejecting
of him, and the cruel Treatment that he was to reeeive from them, was to be
revenged in so terrible a manner. This to a spiteful mind would have afforded
some content; but he that was so full of Universal Love and Goodness, could not
entertain such ill-natured thoughts. Nor could, on the other hand, all the
Glory to which he himself was to be advanced long before the effusion of the
Wrath of God upon this City, make him less sensible of this Misery, because
neither he nor his Followers were to share in it. It was true Pity and
Compassion that were his Motives, which both drew tears from his eyes, and also
the sad wish that follows. His sense of their sins was from the same pure and
disinteressed Motives, for he had none of his own to return into his mind, when
he considered theirs, to make the Sorrow more melting. And tho that bloody
Scene which he himself was so soon to go through, might, according to such
measures as we act by, have so entirely possessed his thoughts, that no room
should have been left for the compassionating others; yet even in this nearness
to that bitter Cup which he was so soon to drink, he considered their miseries
that were more remote, with all the tendernesses of hearty Sorrow and
Compassion.

In imitation then of the Author of our Faith, it does much more become us to
look on this great City that has risen out of its ashes with so much Glory,
that is now the Treasure as well as the Pride of the Nation, that has so many
characters of Greatness, as well as Wealth in every corner of it; but that at
the same time has contracted so much guilt, is covered with so much Defilement,
Luxury, and Excess; is agitated with such Factions, and these acted with so
much animosity; but not to view all this without feeling a tenderness run
through all our Powers, and give us many sad and melting thoughts, which ought
to affect us so much the more sensibly, when we find how great a share we our
selves have in these sins, which we lament in others; so that the Words of our
Savior, 23 Luke 28
Weep not for me, but weep for your selves, may be applied to us in another
sense, since upon strict enquiry, we shall find that we are not pure enough our
selves, to be capable of such a disinteressed sorrow, while we weep over
London: We must first begin and lament our selves, while we remember in how
many places of this City, and in how many several ways we have dishonored God,
and contributed our proportion toward the kindling the Wrath of God against
us. Our melancholy thoughts also must have another mixture in them, since if
this place is to be made as great a scene of the Judgments of God, as it has
been hitherto of his Mercies, we must be all involved in it. This thought does
indeed render our Compassion for the Public, less generous; but it will
perhaps make it more sensible to us. In a word, as there is nothing that shows
that a man has truly repented of his own sins, more than a tender sense of the
Wrath of God; so nothing proves a man to be possessed with a spirit of Love and
Charity, more than a feeling sense of the sins and miseries of others; and to
weep over ones Country or City, as it is the most important service that can
be done the Public, which may delay, if not quite divert the Judgments of God;
so this is that which is in every ones Power to do: Wealth is not necessary for
this aid; yet perhaps there is scarce any one duty that is more universally
neglected, than this is; ill men do not so much as once think of it; men of a
low degree of Goodness, have not elevation of soul enough for it; and the only
men that are capable of doing this service to their Country, have so much
Modesty and Humility, and are so depressed with the sense of their own sins,
that they are tempted to think it is an over valuing themselves, and a sort of
a Presumption for them to intercede for others, or for their Country.

But we are Members of one Political Body, and must all bear a share in the
Prosperity, or the Misfortunes of the Nation; so that if a nobler Principle
does not engage us to this Duty, yet at least Self-love should work on us;
since we cannot flatter our selves so far, as to fancy, that if any general
Calamity should overtake the Land, or City, that we our selves should be
exempted from it. We are also joined into a nearer Relation as we are become
Members of one Body, of which Christ is the Head; and by this Union the same
Spirit of Love and Charity will be spread over the whole Body; so that we will
rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep. Since then the
present state of things, and the Commands of Authority, our common Interests,
as well as our Christian Charity, do all concur to engage us, first of all to
weep for our sins, and then to look over our Country, and this the City of our
Solemnities, and mourn over them; let us go over the several branches of the
moving and emphatical words of our Savior, and apply them as far as the
parallel goes, to the present state of things: in which let us consider,

1. The Importance of this redoubling the word, thou, even thou.

2. The Importance of these words, at least in this thy day.

3. What are the things that concern the peace of a Nation, and how they may be
known.

And 4thly, what are the happy effects of a Nation's knowing them: This, tho
not expressed, yet is implied in the wish in which the period is laid, without
being regularly closed.

I have not read the last words of this Verse, neither will I speak to them,
for they might seem to carry too dismal a sound with them; yet, I hope, all
that hear me, will so seriously reflect on them, that by their so doing, they
may come not to belong to us. For though perhaps in the present unhappy posture
in which we are, it is but too true that now they are hid from our eyes; yet if
we will seriously attend to those things of which I am to treat, then we shall
be delivered from so heavy a Sentence as is imported in them. To return.

1. If thou, even thou; the words carry plainly a weight in them, which to
comprehend aright, we must consider the state in which Jerusalem was at that
time, and that with respect to both the good and bad of it. It was the Capital
of that Nation, that God had chosen out of all the Families of the Earth to be
his own Inheritance: it was the place where his Name was called upon, and to
which the Worship of God was appropriated. It was now so enriched by Herod, who
having heaped up Treasures like another Solomon, had laid them out in the
rebuilding the Temple, which in a course of 46 years was carried on to so vast
a Magnificence, that it was become indeed one of the Wonders of the World: It
was also so well fortified, and had within it such a number of Inhabitants, who
had such a violent love to their Country, and so much zeal for it, that one
might have thought they were in no danger of being besieged; but that they were
strong enough to have gone out and fought any Enemy that could have gone
against them: and that no Siege could have signified any thing, but to have
ruined the Army that should have attempted it: so that by this thou, even thou,
in one view we may understand a City dedicated to God, and under his
Protection; a City well fortified, full of Wealth, and full of People, and yet
to such a City it was necessary to know the things that belonged to their peace.

Here, before we go farther, Reflections offer themselves to us in abundance:
This our City has been under signal Characters of the Protection of God; it has
been preserved from violent Concussions, and from the hand of an Enemy, when
all the rest of the Nation has had their turns in the Accidents of War: It is
true, two signal strokes from Heaven that came one after another, a wasting
Pestilence, and a devouring Fire that seemed to threaten it with ruin, showed
that God corrected them, tho he would not deliver them over to the will of
their Enemies; The quick recovery of the City, carries the marks of a
particular car of Heaven; and the haste that has been made to raise up so many
of these holy and beautiful Houses, in which God is worshipped, may be reckoned
among the Glories, and the Defenses of this place. Its vast Wealth, the
increase of the Inhabitants, the prodigious extent of it, and the zeal with
which all seem to be heated for preserving the Honor of the City, bring us so
near a Parallel to Jerusalem, that in this, thou, even thou, we may find the
Characters of a City, hitherto highly blessed of God, and full of the Good
things of this life; yet in the midst of all this Wealth, and Abundance, there
is great need of preparing for a Storm.

2dly, If we consider the state of Jerusalem with relation to Religion; the
Jews who had showed so violent an Inclination to Idolatry before they were
carried Captives to Babylon, were there so absolutely cured of that, that ever
after they expressed the strictest Zeal possible against every step toward
Idolatry, or the least appearance of it. We see how they resisted the Kings of
Syria in their Attempts for profaning the Temple, and defiling their Worship:
and not long after our Savior's death, when Caligula ordered his Statue to be
set up in the Temple, they were all in so great a commotion upon it, that an
Embassy was sent to him, to show that they could not bear any thing that looked
like a departure from the God of their Fathers, which was urged by Philo that
went on the Embassy, in terms full of zeal, that expressed a firm resolution of
suffering every thing, rather than endure such an affront to be done to their
Religion. To this Zeal against Idolatry, they added a most punctual observation
of all the Rituals of their Religion; and not satisfied with those which Moses
had appointed, they had added many new ones, which they reckoned the setting a
hedge about the Law; securing the observance of the commanded Rites by those,
which, according to the Tradition of the Elders, had been for some Ages
observed among them; so here was a City that was both free from Idolatry, and
exact in obeying the Laws of God, that yet is warned of a great danger in these
words, Thou, even thou. I do not know whether our conformity to them, as to
these particulars, goes so high, or is so Universal, yet something like it we
have. Great Zeal has appeared against the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, with
a constancy in the Matters of Religion, that has amazed all the World: the
steps made toward that, alarmed the Nation, and this City in particular: and
it appeared that you could not bear those who called themselves the Church of
God, but that are the Synagogue of Satan. You have showed also such firmness to
the Church of England, and to the Established Religion, as not to bear any
thing that declined from it, either to the right hand, or to the left. Yet
after all this, we may have cause to apprehend the Wrath of God,
notwithstanding it all, if our Religion goes no farther, than the cleansing the
outside, or the tything the mint and anise. If we have Idols in our hearts, tho
we have purged our Churches of them; if we forget God at the same time, that we
do not worship Images; and if while we are zealous in lesser matters, we
neglect the great things, of righteousness, mercy and faith, then all our
Negative Religion, our No Popery, and all our zeal for the Church, when it does
not oblige us to conform our selves to her Dictates, and Rules, as well as to
be hot and eager in her defense, will not secure us, but that this Thou, even
thou, may belong to us.

3dly, The Jews at this time had so fallen from all the true Principles of
Religion, that even their Religion had embittered their Spirits, so that they
were rather the worse for it, than the better. The Pried and Affectation of the
Pharisees, that had no real worth under it to support it, set them on all the
methods of Slander and Injustice, of Falsehood and Cruelty: so that when they
found they could not stand before the true worth of our Savior, and his
Apostles, they then fell upon the blackest Calumnies, and most violent Rage for
destroying those before whom they could not maintain their ground upon an equal
foot: their Morals were universally depraved, and their Tempers so vitiated,
that under the appearance of an adhering strictly to their Religion, there
never was a Nation that did more totally fall from the power and life of
Godliness, than they did: they were both cruel and barbarous, and not satisfied
with shedding the Blood of Christ, they filled up the measure of their
Iniquities by persecuting his Followers everywhere: so that under a show of
preserving their Law, they had entirely lost all the true and good Principles
of Religion; and so had contracted a vast guilt, besides that heavy load of the
Blood of him that was the Heir of the Vineyard, whom they killed, that the
Inheritance might be their own. And thus the view of a Nation that was both so
corrupted, and that lay under so heavy a load of guilt, leads us to the full
importance of this, If thou, even thou; that even after all their Sins, and all
their guilt, there was still room for Repentance. If this Nation has brought it
self into the like state of having the knowledge of the Truth, and seeming
zealous about it, and yet falling from all that is pure and excellent in
Religion, into a fierceness about some Inconsiderable Matters; if while we seem
to have a great concern for our Religion, we have none at all for our Morals;
if Malice and ill nature, if Fury and Cruelty, do not only transport us to all
excesses, but make us cover and justify them with pretexts of Religion; if our
Cities and Country have been defiled with all the brutalities that humane
Nature is capable of; If, instead of mutual Love and Forgiveness, we hate, and
study to destroy one another; If, instead of Truth, there is nothing but
Injustice; and instead of Righteousness, there is nothig but Violence and
Deceit, then we will find our selves under the worst part of that which is
intimated in this, If thou, even thou. Yet after all, there is somewhat that
gives comfort in this; for if a City charged with all the blood that was shed
from Abel down to Zacharias, was even after all that, admitted to a possibility
of escaping the Judgments of God, by a true Repentance, then we see that we who
have reason to hope that we are not near so guilty as they were, are not yet
quite desperate.

2. From this, I go next to consider the Importance of these words, at least in
this thy day. In Scripture this word of the day, or time of a Nation, stands in
a double sense: Isa. 49. 8.
sometimes for a time of mercy and kindness, an acceptable time, and day of
Salvation: sometimes for a day of trial, Verse. 43.
or visitation, as it is in the following words. The meaning of the first is,
that when God receives Nations into his Protection and Favor, he not being as
a Man, inconstant and changeable, does not easily repent of the good that he
shows them, nor change his Methods toward them: and therefore till their Sins
become so high, and crying, that it does not agree with the honor of his
Providence not to show his anger against them, he bears with their Offenses;
or, if he corrects them for them, he does it not in anger; he will chastise
them, Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32, 33.
as he said with relation to David's Posterity, If they sin against him, but he
will not quite cast them off; he will visit their Transgressions with the rod,
and their Iniquity with stripes; Nevertheless he will not take his loving
kindness utterly from them. And thus we find it was often said of the Jewish
Nation in the Old Testament, that God would have cast them off, if he had not
remembered Abraham, Israel and Jacob; so in this sense the Jews were still God's
People, and in Covenant with him. To them were the first offers of the Messiah
to be made; and therefore if while that Covenant lasted, and they were still
under the Privileges of it, they could have applied themselves to know the
things that belonged to their Peace, they might still have maintained their
Title to his Favor. The second sense of this thy day, imports that there is a
time of Trial and Repentance granted by God, even to guilty Nations, in order
to their preventing the last strokes of his Wrath, and the final Calamity that
is threatened. When God was provoked by the sins of the old World to bring a
flood upon the whole Earth, 6. Genesis 3.
he gave them the space of 120 years for a time of warning, in which Noah
continued as a Preacher of Righteousness, denouncing to them the Judgments that
were to be poured out upon them: 3. Jonas 4.
Even Niniveh had 40 days given to them for a time of Repentance, by which
their final destruction might be respited, as in fact it proved to be. We find
upon three great occasions, that God granted to the people of the Jews a time
of 40 Years: When they rebelled against him at Kadesh-barnea, 14. Numb. 33, 34.
and would not go in and possess the Land; he declared that none of them except
two, should enter into it, but that they should fall in the Wilderness; yet
they were to wander in it 40 Years; for so long does the Psalm say, that he was
grieved with that generation. Next, when Manasses had so defiled Jerusalem with
both Idolatry and Bloodshed, 2 Kings 24. 4.
that it is said that God would not pardon it; yet upon Iosiah's serious
Repentance, and purging the Temple, which he began in the 12th Year of his
Reign, God granted to the Jews 40 Years Reprieve; for it was just so long
between the 12th of Josiah, and Zedekiah's Captivity: And the third 40 Years
was from the first year of our Saviors Preaching, to the final Destruction of
Jerusalem: they were then in the day of their Visitation, which grew gradually
upon them; the Roman Yoke becoming every day more and more intolerable, and
their humors growing more and more boisterous. Toward the conclusion of this
time of their Trial, the alarms grew higher; many Prodigies, and other
extraordinary things appearing, that seemed to warn them of the Wrath to come.
Cestius Gallus came with an Army against them four Years before their
Destruction, and took the lower City; and tho he did retreat with some loss,
yet they had all reason to conclude that the Romans could not bear such a
Repulse: After this, Galilee was conquered and destroyed: All these were
warnings to Jerusalem, and were the last immediate Forerunners of its final
Destruction. This being then the full extent of the meaning of these Words, In
this thy day, it will not be uneasy to see how they may belong to us.

It is still with us a day of mercy; and when we consider the whole state of
Christendom, particularly of many parts of it, ever since the Reformation was
established, we must acknowledge that it has been of a very long continuance; we
had 80 years of Peace and Plenty, Prosperity and Victory, as well as of the
Purity of the Gospel, from the year 1558, to the year 1638; a thing without
example in Modern History. In all that time, unless it were a few months Plague
at two several times, we had not any one National stroke, to be set against the
many public Blessings we enjoyed; but when we were so happy that we had no
Enemies that could hurt us, we became our own Enemies, and then the Sword raged
among us; but even that was so allayed, that we fell not under the Fury that
commonly attends Civil Wars. And both Sides in their mutual Heats, did yet so
far remember that they were Englishmen, that neither of them brought over
Strangers, nor gave them footing among us. We have now enjoyed an Age of Peace
and Plenty, and with that have had the Gospel among us, with that clearness and
fullness, that no Age has produced more Light, better Explanations of Divine
Matters, and fuller Proofs of their Truth. And though we have seen many Storms
gathering thick and black over our Heads, so that we had reason to look for
most terrible Confusions; yet all these have gone over us in so inoffensive a
manner, that perhaps many do not enough feel the Blessings of our Deliverance,
because we only saw, but did not feel what our Enemies had designed against us;
and this being a thing which some had not Opportunities, and others had not
Capacity enough to apprehend; we despise, or perhaps even loath our
Deliverance; because we neither value the Gospel which is preserved among us,
nor understand how near we were the losing it. The Quiet we now enjoy, and the
Security we live in while, all the World about us is on fire, is no ordinary
Indication of a particular favor of Heaven to us; and after so long a course
of Goodness, we have reason to conclude that God will not change his Methods,
if our Sins do not call aloud for it.

We have likewise reason to think we are now in a Day of Visitation, and that
terrible Calamities are not far from us, if in this our Day, we are not wise
nor good enough to prevent it. We have seen the Cup of God's Wrath, going round
all the Protestant Churches, which having fallen from their first Love, and
forsaken their first Purity, mixing into the Vanities of the World, and
corrupting their Manners notwithstanding the Purity of their Doctrine and
Worship, have been severely visited by God: Some fatally broken and extirpated,
as the Churches of France and Piedmont; others brought near utter ruin, as the
Churches of Hungary and the Palatinate, and others; though not visited so
heavily, yet were brought very low; so were the Churches of the Netherlands 18
Years ago, and many Churches in Germany. But when all these things have been
set before our Eyes, and when the Visitation is brought into our Galile, if I
may so speak, I mean into Ireland, and has cast that Island, and all its
Inhabitants, into such Convulsions, that we cannot yet form a clear Judgment
how far they may be consumed by this Fire, which now devours them, before they
come out of it; While these things have gone round about us, why should we
think that we can escape? Are we better than the others who have suffered? Or,
can we think that God is partial to us? And when God suffered them so far to
break in upon us, that we saw an Idolatrous Worship openly, and in contempt of
the Laws both of God and of the Land, set up among us; and an open Treaty set
on foot for bringing us under the Tyranny of Rome: When we were under the
Ministry of a Jesuit, and the Influences of France; when we saw Breaches made
upon the most sacred of our Laws, and the Subversion of the whole attempted:
This was certainly such a Day of Visitation, as Cestius Gallus his showing the
Roman Army was to Jerusalem. The Jews did not any more fear that Enemy, because
they had strength enough once to stand it out against so faint an Attempt; but
the next return of the Romans was more formidable, and proved in Conclusion
fatal to them. If we either grow to have milder Thoughts of our Enemies the
modern Romans, and fancy they are not quite so bad as our Fears may have
Pictured them to us; or if we despise their Forces, and fancy that we have not
so considerable an Enemy in them as we were made believe; we may be soon
undeceived of both Errors, when it will be too late for us upon the discovery
to correct them.

In Sum, We must not think that such extraordinary Providence as have of late
occurred both at home and abroad, are Matters that deserve no Reflections to be
made upon them: They are Essays, and perhaps the last Essays that are to be
made upon us, to try if our Dangers, or our Neighbors Fates, can make us wiser
or better.

III. And this leads me to the third Particular, What are those things which
concern the Peace of a Nation, and how they may be known. The obvious Division
of this is unto those things that belong to our Peace with God, those things
that may preserve the whole Nation, and its Peace as it is a complicated Body;
and the things which belong to our Peace among our selves, one with another.

We cannot make any Reflections on our Condition with relation to God, without
observing that he has been offended in a most eminent manner; while Religion
has been so visibly neglected by those who have pretended the most to it; while
not only Vices of all Sorts have abounded among us, and have been acted with so
high a Hand, as if the Actors had equally despised the Judgments of God and the
Reproaches of Men; but what do I say, Reproaches! Men have been so far from
being out of countenance for their Sins, that they have valued themselves upon
them, and gloried in them. How loud is the Cry of the Luxury, the Injustice,
the Fraud, the Violence, and the Impieties of this Place? How have they gone up
into the Ears of the Lord of Hosts? And will he bear with us for ever? But as
if the Abominations of others Age and Countries had not been enough to provoke
him to Anger, we have found out and added new ones to those of past Times.
Perhaps in no Age or Nation the Religion that Men pretend to believe, has been
so openly not only attacked and questioned, but laughed at and rejected with
all the Indignities of impious Scorn, as it has been among us: Others who had
more Modesty and Decency in their Natures, and so could not rise up to that
pitch of Insolence, yet have been generally corrupted into Infidelity; so that
perhaps scarce any Nation now under Heaven believe less of the Religion that is
professed in it, than we do. Now this is as much beyond all other Sins, as High
Treason is beyond all other legal Offenses. This strikes at the Majesty and
Authority of God, and at every Article of Religion, since it overturns the
Foundation upon which all is built. And to what a height is the Cry of our
Iniquities risen, when there is scarce a lewd Company that get together, that
do not make the most solemn and sacred things in the World, the Subjects of
their Mirth and Diversion? Shall not I visit for these things, Ierem. 5. 29.
says the Lord? shall not my Soul be avenged on such a People as this is?
Besides this that dissolves all Sense of Religion, this Age has produced
another that has as much dissolved all Morality, which is the open affronting
the State of Marriage: Other Ages have perhaps produced high Offenses against
it, and public Breaches of that Faith; but to see an open and avowed Contempt
of it done in the Sight of the Sun, and as it were in spite of that State, is
what no Christian Nation has so publicly owned as ours has done.

Whilst God has been so highly provoked, and when we saw our selves in such a
desperate State, as that under which we lately groaned, who were then repenting
of their Sins, and turning to God? Who were putting from them the Evil of their
Ways? Who were cleansing themselves from their Impieties and Impurities, from
their Injustice and Oppression? Such a Preparation as this had made us both
more fit for a Deliverance, and more capable of improving it to all those Ends
for which God had blessed us with it, If this great Work sticks in the Birth so
long, it is because Men have not repented of their Sins, but have returned to
them, or rather have openly continued in them: and while our Divisions make us
sharp-sighted to find out one another Faults, we make no other use of the
Discovery, but to reproach others for them, and to represent them more odious
to our selves and others, upon that Account. But who considers these things as
a Christian ought to do, who animated with the Spirit of Christ, mourns over
them, and humbles himself before God for them? as Ezra did, who finding that
the People of the Jews after their Return out of the Captivity, were beginning
to fall back into their old Disorders, Rent his Clothes, and sat astonished; he
was ashamed, Ezrah 9. 3, 4.
and blushed to lift up his Face to God: and in Words full of tender sense, he
laments their Sins. Now for a little space Grace has been showed us, Ver. 8.
to give us a little reviving. And now Lord, what shall we say after this? Ver.
10.
for we have forsaken thy Commandments. Ver. 13.
And after all that is come upon us for our our evil Deeds, seeing that thou
our God have punished us less than our Iniquities deserve, Ver. 14, 15.
and have given us such a Deliverance as this, should we again break thy
Commandments, would not thou be angry with us till thou had consumed us, so
that there should be no Remnant nor escaping? O Lord God of Israel, thou art
righteous: for we remain yet escaped, as it is this day: Behold, we are before
thee in our Trespasses, for we cannot stand before thee, because of this. Such
Acts of Sorrow as these, rising from a sense of the Dishonor done to God, and
of the Danger the Nation is in by it, were a Service to the Public, beyond all
that can ever rise from that false Heat, with which any of us may be animated.
Other Services require good Heads, or great Credit, and much Wealth; but this
is that which every Person of a pure and devout Mind can offer up for their
Country. But alas, can it be expected that those who do not mourn for their own
Sins, should mourn for the Sins of others? which will perhaps appear an
unreasonable piece of Melancholy to those who do not consider that we being all
one Body in Christ, the Communion of the Saints, of which this is a main part,
is established by God, by which we are obliged to mix our Tears and Prayers
together as one Body, not doubting but that these have their Effect before God;
at least they shall return into our own Bosom, and our Charity shall not want
its Reward; for though the Sins of a Nation were grown to that height, that
though Noah, Job, and Daniel, Ezekiel. 14. 16.
were among them, and interceding for them, they could only deliver their own
Souls, by their Righteousness, yet still that is a happy Reserve.

Those who mourn in Sion, shall be marked on their Foreheads: and when the
destroying Calamity shall have a Commission to march over the Land, Ezekiel. 9. 4,
7.
beginning even at the Sanctuary, at that Order of Men, who should have been
the Intercessors for others, but that have rather heightened the Provocation by
their Sins, than those who carry that Mark, shall be exempted, and either be
quite preserved from the common Calamity, or at least shall have a
distinguished Fate in it, for they may hope for an easier Fall and gentler
Circumstances. This is then the chief thing that belongs to our Peace, our
Reconciliation with God; so that he turns from the Fierceness of his Anger, and
lifts up upon us the Light of his Countenance.

The 2d thing that concerns our Peace, is the falling upon proper and effectual
Means for preserving our selves, and the Nation, for this is our Peace. We who
have been accustomed to ease and fullness, who cannot bear the lessening any one
Article either of our Luxury or of our Vanity, have mean Notions of what
belongs to our Peace, if we think that any thing is too much which secures it
to us. We have an Enemy in head of us, who has ever looked on the Prosperity
and Plenty of this Island, as that which stood most in the way of his Glory:
and though he could more easily bear with it, when our Princes were under his
Conduct, and guided by the Measures that he gave them, yet now Prince and
People are both equally odious to him. If we have any Regard either to our
Selves, our Families or Posterities, to our Religion or our Country, to the
present or the succeeding Generations, we must now unite our whole Strength,
and turn our whole Forces against those Enemies of Humane Nature, who
wheresoever they come, turn the richest Soil to a barren Wilderness; and after
they have gratified their Revenges with unheard of and studied Cruelties, their
Appetites with the most defiling Rapes, their Avarice with the most exquisite
Plunder, finally destroy all that cannot be any way serviceable to themselves.
These are things which we cannot easily believe; since Wars formerly were
managed by Rules, and a Faith that was held sacred even in the hottest Rages of
War; but those Beasts of Prey gave themselves no Restraints; or if they
themselves were capable of any, yet the terrible Orders that are given them, of
executing whole Nations and Provinces, leave no room for any Remnant of
Humanity that is perhaps not quite extinguished in them. Men of gentle and
peaceful Natures cannot form to themselves a just Idea of the Miseries which
must follow on our falling under such an Enemy.

If while things are in this State, every one will look on, and fancy, That
this lies on the Government, and not on himself; if Men will neither with their
Persons nor their Purses contribute what is in them to our preservation, if
some small Distastes do alienate them from one another, and from the public;
this gives us yet a more terrible Prospect than the Jews had. For though they had
whetted their Spirits one against another beyond Imagination, yet all agreed in
opposing the Romans. And when they attacked them, they went all to their common
Defense: But if we will throw up all, because we cannot carry every things, if
because we cannot revenge or subdue those who differ from us, or because some
things do not please us, we come to have softer Thoughts of our Enemies, and
imagine that we can make Terms with them and trust them; and if some fancy that
by reason of some Managements they have been in, their Fate will be milder, not
to say better, this is an Error, that they will not perhaps ever see, because
they are not like to outlive it. To such as can so deceive themselves, I will
only tell what the Pope's Legate, that commanded the Army that besieged
Beziers, said* When, as they were going to storm the Town, Ranaldus's
continuation of Baronius.
some told him, That there were many good Catholics among the Heretics or
Albigenses, and therefore asked orders what to do with them. Kill all, said he,
God knows them that are his: being resolved that what share soever, they might
have in the Mercies of God, they should have none of his. Under the Price of
our being both Papists and Slaves, there can be no Redemption; and when they
have destroyed with so much unrelenting and treacherous Fury whole Countries of
their own Religion, not sparing neither Churches nor Monasteries, for which
even savage Nations have had some regard; What can Heretics expect from him
who has vowed their destruction, and reckons the Persecution that he has set on
foot against them, the top of his Glory? If after all this, Men will not
apprehend their danger, or will fancy that they can secure themselves by acting
in a different Interest, let these see if among the Protestants of France,
those that showed at all times the most submissive Compliances with all the
Inclinations of the Court, found when the fatal Decree was given, any other
Distinction than that a very few of them were suffered to go out of the
Kingdom; and even this Cruelty was to be magnified, as an extraordinary Favor
and Gratitude of the Court. We are now upon the greatest Crisis of any Age: The
greatest that is in our History, and much the greatest that has been since the
Reformation began: If we can get through this War with Success and Victory, we
have before us the happiest Prospect that any Nation can have in view; of
securing our own Peace and Happiness, our Religion and our Government: And of
being the Nation that shall give a Deliverance to Europe, and a Security to the
Procestant Religion, and of setting Bounds to the great Abaddon the Destroyer
and Enemy to Mankind. If we value either our own Happiness or the Honor of our
Country, will we think it a heavy thing to lessen our Expense, to cut off from
Prodigality and Luxury, and reduce our selves to a narrow compass; that we may
preserve the whole, when a few Years frugality may support a chargeable War;
and bring us into Habits that may make the succeeding Peace prove a double
Blessing to us? Can we think any thing is too much when our Religion, our
Country, our Lives and Liberties are the price that is to be fought for: And
when the Issue of the present Scene and War must be our Being, either the
happiest or the miserablest Nation upon Earth.

The Fate of Constantinople was terrible, and ought to be set before us: They
were besieged by the Turks, whom they knew to be a most cruel Enemy, and a most
barbarous Master. They could hope for nothing if they fell into their Hands,
but to become a prey to them: Yet they would neither assist their unfortunate
Emperor with their persons nor their Purses. He had none to preserve both him
and them, but some hired Troops, who for want of pay were mutinying upon all
occasions, he coined all his own plate, even the sacred Vessels were not
spared; He went in person among the rich Citizens, and with Tears in his Eyes,
desired their Assistance toward the preservation of the Empire and City; but
by a fatal stupidity, they either did not see their danger, or took no care to
prevent it: For though there was an inconceivable treasure found among them in
the sack of Constantinople, yet they seemed to take care to preserve it all for
the Enemy; and would employ none of it for their own defense. This was such a
degree of Infatuation, that if the Historian who relates it, had not lived in
the time, and had his Information from Eyewitnesses, we could scarce give
credit to it. God grant such Examples may make us wise. The poor Emperor
resolved not to outlive his Glory, and so in a desperate sally that he made he
fell before the Enemy, who after that found so faint a Resistance, that they
quickly carried the place and became Masters of all that Wealth, which its
former owners had so carefully preserved for them.

If we had a suit for our whole Estate with one that spared no cost, we should
not out of an ill timed Frugality let him carry it, rather than be at the
charge of maintaining our Right; we should rather save it, out of every thing
else, than let all go. Our Enemy leaves his subjects as well as his Enemies
nothing: so he finds spoil enough to support his Ambition and Lust of Conquest.
When then all is struck at, all must concur in so just and so necessary a cause.

But I come in the last place to those things that belong to our mutual Peace,
among our selves: The common Peace and Safety will be ill preserved, if we are
biting and devouring one another; we shall need no Enemy to destroy us, Gal. 5.
15.
if this continues, for we shall be consumed one of another. We have nothing so
conspicuous in the History of the Destruction of the Jews, as their cruel
intestine Feuds and Wars, which made them an easy Prey to the Romans. They
were at first divided into three great Sects, that of the Sadduces, who were
plain Atheists and Libertines, that denied the being of Spirits, and a future
state, and that by consequence could lie under no Restraints from their
Religion. They struck in to Herod, and afterward fell under so general an
Odium, that they grew more inconsiderable toward the end of that State. The
second Sect was that of the Essens, who were men of excellent Morals, and of a
sublime Piety, who retained their ancient Simplicity, they retired from the
World, lived in common, at work, and in constant Devotion: These did likewise
disappear, and probably they became Christians, to which their holy
Dispositions and their strict Lives did so much prepare them, that it is scarce
possible to think that Men of such Tempers could resist such a Religion. But
the third Sect, that swallowed all the rest up, was that of the Pharisees, of
whom so much is said in the Gospels, that it is not necessary to enlarge upon
their Character: They were a sort of People that under an outward appearance of
great strictness were the falsest, the violentest, the cruellest, and the most
revengeful; they were the least moral, and the most hypocritical and diabolical
Sect that ever was: These, by the appearance of Exactness and of Zeal, had so
possessed themselves of the Opinion and the Affections of the People, that they
could turn them which way they pleased; but among them there were Subdivisions.
The Zealots were those who from the Example and the Rewards of Phinehas, came
to think, that when Magistrates were too slack in punishing Offenders, private
persons might do it. St. Paul had been one of these, and as such, he not only
persecuted the Church from House to House, but having got a company of Men of
the same fury to follow him, he went to persecute them even to strange Cities.
Now, toward the end of the History of the Jews, we see this became a matter of
mere Rage; and Companies assuming this name, got together, and run about
executing whatsoever their own Fury inspired them with, as a revenge of Sin, in
the Name of God. These first murdered all the Romans every where, and so
engaged themselves in a War with them, that required either a most mighty
resistance, or that must in conclusion end in their own utter ruin: They also
murdered all that inclined or moved at any time to treat with the Romans. But
men of this sort seldom agree long together: So these were soon subdivided into
those who were headed by Eleazar, who were the Masters of the Inner Courts of
the Temple; and those who were headed by John, that possessed themselves of the
Outer Courts: And when those within opened the Gates at the Feast of the
Passover, that so the People might come in and offer their Lambs, some of
John's party went in and killed Eleazar, and so he became Master of the whole
Temple. But this was not all: for there was another party among them that were
called the Robbers, that did the same thing that the Zealots did, for it is
scarce possible to think they could do worse: But it seems they did not cover
it with the pretense of Zeal for the Law, and so were the more honest Robbers
of the two; who owned that they robbed for robbing sake. These were at first
commanded by Minahem the Son of Judas of Galilee; but he being killed by
Eleazar's means, they were after that headed by one Simon, who being called
into Jerusalem, drove John out of the City, and had many Engagements with him
and his Zealots, in one of which they burnt the common store of Provisions,
which if preserved, would have served to maintain a long Siege. Thus were they
fighting with one another; when Titus came before them with an Army that
consisted only of four Legions, besides Auxiliaries: a small force against so
vast a multitude of Men, of an enraged Courage, and a City of such extent and
defense. In this Extremity it was plain, that they must either treat and
submit, or unite and resist vigorously: There was but one thing that was both
desperate and foolish, to perish within their Walls by Hunger, and to be
destroying one another as often as the Enemy gave them leisure to go about it:
And this was precisely the course they took. If any spoke of treating with the
Romans, he was presently the Object of the common fury; yet they did not sally
out upon them till it was too late.

From the 14. of April that Titus sat down before them, the account of those
that died by Famine was kept by Mannoeus, who had the charge of carrying out
the dead Bodies to the 1st. of July, and it swelled up to an hundred and
fifteen thousand and eight hundred: This was besides those who were carried out
by their Friends. After that he fled to the Romans, and those who were
appointed still to take care of the Dead, told that the number was grown up to
Six hundred thousand. And thus the greatest, and once the best, but then the
worst City in the World, perished in so terrible a manner, that the History of
it would pass for a melancholy aggravating of matters beyond the possibilities
of truth, if he that wrote it had not been an Eyewitness, and a person of so
true a judgment, of so much probity, and so full of affection to his Country,
that there is no reason to suspect the Relation that he has made of it; which
as it is by much the saddest piece of History, so it is that which can never be
enough read; for it will always leave a very good Impression upon the Reader's
mind.

But this is not to be read merely as a signal Transaction that passed 1600
years ago, but as a standing Monument of the severity of the Justice of God
against an Impenitent and Rebellious Nation: and if these things were done in
the green tree, what shall be done in the dry? If the Seed of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob were so used, why should others hope to escape, if they become guilty
of the like Ingratitude? And since the immediate cause of their ruin was that
mutual fury that transported them into the most extravagant Excesses, and which
blinded them in all they did, and made them neglect the most obvious and
certain methods for their preservation, either in the way of treaty or of
defense; what a melancholy Prospect does this set before us, who have such a
mighty Enemy to deal with, that all our Heads, Hands, and Purses united against
him, will find work enough, and yet are reviving with the old and once
extinguished names our old animosities, to so high a degree, that this puts
every thing to a stand, even the Thoughts of good and wise men. It was once
hoped, that all past Errors had been forgot, especially in those who in a time
of danger, when they saw the tendency of some steps into which they had been
engaged, made so generous a resistance, and stand against the common Enemy,
which showed the sincerity of their Hearts, and their firmness to the Religion
and Laws of England; and that former Errors had been the effects of a too great
easiness to believe and to think well of others. But when this City was so much
united in so noble a resistance to barefaced Popery and Tyranny; who could have
thought that upon such a Deliverance as we have been blessed with, we should not
have improved it much further than we have done, for those great ends for which
we have reason to believe, that God has sent it to us. If some years ago, when
all were under those fears, out of which God has brought us, and were joined
together in that struggle for our most holy Faith, out of which if we had not
all escaped, we must all have perished together; any one had said, that either
differences of Opinion, or any former Errors would have made us fall out
again, if God should again have blessed us with the return of Religion, and of
our Laws in their Ancient force; he would have been looked on by all as a
Melancholy Presager of evil things. But we are now just in this, or rather in a
worse condition: a violent Aversion, and a mortal Jealousy appears on all
hands, we fancy we are not safe from one another; and by our fancying it, we
render our selves indeed unsafe. If this should have come upon us after we had
got entirely out of all our difficulties and dangers, it had been bad enough;
but in a state of calm we could have better born such Concussions, and should
have had time to look out for proper Remedies; but while we are yet in so much
danger, while Union is so necessary to all our common preservation, that we
should now embroil our selves, and the Public; as it is just that very madness
which our Enemies would wish to us, so it carries in it so terrible a Character
of God's casting us off, and giving us up to the Counsels of our own hearts,
that if by the earnest Prayers of those who mourn in secret, and the hearty
endeavors of such as are fitted for such healing work, we cannot cure this
Disease, we must give our selves for a lost Nation. If Attempts this way prove
unsuccessful, then every man must prepare himself the best he can, to bear the
share that he himself must expect in the Miseries of his Country. And if
through our Passions and Follies, God does deliver us up into the hands of our
Implacable Enemies, as we must expect that they will take care, that we shall
never be in a condition to shake off the yoke again: so to every one whose
passions have transported him into those Excesses which are like to be fatal to
us, the remembrance of this will be one of the most insupportable Ingredients
in his misery, that he had procured it to himself. O Israel thou have destroyed
thy self! will carry in it a terrible sound, when the Application will be so
just. Suffer me then in the words of St. Paul, 2 Cor. 6. 5.
to say, Is there not a wise man among you? I speak this to your reproach. Is
every Man so soured with the leaven of a Party, that he cannot see himself, or
make others observe the tendency of all this? Were the wrongs done so great
that they cannot be forgiven? Are the differences so wide that they cannot be
healed? Is there no Balm in Gilead, and is there no Physician there? Have we no
sense of all that God has done for us? Will we quite defeat, and disappoint it?
Have we no sense of God's forgiving us our many heinous sins? Have we no regard
to the great Example of the Holy Jesus, who here mourned over that City, which
was in a few days to cry out against him, Crucify, Crucify? And do we not
consider the unexampled gentleness of him whom God has set over us, whom
perhaps some may think merciful to an excess: But it is a happy state for
Subjects when this is one of their chief Complaints. He to whom under GOD we
owe our present peace and happiness, does both by his own practice, and his
advices recommend this temper so earnestly to us, that if none of all these
Considerations of Religion, Reason, Example and Interest can work upon us, we
must conclude, that this is one of the heavy Judgments of God, which is already
poured out upon us; that is not only heavy in it self, but is chiefly heavy on
this account, because it will most certainly draw a great many heavier ones
than it self after it. If our differences were of so strange a nature, that no
Expedient could be offered that were proper to compose them, nothing in such a
case should remain, but to cry out, The wound of the Daughter of my People is
greater than that it can be healed. But as it is a strange reproach to a
Physician, if one should die under his hand, of one of the slightest evils that
could possibly affect the Body of Man; so to see the Peace of a City, or of a
Nation disturbed, not to say lost, upon such matters, must prove either that
the Humors are very bad, or that the Wound has been but slightly cured, by
those who perhaps instead of using Lenitives to allay the heat, do rather
inflame it. Upon the whole matter, the right way of procuring fit Remedies to
all our evils, Lam. 3. 40.
is to search and try our ways and to turn again unto the Lord, to lift up our
hearts with our hands unto God in the heavens, and to acknowledge that we have
transgressed and rebelled: and that hither to God has not pardoned: That he
covered us with his anger, and himself with a cloud: That Fear and a snare is
come upon us, that therefore our eye should run down without any intermission,
till God look down and behold from heaven: V. 56, 57, 58.
And then we might see that God would hear our voice, and not hide his ears
from our cry; that he would draw near to us in those days that we call upon
him, and say unto us, fear not: That he would plead our cause and redeem our
life who sees the vengeance of our Enemies, and all their imaginations against
us; v. 64. 66.
and would render them a recompense according to the works of their hands, and
persecute and destroy them in his anger from under the heavens.

There remains little to be said to the last particular that I proposed, which
is that which is implied in this period, that is in the form of a wish, or
rather supposition: If thou had known, and so it is broken off abruptly,
without adding any words, that import what should have followed upon it. But
this is a figure natural enough to every Language, without going to search for
a Hebraism: There being something in this way of expression, that is so tender
and languishing that it exceeds any thing that could have come to give it a
more regular conclusion. In a word, it imports that all that is great or good,
all that they could wish for or desire, either with relation to the public, or
in their own particular, all the Preservations and Deliverances, all the
Felicities and Prosperity of a Nation, might be justly expected from so happy a
discovery, and such a change in their tempers; as first to find out, and know,
and then to seek after the things that belonged to their peace. They could not
indeed have continued to have been as they had been formerly the People of God,
with the exclusion of all others; but they would still have retained this
privilege that the Gospel was to be offered to the Jew first, and then to the
Gentiles; so that they would have been always the Firstborn of the Churches of
God: and if they had received the Messiah, they might have continued to be the
head of all Nations. But it was otherwise appointed in the wise and holy
Councils of God, for reasons which we do not now perfectly understand. This
only we know, that God's rejecting them was the calling of the Gentiles. Rom;
11.
And indeed the tenderness of the expression here used, seems to import this
that there was no hope of this supposition's proving real: so the words that
follow may be considered as the closing the period. I need not here enlarge to
set before you the blessings that without flattering our selves too much, we
may reasonably expect upon our setting our selves to find out, and to pursue
the things that belong to our peace: They are both so visible in the Natural
Consequences of things, and so eminent and great in themselves, that I cannot
imagine how any one that loves his Religion or Country, himself, or his
Posterity, can think of them without feeling in himself all the emotions of
joy, and all the fervency of desire upon so glorious and so amiable a prospect,
that we shall be blessed in the City and blessed in the Country, Deuteronomy. 28. 3,
7, 9, 10, 1^.
that the Lord shall cause our Enemies that rise up against us to be smitten
before our face: And that he shall bless us in all that we set our hand to, and
shall establish us to be a holy people to himself; so that all the people of
the earth shall see that we are called by the name of the Lord, and shall be
afraid of us, and that we shall lend to many Nations, and not borrow. I will
not offer to you the dismal reverse of all this, in the Curses that are
denounced upon a people that shall not hearken to the Voice of the Lord, nor
observe his Commandments to do them. I hope for better things from you, and
such as accompany Salvation, for which let us look up to him who can give us
Grace both to will and to do, to whom be Glory and Honor for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE Fifteen Notes of the Church, as laid downby Cardinal Bellarmin, examined
and confuted, by several London Divines, 4o. With a Table to the whole, and the
Authors Names.

An Exposition of the Ten Commandments, By Dr. Simon Patrick, now Lord Bishop
of Chichester.

The Lay Christians's Obligation to read the Holy Scriptures, by Dr. Stratford
now Lord Bishop of Chester.

The Texts which the Papists cite out of the Bible for proof of the points of
their Religion, Examined, and showed to be alleged without Ground. In twenty
five distinct Discourses, by several London Divines, with a Table to the whole,
and the Authors Names.

Taxes no Charge: In a Letter from a Gentleman to a Person of Quality: Showing
the Nature, Use, and Benefit of Taxes in this Kingdom; and compared with
Impositions of Foreign States. Together with the improvement of Trade in time
of War.

The Case of Allegiance in our present circumstances considered, in a Letter
from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country. 4o.

A Breviate of the State of Scotland in its Government, Supreme Courts,
Officers of State, Inferior Officers, Offices, and Inferior Courts,
Districts, Jurisdictions, Buroughs, Royal, and Free Corporations. Fol.

Some Considerations touching Succession and Allegiance, 4o.

Reflections upon the late Great Revolution: Written by a Lay-Hand in the
Country, for the satisfaction of some Neighbors.

The History of the Desertion; or an Account of all the public Affairs in
England, from the beginning of September 1688. to the Twelfth of February
following. With an Answer to a Piece called, The Desertion discussed, in a
Letter to a Country Gentleman. By a Person of Quality.

K. William and K. Lewis, wherein is set forth the inevitable necessity these
Nations lie under of submitting wholly to one or other of these Kings; and that
the matter in Controversy is not now between K. William and K. James, but
between K. William and K. Lewis of France, for the Government of these Nations.

Two Sermons, one against Murmurin^, the other against Censuring: By Simon Pat
ick, D. D. now Lord Bishop of Chichester.

An Account of the Private League betwixt the late King James the Second, and
the French King. Fol.

Mr. Tully's Sermon of Moderation, before the Lord Mayor, May 12. 1689.

An Examination of the Scruples of those who reiuse to take the Oath of
Allegiance. By a Divine of the Church of England.

A Dialogue betwixt two Friends, a Iacobite and a Williamite; occasioned by the
late Revolution of Affairs, and the Oath of Allegiance.

The Case of Oaths Stated. 4o.

Markam's perfect Horseman, in fifty years practice, 8o Hodder's Arithmetic,
12o.

An Account of the Reasons which induced Charles the Second, King of England,
to declare War against the States General of the United Provinces in 1672.

A Letter from a French Lawyer to an English Gentleman, upon the present
Revolution. 4o.

The Advantages of the present Settlement, and the great danger of a Relapse.

The Interest of England in the preservation of Ireland.

A short View of the Unfortunate Reigns of these Kings, William the 2d. Henry
the 2d. Edward the 2d. Richard the 2d. Charles the 2d. and James the 2d.

Dr. Sherlock's Summary of the Controversies between the Church of England and
Church of Rome.

The Plain Man s Reply to the Catholic Missionaries.

Dr. Wake's Preparation for Death.

-- His Tracts and Discourses against Popery, in 2 Vol. 4o.

-- His twelve Sermons and Discourses, on several Occasions. 8o.

The Devout Communicant, assisted with Rules for the worthy Receiving: Together
with Meditations, Prayers, Anthems, for every Day in the Holy Week.

Valentine's private Devotions, digested into six Litanies, with Directions and
Prayers for the Lord's Day, Sacrament, day of Death and Judgment.

Bishop Burnet's Sermon before the King and Queen on Christmasday, 1689.

-- His Sermon of Peace and Union, Nov. 26. 1689.

Some Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of
Piedmont. By P. Allix. DD. 4o.

Geologia: Or, A Discourse concerning the Earth before the Deluge. wherein the
Form and Properties ascribed to it, in a Book entitled [The Theory of the
Earth] are excepted against: And it is made appear, That the dissolution of
that Earth was not the Cause of the Universal Flood. Also a new Explication of
that Flood is attempted. By Erasmus Warren, Rector of Worlington in Suffolk.

A Private Prayer to be used in difficult Times.

A Thanksgiving for our late Wonderful Deliverance: [recommended chiefly to
those who have made use of the prayer in the late Difficult Times]

A Prayer for perfecting our late Deliverance by the Happy success of their
Majesty's Forces by Sea and Land.

A Prayer for Charity, Peace and Unity, to be used in Lent.

Dr. Tenisou's Sermon of discretion in giving Alms, 12o.

His Sermon concerning doing Good to Posterity. Preached before Their Majesty's
at Whitehall, on Feb. 16. 1689/90.


