SOME REFLECTIONS On his Majesty's PROCLAMATION Of the 12th of February 1686/7
for a Toleration in Scotland, together with the said Proclamation.
I. THe Preamble of a Proclamation, is often writ in have, and is the flourish of
some wanton Pen: but one of such an Extraordinary nature as this is, was
probably more severely examined; there is a new designation of his Majesty's
Authority here set forth of his Absolute Power, which is so often repeated,
that it deserves to be a little searched into. Prerogative Royal, and Sovereign
Authority, are Terms already received and known; but for this Absolute Power,
as it is a new Term, so those who have coined it, may make it signify what they
will. The Roman Law speaks of Princeps Legibus solutus, and Absolute in its
natural signification, importing the being without all Ties and Restraints;
then the true meaning of this seems to be, that there is an Inherent Power in
the King, which can neither be restrained by Laws, Promises, nor Oaths; for
nothing less than the being free from all these, renders a Power Absolute.

II. If the former Term seemed to stretch our Allegiance, that which comes
after it, is yet a step of another nature, tho one can hardly imagine what can
go beyond Absolute Power; and it is in these Words, Which all our Subjects are
to obey without reserve. And this is the carrying obedience many sises beyond
what the Grand Seigneur has ever yet claimed: For all Princes, even the most
Violent pretenders to Absolute Power, till Lewis the Great's time, have thought
it enough to oblige their Subjects to submit to their Power, and to bear
whatsoever they thought good to impose upon them; but till the Days of the late
Conversions by the Dragoons, it was never so much as pretended, that Subjects
were bound to obey their Prince without Reserve, and to be of his Religion,
because he would have it so. Which was the only Argument that those late
Apostles made use of; so it is probable this qualification of the duty of
Subjects was put in here, to prepare us for a terrible le Roy le veut; and in
that case we are told here, that we must obey without reserve; and when those
severe Orders come, the Privy Council, and all such as execute this
Proclamation, will be bound by this Declaration to show themselves more forward
than any others, to obey without reserve: and those poor pretensions of
Conscience, Religion, Honor, and Reason, will be then reckoned as reserves
upon their obedience, which are all now shut out.

III. These being the grounds upon which this Proclamation is founded, we ought
not only to consider what consequences are now drawn from them, but what may be
drawn from them at any time hereafter; for if they are of force, to justify
that which is now inferred from them, it will be full as just to draw from the
same premises an Abolition of the Protestant Religion, of the Rights of the
Subjects, not only to Church Lands, but to all Property whatsoever. In a word,
it asserts a Power to be in the King, to command what he will, and an
Obligation in the Subjects, to obey whatsoever he shall command.

IV. There is also mention made in the Preamble of the Christian Love and
Charity, which his Majesty would have established among Neighbors; but another
dash of a Pen, founded on this Absolute Power, may declare us all Heretics;
and then in wonderful Charity to us, we must be told, that we are either to
obey without Reserve, or to be Burnt without Reserve. We know the Charity of
that Church pretty well: It is indeed Fervent and Burning: and if we have
forgot what has been done in former Ages, France, Savoy, and Hungary, have set
before our eyes very fresh instances of the Charity of that Religion: While
those Examples are so green, it is a little too imposing on us, to talk to us
of Christian Love and Charity. No doubt his Majesty means sincerely, and his
Exactness to all his Promises, chiefly to those made since he came to the
Crown, will not suffer us to think an unbecoming thought of his Royal
Intentions; but yet after all, tho it seems by this Proclamation, that we are
bound to obey without Reserve, it is hardship upon hardship to be bound to
Believe without Reserve.

V. There are a sort of People here tolerated, that will be very hardly found
out: and these are the Moderate Presbyterians: Now, as some say, that there are
very few of those People in Scotland that deserve this Character, so it is hard
to tell what it amounts to; and the calling any of them Immoderate, cuts off
all their share in this Grace. Moderation is a quality that lies in the mind,
and how this will be found out, I cannot so readily guess. If a Standard had
been given of Opinions or Practices, then one could have known how this might
have been distinguished; but as it lies, it will not be easy to make the
Discrimination; and the declaring them all Immoderate, shuts them out quite.

VI. Another Foundation laid down for repealing all Laws made against the
Papists, is, that they were enacted in K. James the Sixth's Minority: with some
harsh expressions, that are not to be insisted on, since they show more the
heat of the penner, than the Dignity of the Prince, in whose name they are
given out; but all these Laws were ratifyed over and over again by K. James,
when he came to be of full Age: and they have received many Confirmations by K.
Charles the First, and K Charles the Second, as well as by his present Majesty,
both when he represented his Brother in the year 1681. and since he himself
came to the Crown: so that whatsoever may be said concerning the first
Formation of those Laws, they have received now for the course of a whole
hundred years, that are lapsed since K. James was of full Age, so many
Confirmations, that if there is any thing certain in Humane Government, we
might depend upon them; but this new coined Absolute Power must carry all
before it.

VII. It is also well known, that the whole Settlement of the Church Lands and
Tithes, with many other things, and more particularly the Establishment of the
Protestant Religion, was likewise enacted in K. James's minority, as well as
those Penal Laws: so that the Reason now made use of, to annul the Penal Laws,
will serve full as well for another Act of this Absolute Power, that shall
abolish all those; and if Maxims that unhinge all the Securities of Humane
Society, and all that is sacred in Government, ought to be looked on with the
justest and deepest prejudices possible, one is tempted to lose the respect
that is due to every thing that carrys a Royal stamp upon it, when he sees such
grounds made use of, as must shake all Settlements whatsoever; for if a
prescription of 120. years, and Confirmations reiterated over and over again
these 100. years past, do not purge some Defects in the first Formation of
those Laws, what can make us secure: but this looks so like a Fetch of the
French Prerogative Law, both in their processes with Relation to the Edict of
Nantes, and those concerning Dependences at Mets, that this seems to be a Copy
from that famous Original.

VIII. It were too much ill nature to look into the History of the last Age, to
examine on what grounds those characters of pious and blessed given to the
Memory of Q. Mary are built; but since K. James's Memory has the character of
glorious given to it, if the civility due to the fair sex makes one unwilling
to look into the one, yet the other may be a little dwelt on. The peculiar
Glory that belongs to K. James's Memory, is, that he was a Prince of great
Learning, and that he employed it chiefly in writing for his Religion: of the
Volume in folio, in which we have his works, two thirds are against the Church
of Rome; one part of them is a Commentary on the Revelation, proving that the
Pope is Antichrist; another part of them belonged more naturally to his Post
and Dignity; which is the warning that he gave to all the Princes and states of
Europe, against the Treasonable and bloody Doctrines of the Papacy. The first
Act he did when he came of Age, was to swear in person with all his family, and
afterward with all his people of Scotland, a Covenant, containing an
Enumeration of all the points of Popery, and a most solemn renunciation of
them, somewhat like our Parliament Test: his first Speech to the Parliament of
England was Copious on the same subject: and he left a Legacy of a Wish on such
of his posterity as should go over to that Religion, which in good manners is
suppressed. It is known, K. James was no Conqueror, and that he made more use
of his Pen than his Sword: so the Glory that is peculiar to his Memory must
fall chiefly on his Learned and Immortal Writings: and since there is such a
Veneration expressed for him, it agrees not ill with this, to wish, that his
Works were more studied by those who offer such Incense to his Glorious Memory.

IX. His Maj. assures his people of Scotland, upon his certain knowledge and
long Experience, that the Catholics, as they are good Christians, so they are
likewise Dutiful subjects: but if we must believe both these equally, then we
must conclude severely against their being Good Christians; for we are sure
they can never be Good Subjects, not only to a Heretical Prince, but even to a
Catholic Prince, if he does not extirpate Heretics; for their beloved Council
of the Lateran, that decreed Transubstantiation, has likewise decreed, that if
a Prince does not extirpate Heretics out of his Dominions, the Pope must
depose him, and declare his Subjects absolved from their Allegiance, and give
his Dominions to another: So that even His Majesty, how much soever he may be a
Zealous Catholic, yet cannot be assured of their fidelity to him, unless he
has given them secret assurances, that he is resolved to extirpate Heretics
out of his Dominions; and that all the Promises which he now makes to these
poor wretches are no other way to be kept, than the assurances which the Great
Lewis gave to his Protestant Subjects, of his observing still the Edict of
Nantes even after he had resolved to break it, and also his last promise made
in the Edict, that repealed the Edict of Nantes, by which he gave Assurances,
that no Violence should be used to any for their Religion, in the very time
that he was ordering all possible Violences to be put in execution against them.

X. His Majesty assures us, that on all occasions the Papists have showed
themselves Good and faithful subjects to him and his Royal Predecessors; but
how Absolute soever the Kings Power may be, it seems his knowledge of History
is not so Absolute, but it may be capable of some Improvement. It will be hard
to find out what Loyalty they showed on the occasion of the Gunpowder Plot, or
during the whole progress of the Rebellion of Ireland; if the King will either
take the words of K. James of Glorious Memory, or K. Charles the first, that
was indeed of pious and blessed Memory, rather than the word of the penners of
this Proclamation, it will not be hard to find occasions where they were a
little wanting in this their so much boasted Loyalty: and we are sure, that by
the Principles of that Religion, the King can never be assured of the Fidelity
of those he calls his Catholic Subjects, but by engaging to them to make his
Heretical Subjects Sacrifices to their Rage.

XI. The King declares them capable of all the Offices and Benefices which he
shall think fit to bestow on them, and only restrains them from invading the
Protestant Churches by force: so that here a door is plainly opened for
admitting them to the exercise of their Religion in Protestant Churches, so
they do not break into them by force; and whatsoever may be the sense of the
term Benefice in its ancient and first signification, now it stands only for
Church Preferments; so that when any Churches, that are at the Kings gift, fall
vacant, here is a plain intimation, that they are to be provided to them; and
then it is very probable, that all the Laws made against such as go not to
their Parish Churches, will be severely turned upon those that will not come to
Mass.

XII. His Majesty does in the next place, in the virtue of his Absolute Power /
Annull a great many Laws, as well those that established the Oaths of
Allegiance and supremacy, as the late Test, enacted by himself in person, while
he represented his Brother: upon which he gave as strange an Essay to the World
of his Absolute Justice in the Attainder of the late Earl of Argile, as he does
now of his Absolute Power in condemning the Test it self; he also repeals his
own Confirmation of the Test, since he came to the Crown, which he offered as
the clearest Evidence that he could give of his Resolution to maintain the
Protestant Religion, and by which he gained so much upon that Parliament, that
he obtained every thing from them that he desired of them; till he came to try
them in the Matters of Religion. This is no extraordinary Evidence to assure
his People, that his Promises will be like the Laws of the Medes and Persians,
which alter not; nor will the disgrace of the Commissioner that enacted that
Law, lay this matter wholly on him; for the Letter, that he brought, the Speech
that he made, and the Instructions which he got, are all too well known to be
so soon forgotten: and if Princes will give their Subjects reason to think,
that they forget their promises, as soon as the turn is served for which they
were made, this will be too prevailing a temptation on the Subjects to mind the
Princes promise as little as it seems he himself does; and will force them to
conclude, that the truth of the Prince, is not so Absolute as it seems he
fancies his power to be.

XIII. Here is not only a repealing of a great many Laws, and established
Oaths and Tests, but by the Exercise of the Absolute Power / a new Oath is
imposed, which was never pretended to by the Crown in any former time; and as
the Oath is created by this Absolute Power / so it seems the Absolute Power
must be supported by this Oath: since one branch of it, is an obligation to
Maintain His Majesty and his Lawful Successors in the exercise of this their
Absolute Power and Authority against all deadly, which I suppose is Scotch for
Mortals: now to Impose so hard a yoke as this Absolute Power on the Subjects,
seems no small stretch; but it is a wonderful exercise of it to oblige the
Subjects to defend this: it had been more modest, if they had been only bound
to bear it, and submit to it: but it is a terrible thing so far to extinguish
all the remnants of natural Liberty, or of a legal Government, as to oblige
the Subjects by Oath to maintain the exercise of this, which plainly must
destroy themselves: for the short execution by the Bow-strings of Turkey, or by
sending orders to men to return in their heads, being an exercise of this
Absolute Power / it is a little hard to make men swear to maintain the King in
it: and if that Kingdom has suffered so much by the many Oaths that have been
in use among them, as is marked in this Proclamation, I am afraid this new
Oath will not much mend the matter.

XIV. Yet after all, there is some Comfort; his Majesty assures them, he will
use no Violence nor force, nor any Invincible Necessity to any man on the
account of his Persuasion: It were too great a want of respect to fancy, that a
time may come in which even this may be remembered, full as well, as the
Promises that were made to the Parliament after His Majesty came to the Crown:
I do not, I confess, apprehend that; for I see here so great a caution used in
the choice of these words, that it is plain, very great Severities may very
well consist with them: It is clear, that the general words of Violence and
Force are to be determined by these last of Invincible Necessity / so that the
King does only promise to lay no Invincible Necessity on his Subjects; but for
all Necessities, that are not Invincible, it seems they must expect to bear a
large share of them; Disgraces, want of Employments, Fines, and Imprisonments,
and even Death it self are all Vincible things to a man of a firmness of mind:
so that the Violences of torture, the Furies of Dragoons, and some of the
Methods now practiced in France, perhaps may be Included within this Promise;
since these seem almost Invincible to humane nature, if it is not fortified
with an Extraordinary measure of Grace: but as to all other things, His Majesty
binds himself up from no part of the Exercise of his Absolute Power by this
Promise.

XV. His Majesty orders this to go Immediately to the Great Seal, without
passing through the other Seals: now since this is counter-signed by the
Secretary, in whose hands the Signet is, there was no other step to be made but
through the Privy Seal; so I must own, I have a great curiosity of knowing his
Character in whose hands the Privy Seal is at present; for it seems his
Conscience is not so very supple, as the Chancellors and the Secretaryes are;
but it is very likely, if he does not quickly change his mind, the Privy Seal
at least will very quickly change its Keeper; and I am sorry to hear, that the
L. Chancellor and the Secretary have not another Brother to fill this post,
that so the guilt of the ruin of that Nation, may lie on one single Family, and
that there may be no others involved in it.

XVI. Upon the whole matter, many smaller things being waved, it being extreme
unpleasant to find fault, where one has all possible dispositions to pay all
respect; we here in England see what we must look for. A Parliament in Scotland
was tried, but it proved a little Stubborn; and now Absolute Power comes to set
all right; so when the Closetting has gone round, so that Noses are counted, we
may perhaps see a Parliament here, but if it chances to be untoward, and not to
obey without Reserve / then our Reverend Judges will copy from Scotland, and
will not only tell us of the Kings Imperial Power, but will discover to us this
new Mystery of Absolute Power, to which we are all bound to obey without
Reserve.

These Reflections refer in so many places to some words in the Proclamation,
that it was thought necessary to set them near one another, that the Reader may
be able to Judge, whether he is deceived by any false Quotations or not.
By the King. A PROCLAMATION.
JAMES R.

JAMES the Seventh by the Grace of God, King of Scotland, England, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc
To all and sundry our good Subjects, whom these presents do or may concern,
Greeting.
We having taken into Our Royal Consideration the many and great
inconveniences which have happened to that Our Ancient Kingdom of Scotland of
late years, through the different persuasions in the Christian Religion, and
the great Heats and Animosities amongst the several Professors thereof, to the
ruin and decay of Trade, wasting of Lands, extinguishing of Charity, contempt
of the Royal Power, and converting of true Religion, and the Fear of GOD, into
Animosities, Names, Factions, and sometimes into Sacrilege and Treason. And
being resolved as much as in Us lies, to unite the Hearts and Affections of Our
Subjects, to GOD in Religion, to Us in Loyalty, and to their Neighbors in
Christian Love and Charity. Have therefore thought fit to Grant, and by Our
Souveraign Authority, Prerogative Royal, and Absolute Power, which all Our
Subjects are to obey without Reserve; Do hereby give and grant Our Royal
Toleration, to the several Professors of the Christian Religion after-named,
with, and under the several Conditions, Restrictions, and Limitations
after-mentioned. In the first place, We allow and tolerate the Moderate
Presbyterians, to Meet in their Private Houses, and there to hear all such
Ministers, as either have, or are willing to accept of Our Indulgence
allanerly, and none other, and that there be not any thing said or done
contrary to the Well and Peace of Our Reign, Seditious or Treasonable, under
the highest Pains these Crimes will import; nor are they to presume to Build
Meeting Houses, or to use Outhouses or Barns, but only to exercise in their
Private Houses, as said is: In the mean time, it is Our Royal Will and
Pleasure, that Field Conventicles, and such as Preach, or Exercise at them, or
who shall any ways assist or connive at them, shall be prosecuted according to
the utmost Severity of our Laws made against them, seeing from these
Rendezvouzes of Rebellion, so much Disorder has proceeded, and so much
Disturbance to the Government, and for which after this Our Royal Indulgence
for tender Consciences there is no excuse left. In like manner, we do hereby
tolerate Quakers to meet and exercise in their Form, in any Place or Places
appointed for their Worship. And considering the Severe and Cruel Laws, made
against Roman Catholics (therein called Papists) in the Minority of Our Royal
Grand Father of Glorious Memory,
without His Consent, and contrary to the Duty of good Subjects, by His
Regents, and other Enemies to their Lawful Sovereign, Our Royal Great Grand
Mother Queen Mary of blessed and pious Memory, wherein under the pretense of
Religion, they clothed the worst of Treasons, Factions, and Usurpations, and
made these Laws, not as against the Enemies of GOD, but their own; which Laws
have still been continued of course without design of executing them, or any of
them ad terrorem only, on Supposition, that the Papists relying on an External
Power, were incapable of Duty, and true Allegiance to their Natural Sovereigns,
and Rightful Monarchs; We of Our certain Knowledge, and long Experience,
knowing that the Catholics, as it is their Principle to be Good Christians, so
it is to be dutiful Subjects; and that they have likewise on all occasions
shown themselves Good and faithful Subjects to Us, and Our Royal Predecessors,
by hazarding, and many of them actually losing their Lives and Fortunes, in
their Defense (though of another Religion) and the Maintenance of their
Authority against the Violences and Treasons of the most violent Abettors of
these Laws: Do therefore with Advice and Consent of Our Privy Council, by Our
Sovereign Authority, Prerogative Royal, and Absolute Power, aforesaid, Suspend,
Stop and disable all Laws, or Acts of Parliament, Customs or Constitutions,
made or executed against any of our Roman Catholic Subjects, in any time past,
to all Intents and Purposes, making void all Prohibitions therein mentioned,
Pains or Penalties therein ordained to be inflicted, so that they shall in all
things be as free in all Respects as any of Our Protestant Subjects whatsoever,
not only to exercise their Religion, but to enjoy all Offices, Benefices and
others, which we shall think fit to bestow upon them in all time coming:
Nevertheless, it is Our Will and Pleasure, and we do hereby command all
Catholics at their highest Pains, only to exercise their Religious Worship in
Houses or Chapels; and that they presume not to Preach in the open Fields, or
to invade the Protestant Churches by force, under the pains aforesaid, to be
inflicted upon the Offenders respectively; nor shall they presume to make
Public Processions in the High-streets of any of Our Royal Burghs, under the
Pains abovementioned. And whereas the Obedience and Service of Our Good
Subjects is due to Us by their Allegiance, and Our Sovereignty, and that no
Law, Custom or Constitution, Difference in Religion, or other Impediment
whatsoever, can exempt or discharge the Subjects from their Native Obligations
and Duty to the Crown, or hinder Us from Protecting, and Employing them,
according to their several Capacities, and Our Royal Pleasure; nor Restrain Us
from Conferring Heretable Rights and Privileges upon them, or vacuate or annul
these Rights Heretable, when they are made or conferred: And likewise
considering, that some Oaths are capable of being wrested by Men of sinistrous
Intentions, a practice in that Kingdom fatal to Religion as it was to Loyalty;
Do therefore, with Advice and Consent aforesaid, cass, annull and Discharge all
Oaths whatsoever, by which any of Our Subjects are incapacitated, or disabled
from holding Places, or Offices in Our said Kingdom, or enjoying their
Hereditary Rights and Privileges, discharging the same to be taken or given in
any time coming, without our special Warrant and Consent, under the pains due
to the contempt of Our Royal Commands and Authority. And to this effect, we do
by Our Royal Authority aforesaid, stop, disable, and dispense with all Laws
enjoining the said Oaths, Tests, or any of them, particularly the first Act of
the first Session of the first Parliament of King Charles the Second; the
eleventh Act of the foresaid Session of the foresaid Parliament; the sixth Act
of the third Parliament of the said King Charles; the twenty first and twenty
fifth Acts of that Parliament,
and the thirteenth Act of the first Session of Our late Parliament, in so far
allanerly as concerns the taking the Oaths, or Tests therein prescribed, and
all others, as well not mentioned as mentioned, and that in place of them, all
Our good Subjects, or such of them as We or Our Privy Council shall require so
to do, shall take and swear the following Oath allanerly. I A. B. do
acknowledge / testify and declare / that JAMES the Seventh, by the Grace of
God, King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
is rightful King, and Supreme Governor of these Realms, and over all Persons
therein; and that it is unlawful for Subjects, on any pretense, or for any
cause whatsoever, to rise in Arms against Him, or any Commissionated by Him;
and that I shall never so rise in Arms, nor assist any who shall so do; and
that I shall never resist His Power or Authority, nor ever oppose his Authority
to his Person, as I shall answer to God; but shall to the utmost of my power
Assist, Defend. and Maintain Him, His Heirs and lawful Successors, in the
exercise of their ABSOLUTE POWER and Authority against all Deadly. So help me
God. And seeing many of Our good Subjects have, before Our Pleasure in these
Matters was made public, incurred the Guilt appointed by the Acts of
Parliament abovementioned, or others; We, by Our Authority, and Absolute Power
and Prerogative Royal abovementioned, of Our certain Knowledge, and innate
Mercy, Give Our ample and full Indemnity to all those of the Roman Catholic or
Popish Religion, for all things by them done contrary to Our Laws or Acts of
Parliament, made in any time past, relating to their Religion, the Worship and
Exercise thereof, or for being Papists, Jesuits, or Traffickers, for hearing,
or saying of Mass, concealing of Priests or Jesuits, breeding their Children
Catholics at home or abroad, or any other thing, Rite or Doctrine, said,
performed, or maintained by them, or any of them: And likewise, for holding or
taking of Places, Employments, or Offices, contrary to any Law or Constitution,
Advices given to Us, or Our Council, Actions done, or generally any thing
performed or said against the known Laws of that Our Ancient Kingdom: Excepting
always from this Our Royal Indemnity, all Murders, Assassinations, Thefts, and
such like other Crimes, which never used to be comprehended in Our General Acts
of Indemnity. And we command and require all Our Judges, or others concerned,
to explain this in the most Ample Sense and Meaning Acts of Indemnity at any
time have contained: Declaring this shall be as good to every one concerned, as
if they had Our Royal Pardon and Remission under Our Great Seal of that
Kingdom. And likewise indemnifying Our Protestant Subjects from all Pains and
Penalties due for hearing or Preaching in Houses; Providing there be no
Treasonable Speeches uttered in the said Conventicles by them, in which case
the Law is only to take place against the Guilty, and none other present;
Providing also that they Reveal to any of Our Council the Guilt so committed;
As also, excepting all Fines, or Effects of Sentences already given. And
likewise Indemnifying fully and freely all Quakers, for their Meetings and
Worship, in all time past, preceding the Publication of these Presents. And we
doubt not but Our Protestant Subjects will give their Assistance and Concourse
hereunto, on all occasions, in their respective Capacities. In consideration
whereof, and the ease those of Our Religion, and others may have hereby, and
for the Encouragement of Our Protestant Bishops, and the Regular Clergy, and
such as have hitherto lived orderly, We think fit to declare, that it never was
Our Principle, nor will We ever suffer Violence to be offered to any Man's
Conscience, nor will We use force, or Invincible Necessity against any Man on
the Account of his Persuasion, nor the Protestant Religion, but will protect
Our Bishops and other Ministers in their Functions, Rights and Properties, and
all Our Protestant Subjects in the free Exercise of their Protestant Religion
in the Churches. And that We will, and hereby Promise, on Our Royal Word, to
maintain the Possessors of Church Lands formerly belonging to Abbays, or other
Churches of the Catholic Religion, in their full and free Possession and
Right, according to Our Laws and Acts of Parliament in that behalf in all time
coming. And We will employ indifferently all our Subjects of all Persuasions,
so as none shall meet with any Discouragement on the account of his Religion,
but be advanced, and esteemed by Us, according to their several Capacities and
Qualifications, so long as We find Charity and Unity maintained. And if any
Animosities shall arise, as We hope in God there will not, We will show the
severest Effects of Our Royal Displeasure against the Beginners or Fomenters
thereof, seeing thereby Our Subjects may be deprived of this general Ease and
Satisfaction, We intend to all of them, whose Happiness, Prosperity, Wealth and
Safety, is so much Our Royal Care, that we will leave nothing undone which may
procure these Blessings for them. And lastly, to the End all Our good Subjects
may have Notice of this Our Royal Will and Pleasure, we do hereby command, Our
Lion King at Arms, and his Brethern Heralds, Macers, Pursevants and Messengers
at Arms, to make timous Proclamation thereof at the Market Cross of Edinburgh;
And besides the Printing and Publishing of this Our Royal Proclamation, it is
Our express Will and Pleasure, that the same be past under the great Seal of
that Our Kingdom per saltum,
without passing any other Seal or Register. In Order whereunto, this shall be
to the Directors of Our Chancellary, and their Deputes for writing the same,
and to Our Chancellor for causing our Great Seal aforesaid, to be appended
thereunto, a sufficient Warrant.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal the twelfth day of Febr. 1686/7. and of Our
Reign the third year. By His Majesty's Command MELFORT.

God save the King.
FINIS.

