SECOND REMARKS UPON AN ESSAY CONCERNING Humane Understanding, IN A LETTER
addressed to the AUTHOR.

BEING A Vindication of the First Remarks, AGAINST THE ANSWER OF Mr. LOCK, At
the End of His REPLY to the LORD BISHOP of WORCESTER.

LONDON, Printed for M. Wotton, at the Three Daggers in Fleet Street. 1697.

The Occasional Paper will be continued next Term.

SECOND REMARKS UPON AN ESSAY CONCERNING Humane Understanding, In a LETTER
addressed to the Author.
SIR,
AT the End of your Reply to the Lord Bishop of Worcester, I have met with your
Answer, as you are pleased to call it, to my short Remarks upon your Essay, and
am very much surpised to find it writ in such an angry Style, and with such
undeserved and ill-grounded Reflections. I writ to you with Civility and
Respect, and I dare appeal to any Gentleman, if there be any thing unbecoming
or provoking in the Style or Expressions of my Letter. If you made a false
Surmise to your self, that a Storm was coming, as you phrase it, and a Design
hatching to run down your Book; As there is no Storm, I Am sure, in my Letter,
but every Line calm and peaceable, so I protest I never heard of any such
Design, never had Communication with any, about the confuting or opposing your
Book: And as to these Two short Papers of Remarks, It Is more than I know if any
Person in the World (besides my self) knows me to be the Writer of them. So far
was I from designing any thing by them but my own Satisfaction, and to know the
true State of Your Principles, that I might the better judge of their Truth,
and of their Consequences. And whereas you say, If it was for my own
Information, what need of putting my Doubts in Print? I thought that the best
way, that your Answer might give Satisfaction to others (as well as to me) who
probably might have the same or like Scruples. And as to your self, I thought I
had done you a Kindness, by giving you an Opportunity of explaining or
vindicating some of your Principles, which were likely, I thought, to fall
under the Censure of Inquisitive Persons. Then, as to the Crime of concealing
my Name, which is another thing objected, I think, of all Men I know, Mr. Lock
had the least Reason to make that Criminal, He, who has writ so many Books
without putting his Name to them, and some in confutation of the Principles of
other Men. Turpe est Censori, cum --


But you have invented a strange Reason for my concealing my Name, with a black
Accusation contained in it, In these Words: I cannot Answ. p. 3.
much blame him in another respect, for concealing his Name. For, I think, any
one who appears amongst Christians, may be well ashamed of his Name, when be
raises such a Doubt as this, viz. Whether an infinitely Powerful and Wise
Being, be Veracious or no? unless Falsehood be in such reputation with this
Gentleman, that he concludes Lying to be no Mark of Weakness and Folly. This
Insinuation is the more inexcusable, because to bring it in, you have
misrepresented and perverted the Sense of the Author. The Question there is
not, Whether God be Veracious? but, Whether, according to your Principles, he
can be proved to be so? The Reflection which falls upon your Principles only,
you would have thrown upon God, and very unjustly suppose that the Remarker
calls in question the Divine Veracity, whereas he only calls in question the
Truth of your Principles: which, I think, is a very different thing from the
Divine Veracity. In the Pages you cite, the Remarker says, Veracity, according
to His Principles, may be proved to belong to the Divine Nature, as being a
Perfection; but tells you at the same time, that you make no use of that
Argument, nor vouchsafe to give us any Account or Idea of Perfection, though you
do of many other Terms and Notions of less importance. You may see by this,
that Falsehood and Lying (as your gross Words are) are not in reputation with
this Gentleman, seeing he looks upon them as Imperfections inconsistent with
the Divine Nature. Now let every impartial Reader judge, whether there is less
of the Christian in the first Objection, or in the pretended Answer; and
whether of these two Persons has more reason to be ashamed. You add in the
same Place, that you have more than once Spoke of the Goodness of God, another
Evidence of his Veracity. Be it so; But where have you proved the Divine
Goodness? Or how can it be proved, from your Principles? The Question is not,
as I told you before, Whether God be Good and Veracious, etc. nor whether you
think so, (for I do not enter into your Thoughts) but only, Whether you have
proved these Attributes, or laid down any Principles by which they may be
proved.

Next, you proceed to what concerns the Mathematical Demonstration of Morality:
where I desired to know how it could be founded on your Principles. In answer
to this, you tell me, my Judgment does not seem of that Consequence, that Page
4.
any one should be in haste to gratify my Impatience. Sir, I did not presume
to desire to know the full Systems of your Morality, but the Basis up on which
you would build it: And you having declared more than once, That from Grounds
and Principles laid down in your Book, Morality might be Mathematically
demonstrated, I thought it would give no offense to enquire which Ground or
Principle you pitched upon for your Foundation. I thought, I say, That would
have given no offense, especially seeing I was willing to suppose, That 'twas
not the deficiency of your Principles, Remarks, p. 5
but my own short-sightedness, that made me at a loss. But however, if this
Enquiry, how modestly soever proposed, be looked upon by you as presumptuous, I
beg your Pardon, if that will satisfy at present; And we shall have occasion
hereafter to speak more at large concerning the Grounds of Morality; where,
though you be so reserved in declaring yours, I shall not be so in declaring mine.

After this, you make a Remark upon what I had said concerning the Knowledge of
our Duty, and concerning the Grounds of the Divine Law: And you express it in
these Words; And since he thinks the illiterate part of Mankind Page 4.
(which is the greatest) must have a more compendious way to know their Duty,
than by long Deductions, (you should have said, long and obscure Deductions, if
you had truly taken the Words of the Author) He may do well to consider,
whether it were for their sakes he published this Question, viz. What is the
Reason and Ground of the Divine Law? I suppose this is mentioned as containing
something inconsistent or incongruous; but I see no such thing in the Words
cited. May not the illiterate part of Mankind know their Duty by Natural
Conscience, and the Revealed Law of God, and yet that Divine Law have a Reason
or Ground? I can see no interfering in this, nor any Incongruity.

But this is a gentle Reprimand or (intended) Reflection upon me, in comparison
of the next, which flies as high as the imputation of Malice and Ignorance; in
these Words: A Man Page 5.
that insinuates, as he does, as if I held, that the distinction of Virtue and
Vice was to be picked up by our Eyes, our Ears, or our Nostrils, shows so much
Ignorance, or so much Malice, that he deserves no other Answer but Pity. Malice
and Ignorance! These are such vulgar Topics of Railing amongst angry and
ill-bred Writers, that methinks it should be below the Genius of a Gentleman
and a Philosopher, to make use of them. Do you find these hard Words in the
Writing you criticize? I know that is no Rule to you; but however, the World
will consider these things (whether you will or no) to judge of the Temper of a
Person, who treats another at this rate, that used him with Respect, and in
civil Language. But let us consider the Matter it self.

You call this an Insinuation of mine, not a thing directly expressed; and you
have reason for this diminution of it: But this also will make it more
difficult to find out the particular Passage you understand here. The first
Passage in the Paragraph to which I suppose you refer, is this: Your general
Principle of picking up all our Knowledge from our Five Senses, I confess, does
not sit easily in my Thoughts, though you join Reflection to help us. Now if this
be the Sentence you mean, surely you ought not to have omitted Reflection, and
to have charged this only upon the Five Senses, which you see I do not. There
is another Sentence in the same Paragraph, which possibly you may refer to; and
it is this: As to Morality, we think the great Foundation of it is, The
Distinction of Good and Evil, Virtue and Vice, Turpis and Honesti, as they are
usually called: and I do not find that my Eyes, Ears, Nostrils, or any other
outward Sense, make any Distinction of these Things, as they do of Sounds,
Colors, Scents, and other outward Objects; nor from any Idea taken in from
them or from their Reports, am I conscious that I do or can conclude, that
there is such a Distinction in the Nature of Things. In these two Passages I
though I had taken in enough to comprehend your Sensation and Reflection, which
you make the Principles of all our Knowledge, Natural or Moral, and
consequently of the Distinction of Good and Evil, Virtue and Vice. But we shall
see further into this Matter, and into your Sense, when you have further
explained your Moral Notions, and let us see what you make Virtue and Vice,
Good and Evil to be, according to your way.

But I must not forget to speak a few Words to the Charge it self, Malice and
Ignorance. Malice is against a Person: Now God knows, I never had either Malice
or Envy against your Person: And whosoever reads that Paper of Remarks, I
believe, will think so; for it is writ in a courteous Style, and with favorable
Expressions to you, from first to last. As to the Imputation of Ignorance, I am
not so much concerned to clear my self in that Point. If it be my Ignorance in
general that you pity, I acknowledge your Kindness, and own your Pity well
placed: But if it be my Ignorance of your Principles that you pity, as it seems
to be, That may be a Weakness in me, I confess, but I hope no mortal Sin, nor
any thing that requires much pity. But however, if you pity my Ignorance of
your Principles, and yet will not instruct me in them, nor help me when I beg
your Charity, that Pity is but a Mock-pity, and deserves no Thanks.

Now we come to the last Head of Inquiries you are pleased to take notice of,
The Immortality Page 5, 6.
of the Soul. And for a Proof of this, you refer me (whether ludicrously and
sarcastically, or no, you best know) to the Lord Bishop of Worcester's
Arguments, taken from your Principles. Then you add, But if that will not serve
his turn, I will tell him a Principle of mine that will clear it to him; and
that is, The Revelation of Life and Immortality by Jesus Christ through the
Gospel. I write it Immortality, for so I know it was intended; though, by an
unlucky slip of the Press, it is printed there Immorality. The Revelation of the
Gospel is no doubt an happy Confirmation of the Immortality of the Soul; but we
are speaking of Proofs to be made by the Light of Nature, and particularly by
the Principles of Humane Understanding, as you have represented them. And
before you make use of Revelation in this Point, you should resolve the other
Point objected to you, viz. How you can prove the Truth of Revealed Religion,
according to your Principles.

Sir, I have now done with your Answer, as you call it; but I can find neither
Answer nor Explication in it to those Doubts I proposed. You may have some
particular Reasons for that, which you best know: But I know no good Reason you
can have for writing in such a snappish and peevish way. If you affect the
Character of a Captious Disputant, I do not envy it you, I think you have taken
the ready way to gain it, by your way of Writing, both here and elsewhere. If
you have been so treated by other Pens, as to make you angry and out of humor,
you ought not to take your Revenge, or ease your Spleen upon an inoffensive
Pen: And you will be less pitied, when roughly handled by others, if you treat
them rudely that treated you civilly. There is nothing, I Am sure, in my Words
or Expressions that could offend you: It must be in the Sense, by touching, it
may be, upon some tender Parts of your Essay, that would not bear pressing
without giving Pain. If you concluded' with your self, that the Writer of those
Remarks was some mean contemptible Thing, with whom you were not bound to
observe the Measures of common Civility; yet methinks, even in that Case, it
had been better to have wholly neglected a Person of whom you had such an Idea,
than to have given an Answer without giving any Satisfaction to his Doubts, or
any Vindication of your Principles.

As to the Storm you speak of, preparing against you, I know nothing of it, as
I told you before; yet I can blame none that desire such Principles of Humane
Understanding as may give them Proofs and Security against such a system as
this, Cogitant Matter, a Mortal Soul, a Manichean God (or a God without Moral
Attributes,) and an Arbitrary Law of Good and Evil. How far your Principles are
concerned in these Things, or lead to Skepticism in these and other material
Points, is left to your Consideration. This however I know, The ready way to
prevent any such Storm, is to give such a plain Explication of your Principles,
without Art or Chicane, as may cure and remove any Fears of this Nature.

After all, notwithstanding this imperfect and angry Answer, I will not be
discouraged from soliciting once more a further Explication of your Principles
upon the Three grand Points, The Immortality of the Soul, Natural Religion, and
Revealed Religion. And whereas you seem to say, Those that do not like your
Principles, or think them false or defective, let them find out better: We
cannot tell how good or how bad, how full or defective your Principles are,
till we know the true State of them, and their Consequences, in reference to
Moral Things: And for that reason we desire a further Explanation of them upon
those Heads.

I am apt to believe, many of your Readers, if not the generality, do not so
far understand your Principles, as to see what Consequences they draw after
them; and possibly you did not reflect upon it your self. Your Readers may
easily be amused in a Multitude of Names and Notions, and Signs of Notions:
They Are led into a Wood of Idea's (Simple and Complex, and Complex-collective;
Absolute, Relative, Real, or Fantastical, etc.) and there they are lost;
pleasantly indeed, amongst Lights and Shades, and many pretty Landskips; but
they know not where they are, nor see to the end of the Wood. You know what
Philosophers (Ancient or Modern) your Principles are said to imitate; but I do
not desire to make use of Names, one way or other, but to argue every thing
fairly and upon the square, as far as Reason will go. And let those that are
unconcerned and impartial, judge what is fairly objected, what fairly answered,
and what not. But if in these things, which concern Religion and Morality, you
will give us no further Light or Answer, I may reasonably conclude, that I have
not mistaken your Sense, and that I have truly calculated the Elevation of
those Principles. Wherein, notwithstanding, I shall be always willing and
desirous to be set right, if I have committed any Error. But let us proceed to
the Matters under debate.

As to the Immortality of the Soul, In your Answer Page 74, 75.
to the Lord Bishop of Worcester, you acknowledge the Deficiency or Limitation
of your Principles as to the Proof of its Immateriality: but however, you do
not freely tell us, what you make the Soul to be. You say indeed, it is a
Thinking Substance; but so you say Matter may be made, for any thing you know.
Then the Soul may be Mortal, for any thing you know, or any thing we know, by
your Principles. Do you think the Soul to be a permanent Substance, distinct
from the Body? or a Modification or Power of the Body? or Life only? or a
certain Influence from without, acting in Matter so and so qualified, or in
such and such Systems? Which Dispositions or Systems, when they come to be
dissolved or destroyed, that Power ceases to act there; either perishing, as a
Flame when the Fuel is spent; or returning to its Fountain, whatsoever it was.
This Notion seems to me to suit best to the general Air of your Discourse about
the Soul, and with several particular Passages relating to it. As when you make
Cogitation in us to be Effay, p. 44.
like Motion in Matter, which receives its Motion from external Impression. And
when you speak about the Sleep of the Soul, or the Suspension of Cogitation
when we sleep; the Body not being then receptive of the Thinking Influence. You
say, the Soul has no Extension, Page.68. fect. 10.
nor, at certain Fits, any Cogitation: What can the Soul be then, but a certain
Power acting in the Body, when the Body is prepared for the exercise of it, and
ceasing to act when the Body is indisposed? But whether that be a Superior
Divine Power, distinct from Matter, as a vis movens; or a Power fastened, I know
not how, to the Body, or upon such and such Systems of Matter: Whether, I say,
of these two Suppositions better agrees with your Doctrine, I cannot certainly
tell; but either of them destroys the Immortality of the Soul, upon the
Dissolution of the Body.

Furthermore, this seems to be the Supposition you go upon, when you question,
whether P. 44, 45. and Lib. 2. c. 27.
a Man waking and sleeping (without Thoughts) be the same Man. If there be
still, sleeping or waking, the same Soul, the same permanent Substance, I see
no room for that Question or Doubt which you make; and your making of it, would
induce one to believe, that it is a Difficulty that arises to you particularly,
and upon that Principle, That the Soul of Man is not a permanent and distinct
Substance, but an extrinsick or intrinsic Power, that acts or is suspended
according to the Disposition or Indispositions of the Body. Accordingly, I do
not see by your Discourse, how St. Peter, suppose, at the Page 180. sect. 6.
Resurrection, will be the same Man, unless he have the same Body, or the same
Organization of Parts; though his Soul be the same, with the same Dispositions
and Habits: Nor how our Savior, now in Heaven, is the same Man that was
crucified at Jerusalem; or that He that was crucified at Jerusalem, is the same
Man that will come again to judge the Quick and the Dead. But I do not love to
walk in the dark, and therefore I refer these things to your further
Explication, if you so please. Your Doctrine of the Soul seems to me obscure
and ambiguous: Men write, I think, to be understood; and I hope I may, without
offense, use the same Sentence to you, which you have used to others, Si monvis
intelligi, debes negligi. However Page 272.
if you please to let us into the Secret, if there be a Secret, I shall make no
other use of it than to give it a fair and free Examination.

I proceed now to another Difficulty in your Doctrine of the Soul, which I
mentioned formerly. You think the Soul, when we are asleep, is without any
Thoughts or Perceptions. I am still at a loss, I confess, how to frame any Idea
of a thoughtless, senseless, lifeless Soul. This Carcass of a Soul I cannot
understand: If it neither have Cogitation, nor Extension, as you suppose, what
Being or manner of Being it has, I am not able to comprehend. It must be a
Substance, and a particular finite Substance, and yet without any Mode. If you
say you have no Idea of it, why then do you affirm or introduce a new and
unintelligible State of the Soul, whereof neither you, nor others, can have any
Conception? However, you ought to tell us, how you bring the Soul out of this
unintelligible State. What Cause can you assign able to produce the first
Thought at the end of this Sleep and Silence, in a total Eclipse and
intermission of Thinking? Upon your Supposition, That all our Thoughts perish
in sound Sleep; and all Cogitation is extinct, we seem to have a new Soul every
Morning. If a Flame be extinct, the same cannot return, but a new one may be
made. If a Body cease to move, and come to perfect rest, the Motion it had
cannot be restord, but a new Motion may be produced. If all Cogitation be
extinct, all our Ideas are extinct, so far as they are Cogitations, and seated
in the Soul: So we must have them new impressed; we are, as it were, new born,
and begin the World again. If you say, the Ideas remain in the Soul, in that
State of Silence and Insensibility, and need only a new Excitation; Why then,
say I, may not Infants have innate Ideas (which you so much oppose) that want
only Objects and Occasions to excite and actuate them, with a fit disposition
of the Brain?

Sir, I am sorry my Apprehension should be so slow, or your Doctrine about the
Soul so shaded and covered, that I cannot, without further Light, come to know
your Meaning; or, which I most desire, see how it is consistent with Reason and
Nature. To gratify your Readers with a clearer Explanation of your Principles
in this Particular, seems to be a Debt due to them, which I shall take however
as an Obligation: But if you be otherwise minded, for Reasons best known to
your self, I shall use no further Entreaty or Importunity.

Another Head wherein I desired your further Explication, was in reference to
Revealed Religion; that we may see what Ground we can have upon your Principles
for the Certainty of it. If we cannot in your way be assured of the Immortality
of the Soul by the Light of Nature, or by Revelation, you leave us no certain
way to know it. Now if you do not make that Revelation certain in it self, it
cannot make us certain of any thing. You seem therefore the more obliged to
give good Proof of the Certainty of Revealed Religion, by how much you make the
Assurance of our Immortality to depend upon its Testimony. I told you formerly,
why I thought your Principles would not reach to the Proof of a Certainty in
Revealed Religion; namely, because they do not prove, nor give us Grounds
whereupon we may prove the Moral Attributes of God; upon which, and not upon
Infinite Power and Knowledge only, depends the Satisfaction and Assurance we
have of the Truth of a Revelation. The Divine Veracity is the particular
Attribute upon which it mainly depends; and that we think may be proved from
the Divine Perfection: But you have given us no Idea of Perfection, unless you
resolve it into Power; whereof indeed you have given a large Account, but that
will not reach and decide the Case in question. However, I will wait your
Pleasure and Leisure, to see if you are minded to give us any more Instruction
in this Particular. The truth is, There is a Passage in your late Reply to the
Bishop of Worcester, ( p. 95, 96.) which would incline one to believe, That you
think there is no Certainty in Revealed Religion, seeing you do not allow the
Certainty of Faith, but look upon that Expression as Jargon, or next to
Nonsense. To talk of the Certainty of Faith, say you, seems all one to me, as
to talk of the Knowledge of Believing: A way of speaking not easy to me to
understand. Faith, methinks, must either be Certain or Uncertain; and if you
refuse the one, you must take the other. But this, I suppose, with what follows
there, will fall under the Examination and Censure of a better Pen: I will
therefore insist no more upon it.

I proceed now to the Third Head, That of Natural Religion and Morality. This
you think is demonstrable from your Principles, Mathematically demonstrable.
This indeed would be an happy Performance, and of great use to Mankind. But, I
cannot discern from what sure Foundation, or in what Method you can make out
this Demonstration. If you make Natural Religion and Morality to depend upon
Future Rewards and Punishments, as I think P. 17. sect. 5, 6.
you do, then they must depend upon the Immortality of the Soul; And if they
depend upon P. 192. sect. 5.
That, and that be only Probable by the Light of Nature, then neither can the
other by the Light of Nature be Mathematically demonstrable. I should argue
thus, If Morality stands upon Future Punishments and Rewards, and Future
Punishments and Rewards stand upon the Immortality of the Soul, and the
Immortality of the Soul be only Probable, then Morality cannot be
Mathematically demonstrable. This is P. 86. sect. 19.
something like your Indian Comparison. If the Earth stand upon an Elephant,
and the Elephant P. 197. sect. 2.
upon a Tortoise, then what supports the Tortoise?

Thus far we are clear; There ought not, I Am sure, be more in the Conclusion,
than was in the Premises. You allow, I think, a Law of Nature, with or without
Revelation; a natural Conscience to distinguish Good and Evil, Virtue and Vice.
This is generally understood by Morality and Natural Religion. And this
Morality, if I understand you aright, is what you say is Demonstrable by your
Principles. But if you use that Word Morality in another sense than what is
generally understood by it in common Conversation, or by Ancient and Modern
Authors, you (who blame others so often for an uncertain use of Words) ought to
fix and declare your peculiar Signification of that Word, that we may know your
Meaning. If by Morality you understand the Practical Precepts of the Christian
Religion, who doubts but That Morality may be known clearly and evidently? We
have no need of your Mathematical Demonstration in That Case, if you mean only
that you can prove Morality from Scripture. Besides, if that were required, you
must first give us a Demonstration of the Veracity of the Revealer from your
Principles, before you can demonstrate Morality in this Sense. But if you
understand Natural Morality, as others do; We think, and say, you cannot give,
by your Principles, a Demonstration of it.

After all, Whatsoever you understand by Morality, you seem to ground your
Demonstration upon Future Punishments and Rewards, and upon the arbitrary. Will
of the Law giver: And I do not think these the first Grounds of Good and Evil,
Virtue and Vice. I do not think they are constituted by Punishments and
Rewards, nor by the Will of God only, if you take that Will for an Arbitrury
Power: And I Will give my Reasons for it. If things were so, there would be no
Fixed Notion of Holiness, and God might be the Author of Sin: I mean, of what we
call Sin, and judge Sin, and for which Sinners are punished. But in reality
(according to this Principle) there is nothing Sin to this Almighty Being, nor
any fixed Notion of Holiness. For if his Will be the Original Rule of Good and
Evil, and that Will go by no Rule, there is no Rule of Sin to him: All things
are Indifferent, till he declare This or That to be Sin, according to his
Pleasure; nor is there any Rule of Sin to us, but that Revealed Pleasure. This
Consequence, I believe, will be granted, admitting the Supposition. But you
will say, it may be, After God has declared such and such Things to be Sin,
they are so, and he cannot be the Author of them. And why not, I pray? I desire
to know, what binds him to his Word? to this Order or Declaration he has made?
It must be something antecedent to his Will, and, in that respect, superior:
Which if you allow, we have all we desire, An Original Standard for Sin and
Holiness; namely, the Divine Nature and Essential Perfections: A Law from which
the Divine Will can never deviate; nor we, without Sin, ever transgrefs.

Then, on the other hand, as to Holiness, What Definition or Idea can you give
us of it, according to this Principle? Is Holiness only a due Care and Concern
for our Interest and Happiness, present and future? That Is a good thing, and
very necessary; but it is rather Prudence or Wisdom, than Holiness, in the
proper Sense of the Word. Suppose then you say, Holiness is a Conformity to the
Will of God: That also is very true; for the Divine Will is never contrary to
the Divine Nature: But this is not the Original Notion of Intrinsic Holiness,
into which it is ultimately resolved; This is not the Archetype. Intrinsic
Holiness is a Conformity to the Divine Nature, according to our Capacities;
being like to God, and Partakers of his Perfections, Pure as He is Pure, so far
as the Measures of Humanity will permit. This, I think, is clear in Reason, and
I m sure it is confirmed by good Authorities; That of Revelation, and also that
of the best esteemed Philosophers that have writ about Morality. And
furthermore, How can we know (antecedently to Revelation) what the Will of God
is, or what he has appointed to be Good or Evil, Sin or Holiness? I say, How
can you know this, if you do not know it from the immutable Nature of God, and
the immutable Differences of Good and Evil? And there will be the same
Difficulty to know or ascertain Future Punishments and Rewards, without, or
with a Revelation: For though you have a Revelation, if there be no immovable
Rules of Good and Evil, Just and Unjust; nor any fixed Rule of Right betwixt God
and his Creatures, you can never be assured of Performance, whatsoever is
promised or threatened. There may be a Revealed and a Secret Will, for any thing
you know: And we may follow one, and the other be finally executed, according
to a Secret Intention; which will lay a Ground for an incurable Skepticism. But
I have noted before, how these Principles, upon another account, render the
whole Future State uncertain, and therefore prosecute it no further at present.

I think you should tell us also, What is the Love of God (the Fountain of
Virtue and Piety) according to your Principles; and how it is distinguished
from Self love: Which, in your way, it seems to be in the last Resolution of
it. We love God; but why? Not for his sake, but for our own sake; because he
will reward our Love and Obedience. Without this Motive, you seem to leave no
Argument to love Him, or Virtue, or Piety: We may fear and admire an Eternal,
Almighty, All knowing Being: But if he have no other Attributes, as I do not
find you have proved any more, you lay no Foundation for the Love of God, nor
for the Love of Virtue and Piety. Those Verses express my Sense in this
Particular: Oderunt peccare Mali, formidine poenae:
Oderunt peccare Boni, virtutis amore.


But your Principles turn the latter Verse another way; Oderunt peccare Boni,
mercedis amore.


How, pray you, upon these Principles, do you preserve the Distinction (that
good old Distinction, which it may be you despise) of Bonum Utile and Honestum?
In your way, either the Parts are coincident, or Bonum Utile is superior to
Bonum Honestum. It Is an open and free Saying of Tully's, but was always thought
to De fin. Bon. and Mal. c.18.
have good Sense in it, Perspicuum est, nisi aequitas, fides, justitia,
proficiscantur a natura, and si omnia haec ad utilitatem referantur, virum
bonum non posse reperiri. Many, you know, of our best Authors in Morality have
spoken things to the same sense. In like manner, the Distinction of Positive
Laws, and Natural or Moral Laws, seems to be confounded, if you make both to
depend upon the arbitrary Will of God. At least, these things need a further
Explication, if, according to this new way, you make them both to have the same
Ground and Measure.

Give me leave to add one Consideration more: As the Reasons of Good and Evil,
so likewise of True and False, seem to be unstable and unsettled, according to
these Principles. For, if the Difference of True and False be immutable, or not
determined by the arbitrary Will of God, I see no reason why we should not make
the same Judgment as to the Difference of Good and Evil; or why Moral Truths
should not be as fixed and unalterable as any other. Let us take a Proposition
in Mathematics, and another in Morality: Suppose, in the former, That which is
often made use of, that the Three Angles of a Triangle are equal to Two Right
ones: And in Morals, that it is a wicked thing for a Man maliciously to kill
his Friend, or his Father, or any innocent Person. The Truth of this seems to
me as clear, eternal, and unalterable, as the other. There is a Rectitude and
Obliquity in Actions, as well as in Lines, a Congruity or Incongruity. It Is
true, Moral Cases are commonly more Complex, and so not so easily stated; but
in those that are Simple and General, or clearly stated, Propositions about
them are as certain as other Truths. In every Moral Action or Moral Case there
is a Right and a Wrong, as much as every Number is Even or Odd, or every Line
Straight or Crooked. And the Relations of Moral Things seem to me as necessary,
as the Relations of Figures and Numbers. I am also apt to believe, That the
Differences of Good and Evil, Just and Unjust, Turpis and Honesti, would be as
sensible to us (in Nature pure) as Physical or Mathematical Differences; as
smeet and sour, straight and crooked; if Interest, Appetities, Passions, and
Lusts did not deprave our Taste and Judgments in those Intellectual Things.
Which Prejudices and brutish Inclinations take no place, you know, in Physical
or Mathematical Speculations.

Sir, If you please to let us know your Grounds of Morality (Mathematically
demonstrable) as plainly as I have done mine, it is all that I desire as to this
Particular. And in all other things, I think, it is enough to express our
Thoughts clearly, with our Reasons for them. More is not needful amongst
Persons that have no other Design than to find out Truth, by comparing the
Opinions of others with their own, and weighing the Reasons on both sides. For
a Man to attend to his own Thoughts and Conceptions, and the best Light he
has; not to speak by roat, and blindly follow either new or received Opinions,
is so far commendable. But whether his Principles and Conclusions are just, and
proportionate to the Nature of Things, is a further Question, and must be left
to Time and Trial. Every Man would be willing to know the Sense of the Authors
that he reads, the State of their Principles with their Consequences
(especially as to Moral things) that he might make a sure Judgment of them. I
am sensible that when Men have a different Set of Ideas and First Principles,
they may be easily mistaken in judging of one another Meaning, or in drawing
Consequences from one another Principles: But that, methinks, ought to give no
offense; but rather to be gently rectified (without ill Language) by the
Authors themselves, who best know their own Mind. And as I find that you say
you are often at a loss in understanding the Lord Bishop of Worcester's Remarks
upon some of your Notions, so I hope you will not think it strange if I am
sometimes at a loss also how to understand your Writings; which, we may
reasonably presume, are not more clear, either as to Sense or Words.

You tell me in your Answer, That I pretend Page 2.
to have writ that Letter to be informed: And so I did; but withal gave you
some Reasons for my Doubts. Will you not allow a Learner to desire his Master
to explain himself, when he does not understand his Dictates? and also to
propose Objections, when his Teacher's Sense seems to him contrary to Reason?
We are taught by your self, not to give up our Assent to Essay, p. 405. sect.
17.
the Authority of others, without good Evidence; and you make it one great
Cause of Error, To rely blindly upon the Opinions of others. I hope therefore
I have obeyed your Precepts in this, as I am ready to do in all other things
that are reasonable. I can truly and sincerly say, That I do not write out of
any Spirit of Opposition, nor for any By-ends whatsoever; but for my own
Instruction and Satisfaction, and for the Discovery of Truth in those great
Points. When I doubt of your Sense, if you please to direct me; and when I make
Objections, if you please to answer them, I have my Design; and desire only
that the Merits of the Cause may be spoken to on either hand, without course
Language, and Personal Reflections, which, I think, is your own Advice. No
bodies Notions, I think, are the better or truer, for illmanners joined with
them; and I conclude, your Lordship, who so well knows the different Cast of
Men's Heads, and of the Opinions that possess them, will not think it ill
Manners in any one, if his Notions differ from your Lordship's, and that he
owns that Difference, and explains the Grounds of it as well as be can: I have
always thought, that Truth and Knowledge, by the ill and over-eager Management
of Controversies, lose a great deal of the Advantages they might receive from
the Variety of Conceptions there is in Men's Understandings. Could the Heats,
and Passions, and ill Language be left out of them, they would afford great
Improvements to those who could separate them from By-interests and Personal
Prejudices. Answer to the Bishop of Worcester, p. 222.


In your Conclusion you tell me again of my Fault, in not setting my Name to my
Paper, in these hard, Words; To conclude, Were there nothing else in it, I
should not think it fit to trouble my self about the Questions of a Man, which
he himself does not think wortby owning. To which I answer, Though in some Cases
I think the Sense is more impartially considered (without Favor or Prejudice)
when the Author is unknown; yet if that will satisfy you, Do you put your Name
to all the Books and Pamphlets you have writ, and I will put my Name to this;
how unusual soever it is to put a Name to such small Papers.

SIR, Your Humble Servant.

FINIS.

