The Burning Shame; OR Covent Garden Morning Frolic.
Being an Account of some Odd and Humorous Pranks which were played off
Yesterday Morning between Three Persons of Fortune and Peg Tear'em a
Washerwoman.
THAT merry Monarch King Charles the Second, was not only highly delighted with
the mad Pranks of the Earl of Rochester and other Courtiers, but often made one
himself in their humerous Adventures; but of all their Tricks none came up to
this, which is as follows. Three Gentlemen of high Rank, in a frolicksome
Humor, met with a poor Washerwoman under the little Piazza in Covent Garden
about three o'Clock in the Morning, who was going to a Day's Work; 's Blood,
Jack, says one, let us see if this Woman has not got Run-goods about her and
immediately began to rummage her lower Apartments. Says Margery, I assure you,
Gentlemen, you will find nothing there but what has been fairly Entered; and if
you will but put your Noses to it, you will be convinced that I carry a
wholesome British Commodity about me. We'll not take your Word, you Slut, says
they, and immediately one of them Gaug'd the Cask. Upon his declaring all was
Right, they concluded among themselves to make Margery amends for the Affront
they had put upon her, in disputing the Goodness of her Ware. They said so good
a Thing ought to be properly ornamented, and turning Margery's Smock and
Petticoat over her Head, tied them close over it; they then hung her Candle and
Lanthorn in a String just before Margery's Dumb-Glutton, and in that manner
marched in Triumph with her to Bloomsbury Square, and knocked at the
Gentleman's Door she was going to, standing at a Distance to see the Event of
their Frolic. The first that came to the Door was a West-Country Maidservant,
who seeing so strange a Sight, and taking it for an Apparition, immediately
fainted away. The rest of the Women-Servants being afraid to go to the Door,
prevailed on a blundering Irish Footman to go to the Spectre, and speak to it.
Teague coming up, and seeing so odd a Figure, cries out, O hu! by Jesus, but
this is not an Irish Ghost! I never saw before I was born an Apparition with a
Candle and Lanthorn stuck in her A-se! In the Name of Jesus who are you? Nobody
but poor Margery, the Washerwoman, eries the poor Creature; and for God's Sake
desire the Maids to help to undo me, and then I Will tell you how I Have been
served. Teague bursting into a Fit of Laughter, runs and tells the Maids who it
was; By Heavens, says he, but they have made a Pudding-bag of her Petticoats to
boil her Head in; and they have cut a great Gash in her Belly and tied it round
with a Counsellor's Perriwig. Upon my Conscience but it is true; and they have
hung a lighted Candle and Lanthorn before it, because nobody should see it,
agra.

After a deal of Laughter on all sides, they untuck'd Margery, and on examining
her Pockets she found they had robbed her of her Pocket Gin-bottle; but to
comfort her for her Loss, they left in the room of it three fine Handkerchiefs,
with a Guinea in each, which Margery thinks a charming Recompense for their Fun.


