THE Unreasonableness AND IMPIETY OF POPERY: IN A SECOND LETTER Written upon
the Discovery of the Late PLOT.

Imprimatur

C. Alston, Nov. 12. 1678.



LONDON, Printed for R. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1678.

The Unreasonableness and Impiety OF POPERY, In a Second Letter written upon
the Discovery of the Late PLOT.
SIR,
YOu are pleased to tell me that my last Letter has had some good effect; and
that many who were before carried away with the false colors of the Romish
Religion, are now a little awakned, and seem not unwilling to examine things,
which they took formerly upon trust: and therefore you desire me, since you are
not Master of so much spare time your self, to set down the most material and
convincing reasons, and in as few words as may be, that are most likely to open
the eyes of honest and simple persons, that have been hitherto misled, and are
now willing to be instructed.

In all such cases I first consider the temper of the persons to be dealt with:
Such as take up their Religion out of interest or humor, and think it point of
honor to continue in it, and so will examine nothing are not to be spoken to.
Others that are naturally superstitious and credulous, are very hard to be
wrought on; for they believe every thing that is said on the one hand, and
distrust all that is told them by any body else. Some of those have a vanity in
coming to talk with Divines, but it is an endless labor to deal with them; for
at every time one must begin of new. But the only persons to be dealt with, are
those that are sincere and inquisitive, that having been bred in that Religion,
or brought over to it by some specious pretenses, are now willing to hear
reason, and resolved to follow it wherever they find it. And therefore in the
first place, their minds must be disingaged from these unjust prejudices, that
they conceive of our Religion: and such just prejudices must be offered them
against the Romish Religion, as may at least beget in them some jealousies
concerning it, by which they may be brought so far, as to think the matter
suspicious. If then there be such reasons offered them, for susspecting foul
dealing from their Priests and Church, as would make them suspect an Attorney,
Physician, or any other person with whom they were to deal, they will be
prepared to hear reason; which is all that we desire: and upon this Head these
following Considerations may be laid before them.

1. All people that pretend to great Power and Dominion over our consciences,
are justly to be suspected. If any man designed to make himself Master of any
of our other Liberties, we would examine his Title, and suspect all his other
motions, when we see they tend to subject us to him: Therefore a Church that
designs to keep all her Votaries under an absolute obedience, is justly to be
suspected: and our Church that pretends to no such power, is more likely to
deal fairly.

2. A Church that designs to keep her Members in ignorance, is more to be
suspected, than a Church that brings every thing to a fair Trial. A Church that
denies the use of the Scriptures in a known tongue, except to a few, and wraps
up their Worship in a Language that is not understood, is reasonably to be
suspected, more than a Church that gives the free use of the Scriptures to all
persons, and worships God in a Language, which the people understand.

3. A Church whose Opinions tend to engross the Riches of the world to its
Officers, is more to be suspected, than a Church that pretends to nothing but a
competent maintenance of the several Officers in it. The Redeeming Souls out of
Purgatory, and the Enriching the Shrines, or Relics of Saints, Pardons,
Jubilees, and many more Tenets of the Church of Rome, are so calculated for
enriching their Societies; that every cautious man must needs suspect some
design in it: which he cannot charge on a Church that has none of these Arts to
get money.

4. A Church that has carried on its Designs, by the most dishonest methods
possible, the forging of Writings, and Deeds, of Miracles, Visions, Prophesies
and other things of that Nature, is more justly to be suspected, than a Church
that cannot be charged with any such practices. The Forging so many Epistles
for the Popes of the first Ages, which are now by themselves confessed to be
Spurious, with many other Forgeries, were the Engines by which the Papal Power
was chiefly advanced. The Legends and Extravagant Fables of which they are now
ashamed, were the chief Motives of Devotion for many Ages. And by these, Saints
and Images were so much magnified, and Monasteries so enriched. A Noted Liar
after a Discovery is no more to be trusted.

5. Any that considers the present State of Rome, the manner of Electing Popes,
the Practices of that Court, and the Maxims they move by, must see that every
thing there is secular, corrupt, and at best directed by rules of Policy. But
to fancy the Holy Ghost can come upon any Election so managed, as their own
Books show that is, is the most unreasonable thing that can be devised.
Therefore a Church that neither pretends so high, nor can be charged with such
proceedings, is more likely to be the true Church.

6. A Church that teaches Cruelty against poor Innocent people, that differ in
opinion; and sets on Plots, Conspiracies, and Rebellion against Princes, that
are judged Heretics, is more likely to be corrupted, than a Church that is so
merciful, as to condemn all capital proceedings for difference of Opinion, and
teaches an absolute Submission to the Sovereign Power, even when it persecutes
and oppresses them.

7. A Church that is false to her own Principles, is not so likely to Instruct
her members aright, as a Church that is in all things consistent to her self.
The great Foundation of their Doctrine, is, That there must be a speaking Judge
to decide all Controversies: Now they have no such Judge, for it is not of
Faith, that the Pope is this Judge, or is Infallible: And for a general Council,
they have had none these 112. years, nor are they like to see another in have.
So they have no Speaking infallible Judge among them. And thus they deceive
people by a false Pretense: whereas we appeal to nothing, but what we really
have among us, which are the Scriptures.

8. A Church that appeals to Marks, which are not possible to be searched out,
is more likely to mislead people, than a Church that pretends to nothing but
what can be certainly proved. The great thing they appeal to* is the Constant
Succession of the Bishops of Rome, and their other Pastors. This cannot be
known, no not by a probable conjecture. But there are on the contrary, as great
grounds for History to deny it in the Sea of Rome, as in any other Ancient See
whatsoever: but though they have it, both the Greek Church, and our Church has
it likewise.

These are such plain things, and the Truth of them is so notoriously known,
that I should ask any of that Communion, whether upon the like reasons he would
not be Jealous of any person or sort of persons whatsoever? And if these
grounds of jealousy would work in other matters, it is much more reasonable,
that they should take place in matters of Religion; In which as an Error is of
far greater Importance; So Impostors in all Ages have studied to make gain by
Religion. Therefore it is most just upon these violent presumptions, to look
about us, and take care we be not cheated.

But before I would descend to particulars, there is one General prejudice that
works most universally, on weaker minds to be removed, which is, that the true
Church cannot Err. If then it be made appear unanswerably, that the true
Church may Err, and that in a most weighty Point, all these Arguments fall to
the ground.

That the Church of the Jews, in our Saviors days was the true Church, cannot
be denied; for our Savior owned it to be such. He joined with them in their
worship, He sent the Lepers to the Priest, He commanded them to hear the
Doctors that sat in Moses Chair, and himself acknowledged the High Priest.
This is sufficient to prove that it was the true Church, and yet this Church
erred, in a most Important point, whether Jesus Christ* was the true Messiah,
in whom the Prophecies were fulfilled or not? they Judged falsely: The High
Priests with all the Sanhedrim, declared him a Blasphemer, and condemned him
guilty of Death. Here the true Church expounds the Scriptures falsely, and erred
in the Foundation of Religion.

And it is well known, that the chief arguments which they of the Romish party
bring to prove, that a Church cannot Err, do agree as well to the Jewish, as
the Christian Church: the one being the true Church, under that dispensation,
as well as the other is now. If then this Decision made by the true Church in
Christ's time, did not oblige all in that Church, to go on in that error, but
private persons might have examined their Sentence, and depart from them upon
it; then upon the same reasons, though we acknowledge the Church of Rome a true
Church, yet we may examine her Doctrines, and separate from her errors. This
grand prejudice being thus removed, there are two things in the next place to
be laid before them.

One is, that the Scriptures, being acknowledged to come from Divine
Inspiration, on all hands, can only decide the Controversies among us: and the
places I shall make use of, shall be cited according to the Doway Translation,
to which, being made by themselves, they cannot except.

Another is, that a man must judge of things as they appear plainly to his
reasonable Faculties. It is against all reason to say that because it is
possible for a man to be mistaken, therefore he ought to doubt his Judgment in
things that are clear to him. This must turn a man Skeptical both to all
Religions, and all the concerns of human life: Therefore every man must follow
his Judgment, when after a diligent Inquiry, any thing appears plain to him.

And now to come up close to those of that persuasion, they are to consider,
that the chief parts of Religion are, First, Articles of Faith: Secondly, Rules
of Life: Thirdly, The worship of God chiefly in the Sacraments: And Fourthly,
The Government of the Church. If then in every one of these Heads, the Church
of England agrees clearly with the Scriptures, and the Church of Rome does
either manifestly contradict them, or differs matterially from them, in all
these points, in which we and they differ; then the Resolution of the Question,
Whether a man ought to join himself to our Church, or theirs? will be easily
made.

For Articles of Faith, if either the Apostles Creed or the Creeds of the First
4. General Councils, contain a just abstract of the Faith; then we who receive
every Article in these Creeds, do agree more exactly to the Apostolical
Doctrine, than they who have added many new Articles to their Creed.

The chief Article of Faith, is, The Covenant made between God and Man through
Jesus Christ, by which upon the Account of his Merits and Intercession, all who
follow the Rules of the Gospel, may expect the Blessings of it, Acts 20. 21.
both here, and hereafter. Penance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord
Jesus Christ, being the conditions upon which we hope for Eternal life. This we
plainly teach, without Addition or Change: But in how many things have they
departed from this Simplicity of the Gospel? First, In teaching People to
address to God, for the Merits and by the Intercession of the Saints: From whom
these things are asked, for which the Scriptures direct us only to God and
Christ. And in the very words pronounced after absolution, The Merits of the
Blessed Virgin and the Saints, are joined with the passion of Christ; as the
grounds on which we obtain pardon of Sin, Grace, and Eternal life. Secondly, In
persuading People, That a Simple attrition with the use of the Sacraments,
without any real conversion of the Soul or change of life, is sufficient to
Salvation. Thirdly, In persuading People, That there is a Communication of the
Merits of Saints to other Persons, though the Scriptures mention only the
Communication of Christ's Merits. Fourthly, by Teaching that tho our sins are
pardoned thorough Christ; yet, there are terrible and long lasting torments to
be endured in another State. Fifthly, that saying Masses, and going of
Pilgrimages can Redeem from these. Now in all these, the two chief Designs of
the Gospel are plainly contradicted: Which be; First, To Change our hearts and
lives: Secondly, To persuade us to a humble Dependence upon Christ, and an high
acknowledgment of him: But these Doctrines of theirs as they show us a way to
be sure of Heaven, without a real Conversion; so they take off so much from
Faith in Christ as they carry us to trust to somewhat else.

These are Errors of great Importance: Since they corrupt the Fountain, and
overthrow the chief design of the Christian Religion. They are also late
devices brought in, in the dark and ignorant Ages.

No mention is made of praying to Saints, in any Ancient Liturgy. There is a
great deal against it in the most Ancient Authors. And though in the Fourth
Century, upon the Conversion of many Heathens to the Christian Faith, to humor
them in their conceit, of some Intermedial Agents, between the Divinity and us
Mortals, there was a Reverence for the Saints set up, to drive out the worship
of those Secondary Deities; yet, this was no direct Adoration, though they then
began to use Rhetorical addresses to Saints like prayers: Yet, even in Gregory
the Great his time (in the beginning of the Seventh Century) we find no Prayers
made to them in all his Liturgies. And for the Belief of a simple Attrition
being sufficient with the Sacrament, no body ever dreamed of it, before the
Schoolmen found out the Distinction, between Attrition and Contrition in the
later Ages. For the Communication of the Merits of Saints, the whole Fathers in
one voice, speak only of the Merits of Christ being Communicated to us. The
Friars first invented it, to invite People at least to die in their habits, by
persuading them, that all the merits of the Saints of their Order, were shared
among the whole Order. And for Redeeming out of Purgatory, the first Four Ages
knew nothing of it. In the beginning of the Fifth Century St. Austin plainly
speaks of it as an Opinion which some had taken up without any ground, and that
it was no way certain, nor could we ever be sure of it. And though in Gregory
the Great's time, the Belief of it was pretty far advanced; yet, the Trade of
Redeeming out of it, by saying Masses for Departed Souls was not even then
found out.

So that all these are both gross Errors, and late Inventions.

The next Branch of Religion, is the Rule of human life: which one would think
could be taken from no other Standard so certainly, as the 10. Commandments:
and the Expositions given of these in Scripture, chiefly our Saviors Sermon on
the Mount. Let Malice it self appear, to Declare wherein our Church strikes at
any of these: or Teaches men to disobey even the least of them. If then our
Rule of life be exactly the same; with that which the Scriptures prescribe, we
are safe as to this, which may be well called, The most important piece of
Religion. For it is to be considered that God making man after his own Image,
the end of his Creation was, that he might be made like God. The Attributes of
God to be Imitated, are Goodness, Mercy, Justice, Wisdom and Truth. And it is
certain that the Design of Revealed Religion was to give men clearer Notions of
these Moral perfections, to press them by stronger Arguments, and encourage cur
Endeavors by suitable Rewards and punishments. So that if any Religion
contradict these Moral Duties, we are sure it is false; for the Revelation of
God's will must be designed to make us better than we would otherwise be,
following barely the Light of Nature, and not worse. If then the Church of Rome
over throws Morality, and contradicts any of the Ten Commandments we are sure
it is not of God. And how far it has done this, they may judge by these
Particulars.

First, Whatever Church offers cheap and easy pardons for sin, does take off
so much from our sense of the evil of sin. We cannot have a very ill opinion of
any thing that is easily forgiven. Now what are the Popes Pardons, Indulgences,
Jubilees, Privileged Altars, the going of Pilgrimages, the saying of some
Collects, the wearing of Agnus Dei's, Peebles, or other such like trash, but so
many Engines to root out of men's minds any deep horror or great sense of sin.
Is not this the very thing which the People of the Jews of old offered at, to
bring Thousands of Rams, Ten Thousand Rivers of Oil, their First born, or the
fruit of their Body, to offer for their sins? All which were rejected in the
name of God in these words, I will show thee O man what is good, and what our
Lord requires of thee: Micha 6. 8.
Verily to do Judgment, and to love mercy, and to walk solicitous with thy God.
This is a Moral matter and unchangable; therefore whoever go to beat down the
sense of sin, by the offer of Pardon, on any other terms, but the sincere
change of a man's life, destroy Morallity, which is the Image of God in man. If
from this general Consideration we descend to Examine the Commandments in
particular, we shall find matter enough for a severe Charge against their
Church.

Is not the First Commandment broken when Devotions are offered to Saints which
Import their being Omniscient, Omnipresent and Almighty; that are the
Incommunicable Attributes of the Godhead: and when pardon of sin,
preservation, Grace against Temptations, and Eternal life, are immediately
begged from Saints. It is true, they say the sense of these prayers, is only
that we desire their assistance at Gods hands for these blessings. But the
words of their Offices import no such matter. And though for above One Hundred
and Sixty Years these things have been complained of; and in the Correction of
their Offices, some of them were cast out; yet, many of them do still continue:
In which the plain sense of the words of their Offices is Idolatrous: Only they
make a shift with another and forced sense put on them, to defend themselves
from that charge. And for such Devotions they can show no Warrant for the first
Thousand years after Christ.

The Second Commandment is so openly and confessedly broken by them, that many
of them maintain, it does not all oblige Christians: but belonged only to the
Jewish Dispensation. And in all their Catechisms it is left out, which was done
very wisely; (with what honesty let them answer) for it was not fit the people
should look on that as a Commandment, which they saw so notoriously broken
throughout their whole Church: A great trade being also driven by the breach of
it. That this was not in the Primitive Church, themselves confess: all the
Books the Fathers wrote against the Idolatry of the Heathens, demonstrate this.
Nor were Images so much as set up in Churches before the Sixth Century. And
then care was taken that they should not be worshipped: and not before the
Eighth Century were they worshipped in any place of the Christian Church.

The Doctrine of the Popes power of Relaxing of Oaths, and discharging men from
the Obligation of them, joined with the practice of their Popes for above 800
years, is as formal an Opposition to the Third Commandment as can be Imagined.
This was also begun in the Eighth Century.

The vast multiplication of Holy Days, made the Observation of the Lords day of
necessity slacken.

They have destroyed the Order of Societies, established in the Fifth
Commandment; by the Power they allow the Pope to Depose Princes, and absolve
Subjects from their Allegiance.

They teach the murdering and burning all Heretics, that is to say, all that
will not submit to their Tyranny: by which Infinite numbers of Innocent persons
have been murdered, against the Sixth Commandment. And these two Doctrines of
deposing Princes, and putting Heretics to death, were abhorred by the Church
for the first Eight ages, and were brought in by the Popes since that time.

The frequent practice of the Court of Rome, in granting Divorces, on the
pretense either of Spiritual kindred, or of Degrees not forbidden, either by
the Law of Nature, or the word of God, and allowing second Marriages to both
Parties, upon such Divorces, is an avowed breach of the Seventh Commandment.

The setting on, some Princes to Invade other Princes in their just Rights, is
the Doctrine, as well as it has been the practice of their Church for some
Ages. And as their Popes have wrested many Territories from Temporal Princes,
so for many Ages they set on Public Robbery against the Eighth Commandment.

The Doctrine of Equivocating, both taught, and practiced, the breaking of safe
Conducts, and public Faith decreed by their General Councils, is also against
the Ninth Commandment.

For the Tenth I shall say nothing of it, because the meaning of it is not so
generally agreed on. But thus we see all the Rules of Morality are contradicted
by that Church.

It might be justly added to swell up this Charge; that of late there have been
Doctrines published to the world by the approved Casuists of that Church, with
License, which subvert all Justice, destroy all security, and take away the
most sacred ties of mankind. By the Doctrines of Probability, and of Ordering
the Intention aright, there is no crime how black soever* but a man may
adventure on it with a good conscience. These things were long and openly
taught amongst them, without any Censure. And when many of the French Clergy
complained of these at the Court of Rome (perhaps more out of spite to the
Jesuits, than zeal for the Truth) it was long before these so just
Remonstrances, were heard. And in conclusion a trifling Censure was past on
them: by which they were declared Scandalous (neither Impious, nor Wicked) and
all were forbidden to teach them any more, but they stand yet, in the Books
formerly published with License.

After all these particulars, is it to be wondered at, if the morals of the men
of that Church be vitiated, when their Doctrine is so corrupted, for peoples
practices are generally worse than their Opinions. And thus the Second point is
made good, that in our Church, we teach the same Rules of Living that are in
the Scriptures, which are grossly corrupted by their Doctrines.

The Third Branch of the Christian Religion is the Worship of God and that
chiefly the use of the Sacraments. For the Worship of God, let it be considered
that we pray to God, and praise him only, for all these things about which the
Scriptures command us to address to him. Our worship is in a Language that all
the people understand, and so are edified by it according to St. Paul, who has
enlarged so much on this matter, 1 Cor. 14.
in a whole Chapter, that it is strange, how any who acknowledge the Authority
of that Epistle, can deny it. Our Liturgies are such, that the Romanists cannot
except to any part of them: Our ceremonies are few, and these be both decent
and useful: So that in all the parts of our Worship, we do so exactly agree to
the Rule of the Scriptures, and the Primitive Church, that they cannot blame us
for any one Rubric or Collect in it. But for their worship, It is in a
Language not understood by the people: who to be sure can receive no
Edification, from that they understand not; nor can they say Amen to such
Devotions. This is as it were in spite to St. Paul, who took special care that
as long as his Authority was in any esteem in the Church, such an abuse should
never creep into it. Nor is there a shadow of Authority for such a practice,
from the Primitive Church, in which for many Ages, the Worship was still in the
vulgar Tongues.

Next their Worship is so overcharged with many Rites and Ceremonies, that the
seriousness of Devotion must needs be much alloyed by them. A great part of the
Worship is so whispered, as if they were muttering Spells. Their Books of
Exorcisms are the most indecent things that can be: full of Charms and other
ridiculous Rites. And for the Pontifical and Ceremonial of their Church, they
may match with Heathenism for Superstition. Their Offices are so various, and
numerous, and the Rubricks seem so full of disorder, that a man may as soon
learn a Trade, as know all the several parts of them. How this can be
reconciled to the Simplicity of the Gospel, or the Worshipping God in spirit
and truth, may be easily judged by those who can compare things.

For the Sacraments, we have the Two that Christ Instituted, Baptism, and the
Lords Supper; And for Penance, Confirmation, Ordination and Marriage, we have
them also among us, as they were appointed by Christ and his Apostles: though
we do not call these Sacraments. For Extreme Unction we find no warrant at all
for it, as a sacred Ordinance: and we are sure the Church for many Ages did not
think of it. Matt. 28. 19.
For Baptism it is done among us, in the very Form our Savior appointed: and
this they do not deny. But among them they cannot be assured that they are at
all Baptized: since according to the Doctrine of the necessity of the Intention
of the Priest, to the Being of a Sacrament, they cannot be assured of it: for
an Atheistical Priest can spoil their Baptism, so that unless they can be
certain of that, which is impossible for them to know, I mean the Intention of
the Priest, they are not sure that they were ever truly Baptized.

But for the Lords Supper, if any person will so far trust his own Reason and
senses, as to compare all the Warrants we have in Scripture for that Ordinance,
with the Practice of our Church and theirs, they will soon see who agree most
to them. Matt. 26. 26, 27. 28. ver.
Christ took Bread which he blessed and gave, saying, This is my Body which is
given for you. He also took the Chalice and said, Drink ye all of it, etc. All
this we do, and no more, so that it is indeed a Communion among us: and those
who have read the account that Justin Martyr gives us of the Rites in the
Communion in his days, would think he were reading the very Abstract of our
Office. But in the Church of Rome, besides the less material things, of the
Form of the Bread, the Consecration of Altars and Vessels, with the numberless
little devices in the Canon of the Mass, that they seem not of such importance
let these considerable changes they have made be looked into.

1. They have brought in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, against the
clearest Evidence both of sense and reason, against the nature of a Sacrament,
and its being a Memorial of Christ's Death, and that by the very words of
Consecration, the Bread and Wine are Christ's Body and Blood, as the one was
given for us, and the other shed for us, on the Cross: and not as he is now at
the Right hand of God. The belief of this crept in by degrees, from the eighth
Century, in which it was first set on foot, but much contradicted both in the
Eastern and Western Church: and was not fully settled till the 13th Century. We
are sure it was not the Doctrine of the Churches of Rome, Constantinople, Asia,
Antioch, nor Africa in the 5th and 6th Centuries, by express Testimonies from
the most esteemed Authors of that time, Gelasius, Chrysostom, Ephrem,
Theodoret, and St. Austin.

2. They deny the Chalice to the Laity against the express words of the
Institution; and contrary both to the Doctrine and Tradition of the Church for
1300 years.

3. They have declared the Priests saying Mass, to be an Expiatory Sacrifice
for the Dead, and the Living, though the Scripture plainly says, That Christ
was once offered for us. Heb. 9. 26, 28.
It is true the Primitive Church used the words Sacrifice and Oblation as our
Church yet does, but their meaning by that, was only in the general sense of
these terms, as Prayers, Praises, and Alms are called Sacrifices.

4. They have brought in a new piece of Worship, which is the hearing of Mass,
without receiving the Sacrament: and it is now the great Devotion of their
Church. Though by the Institution, it is as express as can be, that the
Consecration is only in order to its being a Communion. And by the Apostolical
Canons, which some in their Church believe to be the work of the Apostles, and
are by them all acknowledged to be a Collection of the Rites of the first Ages,
all persons that were present at the Worship, and did not communicate were to
be severely censured.

5. The adoring the Sacrament, the exposing it on the Altar, and carrying it
about in solemn Processions, to be worshipped, as they are late Inventions; so
if Transubstantiation be not true, they are by their own confession the
grossest Idolatries that ever were,

And are not these considerable variations from the first Institution of this
Sacrament?

As for their own Sacraments, though there is no reason to equal them, to
either of these that were instituted by Christ; yet some of them we use, as
they were at first appointed. Acts 8. 17.
Persons Baptized, are Confirmed with Imposition of hands, the only Ceremony
used by the Apostles.

We allow the use of Confession, and do press it in many cases; and give the
benefit of Absolution: but we do not make this an Engine to screw peoples
secrets from them. For which there is no warrant in Scripture; nor was it
thought necessary for many Ages after the Apostles. Confession of public
Scandals was enjoined, and for private sins it was recommended: but this latter
was not judged simply necessary for obtaining the pardon of sin. And what noise
soever they make of the good that Confession, and the enjoining of Penance,
may do, if well managed, we need only appeal to some of their own best Writers,
now in France, whether as they have been practiced, they have not rather driven
all true Piety out of the world. If these abuses had been only the faults of
some Priests, the blame could not have been justly cast on their Church; but
when the public Rules given to Confessors, printed with License, are their
warrants for so doing, then their Church is in fault. So that nothing is more
common among them, than for persons after a confession made of their sins, with
a slight sorrow* and some trifling penance undergone, together with the
Priestly Absolution, to fancy themselves as clean from all sin, as if they had
never offended God. And this being the Doctrine of their Church, it both lessens
the sense of sin, and takes men off from making such earnest applications to
God through Christ, as the Gospel commands.

For Orders they are among us with the same Rites that Christ and the Apostles
gave them first: Morinus.
And a learned Man of their own Church has lately published the most ancient
Forms of Ordinations he could find: From which it appears, that all the
Ceremonies in their Ordinations, for the want of which they accuse us, were
brought in since the eighth Century: so that even by their own Principles these
things cannot be necessary to Ordination, otherwise there were no true Orders
in the Church for the first eight Ages.

For Marriage we honor it as Gods Ordinance; Heb. 13. 4.
and since the Scriptures declare it honorable in all, without exception, we
dare deny it to none who desire it. St. Paul delivers the Duty of Clergymen
toward their Wives, 1 Timothy 3. 2. 4. 11.
with Rules for their Wives behavior, which had been very impertinent if
Clergymen might have no Wives. We find a married Clergy in the first ten
Centuries: And we know by what base Arts the Caelibate of the Clergy was
brought in; and what horrid ill effects it has produced. Neither do we allow of
any devices to hinder Marriage, by degrees of kindred not prohibited in the Law
of God, or the trade that was long driven in granting Dispensations in those
degrees, and afterward annulling these, and avoiding the Marriages that
followed upon them, upon some pretenses of Law.

Thus it appears, how they have corrupted the Doctrine of the Sacraments,
together with the Worship of God.

The last head of Religion is Government; and as to this, we can challenge any
to see what they can except to us. First in reference to the Civil Power, we
declare all are bound for conscience sake to obey every lawful Command of the
Supreme Authority, and to submit when they cannot obey. We pretend to no
Exemption of Clarks from the Civil Jurisdiction, but give to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's. We do not obey the King only because he is of our Religion:
much less do we allow of Conspiracies or Rebellions upon our judging him an
Heretic, so that we deliver no Doctrine that can be of any ill consequence to
the Society we live in.

And for the Ecclesiastical Government we have Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
rightly Ordained, and in their due subordination to one another; every one
administering these Offices due to his Function, which has been the Governemnt
of the Christian Church, since the times of the Apostles. So that we have a
clear vocation of Pastors among us, from whose hands every person may without
scruple receive all the Sacraments of the Church.

But for the Church of Rome, how unsafe is the Civil Government among them? not
to mention the Doctrine of deposing Princes, for which I refer you to my former
Letter; What a security does the Exemption of Clerks from the Civil Courts in
cases criminal, give to loose and debauched Churchmen; and what disturbance
must this breed to a Common wealth? The denying the Civil Magistrate power to
make Laws that concern Religion, or oblige Churchmen, takes away a great deal
of his Rights; for scarce any Law can be made but wrangling and ill-natured
Churchmen, may draw it within some head of Religion. And that this was
frequently done in former Ages, all that have read History know. The quarrels
that were in the beginning of this Century between the Pope and the Republic
of Venice were a fresh Evidence of it.

But for the Ecclesiastical Government, they have spoiled it in all the parts
of it. The Pope has assumed a power of so vast an extent, and so arbitrary a
nature, that all the ancient Canons are thrown out of doors by it. We know that
originally the Bishops of Rome were looked on by the rest of the Church, as
their Colleagues and fellow Bishops. The Dignity of the City made the Sea more
remarkable; and the belief of St. Peter's having founded it, with his suffering
Martrydom there, with St. Paul, made it much honored: so that when the Empire
became Christian, then the Dignity of the Imperial City made the Bishop of Rome
be acknowledged the first Patriarch. From this beginning they arose by many
degrees to the height of pretending to a Supremacy both Civil and Spiritual:
and then they not only received appeals, which was all they at first pretended
to, but set up Legantine Courts every where, made the Bishops swear Obedience
and Homage to them, and the Archbishops receive the Pall from their hands, in
sign of their dependence on them: Exempted Monasteries, and other Clarks from
Episcopal Jurisdiction, broke all the Laws of the Church by their
Dispensations: So that no shadow of the primitive Government does now remain.
And though Gregory the Great wrote with as much indignation against the Title
of Universal Bishop, as ever any Protestant did; yet his Successors, have since
assumed both the Name and thing. And to that height of Insolence, has this
risen, that in the Council of Trent, all the Papal Party opposed the Decree
that was put in, for declaring Bishops to have their Jurisdictions by Divine
Right. The Court Party not being ashamed to affirm, that all Jurisdiction was
by Divine Right only in the Pope; and in the other Bishops, as the Delegates of
the Apostolic See; and they were in this too hard for the other Party. So that
now a Bishop, who by the Divine appointment ought to feed the Flock, can do no
more in that, then as the Pope gives him leave. The greatest part of the
Priests have no dependence on their Bishops. The Monks, Friars, and Jesuits,
being immediately subordinate to the Pope; so that they do what they please,
knowing they can justify any thing at Rome, and they fear no Censure any where
else.

From this so many abuses have crept in, and the Canonists have found out, so
many devices to make them Legal, that there is no hope of Reforming these at
Rome. The whole State of Cardinals is one great Corruption, who, from being
Originally the Parish Priests of Rome, and so under all Bishops, have raised
themselves so high that they do now trample on the whole Order; and pretend to
an Equality with Princes. The giving Benefices to Children, the unlimitted
Plurality of Benefices in one Person; the Comendam's, the reserved Pensions,
with many other such like, are gross, as well as late Corruptions. And no
wonder if all men despair of Reforming the Court of Rome, when these abuses are
become necessary to it, by which the greatness of the Cardinals and the other
Officers, or Ministers there, is kept up.

I need not mention the gross Simony of that Court, where all the world knows,
every thing may be had for money. The Popes themselves, are often Chosen by
these Arts: and if their own Rules be true, such Elections, with every thing
that follows on them are void. The Infinite Swarms of the Inferior Clergy, do
plainly drive a Simoniacal Trade, by the Masses they say for Departed Souls,
for Money. And for Public Penance, they have Universally let it fall, in
stead whereof private Penance is now in use. And if their own Writers say
true, this is made an Engine to serve other ends, when by enjoining slight and
easy Pennances, they draw the People after them; upon which the Jesuits have
been loudly accused, these Forty Years last past. In Sum, all the Corruptions
or rather defects, that are in the Government of our Church, are only such as
they brought in and have not met yet with such effectual remedies, as must cure
the Church of these inveterate Distempers, their ill Conduct did cast her into.

If any of that Party will review these Particulars, and so far trust their own
Reasons, as to judge according to the plainest Evidence, they cannot resist the
conviction that they must needs meet with: when they see the simplicity of our
Faith, the Morality of our Doctrine, the Purity of our Worship, and our
Primitive Government; and compare it with their vast Superfetation of Articles
of Faith, the Immorality of their Rules of living, the Superstition, if not
Idolatry of their Worship, and the most extravagant Innovations in Government,
that are in the Church of Rome.

And indeed these things are so clear that few could resist the force of so
much plain truth, if it were not for some prejudices, with which they are so
fettered that they cannot examine matters with that freedom of mind, that is
necessary. Therefore much care must be taken, to clear these, in the most
familiar and demonstrative manner that is possible.

They may be reduced to these Five chief Ones. First, That the true Church
cannot Err. Secondly, That out of the true Church there is no salvation.
Thirdly, That the case of the Church of Rome is much safer than ours is; since
the Church of England acknowledges a possibility of salvation in the Church of
Rome; which they on the other hand deny to the Church of England. Fourthly,
That unless there be a Supreme Judge set up, we can be sure of nothing in
Religion, but must fall into many Factions and Parties. And Fifthly, That the
Reformation was but a Novelty begun in the former Age, and carried on in this
Nation, out of an ill design; and managed with much Sacrilege.

The First of these seemed necessary to be cleared in the beginning of this
Discourse, and I am deceived if it was not done convincingly. And for the
Second we agree to it, That out of the true Church there is no Salvation.

But then the Question comes, What makes one a Member of the true Church? The
Scriptures call the Church the Body of Christ, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23.
of which he is the Head. So then whoever are joined to Christ according to the
Gospel, must be within the true Church. But the deceit that lies hid under
this, is, That from hence they fancy that the Unity of the Church, does consist
in an outward Communion with the Sea of Rome. And upon that they calculate,
that there must be an Unity in the Body of the Church: And that cannot be,
except all be joined to the Sea of Rome. Now, we grant there is but one Church,
but this Unity consists not in an Outward Communion, though that is much to be
desired, but consists in an Unity of Belief, about the essentials of
Christianity.

There is nothing more evident, than, that even according to their own
Principles, other Churches are not bound upon the hazard of Damnation to hold
Communion with the Sea of Rome; for it is not an Article of Faith, nor certain
according to their own Doctrine, That the Pope is Infallible: And except that
were certain, we cannot be obliged to hold Communion under such a Sanction with
that See. For if it be possible that a Pope may become an Heretic or
Schismatic (which many of them confess, and all agree that the contrary is not
of Faith,) then other Churches are not in that case obliged to hold Communion
with that See. If therefore the possiblity of Error in that See be
acknowledged, then holding Communion with it, cannot be the measure of the
Unity of the Church. So we bring it to this Issue, It is not Heresy to say,
The Pope may Err: Therefore this is no just prejudice against our Church,
because we have departed from Communion with him, when he imposed his Errors on
us. So all the high things they boast of that See, come to nothing, except they
say, This Proposition is of Faith, That the Pope is Infallible. And for these
Meetings that they call General Councils; they were at best but the Councils of
the Western Patriarchate artificially packt, and managed with much Art; as
appears even from Cardinal Pallavicini's History of the Council of Trent.

For the Third Prejudice, It is the most disingenuous thing that can be;
Because our Church is charitable, and modest in her Censures, and theirs is
uncharitable, and cruel in her Judgments; therefore to conclude, That Communion
with them is safer, than with us. If confidence, and Presumption, Noise, and
Arrogance, are the marks to judge a Church by, we must yield to them in these:
but if Truth, and Peace, Charity and holy Doctrines, be the better Standards,
then we are as sure, that our Communion is much safer. Let this Rule be applied
to the other concerns of human life, and it will appear how ridiculous an abuse
it is to take measures from so false a Standard. If a man were sick, the
Question comes, Whether he shall use an approved Physician, or a Montebanks. On
the one hand, the Montebank says, He will certainly cure him, and the Doctors
will undoubtedly kill him. On the other hand, the Doctor modestly says, he will
undertake nothing, but will do the best he can; and for the Montebank he tells
him, It is very dangerous to trust to him, though he will not deny but
sometimes great cures are done by them. The Insolence of the Montebank will
never carry it against a Doctors modesty, but among weak and credulous People;
and such must they also be, who are taken with this Montebankry in Religion.

But if this be taken to pieces, the folly of it will yet appear more manifest.
For First, the reason we give for a possibility of Salvation in the Church of
Rome, is, because we look on such and such things as the Essentials of
Christianity, which are yet retained in that Church: And either this Reasoning
is true or false. If it be true, then it is as true, that we may be saved, who
retain these Essentials of Christianity: If it is false, then no Inference can
be drawn from it. Secondly, Though we yield a possiblity of Salvation in that
Church, we declare that they are in great danger, by many opinions among them,
which if fully understood and believed, do even vitiate the Essentials of
Christanity; particularly that Foundation of Religion, The Covenant between God
and Man thorough Christ, formerly insisted on. So that we declaring a Certainty
of Salvation to those who sincerely follow the rules of our Church, and a great
danger in their Church, the preferring their Communion to ours, upon this
account, is, as unreasonable, as to sleep without shutting our Doors, because
it is possible we shall not be robbed, in so doing: Or when we are at Sea to
prefer a Cock-boat to a good clean Ship. These are such absurdities, that an
ordinary measure of weakness cannot swallow them down. Thirdly, We are not so
forward as they imagine in yielding a possibility of Salvation in their Church.
For our concession amounts rather to this, that we do not deny it, than that we
positively affirm it: And therefore they have no reason to draw these
advantages from it.

4. A great difference is to be made between what God in the Infiniteness of
his mercy may do, and what he is bound to by the Covenant made with man in the
Gospel; for the former we acknowledge, it is impossible to fix the limits of
that mercy which is as far above our thoughts, as the heavens are above the
Earth. And how far it extends to all sincere minds, we are not so presumptuous
as to define; therefore we will not Damn at pleasure, as they do, but we do
assert, Their Church is guilty of such gross Corruptions, by which the vitals
of Religion are vitiated, that they have not that reason to claim the Mercies
of the Gospel due by that Covenant.

5. The Church of Rome has a dark and fair side; the dark side is, what the
true consequence of their Opinions is, the fair side is, what some witty men
have devised to palliate these corruptions with, and to deceive the Vulgar by.
We know many of that Communion, either do not at all know these corrupt
Doctrines, or have such a fair representation made of them, that they are
thereby both more easily and more innocently misled. From hence it is that we
are inclined to hope more charitably concerning some, that are abused by them.
But for those that have examined things more fully, or that having been bred
among us, yet reject the Truth, and go over to them, we are not so much
inclined to have so good hopes of them, as they imagine: So this is a weak and
ill grounded conceit in all the parts of it.

The Fourth Prejudice, is concerning the necessity of Submitting to some Common
Judge, of distrusting our own reasons, and believing the Church, without which
there must be many Sects and Divisions: and this they aggravate from the many
different Parties that are among us.

But these are only specious pretenses to deceive weak people by. For First,
If-it is necessary that there be a Common Judge, it is most necessary that it be
known, who this Judge is, otherwise it is to no purpose to talk of a Judge, if
they cannot point him out. This is like him that came to discover a huge
Treasure that he knew was hid under ground; but being asked in what place it
was? he answered he did not know that: and he believed no body else knew. Some
say the Pope is the Judge, others as confidently, that the Council is Judge
even without the Pope, others think it is sure work to say, the Pope and
Council together: and others say the Body of the Church spread over the World.

For the Popes, some of them have been condemned for Heresy, and others for
making Schism; many of them have been most horrid men: they are generally
ignorant in Divinity, being for most part bred to the Law: so that a great part
of their own Church rejects the Popes Infallibility.

For Councils, they have had none these 115 years, and the last was so
overruled by the Popes, that no other has been desired since: so that if
either a Council without the Pope, or with him, be the Infallible Judge they
have lost their infallibility; and except a Council were constantly sitting,
they can show no living and speaking Judge. So that either this is not necessary
to a Church, or otherwise they are not a complete Church. And for the Body of
the Church, how shall a man find out their sense, unless gathered together in
some Assembly? or must a Man go over Christendom, and gather the Suffrages of
all the Pastors of the Church? Upon the whole matter it is plain that after all
their Canting about the Church, they must say, that it is of Faith that the
Pope is Infallible, otherwise they have no Infallible Judge, and since a Council
cannot be called but by the Pope, what ever Authority the Council has it can
never be exercised, but by the Popes leave.

And for all the sad consequences they say, follow the want of a Common
infallible Judge, it appears they are under them as well as we; but with this
difference, that we plainly acknowledge, we have none, but do the best we can
without one: But they, as they have none, no more than we, yet are under the
Tyranny of one, and though they are not bound to believe him Infallible, yet
are as much enslaved to him, and obliged to obey him, as if he were really
exempted from all possibility of Erring. So that in short, they are slaves and
we are freemen. And for these ill consequences, they are, we confess,
unavoidable; for which we have very good Authority, from his words, who on all
sides is acknowledged to be Infallible, that said, Matt. 18. 7.
Woe be to the World for scandals, for it is necessary that scandals do come.

But to discuss this Objection, which works much on ignorant people, let it be
considered that sin and Error are the two things, that do chiefly cross the
design of the Gospel: and of these two, sin, is the more dangerous and
destructive: since there is great reason to hope that Error cannot be so fatal,
when it infects a mind that is otherwise sincere, as Sin, which clearly defaces
the Image of God in the Soul. We ought not therefore to expect that the Gospel,
should give any further security against Error, than it gives against Sin: On
the contrary we should rather expect a further security from Sin, because it is
most hurtful. But all the Provision made against Sin, is this, that in the
Scriptures we are warned of the evil of it, and are directed to such methods,
and have the promises of such Assistance, that if we use our endeavor, we
shall not be overcome by sin, nor perish in it: So as to Error, we have the
same security. The Gospel affords us a very clear light for directing our
Belief in the most important things, which if we study with due humility, and
sincerity, imploring God for the grace of his holy Spirit, for our instruction,
we shall be preserved from Error. And thus the same provision is made against
Error, that is against Sin. And we have no reason to expect more. And as it
were not fit, that Salvation should be offered without obliging men to use
their utmost endeavors, so it were not fit to give such an easy Remedy
against Error, as that a man should not need to employ his reason to discover
Truth, and avoid Mistakes. If our Gospel be also hid, 2. Cor. 3. 3.
it is hid in them that perish. Therefore that our Searches after Truth, may be
both encouraged and rewarded, God sets it before us in such a Light, that it is
our own fault if we do not see and follow it. But if men will either blindly
give themselves up, to the conduct of such Guides, whose interest it is to
mislead them, which is the case of the Church of Rome; or out of humor, or
other base ends, will invent or follow some erroneous Tenets, as other
Heretics do, they have themselves to blame; and shall bear their own Iniquity:
but they have nor reason to cast the fault upon God, or accuse the Scriptures,
of Darkness, or Defectiveness, in these things that are necessary to Salvation.

I come now to the last Prejudice, which will require a fuller Discussion,
because it relates to matter of Fact: which as it is better understood, so it
makes deeper Impressions on people, that are not so much wrought on by
speculative points, as by these things that fall under their senses.

They first except to the Novelty of our Reformation, and always insult with
this Question, Where was your Religion before Luther? To this, these things are
to be opposed. First, we turn back the Question and ask them where was their
Religion the first six hundred years after Christ? Where was the Worship of
Images, the Doctrine of the Corporal Presence, of Redeeming out of Purgatory,
of Deposing Princes, and of the Worshipping Saints, before the Eighth Century?
If the Reformation be now to be condemned, because of its Novelty, these things
were then to be as much condemned, because they were then Novelties.

Secondly. If the Reformation had brought in any new Doctrine, its Novelty were
indeed a just Prejudice against it: but it was only the throwing out of these
Corruptions which had been brought in, in some dark and Ignorant Ages.

Thirdly. The Doctrine of the Reformed Church, is no other than what Christ and
his Apostles taught; and what the Church believed for many Ages after them. And
as to the Positive part of it, it has been still held by the Church of Rome,
and is yet acknowledged by them: but with so many Additions, that there was a
Necessity of Reforming these: And this is often to be inculcated in them, that
there is no Article of Faith, nor any other material point of Religion, among
us that is condemned by the Church of Rome. They only blame us because we do
not in many other points believe as they do: and this we ought not to do,
unless we could see an equal Authority binding us to all alike.

Another Exception is, that in the Reformation we made a Schism, and broke the
Unity of the Church, whereas if there had been any things amiss in the Church,
they say the Reformers should have endeavored to remove them, without tearing
the Body of Christ in pieces.

But in answer to this, we acknowledge if the things complained of, could have
been continued without sin, they ought not to have departed from the Communion
of other Churches: but when the public Liturgies and the Worship was found to
be full of such Corruptions, that without Idolatry and Superstition, they could
be no longer kept up, then it was not time to stay for the leisure of their
Neighboring Churches.

Yet if there had been any probable hopes, that the Sea of Rome, would have
concurred in such a Reformation, it had been worth staying for, as long, as was
possible. But when it was on the contrary, apparent, that all the most just
Remonstrances made to that Court, were answered at best with delays and Excuses
if not with Excommunications and other censures; they had no reason to expect
any concurrence from thence. So the case being thus put, that they discovered
such Corruptions in the Worship of God, with which they could not comply any
longer; either they were obliged to Worship God against their Consciences, or
to lay aside all public Worship, or else to cast out these Corruptions by a
Reformation. Let any man of good reason judge, whether the last of these was
not to be chosen?

There was no Obligation lying on this Church to wait for the pleasure of the
Court of Rome, or our neighboring Churches in this matter. We are a free and
Independent Church: we owe a charitable and neighbourly Correspondence to
foreign Churches; but we are subject to none of them. And according to the
express Decision of one of the first General Councils, in the like case, we
were no way subordinate to the Sea of Rome, even as it was the Patriarchate of
the West. Themselves do confess that it is no Heresy to say, That See is
fallible: and therefore we were not obliged to dance attendance at that Court,
when we discovered the Corruptions, with which it had deceived the World; but
might in our National or Provincial Synods at home, examine and Reform whatever
errors were among us. And the multitude of those who held these errors, could
be no just ground for delaying any advances toward a Reformation; no more than
in the ancient Church, the Orthodox Bishops when chosen into a See corrupted
with Arrianism, were obliged because that Contagion was generally spread, to
make no attempts toward Reformation.

They Except further, That the Reformation was begun here by a vicious Prince,
King Henry the Eighth, who partly out of revenge, because the Pope would not
grant his desire about the Divorce of his Queen, and partly to enrich himself
and his Courtiers with the sale of Abbey-lands did suffer these Doctrins first
to take head here: and therefore they can have no good opinion of any thing
that came from so wicked a man, and upon such ill motives.

If this be a good Argument against the Reformation, it was as good against
Christianity upon Constantine's turning Christian; for the Heathen Writers
represent him with as black a character as they can do King Henry. But we must
not think ill of every thing that is done by a bad man, and upon an ill
Principle: Otherwise if we had lived in Iehu's days, the same Plea would have
been as strong, for keeping up the Idolatry of Baal: since Iehu had in a very
unsincere manner destroyed it: and yet God rewarded him for what he had done.

But whatever might have been King Henry's secret motives, his proceedings were
regular and justifiable. He found himself married to her that had been his own
Brothers Wife, contrary to the express words of the Law of God. The Popes
Legate, and his own Confessor and all the Bishops of England (except one)
thought his scruples were well grounded. Upon which according to the
superstition of that time, he made his applications to the Court of Rome for a
Divorce: which were at first well received, and a Bull was granted. Afterward
some defects being found in that, a more ample one was desired, which was also
granted: and Legates were appointed to try the matter. But the Pope soon after
turned over to the Emperors Party, whose Aunt the Queen was: and was thereupon
prevailed with, to recall the Legates Commission, destroy the Bull, and cite the
King to appear at Rome, where all things and persons were at the Emperors
devotion. Upon all this, the King did expostulate with the Pope, that either
his business was just, or unjust: if it was just why did he recall what he had
granted, and put him off with such delays. If it was not just, why did he at
first grant the Bull for the Divorce. This was unanswerable, but the Pope did
still seed him with false hopes, yet would do nothing. Upon which he consulted
the chief Universities, and the most learned men in Christendom, about his
Marriage. Twelve famous Universities, and above an hundred learned Doctors, did
declare under their hands and Seals (some writing larger Treatises about it)
that his Marriage was against the Law of God. And that in that case the Popes
Dispensation, which had allowed the Marriage, was void of it self. So after the
King had been kept in suspense from December 1527 till February 1533/4. above
six years, he set his Divines to examine what authority the Pope had in England,
either by the Law of God, or the practice of the Primitive Church, or the Law
of the Land, and after a long and accurate search, they found He had no
authority at all in England, neither by the Laws of God, of the Church, nor of
the Land: so this Decision was not made rashly, nor of a sudden.

The Popes Authority being thus cast off, it was Natural in the next place to
Consider, what Doctrines were then held in England, upon no other grounds-than
Papal Decrees. For it was absurd to reject the Popes power; and yet to retain
these Opinions, which had no better Foundation than his Authority. Upon this
many of the things, which had been for some Ages received in the Church of
Rome, fell under debate: And, a great many particulars were reformed. Yet, that
King was so leavened with the Old Superstition, that the progress of the
Reformation, was but slow during his Reign. But it was carried on to a further
perfection, under King Edward, and Queen Elizabeth. In all their Methods of
proceeding, there is nothing that can be reasonably censured: if it be
confessed that the Pope is not Infallible, and the whole Church of Rome,
acknowledges that it is no Heresy to deny his Infallibility.

And for the Sale of the Abby-lands, they only spoiled the spoilers. For the
Monks, and Friars, had put these public cheats on the Nation, of Redeeming
Souls out of Purgatory, going on Pilgrimages, with the worship of Saints, and
Images, which were infused in the vulgar, by many lying Stories, pretended
Apparitions, the false show of Miracles, with other such like Arts. And the
credulous and superstitious Multitudes were thereby wrought on, to endow these
Houses with their best Lands, and adorn their Churches with their Plate and
richest Furniture. It was not to be expected that when their Impostures were
discovered, they should enjoy the spoil they had made by them: nor was it for
the public interest of the Nation, to give such encouragement to idleness, as
the converting all these Houses to Foundations for an unactive life would have
been. Many of them were applied to good Uses, Bishoprics, Cathedral and
Collegiat Churches, Hospitals, and free Schools: And more of them ought indeed
to have been converted to these ends. But the excesses of King Henry, and his
Courtiers must not be charged on the Reformers; who did all they could to
hinder them.

And thus all these prejudices with which the Vulgar are misled, appear to be
very unjust, and ill grounded. In conclusion, If by these or such like
considerations, any that are now of that Communion, can be brought to mind
Religion in earnest, considering it, as a Design to save their Souls, by making
them truly pure and holy; and so reconciling them to God through Christ: And if
they will examine Matters without Partiality, seeking the truth and resolving
to follow it, wherever they find it; and join with their Enquiries, earnest
Prayers to God, the Father of lights, to open their eyes, and grant them his
Holy Spirit, to lead them into all truth; there is little doubt to be made, but
the great Evidence that is in Truth, will in due time appear so clear to them
as to dissipate all these mists, which Education, implicit Faith, and
Superstition have raised, by which they have hitherto darkened.

FINIS.

