SOME LETTERS, Containing An Account of what seemed most Remarkable in
Traveling through SWITZERLAND, ITALY, Some parts of GERMANY, etc. In the Years
1685. and 1686.

Written by G. Burnet, D. D. to the Hoble R. B.

The Third Edition, Corrected, and Altered in some places by the Author.

To which is added, an Appendix, containing some Remarks on Switzerland and
Italy, writ by a Person of Quality, and communicated to the Author.

Together with a Table of the Contents of each Letter.

AMSTERDAM Printed for the Widow Swart, Bookseller in the Beurs Stege, 1688.

A TABLE Of the Contents of all the LETTERS.
The First LETTER. From Zurich.
THE Desolation that is to be seen all the way from Paris to Lions, occasioned
by the oppression, which the People lie under, p. 1, 2. A short Account of some
of the Rarities, and Inscriptions ^t Lions. The Authors opinion concerning an
^^usual and obscure Inscription, p. 2, 3. A ^^ssage in Vegetius de Re Militari,
misprinted in ^ll the public Editions, corrected from a (...) at Grenoble, p.
3. Of Geneva. Their ^^amber of the Corn. The moderation of the Government in
the price they ^ell it at, compared with the exorbitant Rates imposed by the
Pope in all his Territories upon Grain, the buying and vending whereof he
monopolizeth to himself, p. 4, 5. How the profit arising from Corn, with the
other Revenues of the State, are applied to the benefit of the Public, and not
to the Enriching particular men, ibid. The Learning and Knowledge of the
Citizens, beyond what is found commonly elsewhere. Their public Justice,
personal Virtue and Sobriety, and Severity to open lewdness. Their way of
selling Estates; and the Security of Titles there, above what is in other
places. The Constitution of their Government, with the Method of Electing
Members into their several Councils, and of Choosing their Sindics, and by whom,
p. 5, to 8. A Description of Lausanne, with some account of the Lake, tha^ lies
between it and Geneva, p. 9, 10. The perpendicular height of the Hill Maudit,
p. 10. Of the Canton of Bern; Its Extent, Government, an^ Manner of Electing
Persons into the several Degrees of Magistracy; with the Advantages accruing to
those chosen into Bailiages. The Wealth of their peasants how attained. The
T^mper and Constitution of the People in general. The application of their
Women to domestic Affaits, and Disposition of their Men for War, p. 10, to 15.
Their Military Lists, and wha^ number they can bring into the Field, Armed an^
Disciplined, upon a sudden Emergency, and general Summons. The oversight of the
Government, in suffering the French to possess themselves of the Franche Comt^,
after they were Masters of Alsace; and how they were partly brib' into it, and
partly wheedled, p. 16, 17. Of the War between the Canton of Bern, and the
Canton of Schwits 1656. being occasioned by a La^ made by the Popish Cantons,
rendering it capit^^ to any to change their Religion, and making the^^ goods
confiscable, p. 19, 20. A Description of the Town of Bern. The Great Church.
The Dominicans Chapel, with the famous Hole that went to an Image in the
Church, from one of the Cells of the Dominicans, p. 21, 22. The Difference
betwixt the Dominicans and Franciscans, about the maculate or inmaculate
Conception of the Virgin. The Story of Ietzer, with a large account of the
horrid Cheat and imposture of the Dominicans, for which several of them were
executed at Bern 1509. p. 22, to 30. That Switzerland is better peopled than
France or Italy, tho Countries incomparably more rich, and better situated.
Which proceeds from the Gentleness of the Government in the First, and
intolerable and oppressive Severity of it in the two latter, p. 30, 31. Of
Soloturn and Friburg, two of the chiefest Popish Cantons; The strange Bigottry
of the people there, and their gross and sottish Idolatry and Superstition. How
the Jesuits multiply in those Places, and from the number of ten, to which
they were limited at Soloturn, and one thousand Livres a year allowed for their
Maintenance, they are not only grown numerous, but become so rich, that they
are raising a College and Church, which will cost 400000 Livres, p. 31, 32. Of
the Wealth of some other Religious Houses in Soloturn, and of the Fortification
they are rasing about the Town, p. 33. Of the Government of that Canton, and of
the ill Administration of Justice there, beyond what is in the Protestant
Cantons, ibid. Of ^aden, which tho the Seat of the general Diet of the Cantons,
yet is not one of them, but a Batliage belonging to eight of the ancient
Cantons, p. 33, 34. Of the Canton of Zurich. Its Wealth. The number of
disciplined Men, which it can bring into the Field, upon 24. hours warning. The
Nature of its Magistracy, and the Regulation of their allowances. Their Trade
by means of a large Lake. Their Manufactory of Crape, and its goodness, p. 34.
The situation of the Town of Zurich. The Manners and Customs of the
Inhabitants, and their Freedom from Luxury and Vanity. The Magistracy of the
City. The division of the whole Canton. Its honor, in not being debauched by
French Money, to alter the ancient Capitulations with that Crown. Their Justice
and Virtue in applying the ancient Revenues of the Church to pious uses. Their
prudence in keeping the Edifices of their Hospitals mean, and expending their
Charity upon maintaining the poor that ar^ in them, p. 35. Of the Salary of
their Ecclesiastics, and the great Labor they are obliged unto, p. 36.
Several Letters, written by the most Eminent of the English Reformers to
Bullinger, preserved among the Archives of the Dean and Chapter in which they
lament the retaining the Popish Vestments, and the aversion they found in the
Parliament, to all the Propositions that were made for the Reformation of
Abuses. And Jewel having declared in one, how the Queen refused to be called
Head of the Church, adds, that it could not be ascribed to any Mortal, being
only due to Christ, p. 36, 37, 38. Of the disagreement of ancient Manuscripts
concerning that passage of St. John's Epistle, There are thr^e that bear Witness
in Heaven, etc. To which are subjoyned many things worthy of observation, p.
38. to 41. A new Regulation at Bern, for the better Electing persons into
Bailiages, p 41. The generous protection and unexemplified Charity, which the
Protestant Cantons have expressed to the French Refugies, p. 41, 42. A
Reflection of the Author on the Censure past by the Divines in Switzerland,
against the Opinions of Amirald, concerning the Divine Decrees, and the Extent
of the Death of Christ, etc. p. 42, 43. Of a Tax under which the Switzers lie
when Estates are sold, and how it serves to prevent ill Husbandry, p. 44. A
further account of those Cantons, where both the Reformed and Popish Religion
are tolerated; and how from the diminution of the Papists in Glaris, some
endeavored to raise a War betwixt the Protestant and Popish Cantons; and in
the inte^im, while things seemed to tend to a rupture, how the French begun
their Fortification at Hunningen, p. 44, 45.

The Second LETTER. From Milan.
OF the Bridge upon the Lake at Ripperswood, p. 46. Of Coire, the chief Town of
the Grisons. Of the Chapel pretended to be St. Lucius's, and what the Author
said to the Bishop of Coire, to convince that all related of King Lucius in
that Matter, and of his writing to Pope Eleutherius, was a Fable. Of a
difference between the Bishop and his Chapter about Exemptions, and the Authors
opinion in reference to that pretended Privilege, p. 46, 47, 48. The temper of
the present Bishop. The yearly Revenue belonging to him, and to the several
Prebendaries. The Nature of the Country, with the Wealth of the People, and how
it arises. The Constitution of the Government. The Division of the Country
into Leagues. Whence, and upon what occasion it came to be inhabited. Of whom
the General Diet consists, and of a late contest among themselves, and with the
Emperor, p. 48. to 51. How they shook off the Austrian Jurisdiction, and their
zeal and Courage in vindicating and defending their Liberty, p. 51. The
Distribution of the several Leagues into so many Communities; and in which
Communities the Popish Religion is received, and in which the Protestant. The
absolute Authority that each has within itself, p. 52. The manner of keeping
their Diets, and the Customs therein observed, ibid. Of the Valteline,
Chavennes, and Bormio, Territories which the three Leagues possess in Italy:
and how they obtained them; With an account of the Fertility of the Soil in the
Valteline, p. 54, 55. Of the Ease and Liberty that those Districts enjoy under
the Leagues; and of a Constitution among them, by which the Peasants may demand
a Chamber of Justice, when they judge themselves oppressed, or aggrieved. Of
the Massacre in the Valteline anno 1618. and the War that ensued upon it; with
the issue of it, through the Wisdom and Conduct of the Duke of Rohan, p. 55, to
60. Of the Laws by which they are governed; with some of the Civil and
Religious Customs that prevail among them, p. 62, 63. A remarkable Story of
about 2000. that fled anno 1685. out of a Valley of Tirol, for fear of being
destroyed upon the score of their Religion, and who seem by the Articles of
their Faith, and the simplicity of their Worship, to be a remnant of the old
Waldenses, p. 64, 65. Of the way from Coire to Chavennes, with an account of
the most observable Villages upon the Road, p. 65, 66. Of Chavennes; Its
situation. The fertility of the Soil, Easiness of the Government,
Plentifulness as to all sort of Provisions, with an account of the Nature of
their Wine, and the manner how they both make and preserve it, p. 66, to 69. A
Kind of Stone here, and in the Valteline, which they use instead of Mettle for
making pots, p. 69. The deplorable Fate of the Town Pleurs, which was buried,
together with its Inhabitants, by the fall of a Mountain, anno 1618. p. 70, 71.
Of the Lakes of Chavennes and Como, p. 71, 72. Of Codelago and Lugane, with
other small Provinces here belonging to the Switzers; where as the people live
at ease, so the Country, tho extremely barr^n, is abundantly peopled, p. 73. Of
Lago Maggiore, and of the Borromean Islands, which as to loveliness and
fertility nothing equals, p. 73, 74. Of Lombardy. Its Extent, pleasantness,
goodness of Soil. The Inhabitants inconceivably poor, by reason of the severity
of the Government, p. 75. The Lake cut by Francis the First from the River
Tesine to Millan, ibid. Of the City Millan. The Dimensions of the Duchy. Its
Wealth. The Extent of the Town. The Nobleness of the Structures. The Grandeur
and Beauty of the Dome, where the Body of S. Carlo Borromeo lies. A short
Character of that Prelate, and what marks of his Wealth and Beneficence are to
be seen in the Town, p. 76, 77, 78. Of other Churches and Convents. The
Hospital, with the Lazarette adjoining to it, p. 78, 79. Of the Ambrosian
Office used here, and its distinction from the Roman, p. 79, 80. A remarkable
passage in the Books of the Sacraments ascribed to S. Ambrose, where the Hosty
is said to be the Figure of the Body and Blood of Christ, p, 81, 82. Of Ancient
Offices, and why none to be seen in the Vatican. A Manuscript Translation of
Josephus by Ruffinus, in the Ambrosian Library, p. 82. No Glass Windows in
Millan, not yet in Florence. The people deplorably poor, while the Churches and
Convents are so extravagantly rich. The Decay of their Wealth, occasioned in
part through a faileur in the exportation of their Silks, p. 83. An account of
a Gentlewomen at Geneva, who besides her being greatly accomplished in
Languages and Sciences, writes legibly, tho blind since she was a year old, p.
83, to 86.

The Third LETTER. From Florence.
THe Frontier Towns of the Spaniards and Venetians in Italy, ill fortified, as
appears by Lodi the last Garrison belonging to the Spaniards in Millan, and
Crema, the first Garrison appertaining to the Venetians. Of the Civil and
Military Officers, which the Venetians send into their several Territories and
Provinces. The Cheese that goes by the name of Parmesan, is made chiefly at
Lodi, p. 86. Of Brescia, where the best Barrils for Pistols and Muskets are
made. A famous Nunnery there fallen into disgrace occasioned by the Priests
conversing with the Nuns through a private Vault, p. 87. Of the Lake of Guarda,
and the difference between the Miles in Lombardy and Naples, p. 88. Of Ve^ona.
Its poverty. The baseness of the Coin. The Remains of an old Roman
Amphitheatre. The Museum Calceolarium furnished with many Antiquities and
Rarities, p. 88, 89. The Wine called Vino Santo, that grows near the Lake
Guarda. Of the Color of the Cattle and Hoggs in Italy, p. 89. Of Vincenza. The
riches of the Palaces and Churches. A modern Theater. Count Valerano's Gardens.
The Courseness of the Images, and their gross Idolatry, p. 90. Of Padua. The
University much decayed, and by what means. The Quarrels among the Paduan
Nobility, and what Advantages the Venetians make of them, p. 90, 91. Their
Churches, and the Devotion paid to S. Anthony, who in one of the little Vows
that hang without the holy Chapel, is said to hear those whom God himself does
not hear, p. 92. Why the Venetians employ not their own Subjects in their Wars,
p. 93. The Palaces from Padua to Venice, on both ^ides the River Brent, ibid.
Of the Lagunes, and that they grow daily more shallow. Of the City of Venice.
The Buildings, Palaces, Churches, Bridges, Arsenal, Convents; Their Beauty and
Wealth; with the meanness of the Library of S. Mark, p. 93. to 97. Of the small
Consideration they have for Father Paul, and of the Memorials out of which
(...) collected his History, p. 97. The Attest^tions produced by Mr. Arnaud,
for the agreement of the Greek Church with the Latin, in the matter of
Transubstantiation, where penned, and how obtained: With an account of the
ignorance and corruption of the Greek Priests, p. 97, 98. A famous Venetian
Lady, that spoke Greek and Latin well, besides three other Languages, and who
commenced Dr. of Physic. Of the Ancient Noble Families of Venice. To whom, and
upon what occasion the honor of being Noble Venetian is imparted, p. 98, 99,
100. The limited Power of the Duke, and that that Dignity is not worth a wise
Man's Courting. The reason of Sagr^do's being put by from being Duke; his
retiring thereupon from the City; and the Books he wrote during his retirement,
p. 102, 103. Why married Men are not now chosen to that honor, and of Titles
forbidden, and allowed, p. 103. The Authority of the Senate over the
Ecclesiastics; and the limited power of their Bishop; and that the very Clergy
have little dependence upon him. Of the Election of their Curat's by the
Inhabitants of every Parish, and the Liberty which the Candidates take to
defame and expose one another, p. 103, 104. Ignorance and Vice the chief
Characters of all Priests, especially at Venice. The license assumed by many of
their Nuns, particularly by those that call themselves Noble Venetians. All
Ecclesiastics precluded from a share in the Government; and in case any be
promoted to the Hat, their Friends and Rel^tions become incapable (during their
lives both of Employments, and of sitting in the Great Council, p. 104, 105.
The Inquisition at Venice, through being subject to the Senate, does little
hurt. Many Protestants there, whom the Senate gives no trouble to. The Hosty
not carried openly in procession. The Venetians generally unconcerned as well
as ignorant in matters of Religion, p. 105, 106. Most of the young Nobility
corrupted in their Morals; and wholly decline all Military Employments: So that
their Officers as well as Soldiers are strangers. The reason of the degeneracy
of the Italians, and in particular of the Venetian Nobility, p. 106, 107, 108.
The pleasures which they pursue, are all brutish: but the noble and innocent
pleasures of Friendship and Marriage, etc. they understand not. Their Houses
stately, but not convenient. Neither their Bread, Wine, not the Cookery of
their Flesh good. Their Coaches uneasy, and the Carriages through all Lombardy
inconvenient, p. 108. to 111. Of the late created Nobility; the Sum they
obt^ined it for; their number; and the prejudices arising hereby both to the
Republic and the ancient Nobility, p. 111, 112, 113. By whom Crimes, committed
by any of the Nobility against the Stat^ are judged, and by whom the Offenses
of other Subjects are tried, p. 114, 115. Of the Inquisitors of State. The
extent of their Authority. The Quality and Merit of their persons; and the
usefulness of that Tribunal, p. 115. to 118. Of Mr. de la Hay, French
Ambassador at Venice; His Character, p. 118. The Road from venice to Ferrara.
The Town as well as Country of Ferrara, forsaken of their Inhabitans, through
the ravenousness of the Priests, and the oppressiveness of the Government.
However the Churches and Convents are vastly rich, and that from the Vanity of
the people, more than from their Superstition, p. 119, 120. Of Bologna, which
having delivered it self to the Pope upon a Capitulation, has thereby
preserved many of its Privileges, and so continues Wealthy and well peopled,
p. 121. Its Palaces, Churches and Convents, in one of which (namely that of the
Canons Regular of St. Salvator) there is a Scrowl of the Hebrew Bible,
pretended to be written by Ezra's own hand, but falsely. The Meridional Line,
which Cassini laid along the pavement of St. Petrones's Church, p. 122. Of Pope
Ioan's Statute there, and the Authors unbelief as to such a person's having
been Pope. Of the Monastery of St. M^chael on the Hill above Bologna, and of a
Madona of St. Lukes, four miles from the Town, p. 123. Of the Appenine Hills,
and of Pretolino, one of the Great Duke's Palaces, which stands on the last of
them; with some account of the Gardens in Italy, p. 124, 125. Of Florence. The
Great Dukes Palace. The Dome, with its Cupolo, and Baptistery. Of the Chapel
of St. Laurence, where the Bodies of the great Dukes lie deposited. The Statues
in it, particularly that of the Virgin by Mich. Angelo. The Library belonging
to it, well replenished with Manuscripts, p. 125, 126, 127. Florence much
decayed, and Siena and Pisa shrunk into nothing, and that more from the
severity of the Government, than the Decay of their silk Trade, p. 127, 128. A
comparison between the Territories of the Venetians, Genoa's and Switz^rs in
Italy, which are well peopled, and the Inhabitants rich; and the Territories of
the Great Duke, the Pope, and the King of Spain, where there are few people,
those miserably poor. However the Churches are rich, which helped also to sink
their Trade, p. 128, 129. The Inns, when one has past the Appenines,
wretchedly accommodated. p. 130.

The Fourth LETTER. From Rome.
THe great desolation that appears in all the Popes Territories, through the
rigor of the Government. For a Prince to be Elective, and yet Absolute, a
great solecism in Government. The Pope the most Absolute Prince in Europe in
Temporals, allowing the Cardinals no share with him in that, tho he admit them
to share with him over the Affairs of the Church. The incongruity both of the
one and the other, p. 131, 132, 133. A brief account and Character of the
present, and the three preceding Popes. The scandal arising to Christian
Religion through the neglect of Justice and Mercy by him that styles himself
Christ's Vicar. A handsome Reflection made to the Author by a Roman Prince, upon
the folly of Oppressions, p. 134, 135, 136. The present Viceroy of Naples the
Marquis of Carpi, commended for Wisdom, Moderation and Justice. His suppressing
the insolency of the Spaniards over the Natives. His maintaining the Soldiers
in Discipline, and paying them exactly. His Reforming the Courts of Judicature.
His extirpating the Banditi, and by what means. The design he is upon of
bringing the Money to its true value, p. 136, 137, 138. The Jesuits being the
Proprietors of near the half of Apulia, treat their Tenants with that rigor,
that the Country is much desolated, and many die of hunger. The Sloth and
Lasiness of the Neapolitans, hinders their making those advantages of the
produce of the Country which they might. The provision here for Travelers bad,
and the accommodation worse. Four parts of Five of all the Wealth of the
Kingdom of Naples in Church-mens hands, p. 139, 140. Of the Churches and
Convents in Naples, particularly of the Hospital, styled the Annunciata. The
Jesuits great Merchants, especially in Wine, wherein the Minims also deal, but
more scandalously, in selling it by retail, p. 140, 141. A privilege which the
Convents have as to buying Houses in the Town. And that the Wealth of the
Clergy is so great, that they are in a fair way of making themselves Masters of
the Kingdom. The contempt that Secular persons have for them. More Learning at
Naples, than in all other places of Italy. D. Joseph Valetta's Library, and of
the learned Men that assemble at his House; of which number there are none of
the Clergy, save one Rinaldi. The Imputations which the Churchmen cast upon
persons that have any taste of learning or good sense. The Temptation which men
of wit^ are liable unto, of disbelieving the Christian Religion, from the Idea
which what they see among Priests and people give them of it. The preaching of
the Monks silly and ridiculous. All the learning among the Clergy at Naples
among a Few Secular Priests, p. 141, 142, 143. Of Molinos. His new Method. How
much it prevails. Opposed by the Jesuits; and why* The Pope has a favorable
opinion of him, and yet through the complaint of some Cardinals, and the
influence of a great King, has caused throw him into the Inquisition. A
pleasant saying of Pasquin's thereupon, p. 143, 144, 145. Of the City of
Naples. Its Bigness, Beauty, and Supply as to provisions. Of the Viceroy's
Palace, with the Pictures and Statues in it, p. 145. The Catacomb's here and at
Rome described. The use they ancienlty served for. An^ account of some
Inscriptions to be found among those at Naples. That they were not the
Repositories of the Relics of the ancient Christians* But the common Burying
places of the Heathen. This demon^trated, p. 146. to 152. When Burying began
among the Romans, discoursed at large, and cleared by Testimonies out of old
Roman Authors, p. 152. to 155. The Bones sent from hence, as the Relics of
primitive Christians and Martyr's, nothing but the Bones of Heathens, and for
the most part of those of the meanest and most infamous Rank, p. 155. Of Mont
Vesuvio. The Earthquakes occasioned about Naples, by the Convulsions of that
Hill. The operation which its heat has, to make the Soil about fruitful, and
the Air pure, p. 156. Of the Cave that pierces the Pausalippe, with the Hot
Bath near unto it, with the Grots that send out poisonous steams, ibid. Of the
Bay of Puzzoli. The Rarities which occur there, particularly of the Sulfatara;
and of the Cave, where the Sybil is said to have given out her Inspirations, p.
157, 158. Of the Rests of Caligula's Bridge. The depth of the Water where the
Pillars were built, that supported the Arches. The Extent of the Bridge. The
whole, a Monument of Caligula's extravagancy and profuseness; as the great
Fish Pond and the Centum Camera hewn out of the Rock, were of Nero's. The Baths
of Puzzoli. The Via Appia. The Isle of Caprea, p. 158, to 162. Of Rome. The Via
Flamminia on the Tuscan side. Of St. Peter's Church, and of the Palace
adjoining, with the Defects in that, and in other Roman Palaces. Of the Villa
Borghese, and Villa Pamphilia, and how the Palaces in Rome are furnished, p.
162, 163, 164. Of the vatican Library, and what the Author observed in the
Manuscripts relating to the Council of Constance; and of the difference between
Mr. Schelstrat and Mr. Maimbourg, concerning that Council; with the Authors
opinion as to that difference, p. 165.166, 167. Of the learned Men at Rome,
such as Bellori, Fabri, and Nazar^, with a Character of Cardinal d' Estre, and
Cardinal Howard; and what small account the present Pope makes of learned Men,
p. 168, 169. The contempt that the Romans have for the present Pontificate,
with an impartial Character of the Pope himself, p. 169, 170. A Nation may not
only be dispeopled, by driving people out of it, but by weakening the natural
Fertility of the Subjects. Two Stories of the Fruitfulness of persons* at
Geneva, whereas a strange Barrenness reigns over all Italy, p. 170. Of the
Fountains and Aquaducts at Rome. Of the Civility of the People* and that their
Conversation is generally upon News. A Character of the Queen of Sweden, with a
saying she had to the Author of her self. The jealousy that the Romans have of
their Wives, and why: with an account of the virtuous deportment of the
Duchess of Bracciano amidst all the innocent Freedoms of Conversation, p. 171,
172, 173* Of the Capitol, the Tarpeian Rock, Severus'^ Triump^al Arch, and
other ancient Rarities and Monuments, ibid. and p. 174. Of the Churches, and in
particular of the Rotunda, St. Mary Ma^giore, and St. John in the Lateran. Of
the many ancient Monuments, Pillars, Statues, etc. at Rome, p. 174, 175, 176.
Of the Modern Palaces, and the Statues, Paintings, Heads in the Farnesian
Palace. Of the Minerva, where the Inquisition sits; and of the little hazard
persons are in at Rome, whatsoever their Religion be, if they conduct
themselves with any Discretion. Old-corn't Picture (who was convicted of the
Gunpowder Treason) among the Martyrs in the Gallery of the English Jesuits. Of
the Authors seeing the Emblematical Prophecies relating to England, which those
Jesuits have. Of St. Gregory's Chapel, and the Worship paid to his Statue, p.
176, 177, 178. A Character of the young Prince Borghese, ibid. A strange
alteration of Sex in two Nuns. A youg Gentlewoman at Geneva, that contracted a
Deafness from a Viciou^ness in the Nurses Milk; and who, tho being deaf,
understands what is spoken to her, by observing the motion of their Mouths
that speak, p. 179, 180, 181. How all the World mistrusts the Jesuits, and yet
trusts them. A pleasant Story of a Catholic Gentleman's choosing the most
ignorant Priest he could find for his Confessor, and why, p. 181, 182.

The Fifth LETTER. From Nimmegen.
OF Marseilles. The Convenience of the Harbor. The Wealth of the Town, through
the Freedoms that it enjoyes, p. 184. Of the present Persecution in France, and
how approved and commended by the Clergy; Represented at Rome, by the Spanish
Faction, as a reproach to the Catholic Religion; but applauded by the Pope, p.
185, 186. The fault not so much in the King, as in his Religion* which obliges
him to extirpate Heretics, and not to keep his Faith to them. The Forcing poor
People by extremities to abjure their Religion, a greater cruelty, than if he
should put them to Death for it, p. 186, 187. The Liberty the Author obtained
at Geneva, of preaching to ^ Congregation in English, and of administering the
Sacrament according to the way of the Church of England, p. 187, 188. A
Character of Mr* Turretin, and Mr. Tronchin, two of their Professors, p. 188,
189. Some Monuments, which the Author saw at Avanche. The Chapel nea^ Morat
silled with Bones of the Burgundians with an Inscription, that Charles Duke of
Burgundy, having besieged Morat, hoc sui Monumentum reliquit, p. 189, 190. Of
Basil. The Town described. How it comes to be so ill peopled, and in what
manner Governed. A remarkable Piece of painting in the State-House. Several
Pieces of Holben's there, and in other places of the Town. A new sort of
Wind-Guns made by one in Basil. Of the public Library, and how furnished with
Books, Manuscripts, Medalls; and of a private Library belonging to the Family
of Fesch. Of the Councils of the Town, and of the several Bailiages under their
Jurisdiction. The proportion of Armed Men they can raise. The number of their
Professors p. 190, to 195. Of Hunningen. The Largeness, Figure and Quality of
that Fortification, p. 195, 196. Of Brisac, and the Fortification belonging to
it, with its Figure, greatness, and streng^h, p. 196, 197. Of Strasburg. The
Town, with its old and new Fortifications described. The Animosity of the
Lutherans against the Calvinists, as well as against the Papists. Tho they have
Pictures in their Churches, yet they Worship them not, p. 197, 198. By what
means the City fell into the hands of the French. The Decay it already suffers
in Trade, with an account of the Treatment of Mr. Dietrick by the French,
contrary to the Terms of the Capitulation, p. 199 Of Philipsburg; its Natural
Situation, and Artificial strength, and how recovered from the French, p 200,
201. Of Spire, which as it is an ill Fortified, so it is a poor Town, and
subsisteth chiefly by the Imperial Chamber that sits in it. A late Dispute
between the Town and Chamber concerning Privileges. The Government of the Town
is wholly Lutheran, only the Cathedral is in the hands of the Bishop and
Chapter. The meanness of the Tombs of the Emperors, that lie buried there. A
Fable concerning St. Bernard, with some marks relating to it, on the pavement
of the Church, and an account of some Figures in the Cloister, p. 201, 202. Of
the Lower Palatinate, and of Heidelberg. Of the Situation of the Town. The
Wine-Cellar, with the Celebrated Tun that is in it. The Wisdom and Conduct of
the late Prince Charles, in peopling and settling this State. The nature and
proportion of the Taxes he laid upon the Subjects, and their contentment under
them. The People of Germany only bound to their particular Prince, tho the
Prince himself be under some Ties to the Emperor. Pareus's Commentary on the
13. of the Romans, vindicated upon this Foundation by Fabritius. A Character of
Him, and Dr. Miek, p. 203, 204. Of Manheim. The care Prince Charles Jews took
to fortify it. His granting Liberty, not only to Christians of all parties, but
also to the Jews, and thereby peopling his Country, which had been strangely
desolated. His Character, p. 204. Of the present Prince. His Probity, Virtues
and Stedfastness to the promises he made his Subjects, with relation to their
Religion, p. 205. The Beauty and Fertility of the Country, from Heidelberg to
Frankfort. The latter described. The three Religions tolerated there. The
Original of the Bulla Aurea preserved among the Archives of that City. Lewd
Women condemned here to the Pistrina or hand-mill. The Jews permitted to dwell
there, and to have Synagogues. An account of the Fortification of the Town, and
its Wealth, p. 206, 207. Of Hockam, that yields the celebrated Wine. A famous
Picture over one of the Popish Altars at Worms, as the Author was told, but did
not see either it, or the Town, by reason of having taken another road, p. 287,
288. Of Mentz; Its Situation, Compass, Citadel, and Fortification of the
Town. The Elector an absolute Prince. The Demeasne of the Electorat, and what
Taxes he imposes on his Subjects, with the number of Armed men he can bring
into the Field. How He and his Chapter choose the Prebends by turns, and in whom
the right of choosing the Elector resides, p. 209. Of Bacharach, and of the
Tower, where the Rats are said to have eaten up an Elector. A Labourer at
Geneva stung to death by Wasps, ibid. Of Coblentz; its Situation, Strength,
and Fort styled Hermanstan, p. 209, 210, 211. Of Bonne, where the Elector of
Collen resides. A Character of the present Elector. A Story about the Forgery
of Medalls, and to what value there were found of them at the last siege of
Bonne. Of some Rarities belonging to the Prince, p. 211, 212. Of Collen; tho a
City of great extent, yet ill built, and worse peopled. The Jews are allowed
here to live; and in what place the Protestants are permitted the exercise of
their Religion. The Churches and Convents, with an account of the Fable of the
three Kings, and 11000 Vrsulins. Of the late Reb^llion there, and how
occasioned, with the excesses that attended it, p. 213, 214. Of Dusseldorp. The
Palace; The Jesuits College; The Protestant Religion tolerated there, and by
whose procurement, p. 214. Of Keiserswart, and how fortified. Of Wesel; A fair
Town, meanly fortified, but populous and rich, p. 214, 215. Of Cleve, ibid. Of
Nimmegen. A Character of Sr. William Temple, whose Picture hangs in the
Stadthouse, with an ample commendation of his Book of the Low Countries, p.
215. A large and just Character of the present Prince of Orange, and of the
glorious service he performed, in rescuing his Country from the French p. 216.

An Appendix, containing Remarks of an Italian Gentleman, upon Switzerland, the
Grison Country, the Bailiage of Lugane, the Lakes the Dutchey of Ferrara, the
Estate of Bolognia the Country of the Great Duke of Tuscany, the temporal
Government of the Pope, and the Reduction of the Interest due by the Montes a^
Rome, and of the Avarice of the Jesuits and Priests p. 222, etc.

SOME LETTERS, Containing An account of what seemed most remarkable in
Switzerland, Italy, etc. Zurich,
the first of September, 1685.
SIR,
IT is so common to write Travels, that for one, who has seen so little, and as
it were in haste, it may look like a presumptuous affection to be reckoned
among Voyagers, if he attempts to say any thing upon so short a ^amble, and
concerning Places so much visited, and by consequence so well known: yet having
had opportuni^ies that do not offer themselves to all that travel, and having
joined to those, a curiosity almost equal to the advantages I enjoyed, I fancy
it will not be an ungrateful entertainment, if I give you some account of those
things that pleased me most in the places through which I have passed: But I
will avoid saying such things as occur in ordinary Books, for which I refer you
to the Prints; for as you know, that I have no great inclination to copy what
others have said, so a traveller has not leisure, nor humor enough, for so
dull an employment.

As I came all the way from Paris to Lions, I was amassed to see so much misery
as appeared, not only in Villages, but even in big Towns, where all the marks
of an extreme poverty showed themselves both in the Buildings, the Clothes, and
almost in the looks of the Inhabitants. And a general dispeopling in all the
Towns, was a very visible effect of the hardships under which they lay.

I need tell you nothing of the irregular, and yet magnificent situation of
Lions; of the noble Rivers that meet there; of the Rock Cut from so vast a
height for a prison, of the Carthusians Gardens, of the Townhouse, of the
Jesuits College, and Library of the famous Nunnery of S. Peter, of the
Churches, particularly S. Irenees, of the remnants of the Aqueducts, of the
Colums and the old Mosaic in the Abbey Dene. In short, Mr. Spon has given such
an account of the Curiosities there, that it were a very presumptious attempt
to offer to come after him.

The speech of Claudius engraven on a Plate of Brass, and set in the end of the
low walk in the Town-hsuse, is one of the noblest Antiquities in the World, by
which we see the way of writing and pointing in that age very copiously. The
shield of silver of 22 pound weight, in which some remains of gilding do yet
appear, and that seems to represent that generous action of Scipio's, of
restoring a fair captive to a Celtiberian Prince, is certainly the noblest
piece of Plate that is now extant; the embossing of it is so fine, and so
entire, that it is indeed i^valuable: and if there were an inscription upon it
to put us beyond conjecture, it were yet much more inestimable.

A great many Inscriptions are to be seen of the late and Barbarous ages, as
Bonum Memorium, and Epitaphium hunc: there are 23. Inscriptions in the Garden
of the Fathers of mercy, but so placed, as it shows how little those who
possess them do either understand or value them. I shall only give you one,
because I made a little reflection on it, tho it is not perhaps too well
grounded, because none of the Critics have thought on it.

The Inscription is this, D. M. Et Memoriae Aeternae Sutiae A^thidis. Quae
vixit Annis XXV. M. X^. DV. Quae dum Nimia pia fuit, facta est Im^ia: and Att^^
Probatiolo, Ce^alius Calistio Conjux and Pater, and si^^vivo ponendum curavit
and sub ascia dedicavit. This must be toward the barbarous Age, as appears by
the false Latin in Nimia: But the Inscription seems so extravagant, that a man
dedicating a Burial-stone for this Wife and Son, and under which himself was to
be laid, with ceremonies of Religion, should tax his Wife of impiety, and give
so extraordinary an Account of her becoming so through an excess of piety, that it
deserves some consideration.

It seems the impiety was public, otherwise a Husband would not have recorded
it in such a manner; and it is plain that he thought it rose from an excess of
piety.

I need not examine the conjectures of others: but will choose rather to give you
my own, and submit it to your censure.

It seems to me, that this Sutia Anthis was a Christian* for the Christians,
because they would not worship the Gods of the Heathens, nor participate with
them in their sacred rites, were accused both of A^heism and Impiety. This is
so often objected, and the Fathers in their Apologies have answered it so
often, that it were lost labor to prove it: so this Wife of Cecalius Calistio
having turned Christian, it seems he thought he was bound to take some notice
of it in the inscription: But by it the gives a honorable character of the
Christian Doctrine at the fame time that he seems to accuse it; that through an
excess of piety, his Wife was carried to it: since a mind seriously possessed
with a true sense of piety, could no^ avoid the falling under a distaste of
Paganism, and the becoming Christian.

At Grenoble there is not much to be seen, the learned Mr. Chorier has some
Manuscripts of considerable antiquity. In one of Vi^etius de re Militari, there
is a clear correction of a passage that in all the printed Editions is not
sense. In the Chapter of the sise of the Soldiers he begins, Scio semper
mensuram a Mario Consule exactam: A is in no M S. and Mario Consule is a
mistake for trium Cubitorum; for III. which are for trium, have been read M.
and C. which stands for Cubitorum, as appears by all that follows, was by a
mistake read Consule; so the true reading of that passage is: Scio mensuram
trium Cubitorum fuisse semper exactam. He showed me another M. S. of about 5 ^r
6. hundred years old, in which S. John's Revelation is contained, all
exemplified in Figures, and after that comes Esops Fables likewise, all
designed in Figures; from which he inferred, that those who designed those two
Books, valued both equally, and so put them together.

I will not describe the Valley of Dauphine, all to Chambery, nor entertain you
with a Landscape of the Country, which deserves a better pencil than mine, and
in which the height and rudeness of the Mountains, that almost shut upon it,
together with the beauty, the evenness and fruitfulness of the Valley, that is
all along well watered with the River of Liserre, make such an agreeable
mixture, that this vast diversity of objects, that do at once fill the Eye,
gives it a very entertaining prospect.

Chambery has nothing in it that deserves a long description; and Geneva is too
well known to be much insisted on. It is a little State, but it has so many
good Constitutions in it, that the greatest may justly learn at it. The Chamber
of the Corn has always two years provision for the City in store, and forces
none but the Bakers to buy of it at a taxed price; and so it is both necessary
for any extremities, under which the State may fall, and is likewise of great
advantage; for it gives a good yearly income, that has helped the State to pay
near a Million of debt, contracted during the Wars; and the Citizens are not
oppressed by it, for every Inhabitant may buy his own Corn as he pleases, only
public Houses must buy from the Chamber. And if one will compare the Faith of
Rome and Geneva togethe^ by this particular, he will be forced to prefer the
latter; for if good Works are a strong presumption, if not a sure indication of
a good Faith, then Justice, being a good Wor^ of the first form, Geneva will
certainly carry it.

At Rome the Pope buys in all the Corn of the Patrimony; for none of the
Landlords can sell it either to Merchants o^ Bakers. He buys it at five Crowns
their measure, and even that is slowly and ill paid, so that there was 800000.
Crowns owing upon that score, when I was at Rome. In selling this out, the
measure is lessened a fifth part, and the price of the whole is doubled, so
that what was bought at five Crowns is sold out at twelve: and if the Bakers,
who are obliged to take a determined quantity of Corn from the Chamber, cannot
retail out all that is imposed upon them, but are forced to return some part of
it back, the Chamber discounts to them only the first price of five Crowns:
whereas in Geneva the measure by which they buy and sell is the same, and the
gain is so inconsiderable, that it is very little beyond the common ma^ket
price; so that upon the whole matter, the Chamb^r of the Corn is but the
Merchant to the State. But if the publi^k makes a moderate gain by the Corn,
that, and all the other revenues of this small Commonwealth are so well
employed, that there is no cause of complaint given in the administration of
the public purse: which with the advantages that arise out of the Chamber of
the Corn, is about 100000 Crowns revenue. But there is much to go out of this;
300. Soldiers are paid; an Arsenal is maintained, that in propo^tion to the
State is the greatest in the World; for it contains Arms for more Men than are
in the State: there is a great number of Ministers and Prof^ss^rs, in all 24.
paid out of it, besides all the public charges and Offices of the Government.
Every one of the lesser Council of 25. having a 100. Crowns, and every Syndic
having 200. Crowns pension: and after all this come the accidental Charges of
the Deputies, that they are obliged to send often to Paris, to Savoy and to
Switzerland; so that it is very apparent no man can enrich himself at the cost
of the Public. And the appointments of the little Council are a very small
recompense for the great attendance that they are obliged to give the Public,
which is commonly 4. or 5. hours a day. The Salary for the Professors and
Ministers is indeed small, not above 200. Crowns; but to balance this (which
was a more competent provision when it was first set off 150. years ago* the
price of all things, and the way of living being now much heightened) those
employments are here held in their due reputation, and the richest Citizens in
the Town, breed up their Children so, as to qualify them for those places. And
a Minister that is suitable to his character, is thought so good a match, that
generally they have such Estates either by succession, or marriage, as support
them suteably to the rank they hold. And in Geneva there is so great a
regulation upon expenses of all sorts, that a small sum goes a great way. It is
a surprising thing to fee so much learning as one finds in Geneva, not only
among those whose profession obliges them to study, but among the Magistrates
and Citizens; an^ if there are not many men of the first form of learning among
them, yet every body almost here has a good tincture of a learned education, in
so much, that they are masters of the Latin, they know the Controversies of
Religion, and History, and they are generally men of good sense.

There is an universal Civility, not only toward Strangers, but toward one
another, that reigns all the Town over, and leans to an excess: so that in them
one sees a mixture of a French openness, and an Italian exactness: there is
indeed a little too much of the last.

The public Iusti^e of the City is quick and good, and is more commended than
the private Justice of those that deal in trade: a want of sincerity is much
lamented by those that know the Town well. There is no publi^k leudness
tolerated, and the disorders of that sort are managed with great address. And
notwithstanding their neighborhood to the Switzers, drinking is very little
known among them. One of the best parts of their La^ is the way of selling
Estates, which is likewise practiced in Switzerland, and is called
Subhastation, from the Roman custum of selling Sub hasta. A man that is to buy
an Estate, agrees with the owner, and then intimates it to the Government; who
order three several proclamations to be made six Weeks one after another of the
intended sale, that is to be on such a day: when the day comes, the Creditors
of the seller, if they apprehend that the Estate is sold at an under value, may
out-bid the Buyer; but if they do not interpose, the Buyer delivers the money
to the State, which upon that, gives him his ti^le to the Estate, which can
never be so much as brought under a debate in Law; and the price is paid into
the State, and is by them given either to the Creditors of the Seller, if he
owes money, or to the seller himself.

This Custom prevails likewise in Swisse, where also twelve years possession
gives a prescription; so that in no place of the World are the titles to
Estates so secure as here. The constitution of the Government is the same both
in Geneva, and in most of ^he Cantons. The Sovereignty lies in the Council of
200* and this Council chooses out of irs number 25. who are the lesser Coun^il;
and the censure of the 25. belong to the great Coun^il, they are chosen by a
sort of Ball^t, so that it is not known for whom they give their votes, which
is an affectual method to suppress sactions and resentments; since in a
competit^on, no man can know who voted for him or against him: yet the Election
is not so carried, but that the whole Town is in an intrigue concerning it: for
since the being of the little Council leads one to the Sindicat, which is the
Chief honor of the State; this dignity is courted here, with as active and
solicitous an ambition, as appears elsewhere for greater matters. The 200. are
chosen and censured by the 25. so that these two Councils, which are both for
life, are checks one upon another. The Magistracy is in the one, and the
Sovereignty in the other. The number of 25. is never exceeded in the lesser
C^uncil; but for the greater, though it passes by the name of the Council of 200.
yet there are commonly 8 or 10. more, so that notwithstanding the absence or
sickness of some of the number, they may still be able to call together near
the full number. There is another Council besides these two, composed of 60.
consisting of those of the 200. that have born Offic^s, such as Auditors,
Attorn^y-Generals, or those that have been in other employments, which are
given for a determinate number of years: this Court has no Authority, but is
called together by the 25, when any extraordinary occasion makes it advisable
for them to call for a more general concurrence, in the Resolutions that they
are about to form. And this Council is of the nature of a Council of State,
that only gives advice, but has no power in it self to enforce its advice. The
whole body of the Burgesses choose the Syndics the first Sunday of the year; and
there are some other Elections that do likewise belong to them. The difference
between the Burgesses and Citizens is, that the former degree may be bought, or
given to Strangers, and they are capable to be of the 200; but none is a
Citizen but he that is the Son of a Burgess, and that is born within the Town.

I need say no more of the Constitution of this little Republic, its chief
support is in the firm Alliance that has stood now so long between it, and the
Cantons of Bern and Zurich; and it is so visibly the interest of all
Switzerland, to preserve it, as the Key, by which it may be all laid open, that
if the Cantons had not forgotten their Interest so palpably, in suffering the
French to become Masters of the Franche Count, one would think that they would
not be capable of suffering Geneva to be touched: For all that can be done in
fortifying the Town, can signify no more, but to put it in case to resist a
surprise, or scalade: since if a Royal Army comes against it, to besiege it in
form, it is certain, that unless the Switzers come down with a force able to
raise the siege, those within will be able to make a very short resistance.

From Geneva I went through the Country of Vaud, or the Valley, and Lausanne
its Chief Town, in my way to Bern. The Town of Lausanne is situated on three
Hills, so that the whole Town is ascent and descent, and that very steep,
chiefly on the side on which the Church stands, which is a very noble Fabrique.
The South-wall of the Cross was so split by an Earthquake, about 30. years ago,
that there was a rent made from top to bottom above a foot wide* which was so
closed ten years after by another Earthquake, that now one only sees where the
breach was. This extravagant situation of the Town was occasioned by a Legend
of some miracles wrought near the Church: which prevailed so much on the
credulity of that age, that by it the Church, and so in consequence the
Buildings near it were added to the old Town, which stood on the other Hill,
where there was a Town made on the highway from the Lake into Switzerland, to
which the chief privileges of the T^wn, particularly the judicature of life
and death, do still belong. Between G^neva and this, lies the Lake which at the
one end is called the Lake of Geneva, and at the other the Lake of Lausanne. I
need not mention the dimensions of it, which are so well known, only in some
places the depth has never been found; for it is more than 500 Fathom; the
Banks of the Lake are the beautifullest plots of ground that can be imagined;
for they look as if they has been laid by art; the sloping is so easy and so
equal, and the grounds are so well cultivated and peopled, that a more
delighting prospect cannot be seen any where: the Lake is well stockt with
excellent Fish, but their numbers do sensibly decrease, and one sort is quite
lost; it is not only to be ascribed to the ravenousness of the Pikes that
abound in it, but to another so^t of Fish that they call Moutails, which were
never taken in the Lake till within these six years last past; they are in the
Lake of Neuf-Chastel, and some of the other Lakes of Switzerland; and it is
likely that by some conveyance under ground they may have come into Channels
that fall into this Lake: the Water of the Lake is all clear and fresh. It is
not only a great pond made by the Rhosne, that runs into it, but does not pass
through it unmixt, as some Travelers have fondly imagined, because sometimes a
so^t gale makes a curling of the Waters in some places, which runs smooth in
the places over which that soft breath of Wind does not pass, the gale varying
its place often. But it is believed, that there are also many great Fountains
all over the L^ke. These Springs do very probably flow from some vast cavities
that are in the neighboring Mountains, which are as great Cisterns, that
discharge themselves in the Valleys, which are covered over with Lakes. And on
the two sides of the Alps, both North and South, there is so great a number of
those little Seas, that it may be easily guessed they must have vast sources
that feed so constantly those huge ponds And when one considers the height of
those Hills, the chain of so many of them together, and their extent both in
length and breadth; if at first he thinks of the old Fables of laying one Hill
upon the top o^ another, he will be afterward apt to imagine, according to the
ingenious conjecture of one that traveled over them oftener than once, that
these cannot be the primary productions of the Author of Nature; but are the
vast ruins of the first World, which at the Deluge broke here into so many
inequalities.

One Hill not far from Geneva, called Maudit or Cursed, of which one third is
always covered with Snow, is two miles of perpendicular height, according to
the obs^rvation of that incomparable Mathematician and Philosopher, Nicolas
Fatio Duilier, who at 22. years of age is already one of the greatest Men of
his age, and seems to be bot^ to carry learning some sises beyond what it has
yet attained.

But now I will entertain you a little with the State of Bern; for that Canton
alone is above a third part of all Switzerland. I will say nothing of its
beginning nor History, nor will I enlarge upon the Constitution, which are all
well known. It has a Council of 200. that goes by that name, tho it consists
almost of 300. and another of 25 as Geneva. The Chief Magistrates are two
Advoyers, who are not annual, as the Sindics of Geneva, but are for life; and
have an authority not unlike that of the Roman Con^uls, each being his year by
turns the Advoyer in office. After them, there are the four Bannerets, who
answer to the Tri^unes as the People in Rome: then come the two Bursars or
Treasurers, one for the ancient German Territory, the other for the French
Territory, or the Country of Vaud; and the two last chosen of the 25. are
called the Secrets; for to them all secrets relating to the State are
discovered: and they have an authority of calling the 200. together when they
think fit, and of ac^using those of the Magistracy, the Advoyers themselves not
excepted, as they see cause: tho this falls out seldom.

There are 72. Bailiages, into which the whole Canton of Bern is divided; and
in every one of those there is a Bailif named by the Council of 200. who must
be a Citizen of Bern, and one of the 200. to which Council no man can be chosen
till he is married: these Bailiages are employments both of Honor and profit:
for the Bailif is the Governor and Judge in that Jurisdiction: since tho he
has some Assessors, who are chosen out of the Bailiage, yet he may by his
Authority carry matters which way he will, against all their opinions, and the
Bailiff^ have all the Confiscations and fines; so that drinking being so common
in the Country, and that producing many quarrels, the Bailif makes his
advantage of all those disorders: and in the 6 years of his Government,
according to the quality of his Bailiage, he not only lives by it, but will
carry perhaps 20000. Crowns with him back to Bern: on which he lives till he
can carry another Bailiage: for one is capable of being twice Bailif; but tho
some have been thri^e Bailifs, this is very extraordinary. The Exactions of the
Bailifs are the only Impositions or charges to which the Inhabitants are
subjected, and these falling only on the irregularities and disorders of the
more debauched, makes that this gri^vance, tho in some particular cases it
pres^es hard, yet is not so universally felt: sor a sober and regular Man is in
no danger. Many in this Canton are as in England Lords of Castles, or M^nnors,
an^ have a Jurisdiction annexed to their Estates, and name their Magistrate,
who is called the Castellan. In matters of small consequence there lies no
appeal from him to the Bailif, but beyond the value of two Pistols an appeal
lies, and no sentence of death is executed, till it is confirmed at Bern. There
lies also an Ap^eal from the Bailif to the Council at Bern. There are many
complaints of the injustice of the Bailifs: but their Law is short and clear,
so that a suit is soon ended; two or three hearings is the most, that even an
intricate suit amounts to, either in the first instance before the Bailif, or
in the second Judgment at Bern. The Citizens of Bern consider these Bailiages
as their Inheritance, and they are courted in this State perhaps with as much
Intrigue, as was ever used among the Romans in the distribution of their
Provinces: and so little signify the best Regulations when there are
Intrinsic diseases in a state, that tho there is all possible precaution used
in the nomination of these Bailifs, yet that has not preserved this state from
falling under so great a mischief by those little Provinces; that as it has
already in a great measure corrupted their morals, so it may likely turn in
conclusion to the ruin of this Republic. All the Electors give their voices by
ballot, so that they are free from all after game in the nomination of the
person: all the kindred of the pretenders, even to the remotest degrees, are
excluded from voting, as are also all their creditors, so that none can vote
but those who seem to have no interest in the issue of the competition; and yet
there is so much intrigue, and so great a corruption in the distribution of
these employments, that the whole business in which all Bern is ever in motion,
is the catching of the best Bailiages, on which a family will have its Eye for
many years before they fall; for the Counselors of Bern give a very small
share of their Estates to their Children when they marry them: all that they
propose is, to make a Bailiage sure to them: for this, they feast and drink,
and spare nothing by which they may make sure a sufficient number of votes; but
it is the chamber of the Bannerets that admits the pretenders to the
competition When the Bailif is chosen, he takes all possible methods to make
the best of it he can, and lets few crimes pass, that carry either
confiscations or fines after them; h^s justice also is generally suspected. It
is true, those of the Bailiage may complain to the Council at Bern, as the
oppressed Provin^es did anciently to the Senate of Rome; and there have been
severe judgments against some very exorbitant Bailifs; yet as complaints are
not made, except upon great occasions, which are not often given by the
Bailifs, so it being the general interest of the Citizens of Bern to make all
possible advantages of those employments, the censure will be but gentle,
except the complaint is crying.

In Bern there is very little Trade, only what is necessary for the support of
the Town. They maintain Professors in the Universities of Bern, and Lausanne;
the one for the German Territory, which is the Ancient Canton; and the other
for the new Conquest, which is the French: In the former there are about 300.
Parishes; in the latter there are but about 150: But in the Benefices of the
German side, the ancient Rights of the incumbents are generally preserved so,
that some Benefices are worth a thousand Crowns: Whereas in the pais des Vaud,
the provisions are set off as sallaries, and are generally from one hundred to
two hundred Crowns: It is visible, that those of Bern trust more to the
affections and fidelity of their subjects, th^n to the strength of their Walls;
For as they have never finished them, so what is built, cannot be brought to a
regular fortification; and it is not preserved with any care, nor furnished
with Canon; but if they have none on their Ramparts, they have good store in
their Arsenal, in which they say there are Arms for forty thousand Men.

The Pea^ants are generally rich, chiefly on the German side, and are all well
Armed; they pay no duties to the Public* and the soil is capable of great
cultivation, in which some succeed so well, that I was showed some that were by
accident at Bern, who, as I was told, had of Estat^ to the value of an hundred
thousand Crowns, but that is not ordinary; yet ten thousand Crowns for a
Peasant, is no extraordinary matter. They live much on their Milk and Corn,
which in some places, as about Payern, yields an increase of 15. measures after
one: they breed many Horses, which bring them in a great deal of money. The
worst thing in the Country is, the moisture of the Air, which is not only
occasioned by the many Lakes that are in it, and the Neighboring Mountains
that are covered with Snow, some all the summer long, and the rest till
Mid-Summer; but by the vast quantity of Woods of Fir-teees, which seem to fill
very near the half of their soil; and if these were for the most part rooted
out, as they would have much more soil, so their Air would be much purer; yet
till they find either Coal or Turf for their fuel, this cannot be done. I was
told, that they had found Coal in some places: If the Coal is conveniently
situated, so that by their Lakes and Rivers i^ can be easily carried over the
Country, it may save them a great extent of ground; that as it is covered with
Wood, so the Air becomes thereby the more unwholesome.

They have some Fountains of Salt Water, but the making Salt consumes so much
Wood, that hitherto it ha^ not turned to any account.

The Men are generally sincere, but heavy; they think it necessary to correct
the moisture of the Air with liberal entertainments; and they are well
furnished with all necessary ingredients; for as their soil produces good
Cattle, so their Lakes abound in Fish, and their Woods in Fowl, the Wine is
also light and good. The Women are generally employed in their domes^ick
Affairs: and the Wives even of the chief Magistrates of Bern, look into all the
concerns of the House and Kitchen, as much as the Wives of the meanest
Peasants. Men and Women do not converse promiscuously together, and the Women
are so much amused with the management at home, and enter so little into
intrigues, that among them, as an eminent Physician there told me, they know
not what Vapors are, which he imputed to the idleness and the intrigues that
abound elsewhere; whereas* h^ said, among them the Blood was cleansed by their
labor, and as that made them sleep well, so they did not amuse themselves with
much thinking, nor did they know what Amors were: The third Adultery is
punished with death, which is also the punishment of the fifth act of
Fornication; of which I saw an instance while I was in Bern: For a Woman, who
confessed her self guilty of many W^oredoms, and designed to be revenged on
some Men, that did not furnish her liberally with money, was upon that
condemned and executed; the manner was solemn; for the Advoye comes into an
open Bench in the middle of the Street, and for the satisfaction of the people,
the whole Process was read, and Sentence was pronounced in the hearing of all:
the Counselors both of the great and lesser Council standing about the
Advoyer, who after Sentence took the Criminal very gently by the hand, and
prayed for he^ Soul; and after Execution, there was a Sermon for the
instruction of the people.

The whole State is disposed for War; for every man that can bear Arms is
listed; and knows his Post and Arms; and there are Beacons so laid over the
Country* that the signal can run over the whole Canion in a night: And their
Military Lists are so laid, that every man knows whether he is to come out upon
the first or second, or not till the general summons. They assured me at Bern,
that upon a General Summons they could bring above 80000 Men together. The Men
are robust and strong, and capable of great hardship, and of good Discipline,
and have generally an extreme sense of Liberty, and a great love to their
Country; but they labor under a want of Officers. And tho the subjects of the
State are Rich, yet the public is poor; they can well resist a sudden Invasion
of their Country; but they would soon grow weary of a long War; and the soil
requires so much cultivation, that they could not spare from their labor the
Men that would be necessary to preserve their Country: they were indeed as
happy as a people could be, when the Emperor had Alsace on the one hand, and
the Spaniards had the Franche Comte on the other, they had no reason to fear
their Neighbors; but now that both those Provinces are in the hands of the
French, the case is quite altered; for as Basil is every moment in danger from
the Garrison of Hunningen, that is but a Cannon sho^ distant from it, so all
the Pais de Vaud lies open to the Franche Comte, and has neither Fortified
Places, nor good Passes to secure it; so that their error in suffering this to
fall into the hands of the French was so gross, that I took some pains to be
informed concerning it; and will here given you this account, that I had from
one who was then in a very Eminent Post, so that as he certainly knew the
Secret, he seemed to speak sincerely to me. He told me, that the Duke of
Lorraine had often moved in the Councils of War, that the Invasion of France
ought to be made on that side, in which France lay open, and was very ill
fortified; this he repeated often, and it was known in France: so that the King
resolved to possess himself of the Comte, but used that precaution, that
fearing to provoke the Switzers, he offered a neutrality on that side: but the
Spaniards, who judged right, that it was as much the interest of the Cantons,
as it was theirs, to preserve the Comte in their hands, refused to consent to
it; but they took no care to defend it, and seemed to leave that to the
Switzers.

In the mean while, the Fren^h Money went about very liberally at Bern, and
after those that were most likely to make opposition were gained, the French
Minister proposed to them the necessity in which his Master found himself
engaged to secure himself on that side; but that still he would grant a
neutrality on their account, if the Spaniards would agree to it; and with this
all the Assurances that could be given in Words were offered to them, that they
should never find the least Prejudice from the Neighbou^hood of the French, but
on the contrary, all possible Protection. There was just Cause given by the
Spaniards to consider them very little in their Deliberation: for they would
neither accept of the Neutrality, nor send a considerable force to preserve the
Country, so that it seemed almost inevitable to give way to the French
Proposition; but one proposed that which an unbyassed Assembly would certainly
have accepted, that they should go themselves and take the Country; and by so
doing, they would secure the Neutrality, which was all that the French
pretended to desire; and they might easily satisfy the Spaniards, and reimburse
themselves of the Expense of the Invasion, by restoring the Country to them,
when a General Peace should be made. He laid out the misery to which their
Country must be reduced by so powersul a Neighbor; but all was lost labor;
so he went out in a rage, and published through the Town, that the State was
sold, and all was lost. They now see their error too late, and would repair it,
if it were possible; but the truth is, many of the particular Member^ of this
State, do so prey upon the public, that unless they do with one consent reform
those abuses, they will never be in a condition to do much: for in many of
their Bailiages, of which some are Abbeys, the Bailifs not only feed on the
Subjects, but likewise on the State, and pretend they are so far
super-expended, that they discount a great deal of the public revenue, of
which they are the Receivers, for their Reimbursement: which made Mr. d' Erlack
once say, when one of those Accounts was presented, That it was very strange if
the Abbey could not feed the Monks. It is true, the power of their Bannerets is
so great, that one would think they might redress many Abuses. The City of Bern
is divided into four Bodies, not unlike our Companies of London, which are the
Bakers, the Butchers, the Tanners, and the Black-smiths; and every Citizen of
Bern does incorporate himself into one of these Societies, which they call
Abbeys; for it is likely they were anciently a sort of a Religious Fraternity:
every one of these chooses two Bannerets, who bear office by turns from four
years to four years, and every one of them has a Bailiage annexed to his
Office, which he holds for life. They carry their name from the Banners of the
several Abbeys, as the Gonfaloniers of Italy: and the Advoyers carry still
their name from the ancient title^ Ecdicus, or Advocate, that was ^he title of
the Chief Magistrates of the Towns in the times of the Roman Emperors. The
Chamber of the Four Bannerets that bear Office, has a vast Power, they examine
and pass all Accounts, and they admit all the Competitors to any offices, so
that no man can be proposed to the Council of 200. without their Approbation;
and this being now the Chief Intrigue of their State, they have so absolute an
Authority in shutting men out from employments, that their office, which is for
life, is no less considerable than that of the Advoyer, tho they are inferior
to him in rank. They manage matters with great address, of which this instance
was given me in a competition for the Advoyership not long ago; there was one
whose temper was violent, that had made it so sure among those who were
qualified to vote in it, as being neither of his kindred, nor Alliance, that
they believed he would carry it from the other competitor, whom they favored,
so they set up a third competitor, whose kindred were the persons that were
made sure ^o him, whose advancement they opposed, and by this means they were
all shut out from voting, so that the Election went according to the design of
the Bannerets. The chief man now in Bern, who was ^he reigning Advoyer when I
was there, is Mr. d' Erlack, Nephew to that Mr. d' Erlack, who was Governor of
Br^sack, and had a breve^ to be a Marischal of France; this is one of the
noblest Families in Bern, that acted a great part in shaking off the Austrian
Tyranny, and they have been ever since very much distinguished there from all
the rest of their Nobility. The present Head of it is a very extraordinary Man,
he has a great Authority in his Canton, not only as he is Advoyer, but by the
particular esteem which is paid him. For he is thought the wisest and
worthiest Man of the State, tho it is somewhat strange how he should bear such
a sway in such a Government; for he neither feasts, nor drinks with the rest.
He is a Man of great Sobriety and Gravity, very reserved, and behaves himself
liker a Minister of State in a Monarchy, than a Magistrate in a P^pular
G^vernment; For one sees in him none of those Arts, that seem necessary in such
a Government. He has a great Estate, and no Children; so he has no Projects for
his Family; and does what he can to correct the Abuses of the State, tho the
disease is inveterate, and seems past cure.

He had a Misfortune in a War that was thirty years ago, in the y^ar 1656.
between the Popish and the Protest^nt Cantons: the occasion of which will
engage me in a short digression. The peace of Switzerland is chiefly preserved
by a Law agreed on among all the Cantons, that every Canton may make what
Regulations concerning Religion they think fit, without prejudice to the
General League. Now the Popish Cantons have made Laws, that it shall be capital
to any to change their Religion, and on a set day every year they go all to
Mass, and the Masters of Families swear to continue true to the State, and firm
in their Religion to their lives end; and so they pretend they punish their
falling into Heresy with death and Confiscation of Goods, because it is a
violation of the Faith, which is so solemnly sworn. But on the other hand, in
the Protestant Cantons, such as turn are only obliged to go and live out of the
Canton; but for their Estates, they still preserve them, and are permitted to
sell them. One cannot but observe more of the merciful Spirit of the Gospel, in
the one* than in the other. In two Cantons, Appenzel, and Glar^s, both
Religions are tolerated, and are capable of equal Privileges, and in some
Bailiages that were conquered in common by the Cantons of Bern and Friburg, in
the Wars with Savoy, the two Cantons name the Bailifs by turns, and both
Religions are so equally tolerated, that in the same Church they have both Mass
and Sermon, so equally, that on one Sunday, the Mass begins, and the Sermon
follows, and the next Sunday, the Sermon begins, and the Mass comes next,
without the least disorder or murmuring.

But in the year 1656. some of the Cantons of Schwitz changing their Religion,
and retiring to Zurich, their Estates were confiscated; and some others, that
had also changed, but had not left the Canton, were taken and beheaded. Zurich
demanded the Estates of the refugies, but instead of gra^ting this, the Canton
of Schwitz demanded hack their subjects, that they might proceed against them
as delinquents; and they founded this on ^ Law, by which the Cantons are
obliged to deliver up the Criminals of another Canton, when they come among
them, if they are demanded by the Canton to which they belong; but those of
Zurich and Bern thought this was both inhuman and unchristian; tho the Deputy
of Bas^^ was of another mind, and thought that they ought to be delivered up,
which extremely disgusted those of Zurich. Those of Schwitz committed some
insolences upon the subjects of Zurich, and refused to give satisfaction. Upon
all which a War followed between the Protestant and Popish Cantons. The Cantons
of Bern and Zurich raised an Army of 25000 Men, which was commanded by Mr. d'
Erlak, but was dispersed in several Bodies; and the Papists had not above 6000;
yet they surprised Mr. d' Erlack with a body not much superior to theirs; both
sides after a short engagement run; the Canon of the Canton of Ber^ was left in
the Field a whole day; at last those of Lucer^ seeing that none stayed to
defend the Canon, carried them off; this loss raised such a tumult in Bern,
that they seemed resolved to sacrifice Mr. d' Erlack: but he came with such a
presence of mind, and gave so satisfying an account of the Mi^fortune, that the
Tumult ceased, and soon after the War ended. Upon this many thought, that tho
the Papists acted cruelly, yet it wa^ according to their Laws, and that no
other Canton could pretend to interpose or quarrel with those of Schwitz for
what they did upon that occasion. Within these few years there were some
quarrels like to arise in the Canton of Glaris, where it was said, that the
equal privileges agreed on to both Religions were not preserved; but on this
occasion the Popes Nuntio acted a very different part from that which might
have been expected from him; For whereas the M^nisters of that Court have been
commonly the Incendiaries in all the disputes that concern Religion, he acted
rather the part of a Mediator; and whereas it was visible, that the injustice
lay on the side of the Papists, he interposed so effectually with those of
Lucern, which is the chief of the Popish Cantons, that the difference was
composed.

But to return to Bern; the buildings have neither great magnificence, nor many
Appartments, but they are convenient, and suited to the way of living in the
Country. The Streets not only of Bern and the bigger Towns, but even of the
smallest Villages, are furnished with Fountains that run continually; which as
they are of great use, so they want not their beauty. The great Church of Bern
is a very noble Fabric; but being built on the top of the Hill on which the
Town stands, it seems the ground began to fail, so to support it, they have
raised a vast Fabric, which has cost more than the Church it self; for there
is a Platform made, which is a square, to which the Church is one side, and the
further side is a vast Wall, fortified with buttresses about 150 foot high.
They told me, that all the ground down to the bottom of the Hill was dug into
vaults; this platform is the chief walk of the Town, chiefly about Sun set;
and the River underneath presents a very beautiful prospect* For there is a Cut
taken off from it for the Mills, but all along as this Cut goes, the Water of
Aar runs over a sloping bank of Stone, which they say, was made at a vast
charge, and makes a noble and large Cascade.

The second Church is the Dominicans Chapel, where I saw the famous hole that
went to an Image in the Church, from one of the Cells of the Dominicans, which
leads me to set down that Story at some length: For as it was one of the most
signal cheats, that the World has known; so it falling out about twenty years
before the Reformation was received in Bern, it is very probable that it
contributed not a little to the preparing of the spirits of the people to that
change. I am she more able to give a particular account of it, because I read
the origin^^ process in the Latin record, signed by the Notaries of the Court
of the delegates that the Pope sent to try the matter. The record is above 130
sheets, writ close, and of all side^, it being indeed a large volum; and I
found the printed accounts so defective, that I was at the pains of reading the
whole process, of which I will give here a true abstract.

The two famous Orders, that had possessed themselves of the esteem of those
datk ages, were engaged in a mighty rivalry. The Dominicans were the more
learned, they were the eminentest Preachers of those times, and had the conduct
of the Courts of Inquisition, and the other chief officer in the Church in
their hands. But on the other hand, the Franciscans had an outward appearance
of more severity a ruder habit, stricter rules, and greater poverty: all which
gave them such advantages in the eyes of the simple multitude, as were able to
balance the other honors of the Dominican Order. In short, the two Orders
were engaged in a high rivalry, but the devotion toward the Virgin being the
prevailing passion of those times, the Franciscans upon thi^ had great
advantages. The Dominicans, thar are all engage^ in the defense of Thomas
Aquinas's opinions, were thereby obliged to assert, that she was born in
Original Sin; th^^^ was proposed to the people by the Franciscans as no less
than Blasphemy, and by this the Dominicans began to lose ground extremely in
the minds of the people, who were strongly prepossed in favor of the
immaculate Conceptio^*

About the beginning of the 15th Century, a Francisc^^ happened to preach in
Francfort, and one Wigand a Dominican coming into the Church, the Cordelier
seeing him, broke out into exclamations, praising God that he was no^ of an
Order that profaned the Virgin, or that poysone^ Princes in the Sacrament,
(for a Dominican had poysone^ the Emperor Henry the VII. with the Sacrament,)
Wiga^^ being extremely provoked with this bloody reproach, gav^ him the Lie,
upon which a dispute arose, which ended in a tumult, that had almost cost the
Dominican his life, yet he got away. The whole Order resolved to take their
revenge, and in a Chapter, held at Vimpsen in the year 1504. they contrived a
method for supporting the credit of their Order, which was much sunk in the
opinion of the people, and for bearing down the reputation of the Franciscans,
four of the juncto undertook to manage the design; for they said, since the
people were so much disposed to believe Dreams and Fables, they must dream of
their side, and endeavor to cheat the people as well as the others had done.
They resolved to make Bern the Seen in which the project should be put in
execution; for they found the people of Bern, at that time apt to Swallow any
thing, and not disposed to make severe Enquiries into extraordinary Matters.
When they had formed their design, a fit Tool presented it self; for one Ietzer
came to take their habit as a Lay-brother, who had all the dispositions that
were necessary for the execution of their project: For he was extreme simple,
and was much inclined to Austerities, so having observed his temper well, they
began to execute their project, the very Night after he took the Habit, which
was, on Lady Day 1507. one of the Friars conveyed himself secretly into his
Cell, and appeared to him as if he had been in Purgatory, in a strange figure,
and he had a Box near his mouth, upon which as he blew, fire seemed to come out
of his mouth. He had also some Dogs about him, that appeared as his Tormentors,
in this posture he came near the Friar, while he was a Bed, and took up a
celebrated Story that they used to tell all their Friars, to beget in them a
great dread at the laying aside their habit, which was, that one of the Order,
who was Superior of their House at Soloturn, had gone to Paris, but laying
aside his habit, was killed in his Lay-habit. The Friar in the Vizar said, he
was that person, and was condemned to Purgatory for that Crime; but he added,
that he might be rescued out of it by his means, and he seconded this with most
horrible Cries, expressing the Miseries which he suffered. The poor Friar (
Ietzer) was excessively frighted, but the other advanced, and required a
Promise of him that which he should desire of him, in order to the delivering
him out of his Torment. The frighted Friar promised all that he asked of him;
then the other said, he knew he was a great Saint, and that his prayers and
mortifications would prevail, but they must be very extraordinary; The whole
Monastery must for a week together discipline themselves with a Whip, and he
must lie prostrate in the form of one on a Cross, in one of their Chapels,
while Mass was said in the sight of all that should come together to it; and he
added, that if he did this, he should find the effects of the love that the B.
Virgin did bear him, together with many other extraordinary things; and said,
he would appear again accompanied with two other Spirits; and assured him, that
all that he did suffer for his deliverance, should be most gloriously rewarded.
Morning was no sooner come than the Frie^ gave an account of this Apparition to
the rest of the Convent, who seemed extremely surprised at it; they all pressed
him to undergo the discipline that was enjoined him, and every one undertook to
bear his share; so the deluded Friar performed it all exactly in one of the
Chapels of their Church: This drew a vast number of Spectators together, who
all considered the poor Friar as a Saint, and in the mean while the four Friars
that managed the imposture, magnified the Miracle of the Apparition to the
skie^ in their Sermons. The Fryer's Confessor was upon the Secret, and by this
means they knew all the little passages of the poor Friars life, even to his
thoughts, which helped them not a little in the Conduct of the matter. The
Confessor gave him an Hostie, with a piece of Wood, tha^ was, as he pretended,
a true piece of the Cross, and by these he was to fortify himself, if any other
Apparition should come to him, since evil Spirits would be certainly chained up
by them. The Night after that, the former Apparition^ was renewed, and the
masqued Friar brough^ two others with him in such Vizzards, that the Fry^^
thought they were Devils indeed. The Friar presented the Hostie to them, which
gave them such a cheek, that he was fully satisfied of the virtue of this
preservative.

The Friar, that pretended he was suffering in Purgatory, said so many things
to him relating to the Secre^s of his life, and Thoughts, which he had from the
Confessor, that the poor Friar was fully possessed with the opinion of the
reallity of the Apparition. In two of these Apparitions, that were both managed
in the same manner, the Friar in the Masque talked much of the Dominican Order,
which he said was excessively dear to the B. Virgin, who knew her self to be
conceived in Original sin, and that tbe Doctors who taught the contrary were in
Purgatory: That the Story of S. Bernards appearing with a spot on him, for
having opposed himself to the feast of the Conception, was a Forgery: but that
it was true, that some hideous Flies had appeared on St Bonaventures Tomb, who
taught the contrary. That the B. Virgin abhorred the Cordeliers for making her
equal to her Son; that Scotus was damned, whose Canonization the Cordeliers
were then soliciting hard at Rome; and that the Town of Bern would be destroyed
for harboring such plagues within their walls. When the injoined discipline
was fully performed, the Spirit appeared again, and said, he was now delivered
out of Purgatory, but before he could be admitted to Heaven, he must receive
the Sacrament, having died without it, and after that he would say Mass for
those, who had by their great charities ^escued him out of his pains. The Fry^r
fancied the ^oice resembled the Priors a little, but he was th^n so far from
suspecting any thing, that he gave no great heed to this suspicion. Some days
after this, tbe same Friar appeared as a Nun all in Glory, and told the poor
Friar, that she was St. Barbary, for whom he had a particular devotion; and
added, that the B. Virgin was so much pleased with his charity, that she
intended to come and visit him: He immediately called the Convent together, and
gave the rest of the Friars an account of this Apparition, which was
entertained by them all with great joy; and the Friar languished in desires of
the accomplishment of the promise, that St. Barbara had made him. After some
days, the longed for delusion appeared to him, clothed as the Virgin used to
be on the great Feasts, and indeed in the same Habits: there were about her
some Angels, which he afterward found were the little Statues of Angels, which
they set on the Altars on the great Holy Days. There was also a pulley fastened
in the room over his head, and a cord tied to the Angels, that made them rise
up in the Air, and fly about the Virgin, which increased the delusion. The
Virgin, after some endearments to himself, extolling the merit of his charity
and discipline, told him, that she was conceived in Original Sin, and that Pope
Julius the Second, that then reigned, was to put an end to the Dispute, and was
to abolish the Feast of her Conception, which Six^us the fourth had instituted,
and that the Friar was to be the Instrument of persuading the Pope of the truth
in that matter: She gave him three drops of her Sons blood, which were three
tears of blood that he had shed over Jerusalem, and this signified that she was
three hours in Original Sin, after which she was, by his Mercy, delivered out
of that State: For it seems the Dominicans were resolved so to compound the
matter, that they should gain the main point of her Conception in Sin; yet they
would comply so far with the reverence for the Virgin, with which the World was
possessed, that she should be believed to have remained a very short while in
that State. She gave him also five drops of Blood in the form of a Cross, which
were Tears of Blood, that she had shed while her Son was on the Cross. And, to
convince him more fully, she presented an Hostie to him, that appeared to as an
ordinary Hostie, and of a sudden it appeared be of a deep ^ed color. The cheat
of those supposed visits was often repeated to the abused Friar; at last the
Vi^gin ^old him, that she was to give him such ma^ks of her Sons Love to him,
that the matter should be past all doub^. She said, that the five wounds of St.
Lucia, and S. Catharine, were real wounds, and that she would also imprint them
on him; so she bid him reach his hand; he had no great mind to receive a favor
in which he was to suffer so much: but she forced his hand, and struck a nail
through it, the hole was as big as a grain of pease, and he saw the Candle clearly
through it; this threw him out of a supposed transport into a real Agony; but she
seemed to touch his hand, and he thought he smelt an Ointment, with which she
anointed it, tho his Confess^r persuaded him, that that was only an
imagination, so the supposed Virgin lest him for that time.

The next night the Apparition returned, and brought some linen Clothes, which
had some real or imaginary virtue to allay his Torment: and the pretended
Virgin said, they were some of the Linnings in which Christ was wrapped, and
with that she gave him a soporiferous draught, and while he was fast asleep,
the other four wounds were, inprinted on his body, in such a manner that he
felt no pain.

But in order to the doing of this, the Friars betook themselves to Charms, and
the Subpri^r showed the rest a book full of them; but he said, that before they
could be effectual, they must renounce God* and he not only did this himself,
but by a formal act put in writing signed with his Blood^, he dedicated himself
to the Deyl; it is true, he did not oblige the rest to this, but only to
renounce God. The composition of the Draught was a mixture of some
Fountain Water and Chrism, the Hairs of the Eyebrows of a Child, some
Qui^ksilver, some grains of Incense, somewhat of an Easter Wax Candle, some
consecrated Salt, and the Blood of an unbaptised Child. This Composition was a
secret, which the Subprior did not communicate to the other Friars. By this the
poor Friar Ietzer was made almost quite insensible: when he was awake, and came
out of this deep sleep, he felt this wonderful impression on his body: and now
he was ravished out of measure, and came to fancy himself to be acting all the
parts of our Saviors Passion: he was exposed to the people on the great Altar,
to the amasement of the whole Town, and to the no small mortification of the
Franciscans. The Dominicans gave him some other draughts that threw him into
convulsions, and when he came out of those, a voice was heard, which came through
that hole which yet remains, and runs from one of the Cells along a great part
of the wall of the Church: for a Friar spoke through a pipe, and at the End of the
hole there was an Image of the Virgins, with a little Jesus in her arms,
between whom and his mother the voice seemed to come; the Image also seemed to
shed Tears, and a Painter had drawn those on her Face so lively, that the
people where deceived by it. The little Jesus asked, why she wept? and she said,
it was because his honor was given to her, since it was said, that she was
born without sin; in Conclusion, the Friars did so over act this matter, that
at last even the poor deluded Friar himself came to discover it, and resolved
to quit the order.

It was in vain to delude him with more Apparitions; for he well nigh killed a
Friar that came to him personating the Virgin in another shape with a Crown on
her head: he also overheard the Friars once talking amongst themselves, of the
Contrivance and Success of the imposture, so plainly, that he discovered the
whole Matter, and upon that, as may be easily imagined, he was filled with all
the horror with which such a Discovery could inspire him.

The Friars fearing that an imposture, which was carried on hitherto with so
much success, should be quite spoiled, and be turned against them, thought the
surest way was to own the whole Matter to him, and to engage him to carry on
the Cheat. They told him in what esteem he would be, if he continued to support
the reputation tha^ he had acquired, that he would become the chief person of
the Order; and in the end they persuaded him to go on with the Imposture: but
at last, they fearing lest he should discover all, resolved to poison him; of
which he was so apprehensive, that once a Loaf being brought him that was
prepared with some spices, he kept it for some time, and it growing green, he
threw it to some young Wolves Whelps that were in the Monastery, who died
immediately. His constitution was also so vigorous, that tho they gave him
Poison five several times, he was not destroyed by it; they also pressed him
earnestly to renounce God, which they judged necessary, that so their Charms
might have their effect on him; but he would never consent to that: at last
they forced him to take a poisoned Hostie, which yet he vomited up soon after
he had swallowed it down; that failing, they used him so cruelly, whipping him
with an iron Chain, and girding him about so strait with it, that ^o avoid
further Torment he swore to them, in a most imprecating style, that he would
never discover the secret, but would still carry it on; and so he deluded them
till he sound an opportunity of g^tting out of the Co^vent, and of throwing
himself in^o the hands of the Magistr^tes, to whom he discovered all.

The four Friars were seized on, and put in prison, and an account of the whole
Matter was sent, first to the Bishop of Lausanne, and then to Rome; and it may
be easily imagined, that the Franciscans took all possible care to have it well
examined; the Bishop of Lausan^e, and of Zyon, with the Provin^ial of the
D^mi^i^ans, were* appointed to form the Process. The four Friars first excepted
to Ietzers credit; but that was rejected: then being threatened with the
Question, they put in a long plea against that; but tho the Provincial would
not consent to that, yet they were put to the question; some endured it long;
but at last, they all confessed the whole progress of the Imposture. The
Provincial appeared concerned; for tho Ietzer had opened the whole Matter to
him, yet he would give no credit to him; on the contrary, he Charged him to be
obedient to them, and one of the Friars said plainly, that he was in the whole
secret, and so he withdrew; but he died some days after at Constance, having
poisoned himself, as was believed. The Matter lay ^sleep some time, but a year
after that, a Spanish Bishop came, authorized with full power from Rome; and
the whole Cheat being fully proved, the four Friars were solemnly degraded from
their Priesthood, and Eight days after, it being the last of May 1509. they
were Burnt in a Meadow, on the other side of the River, over against the great
Church; The place of their Exe^ution was showed me, as well as the Hole in the
Wall, through which the V^ice was Conveyed to the Image. It was certainly one of
the blackest, and yet the best Carried on Cheat, that has been ever known; and
no doubt had the poor Friar died, before the discovery, it had pas^ed down to
posterity, as one of the greatest Miracles that ever was; and it gives a shrewd
suspicion, that many of the other Miracles, of that Church, were of the same
nature, but more successfully finished.

I shall not entertain you any further with the State of Bern, but shall only
add one general remark: which was too visible not to be observed every where,
and of too great importance not to deserve a particular reflection: it belongs
in general to all the Cantons, but I give it here, because I had more occasion
to make it in Bern, having seen it more, and stayed longer in it, than in the
other Cantons.

Switzerla^d lies between France and Italy, that are both of them Countries
incomparably more Rich, and better furnished with all the Pleasures and
Conveniences of Life than it is; and yet Italy is almost quite dis peopled, and
the people in it are reduced to a misery, that can scarce be imagined by those
who have not seen it; and France is in a great measure dispeopled, and the
inhabitans are reduced to a poverty that appears in all the ma^ks in which it
can show it self, both in their houses, furniture, cloths and looks.

On the Contrary, Switzerland is extreme full of people, and in several places
in the Villages, as well as in their towns, one sees all the marks he can look
for of Plenty and Wealth, their Houses and windows are in good case, the High
Ways are well maintained, all people are well Clothed: and every one lives at
his ease. This Observation surprised me yet more in the Country of the
Grisons, who have almost no soil at all, being situated in Valleys, that are
almost all washed away with the Torrents, that fall down from the Hills, and
swell their brooks sometimes so violently, and so suddenly, that in many places
the whole soil is washed away, and yet those Valleys are well peopled, and
every one lives happy and at ease, under a gentle Government, whilst other rich
and plentiful Countries are reduced to such Misery, that as many of the
inhabitants are forced to change their seats, so those who stay behind, can
scarce live and pay those grievous Impositions that are laid upon them; the
rude people generally ^eason very simply when they enter into Speculations of
Government, but they feel true, tho they argu^ false; so an easy Government,
tho joined to an ill soil, and accompanied with great inconveniences, draws, or
at least keeps people in it; whereas a severe Government, tho in general ideas
it may appear reasonable, drives its subjects even out of the best and most
desirable seats.

In my way from Ber^ to this place I passed by Soloturn, and I came through
Fri^ourg in my way from Lausanne to Bern; these are two of the Chief of the
Popish Ca^tons, after Lucerne, and one sees in them a heat, and bigotry beyond
what appears either in France or Italy: long before they come within the Church
doors they kneel down in the Streets when Mass is a saying in it. The Im^ges
are also extreme gross. In the Chief Church of Soloturn there is an Image of
God the Father, as an old man with a great black bea^d, having our Savior on
his knees, and a Pigeon over his head. Here also begins a devotion at the
Ave-Marybel, which is scarce known in France, but is practiced all Italy over:
At noon and at Sun set the Bell rings, and all say the Ave-Mary, and a short
prayer to the Virgin; bu^ whereas in Italy they content themselves with putting
off their Hats, in Switzerland they do for the most part kneel down in the
Streets; which I saw no where practiced in Italy except at Venice, and there it
is not commonly done. But notwithstanding this extreme bigotry, all the
Switzers see their common interest so well, that they live in a very good
unde^standing one with another. This is indeed chiefly owing to the Canton of
Lucern, where there is a spirit in the Government very different from what is
in most of the other Popish Cantons: the residence of the Spanish Ambassador,
and of the Nuntio, in that Town, contributes also much to the preserving it in
so good a temper, it being their interest to unite Switzerland, and by this
means the heat and indiscretion of the rest is often moderated. The I^suits
begin to grow as powerful in Switzerland as they are elsewhere: they have a
noble College and Chapel situated in the best place of Friburg. It is not
long since they were received at Soloturn, where there was a revenue of 1000
Livres a year, set off for the maintenance of ten of them, with this provision,
that they should never exceed that number; but where they are once settled,
they find means to break through all Limitations; and they are now become so
rich there, that they are raising a Church and College, which will cost before
it is finished above 400000. Livres, to which the French King gives 10000
Livres for the frontis-piece: For this being the C^nton in which his Ambassador
reside^, he thought it suitable to his glory, to have a monument of his bounty
raised by an order, that will never be wanting to flatter their b^^^factors, as
long as they find their account in it.

In the same Canton there is an Abbey that has 100000 Livres of revenue; there
is also a ^ery rich House of Nuns, that wear the Capuchins Habit, that as I was
told had 60000 Livres of revenu^ and but 60 Nuns in it, who having thus 1000
Livr^^ apiece, may live in all possible plenty in a Country where a very
little money goes a great way: But that which surprises one most at Soloturn,
is, the great Fortification that they are building of a Wall about the Town,
the noblest and sol^dest that is any where to be seen; the Stone with which it
is faced, is a sort of course Marble, but of that bigness, that many Stones are
10 foot long, and two foot of breath and thickness: But tho this will be a wo^k
of vast Expense and great Beauty, yet it would signify little against a great
Army that would attack it vigorously. The Wall is finished on the side of the
River on which the Town stands, the Ditch is very broad, and the Counterscarp
and Glasier are also finished, and they are working at a Fort on the other side
of the River, which they intend to fortify in the same manner. This has cost
them near two millions of Livres; and this vast expense has made them often
repent the undertaking; and it is certain, that a fortification that is a^le to
resist the rage of their Peasants in the case of a Rebellion, is all that is
needful. This Canton has two Advoyers, as Bern; the little Council consists of
36, they have 12 Bailiages belonging to them, which are very profitable to
those that can carry them, they have one Bursar, and but one Banneret. All the
Cantons have their Bailiages; but if there are disorders at Bern in the choice
of their Bailifs, there are far greater among the Popish Cantons, where all
things are sold, as a foreign Minister that resides there told me, who tho he
knew what my Religion was, did not stick to own franckly to me, that the
Catholic Cantons were not near so well governed as the Protestant-Cantons.
Justice is generally sold among them, and in their Treaties with foreign
Princes, they have sometimes taken money both from the F^en^h and Spanish
Ambassadors, and have signed contradictory Articles at the same time.

Baden has nothing in it that is remarkable, except its convenient situation,
which makrs it the seat of the general Diet of the Cantons, tho it is not one
of them; but is a Bailiage that belongs in common to ei^ht of the ancient
Cantons. At last I came to this place, which as it is the first and most
honorable of all the Cantons, so with relation to us, it has a precedence of a
higher nature, it being the first that received the Reformation.

This Cant^n is much less than Bern, yet the public is much richer: they
reckon that they can bring 50000. Men together upon 24. hours warning, their
subjects live happy: for the Bailifs here have regulated appointments, and have
only the hundred Penny of the fines, so that they are not tempted as those of
Bern are, to whom the Fine belongs entirely, to strain matters against their
Subjects: and whereas at Bern the constant intrigue of the whole Town is
concerning their Bailiages; here on the contrary, it is a service to which the
Citizens are bound to submit according to their Constitution, but to which they
do not aspire. The Government is almost the same as at Bern, and the Magistrate
that is called the Advoyer at Bern, is here called the Bourgomaster. The
revenue of the State is here justly accounted for, so that the public Purse is
much richer than at Bern; the Arsenal is much better furnished, and the
Fortifications are more regular. There is a great trade stirring here; and as
their Lake, that is 24. miles long, and about two or three Broad, supplies them
well with provisions, so their River carries their Manufacture to the Rhine,
from whence it is conveyed as they please. One of their Chief Manufacturies is
Crape, which is in all respects the best I ever saw. I will not describe the
situation of the Town, but shall content my self to tell you, that it is
extreme pleasant, the Country about it is Moun^anous, and the Winters are
hard; for the L^ke freezes quite over, only in some places the Ice never lies,
which is believed a mark that some Spr^ngs rise there, which cause that heat;
so also in the Lake of Geneva, tho it is never quite frozen, yet great flakes
of Ice lie in several parts; but these are never seen in some parts of the
Lake, which is supposed to flow from the same cause.

But to return to Zurich; one sees here the true ancient Simplicity of the
Switzers, not corrupted which Luxury or Vanity; their Women not only do not
converse familiarly with men, except those of their near kindred, b^t even on
the Streets do not make any returns to the Civility of Strangers; for it is
only Strangers that put off their Hats to Women; but they make no Courtisies:
and here, as in all Switzerland, Women are not saluted, but the civility is
expressed by taking them by the Hand. There is one thing singular in the
constitu^ion of Zurich, that is, their little Council consists of 50 persons,
but there sit in it only 25. at a time, and so the two halves of this Council,
as each of them has his proper Bourgomaster, have also the Government in their
Hands by turns, and they shift every six months, at Mid-summer and at
Christ-Mass. The whole Canton is divided into nine great Bailiages, and 21
Castellaneries; in the former the Bailif resides Constantly; but the Castellan,
who is also one of the great Council, has so little to do, that he lives at
Zurich, and goes only at some set times of the year to do justice.

The virtue of this Canton has appeared signally in their adhering firmly to
the ancient Capitulations with the Fren^h; and not slackening in any Article,
which has been done by all the other Cantons, where money has a Sovereign
influence: but here it has never prevailed. They have converted ^he ancient
Revenues of the Church more generally to pious Uses, than has been done any
where else, that I know of. They have many Hospitals well entertained; in one,
as I was told, there was 650 poor kept: but as they support the real Charities,
which belong to such endowments, so they despise that vain Magnificence of
Buildings, which is too generally affected elsewhere; for theirs are very
plain; and one of the Government there said to me very sensibly, That they
th^ught it enough to maintain their Poor as Poor; and did not judge it proper
to lodge them as Prin^es.

The Dean and Chapter are likewise still continued as a corporation, and enjoy
the revenues which they had before the Reformation; but if they subsist
plentifully, they labor hard; for they have generally two or three Sermons a
day, and at least one: the first begins at five a clock in the morning. At
Geneva, and all Switserland over, there are daily Sermons, which were
substituted upon the Reformation from the Mass. But the Sermons are generally
too long, and the Preachers have departed from the first design of these
Sermons, which were intended to be an explication of a whole Chapter, and an
exhortation upon it; and if this were so contrived, that it were in all not
above a quarter of an hour long, as it would be heard by the People with less
Weariness and more profit, so it would be a vast Advantage to the Preachers;
For as it would oblige them to study the Scriptures much, so having once made
themselves Masters of the practical parts of the Scripture, such short and
simple Discourses would cost them less pains, than those more labored Sermons
do, which consume the greatest part of their time, and too often to very little
purpose.

Among the Archives of the Dean and Chapter, there is a vast Collection of
Letters, written either to Bullinger, or by him; they are bound up, and make a
great many V^lums in Folio, and out of these no doubt but one might discover a
great many particulars relating to the History of the R^formati^m: For as
Bullinger lived long, so he was much esteemed. He procured a very kind
reception to be given to some of our English Exiles in Queen Mary's Reign, in
particular to Sands, afterward Ar^h-Bishop of York; to Horn, afterward
Bishops of Win^hester; and to Jewel, Bishop of Salisbury. He gave them lodgings
in the Close, and used them with all possible kindness; and as they presented
some Silver-Cups to the College, with ^n Inscription, acknowledging the kind
Reception they had ^ound there, which I saw, so they continued to keep a
constant Correspondence with Bullinger, after the happy re-establishment of the
Reformation under Queen Elisabeth: Of which I read almost a whole Volum while I
was there: Most of them contain only the general news, but some were more
important, and relate to the Disputes then on foot, concerning the Habits of
the Clergy, which gave the first beginnings to our unhappy Divisions: and by
the Letters, of which I read the Originals, it appears, that the Bishops
preserved the ancient Habits rather in compliance with the Queens inclinations,
than out of any liking they had to them; so far they were from liking them,
that they plainly expressed their dislike of them. Jewel, in a Letter bearing
date the 8. of February 1566. wishes, that the Vestments, together with all the
other Remnants of Popery, might be thrown both out of their Churches, and out
of the minds of the People; and laments the Queens fixedness to them, so that
she would suffer no change to be made. And, in January of the same year, Sands
writes to the same purpose. Contenditur de vestibus Papisti^is utendis vel non
utendis, dabit Deus his quoque finem. Di^putes are now on foot concerning the
Popish Vestments, whether they should be used or not; but God will put an end
to those things. Horn, Bishop of Win^hester, went further; For in a Letter,
dated the 16th of July, 1565. He writes of the Act concerning the Habits, with
great regret, and expresses some hopes that it might be repealed next Session
of Parliament, if the Popish Party did not hinder it; and he seems to stand in
doubt, whether he should conform himself to it or not; upon which he desires
Bullingers Advice. And in many Letters writ on that subject, it is asserted,
that both Cranmer and Ridley intended to procure an Act for abolishing the
Habits, and that they only defended their Lawfulness, but not their Fitness;
and therefore they blamed private Persons that refused to obey the Laws.
Grindal in a Letter dated the 27th of August, 1566. writes, That all the
Bishops, who had been beyond Sea, had at their return dealt wi^h the Queen to
let the matter of the Habits fall: but she was so prepossessed, that tho they
had all endeavored to divert her from prosecuting that matter, she continued
still inflexible. This had made them resolve to submit to the Laws, and to wait
for a fit opportunity to rever^e them. He laments the ill effects of the
opposition that some had made to them, which had extremely irritated the Queens
Spirit, so that She was now much more heated in those matters than formerly; he
also thanks Bullinger for the Letter that he had writ, justifying the Lawful
use of the Habits, which he says had done great service. C^x, Bishop of Ely, in
one of his Letters, laments the a^ersion that they found in the Parliament to
all the Prop^sitions that were made for the Reformation of Abuses. Jewel, in a
Letter dated the 22th of May 1559. writes, That the Queen refused to be called
Head o^ the Church, and adds, That that Title could not be justly given to any
mortal, it being due only to Christ; and that such Titles had been so much
abused by Antichrist, that they ought not to be any longer continued. On all
these Passages I will make no reflections here: For I set them down only to
show what was the sense of our Chief Churchmen at that time concerning those
matters, which have since engaged us into such warm and angry Disputes; and
this may be no inconsiderable instruction to one, that intends to write the
History of that time. The last particular, with which I intend to end this
Letter, might seem a little too learned, if I were writing to a less knowing
Man than your self.

I have taken some pains in my travels to examine all the Ancient Manus^ripts of
the New Testament, concerning that doubted pas^age of St. John's Epistle, There
are three that bear witness in Heaven; the Father, the Word, and the Spirit;
and these three are one. Bullinger doubted much of it, because he found it not
in an ancient Latin Manuscript at Zurich, which seems to be about 800. years
old: For it is written in that hand that began to be used in Charles the
Great's time. I turned the Manuscript, and found the passage was not there; but
this was certainly the error or omission of the Coppier: For before the
General Epistles in that Manuscript, the Preface of St. Jerome is to be found,
in which he says, that he was the more exact in that Translation, that so he
might discover the fraud of the Arrians, who had struck out that passage
concerning the Trinity. This Preface is printed in Lira's Bible: but how it
came to be left out by Erasmus in his Edition of that Father's works, it that
of which I can give no account: For as on the one hand, Erasmus's sincerity
ought not to be too rashly censured; so on the other hand, that Preface being
in all the Manuscripts Ancient or Modern of those Bibles that have the other
Prefaces in them, that I ever yet saw, it is not easy to imagine what made
Erasmus not to publish it; and it is in the Manuscript Bibles at Basil, where
he printed his Edition of S. Ieromes Works. In the old Manuscript Bible of
Geneva, that seems to be above 700. years old, both the Prefa^e and the P^ssage
are extant, but with this difference from the common Editions, that the common
Editions ^et the Verse concerning the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, before
that of the Water, the Blood, and the Spirit; which comes after it in this
Copy: And that I may in this place end all the Readings I found of this passage
in my Travels, there is a Manuscript in St. Mark's Library in Venice in three
Languages, Greek, Latin, and Arabic, that seems not above 400. years old, in
which this passage is not in the Greek, but it is in the L^tin set after the
other three, with a sicut to join it to what goes before. And in a Manuscript
Latin Bible in the Library of St. Laurence at Florence, both St. I^romes
Preface and this Passage are extant: but this Passage comes after the other,
and is pinned to it with a sicut, as is that of Venice: yet si^ut is not in the
Geneva Manuscript. There are two Greek Manuscripts of the Epistles at B^sil,
that seem to be about 500. years old, in neither of which this passage is to be
found: they have also an Ancient Latin Bible, which is about 800. years old, in
which tho St. Ierom's Prologue is inserted, yet this Passage is wanting. At
Stras^^^rg I saw four very Ancient Manuscripts of the New Testament in Latin:
three of these seemed to be about the time of Charles the Great, but the fourth
seemed to be much antienter, and may belong to the seventh Century: in it
neither the Prologue nor the Place is extant: but it is added at the foot of
the page with another hand. In two of the other, the Prologue is extant, but
the Place is no^: only in one of them it is added on the Margin. In the fourth,
as the Prologue is extant so is the Place likewise, but it comes after the
verse of the other three, and is ^oyned to it thus, Sicut tres sunt in coelo.

It seemed strange to me, and it is almost incredible, that in the Vatican
Library there are no Ancient Latin Bibles, where above all other places they
ought to be looked for: but I saw none above 400. years old. There i^ indeed the
famous Greek Manuscript of great value, which the Chanoine Shelstrat, that was
Library keeper, asserted to be 1400. years old, and proved it by the great
similitude of the Characters with those that are upon S. Hippolites Statue,
which is so evident, that if his Statue was made about his time, the antiquity
of this Manuscript is not to be disputed. If the Characters are not so fair,
and have not all the marks of Antiquity that appears in the Kings Manuscript at
S. James's, yet this has been much better preserved, and is much more entire.
The Passage that has led me into this digression, is not to be found in the
Vati^an Manuscript, no more than it is in the Kings Manuscript. And with this I
will finish my account of Zurich. The public Library is very noble: The Hall
in which it is placed, is large and well contrived; there is a very handsome
Cabinet of Med^ls, and so I will break off; but when I have gone so much
farther that I have gathered Materials for another Letter of this Volum, you
may look for a sec^n^ entertaiment, such as it is from.

Your, and^.
POSTSCRIPT.
I told you, that in Bern the Balliages are given by a sort of a Ballot, which
is so managed, that no man's Vote is known: but I must now add, that since I was
first there, they have made a considerable regula^ion in the way of Voting,
when Offices are to be given, which approaches much nearer the Ven^tian method,
and which exposes the competitors more to chance, and by consequence may put an
end to the Intrigues, that are so much in use for obtaining those Employments.
There is a number of Balls put into a Box, equal to the number of those that
have right to vote, and that are present; of these the third part is guilt, and
two parts are only silvered, so every one takes out a ball; but none can vote
except those who have the guilt balls; so that hereafter a man may have more
than two thirds sure, and yet be cast in a competition.

There is one thing for which the Switzers, in particular those of Bern, cannot
be enough commended, they have ever since the Perse^ution began first in
France, opened a Sanctuary to such as have retired thither, in so generous and
so Christian a manner, that it deserves all the honorable Remembrances that
can be made of it: such Ministers and others, that were at first condemned in
France, for the affair of the Cevennes, have not only found a kind Reception
here, but all ^he Support that could be expected, and indeed much more than
could have been in reason expected. For they have assigned the French Ministers
a pen^ion of f^ve Crowns a month, if they were unmarried, and have increased it
to such as had Wife and Children, so that some had above ten Crowns a month
pension. They dispersed them over all the Pais de Vaud: but the greatest number
staid at Lausa^ne and Vevay. In order to the supporting of this charge, the
Charities of Zuri^h, and the other neighboring Protestant States, were brought
hither. Not only the Protestan^ Cantons, but the Gris^ns, and some small
States, that are under the protection of the C^nton^, such as Neufchastel, S.
Gall, and some others, have sent in their Charities to Bern, who dispense them
wit^ great dis^retion, and bear what further ^harge this Relief brings upon
them; and in this last total and deplo^^ble dispersion of those Churches, the
whole Country h^^ been animated with such a Spirit of Charity and Compassion,
that every Man's house and purse has been opened to the Re^u^ies, that have
passed thither in suc^ numbers, that sometimes the^e have been above 2000. i^
Lausanne alone, and of these there were at one ti^^ near 200. Ministers, and
they all met with a Kindness and Free-heartedness, that looked more like some
what o^ the primitive Age revived, than the Degeneracy of the A^^ in which we
live.

I shall Conclude this Postscrips, which is already swelled to the bigness of a
Letter, with a sad Instance o^ the Anger and heat that rises among Divines
concerning Matters of very small consequence.

The middle way that Amirald, Daiile, and some others in Fran^e took in the
matters that were disputed i^ Holland, concerning the Divine Decrees, and the
extent of the Death of Christ, as it came to be generally followed in France,
so it had some Assertors both in G^neva and Switz^rland, who denied the
Imputation of Adams sin, and asserted the Universality of Christ's death,
together with a sufficient Grace given to all men, asserting with this a
particular and free Decree of Election, with an efficacious Grace for those
included in it: these cam^ to be called Universalists, and began to grow very
considerable in Geneva: two of the Professors o^ Divini^y there being known to
favor those Opinions, Upon this, those who adhered strictly to the opposite
Doctrine, were inflamed, and the Contention grew to that height, that almost
the whole Town came to be concerned, and all were divided into parties. If upon
this, the Magistr^te^ had enjoined silence to both parties, they had certainly
acted wisely: for these are speculations so little certain, and so little
essential to Religion, that a Diversity of Opinions ought not to be made the
occasion of Heat or Faction. But tho the party of the Vniversalists was
considerable in G^neva, it was very small in Switzerland, therefore some
Divines there, that adhered to the old received Doctrine, drew up some
Articles, in which all these Doctrines were not only condemned, together with
some Speculations, that were asserted concerning Adams Immortality, and other
qualities belonging to the state of Innocence; but because Cap^l and some other
Critics had not only asserted the novelty of the points, but had taken the
liberty to correct the reading of the Hebrew, supposing that some errors had
been committed by the Coppiers of the Bible, both in the Vowels and Consonants,
in opposition to this, they condemned all corrections of the Hebrew Bible, and
asserted the Antiquity of the Points, or at least of the power and reading
according to them; by which, tho they did not engage all to be of Buxtors's
opinion, as to the Antiquity of the points, yet they shut the door against all
Corrections of the present Punctuation: If this consent of Doctrine (for so
they termed it) had been made only the Standard, against which no man might
have taught, without incurring censures, tbe severity had been more tolerable:
but they obliged all such as should be admitted either to the Ministry. or to a
Professors Chair, to sign sic sentio, so ^ think; and this being so settled at
Bern and Zurich, it was also carried by their authority at Geneva: but for
those in office, the M^derator and C^erk signed it in all their names: and thus
they were not contended to make only a Regulation in those Matters, but they
would needs, according to a maxim that has been so often fatal to the Church,
enter into peoples Cons^iences, and either shut out Young Men from Employments,
or impose a Test upon them, which perha^s some have signed not without
Struglings in their Conscience. Yet some that set on this Test or Consent* are
men of such extraordinary Worth, that I am confident they have acted in this
matter out of a sincere zeal for that which they believe to be the Truth: only
I wi^^ they had larger and freer Souls.

The only considerable Tax under which the Switze^* lie, is, that when Estates
are sold, the fifth part of the price belongs to the Public, and all the
Abatement th^^ the B^ilif can make, is to bring it to a sixth part; this the^
call the Lod, which is derived from Alodium: only ther^ are some Lands that are
Frank alod, which lie no^ under this Tax: but this falling only on the Sellers
of Estat^s, (...) was thought a just Punishment, and a wise Restraint o^ ill
Husbands of their Estates.

I was the more confirmed in the account I have give^ you of the derivation of
Advoyer, when I found that i^ some small Towns in the Canton of Bern, the chief
Magistrate is still so called: as in Payerne, so that I make no doubt, but as
the Ancient Magistrates in the time of the Romans, that were to give an account
of the Town, were called Advocates, and afterward the Judge i^ Civil Matters,
that was named by the Bishops, was called at first Advocat, and afterward
Vidam or Vi^edom^nus; so this was the Title thas was still continued in Bern,
while they were under the Austrian and German yoke, and was preserved by them
when they threw it off.

I have perhaps touched too slightly the last Difference that was in
Switzerland, which related to the Canton o^ Glaris. In the Canton of Apenzell,
as the two Religion are tolerated, so they are separated in different quarter^*
those of one Religion have the one half of the Canton, an^ those of the other
Religion have the other half, so they live apart: but in Glaris they are mixed:
and now the number of the Papists is become very low; one assured me, there
were not above 200. Families of that Religion, and those are also so poor, that
their necessities dispose some o^ them every day to change their Religion. The
other P^pish Cantons, seeing the danger of losing their interest entirely in
that Canton, and being set on by the intrigues o^ ^ Court, that has understood
well the policy of imbroiling ^ll other States, made great use of some
complaints that were brought by the Papists of Glaris, as if the prevailing of
the other Religion exposed them to much injustice and oppression; and upon that
they proposed, that the Can^on should be equally divided into two halves, as
Appenz^l was: this was extremely unjust, since the Papists were not the tenth,
or perhaps the twentieth part of the Cant^n. It is true, it was so situated in
the midst of the Popish Cantons, that the Protestant Cantons could not easily
come to their assistance: but those of Glaris resolved to dye rather than
suffer this injustice, and the Prot^st^nt Cantons resolved to engage in a war
with the Popish Cantons, if they imposed this matter on their Brethren of
Glaris: at last this temper was found, that in all suits of law between those
of different Religions, two thirds of the Judges should be always of the
Religion of the defendant; but while this Contest was on foot, those, who as is
believed, fomented it, if they did not set it on, knew how to make their
Advantage of the Conjuncture; for then was the Fortification of Hunningen at
the Ports of Basil much advanced, of the importance of which, they are now very
apprehensive when it is too late. There are six Noble Families in Bern, that
have still this privilege, that when any of them is chosen to be of the
Council, they take place before all the Ancient Counselors, whereas all the
rest take place according to the Order in which they were chosen to be of the
Council.



THE SECOND LETTER.
Millan, the first of October, 1685.
AFTER a short stay at Zurich, we went dow^ the Lake, where we past under the
Bridge a^ Ripperswood, which is a very noble Work for such a Country; the Lake
is there about half a mile broad, the Bridge is about twelve foot broad, bu^
has no Rails on either side, so that if the wind blow^ hard, which is no
extraordinary thing there, a man is in great danger of being blown into the
Lakes: and this same defect I found in almost all the Bridges of Lombardy,
which seemed very strange; for since that Defense is made upon so small an
Expense, it was amazing to see Bridges so naked: and that was more surprising
in some places, where the Bridges are both high and long: yet I never heard of
any mischief that followed on this; but those are sober Countries, where
drinking is not much in use. After two days journey, we came to Coire, which
is the chief Town of the Grisons, and where we found a general Diet of the
three Leagues sitting, so that having staid ten days there, I came to be
informed of a great many particulars concerning those Leagues, which are not
commonly known: The To^n is but little, and may contain between four and five
thousand Souls; it lies in a bottom, upon a small brook, that a little below
the Town falls into the Rhine. It is environed with Mountains of all hands, so
that they have a very short Summer; for the Snow is not melted till May or
June; and it began to Snow in September when I was there. On a rising ground at
the East and of the Town is the Cathedral, ^he Bishops Palace, and the Close,
where the D^an and six Pre^endaries ^ive; all within the Close are Papists, but
all the Town ^re Protestants, and they live pretty neighbourly together. Above
a quarter of a mile high in the Hill, one goes up by a steep ascent to Saint
Lucius Chapel; My curiosy carried me thither: Tho I gave no faith to the
legend of King Lucius, and of his coming so far from home ^o be the Apostle of
the Grisons. His Chapel is a little Vault about ten foot square, where there
is an Altar, and where Mass is said upon some great Festivals; it is situated
under a natural Ar^h that is in the Rock, which was thought proper ^o be given
out to have been the Cell of a Hermit: from it some drops of a small Fountain
fall down near the Chapel; the Bishop assured me it had a miraculous virtue
for weak-eyes, and that it was Oily; but neither taste nor feeling could
discover to me any Oilyness: I believe it may be very good for the Eyes, as all
Rock-Water is; but when I offered to show the good old Bishop, that the legend
of Lucius was a Fable in all the parts of it, but most remarkably in that which
related to the G^isons, and that we had no Kings in Britain at that time, but
were a Province to the Romans, that no ancient Authors speak of it, Bid being
the first that mentions it; and that the pretended Letter to Pope Eleutherius,
together with his answer, has evident characters of Forgery in it, all this
signified nothing to the Bishop, who assured me, that they had a Tradition of
that in their Church; and it was inserted in their Breviary, which he firmly
believed: he also told me the other legend of King Lucius's sister S. Emerita,
who was burnt there, and of whose Veil there was yet a considerable remnant
reserved among their Relics: I confess, I never saw a Relic so ill
disguised; for it is a piece o^ worn Linen Cloth lately washed, and the
burning did not seem to be a month old; and yet when they took it out of the
Case, to show it me, there were some there that with great devotion rubbed their
beads upon it. The Bishop had some contests with his Dean, and being (...)
Prin^e of the Empire, he had proscribed him: the De^^ had also behaved himself
so insolently, that by an orde^ of the Diet, to which even the Bishop, as was
believed, consented, he was put in Prison as he came out of the Cathedral. By
the common consent both of the Popi^^ and Protestant Communities, a Law was
long ago made against E^^lesiastical Immunities: this attempt on ^he Dean was
made four years ago; as soon as he was let o^^ he went to Rome, and made great
complaints o^ the Bishop, and it was thought the Popish party intended to mo^e
in the Diet while we were there ^or the repealing of th^^ Law, but they did it
not. The foundation of ^he Quar^^ between the Bishop and Dean was the
Exemptions to which the Dean and Chapter pretended, and upon which the B^sh^p
made some Invasion: Upon which I took occasion ^o show him the novelty of those
Exemptions, and that in the primitive Church it was believed, that the Bishop
had the Authority over his Presbyters by a divine right; and if it was by a
Divine Right, then the Pop^ could not exempt them from his obedience: but the
Bishop would not carry the matter so high, and contented himself with two
maxims; the one was, That the Bishop was Christ's Vicar in his Diocese; and the
other was* That what the Pope was in the Catholic Church, the Bishop was the
same in his Diocese.

He was a good-natured Man, and did not make use o^ the great Authority that he
has over the Papists there, to set them on to live uneasily with their
neighbors of another Religion. That Bishop was anciently a great Prince; and
the greatest part of the League, that carries still the name of the House of
God, belonged to him; tho I was assured that Pregallia, one of those
Communities, was ^ ^ree State above six hundred years ago, and that they have
Records yet extant that prove this: The other Communities of this League bought
their liberties from several Bi^hops some considerable time before the
Reformation, of which the Deeds are yet extant; so that it is an impudent thing
to say, as some have done, that they shook off his Yoke at that time.

The Bishop has yet reserved a Revenue of about one thousand pound Sterling a
Year, and every one of the Preb^ndaries has near two hundred pound a Year. It
is not easy to imagine out of what the Riches of this Country is raised; for
one sees nothing but a tract of vast Mountains, that seem barren Rocks, and
some little Valleys among them not a mile broad, and the best part of these is
washed away by the Rhine, and some Brooks that fall into it: but their wealth
consists chiefly in their Hills, which afford much pasture; and in the hot
months, in which all ^he Pasture of Italy is generally parched, the Cattle are
driven into these Hills, which brings them in a Revenue of above two hundred
thousand Crowns a Year. The Public is indeed very poor, but particular persons
are so rich, that I knew a great many there, who were believed to have Estates
to the value of one hundred thousand Crowns. Mr. Schovestein, that is accounted
the richest man in the Country, is believed to be worth a Million, I mean of
Livres. The Government here is purely a Commonwealth; for in the choice of
their Magistrates, every man that is above sixteen Years old has his Voice,
which is also the constitution of some of the small Cantons. The Three Leagues
are, the League of the Grisons, that of the House of God, and that of the ten
Jurisdictions.

They believe, that upon the incursions of the Goths and Vandals, as some fled
to the Venetian Islands, out of which arose that famous Commonwealth; so
others came and sheltred themselves in those Valleys. They told me of an
ancient inscription lately found, of a Stone where on the one side is graven,
Omitto Rhetos Indomitos, and ne plus ultra is on the other; which they pretend
was made by Julius Caesar: the Stone on which this inscription is, is upon one
of their Mountains; but I did not pass that way, so I can make no judgment
concerning it. After the first ^orming of this people, they were cast into
little States, according to the different Valleys which they inhabited, and in
which Justice was administered, and so they fell under the power of some little
Princes, that became severe Masters; but when they saw the Example that the
Switzers had set them, in shaking off the Austrian Yoke, above two hundred
years ago, they likewise combined to shake off theirs; only some few of those
small Princes used their authority better, and con^urred wi^h the people in
shaking off the Yoke, and so they are still parts of the Body; only Haldenstein
is an absolute Sovereignty; it is about two miles from Coire to the West, of
the other side of the Rhine; the whole Territory is about half a mile long at
the foot of the Alps, whe^^ there is scarce any breadth. The authority of these
Baro^^ was formerly more absolute that it is now; for the Subjects were their
Slaves: but to keep together the li^^l^ Village, they have granted them a power
of naming a list for their Magistrates, the person being to be named by the
Baron; who has also the Right of Pardoning, a Right of Coining, and every
thing also that belongs to a Sovereign. I saw this little Prince in Coire, in
an Equipage not suitable to his Quality; for he was in all poin^^ like a very
ordinary Gentleman. There are three other Baronies that are Members of the
Diet, and subject to it; the chief belonged to the Ar^h-Duke o^ Inch-pruck; the
other two belong to Mr. Schoven-stain and Mr. de Mont* they are the Heads of
those Communities of which their Bar^nies are composed; they name the
Magistrates out of the lists that are presented to them by their Subjects; and
they have the right of pardoning and of con^iscations: That belonging to the
House of A^stria is the biggest, it has five voices in the Diet, and i^ can
raise twelve hundred Men. One Trav^rs bought it o^ the Emperor in the year
1679. he entered upon the Righ^ of the ancient Barons, which were specified in
an agreement that past between him and his Peasa^ts, and wa^ confirmed by the
Emperor. Travers made many i^croachments upon the Privileges of his Subjects,
who upon that made their Complaints to the League; but Travers would have the
Matter judged at Inchpruck, and the Emperor supported him in this Pretension,
and sent an Agent to the Diet: I was present, when he had his Audience, in
which there was nothing but General Complements: But the Diet stood firm to
their Constitution, and asserted, that the Emperor had no Authority to judge
in that Matter, which belonged only to them; so Travers was forced to let his
Pretentions fall.

All the other Parts of this State are purely Democratical; there are three
different Bodies or Leagues, and every one of these are an entire Government;
and the Assembly or Diet of the Three Leagues, in only a Confederacy, like the
United Provinces, or the Cant^ns: There are sixty-seven V^ices in the General
Diet, which are thus divided: The League of the Grisons has twenty-eight
Voices, that of the House of God has twenty-four, and that of the
Jurisdictions has fifteen. The Jurisdictions belonged anciently to the House
of Austria: but they having shaken off that Authority, were incorporated into
the Diet: but in the last Wars of Germany, the Austrians thought to have
brought them again under their Yoke; yet they defended their Liberty with so
much Vigor, that the Austrians it seems thought the conquest not worth the
while, and that it would not quit the cost. They were affrighted by two
extraordinary Actions; in one Village, which was quite abandoned by all the Men
belonging to it, who left the Women in it, some hundreds, as I was told, there
quartered, xnd were apprehensive of no danger from their Hostesses; but the
Women intended to let their Husbands see, that they were capable of contriving
and executing a bold Action; tho it must be confessed, it was a little too rough
and Barbarous for the Sex: They entered into a Combination to cut the Throa^s of
all the Soldiers at one time; the Woman that proposed this, had four lodged
with her, and she with her own Hands dispatched them all, and so did all the
rest, not one Soldier escaping ^o carry away the News of so unheard of a Rage.
In another Place, a Body of the Austrians came into a Valley, that was quite
abandoned; for the Men that had no Arms but their Clubs and Staves, had got up
to the Mountains; but they took their Measures so well, and possessed
themselves so of the Passes, that they came down upon the Soldiers with so
much Fury, that they defeated them quite, so that very few escaped; and it is
certain, that the Subduing them would have proved a very hard Work. It is true,
they are not in a Condition to hold out long; the public is too poor; so that
tho particular Persons are extreme rich; yet they have no public Revenue, but
every Man is concerned to preserve his Liberty, which is more entire here, than
it is even in Switzerland: but this swells often so much, and throws them into
great Convulsions. The League of the Grisons is the first and most ancient, and
it is composed of eight an^ twenty Communities, of which there are eighteen
Papists, and the rest are Protestants; the Communities of the two Religions
live neighbourly together, yet they do not suffer those of another Religion to
live among them, so that every Community is entirely of the same Religion; and
if any one changes, he must go into another Community. Each Community is an
entire State within it self, and all Perso^^ must meet once a year to choose the
Judge and his Assistants, whom they change, or continue from year to year, as
they see cause: There is no difference made between Gentleman and Peasant, and
the T^nant has a Vote as well as his Landlord, nor dare his Landlord use him
ill when he vote^ contrary to his intentions; for the Peasants would look upon
that as a common Quarrel. An appeal lies from the Judge of the Community, to
the Assembly of the League, where all matters end; for there lies no appeal to
the general Diet of the thr^e Leagues, except in matters that concern the
conquered Countries, which belong in common to all the three. There is one
chosen by the Deputies for the Assembly of the League, who is called the Head
of the League, that can call them together as he sees ^ause, and can likewise
bring a cause that has been once judged to a second hearing. Ilants is the
Chief Town of this League, where their Diet meets. The second League is that of
the House of God, in which there are 24 Communi^ies; the Burgomaster of Coire
is always the Head of this League: This League is almost wholly Protestant, and
the two Valleys of the Upper and Lower En^edin are pointed out by the Papists,
as little less than Cannibals toward such Ca^holicks as come among them; but
Friar Sfondrato, Nephew to Pope Gregory the fourteenth, whose Mother the
Marquess of Bergominiero, that was in England, has married, found the contrary
of all this to be true to his great regret. About eighteen years ago he was
believed to have wrought Miracles, and he became so much in love with the Crown
of Martyrdom, that he went through the Enged^n, not doubting but he would find
there that which he desired. His Brother had come some time before into the
Country to drink Mineral Waters, and was well known to the Gentry, so some of
these hearing of the Fry^r's coming, went and waited on him, and he was
entertained by them in their Houses, and conveyed through the Country, tho he
took all possible ways to provoke them; for he was often railing at their
Religion, but to all that they made no answer, only they continued their
Civilities still, which did so inrage the warm Friar, that he went to Bormio,
and there (as was believed) he Dyed of Grief. An Accident fell out five years
ago, that the People of the Country esteemed a sort of a Miracle. The Papists
in their Processions go sometimes out of one Community into another, and when
they pass through Protestant Comm^nities, they lower the Cross, and give over
singing till they are again upon Popish ground: but then they went on bea^ing
up the Cross, and singing as they went; upon which the Protestants stopped them,
and would not suffer them to go on in that manner: they finding that they were
not equal in number to the Protestants, sent to a Catholic Community, and
desired them to come to their Assistance: Two thousand came, and by all
appearance the Dispute would have had a bloody Issue: for the Protestants were
resolved to maintain the Right^ of their Community, and the others were no less
resolved to force their Way: but an extraordinary thick mist arose, and through
it, the Papists fancied they saw ^ vast Body of Men, which was no other than a
Wood: but terrified with the Appearance of such a number, they retired, and
this saved a little battle, that probably would not only have ended in the
shedding much blood, but might have very much disordered the whole Constitution
and Union of their Leagues. The Papists of quality endeavor much to keep their
People in ordet* but they acknowledged to my self, that the Protestants were
much peaceabler than the Catholics. The Jurisdictions have fifteen Votes in
the General Diet, yet they are generally called the ten Jurisdictions, and the
greater part of them are likewise of the Religion; for upon the general
Computation of the three Leagues, the Protestants are about two thirds. In
their Diets there are three Tables, one in the middle, and two on either side;
at every Table sits the Head of the League, and a Secretary near him; and from
the Ta^^^ there goes down Benches on both Hands for the Deputi^^ from the
Communities of that League: They hold their Diets by turns in the Chief Towns
of the several Leagues, and it happened to be the turn of the House of God, when
I was there; so they met at Coire.

The three Leagues have a conquered Country in Italy, divided into three
Districts, the Valteline, Chavennes and ^ormio. When John Galeasse possessed
himself of the Duchy of Milan, and drove out Ba^nabas, Mastinus one of
Barnabas's Son^, to whom his Father had given those three Branches of the
Duchy of Milan, retired to Coire, and being hospitably received and
entertained by the Bishop, when he died, he gave his Right to those Territories
to the Cathedral of Coire: but here was a Title without a force able to make it
good. But when the Wars of Italy were on Foot, the three Leagues being much
courted by both the Crowns, since they were Masters of the Passes, by which
either the Switzers or Germans could come into Italy, they resolved to lay hold
on that Opportunity: yet they had not Zeal enough for their Bishop, to engage
deep upon his Account, so they agreed with him to pay him such a Revenue, and
he transferred his Title to them, and they were so considerable to the
Spaniards, that without much ado, they yielded those Parcels of the D^t^hy of
Milan to them, and by this means they are possessed of them. Those Accessions
to this State are much better than the principal; for as certainly the
Valteline, which is above forty Miles long, and two broad, is one of the riches
Valleys in the World, in which there are three Harvests some years; so the
Chavennes and Bormio are much preferable to the best Valleys of the Grisons;
yet the engagement that people have to their native Homes appears signally
here, since the Grisons have not forsaken their Country, that they might
situate themselves so advantagiously: but they love their rugged Valleys, and
think the safety they enjoy ^n them beyond the pleasures of their acquired
Dominions; so they govern them by Bailifs and Podesta's, and other Officers
whom they send among them; and all the advantages that they draw from them, is
that the Magistrates whom they send to govern them, do enrich themselves, as
the Bailifs in Switzerland do. All those Offices go round the several
Communities, who have the right of nomination in their turn: But if there is
none of the Community proper for the Employment, any one of another Community
may buy of them the Nomination for that turn, and the Community distribute
among them the Money that he gives them. The public draws nothing out of those
parts, except the Fines, which in some years amounts to no considerable sum;
and ten or twelve thousand Crowns is thought a great deal to be raised out of
them in a year; so that their Subjects live happy, and free of all Taxes, which
made their last Revolt appear the more extraordinaty; and it was indeed the
effect of a very surprising Bigotry, when a people under the gentlest yoke in
the World, who had no other Grievance, but tha^ now and then their Magistrates
were of another Religion, and that the Protestant Religion was tolerated
amongst them, would therefore throw off their Masters, cut the Throats of their
Neighbors, and cast themselves into the hands of the Spaniards, who are the
terriblest Masters in the World.

But to give a more particular Relation of that matter, and to tell the
Circumstances which seem a little to lesse^ that Rebellion and Massacre, I must
give an Account of a part of this Constitution that is very Terrible, and which
makes the greatest Men in it to tremble: The Peasants come sometimes in great
Bodies, and demand a Chamb^r of Justice from the general Diet, and they are
bound to grant it always when it is thus demanded, which come^ about generally
once in twenty years; commonly this tumult of the Peasants is set on by some of
the Male-contented Gentry, and generally there are a great many Sacrifices
made. This Court is composed of ten Judges out of every League, and twenty
Advocates, who manage such Accusations as are presented to them; this Court is
paramount to Law, and Acts like a Court of Inquisition; they give the Question,
and do every thing that they think necessary to discover the Truth of such
Accusations as are presented to them; and the Decisions of this Court can never
be brought under a second Review, tho there is an exception to this; for about
a hundred years ago, one Court of Justice reversed all that another had done;
but that is a single instance. The Peasants are in as great a jealousy of the
Spaniards, as the Switzers are of the French, and the good Men among them are
extreme sensible of a great Dissolution of Morals that the Spanish service
brings among them: For there is a Grison Regiment kept still in pay by the
Spaniards, there are in it twelve C^mpanies of fifty apiece, and the Captains
have a thousand Crowns pay, tho they are not obliged to attend upon the
service: This is upon the matter a Pension paid under a more decent name to the
most considerable Men of the Country; and this is shared among them without
any distinction of Protestant and Papist, and is believed to sway their
Councils much. The Peasants are apt to take fire, and to beli^ve they are
betrayed by those Pensioners of Spain; and when Rumors are blown about among
them, they come in great numbers to demand a Chamber of Justice; the common
Question that they give, which is also used all Switzerland over, and in
Geneva, is, that they tie the Hands of the suspected person behind his back,
and pull them up to his Head, and so draw them about, by which the arms and
chiefly the Shoulder-blades are disjoynted; and when a person put to the
Question confesses his Crime, and is upon that condemned to dye, he is obliged
to renew his Confession upon Oath at the Place of Execution: and if he goes off
from it then, and says, That his Confession was extorted by the Violence of
the Torture, he is put again to the Question: for this passes for a Maxim, That
no man must dye unless he conf^sseth himself guilty: Generally when the fury of
demanding this Chamber is spread among the people, the Gentry run away, and
leave the whole matter in the power of the Peasants; for they know not where it
will end; and so the Peasants being named to be Judges, the Justice goes quick,
till some Sacrifices appease the Rage. Two Year ago, upon the sale of a Common
to the Bishop of Como, to which he had an ancient pretension, the Peasants
having no more the liberty of the Common, were enraged at their Magistrates,
and a Report was spread abroad, of which the first Author could never be
discovered, that the Spaniards had sent a hun^red thousand Crowns among them to
corrupt all their Magistrates; upon this they were so set on fire, that it was
generally thought there would have been many Sacrifices made to this fury: but
the Gentry happened to be then so much united, that there was none of them
engaged among the Peasants, or that managed their Rage: a Chamber of Justice
was granted, but the matter was so ordered, that it did not appear that any one
was guilty; yet some that had dealt in that transaction were fined, not so much
for any fault of theirs, as to raise a fund to pay the Expenses of the Chamber;
and because they could not find color enough to raise so much out of the
Fines, there was a fine of five hundred Livres laid on every one of the Spanish
Companies. I hope this digression will not appear tedious to you, and the
rather because you will soon see that it was a little necessary to open the
matter of the Rebellion and Massacre in the Valteline.

In the Year 1618. there was a Report set about, That the Spaniards had a
Treaty on foot ^o tear away the Valteline from the Leagues: this was supported
by the Fort Fuentes, that the Governor of Milan was building upon the Lake of
Como, near the Valteline. There was one Ganatz a Minister, but a bloody and
Perfidious Man, that set on and managed the rage of the Peasa^ts, and there was
great reason to suspect some underhand dealing, tho he threw it which way he
pleased. A Chamber of Justice was appointed to sit at Tossane, which is a
considerable Town twelve miles from Coire, on the way to Italy, near Alta
Rhetia, which is a high and small Hill, to which there is no access but on one
side, where there are yet the Ruins of a Castle and a Church, and which they
believe was the Palace of Rhetus, the first Prince of the Country: There was
severe Justice done in this Chamber, a Pri^st was put to the Question, and so
ill use^ that he dyed in it, which is a crying thing among them. The chief
suspicion lay upon one Pianta, who being of one of the best Families of the
Grisons, was then one of the Captains in the Spanish Regiments; he withdrew
himself from the Storm, but the Peasants led on by Ganatz pursued him so, that
at last they found him, and hewed him in pieces, Ganatz himself striking the
first stroke with an Ax, which was taken ap and preserved by his Friends; and
^our and twenty years after ^ifty or sixty of his Friends ^ell upon Ganatz in
Coire, and killed him with the same Ax, which they brought along with them,
that they might execute their design by the same Tool with which their Friend
was murdered. Ganatz had during the Wars abandoned both his Religion and
Pr^fession, being indeed a disgrace to both, and had served first in the
Venetian, and then in the Spanish Troops: After the peace was made, he became
so considerable, being supported by the Spanish Faction, that he was chosen
Governor of Chavenn^s, and was come over to Coire to a Diet, he being then in
so important a charge: but he was so much hated, that tho the muthering of a
Magistrate in Office, and at a public Assembly in so terrible a manner, ought
to have been severely pun^shed, yet no inquiry was made into the Crime, nor was
any Man so much as questioned for it. In that Chamber many that were put to the
Question, confessed enough to hang them; some endured the Question, and escaped
with the loss of the use of their Arms. Those of the Valteline have made use of
this severity, as that which gave the rise to the Massacre; and it is very
probable, this might have drawn in some, that would have been otherwise more
moderate, and that it did likewise precipitate that Barbarous Action: yet it
was afterward found out, that the Plot had been formed long before, so that
the Industry and Rage of the Priests, managed by Spanish Emissaries, wo^king
upon the bigotry of the People, was the Real Cause, and this was only made use
of as a pretext to give some more plausible colors to the Massacre, which was
executed some Months after this Chamber was dissolved. It began while the
Protestants were at Church; there were some hundreds destroyed, the rest got
all up to the Mountains, and so escaped into the Country of the Grisons, and
those of Chavennes got likewise up to the Hills; for they are situated just at
the bottom of them.

I shall not prosecute the rest of that Har; the Fren^h saw of what Advantage
it was to them, not to let this Pass from Italy into Germany fall into the
Hands of the Spaniards; so Bassompiere was sent to Madrid, and obtained a
p^omise, that all things should be put in the same state in which they were
before the year 1618. but when that order was sent to the Governor of Milan,
it was plain he had secret Orders to the contrary; for he refused to execute
it: so a War followed, in which the Gris^ns found it was not easy for them to
support the charge of it, without employing the Assistance of the Fren^h. But
the Spaniards pretended to have no other Interest in the affairs of the
Valteline, than the preservation of the Catholic Religion; and to s^ew their
sincerity, they put the Country into the Popes Hands, knowing that he could
not preserve it but by their Assistance, nor restore it without securing it
from all change of Religion. The French willingly undertook the cause of the
Grisons, and because the Duke of Rohan was like to be the most favorable
General, as being of the Religion, he was sent to command some forces that
marched thither: But he saw, that if the French once made themselves Masters of
the Passes of the Country, it would turn to their Ruin; and finding the
Grisons reposed an entire confidence in him, he thought it unbecoming him to be
an Instrument in that which he saw must be fatal to them. The Spaniards seeing
the Fren^h engage in the Quarrel, and fearing lest they should possess
themselves of the Passes, offered to restore all the Territotry in Italy; for
Chavennes and Bormio had likewise revolted, only the Protestants got away so
quick upon the disorders in the Valteline, that they prevented the Rage of the
Priests. The Spaniards asked these conditions, that an Amnesty should be
granted for what was past; that there should be no Exercise of the Protestant
Religion tolerated in the Country, and that even the Bailifs and other
Magistrates of the Religion, that came to be sent into the Valteline, should
have no Exercise of their Religion; and as for other persons, that none of the
Religioe might stay above six Weeks at a time in the Country. The Duke of
Rohan seeing that Condition^ of so much Advantage to the Leagues were offered
to them, did underhand advise those of the Religion to accept of them, at the
same time that he seemed openly to oppose the Treaty set on foot on those Tems;
and that he might get out of this Employment with the less dishonor, he
advised their clapping him up in Prison till they had finished their Treaty
with the Spaniards. So that they very gratefully to this day own, that they owe
the Preservation of their Country to the wise Advices of that great Man. Many
that were of the Religion returned to their Houses and Estates, but the
greatest part fearing such another Massacree, have since changed their
Religion, others have sold their Estates, and left the Country; some stay
still, and go two or three hours journey to some of the Protestant Communities,
where they have the Exercise of the Religion: And tho they may not stay in the
Valteline above six weeks at a time; yet they avoid that by going for a day or
two out of the Country once within that time; nor is that matter at present so
severely examined: so that there is a calm among them as so those matters. But
when it comes to the turn of the Protestant Communities to send one of the
Religion to those employments, he is often much embarassed by the Bishop of
Como, to whose Diocese those Territories belong; for if the Bishop fancies,
that they do any thing contrary to the Ekclesiastical immunities, he
ex^ommunicates them; and tho this may appear a ridiculous thing, since they are
already in a worse state by being Heretics, yet it produces a very sensible
effect; for the people that are extremely superstitious, will not after that
come near such Magistrates* so that about three year ago a Bailif found himself
obliged to desire to be recalled, tho his time was not out, since being
excommunicated, he could no longer mainrain the Government in his own person.

Among the Grisons the Roman Law prevails, modefied a little by their Customs:
one that was a little particular, was executed when I was there. A M^n that
has an Estate by his Wife, enjoyes it after her death, as long as he continues
a Widower; but when he marri^s again, he is bound to divide it among the
Children that he had by her. The I^stice is short, and simple, but i^ is often
thought that bribes go here, tho but meanly in proportion to their poverty, as
well as in other places. The married Women here do scarce appear abroad, except
at Church; but the young Women have more Liberty before they are m^rried. There
is such a plenty of all things, by reason of the Gen^lene's of the Government,
and the Industry of the People, that in all the ten days, in which I stayed at
Coire, I was but once asked an Alms in the Streets. There are two Churches in
Coire; in the one there is an Organ, that joins with their Voices in the
singing of the Psalms* and there was for the Honor of the D^e^, while we were
there, an Anthem sung by a set of Musicians very regularly. In all the Churches
both of Switzerland and the Grisons, except in this only, the Minister preaches
covered; but here he is bare-headed. And I observed a particular devotion used
here in saying of the Lords Prayer, that the Ministers who wear Caps, put them
off when this was said. The Women here as in Bern, turn all to the East in time
of prayer, and also in their private Devotions, before and after the public
Prayer^; many also bow at the Name of Jesus: They Christen discovering the
whole Head, and pouring the Water on the Hind-head, using a trine aspersion,
which is also the practice of the Switzers. It was matter of much edification,
to see the great numbers both here and all Switzerland over, that come every
day to prayers morning and evening. They give here in the middle of the prayer
a good interval of Silence for the private Devotions of the Assembly. The
Schools here go not above Latin, Geek and Logic; and for the rest, they send
their Children to Zurich or Basil. The Clergy here are very meanly provided;
for most part they have nothing but the Benevolence of their people: they
complained much to me of a great Coldness in their people in the matters of
Religion, and of a great Corruption in their Morals: The Commons are extreme
insolent, and many Crimes go unpunished, if the persons that commit them have
either great credit, or much money. The poor Ministers here are under a
terrible slavery ^s for the Grisors pretend, that in all times they had not
only the P^atr^nage of their Chur^hes, but a power to dismiss the^r Churchmen
as they saw cause. How it is among the Papists, I cannot tell; but the Dean of
the Syn^d of the House of God ^old me, they had an ill custom of Ordaining
their Ministers without a Title, upon an examination of their Qualifications
and Abilities, which took them up generally six or seven hours, and when this
trial was thus dispatched, if the person was found qualified, they ordained
him; and it was too ordinary for those that were thus Ordain^d, to endeavor to
undermine the Ministers already in employment, if their people grew disgusted
at them, or as they became disabled by Age; and often the Interest and Kindred
of the Intruder carried the matter against the incumbent, without any color or
pretense; and in that case the Synod was bound to receive the Intruder In one
half of the Country they preach in high Dutch, and in the other half in a
corrupt Italian, which they call Romanish, that is, a mixture of French and
Italian. In every League they have a Synod; and as the people choose their
Ministers, so in imitation of the Switzers, every Synod chooses their Antistes
or Superintendant; he is called the Dean among the Grisons, and has a sort of
an Episcopal Power; but he is accountable to the Synod: The Office is for life;
but the Synod upon great cause given, may make a change. The people of this
Country are much more lively than the Switzers, and they begin to have some
tincture of the Italian temper. They are extreme civil to Strangers; but it
seems in all Commonwealths I^n-keepers think they have a right to exact upon
Strangers, which one finds here, as well as in Holland, or in Switzerland.

I shall conclude what I have to say concerning the Grisons with a very
extraordinary Story, which I had both from the Ministers of Coire, and several
other Gentlemen, that saw in April 1685. about five hundred Persons of
different Sexes and ages, that past through the Town, who gave this account of
themselves. They were the Inhabitants of a Valley in Tirol, belonging for the
greatest part to the Arch-Bish^prick of Saltsburg, but some of them were in the
Diocesses of Trent and Bresse; they seemed to be a remnant of the old
Waldenses; they worshipped neither Images nor Saints; and they believed the
Sacrament was only a Commemoration of the Death of Christ: and in many other
Points they had their peculiar opinions, different from those of the Church of
Rome; they knew nothing neither of Lutherans nor Calvinists; and the Gri^ons,
tho their Neighbors, had never heard of this Nearness of theirs to the
Protestant Religion. They had Mass said among them; but some years since some
of the Valley going over Germany to earn somewhat by their labor, happened to go
into the Palatinate, where they were better instructed in matters of Religion,
and these brought back with them into the Valley the Heidelberg Cate^hism,
together with some other German Books, which ran over the Valley, and they
being before that in a good disposition, those Books had such an effect upon
them, that they gave over going to Mass any more, and began to worship God in a
way more suitable to the Rules set down in Scripture: some of their Priests
eoncurred with them in this happy Change; but others, that adhered still to the
Mass, went and gave the Arch-Bishhop of Saltsburg an account of it; upon which
he sent some into the Country to examine the Truth of the Matter, to exhort
them to return to Mass; and to threaten them with all severity, if they
continued obstinate: so they seeing a terrible Storm ready to break upon them,
resolved to abandon their Houses, and all they had, rather than sin against
their Consciences: And the whole Inhabitants of the Valley, old and young, Men
and Women, to the number of two thousand, divided themselves into several
Bodies; some intended to go to Brandenburg, others to the Palatinate, and about
sive hundred took the way of Coire, intending to disperse themselves in
Switzerland. The Ministers told me, they were much edified with their
Simplicity, and Modesty; for a Collection being made for them, they desired
only a little bread to carry them on their way. From Coire we went to T^ssane,
and from that, through the way that is justly called Via Mala. It is through a
bottom between two Rocks, through which the Rhine runs, but under ground for a
great part of the way: The way is cut out in the middle of the Rock in some
places, and in several places the steepness of the Rock being such, that a way
could not be cut out, there are Beams driven into it, over which Boards and
Earth are laid; this way holds an hour: After that, there is for two hours good
way, and we past through two considerable Villages; there is good lodging in
both: from thence there is, for two hours Journey, terrible Way, almost as bad
as the Via Mala; then an hours Journey good way to Splugen; which is a large
Village of above two hundred Houses, that are well built, and the Inhabitants
seem all to live at their ease, tho they have no sort of soil but a little
Meadow ground about them; This is the last Protestant Church that was in our
way; it was well endowed; for the provision of the Minister was near two
hundred Crowns: Those of this Village are the Carriers between Italy and
Germany, so they drive a great Trade; for there is here a perpetual Carriage
going and coming; and we were told, that there pass generally a hundred Horses
through this Town, one day with another; and there are above five ^undred
Carriage Horse that belong to this Town. From this place we went mounting for
three hours, till we got to the top of the Hills, where there is only one great
Inn. After that the way was tolerably good for two hours; and for two hours
there is constant descent, which for the most part is as steep as if we were
all the while going down stairs: At the foo^ of this is a little Village,
called Campdolein, and here we found we were in Italy, both by the vast
difference of the Climate; for whereas we were freezing on the other side, the
heat of the Sun was uneasy here, and also by the number of the Beggar^, tho it
may seem the reverse of what one ought to expect, since the richest Country of
Europe is full of Beggars; and the Grisons, that are one of the poores^ States,
have no Beggars at all. One thing is also strange, that among the Grisons, the
rich Wine of the Valteline, after it is carried three Days Journey, is sold
cheaper than the Wine of other Countries, where it grows at the door: but there
are no Taxes nor Impositions here. From Campdolein there is three Hours Journey
to Chavenne^, all in a Slow descent; and in some Places the Way is extreme
rugged and stony. Chaveunes is very pleasantly situated at the very Foot of
the Mountains; there run^ through the Town a pleasant little River: It is nobly
built, and has a great many rich Vineyards about it: and the Rebound of the
Sunbeams from the Mountains, does so increase the heats here, that the Soil is
as rich here, as in any Place of Italy. Here one begins to see a Noble
Architecture in a great many Houses; in short, all the Marks of a rich Soil,
and a free Government appear here. The Town stood a little more to the North,
about five hundred years ago, but a Slice of the Alps came dow^ upon it, and
buried it quite; and at the Upper-end of the Town there are some Rocks that
look like Ruins, about which there has been a very extraordinary Expense, to
divide them one from another, and to make the^ fit Places for Forts and
Castles: the Marks of the Too^^ appeared all over the Rock in one place. I
measured the Bread^h of the one from the other, which is twent^ Foot, the
length is four hundred and fifty Foot, and a^ we could guess, the Rock was two
hundred Foot high, cut down on both sides in a Line as even as a Wall; toward
the top of one, the name Salvius is cut i^ great Letters, a little Gothic. On
the Tops of thos^ Ro^ks, which are inaccessible except on the one si^e, and to
that the Ascent is extreme uneasy, they had Garrisons during the Wars of the
Valteline: there were fifteen hundred in Garrison in that which is in the
middle: There falls down frequently Slices from the Hills, that do extremely
fatten the Ground which they cover, so that it becomes fruitful beyond
expression: and I saw a Lime Tree, that was planted eight and thirty years ago,
in a piece of Ground, which had been so covered, that was two Fathom and a half
of Compass. On both sides of the River, the Town, and the Gardens belonging to
it, cover the whole Bottom, that lie^ between the Hills, and at the Roots of
the Mountains they dig great Cellars, and Grottoes, and strike a hole about a
foot Square, ten or twelve foot into the Hill, which all the Summer long blows
a fresh Air into the Cellar; so that the Wine of those Cellars drinks almost as
cold as if it were in Ice; but this Windpipe did not blow when I was there,
which was toward the end of September: For the Sun opening the Pores of the
Earth, and rarifying the exterior Air, that which is compressed within the
cavities that are in the Mountains, ^ushes out with a constant Wind; but when
the operation of the Sun is weakened, this course of the Air is les^ sensible.
Before or over those Vaults they build little pleasant rooms like Sommerhouses,
and in them they go to collation generally at night in Summer. I never saw
bigger Grapes than grow there; there is one sort bigger than the biggest Damas
ene Plums that we have in E^gland.

There is a sort of Wine here and in the Valteline, which I never heard named
any where else, that is called Aromatick-wine; and as the taste makes one think
it must be a composition (for it tastes like a Strong-water drawn of Spi^es) so
its strength being equal to a weak Brandy, disposes one to believe that it
cannot be a natural Wine, and yet it is the pure juice of the Grape, without
any mixture. The Liquor being singular, I informed my self particularly of the
way of preparing it: the Grapes are red, tho it drinks white; they let the
Grapes hang on the V^nes till November, that they are extreme ripe, then they
carry them to their Garrets, and set them all upright on their ends by one
another for two or three months, then they pick all the Grapes, and throw away
those in which there is the least appearance of rottenness, so that they press
none but sound Grapes: after they are pressed, they put the Liquor in an open
Vessel, in which it throws up a scum, which they take off twice a day, and when
no more scum comes up, which according to the difference of the season is
sooner or later (for sometimes the scum comes no more after eight days, and at
other times it continues a fortnight) then they put it in a close Vessel; for
the first year it is extreme sweet and luscious, but at the End of the year,
they pierce it a little higher than the middle of the Vessel, almost two thirds
from the Bottom, and drink it off till it comes so low, and then every year
they fill it up anew: once a year in the Month of March it ferments, and cannot
be drunk till that is over, which continues a Month, but their other Wi^^
ferments not at that time. Madam Salis, a Lady of that Country, who entertained
us three Days with a Magnificence equal to what can be done in London or
Paris, had Wine of this Composition, that was forty years old, and was so very
strong, that one could hardly drink above a spoonful, and it tasted high of
Spicery, tho she assured me there was not one grain of Spice in it, nor of any
other mixture whatsoever. Thus the heat that is in this Wine, becomes a fire,
and distills it self, throwing up the more spirituous parts of it to the top of
the Hog^head.

Both here, and in the Grisons, the meat is very juicy, the Fowl is excellent,
their Roots and Herbs very tastful; but the Fish of their Lakes is beyond any
thing I ever saw. They live in a great Simplicity as to their Habit an^
Furniture, but they have plenty of all things, and are extreme rich; the Family
where we were so nobly entertained, is believed to have about two hundred
thousan^ Crowns: here the Italian custom, of one only of a Family that marries,
takes place generally. There is a sort of Pots of Stone that is used not only
in all the Kitchins here, but almost all Lombardy over, called Lav^ge, the
Stone feels oily and scaly, so that a Scale sticks to ones Finger that touches
it, and is somewhat of the nature of a Slate; there are but three Mines of it
known in these parts, one near Chavennes, another in the Valteline, and the
third in the Grisons; but the first is much the best; they generally cut it in
the Mine round, of about a Foot and a half Diameter, and about a Foot and a
quarter thick, and they work it in a Mill, where the Chizzels that cut the
Stone are driven about by a Wheel that is set a going by Water, and which is so
ordered, that he who manages the Chizzel, very easily draws forward the Wheel
out of the course of the Water; they turn off first the outward coat of this
Stone, till it is exactly smooth, and then they separate one Pot after another
by those small and hooked Chizzels, by which they make a Nest of Pots, all one
within another, the outward and biggest being as big as an Ordinary Beef-pot,
and the inward Pot being no bigger than a small Pipkin; these they arm with
hooks and Circles of brass, and so they are served by them in their Kitchins.
One of these Stone-pots takes heat and boils sooner than any Pot of Mettle; and
whereas the Bottoms of Mettle-pots transmit the heat so entirely to the Liquor
within, that they are not insufferably hot; the bottom of this Stone-pot, which
is about twice so thick as a Pot of Mettle, burns extremely; it never cracks,
neither gives it any sort of taste to the Liquor that is boiled in it: but if
it falls to the Ground, it is very brittle; yet this is repaired by patching it
up; for they piece their broken Pots so close, tho without any cement, by
sowing with Iron-wire the broken parcels together, that in the holes which they
pierce with the wire; there is not the least breach made, except that which the
wire both makes and fills. The passage to this Mine is very inconvenient; for
they must creep into it for near half a mile through a Rock, that is so hard,
that the passage i^ not above three foot high, and so those that draw out the
Stones creep all along upon their belly, having a Candle fastened in their
forehead, and the Stone laid on a fort of Cushion made for it upon their hips:
The Stones are commonly two hundred weight.

But having mentioned some falls of Mountains in those parts, I cannot pass by
the extraordinary fate of the To^^ of Pleurs, that was about a league from
Chavennes to the North, in the same bottom, but on a ground that is a little
more raised: The Town was half the bigness of Chavennes, the number of the
Inhabitants was about two and twenty hundred persons, but is was much more
nobly built; for besides the great Palace of the Francke^, that cost some
millions, there were many other Palace^ that were built by several rich Factors
both of Milan, and the other parts of Italy, who liked the situation and air,
as well as the freedom of the Government of this place, so they used to come
hither during the Heats, and here they gave themselves all the indulgences that
a va^^ Wealth could furnish. By one of the Palaces, that was a little distant
from the Town, which was not overwhelmed with it, one may judge of the rest: It
was an out-house of the Family of the Francken, and yet is may compare with
many Palaces in Italy; and certainly, House and Gardens could not cost so
little as one hundred thousand Crowns. The voluptuousness of this place became
very crying, and Madam de Salis told me, that she heard her Mother often relate
some passages of a Protestant Min^sters Sermons, that preached in a little
Charch, which those of the Religion had there, and warned them often of the
tertible judgments of God which were hanging over their heads, and that he
believed would suddenl^ break out upon them. On the 25th of August 1618. a^
Inhabitant came and told them to be gone; for he saw the Mountains cleaving;
but he was laughed at for his pain^* He had a Daughter, whom he persuaded to
leave all and go with him; but when she was gone out of Town wit^ him, she
called to mind that she had not locked the Door of a Room in which she had some
things of Value, and so she went back to do that, and was buried with the rest;
for at the hour of Supper the Hill fell down, and buried the Town and all the
Inhabitants, so that not one person escaped: The fall of the Mountains did so
fill the Channel of the River, that the first news those of Chavennes had of
it, was by the failing of their River; for three or four hours there came not a
drop of Water; but the River wrought for it self a new course, and returned to
them; I could hear no particular Character of the Man who escaped, so I must
leave the secret Reason of so singular a Preservation to the great discovery at
the last Day of those steps of Divine Providence, that are now so
unaccountable. Some of the Family of the Francken got some Miners to work under
ground, to find out the Wealth that was buried in their Palace; for besides
their Plate and Furniture, there was a great Cash and many Jewels in the House:
the Miners pretended they could find nothing; but they went to their Country of
Tirol, and built fine Houses, and a great Wealth appeared, of which no other
visible account could be given but this, that they had found some of that
Treasure. The Chief Factors of Italy have been Grisons; and they told me, that
as the Trade of Banking began in Lombardy, so that all Europe over, a Lombard
and a Bank signified the same thing; so the great Bankers of Lombardy were
Grisons; and to this day the Grisons drive a great Trade in Money; for a Man
there of a hundred thousand Crowns Estate, has not perhaps a third part of
this within the Country, but puts it out in the neighboring States, And the
Liberty of the Country is such, that the Natives when they have made up
Estates elsewhere, are glad to leave even Italy and the best parts of Germany,
and to come and live among those Mountains, of which the very sight is enough
to fill a Man with horror.

From Chavennes we went for two hours through a plain to the Lake of Chavennes,
which is almost round, and is about two mile Diameter. This Lake falls into the
Lake of Como, over against the Fort Fuentes; when we passed there, the Water
was so low, that the Boat could not easily get over a Bank that lay between the
two Lakes. The Lake of Como is about eight and forty miles long, and four
broad; it runs between two ranges of Hills: I did nor stay long enough in Como
to give any Description of it; for I thought to have returned that way from a
little Tour that I made into the Bailiages that the Switzers have in Italy, of
Lugane, Locarmo, and Bellinzona: but I took another Course, so I saw nothing in
Como; the best thing in it is a fine Chapel, which the present Pope, who is a
Native of Como, is building. From Como we went eight miles to Codelaggo, which
belongs to the Switzers, and from thence to Lugane we had eight miles of Lake:
This Lake does not run in an even current, as the other Lakes, that rise under
the Alps, but the situation of the Hills about it, throws it into several
courses.

The Switzers have here several little Provinces, or Bailiages, of which during
the Wars of Italy, betwee^ the Dukes of Milan and the two Crowns, in Francis
the First, and Charles the Fifths time, they possessed themselves of as a
Pledge for payment of their Arrears; and they were then such considerable
Allies, that they made both the Competitors for the Duchy of Milan court them
by turns, and became the peaceable Prossessors of almost all that tract that
lies between the Lake of Como to the Counttey of the Valessii, or the Valleys,
The Inhabitan^s here are so well used, they live so free of all Impositions,
and the Switzers Government is so gentle, that here I must tell you another
Paradox, this is the Worst Country, the least Productive, the most exposed to
Cold, and the least Capable of Trade of all Italy, and yet it is by far the
best Peopled of any that I saw in all Italy: There belon^ to the Bailiage of
Lugane alone, ninety nine Villages, of which a great many are very large, and
all are full of People. The twelve Ancient Cantons have their turns of all the
Bailiages and other Offices here: but when it come to the turn of those of the
Religion, their Bailifs must be contented with private Devotions in their own
House, but can have no public Exercises, nor so much as a Minister in their
Houses. For here, as in the Valteline, when the Spaniards confirmed the Right
of the Cantons to those Territories, they made an express Provision, that no
Religion except the Popish should be tolerated here; so that the Bailif, who is
the Prince, often has not the free Liberty of his Religion in these Parts. The
Balifs here make their Advantages, as well as in the other Parts of
Switzerland, but yet with more Caution; for they take great care not to give
the Natives any distaste, tho the Miseries, to which they see all their
Neighbors exposed, and the Abundance and Liberty in which they live, should by
all appearance deliver their Masters from any great Apprehensions of a Revolt:
A great many Mechanics of all sorts live in these parts, who go all Summer
long over Italy, and come back hither with what they have gained, and live free
of all Taxes. I was told, that some Nephews of Popes, in particular the
Barberines, had treated with the Switzers, to buy this Country from them, and
so to erect it into a Principality; and that they had resolved to offer twelve
hundred thousand Crowns to the twelve Cantons: but they found it would
certainly be rejected; so they made not the propositions to the Diet of the
Cantons, as they once intended: and it is certain, whenever this Country is
brought under a Yoke, like that which the rest of Italy bears, it will be soon
abandoned; for there is nothing that draws so many People to live in so ill a
Soil, when they are in sight of the best Soil of Europe, but the easiness of
the Government. From Lugane I went to the Lago Maggiore, which is a great and
noble Lake, it is fix and fifty Miles long, and in most places six Miles broad,
and a hundred Fathom deep about the middle of it, it makes a great Bay to the
Westward; and there lies here two Islands, called the Berromean Islands, that
are certainly the loveliest spots of ground in the World; there is nothing in
all Italy, that can be compared to them; they have the full view of the Lake;
and the ground rises so sweetly in them, that nothing can be imagined like the
Terrasses here; they belong to two Counts of the Borromean Family. I was only
in one of them, which belongs to the Head of the Family, who is Nephew to the
famous Cardinal known by the name of S. Carlo: on the Westend lies the Palac^*
which is one of the best of Italy; for the Lodgings within, tho the
Architecture is but ordinary, there is one noble Apartment above four and
twenty foo^ high; and there is a vast Addition making to it; and here is a
great Collection of noble Pictures, beyond any thing I saw out of Rome: The
whole Island is a Garden, except a little corner to the South, set off for a
Village o^ about forty little Houses; and because the figure of the Island was
not more regular by nature, they have buil^ great Vaults and Portico's along
the Rock, which are all made Grotesque, and so they have brought it to a
regular form by laying Earth over those Vaults. There i^ first a Garden to the
East, that rises up from the Lakes by five Rows of Terrasses, on the three
sides of the Garden that are watered by the Lake; the Stairs are noble; the
Walls are all covered with Oranges and Citrons; and a more beautiful spot of a
Garden cannot be seen: There are two Buildings in the two Corners of this
Garden, the one is only a Mill for fetching up the Water, and the other is a
noble Summer House all wainscotted, if I may speak so, with Alabaster and
Marble, of a fine color, inclining to red; from this Garden one goes in a
level to all the rest of the Alleys and Parterres, Herb-Gardens and
Flower-Gardens; in all which there are variety of Fou^tains and Arbors; but the
great Parterre is a surprising thing; for as it is well furnished with Statues
and Fountains, and is of a vast extent, and justly situated to the Palace, so
at the Further-end of it, there is a great Mount, that face of it that looks to
the Parterre is made like a Theater, all full of Fountains and Statues, the
height rising up in five several Rows, it being about fif^y foot high, and
about fourscore foot in front; and round this Mount, answering to the five Rows
into which the Theater is divided, there goes as many Terrasses of noble Walks;
the Walls are all as close covered with Oranges and Citrons as any of our Walls
in England are with Laurel: the Top of the Mount is seventy foot long and forty
broad; and here is a vast Cistern, into which the Mill plays up the Water that
must furnish all the Fountains: The Fountains were not quite finished when I
was there; but when all is finished, this place will look like an In^hanted
Island. The Freshness of the Air, it being both in a Lake, and near the
Mountains, the fragant Smell, the beautiful Prospect, and the delighting
Variety that is here, makes it such a Habitation for Summer, that perhaps the
whole World has nothing like it. From this I went to Sestio, a miserable
Village at the end of the Lake* and her^ I began to feel a mighty change, being
now in Lombardy, which is certainly the beautifullest Country that can be
imagined, the ground lies so even, it is so well watered, so sweetly divided by
Rows of Trees, enclosing every piece of ground of an Acre or two Acres compass,
that it cannot be denied, that here is a vast extent of Soil, above two hundred
Miles long, and in many places a hundred Miles broad, where the whole Country
is equal to the loveliest spots in all England or France; it has all the
Sweetness that Holland or Flanders have, but with a warmer Sun, and a better
Air; the Neighborhood of the Mountains causes a freshness of Air here, that
makes the Soil the most desirable place to live in that can be seen, if the
Government were not so excessively severe, that there is nothing but Poverty
over all this rich Country. A Traveller in many places finds almost nothing,
and is so ill furnished, that if he does not buy provisions in the great Towns,
he will be obliged to a very severe Diet, in a Country that he should think
flowed with Milk and Honey: but I shall say more of this hereafter. The Lago
Maggiore discharges it self in the River Tesine, which runs with such a force,
that we went thirty Miles in three hours, having but one Rower, and the Water
was no way swelled. From this we went into the Canale, which F^an^is is the
First cut from this River to the Town of Milan; which is about thirty foot
broad, and on both its Bank^ there are such provisions to discharge the Water
when it rises to such a height, that it can never be fuller of Water than is
intended it should be; it lies also so even, that sometimes for six Miles
together one sees the line so exact, that there is not the least crook: it is
thirty Miles long, and is the best Advantage that the Town of Milan has for
Water Carriage.

I will not entertain you with a long description of this great City, which is
one of the noblest in the World, to be an Inland Town, that has no great
Court, no Commerce, either by Sea, or any Navigable River, and that is now the
Metropolis of a very small State; for that which is not Mountainous in this
State, is not above sixty Miles square, and yet it produces a Wealth that is
surprising: It pays for an establishment of seven and forty thousand Men, and
yet there are not sixteen thousand Soldiers effectively in it; so many are eat
up by those in whose hands the Government is lodged: But the Vastness of the
Town, the Nobleness of the Buildings, and above all, the surprising Riches of
the Churches and Convents, are signs of great Wealth: The Dome has nothing to
commend it of Architect^re, it being built in the rude Gothic manner; but for
the vastness and riches of the Building, it is equal to any in Italy, St.
Peter's it self not excepted. It is all Marble, both Pavement and Walls, both
outside and Inside, and on the Top it is all flagg'd with Marble; and there is
the vastest Number of Ni^hes for Statu^s of Marble, both within and without
that are any where to be seen. It is true, the Statues (...) some of the Niches
are not proportioned to the Niches themselves; the Frontispiece is not yet
made, it is to be all over covered with Statues and Bas-reliefs; and Pillars,
of which there are four Rows in the Body of the Church, have each of them eight
Niches at the top, for so many Statues; and tho one would think this Church so
full of Statues, that almost every Saint has his Statue, yet I was assured,
they wanted seven thousand to finish the design; but these m^st chiefly belong
to the Frontispi^e: The Church as I could measure it by walking over it in an
equal pace, is five hundred foot long, and two hundred wide; the Quire is
wainscotted and carved in so extraordinary a manner, that I never saw Passion
so well expressed in Wood; it contains sixty Stalls, and they have almost all
the Histories of the Gospel represented in them. Just under the Cupulo lies S.
Carlo's Body, as I was told, in a great Case of Cristal of vast value; but I
could not come near it; for we were there on two Ho^y-dayes, and there was a
perpetual crowd about it; and the Superstition of the People for his Body, is
such, that on a Holy Day one runs a hazard that comes near it without doing
some Reverence. His Canonization cost the To^n a hundred thousand Crown^; they
pretend they have Miracles too for Cardinal Fred^rigo B^rromeo, but they will
not set about his Canonisation, the price is so high. The Plate and other
Presents made to S. C^rlo are things of a prodigious value; some Services for
the Altar are all of Gold; some very Massive, and set wi^h Jewels, others so
finely wrought, that the fashion is thought equal to the value of the mettle;
the Habits and all the other Ornaments for the Function of his Canoni^ation are
all of an incredible Wealth. He was indeed a Pr^late of great merit, and
according to the An^wer that a Friar made to Philip de Comines, when he asked
him, how they came to qualify one of the worst of their Princes with the Title
of Saint in an inscription which he read, which was, that they gave that Title
to all their Benefactors; never man deserved of a Town this Title so justly as
Cardinal Borromeo did; for he laid out a prodigious Wealth in Milan, leaving
nothing to his Family, but the honor of having produced so great a man, which
is a real temporal inheritance to it; for as there have been since that time,
two Cardinals of that Family, so it is esteemed a Casa Santa; and every time
that it produces an Ecclesiastic of any considerable merit, he is sure, if he
lives to it, to be raised to this Archbishopric; for if there were one of the
Family capable ^f it, and that did not carry it, that alone might dispose the
State to a Rebellion, and he were a bold man that would adventure on a
Competition with one of t^is Family. He laid out a great deal on the Dome, and
consecrated it, tho the work w^ll not be quite finished yet for some Ages; that
being one of the Crafts of the Italian Priests, never to finish a great design,
that so by keeping it still in an unfinisht estate, they may be always drawing
great Donatives to it, from the Superstition of the People. He built the Arch
Bishops Palace, which is very noble, and a Semin^ry, a College for the
Switzers, several Parish Churches, an^ many Convents. In short, the w^ole Town
is full of the marks of his Wealth The Riches of the Churches of Milan, strike
one with amazement, the Building, the Painting, the Altars, and the Plate, and
everything in the Convents, except their Librairies, are all signs both of
great Wealth and of a very powerful Superstition; but their Librairies not only
here, but all Italy over, are scandalous things; the Room is often fine, and
richly adotned, but the Books are few, ill bound, and worse chosen; and the
ignorance of the Priests both secular and Regular is such, that no man, that
has not had occasion to discover it, can easily believe it. The Convent of S.
Victor, that is without the Town, is by much the richest, it is composed of
Canons Regular; called in Italy the Order of Mount Olive, or Olivetan; that of
the Bernabites is extreme rich; there is a Pulpit and a Confessional all inlaid
with Agates, of different colors, finely spotted Marbles, and of Lapis
L^zulis, that are thought almost inestimable. S. Lauren^e has a noble Cupulo,
and a Pulpit of the fame sorm with that of the Bernabites. The Jesuits, the
Theatin^s, the Dominicans, and S. Sebastians are very rich. The Cittad^l is too
well known to need a description; it is very regularly built; and is a most
effectual restraint to keep the Town in order, but it could not stand
outagainst a good Army three days; for it is so little, and so full of
Buildings, that it could not resist a shower of Bombs. The Hospital is indeed a
Royal Building; I was told it had ninety thousand Crowns Revenue: The old Court
is large, and would look noble, if it were not for the new Court that is near
it, which is two hundred and fifty foot square, and there are three rows of
Corridors or Galleries all round the Court, one in every stage, according to
the Italian manner, which makes the Lodgings very convenient, and gives a
Gallery before every door: It is true, these take up a great deal of the
Building, being ordinarily eight or ten foot broad; but then here is an open
space, that is extreme cool on that side where the Su^ does not lie; for it is
all open to the Air, the Wall being only supported by Pillars, at the distance
of fifteen or twenty foot one from another. In this Hospital there are not only
Galleries full of Beds on both sides, as is ordinary in all Hospitals; hut
there are also a great many Chambers, in which persons, whose condition was
formerl^ distinguished, are treated with a particular Care. There is an
out-house, which is called the Lazarette, that is without the Walls, which
belongs to this Hospital, it is an extract quarter of a mile square, and there
are three hundred and sixty Rooms in it, and a Gallery runs all along before
the Chambers, so that as the service is convenient, the sick have a covered
walk before their Doors. In the middle of this vast square there is an
Octangular Chapel, so contrived, that the sick from all their Beds may see the
el^vation of the Host^e, and adore it: This House is for the Plague, or for
infections Fevers; and the Sick that want a freer Air, are also removed hither.

As for the Devotions of this place, I saw here the Ambrosian Office, which is
distingusshed from the Roman; both in the Music, which is much simpler, and
some other Rites: the Gospel is read in a hi^h Pulpit at the lower end of the
Quire, that so it may be heard by all the people; tho this is needless, since
it is read in a language that they do not understand: when they go to say high
Mass, the Priest comes from the high Altar to the lower-end of the Quire, where
the Offertory of the Bread and the Wine is made by some of the Laity; they were
Nu^s that made it when I was there; I heard a Capucin Preach here; it was the
first Sermon I heard in Italy, and I was much surprised at many Comical
Expressions and Gestures, but most of all with the Conclusion; for there being
in all the Pulpits of Italy a Crucifix on the side of the Pulpit toward the
Altar; he, after a long address to it, at last in a forced Transport, took it
in his A^ms, and hugged it, and kissed it: But I observed, that before he
kissed it, he seeing some dust on it, blew it off very carefully; for I was
just under the Pulpit: He entertained it with a long and tender Caress, and
held it out to the people, and would have forced Tears both from himself and
them; yet I saw none shed. But if the Sermon in the morning surprised me, I
wondered no less at two Discourses that I heard in one Church, at the same time,
in the afternoon: for there were two Bodies of men set down in different places
of the Church, all covered, and two Laymen, in ordinary habits were
entertaining them with Discourses of Religion in a Cate^histical style: These
were Consrairies, and those were some of the more devout, that instructed the
rest. This, as I never saw any where else, so I do not know whether it is
peculiar to Milan, or not. My Conductor could not speak Latin, and the Italian
there is so different from the true Tuscan, which I only knew, that I could not
understand him when he was engaged in a long discourse, so I was not clearly
informed of this matter: but I am apt to think, it might have been some
institution of C^rdinal Borromeos. The Ambrosian Li^rary, founded by Cardinal
Frederick Borromeo, is a very noble Room, and well furnished, only it is too
full of Schoolmen and Canonists; which are the chief studies of It^ly; an^ it
has too few Books of a more solid and useful learning. One part of the
disposition of the R^om was pleasant; there is a great number of Chairs, placed
all round it at a competent distance from one another; and to every Chair there
belongs a Desk, with an E^ritoire, that has Pen, Ink, and Paper in it; so that
every Man finds tools here for such extracts as he would make. There is a
little Room of Manuscripts at the e^d of the great Gallery, but the
Library Keeper knows little of them; a great many of them relate to their Saint
Charle^. I saw some fragments of Latin Bi^les, but none seemed to be above six
hundred Years old; there are also some fragments of Saint Am^roses W^rks, and
of Saint Ieroms Epistles, that are of the same antiquity. I was sorry not to
find Saint Ambrose's Works inti^e, that I might have seen, whether the Books of
the Sacraments, are ascribed to him in ancient C^pies; for perhaps they belong
to a more modern Author. It is true, in these Books, the Doctrine of a sort of
a corporal presence is asserred in very high expressions; but there is one
thing mentioned in them, which is stronger against it, than all those Citations
can be for it; for the Author gives us the formal Words of the Prayer of
Consecration in his time, which he prefaces with some solemnity: will you know
how the change is wrought, hear the Heavenly Words? For the Priest says, etc.
But whereas in the present Canon of the Mass, the Prayer of consecration is for
a good part of it very near in the same Words with those which he mentions,
there is one essential difference; for in the Canon they now pray, that the
Hosty may be to them the Body and Blood of Christ; (which by the way does not
agree too well with the notion of Transubstan^^^tion, and approaches more to
the Doctrine of the Lu^herans:) whereas in the Prayer, cited by that Author,
the Hosty is said to be The Figure of the B^dy and Blood of Christ: here is the
language of the whole Church of that time, and in the most important part of
the Divine Office, which signifie^h more to me, than a thousand Quotations out
of particular Writers, which are but* their Private Opinions: but this is the
Voice of the whole Body in its Addresses to God: and it seems, the Church of
Rome, when the new Doctrine of the Corporal Presence was received, saw that
this Prayer of Consecration could not consist with it, which made her change
such a main Part of the Office. This gave me a curiosity every where to search
for ancient Offices, but I found none in the Abbey of St. Germains, that seemed
older than the times of Charles the Great; so I found none of any great
Antiquity in all Italy: Those published by Cardinal Bona, and since by P.
Mabillon, that were brought from Heidelberg, are the most ancient that are in
the Vatican; but these seem not to be above eight hundred years old: There are
none of the ancient Roman Offices now to be seen in the Vatican. I was amazed
to find none of any great Antiquity; which made me conclude, that either they
were destroyed, that so the difference between Ancient and Modern Rituals might
not be turned against that Church, as an undeniable Evidence, to prove the
Changes that she has made in divine Matters; or, that they were so well kept,
that Heretics were not to be suffered to look into them. But to return to the
Ambrosian Library, there is in it a Manuscript of great Antiquity, tho not of
such great consequence, which is Ruffinus's Translation of Josephus, that is
written in the old Roman hand, which is very hard to be read. But there is a
deed in the curious Collection that Count Mascard^ ha^h made at Verona, which
by the date appears to have been written in Theodosius's time, which is the
same sort of w^iting with the Manuscript of Ruffinus, so that it may be
reckoned to have been writ in Ruffinus his own time, and this is the most
valuable, tho the least known Curiosity in the whole Library.

I need not say any thing of the curious Works in Crystal that are to be seen
in Milan, the greatest quantities that are in Europe, are found in the Alps,
and are wrought here, but this is too well known to need any further
enlargement. It is certain, the Alps have much Wealth shut up in their Rocks,
if the Inhabitants knew how to search for it: But I heard of no Mines tha^ were
wrought, except Iron Mines; yet by the colorings, that in many places the
Fountains make, as they run along the Rocks, one sees cause to believe, that
there are Mines and Miner^ls shut up within them. Gold has been often found in
the River of Arve, that runs by Geneva.

The last curiosity that I shall mention of the Town of Milan, is the Cabinet
of the Chanoine Settala, which is now in his Brothers hands, where there are a
great many very valuable things, both of Art and Nature: there is a lump of
Ore, in which there is both Gold, and Silver, and Emeralds, and Diamonds, which
was brought from Peru. There are many curious motions, where by an unseen
Spring, a Ball, after it has rolled down through many winding descents is
^hrown up, and so it seems to be a perpetual motion; this is done in several
forms, and it is well enough disguised to deceive the vulgar. Many motions of
little Animals, that run about by Springs, are also very pretty. There is a
Lodestone of a vast force, that carries a great Chain: There is also a
moustrous Child, that was lately born in the Hospital, which is preserved in
Spirit of Wine: it is double below, it has one Breast and Neck two pair of
Ears, a vast Head, and but one Face. As for the Buildings in M^lan, they are
big and substantial; but they have not much regular, or beautiful Architecture:
The Governor's Palace has some noble Apartments in it: the chief Palace of the
Town is that of the Homodei, which was built by a Bankier. There is one
Inconvenience in Milan, which throws down all the Pleasure that one can find in
it: They have no glass Windows, so that one is either exposed to the Air, or
shut up in a Dungeon: and ^his is so universal, that there is not one House of
ten that has Glass in their Windows: The same D^fect is in Florence, besides
all the small Towns of Italy, which is an effect of their Poverty Fort what by
the Oppression of the Government, wha by the no less squeezing Oppression of
their Priests, who drain all the rest of their Weal^h, that is not eat up by
the Prince, to enrich their Churches and Convents, the People here are reduced
to a Poverty, that cannot be easily believed by one that sees the Wealth that
is in their Churches: and this is going on so constantly in Milan, that it is
scarce accountable from whence so vast a Treasure can be found; but Purgatory
is a Fund not easily exhausted. The Wealth of the Milanese consists chiefly in
their Silks, and that Trade falls so mightily by the vast Importations that the
East India Companies bring into Europe, that all Italy feels this very
sensibly, and languish extremely by the great fall that is in the Silk-Trade.
There is a great magnificence in Milan; the Nobility affect to make a noble
Appearance, both in their Clothes, their Coaches, and their Attendants; and the
Women go abroad with more Freedom here, than in any Town of Italy. And thus I
have told you all that hitherto occurred to me, that I thought worth your
knowledge. I am

Yours.
Postscript.
In the Account that I gave you of Geneva, I forgot to Mention a very
extraordinary Person that is there, M^stris Walkier; her Father is of
Shaff-house, she lost her sight when she was but a year old, by being too near
a Stove that was very hot: There rests in the upper part of her eye so much
sight, that she distinguishes day from night: and when any person stands
between her and the light, she will distinguish by the Head and its dress a Man
from a Woman; but when she turns down her Eyes, she sees nothing: she has a
vast Memory; besides the French, that is her natural Language, she speaks both
High Dutch, Italian and Lat^n: she has all the Psalms by heart, in French; and
many of them in Dutch and Italian: she understands the Old Philosophy well; and
is now studying the New: she has studied the Body of Divinity well, and has
the Text of the S^riptures very ready: On all which matters I had long
conversation with her; she not only sings well, but she plays rarely on the
Organ; and I was told, she played on the Violin, but her Violin was out of
order. But that which is most of all, is, she writes legibly: in order to her
learning to write, her Father, who is a worthy man, and has such tenderness
for her, that he furnishes her with Masters of all sorts, ordered Letters to
be carved in Wood, and she by feeling the Characters, formed such ^n Idea of
them, that she writes with a Crayon so distinctly, that her writing can be well
read, of which I have several Essays. I saw her write; she does it more nimbly
than can be imagined; she has a Machine that holds the Paper, and keeps her
always in Line. But that which is above all the rest, she is a person of
extraordinary Devotion, great resignation to the Will of God, and a profound
humility: The Preceptor, that her Father kept in the house with her, has
likewise a wonderful Faculty of acquiring Tongues. When he came first to Geneva
(for he is of Zurich) he spoke not a word of French, and within thirteen Months
he preached in French correctly, and with a good Accent: He also began to study
Italian in the Month of November, and before the end of the following February
he preached in Italian; his accent was good, and his style was floried, which
was very extraordinary; for the Italian Language is not spoken in Geneva, tho
the race of the Italians do keep up still an Italian Church there.



THE THIRD LETTER.
Florence, the 5 th of November, 1685.
I Have now another Month over my Hea^, since I writ last to you, and so I know
you expect an Account of the most considerable things that have occurred to me
since my last from Milan. Twenty miles from Milan we past through Lodi, a
miserable Gar^ison, tho a Frontier Town; but indeed, the Frontiers, both of the
Spaniards and the Venetians, as well as those of the other Prin^es of Italy,
show that they are not very apprehensive of one another; and when one passes
through those places, which are represented in History, as places of great
strength, capable of resisting a long Siege, he must acknowledge, that the
sight of them brings the Idea that he had conceived of them, a great many
degrees lower. For Lombardy, which was so long the seat of War, could not stand
out against a good Army now so many days, as it did then years. The Garrison
of Crema, which is the first of the Venetian Territory, is no better than that
of Lodi, only the People in the Venetian Dominion live happier than under the
Spaniard.

The Senate sends Podesta's, much like the Bailifs of the Switzers, who order
the Ju^^ice and the Civil Government of the Jurisdiction assigned them: There
is also a Captain-Gen^ral, who has the Military Authority in his hands; and
these two are Checks upon one another; as the B^ss^'s and the Cadi's are among
the Turks. But here in Crema, the Town is so small, that both these are in one
person. We were there in the time of the Fair; Linen Cloth, and Cheese (which
tho it goes by the name of the Parmesan, is made chief^y in Lodi) are the main
Commodities of the Fair. The magnificence of the Podesta appeared very
extraordinary; for he went through the Fair with a great Train of Coaches, all
in his own Livery; and the two Coaches, in which he and his Lady ride, were
both extraordinary rich: his was a huge Bed-coach, all the outside black
Velvet, and a mighty rich Gold Fringe, lined with black Damask, flowered with
Gold. From Crema it is thirty Miles to Bres^ia, which is a great Town, and full
of Trade and Wealth; here they make the best Barrils for Pistols and Muskers of
all Italy: there are great Iron Works near it; but the War with the Turk had
occasioned an order, that none might be sold without a Permission from Venice:
They are building a Noble Dome at Brescia: I was showed a Nunnery there, which
is now under a great Disgrace; some years ago, a new Bishop coming thither,
began with the Visitation of that Nunnery; he discovered two Vauits, by one,
Men came ordinarily into it; and by another, the Nuns that were big, went and
lay in of Childbed: when he was examining the Nuns severely concerning those
Vaults, some of them told him, that his own Priests did much worse. He shut up
the Nuns, so that those who are profefsed live still there, but none come to
take the Vail: and by this means the House will soon come to an end. The
Citadel lies over the Town on a Rock, and commands it absolutely. Both here,
and in Crema, the Towns have begun a Complement within these last ten or twelve
years to their Podesta's, which is matter of great Ornament to their Palaces,
but will grow to a vast charge; for they erect Statues to their Podesta's: and
this being once bogun, must be carried on; otherwise those to whom the like
honor is not done, will resent it as a high affront; and the Revenges of the
Noble Venetians are dread^ul things to their Subjects. This name of Podesta is
very ancient; for in the Roman times, the chief Magistrates of the lesser Towns
were called the Potestas* as appears by that of Iuvenal, Fidenarum Gabiorumve
esse Potestas.

From Brescia, the beauty of Lombardy is a little interrupted; for as all the
way from Milan to Brescia is as one Garden, so here on the one side we come
under the Mountains, and we pass by the Lake of Guarda, which is forty miles
long, and where it is broadest, is twenty miles over: The Miles indeed, all
Lombardy over, are extreme short; for I walked often four or five Miles in a
walk, and I found a thousand paces made their common Mile; but in Tuscany and
the Kingdom of Napels, the mile is fifteen hundred paces. We pass through a
great Heath for seven or eight miles on this side of Verona, which begins to be
cultivated. Verona is a vast Town, and much of it well built; there are many
rich Chur^hes in it: but there is so little Trade stirring, and so little money
going, that it is not easy here to change a Pistol, without taking their Coin
of base Alloy, which does not pass out of the Veronese: for this seems a
strange Maxim of the Venetians, to suffer those small States, to retain still a
Coin peculiar to them, which is extreme inconvenient for Commerce. The known
Antiquity of Verona is the Amphitheater, one of the least of all that the
Romans built, but the best preserved; for tho most of the great Stones of the
outside are picked out; yet the great flopping Vault, on which the rows of the
seats are laid, is entire; the rows of the sea^s are also entire, they are sour
and forty Rows; every Row is a foot and half high, and as much in breadth, so
that a Man sits conveniently in them under the feet of those of the higher Row:
and allowing every Man a foot and a half, the whole Amphitheather can hold
twenty three thousand Persons. In the Vaults, under the Rows of Seats, were the
stalls of the Beasts that were presented to entertain the Company: the
thi^kness of the Building, from the outward Wall to the lowest Row of Seats, is
ninty foot: But this Noble Remnant of Antiquity, is so often, and so copiously
described, that I will say no more of it. The ne^t thing of value is the famous
Museum Calceolarium, now in the Hands ^of the Count Mascardo, where there is a
whole Apartment of Rooms, all furnished with Antiquities, and Rarities. There
are some old Inscriptions, made by two Towns in Africa, to the honor of M.
Crassus: There is a great Collection of Medals and Medaillons, and of the Roman
Weights, with their Instruments for theit Sacrifices; there are many
Curiosities of Nature, and a great Collection of Pictur^s, of which many are of
Pa^lo Veronese's Hand. There is a noble Garden in Verona, that rises up in
Terrasses the whole height of a Hill, in which thete are many ancient
Inscriptions, which belongs to Count Giusto. As we go from Verona to Vin^enza,
which is thirty miles, we return to the Beauty of L^mbardy; for there is all
the way as it were a Succession of Gardens: the ground is better cultivated
here, than I saw it in any other place of Italy: But the Wine is not good; for
at the roots of all their Trees they plant a Vine; which grows up winding about
the Tree, to which it joins; but the Soil is too rich to produce a rich wine;
for that requires a dry ground. There is near the Lake of Guarda a very
extraordinary Wine, which they call Vino Santo, which drinks like the best sort
of Canary, it is not made till Christmaes, and from thence it carries the Name
of Holy Wine; and it is not to be drunk till Midsummer; for it is so long
before it is quite wrought cleat; but I have not ma^ked down how long it may be
kept: we had it there for a Groat an English quart; I wondered that they did not
trade with it. All the Cattle of Italy are gray or white, and all their Hogs
are black, except in the Bologn^se, and there they are red. I will not inquire
into the reasons of these things: it is certain, Hogs-Flesh in Italy is much
better than it is in France and England, whether the truffs on which they feed
much in Winter, occasion this or not, I know not; the Husks of the pressed
G^apes is also a mighty nourishment to them; but Cattle of that grayish color,
are certainly weaker: The Carriage of Italy is generally performed by them; and
this is very hard work in Lombardy, when it has rained ever so little; for the
ground being quite level, and there being no raised Highways or Cause-wayes,
the Carts go deep, and are hardly drawn.

Vin^enza has still more of its ancient liberty reserved than any of these
Towns, as Padua has less; for it delivered it self to the Venetians; whereas
the other disputed long with it, and brought it often very low: one sees the
marks of Liberty in Vincenza, in the Riches of their Palaces and Churches, of
which many are newly built: they have a modern Theater, made in imitation of
the ancient Roman Theaters. C^unt Velarano's Gardens at the Port of Ver^n^, is
the finest thing of the Town; there is in it a very noble Alley of Oranges and
Citrons, some as big as a Man's Body, but those are covered all the Winter long;
for in this appears the sensible difference of Lombardy from those parts of
Italy; that lie to the South of the Apenins, that here generally they keep
their Oranges and Citrons in great Boxes, as we do in England, that so they may
be lodged in Winter, and defended from the Breeses, that blow sometimes so
sharp from the Alps, that otherwise they would kill those delicate Plants:
whereas in Tuscany they grow as other Trees in their Gardens; and in the
Kingdom o^ Naple^, they grow wild, without any Care or Cultivation. We were at
Vincenza upon a Holy day, and there I saw a preparation for a Procession that
was to be in the afternoon: I did not wonder at what a French Papist said to
me, that he could hardly bear the Religion of Italy, the Idolatry in it was so
gross. The Statue of the Virgi^ was of Wood, so finely painted, that I thought
the head was Wax; it was richly clad, and had a Crown on its Head, and was set
full of Flowers: how they did when it was carried about, I do not know; but in
the morning all people ran to it, and said their prayers to it, and Kissed the
Ground before it, with all the appearances of Devotion.

From Vincenza it is eighteen m^les to Padua, all like a Garden: here one sees
the decays of a vast City; which was once one of the biggest of all Italy; the
compass is the same that is was, but there is much uninhabited ground in it,
and Houses there go almost for nothing; the Air is extreme good, and there is
so great a plenty of all things, except Money, that a little Money goes a great
way. The University here, tho so much surported by the Venetians, that they pay
fifty Pro^essors* yet sinks extremely: there are no men of any great Fame now
i^ it: and the quarrels among the Students have driven away most of the
Strangers that used to come and study here; for it is not safe to stir abroad
here after Sun set: The number of the Palaces here is incredible, and tho the
Nobility of Padua is almost quite ruined, yet the Beauty of their ancient
Palaces shows what they once were. The Ve^etians have been willing to let the
ancient Quarrels that were in all those conquered Cities continue still among
them; for while one kills another, and the Children of the other take their
Revenges afterward, both comes under the Bando by this means, and the
Confisca^ion goes to the Senate. At some times of Grace, when the Senate wants
Money, and offers a pardon to all that will compound for it, the numbers of the
guilty persons are incredible. In Vincenza, and the Country that belongs to it,
I was assured by Monsieur Patin, that learned Autiquary, that has been ^any
years a Professor in Padua, that there were five and thirty thousand pardoned
at the last Grace; this I could hardly believe, but he bid me write it down
upon his word. The Nobility of Padua, and of ^he other Towns, seem not to see
what a profit their Quarrels bring to the Venetians, and how they eat out their
Families: for one Family in the same man's time, who was alive while I was
there, was reduced from fourteen thousand Ducats Revenue, to less than three
thousand, by its falling at several times under the Bando* But their Jealousies
and their Revenges are pursued by them with so much vigor, that when these are
in their way, all other things are forgot by them. There is here the remnant of
the Amphitheater, tho nothing but the outward Wall stands: There is here, as
well as in Milan, an inward Town, called the City, and an outward, without
that, called the Burgo; but tho there is a Ditch about the City, the great
Ditch and Wall goes about all, and Padua is eight miles in compass; it lies
almost round: The public Hall is the Noblest of Italy: The Dome is an ancient
and mean Building: But the Church of S. Anthony, especially the Holy Chapel in
it, where the Saint lies, is one of the best pieces of modern Sculpture; for
round the Chapel, the chief Miracles in the legend of that Saint are
rep^esen^ed in Mezzo Rilievo, in a very surprising manner: The devotion that is
paid to this Saint, all Lombardy over, is amazing: he is called by way of
excellence il Santo, and the Beggars generally ask Alms for his sake: But among
the little Vows that hang without the Holy Chapel, there is one that is the
highe^t pitch of Blasphomy that can be imagined, Exaud^t, speaking of the
Saint, quos non au^ it and ipse D^us; he hears those whom God himself does not
hear. St. Iustina is a Church so well ordered within, the Architecture is so
beautiful, it is so well enlightened, and the Cupulo's are so advantageously
placed, that if the outside answered the inside, it would be one of the best
Churches of Italy; but the Building is of Brick, and it has no Frontispiece;
there are many new Altars, made as fine as they are Idolatrous, all full of
Statues of Marble. This Abbey has a hundred thousand Ducats of Revenue, and so
by its Wealth one may conclude that it belongs to the Benedictine Order.
Cardinal Barberigo is Bish^p here; he seems to set St. Carlo before him as his
pattern; he has founded a Noble Seminary for the secular Priests; he lives in
a constant discipline himself, and endeavors to reform hi^ Clergy all he can;
but he is now in ill terms with his Canons, who are all Noble Venetians, and so
allow themselves great liberties, of which they will not be willingly abridged:
he is charitable to a high degree, an^ is i^ all respects a very extraordinary
man.

In the Venetian T^rritory their subjects live easy and happy, if they could
be so wise as to give over their Q^arrels; but tho the Taxes a^e not high, they
oppress their Tenants so ^everely* that the Peasants live most miserably, yet
on all hands round about them, the Oppressions being more intolerable, they
know not whither to go for ease; whereas on the contrary, the miseries under
which their Neighbors groan, chiefly those of the Ecclesiastical State, send
in an increase of people among them, so that they are well stoekt with people;
but the Venetians are so jealous of their Subjects understanding Military
matters, which may dispose them to revolt, that they never make any Levies
among them for their Wars; this jealousy is the true ground of that maxim, tho
another is pretended, that is more plausible, which is, their Care of their own
people, whom they study to preserve, and therefore they hire Strangers, rather
than expose their Subjects. It is certain, a revolt here, were no hard matter
to effectuate; for the Garrisons and F^rtifications are so slight, that those
great Towns could easily shake off their yoke, if it were not for the Factions
that still reign among them, by which one party would choose rather to expose
the other to the rigor of the Inquisitors, than concur with them in asserting
their Liberty; and the Inquisitors in such cases proceed so secretly, and yet
so effectually, that none dares trust another with a Secret of such
consequence; and the oppressed Nobility of those States, retain still so much
of their old and unsubdued Insolence, and treat such as are under them so
cruelly, that the Venetians are as secure in those Conquests, as if they had
many strong Cittadels, and numerous Garrisons spread up and down among them.
From Padua down to Venice, all along the River Brent, there are many Palaces of
the Noble Venetians on both sides of the River, built with so great a variety
of Architecture, that there is not one of them like another; there is also the
like diversity in the laying out of their Gardens; and here they retire during
the hot months; and some allow themselves all the excesses of dissolute Liberty
that can possibly be imagined. From Lizza Fucina, which is at the mouth of the
Brent, we pass for five or six miles on the Lagunes, or shallows, to Venice;
these shallows sink of late so much, that the preserving Venice still an
Island, is like to become as great a charge to the Venetian^* as the keeping
out the Sea is to the Dutch; for they use all possible industry to cleanse the
Channels of their Lagune^, and to keep them full of Water: and yet many think,
that the Water has failed so much in this last age, that if it continues to
abate at the same rate, within an age o^ two more, Venice may become a part of
the Terra firm^ It is certainly the most surprising sight in the whole World,
to see so vast a City, situated thus in the Sea, and such a number of Islands
so united together by Bridges, brought to such a regular figure, the Pilotty
supplying the want of earth to build on, and all so nob^^ built, which is of
all the things that one can see the mo^^ amazing. And tho this Republic is
much sunk from what is was, both by the great Losses they have suffered in
their Wars with the Turks, and by the great decay of Trade, yet there is an
incredible Wealth, and a va^^ plenty of all things in this place. I will not
offer to describe neither the Church nor the Palace of S. Mark, which are too
well known to need a long digression to be made for them; the painting of the
Walls, and the roofs of the Halls, and public Rooms in the Palace, are of vast
value; Here I saw that Story of Pope Alexander the III. treading on the neck of
the Emperor Frederic^ Barbarossa. The Nobleness of the Stair-^ases, the Riches
of the Halls, and the Beauty of the whole Building* are much prejudiced by the
Beastliness of those that wal^ along, and that leave their marks behind them,
as if this were rather a common House of Office, than so Noble a Palace: And
the great Hall, where the whole body of the Nobility meet, in the Great
Council, has nothing but the roof and walls that answers to such a^ Assembly;
For the Seat^ are liker the benches of an Auditory of Scholars, than of so
glorious a Body. When the two sides of this Palace are built as the third,
which is the most hid, it will be one of the gloriousest Palace^ that the World
can show. The two sides that are mo^^ seen* the one facing the square of St.
Mark, and the other the great Canale, are only of Brick, the third being all of
Marble, but the War of Candy put a stop to the Building. St. Mark's Church has
nothing to recommend it, but its great Antiquity, and the vast Riches of the
Building, it is dark and low; but the pavement is so rich a Mosaic, and the
whole roof is also Mosai^k, the outside and inside are of such excellent
Marble, the Frontispice is adorned with so many Pillars of Porphiry and Jasper.
and above all with the four Horses of Corinthian Brass, that Tiridates brought
to Tiberius, which were carried afterward to Constantinople, and were brought
from thence to Venice, and in which the gilding is still very bright, that when
all this is considered, one does no where see so much cost brought together. I
did not see the Gospel of St. Mark, which is one of the valuablest things of
the Treasure; but they do not now open it to Strangers; yet Doctor Grand^, a
famous Physician there, told me* that by a particular order, he was suffered to
open it; he told me* it was all writ in Capital Letters, but the Characters
were so worn out, that tho he could dis^ern the Ends of some Letters, he could
not see enough to help him to distinguish them, or to know wheter the M.S. was
in Greek or Latin. I will not say one Word of the Arfenal; for as I saw it in
its worst State, the War that is now on foot having disfurnished a great deal
of it, so it has been often described, and it is known to be the Noblest
Magazine* the best ordered, and of the greatest variety, that is in the whole
World: its true, it is all that this Stat^ has; so that if the Magazines of
other Princes, which lie spread up and down in the different Places of their
Dominions, were gathered together, they would make a much greater show. The
Noblest Convent of Venice is that of the Dominicans, called Saint John and
Saint Paul; the Church and Chapels are vastly rich: there is one of Saint
Luke's Madona's here, as they pretend; the Dormitory is very great; the Room
for the Library, and every thing in it, except the Books, is extreme fine. But
Saint George's, which is a Convent of the Benedictines; in an Isle entirely
possessed by them, over against Saint Marks square, is much the richest: the
Church is well contrived, and well adorned: and not only the whole Building is
very Magnificent; but which is more extraordinary at Venice, they have a large
Garden, and noble walks in it. The Redemptore and the Salute, are two Noble
Churches, that are the effects of Vows that the Senate made when they were
afflicted with the Plague, the latter is much the finer, it is to the Virgin;
and the other is only to our Savior: so naturally does the Devotion of that
Church carry it higher for the Mother than the Son. It is true, the Salute is
later than the other, so no wonder if the Architecture and the riches exceed
that which is more ancient. The School of Saint Roch, and the Chapel, and
Hall, are full of great pieces of Tintore^^: a Cena, of Paulo Veronese in the
Refectory of St. George, and the Picture of St. Seter the Martyr of Titians,
are the most celebrated pieces of Venice: Duke P^saro's Tomb in the Friary is
the Noblest I ever saw. B^^ if the riches of all the Convents, and the Parish
Churches of Venice amassed me, the Fronts especially, many of which are of white
Marble, beautified with several Statues; the meanness of the Library of S. Mar^
did no less surprise me. There are in the Antichamber to it, Statues of vast
value, and the whole Roof of the Library is composed of several pieces of the
greate^^ Masters put in several Frames: but the Library has nothing answerable
to the Riches of the Case; for the Greek Manuscrips are all modern; I turned
over a great many, and saw none above five hundred years old I was indeed told,
that the last Library Keeper was acc^sed for having conveyed away many of their
Manuscrips, and that four years ago being clapped in prison for this by the
Inquisitors; he, to prevent further Severities, poisoned himself. I went to the
Convent of the Servi; b^t I found Father Paul was not in such consideration
there, as he is elsewhere. I asked for his Tomb, but they made no account of
him, and seemed not to know where it was; it is true, the person to whom I was
recommended, was not in Venice, so perhaps they refined too much in this
matter: I had great Discourse with some at Venice concerning the Memorials out
of which F. Paul drew his History, which are no doubt all preserved with great
care in their Archives; and since the Transactions of the Council of Trent, as
they are of great Importance, so they are become now much controverted, by the
different Relations that F. Paul, and Cardinal Pallavicini have given the World
of that matter; the only way to put an end to all Disputes in matter of Fact,
is to print the Ori^inals themselves. A Person of great Credit at Venice,
promised to me, to do his utmost, to get that Proposition set on foot, tho the
great Exactness that the Government there has always affected, as to the
matter of their Archives, is held so sacred, that this made him apprehend, they
would not give way to any such search. The Affinity of the matter brings into
my mind a long Conversation that I had with a person of great Eminence at
Venice, that as he was long at Constantinople, so he was learned far beyond
what is to be met with in Italy; he told me, he was at Constantinople when the
Inquiry into the Doctrine of the Greek Church was set on foot, occasioned by
the famous Dispute between Mr. Arnaud and Mr. Claude he being a zealous Roman
Catholic, was dealt with to assist in that business; but being a Man of great
Honor and Sincerity, he excused himself, and said, he could not meddle in it:
He has a very low and bad Opinion of the Greeks; and he told me, That none of
their Priests were more inveterate Enemies to the Church of Rome than those
that were bred up at Rome; for they, to free themselves of the prejudices that
their Countrymen are apt to conceive against them, because of their Education
among the Latins, do affect to show an Opposition to the Latin Church beyond
any other Greeks. He told me, that he knew the Ignorance and Corruption of the
Greeks was such, that as they did not know the Doctrines of their own Church,
so a very little Money, or the hope of Protection from any of the Ambass^dors
that came from the West, would prevail with them to sign any thing that could
be desired of them. He added one thing, that tho he firmly believed
Transu^stantiation himself, he did not think they believed it, let them say
what they pleased themselves; he took his measures of the Doctrine of their
Church, rather from what they did, than from what they said: For their Rites
not being changed now for a great many ages, were the true Indications of the
Doctrines received among them; whereas they were both ignorant of the Tradition
of their Doctrine, and very apt to prevericate when they saw Advantages or
Protection set before them; therefore he concluded, that since they did not
adore the Sacrament after the Consecration, that was an evident sign that they
did not believe the Corporal Presence; and was of a force well able to balance
all their Subscriptions: He told me, he was often scandalized to see them open
the Bag, in which the Sacrament was preserved, and show it with no sort of
respect, no more than when they showed any Manuscript; and he looked on
Adoration as such a necessary Consequent of Transu^stantiation, that he could
not imagine that the latter was received in a Church that did not practice the
former. To this I will add what an Eminent Catholic at Paris told me; he said,
the Originals of those Attestations, were in too exact and too correct a style,
to have been formed in Greece; he assured me, they were penned at Paris, by one
that was a Master of the Purity of the Greek Tongue, I do not name these
Persons, because they are yet alive, and this might be a prejudice to them. One
of the chief Ornaments of Ve^ice was the famous young W^man that spoke five
Tongues well, of which the Latin and Greek we^e two; she passed Doctor of
Physic at Padua, according to the ordinary Forms; but which was beyond all,
she was a person of such extraordinary Virtue and Piety, that she is spoken of
as a Saint; she died some Months before I came to Venice: she was of the noble
Family of the Cornaro's, tho not of the three chief Branches, which are Saint
Maurice, Saint Paul, and Call, who are descended from the three Brothers of
the renowned Queen of Cyprus, but the distinction of her Family was Piscopia.
Her extraordinary merit made all people unwilling to remember the blemish of
her descent of the one side; for tho the Cornaro's re^kon themselves a size of
Nobility beyond all the other Families of V^nice, yet her Father having
entertained a Goudalier's Daughter so long, that he had some Children by her,
at last for their sakes married the Mother, and paid a considerable Fine to
save the forfeiture of Nobility, which his Children must have undergone, by
reason of the meanness of the Mothers birth. The Cornaro's carry it so high,
that many of the Daughters of that Family have made themselves Nuns, because
they thought their own Name was so Noble, that they could not induce themselves
to change it with any other; and when lately one of that Family married the
Heir of the Sagredro, which is also one of the antientest Families, that was
extreme rich, and she had scarce any portion at all, (for the C^rnaro's are now
very low) some of their Friends came to wish them joy of so advantageous a
Match; but they very coldly rejected the Complement, and bid the others go and
wish the Sagredo's joy, since they thought the Advantage was wholly of their
side.

There are of the truly Ancient Noble Families of Veni^e, four and twenty yet
remaining, and even among these, there are twelve that are thought superior to
the rest in rank: since the first Formation of their Senate, they have created
many Senators. In their Wars with Genua they conferred that honor on thirty
Families: several of their Generals have had that honor given them as a reward
of their service: They have also offered this honor to some Royal Families;
for both the Pamilies of Valo^s and Bourbon, were Nobles of Venice; and Henry
the III. when he came through Venice from Poland, to take possession of the
Crown of France, went and sat among them, and drew his Ballot as a Noble
Venetian: many Popes have procured this honor for their Nephews. Only the
Barberines would have the Venetians offer it to them without their asking it,
and the Veneti^ns would not give it without the others asked it, and so it
stuck at this. But during the War of Candy, Cardinal Fran^is Barberi^e gave
twelve thousand Crowns a year toward the War, and the temper found for making
them Noble Veuetians was, that the Queen Mother of France moved the Senate to
grant it. In all ^he Creations of Se^ators before the last War of Candy, they
were free; and the Considerations were, either great Services, or the great
Dignity of those on whom they bestowed this Honor. Those new Families are
divided into those that are called Ducal Families; and those that were called
simply New Families; the Reason of the former designation is not rightly
understood; but one that knew all that related to that Constitution
particularly well, gave me a good account of it. That which naturally occurs as
the Reason of it, is, that all those Families, that are called Du^al, have had
the Dukedom in their House: But as all the old Families have had the same
Honor, though they carry not that Title, so some of the n^w Families have also
had it, that yet are not called Ducal. Others say, that those Families that
have had branches, who have been made Dukes, without their being first
Procurators of S. Mark, or that have been chosen to that Honor, without their
pretending to it, are called Ducal: But the true Account of this is, that from
the year 1450. to the year 1620. for a hundred and seventy years, there was a
combination made among those new Families to preserve the Dukedom still among
them: For the old Families carrying it high, and excluding the new Families
from the chief Honors, nineteen of the new Families entered into mutual
Engagements to exclude the ancient Nobility: It is true, they made the Dukedom
sometimes fall on some of the new Families that were not of this Association;
but this was more indifferent to them, as long as the ancient Famillies were
shut out, and that it appeared, that they bore the chief sway in the Election,
This Combination was a thing known to the very people, tho the Inquisitors did
all they could to break it, or at least to hide it, so that I never met with it
in any of their Authors. But this failed in the year 1620. when Memmio was
chosen Duke, who was descended of one of the ancient Nobility, which was so
great a mortification to the Case Ducale, that one of them ( Veniero) hanged
himself, by the Rage to which that Disgrace drove him, yet his man came into
the room in time, before he was dead, and cut him down, and he lived long after
that in a better mind. Since that time, one of the Bembo's, two of the
Cornaro's, and one of the Co^tarini's, and the present Prince, of the
Iust^niani, the first of that family that has had that honor, have been
Dukes, who are all of the ancient Families: So that this Faction is now so
entirely buried, that it is not generally known (even in Veni^e it self) that
it was ever amongst them; and thus time, and other Ac^id^nts bring about happy
Events, which no Care n^r Industry could produce: For that which all the
Endeavors of the Inquisit^rs could not compass, was brought about of it self.
It is true, the Factions in Veni^e, tho violent enough in the persons of those
who manage them, yet are not derived by them, as an Inheritance to their
Posterity, as it was among the Florentines; who tho they value themselves as a
size of men much above the Venetians, whom they despise as a phlegmatic and
dull race of people, yet showed how little they understood with all their
vivacity, to conduct their State; since by their domestic Heats they lost
their Liberty, which the Venetians have had the wisdom still to preserve. This
Faction of the Case Ducale was perhaps willing to let the matter fall; for they
lost more than they got by it; for the Ancient Families in revenge set
themselves against them, and excluded them from all the other advantageous
Employments of the State. For the others being only united in that single point
relating to the Dukedom, the Ancient Families let them carry it; but in all
other Competitions they set up always such Competitors against the Pretenders
that were of the Ducal Families, that were much more esteemed than these were,
so that they shut them out of all the best Offices of the Republi^k. Such a
Faction as this was, if it had been still kept up, might in Conclusion have
proved fatal to their Liberty. It is indeed a Wonder to see, the Dignity of the
Duke so much courted; for he is only a Prisoner of State, tied up to such
Rules, so severely restrained and shut up as it were in an Apartment of the
Palace of S. Mark, that it is not strange to see some of the greatest Families,
in particular the Cornaro's decline it. All the Family, if ever so numerous,
must retire out of the Senate, when a Du^e is chosen out of it, only one that
is next to him of kin. sits still, but without a Vote: And the only Real
Privilege that the Duke has, is, that he can of himself, without
communicating with the Savii, propose matters, either to the Council of Ten, to
the S^nate, or to the Great Coun^il; whereas all other propositions must be
first offered to the Savii, and examined by them, who have a sort of
Tribunitian Power to reject what they dislike; and tho they cannot hinder the
Duke to make a Proposition, yet they can mortify him when he has made it;
they can hinder it to be voted; and after it is voted, they can suspend the
execution of it till it is examined over again: And a Duke, that is of an
active Spirit, must resolve to endure many of these A^flictions; and it is
certain, that the Savii, do sometimes affect to show the Greatness of their
Authority, and exercise a sort of Tyranny in the rejecting of Propositions,
when thy intend to humble those that make them: yet the greatest part of the
best Families court this Honor ^f Dukedom extremely. When Sagredo was upon the
point of being chosen Duke, there was so violent an Outcry against it over all
Veni^e, because of the Di^grare, that they thought would come on the Republik,
if they had a Prince, whose Nose had mi^carried in some unfortunate Disorders;
the Senate complied so far with this Aversion, that the people testified, that
tho the Inquisitors took care to hang or drown many of the chief of the
Mutineers, yet they let the design for Sagredo fall: Upon which he was so much
disgusted, that he retired to a house he had in the Terra firma, and never
appeared more at Venice: During which time of his Retirement, he writ two
Books, the one Memory Ottom^niche, which is Printed; and he is accounted the
best of all their mordern Authors. The other was Memoires of the Government and
History of Venice, which has never been Printed; and some say, it is too
^incere, and too particular, so that it is thought it will be reserved among
their Archives. It has been a sort of Maxim now for some time, not to choose a
married man to be Duke, for the Coronation of a Du^hes^ goes high, and has
cost above a hundred thousand D^^ats. Some of the ancient Families have
affected the Title of Prince, and have called their branches, Princes of the
Blood; and tho the Cornaro's have done this more than any other, yet others
upon the account of some Principalities, that their Ancestors had in the
Islands of the Archipelago, have also affected those vain Titles: But the
Inquisitors have long ago obliged them, to lay aside all those high Titles; and
such of them as boast too much of their blood, find the disl^ke which that
brings on them very sensibly; for whenever they pretend to any great
Employments, they find themselves always ex^luded. When an Election of
Ambassadors was proposed, or of any of the chief O^^ices, it was wont to be
made in those terms, that the Coun^il must choose one of its Principal Members
for such an employment: But because this looked like a term of Distinction among
the Nobility, they changed it five and twenty years ago; and instead of
Principal, they use now the term Honorable, which comprehends the whole body
of their Nobility, without any distinction. It is at Venice, in the Church, as
well as in the State, that the Head of the Body has a great Title; and
particular Honors done him; whereas in the mean while this is a mere
Pageantry, and under these big words there is lodged only a lig^t shadow of
Authority; for their Bishop has the glorious Title of Patriarch, as well as the
Duke is caled their Prince, and his Serenity, and has his name stamped upon
their Coin; so the Patriarch with all this high Title, has really no
Authority: For not only Saint Mark's Church is entirely exempted from his
jurisdiction, and is immediately subject to the Duke, but his Authority is in
all other things so subject to the Senate, and so regulated by them, that he
has no more power, than they are pleased to allow him: So that the Senate is
as really the supreme Governor over all persons, and in all causes, as the
Kings of England have pretended to be in their own Dominions since the
Reformation: But besides all this, the Clergy of Venice have a very
extraordinary sort of Exemption, and are a sort of a body like a Presbytery
independent of the Bishop: The Curats are chosen by the Inhabitants of every
Parish, and this makes that no Noble Venetian is suffered to pretend to any
Cura^y; for they think it below that dignity, to suffer one of their body, to
engage in a competition with one of a lower order, and to run the hazard of
being rejected, I was told, the manner of those Elections was the most
scandalous thing possible; for the several Candidates appear on the day of
Election, and set out their own Merits, and defame the other Pretenders in the
sowlest Language, and in the most scurrilous manner imaginable; the secrets of
all their Lives are published in most reproachful terms, and nothing is so
abject and ridiculous, that is not put in practice on those occasions: There is
a sort of an Association among the C^rats for judging of their common concerns,
and some of the Laity of the several Parishes assist in those Courts, so that
here is a real Presbytery. The great Libertinage, that is so undecently
practiced by most sorts of people at Venice, extends it self to the Clergy to
such a degree, that tho Ignorance and Vice, seem the only indelible Characters,
that they carry generally over all Italy, yet those appear here in a much more
conspicuous manner than elsewhere; and upon these popular elections all comes
out. The Nuns of Venice have been under much scandal for a great while; there
are some Nunnerys that are as famous for their strictness and exactness to
their Rules, as others are for the Liberties they take: chiefly those of Saint
Zachary and Saint Laurence, where none but Noble Venetians are admitted, and
where it is not so much as pretended, that they have retired for Devotion; but
it is owned to be done merely, that they might not be too great a Charge to
their Family: They are not veiled, their neck and breast is bare, and they
receive much company: but that which I saw, was in a public Room, in which
there were many Grills for several Parlors, so that the conversation is very
confused; for there being a different company at every Grill, and the Italians
speaking generally very loud, the noise of so many loud Talkers, is very
disagreeable. The Nuns talk much, and very ungracefully, and allow themselves a
liberty in Rallying, that other places could not bear. About four years ago the
Patraiarch intended to bring in a Reform into those Houses; hut the Nuns of S.
Laurence, with whom he began, told him plainly, they were Noble Ven^tians, who
had chosen that way of life as more convenient for them, but they would not
subject themselves to his Regulations; yet he came and would shut up their
house, so they went to set fire to it; upon which the Senate interposed, and
ordered the Patriarch to desist. There is no Christian State in the World, that
has expressed a Jealousy of Church men's getting into the public Councils so
much as the Veneti^ns: for as a Noble Venetian, that goes into Orders, loses
thereby his right of going to vote in the great Council; so when any of them
are promoted to be Cardinals, the whole kin^red and family must (during their
lives) withdraw from the great Council, and are also incapable of all
employments: And by a clause, which they added when they received the
Inqu^sition, which seemed of no great consequence, they have made it to become
a Court absolutely subject to them; for it being provided, that the Inquisitors
should do nothing but in the presence of such as should be Deputed by the
Senate, to be the Witnesses of their proceedings, those Deputies either will
no^ come but when they think fit; or will not stay longer than they are pleased
with their proceedings; so that either their absence, or their withdrawing,
dissolves the Court: for a Citation cannot be made, a Witness cannot be
examined, nor the lea^^ point of Form carried on, if the Deputies of the Senate
a^^ not present: and thus it is, that tho there is a Court of I^quisition at
V^nice, yet there is scarce any person brough^ into trouble by it; and there
are many of the Protesta^^ Religion that live there without any trouble: and
tho there is a Congregation of them there, that has their exercises of
Religion very regularly, yet the Senate gives them no trouble. It is true, the
Hosty's not being carried about in Proc^ssion, but secretly by the Priest to
the Sick, makes that this uneasy discrimination of Protesta^^ and Papist, does
not offer it self here, as in other places; for the straitness of the streets,
and the Channals through which one must go almost every foot, makes that this
could not be done in Venice as it is elsewhere; and from Veni^e this Rule is
carried over their whole Territory, tho the like Reason does not hold in the
Terra Firma. The Venetians are generally ignorant of the matters of Religion to
^ scandal, and they a^e as unconcerned in them, as they are Strangers to them;
so that all that vast pomp in their Ceremonies, and wealth in their Churches,
is affected rather as a point of Magnificence, or a matter of Emulation among
Families, than that Superstition has here such a power over the Spirits of the
People, as it has elsewhere: for the Athe^sm that is received by many here, is
the dullest, and cou^sest thing that can be imagined. The young Nobility are so
generally corrupted in their Morals, and so given up to a most supine Ignorance
o^ all sort of knowledge, that a man cannot easily imagi^ to what a height this
is grown; and for Military Co^rage, there is scarce so much as the Ambition of
being thought brave remaining among the greater part of them. It seemed to me a
strange thing, to see the Bro^lio, so full of graceful young Senators and
Nobles, when there was so glorious a War on foot with the Turks; but instead of
being heated in point of Honor to hazard t^^ir lives, they rather think it an
extravagant piece of Folly, for them to go and hazard it, when a little Money
can hire Strangers, that do it on such easy term^; and thus their Arms are in
the hands of strangers, while they stay at home managing their In^rigues in the
Broglio, and dissolving their spirits among their Courtisans. And the
Reputation of their Service is of late years so much sunk, that it is very
strange to see so many come to a service so decryed, where there is so little
care had of the Soldiers, and so little regard had to the Officers; the
Arrea^s are so slowly paid, and the Rewards are so scantly distributed, that
if they do not change their Maxims, they may come to feel this very sensibly;
for as their Subjects are not acquainted with Warlike matters, so their
Nobili^y have no sort of Ambition that way, and strangers are extremely
disgusted. It is chiefly to the conjuncture of affairs that ^hey owe their
Safety; for the Feebleness of all their Neighbors, the Turk, the Emperor, the
King of Sp^in, the P^pe, and the Duke o^ Mantua, preserves them from the
apprehension of an Invasion; and the Quarrels, and Degeneracy of their
Subjects, save them from the Fears of a Revolt; but a formidable Neighbor
would put them hard to it. One great O^casion of the Deg^neracy of the
Italians, and in particular of the Venetian Nobility, is a Maxim that has been
taken up for some considerable time, that for the preservation of their
Famili^^, it is fit that only one of a Famil^ should marry; to which I will not
add, that it is generally believed, that the Wife is in common to the whole
Family. By this means the younger Brothers, that have Appointments for ^ife,
and that have no Families that come from them, are not stirred up by any
Ambition to signa^ize themselves, or to make Families, and so they give way to
all the Laziness of Luxury, and are quite enervated by it. Whereas the best
Services done in other State^, flows from the Necessities as well as the
Aspirings of younger Brothers, or their Families, whose blood qualifi^s them to
pretend, as well as their Pride and Necessities push them on, to acquire first
a Reputation, and the^ a Fortune: But all this is a Mystery to the Venetians,
who apprehend so much from the active Spirits of a necessitou^ Nobility, that
to lay those to sleep, they encourage them in all those things that may blunt
and depress the^^ Minds; and youth naturally hates Letters as much as it loves
Pleasure, when it is so far from being restrained, that it is rather pushed on
to all the Licentiousness of unlimitted Disorders.

Yet I must add one thing, that tho Venice, is the place in the whole World,
where pleasure is most studied, and where the youth have both the greatest
Wealth, and the most leisure to pursue it; yet it is the place that I ever saw,
where true and innocent Pleasure is the least understood; in which I will make
a little Digression, that perhaps will not be unpleasant. As for the Pleasure^
of Friendship, or Marriage, they are Strangers to them; for the horrible
distrust, in which they all live, of one another, makes; that it is very rare
to find a Friend in Italy; but most of all in Venice: and tho we have been told
of several Stories of celebrated Friendships there, yet these are now very
rare. As for their Wives, they are bred to so much ignorance, and they converse
so little, that they know nothing but the d^ll Superstition on Holidays, in
which they stay in the Chur^hes as long as they can, and so prolong the little
Liberty they have of going abroad on those days, as Children do their Hours of
play: They are not employed in their Domestic Affairs, and generally they
understand no sort of Work; so that I was told, that they were the insipidest
Creatures imaginable: They are perhaps as vicious as in other places, but it is
among them downright Lewdnes^; for they are not drawn into it, by the
intanglements of Amor, that inveigle and lead many persons much farther than
they imagined or intended at first; but in them, the first step, without any
preamble or preparative, is downright beastliness. And an Italian that knew the
World well, said upon this matter a very lively thing to me, he said, their
jealousy made them restrain their Daughters, and their Wives so much, that they
could have none of those Domestic Entertainm^nts of Wit, Conversation, and
Friendship, that the French or English have at home: It is true, those he said
hazard a little the Honor of their Families by that Liberty; but the Italians,
by their excessive Caution, made that they had none of the true Delights of a
Married Sta^e; and notwithstanding all their uneasy jealousy, they were still
in danger of a contraband Nobility; therefore he thought they would do much
better to hazard a little, when it would produce a certain satisfaction, than
to watch so anxiously, and thereby have an insipid Companion, inste^d of a
lively Friend, tho she might perhaps have some ill moments. As for their
houses, they have nothing convenient at Venice; for the Architecture is almost
all the same* one Staircase, a Hall that runs along the Body of the House, and
Chambers on both hands; but there are no Apartments, no Closet^ or Backstairs;
so that in houses that are of an excessive Wealth, they have yet no sort of
convenience; Their Bedsteads are of Iron, because of the vermin that their
moisture produces, the bottoms are of boards, upon which they lay so many
Quilts, that it is a huge step to get up to them; their great Chairs are all
upright, without a slope in the back, hard in the bottom, and the wood of the
Arms is not covered: they mix Water with their Wine in their Hogsheads, so that
for above half the year, the Wine is either dead or four: they do not leaven
their bread, so that it is extreme heavy, and the Oven is too much heated, so
that the Crum is as Dough, when the Crust is as hard as a Stone; in all Inns
they boil meat first before it is roasted, and thus as indeed they make it
tender, so it is quite tastless, and insipid: And as for their Land-carriage,
all Lombar^y over, it is extreme inconvenient; for their Co^ches are fastened to
the perch, which makes them as uneasy as a Cart: It is true, they begin to
have at Rome, and Napl^s, Coaches that are fastened to a sort of double Perch,
that runs along the bottom of the Coach of both sides, which are so th^^, that
they ply to the motion of the Coach, and are extreme easy, but those are not
known in ^om^ardy* and besides this, their Caleshes are open, so that one is
exposed to the Sun and Dust in Summer, and to ^^e Weather in W^nter: But tho
they are covered as ours are, on the other side of the Appenins, yet I saw none
that were covered in Lombardy: and thus by an enumeratio^ of many of the
innocent pleasures, and Con^eniences o^ Life, it appears, that the Veneti^ns
pursue so violentl^ Forbidden Pleasures, that they know not how to find out
that which is allowable. Their constant practices i^ the Broglio is their chief
business, where those that are necessitous, are suing for employments of
Advantage, and those that are sull of Wealth, take a sort of pleasure in
crossing their pretentions, and in imbroiling matters. The Wall in which the
Nobility tread, is left to them: for no o^he^^ dare walk among them; and they
change the side of the square of Saint Mark as the Sun and the weather direct
them. Perhaps a derivation that Mr. Patin gave me of Broglio from the Greek
Per^bola^on, a little corrupted, is not forced; and since they make all their
pa^ties, and manage all their intrigues in those Wolks, I am apt to think that
Broils, Brovillons and Imbroilments are all de^ived from the Agitations that
are managed in those Walks.

As for the last created Nobility of V^ni^e, I came to know some particulars
that I have not yet seen in any Books, which I suppose will not be unacceptable
to you. It is certain, that if the Venet^ans could have foreseen a^ the
beginning of the War of Candy, the vast Expense in which ^he length of it
engaged them, they would have abandoned the Isle, rather than have wasted their
Treasure, and debased their Nobility. This last was extreme sensible to them;
for as the Dignity of the rank they hold, is so much the more Eminent as it is
restrained to a small number; so all the best Employments and Honors of the
State belonging to this Body, the admitting such a number into it, as must rise
out of seventy e^ght Families, was in effect the sharing their Inheritance
among so many adopted Brothers. This had been less infamous, if they had
communicated that Honor only to the ancient Citizens of Venice, or to the
Nobility of those States that they have subdued in the Terra Firm^; for as
there are many Citizens, who are as ancient as the Nobility, only their
Ancestors not happening to be of that Co^n^il, that assumed the Government about
^our hundre^ years ago, they have not been raised to that Honor, so there had
been no Infamy in creating some of them to be of the Nobility. It had been also
brought under consultation long ago, upon the Reduction of those State in the
Terra Firma, whether it was not advisable, according to the Maxims of the
Ancient Romans, to communicate that Dignity to some of their chief Families, as
being the surest Way to give some contentment to those States, it being also a
real, as well as a cheap Security, when the chief Families in those Cities,
were admitted to a share in all the Honors of the Republic. It is true, some
of the Nobility of those States thought they had Honor enough by their Birth,
and so Zambara of Bres^ia refused to accept an Honor from those that had
robbed his Country of its Liberty, yet his posterity are now of another mind;
for ^hey came and bought in this last sale of Honor that which was freely
offered to their Ancestor, and was rejected by him. When the Senate found it
self extremely pressed for Money, during the War, it was at first proposed,
that some Families, to the number of five, might be Enobled; they offering
sixty thousand Ducats if they were Venetians, and seventy thousand if they were
Strang^rs: There was but one person that opposed this in the S^nate, so it
being passed there, was presented to the Great Council; and there it was like
to have passed without any di^ficulty, but one person opposed it with so much
vigor, that tho the Duke desired him to give over his Opposition, since the
Necessities of the War required a great supply, yet he persisted still; and tho
one of the Savii set for^h with Tears the extremities to which the State was
reduced, he still insisted, and fell upon one Conceit that turned the whole
Coun^il; he said, they were not sure if five Persons could be found, that would
purchase that Honor at such a rate, and then it would be a vast Disgrace, to
expose the offer of Nobility first to sale; and then to the Affront, of finding
no Buyers when it was offered to be sold; and by this means he put by the
Resolution for that time: But then another Method was taken, that was more
honorable, and was of a more extended Consequence. Labia was the first that
presented a Petition to the Great Council, setting forth his Merits toward the
Republi^k, and desiring that he might be thought worthy to offer a hundred
thousand Du^ats toward the service of the State: this was understood to be the
asking to be made Nobl^ at that price. Delfino said, he thought every man might
be well judged worthy, to offer such an assistance to the Public, and that
such as brought that supply, might expect a suitable acknowledgement from the
Senate, who might afterward of their own accord bestow that Honor on those
that expressed so much Zeal for the Public: and this would in some fort
maintain that degree, which would be too much debased* if it were thus bought
and sold: but it seems the Purchasers had no mind to part with their Money, and
to leave the Reward to the Gratitude of the Council, so the Petition was
granted in plain terms: and the Nobility so acquired was not only to descend to
the Children of him that was enobled; but to his Brothers, and the whole Family
to such a degree. After Labia, a great many more came with the like Petitions,
and it was not unpleasant to see in what terms Merchants, that came to buy this
Honor set forth their Merits, which were, that they had taken care to furnish
the Republic with such things as were necessaty for its preservation. There
was a sort of a Trium^irat ^ormed, of a Jew, a Greek, and an Italian, who were
the Brokers, and found out the Merchants: and at last brought down the price
from a hundred thousand, to sixty thousand Ducats; and no other qualifications
were required, if they had money enough: For when Correge said to the Duke,
that he was afraid to ask that Honor for want of Merit, the Duke asked him, if
he had a hundred thousand Ducats? and when the other answered, the Sam was
ready; the Duke told him, that was a great M^rit. At last seventy eight
pur^hased this Honor, to the great regret of Laebia: who said, that if he had
imagined, that so many would have followed him in that demand, he would have
bid so high for it, that it should have been out of their power to have done
it. It is true, many of the Purchasers were Ancient and Noble Families; but
many others were not only Merchants, but were of the lowest sort of them: who
as they had enriched themselves by Trade, did then impoverish themselves by the
acquisition of an Honor, that as it obliged them to give over their Trade, and
put them in a higher Way of living, so it has not brought them yet in any
Advantage to balance that Lofs: for they are so much despised, that they are
generally excluded, when they compete with the ancient Nobility; tho this is
done with that Discretion, that the old Families do not declare always against
the new; for that would throw the new into a Faction against them, which might
be a great prejudice to them; for the new, are much more numerous than the old.
Another great Pr^judice that the R^p^bli^k feels by this great Promotion, is,
that the Chief Families of the Citizens of V^nice, who had been long practiced
in the Affairs of State, and out of whom the Envoyes, the Secretaries of State,
and the Chancellor, that is the Head of the Citizens, as well as the Duke is
the Head of the Nobility, are to be chosen, having purchased the Chief Honor
of the State, there is not now a sufficient Number of capable Citizens left for
serving the St^te in those Employments; but this defect will be red^est with
the help of a little time. But if this increase of the N^bility, has leslened
^he dignity of the ancient Families, the^e is a Regula^ion made in this age,
that st^^l preserves a considerable distinction of Authority in their hands.
Crimes against the State, when committed by any of the Nobility, were always
judged by the Inquisitors, and the Council of Ten; but all other crimes were
judged by the Council of Forty. But in the year 1624. one of the Nobles was
accused of Peculat, committed in one of their Governments, and the Avogadore,
in the pleading* as he set forth his crime, called him a Rogue and a Robber:
yet tho his Crimes were mani^est, there being but six and twenty Judges
present, twelve only condemned him, and fourteen acquitted him; this gave gre^^
O^fence; for tho he was acquitted by his Judges, his Crimes were evident, so
that his fame could not be restored: for the Depositions of the Witnesses, and
the Avogadores (or the Attorney Generals) charge, were heard by the people; so
it was proposed to make a Difference between the Nobility, and the other
Subjects; and since all Trials before the Forty were public, and the Tryal^
before the Ten were in Secret, it seemed fit to remit the Nobility to be tried
by the T^n* Some foresaw, that this would tend to a Tyranny, and raise the
Dignity of the ancient Families (of whom the Council of Ten is always
composed) too high; therefore they opposed it upon this ground, that since the
Coun^il of Forty sent out man^ Orders to the Governors, it would very much
lesse^ their Authority, if they were not to be the Judges of those, who were
obliged to receive their Orders: but to qualify this Opposition, a Proviso was
made, that reserved to the Cou^cil of Forty a Power to judge of the Obedience
that was given to their Orders; bu^ all other Accus^tions of the Nobility were
remitted to the Coun^il of Ten* and the Body of the Nobility were so pleased
with this distinction, that was put between them and the other Subjects, that
they did not see, that this did really insla^e them so much the more, and
brought them under more danger; since those who judge in secret have a freer
scope to their Passions, than those whose proceedings are Publi^k, and so are
in effect judged by the Public, which is often a very effectual restraint upon
the Judges themselves. But the Council of Ten being g^nerally in the hands of
the great Families; whereas those of all sorts are of the Council of F^rty,
which was the chief Iudicatory of the State, and is much Ancienter than shat of
T^n: it had been much more wisely done of them to have been still Judged by the
Forty: And if they had thought it for their Honor, to have a di^ference made
in the way of Judging the Nobi^ity, and the other Subjects, it had been more
for their Security, to have brought their Trials to this, that whereas the
Forty judge all other Offenders with Open Doors, the Nobility should be judged
the Doors being shut, which is a thing they very much desire now, but without
any hope of ever obtaining it. For this power of Judging the N^bility, is now
considered as the Right of the Ten; and if any man would go about to change it,
the Inquisitors would be pe^haps very qu^ck wi^h him as a Mover of Sedition,
and be, in that case, both Judge and Party; Yet the Inquisitors being
appr^hensive of the distaste, that this might breed in the Body of the Nobility,
have made a sort of Regulation, tho it does not amount to much; which is, that
the Nobility shall be judged before the Council of Ten for attrocious Cases,
such as Matters of State, the Robbing the Public, and other enormous Crimes;
but that for all other matters, they are to be judged by the Forty: yet the
Coun^il of Ten draws all Cases before them, and none dare dispute wi^h them.

But this leads me to say a little to you of that part of ^h^s Constitution,
which is so much censured by Strangers; but is really both the greatest Glory,
and the chief Security of this Republic, which is, the un^imitted Power of the
Inquisitors, that extends not only to the Chief of the Nobility, but to the
Duke himself, who is so subject to them, that they may not only give hi^ severe
Reprimands, but search his Papers, make h^^ Process, and in conclusion, put him
to death, without being bound to give an Account of their proceedings, except
to the Council of Ten: This is the Dread not onl^ of all the Subjects, but of
the whole Nobility, and o^ all that bear Office in the Republic; and makes the
greatest among them tremble, and so obliges them (...) an exact conduct. But
tho it is not to be denied, tha^ upon some occasions, they may have been a
little too sudden, particularly, in the known story of Fo^carini; (...) such
unjustifiable Serverities have occured so seldom, that as the wisdom of this
body in making, and preserving such an Institution, cannon be enough admired,
so the dextrous conduct of those who manage this (...) Tru^t, so as not to
force the body to take it out of the^^ hands, is likewise highly to be wondered
at. In short, the Insolence, the Factions, the Revenges, the Necessitie^ and
Ambition, that must needs possess a great many Members of so vast a body, as is
the Nobility of Venice; mu^^ have thrown them often into many fatal
Convulsions, (...) it were not for the Dread in which they all stand of th^s
Court; which has so many Spies abroad, chiefly among the Gondaliers, who
cannot fail to discover all the secre^ Commerce of Venice: besides the secret
Advices that a^^ thrown in at so many of those L^ons mouths, that are i^
several places of St. Mark's Palace, within which there are Boxes that are
under the keys of the Inquisitors; so th^^ it is scarce possible for a man to
be long in any design against the State, and not to be discovere^ by them* And
when they find any in fault, they are so inexorable, and so quick, as well as
severe in their Justice, that ^he very fear of this is so effectual a
restraint, that perhap^ the long preservation of Venice, and of its Liberty, is
owing to this single piece of their Constitution. A^^ the Inquisitors are
persons generally so distinguished for their Merit, who must be all of
different Families, and their Authority lasts so short a while, that the
Advantages of this vast Authority, that is lodged with them, are constant and
visible; whereas the unhappy instances of their being imposed on, and carrying
their suspicions too far, are so few, that whenever the Nobility grows weary of
this Yoke, and throws it off, one may re^kon the Glory and Prosperity of V^nice
at an end. It was terribly attackt not long ago by Cornaro, when Ierom Cornaro
was put to death for his correspondonce with Spain; he was not near akin to the
great Family of that name, yet the Family thought their Honor was so much
touched when one of its remotest branches wa^ condemned of Treason, that they
offered a hundred thousand Crowns to have saved him, and by consequence to have
perserved the Family from that Infamy; but tho this was not accepted; (for he
suffered, ^s he well deserved) yet it was so visible, that none of the Family
were concerned in his Crimes, that it did not at all turn to their Prejudice.
But upon the first occa^ion that offered it self after that, to quarrel with
the proceedings of the Inquisitors, they laid hold on it, and aggravated the
matter extremely, and moved for the limiting of their Authority; but the Great
Council was wiser than to touched so sacred a part of the Government, so they
retain their Power very entire, but they manage it with all possible Caution. A
Foreigner that has been many years in their service, told me, that the Stories
with which Strangers were frighted at the Arbitrary Power that was rested in
those Inquisitors, were slight things, in comparison of the Advantages that
they found from it: and alter eleven years spent in their service, he said, he
never was so much as once sent for to receive a Reprimand from them. And if the
Nobelity, that have any Commerce with Strangers, confess it sincerely to the
Inquisitors, they are in no danger by it; but if they conceal it, or any main
Circumstances of it, their Process will be soon dispatched. These are the most
remarkable things that I could pick up, during my stay at Venice. (...) have
avoided to say any thing relating to their several Councils, Offi^ers, and
Iudicatories, or to the other parts of their Government, which are to be found
in all Books; and the Forms by which they give their Votes by Ballot are so
well known, that it were an abusing of your time, to enlarge my se^^ concerning
them; nor was I suffi^iently informed, concerning the particulars of the Sale
of Nobil^ty that is now on foot, since this last War with the Turks, which has
made them willing to take up once again this easy way of raising of Money: No^
could I give credit to that of which a person of (...) Eminence there assured
me, that there was a Po^soner General in Ve^ice, that had a Salary, and (...)
employed by the Inpuisitors to dispatch those, against whom a public
proceeding would make too great (...) noise; this I could not believe, tho my
Author protested, that the Brother of one that was solicited t^ accept of the
employment discovered it to him. The^e is no place in the World where Strangers
live wit^ more freedom; and I was amazed to see so litt^^ Exactness among the
Sear^hers of the Customhouse for though we had a Mullets-load of Trunks, an^
Portmantles, yet none offered to ask us, either coming or going, what we were,
or what we ca^ried with us. But the best and Noblest Entertainmen^ that Veni^e
afforded while I was there, was the Company of Mr. de la Hay^, the Fren^h
Ambass^dor, who as he has spent his whole life in public^ Embassies, so he
has acquired so great a Kno^ledge of the World, with so true a Judgment, an^
so obliging a Civility, that he may well pass (...) a Pattern; an^ it is no
wonder to see him (...) engaged in a constant succession of public
Employments; and his Lady is so wonderful a person, th^^ I pay them both but a
very small part of wh^^ I owe them, in this Acknowledgment, which I judge my
self bound to make of their extraordinary Civilities to me: and indeed, without
the Advan^age of such a Rendezvous as I had there, a fortnights stay at V^nice
had been a very te^ious mat^er. From Venice we went again to Padu^; From ^hence
to Rovigo, which is but a small Town, and so to the Po, which divides the
Territory of the R^publick from the Ferrarese* which is now the Popes Country;
and here one sees what a difference a good and a bad Government makes in a
Coun^ry; for tho the soil is the same on both sides of ^he River, and the
Ferrarese was once one of the ^eautifullest spots of all Italy, as Ferrara was
one o^ its best Tow^s, while they had Princes of their own, who for a course of
some Ages were Prin^es of such Eminent Virtue, and of so Heroical a Nobleness,
that they were really the Fathers of their Country; nothing can be imagined
more changed than all this is now. The soil is abandoned, and uncultivated, nor
were there hands enough so much as to mow their Grass, which we saw withering
in their Meadows to our no small wonder. We were amazed to see so rich a soil
thu^ forsaken of its Inhabitants, and much more when we passed through that
vast Town, which by its extent shows what it was about an age ago, and is now
so much deserted, that there are whole sides of Streets without Inhabitants;
and the Poverty of the Place appears signally in the Churches, which are mean,
and poorly adorned; for the superstition of Italy is so ravenous, and makes
such a progress in this Age, that one may justly take the mea^ures of the
Wealth of any place from the Churches. The Superstition, or Vanity of this Age,
is so much beyon^ that of the past (tho the contrary to this is commonly
believed) that all the vast Buildings of great Churches or rich Convents, and
the surprising Wealth that appears in them on Festival days, are the Donatives
of the present Age; so that it is a vulgar error that some have taken up, who
fancy, that Superstition is at a stand, i^ not in a Decay; unless it be
acknowledged, that the cra^^ of the Priests has opened to them a new method to
support their riches, when the old ones of Purgatory, and Indulgences were
become less effectual in an Age of more knowledge, and better enlightened; and
that is, to engage men to an Emulation and a Vanity in Enriching the^^
Churches, as much as other Italians have in the enrichin^ their Palaces; so
that as they have a Pleasure as well as (...) Vanity, in seeing so much dead
wealth in their houses, they have translated the same humor to their Churche^:
and the vanity of the present Age, that believes little or nothing of those
contrivances, of Purgatory, or the like, produces the same, if not greater
effects, in the building and enriching their Churches. and so carries it* in
Expense and Prodigality, from the superstition of the former Ages, that
believed every thing. But to return^^ Ferrara, I could not but ask all I saw,
how it came, that so rich was so strangely abandoned? some said, the Air was
become so unhealthy, that those who sta^ in it were very short lived; but it is
well known, th^^ fourscore years ago it was well peopled* and the ill Air (...)
occasioned by the want of Inhabitants; for there no^ being people to drain the
ground, and to keep the Ditche^ clean, this makes that there is a great deal of
water th^^ li^s on the ground and rots, which infects the Air in the same
manner, as is observed in that vast and rich, (...) uninhabited Champaign of
Rome; so that the ill Air is t^^ effect, rather than the cause, of the
dispeopling of t^^ Popes Dominions. The true cause is the Severity of the
^^vernment, and the heavy Taxes, and frequent Confisotions, by which the
Nephews of several Popes, as the^ have devoured many of the Families of
Ferrara, so the^ have driven away many more. And this appears mo^^ visibly, by
the different State as well as the Constitution of Bologna, which is full of
people that abound in Wealth; and as the Soil is extreme rich, so it is
cultivated with all due care. For Bologna delivered it self to the P^pedom upon
a Capitulation, by which there are many Privileges reserved to it: Crimes
there are only punished in the perfons of those who commit them; but there are
no confiscations of Estates; and tho the Authority, in criminal matters,
belongs to the Pope, and is managed by a Legate and his Officers; yet the Civil
Government, the Magistracy, and the power of Judicature in Civil matters, is
int^rely in the hands of the State: And by this Regulation it is, that as the
Riches of Bologna amazes a Stranger, it neither being on a Navigable River, by
which it is not capable of much Trade, nor being the Center of a Sovereignty,
where a Court is kept; so the Taxes that the Popes fetch from thence are so
considerable, that he draws much more from this place of Liberty; than from
those where his Authority is unlimited and absolute, but that are by those
means almost quite abandoned: for the greatness of a Prince or State rising
from the numbers of the Subjects, those Maxims that re^ain the Subjects, and
that draw Strangers to come among them, are certainly the truest Maxims for
advancing the greatness of the Master. And I could not but with much scorn
observe the folly of some Frenchmen, who made use of this Argument to show the
Greatness of their Nation, that one found many Frenchmen in all places to which
one could come, whereas there were no English nor Dutch, no Switzers, and very
few Germans; but ^his is just contrary to the right consequence that ought to
be drawn from this observation. It is certain, that few leave their Country,
and go to settle elsewhere, if they are not pressed with so much uneasiness at
home, that they cannot well live among their Friends and Kindred; so that a
mild Government drives out no swarms: whereas it is the sure mark of a severe
Government that weakens it self, when many of the Subjects find it so hard to
subsist at home, that they are forced to seek that abroad, which they would
much rather do in their own Country, if Impositions and other Severities, di^
not force them to change their Habitations.

But to return to the Wealth of Bologna, it appea^^ in every Corner of the
Town, and all ^ound it, tho i^scituation is not very fa^ourable; for it lies at
the foot of the Appenins, on the North-side, and is extreme cold in Winter. The
Houses are built as at Padua and Ber^, so that one walks all the Town over,
covered under Pi^zza's; but the walks here are both higher and larger than any
were else, there are many Noble Pala^es all over the Town, and the Churches and
Convents are incredibly rich: within the Town, the richest are the Domini^ans,
which is the chief House of the Order, where their Founders Body is laid in one
of the best Chapp^^^ of Italy: and next to them are the Franciscans, the
Servites, the Jesuits, and the Cannons Regular of St. Salvator. In this last
there is a Scrowl of the Hebre^ Bible, which tho it is not the tenth part of
the Bible, they fancy to be the whole Bible: and they were made believe by some
Jew, that has no doubt sold it at a high rate, that it was written by Ezra's
own hand; and this has past long for current: but the Manuscript is only a
fine Copy, like those that the Jews use in their Synagogues, that may be
perhaps three or four hundred Years old: that part of it on which I cast my
eye, was the Book of Esther; so by the bulk of the Scrowl, I judged it to be
the collection of those small books of the Old Te^^^ment that the Jews set
after the Law; but those of the House fancy they have a great treasure in it,
and perhap^ such Jews as have seen it are willing to laugh at their ignorance,
and so suffer them to go on in their Error. The chief Church in the Town is St.
Petrone's, and there one sees the curious and exact Merid^onal-line, which th^^
rare Astronomer Cassini laid along a great part of the Pavement in a ^ras^
Circle: it marks the true point of mid^ay from June to January, and is one of
the best Performances that perhaps the World ever saw. In the great square
before the Church, on the one side of which is the Legates Palace, among other
Statues one surprised me much, it was Pope Ioans, which is so named by the
people of the Town; it is true, the learned men say* it is the Statue of Pope
Nicolas the IV. who had indeed a youthly and womanish face. But as I looked at
this Statue very attentively, through a little prospect that I carried with me,
it appeared plainly to have the face of a young Woman, and was very unlike that
of Pope Nicolas the IV. which is in St. Maria Maggiore at Rome: For the Statue
of that Pope, tho it has no beard, yet has an age in it, that is very much
different from the Statue at Bologna. I do not build any thing on this Statue;
for I do not believe that Story at all; and I my self saw in England a
Manuscript of Martinus Polonus, who is one of the ancient Authors of this
matter, which did not seem to be written long after the Authors time, in it
this Story is not in the Text, but is added on the margin by another hand. On
the Hill above Bologna stands the Monastery of St Michael in Bosco, which has
a most charming situation and prospect, and is one of the best Mon^steries in
Italy; it has many Courts, and one that is Cloistered, and is Octangular;
which is so nobly painted in Fresco, that it is great pity to see such work
exposed to the Air: All was retou^hed by the famous Guido Reni, yet it is now
again much decayed: The Dormitory is very Magnifi^ent; the Chapel is little,
but very fine; and the Stalls are richly carved. On the other side of Bologna,
in the Bottom, the Carthusians have also a very rich Monastery: Four miles from
Bologna there is a Madona of Saint Lukes; and because many go thither in great
Devotion, there is a Porti^o Building, which is already carried on almost half
way; It is walled toward the North, but stands on Pillars to the South, and is
about twelve foot broad, an^ fifteen foot high; it is carried on very
vigorously; for in eigh^ or ten years the half is built, so that in a little
time, the whole will very probably be finished; and this may prove the
beginning of many such like Portico's in I^aly; for things of this kind want
only a beginning, and when they are once set on foot, they do quickly spread
themselves in a Country that is so entirely subdued by Superstition, and the
Artifices of their Priests. In Bologna they reckon there are seventy thousand
persons. I saw not one of the chief Glories of this place; for the famous
Malphigius was out of Town while I was there. I saw a Play there, but the P^^s^
was so bad, the Farces so rude, and all was so ill acted, that I was not a
little amazed to see the Company expres^ so great a Satisfaction in that which
would have been hissed off the stage either in England or Fran^e. From B^logna
we go eight miles in a Plain, and then we engage into that range of Hills that
carry the name of Appen^^s, tho that is strictly given only to one that is the
highest: All the way to Florence this track of Hills continues, th^^ there are
several bottoms, and some considerable little Towns in them, but all is up hill
and down-hill, an^ Florence it self, is just at the bottom of the last Hill.
The highways all along these Hills are kept in so very goo^ case, that in few
of the best inhabited Countries does one find the Highways so well maintained,
as in those forsaken Mountains: but this is so great a Passage, that (...) that
are concerned in it, find their account, in the expense they lay out upon it.
On the last of these Hills, tho in a little bottom, in the midst of a Hill,
stands Pratoli^, one of the great Dukes Palaces, where the retreat (...) Summer
must be very agreeable; for the Air of thos^ Mountains is extreme thin and
pure. The Gardens in Italy are made at a great cost; the Statues and Fountains
a^^ very rich and noble; the Grounds are well laid out; a^^ the Walks are long
and even: But as they have no G^^vel, to give them those firm and beautiful
walks that we have in England, so the constant greenness of the (...) does so
much please them, that they, preferring the sigh^ to the smell, have their
Gardens so high sented by (...) made with them, that there is no pleasure to
walk (...) them; they also lay their walks so between Hedges, that one is much
confined in them. I saw first in a Gard^n at Vin^enza, that which I found
afterward in many Gardens in Italy, which was extreme convenient, there wen^ a
course of Water ^ound about the Walls, about a foot from the ground is a
channel of stone, that went along the side of the Wall; and in this there were
holes so made, that a pipe of white Iron or Wood put to them, conveyed the
Water to such plants, as in dry sea^on, needed watring, and a Cock set the
Water a running in this course, so that without the trouble of carrying Water,
one person could easily manage the watring of a great Garden. Floren^e is a
beautiful and noble Town, full of great Palaces, rich Churches, and stately
Convents. The streets are paved in imitation of the old Roman Highwayes, with
great S^one, bigger than our common pavement Stone, but much thicker, which are
so hollowed, in their joynings to one another, that horses find fastening enough
to their feet: There are many Statues and Fountains in the streets, so that in
every corner one meets with many agreeable Objects. I will not entertain you
with a description of the great Dukes Palace and Gardens, or of the old Palace,
and the G^llery that joins to it, and of the vast Collection of Pictures,
Statues, Cabinets, and other Curiosities, that must needs amaze every one that
sees them: the Plate, and in particular, the Gold Plate, and the great Coach,
are all such extrao^dinary things, that they would require a very copious
description* if that had not been done so often, that it were to very little
purpose to Copy what others have said: and these things are so exactly seen by
every Traveller, that I can say nothing that is more particular of these
subjects, ^han you will find in the common Itinerarys of all Travelers. The
great Dome is a magnificent building, but the Frontispiece to the great Gate is
not yet made. The Cupulo, is after St. Peter's, the greatest and highest that I
saw in Italy; it is three hundred foot high, and of a vast compass; and the
whole Architecture of this Fabric is very singular, as well as regular. Only
that which was intended to ad^ to its Beauty, lessened it very much in my
thoughts: for the Walls that are all of Marble, being of white and black
Marble, laid in different figures and orders, looked too like a Livery, and had
not that air of Nobleness which in my opinion becomes so glorious a Fabr^^k.
The Baptistery, that stan^s before it, was a Noble Heathen Temple; i^s Gates of
brass, are the best of ^h^t sort that are in the World: There are so many
History, so well represented in Bas Reliefs in them, with so much Exactness,
the Wo^k is so natural, and yet so fine* that a curious man could find
entertainment for many days, if he would examine the three Gates of this
Temple with a critical exactness. The Annunciata, St. Marks, St. Croce, and St.
Maria Novella, are Churches of great Beauty and vast Riches; but the Church and
Chapel of S. Laurence exceeds them all, as much in the Riches within, as it is
inferior to them in the outside, which is quite flayed, (if I may so speak)
but on design to give it a rich outside of Marble. In a Chapel within this
Church, the Bodies of the great Dukes lie deposited: till the famous Chapel is
finished, But I was much scandalized to see Statues with Nudities here, which I
do not remember to have seen any where else in Churches. I will not offer at a
description of the Glorious Chapel, which as it is without doubt, the richest
piece of building that perhaps the World ever saw, so it goes on so slowly,
that tho there are always many at work, ^ yet it does not seem to advance
proportionably to the number of the hands that are employed in it. Among the
Statues that are to be in it, there is one of the Virgin's, made by Michael
Angelo, which represents her grief at the Passion of her Blessed Son, that has
the most life in it of all the Statues I ever saw. But the famous Li^rary, that
belongs to this Convent, took up more of my time than all the other Curiosities
of Florence; for here is a collection of many Manuscripts, most of them are
Greek, that were gathered together by Pope Clement the VII and give^ to his
Country: there are very few Printed Books mixed with them; and those Books that
are there, are so rare, that they are almost as curious as Manuscrips. I saw
some of Virg^ls P^ems in old Capitals. There is a Manuscript, in which some
parts both of Tacitus and Apuleius are written, and in one place, one in a
different hand had writ, that he had compared those Manuscripts, and he adds a
date to this in Olibrius's time, which is about twelve hundred Years ago. I
found some dipthongs in it cast into one Letter, which surprised me; for I
thought that way of writing them had not been so ancient: but that which
pleased me most was, that the Library Keeper assured me, that one had lately
found the famous Epistle of St. Chrysostom to Cesarius in Greek, in the end of
a Volume full of other things, and not among the Manuscripts of that Fathers
Books; of which they have a great many. He thought he remembered well the place
where the Book stood; so we turned over all the Books that stood near it, but I
found it not: he promised to look it out for me, if I came back that way: But I
changing my design, and going back another way, could not see the bottom of
this. It is true, the famous Magliabecchi, who is the Great Dukes
Library Keeper, and is a person of most wonderful Civility, and full of Candor,
as well as he is learned beyond imagination, assured me, that this could be no
other than a mistake of the Library-keepers; he said, such a discovery could
not have been made, without making so much noise; that he must have heard of
it. He added, there was not one man in Florence, that either understood Greek,
or that examined Manuscripts; so that he assured me, I could not build on what
an ignorant Library Keeper had told me: So I set down this matter as I found
it, without building much on it. Florence is much sunk from what is was; for
they do not reckon, that there are above fifty thousand ^ouls in it: and the
other States, that were once great Republics, such as Siena and Pisa, while
they retained their Liberty, are now shrunk almost into nothing: It is certain,
that all three together, are now not so numerous, as any one of them was two
hundred years ago. Legorn is full of people; and all round Florence there are a
great many Villages; but as one goes over Tuscany, it appears so dispeopled,
that one cannot but wonder to find a Country, that has been a Scene of so much
Action, and so many Wars, now so forsaken, and so poor, and that in many places
the Soil is quite neglected for want of hands to cultivate it; and in other
places, where there are more people, they look so poor, and their Houses are
such miserable Ruins, that it is scarce accountable, how there should be so
much Poverty in so rich a Country, which is all over full of Beggars: and here
the style of Begging was a little altered from what I found it in Lombardy; for
whereas there they begged for the sake of St. Anthony, here all begged for the
Souls that were in Purgatory; and this was the style in all the other parts of
Italy, through which I passed. In short; the dispeopling of Tuscany, and most
of the Principalities of Italy, but chiefly of the Popes Dominions, which are
more abandoned than any other part of Italy, seemed to flow from nothing but
the Severity of the Government; and the great Decay of Trade: For the greatest
Trade of Italy being in Silk, the vast Importation of Silks that the East India
Companies bring into Europe, has quite ruined all those that deal in this
Manufacture: Yet this is not the chief Cause of the dispeopling of those rich
Countries; the Severity of the Tax* is the true Reason: notwithstanding all that
Decay of Trade, the Taxes are still kept up. Beside this, the vast Wealth of
the Convents, where the only people of Italy are to be found, that live not
only at their Ease, but in great plenty and Luxury, makes many forsake all sort
of Industry, and seek for a retreat in one of those Seats of Pleasure; so that
the People do not increase fa^t enough to make a new race to come instead of
those, whom a hard Government drives away. It must needs surprise an
unattentive Traveller, to see not only the Venetian Territory, which is indeed
a rich Country, but the Bailiages of the Switzers, and the Coast of Genoa so
full of People, when Tuscany, the Patrimony, and the Kingdom of Naples, have so
few Inhabitants. In the Coast of Genoa, there is for many miles as it were a
constant tract of Towns and Villages, and all those are well peopled, tho they
have scarce any Soil at all, lying under the Mountains, that are very barren,
and that expose them to a most uneasy Sun; and that they lie upon a boistrous
Sea; that is almost always in a Storm, and that affords very few fish: and yet
the Gentleness of the Government draws such multitudes thither, and those are
so full of Wealth, that Money goes at two per cent. But on the other hand, to
balance this a little, so strange and wild a thing is the nature of Man, at
least of Italians, that I was told, that the worst people of all Italy are the
Genoeses, and the most generally corrupted in their Morals, as to all sorts of
Vice; so that tho a severe Co^ernment and Slavery, are contrary to the nature
of man, and to human Society, to Justice and Equity, and to that essential
Equality that Nature has made among men; yet on the other hand, all men cannot
bear that Ease and Liberty that become the Human Nature. The superstition of
Italy, and the great wast of Wealth that one sees in their Chur^hes,
particularly those Prodigious Masses of Plate, with which their Altars are
covered on Holydays, does also sink their Trade extremely; for Silver, being in
Commerce, what blood is in the body, when so much of that is dead, and
circulates no more; it is no wonder if such an extravasa^ion (if I may use so
long and so hard a word) of Silver, occasions a great Deadness in Trade. I had
almost forgot one remark, that I made in the last Hill of the Ap^enins, just
above Florence, that I never saw such tall and big Cypresses any where as grew
over all that Hill, which seemed a little strange, that Tree being apt to be
starved by a cold Winter among us, and there the Winters are severe. All the
ways in Tuscany are very rugged, except on the side^ of the Arne. But the
uneasiness of the Road is much qualified by the great Care that is had of the
Highways, which are all in very good case: The Inns are wretched; and ill
furnished both for Lodging and Diet. This is the plague of all Italy, when once
one has passed the Appen^ns; for, except in the great Towns, one really
suffers so much that way, that the Pleasure of Traveling is much abated by the
Inconveniences that one meets in every Stage through which he passes. I am

SIR, Yours.

THE FOURTH LETTER.
From Rome, the 8th of December, 1685.
I Am now in the last stage of my Voyage over Italy; for since my last from
Florence, I have not only got hither, but have been in Naples; and have now
satisfied my Curiosity so fully, that I intend to leave this place within a day
or two, and go to Civita vecchia, and from thence by Sea to Marseilles; and so
avoid an unpleasant Winters Journey over the Alps. It is true; I lose the sight
of Turin, Genoa, and some other Courts: but tho I am told, these deserve well
the pains of the Journey; yet when one rises from a great meal, no Delicacies,
how much soever they might tempt him at another time, can provoke his appetite:
So I confess freely, that the sight of Naples and Rome have so set my stomach
that way, that the Curiosity of seeing new places is now very low with me; and
indeed, these that I have of late seen are such, that places which at another
time would please me much, would now make but a slight and cold Impression.

All the way from Florence, through the Great Dukes Country, looked so sad,
that I concluded, it must be the most dispeopled of all Italy: but indeed, I
changed my note when I came into the Popes T^rritories, at Pont Centino, where
there was a rich bottom, all uncultivated, and not so much as stocked with
Cattle, But as I passed from M. Fiascone to Viterbo, this appeared yet more
amazing; for a vast Champian Country lay almost quite deserted. And that wide
Town, which is of so great a compass, has yet so few Inhabitants, and those
look so poor and miserable, that the people in the ordinary Towns in Scotland,
and in its worst Places, make a better appearance. When I was within a days
Journey of Rome, I fancied that the Neighborhood of so great a City must mend
the matter; but I was much disappointed; for a Soil that was so rich, and lay
so sweetly, that it far exceeded any thing I ever saw out of Italy, had neither
Inhabitants in it, nor Cattle upon it, to the tenth part of what it could bear:
The surprise that this gave me, increased upon me as I went out of Rome on its
other side, chiefly all the way to Naples, and on the way to Civita Vecchia;
for that vast and rich Champian Country, that runs all along to Terracina,
which from Civita Vecchi^ is above a hundred miles long, and is in many places
twelve or twenty miles broad, is abandoned to such a degree, that as far as
ones eye can carry one, there is often not so much as a house to be seen; but
on the Hills, that are on the North-side of this Valley: and by this
dispeopling of the Country, the Air is now become so unwholsom, that it is not
safe to be a night in it all the Summer long; for the Water, that lies upon
many places, not being drained, it rots; and in the Summer this produc^^ so
many noisome Steams, that it is felt even in Rome itself; and if it were not for
the breeses that come from the Mountains, the Air would be intolerable: When
one sees all this large, but wast Country, from the Hill of Marino, twelve
miles beyond Rome, he cannot wonder enough at it. In a word, it is the rigor
of the Government that has driven away the Inhabitants; and their being driven
away, has now reduced it to such a pass; that it is hardly possible to
repeople it: for such as would come to drain and cultivate it, must run a great
hazard, and few can resolve on that, when they can hope for no other Reward of
their Industry, but an Uneasy Government. It is the greatest Solicism in
Government for the Prince to be El^ctive, and yet Absolute; for an Hereditary
Prince i^ induced to consider his Posterity, and to maintain his people, so
that those that come after him may still support the rank which they hold in
the World: But an Elective ^rin^e has nothing of that in his eye, unless he
has a pitch of generosity, which is not ordinary among men, and least of all
among Italians, who have a passion for their Families, which is not known in
other places: and thus a Pope, who comes in late to this Dignity, which by
consequence he cannot hope to hold long, does very naturally turn to those
Councils, by which his Family may make all the Hay they can during this
Sunshine: And tho anciently the Cardinals were a check upon the Pope, and a
sort of a Council, without whom he could do nothing even in Temporals; yet now
they have quite lost that; and they have no other share in affairs, than that
to which the Pope thinks fit to admit them; so that he is the most absolute
Prince in Europe. It is true, as to Spirituals, they re^ain still a large
share, so that in Censures and Definitions the Pope can do nothing regularly
without their concurrence; tho it is certain, that they have not so good a
Title to pretend to that, as to a share in the Temporal Principality. For if
the Pope derives any thing from Saint Peter, all that is singly in himself, and
it is free to him to proceed by what method he thinks best, since the
Infallibility, according to their p^etensions, rests singly in him; yet because
there was not so much to be got by acting Arbitrary in those matters, and a
Summary way of exercising this Authority, might have tempted the World to have
enquired too much into the grounds on which it is built; therefore the Popes
have let the Cardinals retain still a share in this Suprema^y over the Church,
tho they have no claim to it, neither by any Divi^e nor Ecclesiastical
Warrants: But as for the endowments of the Sea of Rome, to which they may
justly lay claim, as being in a manner the Chapter of that See; there is so
much to be got by this, that the Popes have engrossed it wholly to themselves:
and thus it is, that the Government of this Prin^ipality is very unsteady.
Sometimes the Popes F^mily are extremely glorious, and magnificent; at others
times, they think of nothing but of establishing their Hou^e Sometimes the Pope
is a Man of sense himself; Sometimes he is quite sunk, and as the last Pope
was, he becomes a Child again through old age: Sometimes he has a particular
Stiffness of Temper, with a great Slowness of Understanding and an insatiable
desire of heaping up Wealth, which is the Character of him that now reigns. By
this diversity, which appears eminently ^n every new Po^tificate, that commonly
avoids those Excesses that made the former reign odious, the Councels of ^he
Popedom are weak and disjoynted. But if this is sensible to all Europe, with
relation to the general concer^ of that Body, it is much more visible in the
Principality it self, that is subject to so variable a Head There has been in
this Age a succession of four ravenous reigns; and tho there was a short
Interruption in the Reign of the Rospigliosi, that coming after the Barb^rins,
the Pamphili, and the Ghi^i's, did not enrich it self; and yet it disordered
the Revenue, by the vast Magnificence in which he reigned, more in twenty nine
Months time, than any other had done in so many years. The Altieri did, in a
most scandalous manner, raise themselves in a very short and despised Reign,
and built one of the Noblest Palaces in Rome. He that reig^^ now, does not
indeed raise his Family avowedly, but he does not ease the People of their
Taxes: and as there is no Magnificence in his Court, nor any public Buildings
now catrying on at R^m^; so the many vacant Caps, occasion many empty Palaces:
and by this means, there is so little expense now made at Rome, that it is not
possible for the People to live and pay the Taxes, which hat^ driven, as is
believed, almost a fourth part of the Inhabitants out of Rome, during this
Pontificate. And as the preemption of the Corn makes, that there is no prof^^
made by the Owners, out of the cultivation of the Soil, all that going wholly
to the Pope, so there are no waye^ lest here of employing ones Money to any
considerable Advantage: For the public Banks, which are all in the Popes hand,
do not pay in effect three percent, tho they pretend to give four per cent of
interest: The settlement is indeed four per cent, and this was thought so great
an advantage, that Actions on the Popes Bank were bought at a hundred and
sixteen the hund^ed. But this Pope broke through all this, and declared, he
would give all Men their Money again, unless they would pay him thirty percent
for the continuing of this Interest; and thus for a hundred Crow^s Principal,
one not only paid at first one hundred and sixteen: but afterward thirty: in
all one hundred six and forty for the hundred, which is almost the half lost:
For whenever the Pope will pay them back their Money, all the rest is lost:
And while I am here, there is a report, that the Pope is treating with the
Genoeses for Money at two per cent; and if he gets ^t on those terms, then he
will pay his Debts: and the Subjects, that have put in Money in this Bank, will,
by this means, lose six and forty per cent, which is almost the half of their
Stock. A man of quality at Rome, and an eminent Churchman, who took me likewise
for one of their Clergy, because I wore the Habit of a Churchman, said, that
it was a horrible Scandal to the whole Christian World, and made one doubt of
the Truth of the Christian Religion, to see more Oppression and Cruelty in
their Territory, than was to be found even in Turkey; tho it being in the Hands
of Christ's Vicar, one should expect to find there the pattern of a mild and
gentle Government: and how (said he) can a Man expect to find his Religion
here, where the common Maxims of Justice and Mercy were not so much as known.
And I can never forget the lively reflection that a Roman Prin^e made to me
upon the folly of all those severe Oppressions, which as they drive away the
Inhabitants, so they reduce those that are left to such a degeneracy of Spirit
by their Necessities, that the Spaniards, whose Dominions look so big in the
Map, are now brought so low; and if they had kept still the possession they
once had of the United Netherlands, they would signify no more toward their
preservation, than their other Provinces did; which, by their unskilful
conduct, they have both dispeopled and exhausted. Whereas by their losing those
Seven Provin^es, those States have fallen upon such wise Notions of Government,
and have drawn so much W^alth, and such numbers of People together, that Spain
it self was now preserved by them, and was saved in this Age by the loss it
made of those Provinces in the last; and those States, that if they had
remained subject to Spain, would have signified little to its support, did that
now much more considerably, by being Ali^^s, than they could have done, if they
had not shaken off their Yoke.

Indeed, if Spain had been so happy as to have such Viceroys, and Governo^rs,
as it has now in Naples, their affairs could not have declined so fast as they
have done. The Marquis of Carpy, in his youth intended to have taken so severe
a Revenge of an Injury, that he thought the late King of Spain did him in an
Amor, that he designed the blowing him up by Gunpowder, when he was in the
Council Chamger; but that Crime was discored in time, and was not only forgiven
him in consideration of the greatness of his Family, he being the Son of Don
Lewis de Har^, but after that he was made for several years Ambassador ^t Rome:
He is now Viceroy o^ Naples, and is the only G^vernour of all the Places
through which I Passed, that is, without exception, beloved and esteemed by all
sorts o^ People; for during the few years of his Ministry, he has redressed
such abuses that seemed past cure, and that required an Age to correct them: He
has repressed the Insolence of the Spaniards so much at Naples, that the
Natives have no occasion to complain of the haughtiness of their Masters: sor
he proceeds against the Spaniards with no less severity, when they give cause
for it, than against the Neapolitans: He has taken the Pay of the Soldiers so
immediately into his own care, that they who before his coming, were hal^
naked, and robbed such as passed on the Streets of Naples in day light, are now
exactly paid, well disciplined, and so decently clothed, that it is a
pleasure to see them: He examins their Musters also so exactly, that he is sure
not to be cheated by false lifts: He has brought the Markets and Weights of
Napl^s to a true Exactness: And whereas the Bread was generally too light, he
has sent for Loave^ out of the several places of the Markets, and weighed them
himself; and by some severe Punishments on those that sold the Bread too light,
he has brought this matter to a just Regulation: He has also brought the
Courts of Judicature, that were thought generally very corrupt, to Reputation
again; and it is believed, he has Spies to watch in case the trade of Bribes
is sound to be still going on: He has fortified the Palla^e, which was before
his time so much exposed, that it would have been no hard thing to have made a
descent upon it, But the two things, that raise his reputation most, are his
Extirpating of the Banditi, and the Regulation of the Coin, which he has taken
in hand. It is well enough known, what a Plague the Banditi have been to the
Kingdom; for they going in Troops, not only robbed the Country, but were able
to resist an ordinary Body of Soldiers, if they had set on them: These
traveled about seeking for spoil all the Summer long; but in Winter they were
harbored by some of the Neapolitan Barrons, who gave them Quarter^; and
thereby did not only protect their own Lands, but had them as so many
Instruments ready to execute their Revenges on their Enemies. This was well
known at Naples, and there was a Council that had the Care of the reducing the
Banditi committed to them, who as they catched some few, and hanged them, so
they fined such Barons as gave them harbor; and it was believed, that those
Fines, amounted to near a hundred and fifty thousand Crowns a year: And thus
the disease went on; only now and then there was a little Blood let, which
never went to the bottom of the Distemper. But when the present Vi^eroy entered
upon the Government, he resolved to extirpate all the Banditi; and he first let
all the Barons understand, that if they harbored them any more, a little Fine
would not save them, but that he would proceed against them with the utmost
severity; and by this means the Banditi could find no Winter Quarter^: So they
betook themselves to some fastnesses among the Hills, and resolved to make good
the Passes, and to accommodate themselves the best they could amidst the
Mountains. The Viceroy sent a great body against them, but they desended
themselves for sometime vigorously, and in one sally they killed five hundred
men: but at last, seeing that they were like to be hard pressed, and that the
Viceroy intended to come against them in Person, they accepted of the terms
that he offered them, which was, a pardon for what was past, both as to life
and Galleys, and six pence a day for their entertainment i^ Prison during life,
or the Viceroys pleasure; and so they rendered themselves. They are kept in a
large Prison, and now and then, as he sees cause for it, he sends some few of
them up and down to serve in Garrisons. And thus, beyond all men's expectation,
he finished this matter in a very few months; and the Kingdom of Naples, that
has been so long a scene of Pillage and Robbery, is now so much changed, that
in no place of Europe do the Subjects enjoy a more entire Security. As for the
Coin, it, as all the other Spanish Money, is so subject to Clipping, that the
whole money of Naples is now light, and far below the true value; so the Viceroy
has resolved to redress this: he considers, that the crying down of Money, that
passes upon the public Credit, is a robbing of those in whose hands the money
happens to be, when such Proclamations are put out; and therefore he takes a
method that is more general, in which every one will bear his share, so that
none will be crushed by it. He has laid some Taxes on the whole Kingdom, and
has got a great many to bring in some Plate to be coined: and when he ha^h
thus prepared such a quantity, ^s may se^ve for the circulation that is
necessary, be intends to call in all the old Money, and to give out new Money for
it. Thus does this Viceroy set such a pattern to the other Ministers of the
Crown of Spa^n, that if many would follow it, the State of their affairs would
be soon altered.

The Kingdom of Naples is the richest part of all Italy; for the very
Mount^ins, that are near the half of the Soil, are fruitful, and produce either
Wi^e or Oil in great abundance. Apulia is a great Corn Country, but it is
excessive hot, and in some years all i^ burnt up. The Jesuits are the
Proprietors of near the half of Apulia; and they treat their Tenan^s with the
same rigor that the Barons of this Kingdom do generally use toward their
Farmers: for the Commons here are so miserably oppressed, that in many places
they dye of hunger, even amidst the great plenty of their best years; for the
Corn is exported to Spain: but neither the Spaniards nor the Neopolitans
understand Trade so well as to be their own Merchants or Carriers, so that the
English do generally carry away the profit of thi^ Trade. The Oil of this
Kingdom is still a vast Trade, and the Manufacture of the Wool and Soap of
England, consumes yearly some thousands of Tuns. The silk Trade is so low, that
it only serves themselves, but the exportation is inconsiderable: the Sloth and
Laziness of this people renders them incapable of making those Advantages of so
rich a soil, that a more industrious sort of people would find out: For it
amazes a Stranger to see in their little Towns, the whole men of the town
walking in the Market places in their torn Cloaks, and doing nothing; and tho
in some big towns, such as Capua, there is but one Inn, yet even that is so
miserable, that the best Room and Bed in it, is so bad, that our Footmen in
England would make a grievous Outcry if they were no better lodged; nor is
there any thing to be had in them: the Wine is intolerable, the Bread ill
Baked, no Victuals, except Pigeons, and the Oil is rotten. In short, except
one carries his whole Provision from Rome or Naples; he must resolve to endure
a good deal of Misery in the four days journey that is between those two
places. And this is what a T^^veller, that sees the Riches of the soil, cannot
comprehend: but as they have not hands enough for their soil, so those they
have are generally so little employed, that it is no wonder to see their soil
produce so little; that in the midst of all that abundance, that Nature has
set before them, they are one of the poorest Nations of Europe. But beside this
which I have named, the vast and dead Wealth that is in the hands of the
Churchme^, is another evident cause of their misery. One that knew the State of
this Kingdom well, assured me, that if it were divided into five parts, upon a
strict survey, it would be found, that the Chur^hmen had four parts of the
five: which he made out thus, they have in Soil above the half of the whole,
which is two and a half; and in Tithes, and Gifts, and Legacies, they have one
and a half more: for no man die^^ without leaving a considerable Legacy to some
Church o^ some Convent. The Wealth that one sees in the City of Naples alone,
passes imagination; there are four and twenty Houses of the Order of the
Dominicans, of both Sexes, and two and twenty of the Franciscans, seven of the
I^suites; besides the Convents, of the Olivita^es, the Theatines, the
Carmelites, the Benedictines; and above all, for situation and riches, the
Carthusians, on the top of the Hill that lies over the Town. The riches of the
Annunciata are prodigious: It is the greatest Hospital in the World; the
Revenue is said to be four hundred thousand Crowns a year: the number of the
Sick is not so great as at Milan: Yet one convenience for their Sick^ observed
in their Galleries, which was considerable, that every Bed stood as in an
Alcove, and had a Wall on both sides, separating it from the Beds on both
hands, and as much void space of both sides of the Bed, that the Bed it self
took up but half the Room. The young Children that they maintain are so many,
that one can hardly believe the numbers that they boast of; for they talk of
many thousands that are not seen, but are at Nurse: a great part of the wealth
of this House goes to the enriching their Church, which will be all over
within crusted with inlayings of lovely Marble, in a great variety and beauty
of colors: The Plate that is in the Treasury here and in the Dome, (which is
but a mean building, because it is ancient, but has a Noble Chapel, and a
vast Treasure) and in a great many other Churches, are so prodigious, that upon
the modestest estimate, the Plate of ^he Churc^es of Naples amounts to eight
millions of Crowns. The new Church of the Jesuits, that of the Apostles, and
that of S. Paul, are surprizingly rich; the gilding an^ painting that is on the
Roofs of those Churches have cost millions: And as there are about a hundred
C^nvents in Naples, so every one of these, if it were in another place, would
be thought well worth seeing, tho the riches of the greater Convents here, make
many of them to be less visited. Every year there is a new Governor of the
Annun inta, who perhaps puts in his own Pocket twenty thousand Crowns; and to
make some Compensation when he goes out of Office, he gives a vast piece of
Plate to the House, a Statue for a Saint in Silver, or some Coloss of a
Candlestick; for several of those pieces of plate are said to be worth ten
thousand Crowns; and thus all the Silver of Naples becomes dead and useless:
The Jesuits are great Merchants here; their Wine-Cellar is a vast Vault, and
holds above a thousand Hogsheads, and the best Wine of Naples is sold by them;
yet they do no retail it out so scandalously as the Minims do, who live on the
great square before the Viceroys Palace, and sell out their Wine by reta^l:
they pay no Duty, and have extraordinary good Wine, and are in the best Place
of the Town for this retail. It is true, the Neapolitans are no great Drinkers,
so the Prof^s of this Tavern are not so great as they would be in colder
Countries; for here men go only in for a draught in the mornings, or when they
are athirst. Yet the House grows extreme rich, and has one of the finest
Ch^pp^ls that is in all Naples; but the Trade seems very unbecoming men of that
Profession, and of so strict an Order. The C^nvents have a very particular
privilege in this Town; for they may buy all the Houses that ly on either
side, till the first street that discontinueth the Houses; and there being
scarce a street in Naples in which there is not a Conv^nt, by this means they
may come to buy in the whole Town: And the progress that the Wealth of the
C^ergy makes in this Kingdom is so visible, that if there is not some stop put
to it, within an Age they will make themselves Masters of the whole Kingdom* It
is an amazing thing to see so profound an ignorance, as reign^ among the
Clergy, prevail so effectually; for tho all the Secular persons here, speak of
them with all possible scorn, yet they are the Masters of the Spirits of the
People. The Women are infinitely Superstitious, and give their husbands no rest,
but as they draw from them great presents to the Church. It is true, there are
Societies of men at Naples of sreer thoughts than can be found in any other
place of Italy: The Greek Learning begins to flourish there, and the n^w
Philosophy is much studied; and there is an Assembly that is held in D. Joseph
Vallet^'s Library (where there is a vast Collection of well chosen Books)
composed of Men that have a right taste of true Learning and good Sense: They
are ill looked on by the Clergy, and represented as a set of Atheists, and as
the Spawn of Pomponatius's School: But I found no suc^ thing among them; for I
had the Honor to meet twice or thrice with a considerable number of them,
during the short stay that I made among them: There is a learned Lawyer,
Francisco Andria, that is considered as one of the most inquisitive Men of the
Assembly: There is also a Grandchild of the Great Alciat, who is very c^rious
as well as learned. Few Churchmen come into this attempt for the reviving of
Learning among them: O^ the contrary, it is plain, that they dread it above
a^things. Only one Eminent Preacher, Rinaldi, that (...) Archdeacon of Capua,
associates himself with them: ^e was once of the Jesuits Order, but left it;
and as that alo^^ served to give a good Character of him to me, so upon ^ long
conversation with him, I found a great many other t^^ngs that possessed me with
a high value ^or him. Some Physicians in Naples are brought under the Scandal
of Atheism; and it is certain, that in Italy, men of searching understandings,
who have no other Idea of the Christian Religion, but that which they see
received among them, are very naturally tempted to disbelieve it quite; for
they believing it all alike in gross, without distinction, and finding such
notorious Cheats as appear in many parts of their Religion, are upon that
induced to disbelieve the whole. The Preaching of the Monks in Naples are
terrible things. I saw a Jesuit go in a sort of a Procession, with a great
company about him, and calling upon all that he saw, to follow him to a place
where a Mountebank was selling his Medicines, near whom he took his Room, and
entertained the people with a sort of a Farce, till the Mountebank got him to
give over; fearing lest his action should grow tedious, and disperse the
company that was brought together. There are no famous Preachers, nor men of
any reputation for learning among the Jesuits: I was told, they had not men
capable to teach their Schools; and that they were forced to hire Strangers:
The Order of the Oratory has not that reputation in Italy, that it has gained
in France; and the little Learning that is among the Clergy in Naples, is among
some few Secular Priests.

The new Method of Molino's does so much prevail in Naples, that it is
believed, he has above twenty thousand Followers in this City: And since this
has made some noise in the World, and yet is generally but little understood,
I will give you some account of him: He is a Spanish Priest, that seems to be
but an ordinary Divine, and is certainly a very ill Reasoner, when he
undertakes to prove his Opinions: He has writ a Book, which is entitled, il
Guida Spiritual^, which is a short abstract of the Mystical Divinity; the
Substance of the whole is reduced to this, That in our Prayers, and other
Devotions, the best Methods are to reti^e the mind from all gross Images, and
so to form an Act of Faith, ^^d thereby to present our selves before God: and
then to sink into a silenoe and cessation of new Acts, and to let God act upon
us, and so to follow his Conduct. This way he prefers to the multiplication of
many new Acts, and different form^ of Devotion; and he makes small Account of
corporal Austerities, and reduces all the Exercises of Religion to this
simplicity of Mind: He thinks this is not only to be proposed to such as live
in Religious Houses, but even to Secular persons, and by this he has proposed
a great Reformation of men's Minds and Manners; He ha^h many Priests in Italy,
but chiefly in Naples, that dispose those who confess themselves to them, to
follow his Method: The Jesuits have set themselves much against this conduct,
as foreseeing, that it may much weaken the Emp^^^^ that Superstition has over
the Minds of People, that (...) may make Religion become a more plain and
simple things and may also open a door to Enthusiasms: they also pretend, that
his conduct is Factious and Seditious; that thi^ may breed a Schism in the
Church. And because he says, in some places of his Book, That the Mind may
rise up (...) such a Simplicity in its Acts, that it may rise in some of its
Devotions to God immediately, without contemplating t^^ Humanity of Christ,
they have accused him, as intending to lay aside the Doctrine of Christ's
Humanity; tho it (...) plain, that he speaks only, of the purity of some sing^^
Acts: Upon all those heads they have set themselves much against Molinos; and
they have also pretended that some of his Disciples have infused into their
Peniten^^ That they may go and communicate as they find themselv^^ disposed,
without going first to Confession; which they thought weakened much the yoke, by
which the Pri^^^ subdue the Consciences of the People to their Conduc^ Yet he
was much supported both in the Kingdom of Nap^^^ and in Si^ily; he had also
many Friends and Followers (...) Rome, So the Jesuits, as a Provin^ial of the
Order a^^^red me, finding they could not ruin him by their o^^ force, got a
great King, that is now extremely in the I^^^rests of their Order, to
interpose, and to represent to the Pope the danger of such Innovations. It is
certain, (...) Pope understands the matter very little, and that he is
po^sessed with a great opinion of Molino's Sanctify; yet upon the Complaints of
some Cardinals, that seconded the Zeal of that King, he and some of his
Followers were ^^pt in the Inquisition, where they have been now for some
Months, but they are still well used, which is believed to flow from the good
opinion that the Pope has of ^im, who says still, that tho he may have erred,
yet ^e is certainly a good man: Upon this Inprisonment, Pa^quin said a pleasant
thing; in one week, one man had been condemned to the Galleys for somewhat he
has said, ^^^ther has been hanged for somewhat he had writ, and Mali^^s was
clapped in prison, whose Doctrine consisted ^^efly in this, that m^n ought to
bring their minds to a state of inward qu^etness, from which the name of
Quie^^^^^ was given to all his followers: The Pasquinade upon all this, was, Si
parliamo, in Galere, si scrivemmo Im^i^cati, si stiamo inquiete all' Sant'
Officio, ^e che bisog^^ for^: If we speak, we are sent to the Galleys; if (...)
write, we are hanged; if we stand quiet, we are clapped dapt in the Inquisition:
what mus^ we do then? Yet his Followers at Naples are not daunted, but they
believe, he will come out of this Trial victorious.

The City of Naples, as it is the best situated, and i^ the best Climate, so
it is one of the Noblest Cities of ^^rope; and if it is not above half as big
as Paris or London, yet it has much more beauty than either of them: The
Streets are large and broad, the Pave^ent is great and Noble, the Stones being
generally above a foot square, and it is full of Palaces, and great Buildi^g^:
The Town is well supplied by daily Markets, so that Provisions are ever fresh,
and in great plenty; the Wine is the best of Europe; and both ^he Fish and
Flesh is extreme good: it is scarce ever cold in Winter, and there is a fresh
Air comes, both from the Sea and the Mountains in Summer. The Viceroy's Palace
is no extraordinary building, only the Staircase is great: But it is now very
richly furnished within, in Pictures and Statues: There are in it some Statues
of the Egyptian Deities of Touchstone, that are of great value: There are no
great Antiquities here, only there is an Ancient Roman Porti^^, that is very
Noble before Saint Paul's Church. B^^ without the City near the Church and
Ho^pital of S^i^^ Gennaro, that is without the Gates, are the Noble Catacombs,
which because they were beyond any thing I saw in Italy, and to which the
Catacombs of Rome are not to be compared, and since I do not find any accoun^
of them, in all the Books that I have yet seen concerning Naples, I shall
describe them more particularly.

They are vast and long Galleries cut out of the Rock* there are three Stories
of them one above another: ^ was in two of them, but the Rock is fallen in the
lowest, so that one cannot go into it, but I saw the passage to ^t* These
Galleries are generally about twenty foot broad, and about fifteen foot high:
so that they are Noble and spacious places, and not little and narrow as the
Catacombs at Rome, which are only three or four foot broad* and five or six
foot high. I was made believe, that these Catacombs of Naples went into the
Rock nine mile long; but for that I have i^ only by report: Yet if that be
true, they may perhaps run toward Puz zolo, and so they may have been the
burial places of the Towns on that Bay; but of this I have no certainty. I
walked indeed a great way, and found Galleries going off on all hands without
end, and whereas in the Rom^^ Catacombs there are not above three or four rows
of Niches, that are cut out in the Rock one over another, into which the dead
Bodies were laid; her^ there are generally six or seven rows of those Niches^
and they are both larger and higher; some Niches are ^or Childrens Bodies; and
in many places there are ^n the Floors, as it were great Chests hewn out of the
Rock, to lay the bones of the dead as they dried, in them; but I could see no
ma^ks either of a cover for these holes, that looked like the bellys of Chests,
or of a facing to shut up the Niches when a dead Body was laid in them; so that
it seems they were monstrous unwholesome and stinking places, where some
thousands of Bodies lay rotting, without any thing to shut in so loathsome a
sight, and so odious a smell: For the Niches show plainly, that the Bodies were
laid in them only wrapped in the dead Clothes, they being too low for Coffins. In
some places of the Rock there is as it were a little Chapel hewn out in the
Rock, that goes off from the common Gallery, and there are Niches all round
about; but I saw no marks of any Wall, that shut in such places; tho I am apt
to think, these might be burying places appropriated to particular Families.
There is in some places on the Walls and Arch, Old Mosaic Work, and some
Painting, the Colors are fresh, and the Manner and Characters are Gothic;
which made me conclude, that this might have been done by the Normans, about
six hundred years ago, after they drove out the Saracens: In some Places there
are Palmtrees painted, and Vines in other places. The freshness of the Colors,
show these could ^ot have been done while this place was employed for burying;
for the Steams and Rottenness of the air, occasioned by so much Corruption,
must have dissolved both Plaster and Colors. In one place, there is a man
painted with a little Beard, and Paulus is written by his head: there is
another reaching him a Garland, and by his head Land is written: and this is
repeated in another place right over against it. In another place I found a
Cross painted, and about the upper part of it these Letters ^. C. X. O. and in
the lower part NJKA. are painted: A learned Antiquar^, that went with me,
agreed with me, that the manner of the Painting and Charact^^ did not seem to
be above six hundred years old: but neith^^ of us knew what to make of these
Letters: The low^^ seemed to relate to the last word of the Vision, which it is
said that Constantine saw with the cross that appeared to him: But tho the
first two Letters might be for Jesus, it being ordinary in old Coyns and
Inscriptions to put a C. for an S. and X. stands for Christ, yet we knew not
what to make of the O, unless it were for the Greek Theta, and that the little
line in the bosom of the Theta was worn out, and then it stands for Theos; and
thus the whole Inscription is, Jesus Christ God overcomes. Another Picture i^
the Wall had written over it Sta. Johannes, which was a clear sign of a
barbarous Age: In another place there is ^ Picture high in the Wall, and three
Pictures under it, th^^ at top, had no Inscription; those below it, had these
Inscriptions, S Katharina, S. Agape, and S. Margarita, these Letters are
clearly modern; besides that, Margaret and Katherine are modern names: and the
add^tion of t^^ a little above the S. were manifest evidences, th^^ the highest
Antiquity that can be ascribed to this Painting is six hundred years. I saw no
more Painting, and I ^egan to grow weary of the darkness, and the thick A^r ^f
the place, so I stayed not above an hour in the Catacom^^. This made me reflect
more particularly on the Catacom^^ of Rome, than I had done; I could image no
reason why so little mention is made of those of Naples, when there i^ so much
said concerning those of Rome; and could give my self no other account of the
matter, but that it being a maxim to keep up the reputation of the Roman
Catacombs, as the Repositories of the Relics of the primitive Christians, it
would have much lessned their credit, if (...) had been thought, that there
were Cata^ombs far beyond them in all respects, that yet cannot be supposed to
have been the work of the primitive Christians; and indeed, nothing seems more
evident, than that these were the common Burying Places of the ancient
Heatbens. O^^ enters into them without the Walls of the Towns, according to the
Laws of the twelve Tables, and such are the Cata^ombs of Rome that I saw, which
were those of S. Agnes and S. Sebastian, the entry into them being without the
Town; this answers the Law, tho in effect they run under it; for in those
days, when they had not the use of the Needle, they could not know which way
they carried on those works, when they were once so far engaged under ground,
as to lose themselves. It is a vain ^magination to think, that the Christians,
in the primitive times, were able to carry on such a work; for as this
prodigious digging into such Rocks, must have been a very visible thing by the
Mountains of Rubbish that must have been brought out, and by the vast number of
Hands that must have been employed in it; so it is absurd to think, that they
could hold their Assemblies amidst the annoyance of so much corruption. I found
the Steams so strong, that tho I am as little subject to Vapors as most men,
yet I had all the day long after I was in them, which was not near an hour, a
Confusion, and as it were a boiling in my Head, that disordered me extremely;
and if there is now so much stagnating Air there, this must have been sensible
in a more eminent and insufferable manner while there were vast numbers of
bodies rotting in those Niches. But besides this improbability, that presents
it self from the nature of the thing, I called to mind a passage of a Letter of
Cornelius, that was Bishop of Rome, after the middle of the third Century,
which is preserved by Eusebi^s in his sixth Book, Chapter 43. in which we have
the State of the Church of Rome at that time set forth. There were forty six
Presbyters, seven Deacons, as many Subdeacons, and ninety four of the Inferior
Orders of the Clergy among them: there were also fifteen hundred Widows, and
other poor maintained out of the public Charities. It may be reasonably
supposed, that the numbers of the Christians were as great when this Epistle
was writ, as they were at any time before Constantine's days; for as this was
writ at the end of that long Peace, of which both S. Cyprian and Lactantius
speak, that had continued above a hundred years; so after this time, there was
such a succession of Persecutions, that came so thick one upon another, after
short intervals of quiet, that we cannot think the number^ of the Christians
increased much beyond what they were at this time. Now there are two
particulars in this State of the Clergy, upon which one may make a probable
estimate of the numbers of the Christians; the one is, their Poor, which were
but fifteen hundred: now upon an exact survey, it will be found, that where the
poor are well looked to, their number rises generally to be the thirtieth or
fortieth part of mankind; and this may be well believed to be the proportion of
the Poor among the Christians of that Age: For as their Charity was vigorous
and tender, so we find Celsus, Julian, Lucian, Prophiry, and others, Object
this to the Christians of that time, that their Charities to the Poor drew va^^
numbers of the lower sort among them, who made themselves Christians that they
might be supplied by their Brethren: So that this being the State of the
Christians then, we may reckon the Poor the thirtieth part, and so fifteen
hundred multiplied by thirty, produce five and forty thousand: And I am the
more inclined to think, that this rises up near to the full sum of their
numbers, by the other Character of the numbers of the Clergy; for as there were
forty six Presbyters, so there were ninety four of the inferior Orders, who
were two more than double the number of the Priests: and this was in a time in
which the Care of Souls was more exactly looked after, than it has been in the
more corrupted Ages, the Clergy having then really more work on their hands,
the instructing of their Catechumens, the visiting their Sick, and the
supporting and comforting the Weak, being Tasks that required so much
application, that in so vast a City, as Rome was in those days, in which it is
probable the Christians were scattered over the City, and mixed in all the
parts of it we make a conjecture that is not ill grounded, when we reckon, that
every Presbyter had perhaps about a thousand Souls committed to his Care, so
this ri^es to six and forty thousand: which comes very near the sum that may be
gathered from the other hint, taken from the number of their Poor. So that
about fifty thousand is the highest account to which we can reasonably raise
the numbers of the Christians of Rome in that time: And of so many persons, the
Old, the Young, and the Women, make more than three fourth pa^ts; so that men
that were in condition to work, were not above twelve thousand: and by
consequence, they were in no condition to undertake and carry on so vast a
Work. If Cornelius in in that Letter speaks of the numbers of the Christians in
excessive terms, and if Tertullian in his Apology has also set out the numbers
of the Christians of his time, in a very high strain, that is only to be
ascribed to a pom^ous Eloquence, which disposes people to magnify their own
Party, and we must allow a good deal to a hyperbole, that is very natural to
all that set forth their Forces in general terms. It is true, it is not so
clear when those vast Cavities were dug out of the Rocks. We know, that when
the Laws of the twelve Tables were made, Sepulture was then in use: and Rome
being then grown to a vast bigness, no doubt they had Reposit^ries for their
Dead: so that since none of the Roman Authors mention any such work, it may not
be unreasonable to Imagine, that these Vaults had been wrought and cut out from
the first beginnings of the City* and so the later Authors had no occasion ^o
take notice of it. It is also certain, that tho Burning came to be in use among
the Romans, yet they returned back to their first Custom of Burying Bodies long
before Constantines time; so that is was not the Christian Religion that
produced this change. All our modern Writers take it for granted, that the
change was made in the times of the Antonius: yet there being no Law made
concerning it, and no mention being made in an Age full of writers, of any
orders that were given for Burying-places, Velseru^'^ opinion seems more
probable, that the Custom of Burning wore out by degrees; and since we are
sure, that they once buried, it is more natural to think, that the Slaves and
the meaner sort of people were still Buried, that being a less expenceful, and
a more simple way of bestowing their Bodies, than Burning, which was both
pompous and chargeable; and, if there were already Burying places prepared, it
is much easier to imagine how the Custom of Burying grew universal without any
Law made concerning it.

I could not for some time find out upon what grounds the Modern Critics take
it for granted, that Burying began in the times of the Antonins, till I had the
happiness to talk of this ma^ter with the learned Gronovius, who seems to be
such a Master of all the Ancient Learning, (...) if he had the Authors lying
always open before him: he told me, that it was certain, the change from
Burni^g to Burying, was not made by the Christian Emperors; for Ma^robius
(lib. 7. chap. 7.) says, in plain terms, that the Custom of Burning the ^odies
of the Dead, was quite worn out in that age: which is a clear Intimation, that
it was not laid aside so late as by Constantine; and as there was no Law made
by him on that head, so he and the succeeding Emper^urs, gave such an entire
toleration to Paganism, admitting those of that Religion to the greatest
Employments, that it is not to be imagined, that there was any order given
against Burning; so that it is clear, the Heath^ns had changed it of their own
accord: otherwise we should have found that among the Complain^s that they
made of the Grievances under which they lay from the Christians. But it is more
difficult to fix the time when this change was made. Gronovius showed me a
passage of Phlegons, that mentions the Bodies that were laid in the Ground; yet
he did not build on that; for it may have relation to the customs of Burying
that might be elsewhere. And so Petronius gives the account of the Burial of
the Ephesian Matrons husband; but he made i^ apparent to me, that Burying was
commonly practiced in Commodus's time; for Xiphilinus tells us, that in
Pertinax's time, the Friends of those whom Commodus had ordered to be put to
Death, had dug up their Bodies, some bringing out only some parts of them, and
others raising their entire Bodies. The same Author also tells us, that
Pertinax buried Commodus's body, and so saved it from the Rage of the People;
and here is a positive Evidence, that Burying was the common practice of that
time. The same learned person has since my first conversation with him upon
this subject, suggested to me two passages of Festus Pompeius, that seem to
determine this whole matter; and that tell us, by what names those Catacombs
were known in the Roman time, where-abouts they were* and what sort of persons
were laid in them; we have also the designation by which the Bearers were
commonly known, and the time when they carried out the Dead Bodies: and it
appears particularly by them* that in the Repositories, of which that author
makes mention, there was no care taken to preserve the bodies that were laid in
them from rotting. His words are. Puticulos antiquissi^um genus sepulturae
appellatos, quod ibi in puteis s^pelir^^ter homenes: qualis fuerit locus quo
nunc cadavera projici solent, extra portam Esquilinam: qua quod ibi
putesc^r^nt, inde prius appellatos existimat puticulos Aelius Gall^s, qui ait
antiqui moris fuisse, ut patres familias in lo^^m publicum extra oppidum
mancipia vilia projicerent, atqu^ it a projecta, quod ibi ^a p^tescerent, nomen
esse factum puticuli. The other passage runs thus. Vespa and Vespillones
dicuntur, qui funerandis corporibus officium gerunt, non ^ minutis illis
volucribus, sed quia vespertino tempore cos efferunt, qui funebri pompa duci
propter inopiam nequeunt. All this agrees so exactly to the thoughts, that a
general view of those Repositories give a man, that it will not be hard to
persuade him, that those Burying places, that are now graced with the pompous
title of Catacombs, are no other than the Putecoli mentioned by Festus
Pompeius, where the meanest sort of the Roman slaves were laid, and so without
any further care about them were left to rot.

It is true, it is very probable, that as we see some of the Roman Families
continued to Bury their Dead, even when Burning was the more common Custom; so
perhaps others continued after this to hurn their dead, the thing being
Indifferent, and no Law being made about it; and therefore it was particularly
objected to the Christians after this time, that they abhorred the Custom of
Burning the Bodies of the Dead, which is mentioned by Minutius Felix; but this
or any other evidences, that may be brought from Medalls of Consecrations after
this time, will only prove, that some were still Burnt, and that the Christians
practiced Burying Universally, as expressing their belief of the Resurrection;
whereas the Heathens held the thing Indifferent. It is also clear, from the
many genuine Inscriptions that have been. found in the Catacombs, which bear
the dates of the Consuls, that these were the common Burial-Places of all the
Christians of the fourth and fifth Century; for I do not remember, that there
is any one da^e that is Antienter; and yet not one of the Writers of those Ages
speak of them, as the Work of the Primitive Christians. They speak indeed of
the Burial-Places of the Martyrs; but that will prove no more, but that ^he
Christians might have had their Quarters, and their Walks in those common
Burial-places, where they laid their Dead, and which might have been known
among them, tho it is not likely, that they would in times of Perseoution make
such Inscriptions as might have exposed the Bodies of their dead Friends to the
Rage of their Enemies. And the Spurious Acts of some Saints and Martyrs, are of
too little credit to give any support to the common Opinion. Damasus's Poetry
^s of no better Authority. And tho those Ages were inclined enough to give
credit to Fables, yet it seems this of those Catacombs, having been the work of
the Primitive Christians, was too gross a thing to have been so early Imposed
on the World. And this silence in an Age, in which Superstition was going on at
so great a rate, has much force in it; for so vast a Work, as those Catacombs
are, must have been well known to all the Romans. It were easy to carry this
much further, and to show, that the Bas Reliefs, that have been found in some
of those Catacombs, have nothing of the beauty of the Ancient Roman time. This
is also more discernable in many Inscriptions that are more Gothic than Roman;
and there are so many Inscriptions relating to Fables, that it is plain, these
were of later times; and we see by Saint Ierom, that the Monks began, even in
his time, to drive a trade of Relics; so it is no wonder, that to raise the
credit of such a heap, as was never to be exhausted, they made some miserable
Sculptures, and some Inscriptions; and perhaps shut up the entrys into them
with much care and secresy, intending to open them upon some Dream or other
Artifice, to give them the more Reputation; which was often practiced in order
to the drawing much Wealth and great Devotion, even to some single Relic; and
a few being upon this Secret, either those might have dyed, or by the many
Revolutions that happened in Rome, they might have been dispersed before they
made the discovery: And thus the knowledge of those places was lost, and ca^e
to be discovered by accident in the last Age; and has ever since supplied them
with an inexhaustible Magazin of Bones, which by all appearance are no other
than the Bones of the Pagan Romans; which are now sent over the World to feed a
Superstition, that is as blind as it proves expensive. And thus the Bones of
the Roman Slaves, or at least, those of the mea^^^ sort, are now set in Silver
and Gold, with a great deal of other costly Garniture, and entertain the
Superstition of those who are willing to be deceived, as well as they serve the
ends of those that seek to deceive the World. But because it cannot be
pretended, that there was such a number of Christian^ at Naples, as could have
wrought such Catacombs, and if it had been once thought, that those were the
common Burial-places of the ancient Heathens, that might have induced the World
to think, that the R^man Catacombs were no other; therefore there has been no
care taken to examine these. I thought this deserved a large discourse, and
therefore I have dwelt perhaps a little too long on this subject.

I will not enter upon a long description of that which is so well known* as
Mont Vesuvio, it had roared soloud about a month before I came to Naples, that
at Naples they could ha^dly sleep in the Nights, and some old Hous^s were so
shaken by the Earthquake, that was occasioned by this convulsion of the Hill,
that they fell to the ground: And the great Convulsion above fifty y^ars ag^,
was so terrible, that there was no small fear in Naples, tho it lies at the
distance of seven M^les from the Hill, yet the storm was choked under ground;
for tho it smoakt much more than ordinary, yet there was no eruption: It was
indeed smoking not only in the mouth of the little Mount, that is formed within
the great wast that the fire has made, but also all along the bottom that is
between the outward mouth of thi^ Mountain (which is four miles in compass) and
that inward Hill. When one sees the Mouth of this fire, and so great a part of
the Hill which is covered some foot deep with ashes and stones of a metallic
Composition, that the fire throws out, he cannot but stand amazed, and wonder
what can be the Fuel of so lasting a Burning, that has calcined so much
matter, and spewed out such prodigious quantities. It is plain, there are vast
Veins of Sulphur all along in this Soil, and it seem^ in this Mountain they run
along through some Mines and Rocks; and as their slow consumption produces a
perpetual smoke, so when the Air within is so much ratified that it must open
it self, it throw^ up those masses of Mettle and Rock that shut it in; but how
this Fire draws in Air to nourish its Flame, is not so easily apprehended,
unless there is either a conveyance of Air under ground, by some undiscovered
vacuity, or a more insensible transmission of Air, through the pores of the
Earth. The heat of this Hill operates so much upon the Soil, that lies upon it
toward the foot of it, that it produces the richest Wine about Naples; and it
also purifieth the Air so much, that the Village at the bottom is thought the
best Air of the Country, so that many come from Naples thither for their
health. Ischia, that is an Island not far from Naples, does also sometimes spew
out fire.

On the other side of Naples to the West, one passes through the Cave that
pierces the Pausalippe, and is four hundred and forty paces long; for I walked
it on foot to take its true measure; it is twenty foot broad, and at first
forty foot high, but afterward it is but twenty foot high; the Stone cut out
here is good for building; so that as this opened the way from Puzzoli to
Naples; ^t was also a Quarry for the building of the Town: All along the way
here, one discovers a strange boiling within the ground; for a little beyond
this Grot of Pausalippe, as we ^ome near the Lake of Aniano, there is of the
one Hand, ^ Bath, occasioned by a Steam that rises so hot out of the ground,
that as soon as one goes a little into it, he finds himself all over in a
sweat, which is very proper for some Di^eases, especially that which carries
its name from Napl^s: And about twenty paces from thence, there is another
little Grot, that sends out a Poisonous Steam, that as (...) put out a Candle,
as soon as it comes near it, so it infallibly kills any living Creature
within a minute of time; for in half that time a Dog upon which the Experiment
is commonly tried (the Grot being from thence called Grotto di Cane) fell into
a convulsion. From that one goes to see the poor Rests of Puzzoli, and of all
that Bay, that was once all about a tract of Towns, it having been the retreat
of the Romans, during the heats of the Summer. All the Rarities here, have been
so often, and so cop^ously described, that I am sensible I can add nothing to
what is so well known. I will say nothing of the Amphitheater, or of Cicero and
Virgils Houses, for which there is nothing but a dubious tradition; they are
ancient brick buildings of the Roman way, and the vaults of Virgil's House are
still entire: The Sulfatara is a surprising thing; here is a bottom, out of
which the force of the Fire, that breaks out still ^n many places, in a thick
steaming smoke, that is full of Brimstone, did throw up about a hundred and
fifty years ago, a vast quantity of Earth, which was carried above three miles
thence, and formed the Hill called Monte Novo, upon the Ruins of a Town, that
was overwhelmed with this Eruption; which is of a very considerable height;
they told me, that there was before that time a Channel, that went from the Bay
into the Lake of Averno, of which one sees the beginnings in the Bay at some
distance from the shore, it carries still the name of Iulio's Mole, and is
believed to have been made by Julius Caesar. But by the swelling of the ground
upon the Eruption of the Sulsatara, this passage is stopped, and the Averno is
now fresh Water; it is eighteen fathom deep On the side of it is that amazing
Cave, where the Sybil is said to have given out her In^pirations: the hewing it
out of the Rock, has been a prodigious Work; for the Rock is one of the
hardest Stones in the World, and the Cave goes in seven hundred foot long,
twenty foot broad, and as I could guess, eighteen foo^ high: and from the end
of this great G^llery, there is a narrow passage of three foot broad, two
hundred foot long, and seven high, to a little apartment, to which we go in a
constant sloping descent from the great Cav^; here are three little rooms, in
one of them there are some Rests of an Old Mosaic, with which the Walls and
Roof were laid over; there is also a spring of Water, and a B^th, in which it
is supposed the Sybil bathed her self; and from this Cave it is said, that
there runs a Cave all along to Cuma, which is three long miles, but the passage
is now choakt by the falling in of the Rock in several places: This piece of
Work amazed me; I did not much min^ the popular opinion that is easily received
there* that all this was done by the Devil; the marks of the Chizzel in all the
parts of the Rock shows, that this is not a work of Nature. Certainly they
had both much leisure, and many hands at their command who set about it; and it
seems to have been wrought out with no other design, but to subdue the People
more entirely to the conduct of the Priests that managed this Imposture; so
busy and industrious has the Ambition and Fraud of the Priests been in all
Ages, and in all corrupt Religions. But of all the S^enes of Noble Objects that
present it self in the Bay of Puzzolo, the Rests of Caligula's Bridge are the
most amazing; for there are yet standing ei^ht or ten of the Pillars that
supported the Arches, and of some of the Arches, the half is yet entire. I had
not a line with me to examine the dep^h of the Water where the ^urthest of
those Pillars is built; but my Waterman assured me, it was fifty Cubits. I have
since my being in Naples, instructed one that was going thither in this
particular, and have received this account from him; that he had taken care to
plum the water at the furthest pillar of Caligula's bridge, on the Puzzolo
side; and sound it was seven fathom and a half deep: but he adds, that the
Watermen assured him, that on the other side before Baia, the water was twenty
six fathom deep: but as he had not a plummet long enough to try that, so he
believed a good deal ought to be abated; for the Watermen had assured him* that
the Water was ten fathom deep on the Puzzoli side, tho upon trial he found it
was only seven and a half: and by this measure one may suppose that the water
is twenty fathom deep on the other side: so that it is one of the most
astonishing things that one can think of, that pillars of Bri^k could have been
built in such a depth of water, and for the carrying off of the Sea, that seems
yet more impossible. It is a Noble Monument of the profuse and extravagant
Expense of a Brutal Tyrant, who made one of the vastest Bridges that ever was
attempted, over three or four Miles of Sea, merely to sacrifice so great a
Treasure to his Vanity: As for Agripina's Tomb, it is no great matter, only the
Bas Reliefs are yet entire. The mavelous Fish Pond is a great Basin of Water,
wrought like a huge Temple, standing upon eight and forty great Pillars, all
hewed out of the Rock; and they are laid over with four crusts of the old
Plaster, which is now as hard as stone; this is believed to be a work of
Nero'^: and about a quarter of a mile from thence, there is another vast work,
which goes into a Ro^k; but at the entrance there is a noble Portico built of
Pillars of Brick; and as one enters into the Rock, he finds a great many rooms
regularly shaped, hewed out of the Ro^k, and all covered over with Pla^ster,
which is still entire, and so white that one can hardly think that it has not
been washed over since it was first made; there are a vast number of those
Rooms, they are said to be a hundred; from whence this Cave carries the name
of the Centum Camera: This has been as expensive a work as it is useless; it
is entitled to Nero, and here they say he kept his Prisoners. But there is
nothing in all this Bay that is both so curio^^ and so useful as the Baths,
which seem to flow from the same reason that is the cause of these Eruptions in
he Vesuvio and Sulfatara, and the Grottos formerly mentioned, that as this heat
makes some Fountains there to be boiling hot, so it sends up a steam through
the Rock, that does not break through the pores of the Stone where it is hard*
but where the Rock is soft and spungy, there the steam^ come through with so
melting a heat, that a man is soon, as it were, dissolved in sweat; but if he
stoops low in the passages that are cut in the Rock, he finds no heat, because
there the Rock is hard. Those Steams, as they are all Hot, so they are
impregnated with such Minerals as they find in their way through the Rock; and
near this Bath there are Galleries hewed out the Rock, and faced with a
building; in which there are, as it were, Bedsteads made in the Walls, upon
which, those that come thither, to sweat for their health, lay their Quilts and
Bed-cloaths, and so come regularly out of their sweats.

It is certain, that a man can no where pass a day of his life, both with so
much pleasure, and with such advantage, as he finds in this journey to Puzzoli,
and all along the Bay: but tho an^iently this was all so well built, so
peopled, and so beautifully laid out, yet no where does one see more visibly
what a change Time brings upon all places: for Naples has so entirely eat out
this place, and drawn its Inhabitants to it, that as Puzzoli it self is but a
small Village, so there is now no other in all this Bay, which was anciently
built almost all round; for there were seven big Towns upon it. Having thus
told you what I found most considerable in Naples, I cannot pass by that Noble
remnant of the Via Apia, that runs along thirty miles of the Way between it and
Rome, without making some mention of it: this Higb-way is twelve foot broad,
all made of huge Stones, most of them blew, and they are generally a soot and
half large of all sides: the strength of this Causeway appears in its long
duration, for it has lasted above eighteen hundred Years; and is in most
places for several miles together, as entire as when it was first made: and the
Botches that have been made for mending such places, that have been worn out by
time, shows a very visible difference between the ancient and the modern way of
paving. One thing seems strange, that the ^ay is level with the earth on both
sides: whereas so much weight as those Stones carry, should have sunk the
ground under them by its pressure: Besides, that the Earth, especially in low
grounds, receives a constant increase, chiefly by the dust which the Winds or
Brooks carry down from the Hills, both which Reasons should make a more
sensible difference between those Ways and the So^l on both sides: and this
makes me apt to believe, that anciently those Ways were a little raised above
the level of the ground, and that a course of so many Ages has now brought
them to an equality: Those Ways were chiefly made for such as go on foot: for
as nothing is more pleasant, than to walk along them, so nothing is more
inconvenient for Horses and all sorts of Carriage; and indeed Mulets are the
only Beasts of burden that can bold out long in this Road, which beats all
Horses after they have gone it a little while. There are several Rests of Roman
Aniiquities at the Mole of Cajeta; but the Isle of Caprea, now called Crapa,
which is a little way into the Sea off from Naples, gave me a strange Idea of
Tibe^ius's Reign, since it is hard to tell, whether it was more extraordinary,
to see a Prince abandon the best Seats and Palaces of Italy, and shut himself
up in a little Island, in which I was told, there was a tradition of seven
little Palaces that he built in it; or to see so vast a body as the Roman
Empire so governed by such a Tyrannical Prin^^, at such a distance from the
chief Seat, so that all might have been reversed long before that the News of
it could have been brought to him. And as there is nothing more wonderful in
Story, than to see so vast a State, that had so great a sense of liberty,
subdued by so brutal, and so voluptious a Man as Anthony, and so raw a Youth as
Au^^stus; so the wonder is much improved, when we see a Prince at a hundred and
fifty Miles distance, shut up i^ an Island, carry the Reins of so great a Body
in his hand, and turn it which way he pleased.

But now I come to Rome, which as it was once the Empress of the World; in a
succession of many Ages, so has in it at present more ^urious things to
entertain the attention of a Traveller, than any other place in Europe. On the
side of Tuscany, the entry into Rome is very surprising to Srrangers; for one
comes along for a great many miles, upon the remains of the Via Flamminis,
which is not indeed so entire as the Via Appia; yet there is enough left to
raise a just Idea of the Roman Greatness, who laid such Causewayes all Italy
over. And within the Gate of the Porta di Populo, there is a Noble Obelisk,
(...) vast Founta^n; two fine little Churches, like two twins, resembling one
another, as well as placed near one another, and on several hands one sees a
long Vista of Streets. There is not a Town in these parts of the World, where
the Churches, Convents, and Palaces are so Noble, an^ wbere the other Buildings
are so mean; which indee^ discovers very visibly the Misery under which the
Rom^^ groan. The Churches of Rome are so well known, tha^ (...) will not
adventure on any description of them, and indee^ I had too transcient a view of
them, to make it with the degree of exactness which the subject requires. S.
Pet^^ alone would make a big Book, not to say a long Lette^* Its length,
height, and breadth are all so exactly propo^tioned, and the eye is so equally
possessed with all these that the whole, upon the first view, does not appear^
vast as it is found to be upon a more particular attentio^ and as the four
Pillars, upon which the Cupulo rises are of such a prodigious bigness, that one
would thi^^ they were strong enough to bear any superstructure wha^soever; so
when one climbs up to the top of that (...) height, he wonders what Foundation
can bear so hug^ a weight; for as the Church is of a vast height, so (...)
Cupulo rises four hundred and fifteen big steps above (...) Ro^f of the Church.
In the height of the Concave of (...) Cupulo, there is a representation, that
tho it can hardly be seen from the floor below, unless one has a good sight,
and so it does not perhaps give much scandal, yet it is a gross indication of
the Idolatry of that Church; for the Divinity is there pictured as an ancient
man compassed about with Angels. I will say nothing of the great Altar, of the
Chair of S. Peter; of the great Tombs, of which, the three chief are those for
Paul the III. Urban the VIII. and Alexander the VII. nor of the vast Vaults
under this Church, and the Remains of Antiquity that are reserved in them: nor
will I undertake a description of the adjoy-ning Pala^e, where the painting of
the Corridori, and of many of the Rooms, by Raphael and Mi^hael Angelo are so
rich, that one is sorty to see a wo^k of that value laid on Fresco, and which
must by consequence wear out too soon, as in several places it is almost quite
lost already. I could not but observe in the Sala Regia, that is before the
famous Chapel of Sisto V. and that is all painted in Fresco, one corner that
represents the Marther of the renowned Admiral Chastilion* and that has
written under it those words, Rex Colinii necem probat: The vast length of the
Gallery on one side, and of the Library on another, do surprise one; the
Gardens have many Statues of a most excessive value, and some good Fountains;
but the Gardens are ill maintained both here, and in the Palace on the
Quirinal. And indeed, in most of the Palaces of Rome, if there were but a small
cost laid out to keep all in good case, that is brought together at so vast a
charge, they would make another sort of show, and be looked at with much more
pleasure. In the Apartments of Rome there are a great many things that offend
the sight: The Doors are generally mean, and the Locks meaner, except in the
Palace o^ Prince Borghese, where as there is the vastest collection of the best
Pie^es, and of the hands of the greatest Masters that are in all Europr, so the
Doo^s and Locks give not that ^istast to the eye, that one finds elsewhere. The
^looring of the Palaces is all of Brick, which is so very mean, that one sees
the disproportion that is between the Floors and the rest of the Room, not
without a sensible perception and dislike. It is true, they say, their Air is
so cold and moist in Winter, that they cannot pave with Marbl^; and the heat is
sometimes so great in Summer, that Flooring of Wood would crack with heat, as
well as be eat up by the vermin that would nestle in it. But if they kept in
their great Palaces servant^ to wash their Floors, with that care that is used
in Holland, where the Air is moister, and the Clima^e is more productive of
Vermin, they would not find such effects from wooden floors, as they pretend.
In ^ word, there are none that lay out so much Wealth all as once, as the
Italians do, upon the building and finishin^ of their Palaces and Gardens, and
that afterward besto^ so little on the preserving of them: another thing I
observed in their Palaces; there is indeed a great series of Noble Rooms one
within another, of which their Apartmen^^ are composed; but I did not find, at
the end of the Apartments, where the Bedchamber is, such a disposition of
rooms for Back-stairs, Dressing-rooms, Closets, Servants rooms, and other
Conveniences as are necessary for accommodating the Apartment. It is true, this
is not so necessary for an apartment of State, in which Magnifice^^ is more
considered than Convenience; but I found the fam^ want in those Apartment^ in
which they lodged; so that notwithstanding all the Riches of their Palaces, it
cannon be said, that they are well lodged in them; and their G^^dens are yet
less understood, and worse kept than th^^ Palaces. It is true, the Villa
Borghese ought to be excepted, where, as there is a prodigious collection of
Bas ^^liefs, with which the Walls are, as it were, covered al^ over, that are
of a vast value; so the Statues within, of which some are of Porphiry, and
others of Tou^hstone, ar^ amazing things: The whole ground of this Park, which
is about three miles in compass, and in which there are (...) or seven Lodges,
are laid out so sweetly, that I thoug^^ I was in an English Park when I walked
over it. The Villa Pamphilia is better situated, upon a higher ground* and
has more Waterworks, and twice the extent of the other in Soil, but neither
does the House nor Statues approach to the Riches of the other, nor are the
grounds so well laid out and so well kept. But for the Furniture of the Palaces
of Rome, the public Apartments are all covered over with Pictures; and for
those Apartments in which they lodge, they are generally furnished either with
red Velvet, or red Damask, with a broad gold Galloon at every breadth of the
stuff, and a gold Fringe at top and bottom; but there is very little Tapistry
in Italy.

I have been carried into all this digression, from the ^eneral view, that I
was giving you of the Popes P^lace. I ^amed one part of it, which will engage
me into a new di^^ession, as it well deserves one, and that is, the Library of
^^e Vatican. The Case is great, but that which is lodged in i^, is much
greater; for here is a collection of Books that fills a man's eye: There is
first a great Hall, and at the end of it there runs out on both sides, two
Galleries of so vast a length, that tho the half of them is already furnished
with Books, yet one would hope that there is room left for more new Books than
the World will ever produce. The Heidelberg Library stands by it self, and
fills the one ^^de of the Gallery, as the Duke of Vrbi^s Library of
^^^uscripts fills the other. But tho these last are very (...) and beautiful,
yet they are not of such Antiquity as those of Heidelberg. When it appeared
that I was come from ^^gland, King Henry the VIII's Book of the Seven
Sa^raments, with an Inscription writ upon it with his own Hand to Pope Leo the
X. was showed me; together with a collection of some Letters that he writ to
An^a Bolen, of which some are in English, and some in French. I, that ^^ew his
Hand well, saw clearly that they were no Forgeries. There are not many Latin
Manuscripts of great Anti^^^ty in this Library; some few of Virgils I saw writ
in Capitals. But that which took up almost half of one day ^^at I spent at one
time in this place, related to the present ^^^pute that is on foot between Mr.
Sch^lstrat the Library Keeper, and Mr. Maimbou^g, concerning the Council of
Constance. The two Points in debate are the Words of the Decree made in the
fourth Session, and the P^pes Confirmation. In the fo^rth Session, according to
the Fre^c^ Manuscripts, a Decree was made, subjecting the Pope, and all other
Persons whatsoever, to the Authority of the Council, and to the Decrees it was
to make, and to the Reformation it intended to establish both in the Head and
the Memb^rs; which as it implies, that the Head was corrupted, and needed to be
reformed, so it sets the Council so directly above the Pope, that this Session
being confirmed by the Pope, puts those wbo assert the Pop^^ Infallibility
to no small straits: For i^ Pope Martin, that approved this Decree, was
infallible, then this Decree (...) good still; and if he was not infallible, no
other Pope wa^ infallible. To all this Schelstrat answers from his Man^scripts,
that the words of a Reformation in Head and Members, are not in the Decree of
that S^ssion; and he did she^ me several Manuscripts, of which two were
evidently writ during the sitting of the Council, and were not at all dashed,
in which these words were not. I know the han^ and way of writting of that Age
too well to be easily mistaken in my judgment, concerning those Manuscripts*
but if those words are wanting, there are other words i^ them that seem to be
much stronger for the superiority o^ the Coun^il above that Pope. For it is
Decreed, that Popes* and all other persons, were bound to submit to the
Decisions of the Council, as to Faith: which words are not (...) the French
Manuscripts: Upon this I told Mr. Schelstr^^ that I thought the words in these
Manuscripts were stronger than the other, since the word Reformation, as (...)
was used in the time of that Council, belonged chiefly (...) the Correcting of
Abuses, it being often applied to t^^ Re^ulations that were made in the
Monastic Orders, when they were brought to a more exact Observation of (...)
Rules of their Order: So tho the Council had Decreed Reformation both of Head
and Members, I do no see th^^ this would import more, than that the Papacy had
fall^^ i^to some Disorders that needed a Reformation: and this (...) not
denied, even by those who assert the Popes Infal^i^ility: but a submission to
points of Faith, that is expressly asserted in the Roman Manuscripts, is a much
more positi^e Evidence against the Popes Infallibility: and the word Faith is
not capable of so large a sense as may be justly a^cribed to Reformation. But
this difference, in so main a ^oint between Manuscripts concerning so late a
trans^^tion, gave me an occasion to reflect on the vast uncer^^^nty of
Tradition, especially of matters that are at a ^^eat distance from us; when
those that were so lately ^ransacted, are so differently represented in
Manuscripts, ^^d in which, both those of Paris, and Rome, seem to ^arry all
possible evidences of sincerity. As for the Popes ^^^firmation of that De^ree,
it is true, by a General Bull, ^^pe Martin confirmed the Council of Constance
to such period; but besides that, he made a particular Bull, (...) Schelstrat
assured me, in which he enumerated all the Decrees that he confirmed, and among
those, this De^ree concerning the Superiority of the Council is not na^ed; this
seemed to be of much more importance, and therefore I desired to see the
Ori^inal of the Bull; for there seems to be just reasons to apprehend a forgery
here: He promised to do his endeavors, tho he told me, that ^ould not be easy;
for the Bulls were strictly kept; and ^he next day when I came, hoping to see
it, I could not ^e admitted: but he assured me, that if that had not ^een the
last day of my stay at Rome, he would have proc^red a War^ant for my seeing the
Original: so this is all I can say as to the authenticalness of that Bull: But
sup^osing it to be genuine, I could not agree to Mr. Schel^^^t, that the
General Bull of Confirmation, ought to ^e limited to the other, that enumerates
the particular ^^crees: but since that particular Bull was never discovered
till he has found it out, it seems it was ^ecretly made, and did not pass
according to the forms of the Consistory; and was a fraudulent thing, of which
no noise was to be made in that Age, and therefore in all the Dispute that
followed in the Council of Basil, between the Pope and the Council, upon this
very point, no mention was ever made of it by either side: and thus it can have
no force, unless it be to discover the Artifices and Fraud of that Court: That
at the same time in which the Necessity of their affairs obliged the Pope to
confirm the Decrees of the Council, he contrived a secret Bull, which in
another Age might be made use of, to weake^ the Authority of the General
Confirmation that he gave: and therefore a Bull, that does not pass in due
Form, and is not promulgated, is of no Au^hority; and so this pretended Bull
cannot limit the other Bull. There were some other things, relating to this
Debate, that were shewe^ me by Mr. Schelstrat; but these being the most
important. I mention them only. I will not give you here a la^ge ^ccount of the
Learned Men at Rome, Bellori is deservedly famous for his knowledge of the
Greek and Egyptian A^^iquities, and for all that belongs to the Mythologies,
an^ Superstitions of the Heathens; and has a Closet richly fu^nished with
things relating to those matters. Fabretti i^ justly celebrated for his
Understanding of the Old Roman Architecture and Fabrics. Padre Fabri is the
chief Honor of the Jesuits College, and is much above the common Rate both
for Philosophy, Mathematics, and Churc^-History. And he to whom I was the most
obliged, (...) Nazari, has so general a view of the several parts o^ Learning,
tho he has chiefly applied himself to Philosop^^ and Mathematics, and is a
man of so engaging a Civility and used me in so particular a manner, that I owe
him* as well as those others who^ I have mentioned, and who^ I has the Honor
to see, all the acknowledgments (...) Esteem and gratitude that I can possibly
make them.

One sees in Cardi^al d' Estre all the advantages of a hi^^ birth, great Parts,
a generous Civility, and a meas^^^^ of knowledge far above what can be expected
from a person of his rank; but as he gave a noble Protection to (...) of the
most learned Men that this Age has produced* Mr. Launnoy, who lived many years
with him, so i^ ^^visible, that he made a great progress by the conversation of
so extraordinary a person; and as for Theogicol Lear^ing* there is now none of
the College equal to him. Cardinal Howard is too well known in England to need
any c^^racter from me: The elevation of his present condition has not in the
least changed him; he has all the ^^eetness and gentleness of temper that we
saw in him in England; and he retains the unaffected Simplicity and Humility of
a Friar, amidst all the Dignity of the Purple: and as he shows all the
generous care and concern for his Countrymen that they can expect from him; so
I met with so much of it, in so many obliging marks of his good^ess for my
self, that went far beyond a common civility, that I cannot enough acknowledge
it. I was told, the P^pes Confessor was a ver^ extraordinary man for the
Oriental ^earning, which is but little known in Rome: He is a Master of the
Arabic Tongue, and has writ, as Abbot Nazari told me, the learned Book
against the Mahomet^n Religion, that the World has yet seen, but is not yet
Printed: He is not so much esteemed in Rome as he would be elsewhere; for his
Learning is not in vogue; and the School Divinity and Casuistical Lear^ing,
being that for which Divines are most esteemed there; he whose ^tudies lead him
another way, is not so much valued as ^e ought to be; and perhaps the small
account that the Pope makes of Learned Men, turns somewhat upon the Confessor;
for it is certain, that this is a Reign in which Learning is very little
encouraged.

Upon the general Contempt that all the Romans have, for the present
Pontificate, one made a pleasant reflection to me, he said* Those Popes, that
intended to raise their Families, as they saw the censure that this brought
^^on them, so they studied to lessen it by other things, that might soften the
Spirits of the people. No man did ^ore for beautifying Rome, for finishing St.
Peter's and the Library, and for furnishing Rome with Water, than Pope Paul the
V. tho at the same time he did not forget his Family; and tho the other Popes,
that have raised great Families, have not done this to so eminent a degree as
he did, yet there are many remains of their Magnificence* whereas those Popes
that have not raised Families, have i^ seems thought that alone was enough to
maintain their Reputation, and so they have not done much, either to recommend
their Government to their S^bjects, or their R^ig^ to Posterity; and it is very
plain, that the present Pope takes no great care of this. His life has been
certainly very innocent, and free of all those publi^k Scandals that make a
noise in the World: and there is at present a regularity in Rome, that
deserves great commendation; for public Vices are not to be seen there: His
personal Sobriety is also singular. One assured me, that the Expense of his
Table did not amount to a Crown a day; tho this is indeed short of Sisto V. who
gave order to his Steward, never to exceed five and twenty Bajokes, that is,
eighteen pence a day, for his Diet. The Pope is very careful of his Health, and
does never expose it; for upon the least disorder, he shuts himself up in his
Chamber, and often keeps his Bed for the least indisposition many days; but
his Government is severe, and his Subjects are ruined.

And here one thing comes into my mind which perhaps is not ill grounded, that
the Poverty of a Nation, not only dispeoples it, by driving the People out of
it, but by weakening the natural fertility of the Subjects; for a^ men and women
well clothed, and well fed, that are not exhausted with perpetual Labor, and
with the tearing Anxieties that Want brings with it, must be much more lively,
than those that are pressed with Want; so it is very likely, that the one must
be much more disposed to propagate, than the other: and this appeared more
evident to me, when I compared the Fruitfulness of Genev^ and Switzerland,
which the Barrenness that reigns over all Italy. I saw two extraordinary
instances of the copious productions of Gen^va; Mr. Tron^hin, that was
Pro^ess^^ of Divinity, and Father to the Judicious and worthy Pro^essor of the
same name; that is now there, dyed at the age of sev^nty six Years, and had a
hundred and fifteen Persons all alive, that had e^ther descended from him, or
by marri^ge with those that descended from him, called him Father. And Mr.
Calendrin, a pious and laborious Preacher of that Town, that is descended from
the Family of the Calendrini, who receiving the Reformation about a hundred nnd
fifty ^^ars ago, left Lucea their Native City with the Turre^^^, the Diodati,
and the Bourlamacchi, and some others that came and settled at Geneva: He is now
but seven and forty years old, and yet he has a hundred and five Persons that
are descended of his Brothers and Sisters, or ^arried to them; so that if he
lives but to E^ghty, and the Family multiplieth as it has done, he may see
some hundreds that will be in the same relation to him; but such things as
these are not to be found in Italy.

There is nothing that delights a stranger more in Rome; than to see the great
Fountains of Water, that are almost in all the corners of it: That old Aquaduct
which P^^l the V. restored, comes from a collection of S^^rces, five and
thirty Miles distant from Rome, that ^^ns all the way upon an Aqueduct in a
Cannel that is vaulted, and is liker a River than a Fountain: it breaks out
in five several Fountains, of which some give water about a foot square. That
of Sixtus the V. the great Fountain of Aqua Travi, that has yet no decoration,
but discharges a prodigious quantity of Water. The glorious Founta^n in the
Piazza Navona, that has an air of greatness in it that surprizeth one, the
Fountain in the Piazza de Spagna, those before S. Peter's, and the Palazzo
Farn^^^, with many others, furnish Rome so plentifully, that almost every
private House has a Fountain that runs conti^ually. All these, I say, are
noble Decorations, that carry an ^sefulness with them, that cannot be enough
commended: and gives a much greater Idea of those who have taken care to supply
this City, with one of the chief Pleasures and Conveniences of Life, than of
others; who have laid out ^illions merely to bring quantities of Water to give
the eye ^ little diversion, which would have been laid out much ^ore nobly and
usefully, and would have more effectually enterniz^^ their Fame, if they had
been employed (...) the Romans did their Treasures, in furnishing great To^^
with Water.

There is an universal Civility that reigns among (...) sorts of people at
Rome, which in a great measure flo^ from their Government; for every man being
capable of (...) the avancements of that State, since a simple Eccl^siastick
may become one of the Monsignori, and (...) of these may be a Cardinal, and one
of these may b^ chosen Pope, this makes every man behave himself towar^ all
other persons with an Exactness of Respect: for (...) man knows what any other
may grow to. But this mak^ Professions of Esteem and Kindness go so
promiscou^^^ to all sorts of persons, that one ought not to build to^ much on
them, the conversation of Rome is generally upon News, for tho there is no news
Printed there, yet in the several Antichambers of the Cardinals (where if they
mak^ any considerable figure, there are Assemblys of those th^^ make their
Court to them) one is sure to hear all the (...) of Europe, together with many
speculations upon what p^^seth. At the Queen of Swedens, all that relates to
Germany or the North is ever to be found; and that Princess, tha^ must ever
reign among all that have a true taste either o^ Wit or Learning, has still in
her drawing Rooms the be^^ Court of the Strangers; and her Civility, together
with the vast variety with which she furnishes her conversation* makes her to
be the chief of all the living Rarities that on^ sees in Rome; I will not use
her own words to my self* which was, That she now grew to be one of the
Antiquiti^^ of Rome. The Ambassadors of Crowns, who live here in another form
than in any other Court, and the C^^dinals and Prelates of the several Nations,
that do all m^^^ and center here, make, that there is more news in Rome, than
any where: For Priests, and the men of Religious O^ders, write larger and more
particular Letters, than any other sort of men. But such as apply themselves to
mak^ their Court here, are comdemned to a loss of time, that (...) need be well
recompensed; for it is very great. As for (...) that Studies Antiquities,
Pictures, Statues, or Musi^k, ^^ere is more entertainment for him at Rome, than
in all ^he rest of Europe; but if he has not a taste of these things, (...)
will soon be weary of a place where the Conversation is ^^ways general, and
where there is little Sincerity or Open^^^^ practiced, and by consequence,
where friendship is (...) understood. The Wom^n here begin to be a little more
^^^versable, tho a Nation naturally jealous, will hardly ^^ow a great liberty
in a City that is composed of Ecclesia^^icks; who being denied the privilege
of Wives of their (...), are suspected of being sometimes too bold with ^^e
Wives of others: The Liberties that were taken in the Constable of Naples's
palace, had indeed disgusted the Ro^^ns much at that Freedom, which had no
bounds. ^^t the Duchess of Bracciano, that is a Fren^h Woman, ^ath by the
exactness of her deportment, amidst all the innocent Freedoms of a Noble
Conversation, recovered in a great measure, the Credit of those Liber^ies, that
La^i^^ beyond the Mountains practice, with all the strictness of Virtue: For
she receives visits at public hours, and in public Rooms; and by the
liveliness of her Conversa^^on, makes that her Court is the pleasantest
Assembly o^ Strangers, that is to be found in any of the Palaces of the
Italians at Rome.

I will not engage in a description of Rome, either ancient or modern, this
has been done so often, and with such ^^actness, that nothing can be added to
what has been already published. It is certain, that when one is in the
Ca^^tol, and s^es those poor Rests of what once it was, he is s^rprized to see
a building of so great a fame sunk so low, that one can scarce imagine that it
was once a Castle, sci^^ated upon a Hill, able to hold out against a Siege of
the G^^ls: The Tarpeian Rock is now of so small a fall, that a man would think
it no great matter, for his diversion, to leap over it: and the shape of the
ground has not been so much altered on one side, as to make us think it is
very ^uch changed on the other. For Severus's Triumphal ^rch, which is at the
foot of the Hill on the other side, is not now buried above two foot within the
ground, as ^he vast Amphitheater of Titus* is not above three ^oot sunk under
the level of the ground. Within the Capitol one ^ee^ many Noble remnants of
Antiquity; but none is more glorious, as well as more useful, than the Tables
of (...) Consuls, which are upon the Walls: and the Inscription on the Columna
Rostrate in the time of the first Punick War, is without doubt the most
valuable Antiquity in Rome. From this all along the sacred way, one finds
such remnan^^ of Old Rome in the Ruins of the Temples, in the Triumph^l Arches,
in the Portico's, and other Remains of that Glorious Body, that as one cannot
see these too often, so every time one sees them, they kindle in him vast
idea's of that Republic, and make him reflect on that which he learned in his
youth with great pleasure. From the height of the Convent of Araceli, a man
has a full vie^ of all the extent of Rome, but literally it is now seges ubi
Roma suit; for the parts of the City, that were most inhabited anciently, are
those that are now laid in gre^^ Gardens, or, as they call them, Vineyards, of
which some are half a mile in compass: The vastness of the Rom^^ Magnificence
and Luxury, is that which passes imagination; the prodigious Amphithe^ter of
Titus, that could convenienly receive eighty five thousand spectators; the
great extent of the Circus Maximus; the vaults where the Waters were reserved
that furnished Titus's Baths; and above all, Dioclesi^n's B^ths, tho built when
the Empire was in its decay, are so far above all Modern Buildings, that there
is not so much as room for a comparison. The extent of those Ba^hs is above
half a mile in compass: the vastness of the Rooms in which the Bathers might
swim, of which the Carthusians Church, that yet remains entire, is one, and the
many great Pillars, all of one stone of Marble, beautifully spotted, are things
of which these latter Ages are not capable. The beauty of their Temples, and of
the Portico's before them, is amazing, chiefly that of the Rotunda where the
Fabric without, looks as mean, being only brick, as the Architecture is
bold, for it rises up in a Vault, and yet at the top there is an open left, of
thirty foot in Diameter, which* as it is the only Window of the Church, so it
fills it with light; and is the hardiest piece of Architecture that ever was
made. The Pillars of the Portico are also the noblest in Rome, they are the
highest and biggest that one can see any where all of one Stone: and the
numbers of those ^ncient Pillars, with which, not only many of the C^urches are
beautified, chiefly S. Mary Maggiore, and (...) John in the Lateran* but with
which even private houses are adorned, and of ^he Fragments, of which there are
^^ch mul^itudes in all the Streets of Rome, gives a great idea of the
Expencefulness of the old Romans in their buil^^ngs; for the hewing and
fetching a few of those Pillars, ^ust have cost more than whole Palaces do now:
since ^ost of them were brought from Greece: Many of these Pillars are of
Porphiry, others of Iasp, others of grana^ed Marble, but the greatest number is
of white Marble: The two Columns, Trajans and A^tonius, the two Horses that are
in the Mount Cavallo, and the other two Hors^s in the Capitol, which have not
indeed ^he postures and ^otion of the other: The brass Horse, that as is
believed carries Marcus Aurelius; the remains of N^ro's Colossus; the T^mple
of Ba^^hus near the Catacomb of S. Agnes, which is the intirest and the least
altered of all the ancient Temples: The great Temple of Peace; those of ^he Sun
and Moon: that of Romulus and Remus, (which I considered as the ancientest
Fabric that is now le^t; for it is little and simple, and stands in such a
place, that ^hen Rome grew so costly, it could not have been let alone
unchanged, if it had not been that it was reverenced for its Antiquity) the
many o her Portico's, the Arc^es of Severus, of Titus, and Constantine, in the
last of which one sees that the Sculpture of his Age* was much sunk from what
it had been, only in the top there are some Bas Reliefs, that are clearly of a
much ancienter time, and of a better manner. And that which exceeds all the
rest, the many great Aqueducts that come from all hands, and run over a vast
distance, are things which a man cannot see often enough, if he would form in
himself a just idea of the vastness of that Republic, or rather Empire: There
are many Statues and Pillars, and other Antiquities of great value, dug up in
al^ the quarters of Rome, these last hundred and fourscore years, since Pope
L^o the tenth's time* who as he was the greatest Patron of Learning and Arts,
that perhaps ever was, so was the generousest Prince that ever reigned; and it
was he that first set on foot the inquiring into the Riches of Old Rome, that
lay, till his tim^, for the most part, hid under ground; and indeed if ^e had
been less scandalous in his Impiety and Atheism, of which neither he nor his
Court were so much as ashamed, he had been one of the most celebrated persons
of any Age. Soon after him Pope Paul the III. gave the ground of the Monte
Palatino to his Family: But I was told, that ^hi^ large piece of ground, in
which one should look for the greatest collection of the Antiquities of the
highest value, since this is the Ruin of the Palace of the Romun Emperors, has
never been yet searched into with any exactness: So that when a curious Prince
comes, that is willing to employ many hands in digging up and down this Hill,
we may expect new Scenes of Roman Antiquities. But all this matter would
require Volumes, and therefore I have only named these things, because I can
add nothing to those copious Descriptions that have been so often made of them.
Nor will I say any thing of the modern Palaces, or the Ornaments of them,
either in Pictures or Statues, which are things that carry one so far, that it
is not easy to give bounds to the Descriptions in^o which one finds himself
carried, when he once enters upon so fruitful a Subject. The number of the
Palaces is great, and every one of them has enough to fix the attention of a
Traveller, till a new one drives the former out of his thoughts: It is true,
the Palestrina, the Borghese, and the Farnes^ have somewhat in them that leave
an impression which no new Objects can wear out; and as the last has a noble
Square before it, with two great Fountains in it, so the Statue of Hercules and
the Bull, that are below, and the Gallery above stairs, are unvaluable; the
Roof of the Gallery is one of the best pieces of Painting that is extant, being
all of Carrachio's hand; and there are in that Gallery the greatest number of
heads of the Greek Philosophers and Poets that I ever saw together: That of
Homer and that of Socrates were the two that struck me most, chiefly the
latter, which as it is, without dispute, a true Antic, so it carries in it
all the Characters that Plato and X^nophon give us of Socrates; the flat Nose,
the broad Face, the simplicity of Look, and the mean Appearance which that
great Philosopher made, so that I could not return often enough to look upon it,
and was delighted with this more than with all the Wonders of the B^ll, which
is indeed a Rock of Marble, cut out into a whole Scene of Statues; but as the
History of it is not well known, so there are such faults in the Sculpture,
that tho it is all extreme fine, yet one sees it has not the exactness of the
best times. As for the Churches and Convents of Rome, as the number, the
Vastness, the Riches both of Fabric, Furniture* Painting and other Ornaments
amaze one, so here again a Stranger is lost; and the Convent that one sees
last, is always the most admired: I confess, the Mi^e^va, which is ^he
Dominicans, where the Inquisition sits is that which makes the most
sensible impression upon one that passes at Rome for an Heretic, tho except
one commits great follies* he is in no danger there; and the Poverty that
reigns in that City makes them find their interest so much in using Strangers
well, whatsoever their Religion may be, that no man needs be afraid there: And
I have more than ordinary reason to acknowledge this, who having ventured to go
thither, after all the liberty that I had taken to write my thoughts freely
both of the Church and Se^ of R^me, and was known by all with whom I conversed
there, yet met with the highest Civilities possible among all sorts of people,
and in pa^ticular both among the English and S^ottish Jesuits, tho they knew
well enough that I was no friend to their Order.

In the Gallery of the English Jesuits, among the P^ctures of their Martyrs, I
did not meet with Garnet; for perhaps that name is so well known, that they
would not expose a Picture, with such a name on it, to all strangers; yet
Old-corn, being a name less known, ^is hung there among their Martyrs, tho he
was as clearly convicted of the G^^-powder Treason, as the other was: and it
seemed a little strange to me to see that at a time, in which, for other
Reasons the Writers of that Communion have not thought fit, to deny the truth
of that Conspiracy, a Jesuit convicted of the blackest crime that ever was
projected, should be reckoned among their Martyrs. I saw likewise there the
Original of those Emblematical Prophecies, relating to England, that the
Jesuits have had at Rome near sixty years, and of which I had some time ago
procured a Copy; so I found my Copy was true. I happened to be at Rom^ during St.
Gregory's Fair and Feast, which lasted several days. In his Church the Hosty
was exposed; and from that, all that came thither, went to the Chapel, that
was once his House, in which his Statue, and the T^ble, where he ser^^d the
poor, are preserved: I sa^ such vast numbers of people there, that one would
have thought all Rome was got together. They all kneeled down to his Statue,
and after a prayer said to it, they kissed his foot, and every one touched the
Table with his Beads, as hoping to draw some virtue from it. I will add nothing
of the several Ob^lisks nnd Pillars that are in Rom^, of the celebrated
Chapels that are in some of the gre^^ Churches, in particular those of Sixtus
the V. and Paul the V. in Santa Maria Maggiore, of the Waterworks in the
Quirinal, the Vatican, and in many of the Vineyards: Nor will I go out of Rome
to describe Frescati, (For Tivoly I did not see) The young Prince Borghese, who
is indeed one of the Glories of Rome, as well for his learning as for his
virtue, did me the Honor to carry me thither with those two learned Abbots,
Fabretti and Nazari, and entertained me with a magnificence that became him
better to give than me to receive. The Waterworks in the Aldobrandin Palace
have a Magnificence in them beyond all that I ever saw in France, the mixture
of Wind with the Water, and the Thunders and Storms that this makes is noble:
The W^ter-works of the Ludovisio, and the Monte Dragene, have likewise a
greatness in them that is natural; and indeed, the Riches that one meets with
in all places within doors in Italy, and the P^verty that one sees every where
abroad, are the most unsuitable things imaginable: but it is very likely, that
a great part of their movable Wealth will be ere long carried into Fra^^^; or
as soon as any Picture or Statue of great value is offered to be sold, those
that are employed by the King of France, do presently buy it up, so that as
that King has already, the greatest collection of Pictures that is in Europe,
he will very probably in a few years more, bring together the chief Treasures
of Italy.

I have now given you an account of all that appeared most remarkable to me in
Rome. I shall to this add a very extraordinary piece of Natural History that
fell out there within these two years, which I had first from those two learned
Abbots, Fabretti and N^zari, and that was afterward more authentically
confirmed to me by Cardi^al Howard, who was one of the Congregation of
Cardinals that examined and judged the matter. There were two Nuns near Rome,
one as I remember was in the City; and the other not far from it, who, after
they had been for some years in a Nunnery, perceived a very strange change in
Nature, and that their Sex was altered, which grew by some degrees to a total
alteration in one; and tho the other was not so entire a change, yet it was
visible she was more Man than Woman; upon this the matter was looked into: That
which naturally offers it self here, is, that these two had been always what
they then appeared to be; but that they had gone into a Nunnery in a disguise,
to gratify a brutal App^tite. But to this, when I proposed it, answer was
made, that as the Breasts of a Wom^n, that remained still, did in a great
measure shake off that Objection, so the proofs were given so fully, of their
having been real Females, that there was no doubt left of that, nor had they
given any sort of Scandal in the change of their Sex; And if there had been any
room left to suspect a Cheat or Disguise, the proceedings would have been both
more severe and more secret; and these persons would have been Burnt, or at
least put to Death in some terrible manner. Some Physicians and Chirurgions
were appointed to examine the matter, and at last, after a long and exact
inquiry, they were judged to be absolved from their vows, and were dismissed
from the Obligation of a Religious Life, and required to go in men's habit. One
of them was a Valet (...) Chamber to a Roman Marquess, when I was there: I
heard of this matter only two days before I left Rome, so that I had not time
to inquire after it more particularly; but I judged it so extraordinary, that I
thought it was worth communicating to so curious an Inquirer into Nature.

And since I am upon the subject of the Changes that have been made in Nature,
I shall add one of another fort, that I examined while I was at Geneva: There
is a Minister of S. Gervais, Mr. Gody, who has a Daughter, that is now sixteen
Years old; Her Nurse had an extraordinary thickness of hearing; at a year old,
the Child spoke all those little words, that Children begin usually to learn at
that age, but she made no progress; yet this was not observed, till it was too
late; and as she grew to he two years old, they preceived then that she had
lost her hearing, and was so deaf, that ever since, tho she hears great noises,
yet she hears nothing that one can speak to her. It seems, while the milk of
her Nurse, was more abundant, and that the Child sucked more moderately the
first year, those humors in the Blood and Milk had not that effect on her, that
appeared after she came to suck more violently, and that her Nurse's Milk being
in less quantity, was thicker, and more charged with that vapor that
occasioned the deafness. But this Child has by observing the Motions of the
Mouths and Lips of others, acquired so many Words, that out of these she has
formed ^ ^ort of Iargon, in which she can hold conversation whole days with
those that can speak her own language. I could understand some of her words,
but could not comprehend a period; for it seemed to be a confused noise: She
knows nothing that is said to her, unless she sees the Motion of their Mouths
that speak to her; so that in the Night, when it is necessary to speak to her,
they must light a candle: Only one thing appeared the strangest part of the
whole narration; She has a Sister, with whom she has practiced her language
more than with any other; and in the Night, by laying her Hand on her Sister's
Mouth, she ^an perceive by that, what she says, and so can discourse ^ith her
in the night, It is true, her Mother told me, that this did not go far, and
that she found out only some short period in this manner, but it did not hold
out very long: thus this young Woman, without any pains taken on her, has
merely by a natural sagacity, found out a method of holding discourse, that
does in a great measure lessen the Misery of her Deafness. I examined this
matter critically, but only the Sister was not present, so that I could not see
how the conversation past between them in the dark.

But before I give over writing concerning Rome, I cannot hinder my self, from
giving you an account of a conversation that I had with one of the most
Celebrated persons that lives in it; I was talking concerning the credit that
the Order of the Jesuits had every where; It was said, that all the World
mistrusted them, and yet by a ^^range sort of Contradiction all the World
trusted them; and tho it was well known that every Jesuit was truer to the
Interests of his Order than he could be ^o the Interests of any Prince
whatsoever, yet those Princes that would be very careful, not to suffer Spys to
come into their Courts, or into their Coun^els, suffered those Spys to come
into their Breasts and Consciences: and tho Prin^es were not generally very
tender in those parts, yet as they had often as much G^ilt, so they had sometimes
as much F^ar as other people, which a dextrous Spy knew well how to manage.
Upon which, that Person, that pretended to be a zealous Catholic, added, that
for their part, they considered only the Character that the Church gave to a
Priest; and if the Church qualified him to do the functions of a Priest, they
thought it very needless to enquire after other personal Qualities, which were
but common things, whereas the other was all divine. On the Contrary, they
thought it was so much the better to have to do with a poor Ignorant Priest;
for then they had to do only with the Church, and not with the Man. Pursuant to
this, that persons Confessor was the greatest, and the most notorious Blo^khead
that could be ^ound; and when they were asked, why they made use of so weak a
man; they answered; hecause they could no^ find a weaker: and when ever they
found one better qualified that way, if it were a Groom, or a Footman that got
into Pri^sts Orders, they would certainly make use of him. For they would ask
counsel of a Friend; but they knew no other use of a Confessor, but to confess
to him, and to receive Absalution from him: and in so doing, they pretended
they acted as became a true Catholi^k, that considered only the Power of the
Church in the Priest, without regarding any thing else.

So far have I entertained you with the short Ramble that I made, which was too
short to deserve the name of Traveling, and therefore the Inquiries or
Observations that I could make, must be received with the Ab^tement that ought
to be made for so short a stay; and all will be of a piece, when the Remarks
are as slight, as the Abode I made in the places through which I past was
short. As I have avoided the troubling you with things that are commonly known,
so if I have not entertained you with a long recital of ordinary matters; yet I
have told you nothing but what I saw and knew to be true, or that I had from
such hands, that I have very good reason to believe it: and I fancy, that the
things which made the greatest impression on my self, will be acceptably
received by you, to whom, as upon many accounts, I owe all the expressions of
Esteem and Gratitude that I can ever pay; so I had a more particular reason,
that determined me to give you so full an account of all I saw and observed,
for as you were pleased at parting to do me the Honor, to desire me to
communicate to you such things as appeared most rema^kable to me, so I found
such a vast advantage in many places, but more particularly at Veni^e, Rome and
Naples, by the Happiness I have of being known to you, and of being so far
considered by you, that I could give a copious account both of your Person and
Studi^s, to those in whom your curious Discoveries had kindled that esteem for
you, which all the World pays both to you and to your immortal Inquir^es into
Nature, which are among the peculiar Blessings of this Age; and that are read
with no less care and pleasure in Italy than in England. This was so well
received, that I found the great advantage of this Honor I did my self in
assuming the glorious Title of one of your Friends; and I owe a great part of
that distinction which I met with, to this favorable Character that I gave my
self; so that if I made any progress in the Inquiries that so short a stay
could enable one to make, I owe it in so peculiar a manner to you, that this
Return that I make, is but a very small part of that I owe you, and which I
will be endeavoring to pay you to the last moment of my life.

THE FIFTH LETTER.
From Nimmegen, the 20th of May, 1686. SIR,
I Thought I had made so full a Point at the conclusion of my last Letter, that
I should not have given you the trouble of reading any more Letters of the
volum of the former: But new Scenes, and new matter offering themselves to me,
I fancy you will be very gentle to me, if I engage you again to two or three
Hours reading.

From C^vita Vecchia I came to Marseilles, where (...) there were a Road as
Safe, as the Harbor is Covered; and if the Harbor were as Large, as it is
Convenient, it were certainly one of the most important places in the World:
all is so well defended, that it is with respect either to Storms or Enemies,
the securest Port that can be seen any where. The Freedoms of this place, ^ho
it is now at the mercy of the Citadel, are such, and its Situation draws so
much Trade to it; that there one sees another appearance of Wealth, than I
found in any Town of France; and there is a new Street lately built there, that
for the Beauty of the Buildings, and the Largeness of the Street, is the
Noblest I ever saw. There is in that Port a perpetual heat, and the Sun was as
strong in the Christmas week, that I was often driven off the Key. I made a
Tour from thence through Province, L^nguedo^, and Dauphine. I will offer you no
account of Nismes, nor of the Amphitheatre in it, or the Pont du Gar near it;
which as they are stupendous things, so they are so copiously described by
many, and are so generally known to the English Nation, that if you have never
gone that way your self, yet you must needs have received so particular a
relation of them, from those that have seen them on their way to Montpelier,
that I judge it needless to enlarge upon them: Nor will I say any thing of the
Soil, the Towns, or any other rema^kable things that I found there*

I have a much stronger inclination to say somewhat concerning the Persecution
which I saw in its Rage and utmost Fury; and of which I could give you many
In^^ances, that are so much beyond all the common measures of Barbarity and
Cruelty, that I confess they ought not to be believed, unless I could give more
positive proofs of them, than are fitting now to be brought forth; and the
particulars that I could tell you are such, that if I should relate them with
the necessary Ci^cumstances of Time, Place, and Persons, these might be so
fatal to many that are yet in the power of their Enemies, that my regard to
them restrains me. In short, I do not think that in ^y Age there ever was such
a Violation of all that is Sacred, either with relation to God or Man: And what
I saw and knew there, from the first hand, has so confirmed all the Idea's
that I had taken from Books, of the Cruelty of that Religion, that I hope the
impre^^ion that this has made upon me, shall never end but which my Life: The
Applauses that the whole Clergy give to this way of proceeding, the many
Panegyricks that are already writ upon it, of which, besides the more pompous
ones that appear at Paris, there are numbers writ by smaller Authors in every
Town of any note there; and the Sermons that are all flights of flattery upon
this subject, are such evident Demonstrations of their sense of this matter,
that what is now on foo^ may be well termed, the Act of the whole Clergy of
France, which yet has been hitherto esteemed the most moderate part of the
Roman Communion. If any are more moderate than others; and have not so far laid
off the humane nature, as to go in entirely into those bloody Practices, yet
they dare not own it, but whisper it in secret, as if it were hals Treason: but
for the greater part, they do not only magnify all that is done, bur they
animate even the Dragoo^s to higher degrees of Rage: and there was such a Heat
spread over all the Country, on this occasion, that one could not go into any
Ordinary, or mix in any promiscuous conversation, without fin^ing such effects
of it, that it was not easy for such as were touched with ^he least degree o^
Compassion for the Miseries that the poor Protestants suffered, to be a witness
to the Insulting^ that they must meet with in all places. Some herhaps imagine,
that this has not been approved in Italy, and it is true, there were not any
public Rejoycings upon it at R^me; no Indulgen^es nor Te Deums were heard of:
And the Spanish Facti^n being so prevalent there, it is not strange if a course
of proceedings, that is without a^ example, was set forth, by all that were o^
that Interest, in its proper colors; of which I met with some instances my
self, and could no^ but smile, to see some of the Spanish Faction so far to
forget their Courst of Inquisition, as to argue against the Conversions by the
Dragoons, as a reproach to the Catholic Religion. Yet the Pope was of another
mind; for the Duke d'Estrees gave him an account of the Kings Proceedings in
this matter very copiously; as he himself related it. Upon which the Pope
approved all, and expressed a great Satisfaction in every thing that the King
had done in that matter; and the Pope added, that he found some Cardinals (as I
remember the Duke d'Estrees said two) were not pleased with it, and had taken
the liberty to censure it; but the Pope said, they were too blame: The Duke
d'Estrees did not n^me the two Cardinals, tho he said, he believed he knew who
they were; and it is very like that Cardinal Pio was one; for I was told, that
he spoke freely enough of this matter. I must take the liberty to add one thing
to you, that I do not see that the French King is to be so much blamed in thit
matter as his Religion i^, which, without question, obliges him to extirpate
Heretics, and not to keep his Faith to them: so that i^stead of censuring him,
I must only lament his being bred up in a Reli^ion that does certainly oblige
him to ^ivest. himself of Humanity, and to violate his Faith, whenever the
cause of his Church and Religion requi^e^h it: Or if there is any thing in this
conduct, that cannot be entirely justified from the Principl^s of that
Religion* it is this ^ that be doch not put the Heretics to Death (...) of
hand, but that he forces them, by all the Extremi^^es possible, to sign an
Abju^ation, that all the World must needs see, is done against their
Cons^iences: And t^is being the only End of their Miseries; those that would
think any sort of Death a happy conclusion of their Suffer^ngs, seeing no
prospect of such a glorious issue out of their Trouble, are prevailed on by the
many lingering Deaths* of which they see no end, to make Shipwreck of the Faith:
This appearance of Mercy, in not putting men to Death, does truly verify the
Character that Solo^^^ gives of the tender Mercies of the wicked, that they
(...) cruel.

But I will stop here, tho it is not easy to retire from so copious a subject,
that as it affords so much matter* so upon many accounts, raises a heat of
thought, that i^ not easily governed. I will now lead you to a Scene that
gives less passion.

I past the Winter at Geneva, with more satisfaction than I had thought it was
possible for me to have found a^y where out of England: tho that received great
allayes from the most lamentabl^ Stories that we had every day from France: But
there is a Sorrow by which the Heart is made better. I ought to make the most
public aknowledgments possible for the Extraordinary Civilities that I met
with in my own particular: but that is too low a Subject (...) entertain you
with it. That which pleased me most, was of a more public nature; before I
left Geneva, the ^umber of the English there was such, that I ^ound we could
^ake a small Congregation; for we were twelve or four^een; so I addessed my
self to the Council of 25. for Liberty to ^^ve our own Worship in our own
Language, according to the English Liturgy. This was immediately granted in so
obliging a manner, that as there was not one person that made any Exception to
it, so they sent one of their Body to me, to let me know, that in case our
number should grow to be so great, that it were fit for us to assemble in a
Church, they would grant us one, which had been done in Queen Mary's Reign: but
till then* we might hold our Assemblys as we thought fit. So after that time,
during the rest of my stay there, we had every Sunday our Devotions according
to the Common Prayer Morning and Evening: and at the Evening Prayer, I preached
in a Room that was indeed too large for our small Company; but thete being a
considerable number in Geneva that Understand English, and in particular some
of the Profess^rs and Ministers; we had a great many Strangers that met with
us: and the last Sunday I gave the Sacrament according to the way of the Church
of England; and upon this occasion, I found a general joy in the Town, for
this, that I had given them an Opportunity of expressing the respect they had
for our Church; and as in their public Prayer^ they always prayed for the
Chur^hes of Great ^rittain, as well as for the King, so in private Discourse
they showed all possible esteem for our Constitutions; and they spoke of the
unhappy Divisions among us, and of the Separation that was made from us, upon
the account of ou^ Government and Ceremonies, with great regret and dislike. I
shall name to you only two of their Professors, that as they are Men of great
Distinction, so they were the persons with whom I conversed the most. The one
is Mr. T^^retin, a Man of great Learning, that by his Indefat^gable Study and
Labor has much worn out, and wasted hi^ strength; amidst all the affluence of
a great plenty of Fortune to which he was born, one discerns in him all (...)
Modesty of a humble and mortified temper, and of a^ active and fervent Charity,
proportioned to his Abundance, or rather beyond it: And there is in him such ^
melting Zeal for Religion, as the present conjuncture (...) for, with all the
seriousness of Piety and Devotion, whi^^ shows it felf both in private
conversation and in his most edifying Sermons, by which he enters deep into the
Consciences of his Hearers. The other is Mr. Tron^hin, a Man of a strong Head,
and of a clear and correct Judgment; who has all his thoughts well digested;
his Conversation has an engaging charm in it that cannot be resisted: He i^ a
Man of Extraordinary virtue, and of a Readiness to oblige and serve all
persons, that ha^ scarce any measures: His Sermons have a sublimity in them,
that strikes the Hearer, as well as it edifyes him: His Thoughts are noble, and
his Eloquence is Masculine and exact, and has all the Majesty of the Chair in
it, tempered with all the Softness of Persuasion, so that he not only convinces
^is Hearers, but subdues them, and triumphs over them. In such Company it was
no wonder, if time seemed to go off too fast, so that I left Geneva with a
concern, that I could not have felt in leaving any place, out of the Isl^ of
Britain.

From Geneva, I went a second time through Switzerland to Basil: at Avanche I
saw the Noble Fragments of a great Roman Work, which seems to have been the
Portico to some Temple: the Heads of the Pillars are about four Foot square, of
the Ionick Order; the Temple has been dedicated to Neptune, or some Sea-god*
for on the Fragments of the Architrave, which are very beautiful, there are
Dolphins and Sea-horses in Bas Reliefs; and the Neighborhood of the place to
the Lakes of Iverd^n and Morat makes this more evident: there is also a Pillar
standing up in its full height, or rather the Corner of a Building, in which
one sees the Rests of a regular Archi^^cture in two ranks of Pillars: If the
ground near this were carefully searched, no doubt it would discover more ^ests
of that Fabric. Not far from this is Morat; and a little on this side of it is
a Chapel, full of the Bones of ^he Burgundians, that were killed by the
Switzers, when this place was besieged by the famous Charles Duke of ^urgundy,
who lost a great Army before it, that was ^ntirely cut off by the besieged; the
Inscription is very extraordinary, especially for that Age: for the bones being
so piled up, that the Chapel is quite filled with them, the Inscription bears,
that Charles Duke of Burgundy's Army having besieged Morat, Hoc sui Monume^tum
reliquiet, had left that Monument behind it. It cannot but seem strange to one
that views Morat, to imagine how it was possible for a Town so situated, and so
slightly fortified, to hold out against so powerful a Prince, and so great an
Army, that brought Canon before it. I met with nothing remarkable between this
and Basil, except that I staid sometime at Bern, and knew it better; and at
this second time it was, that My Lord Advoyer d' Erlach gave Order to show me
the Original Records of the famous Process of the four Dominicans; upon which I
have retoucht the Letter that I writ to you last year, so that I now send it to
you with the Corrections and Inlargements, that this second stay at Bern gave
me occasion to make.

Basil is the Town of the greatest extent of all Switzerland, but it is not
inhabited in proportion to its extent. The Rhine makes a Crook before it; and
the Town is situated on a rising ground, which has a noble effect on the Eye,
when one is on the Bridge; for it looks like a Theater. Little Basil on the
other side of the Rhine, is almost a fourth part of the whole: the Town is
surrounded with a Wall and Ditch; but it is so exposed on so many sides, and
has now so dreadful a Neighbor within a quarter of a League of it, the Fort
of Hunningen, that it has nothing to trust to, humanely speaking, but its
Union with the other Cantons. The Maxims of this Canton have hindered its being
better peopled than it is; the Advantages of the Burgership are such, that the
Citizens will not share them with Strangers, and by this mean^ they do not
admit them. For I was told, that during the last War, that Alsatia was so often
the Seat of both Armies, Basil having then a Neutrality, it might have been well
filled, if it had not been for this Maxim. And i^ were a great Happiness to all
the Cantons, if they could have diffecent Degrees of Burgership, so that the
lower Degrees might be given to Strangers for their Encouragement to come and
live among them: and the higher Degrees, which qualify Men for the
advantageous Employments of the State, might he reserved for the Ancient
Fa^ilies of the Natives. Basil is divided into six^een C^mpa^ies, and every one
of these has four Members in the little Council, so that it consists of
six^y four: But of those ^our, two are chosen by the Company it self, who are
called the Masters, and the other two are chosen by the Council out of the
Company; and thus as there are two sorts of C^un^ellors, chosen in those
different manners, there are also two chief Magistrates. There are two
Bur^ermasters, that Reign by turns, and two Zunft. Ma^ters, that have also
their turns, and all is for life; and ^he last are the Heads of the C^mpanies,
like the Romans Tribunes of the People. The Fabric of the State House is
ancient; there is very good paintin^ in fresco upon the Walls; one piece has
given much offense to the Papists, ^ho they have no Reason to blame the
Reformation for it, since it was done several years before it, in the year
1510. ^t is a Representation of the Day of Judgment, and after Sentence given,
the Devil is represented driving many before him to Hell, and among these there
is a Pope, and ^everal E^clesiasticks. But it is believed, that the C^un^il,
which sat so long in this place, acting so vigorously against the Pope,
engaged the Town into such a hatred of the P^pacy, thas this might give the
rise to this Repre^entation The more learned in the Town ascribe the be^inning
of the Custom in Basil of the Clocks anticipating ^he time a full Hour, to the
sitting of the Council, and ^hey say, that in order to the Advancing of
business, and ^he shortning their S^ssions, they ordered their Clocks to be set
forward an Hour, which continues to this day. The Cathedral is a great old
Gothic Building; the Cham^er where the Coun^il sat, is of no great reception,
and is a very ordinary Room: Erasmus's Tomb is only ^ plain Ins^ription upon a
great Brass Plate: There are many of Holbens's Pictures here, who was a native
of Basil, and was recommended by Erasmus to King H^nry the VIII. the two best
are a Corpo or Christ Dead, which is certainly one of the best Pictures in the
World: There is another Piece of his in the Stadt-House (for this is in the
public Library) of about three or four foot square, in which, in six several
Cantons, the several parts of our Saviors Passion are represented with a life
and beauty that cannot be enough admired; it is valued at ten thousand Crowns;
it is on Wood, but has that Freshness of color still on it, that seems
particular to Holbens's Pencil. There is also a Dance, that he painted on the
Walls of an House where he used to drink, that is so worn out, that very little
is now to be seen, except shapes and Postures: but these show the exquisiteness
of the Haud. There is another longer Dance, that runs all along the side of
the Convent of the Augustinians, which is now the French Church, which is
Deaths Dance; there are above threescore Figures in it at full length, of
Persons of all ranks, from Popes, Emperors and Kings, down to the meanest sorts
of People, and of all Ages and Professions, to whom Death appears in an
insolent and surprising posture; and the several Passions that they express,
are so well set out, that this was certainly a great design. But the Fresco
being exposed to the Air, this was so worn out some time ago, that they ordered
the best Painter they had to lay new Colors on it; hut this is so ill done,
that one had rather see the dead shadows of Holbens's Pencil, than this course
work. There is in Basil a Gun-Smith, that makes Wind-Guns, and he showed me
one, that as it received at once Air for ten shot, so it had this peculiar to
it, which he pretends is his own Invention, that he can Discharge all the Air
that can be parcelled out in ten shot at once, to give a home blow. I confess
those are terrible Instruments, and it seems the interest of mankind to forbid
them quite, since they can be employed to Assassinate Persons so dexterously,
that neither Noise nor Fire will discover from what hand the Shot comes. The
Library of Basil is b^ much the best in all Switzerland, there is a fine
collection of Medals in it, and a very handsome Library of Manuscripts; the
Room is Noble, and disposed in a very good Method. Their Manuscripts are
chiefly, the Latin Fathers, or Latin Translations of the Greek Fathers, some
good Bibles; they have the Gospel in Greek Capitals, but they are vitiously
writ in many places; there is an infinite number of the Writers of the darker
Ages, and there are Legends and Sermons without number. All the Books that were
in the several Monasteries, at the time of the Refor^ation, were carefully
preserved; and they believe, that the Bishops who sat here in the Council,
brought with them a great many Manuscripts which they never carried away. Among
their Manu^cripts, I saw four of Huss's Letters, that he writ to the Bohemians
the day before his death, which are very devout, but excessively simple. The
Manuscripts of this Library are far more numerous than those of Bern, which
were gathered by Bongarsius, and left by him to the public Library there: they
are indeed very little considered there, and are the worst kept that ever I
saw: But it is a Noble Col^ecti^n of all the ancient Latin Authors; they have
some few of the best of the Roman times, writ in great Characters, and there
are many that are seven or eight hundred Years old. There is in Basil one of
the best collections of Medals that ever I saw in private hands; together with
a Noble Library, in which there are Manus^ripts of good antiquity, that belongs
to the Family of Fesch, and that goes from one learned man of the Family to
another; for this Inheritan^e can only pass to a man of Learning, and when the
Family produces none, then it is to go to the public In Basil, as the several
Cempa^ies have been more or less strict, in admitting some to a Freedom in the
Company, that have not been of the Trade, so they retain their Privil^dges to
^his day. For in such Compa^ies, that have once received such a number that
have not been of the Trade, ^s grew to be the majority, the Trade has never
been able ^o recove^ their Interest. But some Companies have been more
cautions, and have never admitted any but those that were of the Trade, so that
they retain their Interes^ still in Government. Of these the Butchers were
named for one, so that there are always four Butc^ers in the Council* The
great Council consists of two hundred and forty* but they have no power left
them, and they are only assembled upon some extraordinary occasions; when the
little Council thinks fit to communicate any important matter to them. There
are but six Bailiages that belong to Basil, which are not employments of great
advantage; for the best of them does afford to the Baili^ only a thousand
Livres a Year: They re^kon that there are in Basil three thousand Men that can
bear Arms, an^ that they could raise four thousand more out of the Canton; so
that the Town is almost the half of this State and the whole makes thirty
Parishes. There are eighteen Professors in this University; and there is a
Spirit of ^ more free and generous Learning stirring there, than I sa^ in all
those parts. The^e is a great decency of Habit i^ Basil; and the Garb both of
the Counselors, Minister^ and Professors, their stiff Rufs, and their long
Beards* have an Air that is August: The appointments are but smal^ for
Counselors; Ministers and Professors, have but ^ hundred Crowns a piece: It is
true, many Minister^ are Professors, so this mendeth the matter a little: B^^
perhaps it would go better with the State of Learnin^ there, if they had but
half the number of Pro^^ssors* and if those were a little better encouraged. No
where is the rule of St. Paul [of Women's having on their heads the Badge of the
Authority under which they ar^ brought, which by a phra^e that is not
extraordinar^ he calls Power] better observed than at Basil; for all the
Marri^d Women go to Church with a Coi^ o^ their Heads, that is so ^olded, that
as it comes dow^ so far as to cover their Eyes, so another folding covers
also their M^uth and Chin, so that nothing (...) the Nose appears, and then all
turns backward in a ^oling, that hangs down to their midleg. This is alw^^^
White; so that there is there such a sight of White Heads in their Churches, as
cannot be found any where else: The Unmarried Women wear Hats, turned up in the
brims before and behind; and the brims of the sides being about a foot broad,
stand out far on both hands: This fashion is also at Strasburg, and is worn
there also by the Married Women.

I mentioned formerly the constant danger to which this Place is exposed, from
the neighborhood of Hun^ingen; I was told, that at first it was pretended,
that the French King intended to build only a small Fort there, and it was
believed, that one of the Burgomasters of Basil, who was thought not only the
wisest man of that Canton, but of all Switzerland, was gained to lay all men
asleep, and to as^ure them, that the suffering this Fort to be built so near
them, was of no importance to them; but now they see too late their fatal
Error: For the place is great, and will hold a Garrison of three or four
thousand Men; it is a Pentagone, only the side to the Rhine is so large, that
if it went round on that side, I believe it must have been a Hexagone; the
Bastions have all Orillons, and in ^he middle of them there is a void space,
not filled up with earth, where there is a Magazine built so thick in the
Vault, that it is proof against Bombs: The R^mparts, are strongly faced; There
is a large Ditch, and before the Cortine, in the middle of the Ditch, there
runs all along a Horn work, which is but ten or twelve foot high; and from the
bottom of the Rampart, there goes a Vaul^ to this Horn-w^rk, that is for
conveying of men for its defense; before this Horn-work there is a half Moon,
with this that is peculiar to those new For^ifications, that there is a Dit^^
that cuts the hal^ Moon in an Angle, and makes one half Moon within another;
beyond that there is a Counterscarp about twel^e foot high abo^e the Water,
with a covered Way, and a Gla^y designed, tho not executed; the^e is also a
great H^rn-work besides all this, which runs out a huge way with its Outworks
toward B^sil; there is also a Bridge laid over the Rhine, and there being an
Islan^ in the River, where the Bridge is laid, there is a Horn-work that
fills and fortifieth it. The Buildings in th^s For^ are beautiful, and the
Square can hold above four thousand Men; the Works are not yet quite finished,
but when all is completed, this will be one of the strongest place^ in Europe:
There is a Cavelier on one or two of the Bastions, and there are hal^ Moons
before the Bastions, so that the Switzers see their danger now, when it is not
easy to redress it. This place is situated in a great Plain, so that it is
commanded by no rising ground on any side o^ it. I made a little Tour into
Alsace, as far as Mountbelliard; the Soil is extreme rich, but it has been so
long a Frontier Country; and is, by consequence, so ill peopled, that it is in
many places overgrown with Wood^* In one respec^ it is fit to be the seat of
War, for it is full of Iron-works, which bring a great deal of Money into the
Country. I saw nothing peculiar in the Iron-Works there (except that the sides
of the great Bellows were not of Leather, but of Wood; which saves much money)
so I will not stand to describe them. The River of the Rhin^, all from Basil to
Spire, is so low, and is on both sides so covered with Woods, that one that
comes down in a Boa^ has no sight of the Country: The River runs sometimes
with such a force, that nothing but such woods could preserve its Banks, and
even these are not able to save them quite; for the Trees are often washed away
by the very Roots, so that in many places those Trees ly along in the Channel
of the River: It has been also thought a sort of a Fortification, to both
sides of the River, to have it thus faced with Woods, which makes the passing
of M^n dangerous, when they must march for some time after their passage
through a d^ filepunc; The first night from Basil we came to Brisac, which is a
poor and mi^erable Town, but it is a noble Fortificati^n, and has on the
West Side of the River, over which a Bridge is laid, a regular Fort of four or
five B^stions. The Town of Brisac rises all on a Hill, which is a considerable
height; there were near it ^wo Hills, the one is taken within the
Fortification, and the other is so well levelled with the ground, that one
cannot so much as find out where it was; All the ground about for many Miles is
plain, so that from the Hill, as from a Cavalier one can see exactly well,
especially with the help of a Prospect, all the motions of an Enemy in case of
a Siege: The Fortification is of a huge compass, above a French League, indeed
almost a German Lea^ue; the Bastions are quite filled with Earth, they are
faced with Brick, and have a huge broad Dit^h full of Water around them; the
Counterscarp, the covered Way, which has a Palisade, with^n the Parapet, and
the Glacy, are all well executed; there is a half Moon before every Cortine:
the Bastions have no Orillons except one or two, and the Cortines are so
disposed, that a good part of them defende^h the B^stion. The Garrison of this
Place in time of War must needs be eight or ten thousand Men; there has not
been much done of late to this place, only the Dit^h is so adjusted, that it is
all defended by the Flanks of the Bastions. But the noblest place on the Rhine*
is Strasburg; it is a Town of a huge extent, and has a double Wall and Ditch
all round it: the inner Wall is old, and of no strength, nor is the outward
Wall very good; it has a Faussebraye, and is faced with Brick twelve or
fifteen foot above the Ditch: the Counterscarp is in an ill condition, so that
the Town was not in case to make any long resistance; but it is now strongly
fortified. There is a Ci^tadel built on that side that goes toward the Rhine,
that is much such a Fort as that of Hunningen, and on the side of the Citadel
toward the Bridge, there is a great Horn-work, that runs out a great way with
Out-wo^ks belonging to it; there are also small Forts at the two chief Gates
that lead to Alsace; by which the City is so bridled, that these can cut off
all its communication with the Country about in case of a Revolt: the Bridge is
also well fortifyed; there are also Forts in some Islands in the Rhine, and
some Redoubts: so that all round this place, there is one of the greatest
Fortifications that is in Europe.

Hitherto the Capitulation, with relation to Religion, has been well kept, and
there is so small a number of new Converts, and these are for the greatest part
so inconsiderable, they not being in all above two hundred, as I was told, that
if they do not employ the new-fashioned Missionaries a la Dragonne, the old
ones are not like to have so great a harvest there as they promised themselves,
tho they are Jesuits. The Lu^herans for the greatest part retain their
Animosities almost to an equal degree both against Papists and Calvinists. I
was in their Church, where, if the Music of their P^alms pleased me much, the
Irreverence in singing, it being free to keep on, or put off the Hat, did
appear very strange to me: The Churches are full of Pictures, in which the
^hief passages of our Sa^iour^ Life are represented; but there is no sort of
religious respect paid them, they bow when they name the Holy Ghost, as well
as at the Name of Jesus: but they have not the Ceremonies that the Lutherans of
Saxony use, which Mr. Bebel, their Professor of Divinity, said was a great
happiness; for a similitude in outward Rites might dispose the ignorant people
to change too easily. I found several good people both of the Lutheran
Ministers and others, acknowledge, that there was such a Corruption of Morals
spread over the whole City, that as they had justly drawn down on their heads
the Plague of the loss of their Liberty, so this having touched them so little,
they had reason to look for severer strokes: One sees, in the ruin of this
City, what a miscievous thing the popular pride of a free City is: they fan^ied
they were able to defend themselves, and so they refused to let an Imperial
Garrison come within their Town: for if they ha^ received only five hundred
m^n, as that small number would not have been able to have oppressed their
Liberties, so it would have so secured the Town, that the French could not have
besieged it, without making War on the Empire: but the Town thought this was a
Diminution of their Freedom; and so chose rather to pay a Garrison of three
thousand Soldiers, which as it exausted their Revenue, and brought them under
great Taxes, so it proved too weak for their defense when the Fren^h Army came
before them. The Town begins to sink in its Trade, notwithstanding the great
circulation of Mon^y that the expense of the Fortifications has brought to it:
but when that is at an en^, it will sink more sensibly; for it is impossible
for a Place of Trade, that is to have always eight or ten thousand Soldiers
in it, to continue long in a Flourishing State. There was a great Animosisy
between two of the chief F^milys of the Town, Dietrick and Obr^cht; the former
was the Burgomaster, and was once almost run down by a Faction that the other
had raised against him: but he turned the tide, and got such an advantage
against Obrecht, who had writ some what against the Conduct of their Affairs,
that he was Condemned and Beheaded for writing libels against the Government.
His Son is a learned man, and was Professor of the Civil Law: and he to have
his turn of revenge against Dietrick, went to Paris last Summer, and that he
might make hi^ Court the better, changed his Religion. Dietrick had been
always looked on as one of the chief of the Fren^h Faction, tho he had been at
first an Imperialist, so it was thought, that he should have been well
rewarded; yet it was expected, that to make himself capable of that, he should
have changed his Religion; but he was an ancient man, and would not purchase
his Court at that rate: so without any reason given, and against the express
words of the Capitulation, he was confined to one of the midland Provinces of
Fran^e, as I remember, it was Limosin, and thus he, that has been thought the
chief cause of this ^own's falling under the power of the French, is the first
man that has felt the effects of it. The Library here is considerable; The
Case is a great Room, very well con^rived; for it is divided into Closets all
over the body of the Room, which runs about these as a Gallery, and in these
Closets all round there are the Books of the several Professions lodged apart:
There is one for Manuscripts, in which there are some of considerable
Antiquity. I need say nothing to you of the vast height, and the Gothic
Architecture of the Steeple and of the great Church, nor of the curious Clock,
where there is so vast a variety of motions; for these are well known. The Bas
Reliefs upon the Tops of the great Pillars of the Church are not so visible,
but they are surprising; for this being a Fabri^k of three or four hundred
years old, it is very strange to see such Representations as are there. There
is a Procession represented, in which a Hog carries the Pot with the Holy
Water, and Asses and Hogs in Pri^stly Vestme^ts follow to make up the
Processi^n; there is also an Ass standing before an Altar, as if he were going
to Consecrate, and one carries a Cafe with Relics, within which one sees a
Fox; and the Trains of all that go in this Procession, are carried up by
Monkies. This seems to have been made in hatred of the Monks, whom the Secular
Clergy abhorred at that time, because they had drawn the Wealth, and the
following of the World after them, and they had exposed the Secular Clergy, so
much for their ignorance, that it is probable after some Ages, the Monks
falling under the same contempt, the Secular Clergy took their turn in exposing
them in so lasting a Representation to the Scorn of the World. There is also in
the Pulpit a Nun cut in Wood, lying along, and a Friar lying near her with his
Breviary open before him, and his hand under the Nuns habit, and the Nuns feet
are shod with iron shoes. I confess, I did not look for these things; for I had
not heard of them; but my Noble Friend Mr. Ablancourt viewed them with great
exactness, while he was the French Kings Resident at Strasburg, in the company
of one of the Magistrates that waited on him; and it is upon his credit, to
which all that know his eminent sincerity, know how much is due, that I give
you this particular.

From Strasburg we went down the Rhine to Philipsburg, which lies at a quarter
of a Miles distance from the River; it is but a small place, the Bastions are
but little: there is a Ravellin before almost all the Cortines, and there ly
such Marshes all round it, that in these lies the chief strength of the
place. The Fren^h had begun a great Crow^-work on the side that lies to the
Rhine, and had cast out a Hor^-work beyond that; but by all that appears, it
seems they intended to continue that Crown-work quite round the Town, and to
make a second Wall and Ditch all round it; which would have enlarged the place
vastly, and made a compass capable enough to lodge above ten thousand Men: and
this would have been so terrible a Neighbor to the Palatinate, and all
Franconia, that it was a Masterpiece in Charles Lewis, the late Elector
Palatine, to engage the Empire into this Siege. He saw well, how much it
concerned him to have it out of the hands of the French, so that he took great
care to have the Duke of Lorrain's Ca^p so well supplied with all things
necessary, during the Sie^e, that the Army lay not under the least uneasiness
all the while. From thence in ^hree Hours time we came to Spire, which is so
naked a Town, that if it were attacked, it could not make the least resistance.
The Town is neither great nor rich, and subsisted chiefly by the Imperial
Chamber that fitteth here, tho there is a constant dispute between the Town and
the Ch^mber concerning Privile^g^s; for the Government of the Town, pretends,
that the Judges of the Chamber, as they are private men, and out of the Court
of Iudi^ature, are subject to them; and so about a year ago they put one of the
Judges in Prison: on the other hand, the Judges pretend, that their persons are
sacred. It was the consideration of the Chamber that procured to the Town the
Neutrality that they enjoyed all the last War. I thought to have seen the forms
of this Court, and the way of laying up, and preserving their Records, but the
Court was not then sitting. The Building, the Halls and Chambers of this famous
Court are mean beyond imagination, and look liker the Halls of some small
Company, than of so great a body; and I could not see the places where they lay
up their Archives; The Government of the City is all Lutheran; but not only the
Cathedral is in the hands of the Bishops and Chapter, but there are likewise
several Convents of both Sexes; and the I^suites have also a College there.
There is little remarkable in the Cathedral, which is a huge building in the
Gothic manner, of the worst sort. The Tombs of many Emperors, that ly buried
there, are remarkable for their meanness; they being only great Flagstones
laid on some small St^ne-ballisters of a foot and a half high: There are also
the marks of a ridiculous Fable concerning St. Bernard, which is too foolish to
be related, yet since they have taken such pains to preserve the remembrance of
it, I shall venture to write it. There are from the Gate all along the N^f of
the Church up to the Steps that go up to the Quire, four round Plates of Brass,
above a foot Diameter, and at the distance of thirty foot one from another,
laid in the pavement, on the first of these is engraven, O Clemens; on the
second, O Pia; on the third, O Felix, and on the fourth, Maria* The last is
about thirty foot distant from a Statue of the Virgins: so they say that St.
Bernard came up the whole length of the Church at Four Steps, and that those
four Plates were laid where he stepped: and that at every Step he pronounced the
word that is engraven on the Plate; and when he came to the last, the Image of
the Virgin answered him, Salve Bernarde, upon which he answered, Let a Woman
keep silence in the Church; and that the Virgins Statue has kept silence ever
since; This last part of the Story is certainly very credible. He was a Man of
Learning that showed me this; and he repeated it so gravely to me, that I saw
he either believed it, or at least that he had a mind to make me believe it:
and I asked him as gravely, if that was firmly believed there; he told me, that
one had lately writ a Look to prove the truth of it, as I remember, it was a
Ies^it: He a^knowledged, it was not an Article of Faith; so I was satisfied.
There is in the Cloister an old Gothic Representation of our Saviors Agony in
stone, with a great many Figures of his Ap^stles, and the Company that came to
seize him, that is not ill S^ulpture, for the Age in which it was made, it
being some Ages old. The Calvinists have a Church in this Town, but their
numbers are not considerable. I was told there were some ancient Manuscripts in
the Library, that belongs to the Cathedral: but one of the Prebendaries, to
whom I addressed my self, being, according to the German Custom, a Man of
greater Quality than Learning, told me, he heard they had some ancient
Manusc^ipts, but he knew nothing of it; and the Dean was absent, so I could not
see them; for he kept one of the Keys. The lower Palatinate is certainly one of
the sweetest Countries of all Germany: It is a great Plain till one comes to
the Hills of Heidelberg: the Town is ill situated, just in a bottom, between
two ranges of Hills, yet the Air is much commended: I need say nothing of the
Castle, nor the prodigious Wine-Cellar, in which, tho there is but one
celebrated Tun, that is seventeen foot high, and twenty six foot long, and is
built with a strength liker that of the ribs of a ship, than the Staves of a
Tun; yet there are many other Tuns of such a prodigious bigness, that they
would seem very extraordinary, if this vast one did not Eclipse them. The late
Prince Charles Lewis showed his capacity in the peopling and settling this
State, that had been so entirely ruined, being for many Y^ars the Seat of War;
for in four years time he brought it to a Flourishing condition: He raised the
Taxes as high as was possible without dispeopling his Country, all men's Estates
were valued, and they were taxed at five per cent of the value of their
Estates; but their Estates were not valued to the rigor, but with such
abatements as have been ordinary in England in the times of Subsidies; so that
when his Son offered to bring the Taxes down to two per Cent of the real value,
the Subjects all desired him rather to continue them as they were. There is no
Prince in Germany that is more ab^o^^te than the Elector Pal^tine; for he
laye^h on his S^bject^ what Taxes he pleases, without being limited to any
forms of Go^ernment. And here I saw that which I had always believed to be
true, that the Subjects of Germany are only bound to their particular Prince;
for they swear Allegiance singly to the Elector, without any reserve for the
Emp^rour; and in their Prayers for him, they name him their Sovereign. It is
true, the Prince is under some ties to the Emperor; but the Subjects are under
none. And by this D^ Fabritius, a learned and judicious Professor there,
explained those words of Pareus's Commentary on the Romans, which had respect
only to the Princes of the Empire: and were quite misunderstood by those who
fancied that they favored Rebellion* for there is no place in Europe where all
rebellious Doctrine is more born down than there. I found a great spirit of
Moderation, with relation to those small Controversies, that have occasioned
such heat in the Protestant Churches, reigning in the University there, which
is in a great measure owing to the Prudence, the Learning, and the happy Temper
of Mind of D. Fabritius, and D. Mick: who as they were long in England, so they
have that generous largness of Soul, which is the Noble Ornament of many of the
English Divines; Prince Charles Lewis saw that Manheim was ma^ked out by Nature
to be the most important place of all his Territory, it being situated in the
point where the Neckar falls into the Rhine; so that those two Rivers
defending it on two sides; it was capable of a good Fortification: It is true,
the Air is not thought wholesome, and the Water is not good, yet he made a fine
Town there, and a Noble Citadel, with a regular Fortification about it; and he
designed a great Palace there, but he did not live to build it. He saw of what
advantage Liberty of Con^cience was to the peopling of his Country; so as he
suffered the Jews to come and settle there, he resolved also not only to suffer
the three Religions, ^olerated by the Laws of the Empire, to be professed
there, but he built a Church for them all three, which he called the Church of
the C^ncord, in which both Calvinists Lutherans and Papists had, in the order
in which I have set them down, the exercise of their Religion; and he
maintained the peace of his Principality so entirely, that there was not the
least Disorder occasioned by this Toleration: This indeed made him to be looked
on as a Prince that did not much consider Religion himself: He had a wonderful
application to all affairs, and was not only his own chief Minister, but he
alone did the work of many.

But I were Injust if I should not say somewhat to you, of the Princely Virtues
and the Cele^rated Probity of the present Pr. Elector, upon whom that Dignity
is devolved by the extinction of so many Pr^nces; that in this Age composed the
most numerous F^mily of any of that rank in Europe. This Prince, as he is in
many respects an honor to the Relig^on that he professes, so is in nothing
more to be commended by those who dif^er from him, than for his exact adhering
to the Promises he made his Subjects with relation to their Religion, in which
he has not (even in the smallest matters) broke in upon their established Laws;
and tho an Order of Men, that have turned the world up-side down, have great
credit with him, yet it is hitherto visible, that they cannot carry it so far
as to make him do any thing contrary to the established Religion; and to those
^acr^d Promises that he made his Subjects. For he makes it appear to all the
world, that he does not consider those, as so many words spoken at first to lay
his people asleep, which he may now explain and observe as he thinks sit; but
as so many Ties upon his Conscience and Honor, which he will Religiously
observe. And as in the other parts of his Life, he has set a Noble Pattern to
all the Princes of Europe, so his exactness to his Promises, is that which
cannot be too much commended: of which this extraordinary Instan^e has been
communicated to me since I am come into this Country. The Elector had a
Proc^ssion in his Court last Corpus Christ^ day, upon which one of the
Ministers of Heidelberg prea^ht a very severe Sermon against Popery, and in
particular taxed that Procession perhaps with greater plainness than
discretion: Th^s being brought to the Electors Ears, he sent presently an Order
to the Ecclesiastical Senate to suspend him. That Court is composed of some
Secular men and some Churchmen, and as the Princes Authority is delegated to
them, so they have a sort of an Episcopal jurisdiction over all the Clergy:
This Ord^r was a surprise to them, as being a direct b^each upon their Laws and
the li^erty of their Reli^ion: so they sent a Depu^ation to Court, to let the
Elector know the reasons that hindered them from obeying his O^ders, which were
heard with so much Justice and Gentleness, that the Prince, instead of
ex^ressing any Displeas^^e against them, recalled the Order that he had sent
them. The way from Heidelberg to Fra^kfort* is, for the first twelve or fifteen
Miles, the beautifullest piece of ground that can be imagined; for we went
under a ridge of little Hills that are all covered with Vines, and from them,
as far as the eye can go, there is a beautiful Plain of Cornfieldsd and
Meadows, all sweetly divided and enclosed with rows of Trees, so that I fancied
I was in Lombardy again, but with this advantage, that here all was not of
apiece, as it is in Lombardy; but the Hills, as they made a pleasant inequality
in the prospect, so they made the Air purer, and produced a pleasant Wine: The
way near Darmstat, and all forwards to Frankfort, becomes more wild and more
sandy: There is a good Suburb on the South Side of the Main over against
Frankfort, which has a very considerable Fortification; there is a double
Wall, and a double Dit^h, that goes round it; and the outward Wall, as it is
regularly fortified, so it is faced with Brick to a consi^erable height. The
Town of Frankfort is of a great extent, and seemed to be but about a third part
less than S^rasburg: The three Reli^ions are also tolerated there; and tho the
number of the Papists is very inconsiderable, yet they have the great Church,
which is a huge rude building; they have also several other Churches, and some
Co^ve^ts there. There are several open Squares for Market places, and the
Houses about them look very well without. Among their Archives they preserve
the Original of the B^lla Aurea; that which is showed to Strangers, is only a
great Parchment writ in High Dutch; but the Original is preserved with more
Care, and is in Latin: yet since I made a short stay there, I was not at the
Pains of desiring to see it; for that is not obtained without difficulty. The
Lutherans have here built a new Church, called St. Katherines, in which there
is as much painti^g as ever I saw in any Popish Church; and over the high Altar
there is an huge carved Cru^ifix, as there are painted ones in other places of
their Church: The Pulpit is extreme fine, of Marble of different co^ours, very
well polished and joined. I was here at Sermon, where I understood nothing; but
I liked one thing that I saw both at Strasburg and here, that at the end of
Prayers, there was a considerable interval of silence left, before the
conclusion, for all peopl^s private Devotions. In the House of their public
Discipline, they retain still the old Roman Pistrina or H^nd-mill; at which
lewd Women are condemned to grind, that is, to drive about the Wheel that
makes the Milstones go. There is a great number of Jews there, tho their two
Synagogues are very little, and by consequence, the Numbers being great, they
are very nasty. I was told, they were in all above twelve hundred. The Women
had the most of a tawdry Imbroidery of Gold and Silver about them that ever I
saw; for they had all Mantles of Crape, and both about the top and the bottom,
there was a border above a hand breadth of Imbroid^ry. The Fortification o^
Frankfort is considerable; their Ditch is very b^oad, and very full of Water;
all the Ba^^ions have a Countermine, that runs along by the brim of the
Ditch; but the Counterscarp is not faced with Brick as the Walls are, and so in
many places it is i^ an ill condition; the covered Way and Glacy are also in an
ill case: The Town is rich, and drives a great Trade, and is very pleasantly
situated. No^ far from hence is Hockam, that yields the best Wine of those
parts. Since I took Frankfort in my way from Heidelb^rg to Mentz, I could not
pass by Worms, for which I was sorry. I had a great mind to see that place
where Luther made his first appearance before the Empe^our, and the Diet, and
in that solemn Audience express^d an undaunted Zeal for that Glorious Cause in
which God made him such a blessed Instrument. I had another piece of Curiosity
on me, which will perhaps appear to you somewhat ridiculous. I had a mind to
see a Pi^ture, that as I was told, is over one of the Popish Altar, there,
which one would think was Invented by the Enemies of Transubstantiation, to
make it appear ridiculous There is a Windmill, and the Vir^in throws Christ
into the Hopp^r, and he come^ out at the Eye of the M^^n all in Waters, which
some Priests take up to give to the People. This is so course an Emblem, that
one would think it too gross even for Lapland^rs; but a man that can swallow
Transubstantiation it self, will digest this likewise Mentz is very nobly
situated, on a rising ground* a little below the conjunction of the two
Rivers, the Rhine and the Ma^n; it is of too great a compass, and too ill
peopled ^o be capable of a great defense: there is a Cittad^l upon the highest
part of the Hill that commands the Town; it is compassed about with a dry
Ditch, that is considerably deep. The Walls of the Town are faced with Bri^k,
and regularly fortisied, but the Counterscarp is not faced with Brick, so all
is in a sad condition; and the Fortification is weakest on that side where the
Elect^rs Palace is. There is one side of a new Palace very nobly built in a
regular Arch^tect^re, only the Germans do still retain somewhat of the Gothic
manner; It is of a great length, and the design is to build quite round the
Co^rt, and then it will be a very magnificent Pala^e, only the Stone is red:
for all the Quarries that are upon the Rhi^e, from Ba^il down to Co^lentz, are
of r^d stone, which does not look beautiful. The Elec^or of Mentz is an
absolute Prince: his Subjects present Lists of their Magistrates to him, but he
is not tied to them, and may name whom he will. The Ancient Demeasn of the
Electorat is about ^orty thousand Crowns: but the Taxes rise to about three
hundred thousand Crowns; so that the Subjects here are as heavily taxed as in
the Palatinate: The^e is twelve thousand Crowns a ye^r given the Elector for
his privy Purse, and the State bears the rest o^ ^is whole expense: It can Arm
ten thousand Men, and ^here is a Garrison of two thousand Men in Mentz: this
Elect^r has three Coun^ils, one he is Ch^^c^llour of the Empire, consisting of
three persons: The other two are for the Policy and Iusti^e of his
Principality. He, and ^is Chapter have Months by turns for the Nomination of
the Prebends. In the Month of January he names if any dies, and they choose in
the Room of such as dye in Fe^ruary, and so all the year round. The
Pre^endaries or Dome-Heers have about three thousand Crowns a year a^iece. When
the E^ector dies, the Emperor sende^h one ^o see the Election made, and he
recommendeth one, but ^he Can^ns may choose whom they please; and the present
Elector was not of the Emper^rs Recommendation. Be^ides the Palace at Mentz,
the Elect^r has another near ^ rankf^rt, which is thought the best that is in
those parts ^f Germany: The Cathedral is a huge Gothic Building; ^here is a
great C^pul^ in the West End, and there the Quire sings Mass: I could not
learn whether this was one only because the place here was of gr^ater reception
^han at the East End, or if any burying place and indowment obliged them to the
West End. Near the Cathedral ^here is a huge Chapel of great Antiquity, and on
the North Door there are two great Brass Gates with a long Inscription, which I
had not time to write out, but I ^ound it was in the Emperor Lothariu's time.
There are a vast number of Churches in this Town, but it is poor and ^ll
inhabited. The Rhine here is almost half an English mile broad, and there is a
Bridge of Boats laid over it. From Mentz all along to Baccharach (which seems
to carry its name [ Bacch^ Ar^] from some famous Altar that the Romans probably
erected by reason of the good Win^ that grows in the Neigbourhood.) There is a
great number of very considerable Villages on both sides of the River: Here the
Rats Tower is showed, and the People of the Country do all firmly believe the
Story of the Rats eating ^p an Elector, and that tho he fled to this Island,
where ^e built a small Tower, they pursued him still* and swimmed after him,
and eat him up: and they told us, that there were some of his Bones to be seen
still in the Tow^r. This extraordina^^ death makes me call to mind a very
particular and unlooked for sort of Death, that carried off a poor La^ou^er of
the ground a few days before I left Ge^eva The Foot of one of his Cattle, as
he was ploughing, went into a Nest of ^asps, upon which the whole Sw^rm came
out, an^ set upon him that held the Plow, and killed him in a very little time;
and his Body was prodigiously swelled with the poison of so many Stings But to
return to the Rhine; all the way from Baccharach down to C^blents, there is on
both sides of the River hanging G^ounds, or little Hi^ls, so laid, as i^ many
of them ha^ been laid by Art, which produce the rich Rhenish Wine. They are
indeed as well exposed to the Sun, and covered from Storms, as can be imagined:
and the Ground of those Hills, which are in some place^ of a considerable
height, is so cultivated, that there i^ not an inch lost that is capable of
improvement, and thi^ brings so much Wealth into the Coun^ry, that all along
there is a great number of considerable Villages. Cohlent^ is the strongest
place that I saw of all that belong to the Empire; the situation is N^ble, the
Rhine running before it, ^and the Moselle passing along the side of the Town;
it is well fortified, the Ditch is large, the Counterscarp is high, and the
covered Way is in a good Condition, both Wall^ and Counterscarp are faced with
Brick, and there are Ravelines before the Cortines; but on the side of the
Mosell^ it is very slightly fortified, and there is no Fort at the en^ of the
Stone Bridge that is laid over Moselle, so that it lies quite open on that
side, which seems a strange defect in a place of that consequence. But tho
the F^rtifi^ations of ^his place are very considerabl^, yet its chief de^ence
lies in the F^rt of Herm^nstan, which is built on the top of a very high Hill,
that lies on the other side of the Rhine; and which commands this place so
absolutely* that he who is Master of Hermanstan, is always Master o^ Coblents.
This belongs to the Elector of Triers, whos^ Palace lies on the East side of
the Rhine, just at the Foot o^ the Hill of Hermanstan, and over against the
point ^here the Mose^^e fa^leth into the Rhine, so tha^ nothing ^an be more
pleasantly scitua^ed; only the ground begins ^o rise just at the ba^k of the
House with so much stee^ness, that there is not Room for Gardens or Walks. The
House ^^keth a great show upon the River, but we were told, that the Apartments
within were not answerable to ^he o^^side. I say, we were told, for the Germ^n
Princ^s ^eep such forms, that, without a great deal of ado, one cannot come
within their Courts, unless it be when they ^re abroad themselves; so that we
neither got within the Pala^e at M^n^z, nor this of Herm^nstan. It is but a few
Hours from this to Bonne, where the Elector of Collen kee^eth his Court: The
Place has a regular Fortification; the Walls are faced with Brick; but tho the
Ditch, which is ^ry, is pretty broad, the Counters^arp is in so ill a condi^ion
that it is not able to make a great defense. This (...) is the Noblest born,
and the best provided of all the ^erman Clergy; for he is Brother to the Great
Maximilian Duke of Bavaria; and besides Collen, he has Liege, Mun^er, and
Hildelsh^im, which are all great Bishoprick^: He has been also six and thirty
years in the Electorate: His Palace is very mean, consisting but of one Court;
the half of which is cast into a little Garden, and the Wood-yard i^ in the
very Court; the lower part of the Court was a Stable: but he has made an
Apartment here, that is all fur^ished with Pictures; where, as there are some
of the hands of the greatest Ma^^ers, so there are a great many foils to set
these off, that are scarce good enough for Signposts.

The Elector has a great many Gold Medalls, which will give me occasion to tell
you one of the Ex^ravagantest pieces of Forgery that pe^haps ever was; which
happened to be found out at the last ^iege of Bonne: for while they were clearing
the ground for ^lanting a ^att^ry* they discovered a Vault, in which there was
an Iron chest that was ^ull of Medalls of Gold to the value of 100000 Cr^wns;
and ^f which I was ^old the Elector bought to the value of 30000 Crowns. They
are huge big, one weighed 800. Ducat^ and the Gold was of the fineness of Du^at
Gold: but tho the^ bore the Impressions of Roman Medalls, or rather Medail^ons,
they were all C^unterfeit, and the im^tation was so coursely done, that one
must be extreme Ignorant in Medalls to be deceived by them. Some few that
seemed true, were of the late Greek Emperors. Now it is very unaccountable,
what could in^uce a man to make a forgery upon such Mettle, and in so vast a
quantity, and then to bury all this under ground, especially in an Age in which
so much Gold was ten times the value of what it is at present; for it is judged
to have been done about four or five hundred years ago.

The Prince went out a hun^ing while we were there, with a very handsome Guard
of about fourscore Horse, well mounted; so we saw the Palace; but were not
suffered to see the Apartment where he lodged: There is a great Silver
Casolette gilt, all set with Emeralds and R^bies, that tho they made a fine
appearance, yet were a Composition of the Princes own making: His O^ficer^ also
showed us a Basin and Ewer, which they s^id were of Mercury fixed by the Prince
himself* but they added, that now for many years he wrought no more in his
Lab^u^atory. I did not easily believe this, and as the weight of the Plate did
not approach to that of Quicksilver, so the Medicinal Virtues of fixed Mercury
(if there is any such thing) are so extraordinary, that is seemed very strange
to see twenty or thirty pound of it made up in two pieces of Plate. A quarter
of a mile without the Town, the best Garden of those parts of Germany is to be
seen, in which there is a great variety of Waterworks, and very many Noble
A^i^s in the French manner, and the whole is of a very considerable extent; but
as it has no Statues of any value to adorn it, so the House about which it
lies, is in Ruins: and it is strange to see, that so rich and so great a
Prince, during so long a Regency, has done so little to enlarge or beautify
his Buildings. Bonne and Cobl^ntz are both poor and small Towns. Collen is
three hours distant from Bonne, it is of a prodigious extent, but ill built and
worse peopled in the remote parts of it: and as the Walls a^e all in an ill
case, so it is not possible to fortify so vast a compass as this Town makes,
as it ought to be, without a charge that would eat out the whole Wealth of this
little State. The Jews live in a little Suburb on the other side of the Riv^r,
and may not come over, without leave obtained, for which they pay considerably.
There is no Exercise of the Protestant Religion suffered within the Town, but
those of the Religion are suffered to live there, and they have a Ch^r^h at two
miles distance. The Arsenal here, is suitable to the Fortificat^ons; very mean,
and ill furnished. The Quire of the Great Church is as high in the ^oof, as any
Church I ever saw; but it seems the Wealth of this place could not finish the
whole Fabric, so as to answer the height of the Quire; for the Body of the
Church is very low: Those that are disposed to believe Legends, have enough
here to overset even a good degree of Credulity, both in the Story of the Three
Kings, whose Chapel is visited with great Devotion, and stands at the East
and of the Great Quire; and in that more copious Fa^le of the eleven thousand
Vrsulins, whose Church is all over full of rough Tombs, and of a vast number of
Bones, that are piled up in rows about the Walls of the Church: These Fables
are so firmly believed by the Papists there, that the least sign which one
gives of doubting of their truth, passes for an infall^ble Mark of an
Heretic. The I^suites have a great and Noble Coll^dge and Church here. And for
Thaul^r's sake I went to the Dominicans House and Church, which is also very
great. One grows extreme weary of walking over this great Town, and does not
find enough of entertainment in it: The present Subject of their Dis^ourse is
al^o ^ery melan^holy: The late Rebellion that was there, is so generally known,
that I need no^ say much concerning it. A report was set about the Town, by
some I^^en^iarys, that the Magistrates did eat up the public Revenue, and were
like to ruin the City; I could not learn what ground there was for these
reports; for it is not ordinary to see reports of that kind fly, through a body
of men, without some Foundation: It is certain, this came to be so generally
believed, that there was a horrible disorder occasioned by it; The Magistrates
were glad to save themselves from the storm, and abandoned the Town to the
popular fury, some of them having been made sacrifices to it; and this rage
held long: But within this last year, after near two years disorder, those that
were sent by the Emperor and Diet to judge the matter, having threatened to put
the Town under the Imperial Bann, if it had stood longer out, were received*
and have put the Magistrates again in the possession os rheir Authority, and
all the chief Incendi^rys were clapped in Prison: many have already suffered, and
a great many more are still in Prison: they told us, that some executions were
to be made within a week when we were there. Dusseldorp is the first
considerable Town below Collen, it is the Seat of the Duke of Iuliers, who is
Duke of Newburgh, eldest Son to the present Elector Palatine. The Palace is old
and Gothic enough: but the Jesuits have there a fine College, and a noble
Chapel, tho there are manifest faults in the Archi^ecture: the Protestant
Religion is tolerated, and they have a Church built here within these few
years, tbat wat procured by the intercession of the Elector of Brandenburgh,
who observing exactly the Liberty of Religion that was agreed to in Cleve, had
reason to see the same as duly observed in his Neighbou^hood, in favor of his
own Religion. The Fortification here is very ordinary, the Ramparts being faced
but a few foo^ high with Brick. But Keisersw^rt, some hours lower on the same
side, which belongs to the Elector o^ Collen, tho it is a much worse T^wn
than Dusseldorp, yet is much better fortified: it ha^h a very broad Ditch, and
a very regular Fortification: the Walls are considerably high, faced with
Brick, and so i^ the Counterscarp, which is also in a very good Condition. The
Fortification of Orsoy (...) now quite demolished. Rhineberg continues as it
was but the Fortificati^n is very mean, only of Earth, so that it is not
capable of making a great Resistance. And ^esel, tho it is a very fine Town,
yet is a very poor Fortification, nor can it ever be made good, except at a
vast expense: for the ground all about it being sandy, nothing can be made
there that will be durable, unless the Foundation go very deep, or that it be
laid upon Piloty. In all ^hese Towns one sees another air of Wealth and
Abundance than in much richer Countries, that are exhausted with Taxes. Rees and
Emmerick are good Towns, but the Fortifications are quite ruined. So that here
is a rich and a populous Country, that has at present very little desence,
except what it has from its scitua^ion. Cleve is a delicious Place, the
situation and prospect are charming, and the Air is very pure; and from thence
we came hither in three hours.

I will not say one word of the Country into which I am now come; for as I know
that is needless to you on many accounts, so a Picture that I see here in the
Stadthouse, puts me in min^ of the perfectest Book of its kind that is perhaps
in being; for Sir William Temple, whose Picture hangs here at the upper end
of the Plenipotentiary, that negotiated the famou^ Treaty of Nimmegen, has
indeed set a pattern to the World, which is done with such life, that it may
justly make others blush to copy after it, since it must be acknowledged, that
if we had as perfect an account of the other Places, as he has given us of one
of the least, but yet one of the Noblest parcels of the Universe, Travelli^g
would become a needless thing, unless it were for diversion: since one finds
no further occasion for his curiosity in this Country, than what is fully
fa^issyed by his rare performance; yet I cannot give over writing, without
reflecting on the Resistance that this Place made, when so many other Places
were so basely delivered up, tho one does not see in the ^uins of the
Fortificati^n here, how it could make so long a resistance; yet it was that
that stem'd the tide of a progre^s that made all the World stand amazed; and it
gave a little time to the Dutch to recover themselves out of the constern^^io^*
into which so many blows, that came so think one (...) another, had struck them.

But then the World saw a change, that tho ^t has not had so much Incense
given to it, as the happy conjuncture of another Prince has drawn after it,
with so much excess, that all the topics of flattery seem exhausted by it, yet
will appear to posterity one of the most surprising Scenes in History, and that
which may be well matched with the recovery of the Roman State after the Battle
of Can. When a young Prince, that had never before born Arms, or so much as
seen a Campaign, who had little or no Council about him, but that which was
suggested from his own thoughts, and that had no extraordinary advantage by his
Education, either for Literature or Aff^irs, was of a sudden set at the Head of
a State and Army, that was sunk with so many losses, and that saw the best half
of its Soil torn from it, and the powerfullest Enemy in the World, surrounded
with a Victorious Army, that was commanded by the best Generals that the Age
had produced, come within sight, and settle his Court in one of its best Towns,
and had at the same time the greatest force both by Sea and Land, that has
been known, united together for its destruction. When the Inhabitants were
forced, that they might save themselves from so formidable an Enemy, to let
loose that which on all other occasions, is the most dreadful to them, and to
drown so great a part of their Soil, for the preservation of the rest; and to
complicate together all the Miseries that a Nation can dread, when to the
general consternation, with which so dismal a S^e^e possessed them, a
distraction within doors seemed to threaten them with the last strokes; and
while their Army was so ill disciplined, that they durst scarce promise
themselves any thing from such feeble Troops, after a Peace at Land of almost
thirty Years continuance* and while their chief Ally, that was the most
concerned in their preservation, was, like a great paralitick body, ^iker to
fall on those that it pretended to support, and tho crush them, than to give
them any considerable assistance: When, I say, a young Prince came at the Head
of ^ll this, the very prospect of which would have quite dampt an ordinary
Courage, he very quickly changed the Scene, he animated the Public Councils
with a generous vigor: he found them sinking into a feebleness of harkening to
Propositions for a Peace, that were as little safe as they were honorable; but
he disposed them to resolve on hazarding all, rather than to submit to such
Infamous Terms. His credit also among the Populace seemed to Inspire them with
a new life; they easily persuaded themselves, that as one WILLIAM Prince of
ORANGE had formed their State, so here another of the same name seemed marked
out to recover and preferve it. It was this Spirit of Courage which he derived
from his own Breast, and Infused into the whole People, as well as into the
Magistracy, that preserved this Country. Something there was in all this that
was Divine. The public Councils were again settled, and the people were at
quiet, when they saw him vested with a full Authority for that time with
Relation to Peace and War, and concluded they were safe, because they were in
his hands. It soon appeared how faithfully he pursued the Interest of his
Country, and how little he regarded his own. He rejected all Propositions of
Peace that were hurtful to his Country, without so much as considering the
Advantages that were offered to himself, (in which you know that I write upon
sure grounds.) He refused the offer of the Sovereignty of its Chief City, that
was made to him by a solemn Deputation, being satisfied with that Authority
which had been so long maintained by his Ancestors with so much glory, and
being justly sensible, how much the breaking in upon established Laws and
Liberties, is fatal even to those that seem to get by it. He thus began his
public appearance on the Stage, with all the disadvantages that a Spirit
aspiring to true Glory could wish for; since it was Visible, that he had
nothing to trust to, but a good Cause; a favorable Providence, and his own
Integrity and Courage^ nor was success wanting to such Noble Beginnings; for he
in a short time, with a Conduct and Spirit beyond any thing that the World has
yet seen, recovered this S^ate, out of so desperate a distemper, took some
Places by main force, and obliged the Enemy to abandon all that they had
acquired in so feeble a manner. And if a raw Army had not always success,
against more numerous and better-trained Troops, and if the want of Magazins
and Stores in their Allys Country, which was the chief Scene of the War; made
that he could not Post his Army, and wait ^or favorable circumstances, so that
he was sometimes, forced to run to Action, with a have that his Necessitys
imposed upon him; yet the forcing of the beginnings of a Victory out of the
hands of the greatest General of the Age, the facing a greeat Monarch with an
Army much inferior to his, when the other was too cautious to hazard an
engagement; and in short, the forming the Dutch Army to such a pitch, that it
became visibly Superior to the French, that seemed to have been sed with
Conquests; and the continuing the War, till the Prince that had sacrificed the
quiet of Eur^pe to his Gl^ry, was glad to come and treat for a Pea^e in the
Enemies Coun^ry, and in this very place, and to set all Engines on work to
obtain that, by the Mediation of some, and the Jealousies of other Princes: all
these are such Performances, that Posterity will be disposed to rank them
rather among the Idea's of what an imaginary H^ro could do, than with what
could be really Transacted in so short a time, and in such a manner. And in
conclusion, every place that belonged to these States, and to their Neighbors
along the Rhine, together with a great many in Flanders, being restored, these
Provinces do now see themselves under his happy Conduct, re established in
their former Peace and Se^urity. And tho some scars of such deep wounds do
still remain, yet ^hey find themselves considered on all hands, as the Bulwark
of Christ^ndom, against the Fears of a new Monarchy, and as the Preservers of
the Peace and Liberty of Europe.

Here is a Harvest, not for forced Rhetoric, or false Eloquence, but for a
severe and sincere Historian, capable of affording a Work that will far exceed
all those luscious Panegyricks of mercenary Pens: but a small or a counterfeit
Jewel must be set with all possible Advantages, when a true one of great value
needs only to be showed. I cannot end with a greater Subject; and I must
acknowledge my self to be so inflamed with this hint, that as I cannot after
this bring my pen down to lower matters, so I dare not trust my self too long,
to the heat that so Noble an Object inspires, therefore I break off abruptly.

YOURS.

An APPENDIX, Containing some Remarks, that have been sent to me by a Person of
Quality.
A Person of great Rank, that is of Italian extraction, and that by consequence
knows the Country well, having spent much of his time in it, had heard that I
was giving the World an account of the Reflections that I had made on the
present State of Italy, and upon that he writ the following Paper to one of his
Friends* to be communicated to me; for I have not the honor of any Commerce
with himself: The Observations that he had made, agreed so exactly with my own,
that I thought it would be no small Advantage toward the supporting the Credit
of those that I had made, to find them confirmed by so extraordinary a Person,
whose Character (as those who know him well have assured me) is so undisputed,
that if I durst name him, this alone would serve to establish the belief of the
most critical parts of my Letters in the minds of all that that should read his
Paper: but since I cannot adventure on this, without obtaining his Leave, and
since he is now at such a distance, that it is not easy to get his Friend to
write to him, or to receive an Answer from him time enough, therefore I have
added this Memorial. There are two Particulars in which He and I differ, and in
so great a Variety of Observations, that are so Critical, and so much out of
the Common road, it will not appear strange, if there should be some
disagreement, when he mentions the Tax that the Pope has laid on the Corn; he
does not ad one thing which I mention, and that is, that the Measure, by which
the Pope ^ells, is by a fifth part less than that by which h^ buys: The other
is more considerable; for in the Account that he gives of the pre^ent Pope's
breaking in upon the settlement of the Bank, tho it is upon the matter very
near the same with that which I give, yet there is a differen^e of some
Importance as to the manner of doing it; but as to that, all I can say, is*
that the first Account I had of that Transaction, was the same that is in this
Gentleman's Paper; but afterward I had occasion to talk of this matter very
Copiously with one, that has lived many years in the Popes Dominions, and that
has dealt much in those Affairs; he has now a Character upon him, and so it is
not expedient to name him: It was from him that I had the particular recital of
this matter, and therefore I thought it surer to go upon the Information that I
had from him, than upon the general Report that all Strangers may find at Rome.
This Paper had been more copious, if the person that writ it, had not been
restrained by some particular Considerations from saying any thing relating to
the Government of Venice.

REMARKS. Upon SWITZERLAND.
IT is very surprising when one comes out of France, (which is an Extraordinary
good Country) into Switzerland, which is not near so fertile, and yet to see so
great a difference between the People of ^ho^e two Countries. The People in
France, and especially the Peasants, are very poor, and most of them reduced to
great Misery and Want. The People in Switzerland cannot be said to be very
Rich; but yet there are very few, even amongst the Peasants themselves that are
miserably poor; the most part of them have enough to live upon, from their
Labor, and the Fruits of the Earth. Every where in France, even in the best
Citys, there are Swarms of Beggars; and yet scarce any to be seen throughout
all Switze^land. The Houses of the Peasants, or Country people in France are
extremely mean, and in them no other Furniture to be found besides poor nasty
Beds, straw Chairs, and Plates and dishes of Wood and Earth: In Switzerland the
Peasants have their Houses furnished with good Feather-Beds, good Chairs, and
other Housholdstuff for their Convenience, as well as their Necessity; their
Windows are all of glass, always kept mended and whole, and their Linen very
neat and white, and as well for their Be^ding as their Tables.

Of the GRISONS Country.
THe Grisons Country is much more Barren than Switzerland; because it is wholly
upon the Mountains, which produce nothing at all; yet notwithstanding (all
Excess and Luxury being banished from amongst them, and the Inhabitants being
extremely Laborious) there are none to be seen there that are very poor and
needy, but they live at Ease and there are a great many; Gentry of good
Estates. Their Government is altogether Popular; there are but three or four
Royalties belonging to Nobility in all the Country. All the rest of their Lands
are in Demean, which may yet well be called Royalties too, because exempt from
all dues and payments whatsoever. There is nothing at all to be paid for
bringing into the Country any sort of Goods or Merchandises, or for exporting
of them thence; every one there fully enjoys the Fruit of his own Labors, and
the Revenues of his Land; although the Wine they drink is brought upon Horses
four or five days Journey, yet they have it cheaper there than in most parts of
It^ly or France, where it so plentifully grows. There are Villages upon the
very tops of the Mountains, consisting of 150 and 200 Houses apiece; and although
they have no Co^n or Grain that grows there, and but very little Grass, yet the
Peasants keep three or four hundred Horses, which they employ to carry Goods
and Merchandises, which turns to so good account that they live very well, and
want nothing either for the Necessity or Convenience of life. The Inns upon the
Mountains are very good; and there is always to be had, besides good Bread and
Wine, great quantity of Game and Venison, according to the Season of the Year,
goo^ Trouts, very good Chambers, and Beds after the manner of the Country. When
you leave the Grisons Country, and are ^ome into the Country of Chavenne, the
People begin to speak broken Italian: although this latter is a more fertile
Country, yet the Inhabitants and P^asants do not live so well as in the Grisons
Country, for that the Natives are more slothful and lazy: and here again there
are abundance of poor People, as you will find in all parts of Italy

Of the Bailiages of LUGANE.
THere are on the other side of the Mountains four Bailiages, which were
formerly part of the Duchy of Milan; Lewis XII. when he lost that Duchy, gave
these Bailiages to some of the Switz Cantons. These Bailiages are called,
Lugane, Lucarno, Mendris, and Belinston. I shall only take notice of the
Bailiage of Lugane, which contains ninety nine Villages; The Territories of
this Bailiage and of the others, are not near so good as that of Milan, to
which it joins; yet the Villages of this Bailiage are very populous; the Land
is very fruitful, because it is well cultivated; and all the Inhabitants live
contented and well; there are no Beggars amongst them, nor hardly any Object of
Misery and Want: Their Houses are all good, well built, and kept in good
repair. The Territory of Milan is certainly one of the best in all Italy; it
produces Wine, Corn and Oil in abundance, very great quantity of Silk, and
(generally speaking) all sorts of Fruits; there is also excellent Pasture for
Cattle, and yet the Peasants there do not live so well by much as in the
Bailiage of Lugane; for there is a great deal of Land that lies unmanur'd, and
the Country is not near so populous as in Lugane. There can be no other Reason
given for this Difference, but that Milan is under the Dominion of Spain: That
the People are laden with Imposts, Subsidies and Taxes, which makes them very
poor; whereas the People of Lugane are under the Government of Switzerland, who
put no Taxes or subsidies upon them.

Remarks upon the LAKES.
I Do not know that in the Kingdom of France, as it was thirty years since,
there were any Lakes, except perhaps in the Mountains of Dauphine. From the
Lake of Iour to the Lake of Guard, which is at Desenesan, between Bresse and
Veronne, in the Territories of Venice, there are a great number of Lakes; one
of the most considerable is that of Geneva; then there is the Lake of
Newchattel, the Lake d'Yverdun, the Lake of Morat, the Lake of Bienne, the Lake
of Quinti, the Lake of Lucerne, the Lake of Constance, the Lake of Valestat,
and many others in the Mountains of Switzerland. There is on the other side the
Mountains a great and considerable Lake, called Come, also the Lake of Lugane,
the Lake Major, which is above 60 miles long, and likewise the Lake de Gard^:
All these Lakes are replenished with most excellent Fish, and particularly
Trouts; but in the Lake de Guard there is found an admirable Fish, called
Carpion, which is far more delicate than either Trout or Salmon, but they are
not so great; for those of the largest sise do not weigh above fifteen pounds.
I do not think that in any part of Europe there are so many fine Lakes to be
found in so narrow a Compass, as those which I have here mentioned.

Concerning the Duchy of FERRARA.
THe Duke of Ferrara has always been but a little Prince, because his
D^minions are not very great; yet there have been several of the said Dukes for
above 150 years ago, and since, that have made a handsome Figure, and held a
considerable Rank amongst the Princes of Italy. The Country was formerly very
populous, and the Lands being fertile, and well cultivated, the Revenue of the
Prince were considerable, and he kept a good Court. But since that Duchy i^
devolved upon the Sea of Rome, by the Death of the last Duke, who dyed without
Issue Male, the Country is almost depopulated; the most part of the Lands are
desolate; and for several Years last past the Duchy is infected with Diseases,
purely for want of Inhabitants. There were formerly in the Time of the Dukes of
Ferrara, more than one hundred thousand People, and at present there are not
15000. The Grass grows in the Streets and most of the Houses are void,

Polesino is one of the best parts of Italy; and that part of it which is
possessed by the Venetians, is very well cultivated and populous; and it is one
of the best of their small Provinces. As soon as you pafs the great Arm of the
River Po, which is called the Lagoscouro, which separates that part of the
Polesino which belongs to the Venetians, from that which belongs to the Pope;
although the Land and Country is the very same, yet the most part of those
Lands of the Polesino, which belongs to the Ecclesiastical State, are desolate
and ^ast: The Grass lies withered and rotten upon the ground, because there is
no body takes care to mow it; and in passing through great Villages, you will find
all the Houses abandoned, and not one Inhabitant to be found. It is not easily
to be imagined how it is pos^ible, that a Country so populous and flouri^hing,
should in less than 80 years be so entirely ruined and dispeopled: by this it
is very apparent, that no Subjects are so unhappy, as those that live under the
Domination of the Clergy.

Concerning the Estates of BOLOGNIA.
IF the Popes had been able to have made themselves masters of Bolognia, as
they have done of Ferrara, they would thereby have reduced it to the same
miserable condition; but Bolognia has always preserved their Privileges and
the Civil Government, by means of the Gonfalonniers, under whom they are
governed; they have the right of sending Ambassadors to the Pope, who enjoy the
same Prerogatives as do the Ambassadors of the other free Princes and States:
The P^pe cannot confiscate the Goods of any Subject of B^lognia for any Crime
whatsoever. The great Mischiefs which too frequently happen here, more than in
other parts, are Assassinations and Murders; those that commit them fly for
shelter to some of the Churches, as to an inviolable Afylum, from whence the
Legates themselves cannot bring them to be punished; or perhaps they retire into
the Country, into some Strong hold, or into the Territories of a Neighboring
Prince, where they are certainly secure, and there remain until the Legation of
the then C^rdinal be finished, and afterward make an agreement with the
Successor, who for Money pardons them (having Power so to do) all the Crimes
and Murders they have committed: In other respects the People of Bolognia are
very happy, and live in great plenty, for that the Country is mighty fruitful;
and they pay no Taxes to the Prince.

Remarks upon the Country of the Great Duke of TUSCANY.
THere are in th^s Great Dukedom three considerable Cities, Florence, Pisa, and
S^enna. All those who have read the Hist^ry of Italy, do know, that P^sa was
formerly a very powerful Commonweal^h, that it flourished in Trade and
Commerce, and that there were a great many weal^hy Citizens belonging to it;
there needs no other proof of this, than what we read, that upon a certain
occasion a hundred of the Citizens equipped each of them a Gally at their own
Charges, which they maintained during all the War. The great Actions are well
known which they have done in the Levant by their Fl^ets, and how they a long
time opposed the Duke of Floren^e, who at length subdued them by the Assistance
of the Spanish Arms.

Pisa is one of the largest and most beautiful Cities of Italy; the Buildings
are stately and fine; and so is one of their Churches, which with its
Dependencies is one of the finest in all Italy The City is built upon the River
of Arne, which divides it in the midst; it is navigable for Vessels of a great
burden ^ and at Ligorne, which is twelve Miles distance, it falls into the
Sea. It is one of the best situated Towns in all Italy for Trade, with which
it flourished extremely whils^ it was a Republic: at present not only the
City, but ^he Country belonging to it, is wholly depopulated. Writers say, that
there were formerly above one hundred and fifty thousand Inhabitants, whereas
now there are not twelve thousand. The Grass grows in most of the Places and
Streets of the City, and most of the Houses are deserted, and lie void. I was
my self in a fair large Palace which was let for six Pistoles per annum; the
greatest part of their Lands lie wast, and the Air is very unhealthy in most
parts, because of the small number of Inhabitants. The Duke of Florence thought
there was no way to secure himself of this great City; but by depopulating of
it, and ruining the Trade, which rendered it so potent, so that at present there
is not any Trade there at all.

The City of Sienna was also formerly a very fine Common Wealth, and had in it
many noble, rich, and powerful Families; but since that the Duke of Florence
has reduced it to his Obedience, he has ruined most of the Nobility and
Gentry, many of them retiring into France, and into the territories of some of
the Princes of Italy.

As to the City of Florence it self, it is extremely decayed to what is was
since it came under the Government of the House of Me^icis. It is plain from
the History of Machiavil, and other Italian Authors that lived in those times,
that it was three times more populous when it was a Republic, than it is now.
The Great Duke keeping his Court and residence there, one would think should
make the City flourish the more; yet it wants a great deal of that Luster and
Splendour it had when it was a Commonwealth.

Remarks upon the Temporal Government of the POPE.
THere are certainly very few People so miserable, a^ those who live under the
Dominion of the Pope: most of the States of Italy, and where there are the most
Subsidies and Impositions, have not put any tax upon Corn and Grain which make
Bread, because there is no person, tho never so miserable, that can subsist
without it; there is that humanity and regard had to the People, in not laying
Taxes upon Bread, because it is the common Nourishment and absolutely necessary
even for the most Indigent and Poor; tho Impositions are laid without scruple
upon Wine and other Merchandises, because thy are not so necessary as Bread yet
the Pope makes no scruple to lay very great Imposition^ upon Corn and Bread
throughout all his Dominions, except in those places that have yet preserved
their Liberties. It was Donna Olimpia, that during the Pontificat of Innocent
the X. began to put Taxes and Imposts upon Corn, and made such Laws which have
ruined the most part of the great Nobility and Gentry, that live under the
Ecclesiastical Government, who had their revenues consisting in Corn. All the
Popes who have reigned since Innocents time, have found such a great Advantage
to themselves by these Laws of Donna Olympia, that they have continued them
ever since; and it is at present a very Considerable part of the Ecclesiastical
Revenue. The substance of which said Law or Ordinance is this, That no person
whatsoever is suffered to sell Corn to any Strangers; but all those that have
any, are obliged to sell it at a price certain to the Ecclesiastical Chamber;
which is not at the most above one moiety o^ the real Value; and then the
Ecclesiastical Chamber sells it again at double the price In Italy there is no
person, either in City or Country, in the Popes Dominions, who is permitted to
make their own Bread, but every one is obliged to buy it of the Bakers, who are
appointed by the Chamber; in each Village and Borough there is but one Baker
Established by the Chamber to make and sell Bread; the Baker is obliged to take
the Corn of the Chamber at a certain price, and to make the Bread of such a
quality and weight, and to sell it at a price Certain. In the great Cities, as
at Rome, there are Very many Bakers, who are all obliged to buy a certain
quantity of Corn of the Ecclesiastical Chamber for a whole Year to come, which
they pay for beforehand, and give ten Crowns the Salme or measure, when at the
same time the Chamber bougt it of the particular persons for five Crowns, at
the beginning of the year, all the Bakers are obliged to take the same Quantity
of Corn for the Year ensuing, although sometimes they have a great deal of the
last years Corn upon their hands, which they must deliver to the Chamber for
five Crowns the Salme or measure, and then the very same Corn is sold them
again for ten Crowns. I do not believe that there is any Country in the World,
that draws more profit from their Subjects for Corn, ^^an the Pope does in his
Dominions, which has been partly the Cause of the ruin of the Ecclesiastical
Estate, since the Establishment of the said Law, which was about thirty years
since: the Country is unpeopled, and great part of the Lands lie void and
uncultivated, because it is not worth while to manure them, when the greatest
advantage and profit, arising thereby, goes to the Pope. In traveling through
the Ecclesiastical Territories in Romania, and between Rome and Naples, there
are vast quantites of Land unmanured. A Traveller passing through the Estate of
a Roman Prince, told the Prince upon his return to N^ples, he would if he
pleased send him Husbandm^n that should manure his Land; thinking that it had
been for want of Laborers that the Lands lay yoid and wast. The Prince told
him, that he did not want people to Cultivate his Lan^s; but because they were
obliged to sell all their Corn and Grain to the Chamber at a Very Low Price, it
would not quit Cost to Manure and Cultivate it.

Touching the Reduction of the Interest of money Due by the MONTES at Rome from
4 to 3 per Cent.
EVery body almost knows what 't is which in Italy, and especially at Rome,
they call the Montes; it it is much like the Rents upon the Town house at
Paris. The Popes having occasion of money, borrow great sums of particular
Persons at 4 per Cent Interest; This they call at Rome the Establishment of the
Monte, that is, the Creation of certain Officers, and the assignment of several
Rents for the payment of those who have lent Money to the Pope. The present
Pope, finding the Chamber engaged to the annual payments of I know not how many
Millions of Roman Crowns Interest, to those that had ient Money upon the Monte,
resolved in part to reduce and lessen the great Sum of Money which the Interest
amounted to, and having for this purpose raised several Millions of Roman
Crowns, he acquainted those that had money upon the Monte, that they should
come and receive their principal money, unless they would take 3 per cent
Interest for the 4 per cent which they formerly received; w^ereupon, there
being really no Trade in all the Ecclesiastical Territories, and the Lands
worth nothing, and that the Estates of the Nobility were all sold to a penny,
all Persons who had Money upon the Monte, not knowing how to Employ it to
advantage elsewhere, let it there remain, contenting themselves with three per
cen^ instead of four per cent, which they had before; So that by this means
every one concerned lost a fourth part of their yearly Income, and the Chamber
got I know not how many Millions of Crowns yearly by this Retrenchment of one
per cent.

It is almost incredible the Immence Sums the Pope has raised by retrenching
of many superf^uous Expenses, and extinguishing several Offices to which great
Salleries were paid by the Ecclesiastical Chamber, and b^ diverse other means.
Those who are well informed in the^e matters, do for certain affirm, that all
the Subsidies which the Pope has remitted to the Emperor and King of Poland,
to carry on the War against the Turks, are not the thirtieth part of the Money
which he has treasured up; although likewise he has paid many Debts of the
Chamber, which were not chargeable upon the Montes.

I ought not here to omit relating, that the Inns, especially in Tuscany, in
Romania, and between Rome and Naples, are very sordid and incommodious, one may
give a pretty good guess at the prodigious Wealth belonging to the Clergy in
the Kingdom of Naples by the great quantity of plate, Vessels and Statues of
Silver in the Churches; and by the riches and magnificent Furniture of their
Habitations, and Vestments of the Priests. One may upon the whole matter make
this Important Reflection, that if the King of Spain does not think of some
expedient, to hinder the Clergy from Increasing their Estates in Lands, which
they do daily, they will in a very little time become Masters of the greatest
part of the Kingdom of Naples; for they are already possessed of more than the
half of the Lands of that Kingdom, besides the other vast profits they make
continually under pretense of Service to the Church, for their Masses,
Buildings, Burials, Marriages, Confessions, and by their Indulgences, and the
Legacies left them by Will.

Tho these are Remarks made in have* yet they may be of use to the Author.

I know several very pleasant Stories of the Jesuits at Naples. The Prince of
Salerme gave them the moiety of a great House which he had at Naples, and
thereupon an Inscription was engaven in Capital Letters upon the Frontispice of
the House, of the Donation thereof given to the Jesuits by the said Prince;
within these few years the Jesuits have turned the Heirs of the Prince of
Sal^rme out of possession of the other Moiety of the said House, and have
defaced the Inscription upon the House: and all this they have done by Color
of Law and Justice. Upon the first Establishment of the Society of Jesuits, the
Carthusians of Naples, who are very rich, voluntarily assigned them a yearly
Pension of several thousand Ducats; but the Carthusians perceiving that of late
years several of the Jesuits were grown mighty rich, resolved to withdraw the
said Pension; the Jesuits hereupon went to Law with them, and obtained
Sentence, that the said Pension should be continued. The Jesuits have got a
very considerable part of the Lands of the Nobility in the Kingdom of Naples.
All the Religious, of what Order soever they be, who have Houses at Naples,
have the Privilege of purchasing all Houses that are contiguous to them on the
one side or the other to the very end of the Street, in order to make their
Houses entire and to stand alone like an Island; and for this purpose they have
no more to do, than only pay the Proprietor for his House, not according to the
present Value, but as it was last sold, perhaps 50, 60, or 100 years ago, and
so has descended from Father to Son successively to the person then in
possession.

Many other very considerable Remarks might be made of the diverse Triks and
Methods the Clergy of this Kingdom make use of to wheed^e and trapan the Laity
out of their Estates.

FINIS

