REFLECTIONS ON A PAPER, ENTITLED, His Majesty's Reasons For withdrawing
himself from ROCHESTER.

Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed for John Starkey; and Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown, in
S. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

Reflections on a Paper, entitled, His Majesty's Reasons for withdrawing
Himself from Rochester.
THERE is a Paper spread about the Town, which might be confuted in every
particular, not only with Clearness, but with Severity too, if there was not a
restraint put upon the full liberty of answering any thing that goes under a
Name, to which Respect will still be paid, even by those to whom it is denied:
Therefore nothing will be said to it by way of an entire Answer; nor any
advantage taken of the many Mistakes which lie too open to be Defended. It
shall suffice for the present to mention some things which are laid down in the
Paper, in such a manner, as may, perhaps, mislead men into a wrong judgment of
them, for want of being sufficiently informed in the matter of fact.

The particulars are: 1. The Prince sending his Guards at Eleven of Clock at
Night, to take possession of the Posts at Whitehall, Without advertising him of
it in the least.

2. The sending a kind of an Order by Three Lords, to be gone out of his own
Palace before Twelve that Morning.

To the first, the matter of fact is, That upon the King's being Apprehended,
when He was going out of the Kingdom, and afterward being brought to
Rochester, whither his Servants and Coaches were sent for by Him, to bring Him
up to London, The Prince, who had upon that taken his measures to hasten up to
Town, and being fixed in his opinion, That it was, in many respects, improper
for the King and him to be there at the same time, in the present state of
Affairs; sent Monsieur Zulestein to meet Him in the way, and to desire Him to
return to Rochester; but Monsieur Zulestein missing Him, by going another way
than that by which He came, the King arrived at Whitehall, and at the same time
sent a Message by my Lord Feversham to the Prince, inviting him to come to St.
James's, with what number of Troops he should think fit to bring with him.

The Prince upon this deliberateth with the Lords then at Windsor, the day
before he had appointed to be in Town, and having communicated the Message to
them, and left them to debate the whole matter, it was agreed, That it was in
no kind advisable for the Prince to accept the invitation; and on the other
side, there being a necessity that the Prince should be in Town next day, the
Lords thought that the shortness of time could admit no better Expedient, than
that the King might be desired to remove to some place within a reasonable
distance from London; upon which, Ham, a House belonging to the Duchess of
Lauderdale, was pitched upon. In order to this, a Paper was drawn in these
words, and Signed by the Prince: We desire you the Lord Marquess of Hallifax,
the Earl of Shreusbury, and the Lord Delamere, to tell the King, That it is
thought convenient for the great quiet of the City, and for the greater safety
of His Person, That He do remove to Ham, where He shall be attended by Guards,
who will be ready to preserve Him from any disturbance.

Given at Windsor, the 17th day of December, 1688. Prince de Orange.




The Prince appointed three Lords to carry this Paper; and it was resolved,
That before the delivery, the Prince's Guards should be possessed of all the
Posts at Whitehall, to prevent the possibility of a disturbance from Guards
belonging to several Masters; which besides other ill Consequences might
perhaps have involved even the King's own Person in the danger that might have
arisen from any Dispute. It was supposed by computation, that the Prince's
Guards might be at London by Eight of the Clock that Night: But it so happened,
that it was past Ten before they all arrived, commanded by the Count of Solmes;
and when they were come, there being difficulty made of withdrawing the King's
Guards from Whitehall, there was so much time spent, that it was past Twelve of
the Clock before the Lords could proceed in their Message. In which, that they
might preserve all possible decency and respect; and that they might not
suddenly break in upon the King with a Message of this kind, they sent to my
Lord Middleton, His Principal Secretary of State, the following Letter. My Lord,
There is a Message to be delivered to His Majesty from the Prince, which is of
so great Importance, that we, who are charged with it, desire we may be
immediately admitted; and therefore desire to know where we may find your
Lordship, that you may introduce,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most humble Servants, Hallifax, Shreusbury, Delamere

.



The Lord Middleton told the Messenger, he would be ready at the Stairs of the
Guard-chamber to carry the Lords to the King. Upon this they went, and finding
my Lord Middleton at the place he had appointed, he brought them to the King,
whom they found in bed: After making an Apology for coming at an hour which
might give him disturbance, The Prince's Message before recited was delivered
Him; which after He had read, He said, He would comply with. Then the Lords, as
they were directed, humbly desired, if it might be done with convenience to His
Majesty, That He would be pleased to remove so early, as to be at Ham by Noon;
by this means, to prevent the meeting the Prince in his way to London, where he
was to come the same day; His Majesty readily agreed to it, and then asked,
Whether he might not appoint what Servants should attend Him; to which the
Lords replied, That it was left to Him to give order in that as He pleased. And
after that, they took their leave. When they were gone as far as the Privy
Chamber, the King sent for them again, and told them, That he had forgot to
acquaint them with his Resolutions before the Message came, To send my Lord
Godolphin next Morning to the Prince, to propose His going back to Rochester,
he finding by the Message that Monsieur Zulesteyn was charged with, That the
Prince had no mind He should be in London; and therefore He now desired, that
He might rather return to Rochester, than go to any other Place. The Lords
replied, That they would immediately send an Account to the Prince of what His
Majesty desired, and did not doubt of such an Answer as would be to His
satisfaction; accordingly they sent presently to the Prince, who was then at
Sion, to inform Him of all that had passed; and before Eight of the Clock in
the Morning had a Letter from Monsieur Benting, by the Prince's Order, agreeing
to the King's Proposal of going to Rochester; upon which, the Guards being made
ready, and the Boats prepared, He went that Night to Gravesend.

The Observations which may naturally arise from this whole matter are, First,
That the King having been sent to by the Prince by Monsieur Zulesteyn, That He
would be pleased to return to Rochester. This Message by the Lords could not
possibly be a surprise to Him, but must have been expected as a necessary
Inference from the first; and this is proved in fact by the King's having given
Order to my Lord Godolphin to go to the Prince with an offer to return to
Rochester, concluding that his Highness would have less exception to His being
there, than he might have to his remaining at London.

In the next place, As to the Complaint of the Prince's sending his Guards at
such a time of night, and without giving warning; Let it be considered,
whether, since a thing of this kind was judged necessary to be done, it had not
better grace even in respect to the King Himself, to do it upon short warning,
rather than expose Him more by treating and proposing formally that which His
Majesty was in no condition to deny. In all Cases where the means of contesting
fail, it is sure a Respect to those who are under such a disadvantage, not to
add to their mortification, by drawing it out in length by the deceitful
Ceremony of treating where no Power is left to dispute.

Then as to the Unseasonable hour, besides other Reasons that have been
mentioned; Would those who make the Objection have been content, a thing of
this nature should have been done in broad daylight, and by sound of Drum and
Trumpet? No doubt they would then, with more reason, have complained, That a
King, in these unhappy circumstances, should be exposed to such an appearance
of a Triumph; The thing, in the World, the Prince is the least inclined to, and
in that respect has right to the fairest construction such a Proceeding will
admit.

Whoever will compare the Power of the Prince, with the use he makes of it,
must be sufficiently convinced of his Moderation: And in this particular
instance, allowing the necessity of the Prince's coming to Town that very day,
of which he was the best Judge, and admitting the consequence, which cannot
reasonably be denied, That the King's remaining there at that time might not
only have given an interruption to the Peace of the Town, but to the Respect
that ought to be preserved to his Person; it was not possible to execute what
was thought so necessary, with more Decency and Precaution than was observed;
and impartial Judges, who are not carried away by the Sound of things, against
the Reason of them, will, no doubt, give their Opinions, That this Proceeding
does not deserve any part of the Censure that has been put upon it, by those
who did not know the Truth of it.

THE END.

