THE Royal Martyr, AND THE DUTIFUL SUBJECT, IN TWO SERMONS.

By G. BVRNET.



LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred Majesty, at the
Angel in Amen-Corner, 1675.

THE Royal Martyr Lamented, in a SERMON Preached at the SAVOY, ON King CHARLES
the MARTYR'S Day, 1674/5.

By Gilbert Burnet.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred Majesty, at the
Angel in Amen-Corner, 1675.

THE Royal Martyr Lamented, in a SERMON Preached at the SAVOY, on King CHARLES
the MARTYR'S Day, 1674/5
2 SAMUEL 2. 12. And they mourned and wept, and fasted until even for Saul and
for Jonathan his Son, and for the people of the Lord, and for the house of
Israel, because they were fallen by the sword.
THere is no Maxim so general, or so constant, but that it may allow of some
exception; and therefore though the Wiseman after all his experience, his most
searching Observations, and the great prospect he had of the order of second
Causes, and the temper of men's minds, does pronounce, there was nothing new
under the Sun: Yet this day, and that never-enough-lamented Villainy we now
remember, must put in for an exception from that rule, which did indeed exceed
all the common measures of wickedness so far; that as there is nothing in any
History like it, so when the World is some Ages older (if such an action be not
an Omen that its end is near) this will scarce gain credit, but be looked on as
the Tragical contrivance of some deeply-Melancholy wit. Some Princes have been
by their prevailing Conquerors put to death, others have been assassinated by
their own Subjects. But to see a Sovereign Prince brought to the Pageantry of a
Mock-trial, and by a Court made up of his own Subjects on a pretense of Justice
sentenced to lose his life; not in the corner of some private Prison, but in
the chief City of his Dominions, and in the most eminent place of it, is an
evidence of the degeneracy of the age we live in, that would dare to act what
in former ages none would have thought on.

What Phocas did to the Emperor Mauritius is the nearest parallel to it which
History offers, but comes far short of matching it; for neither were the Rights
of the Roman Emperors derived by so clear a Title, nor so long a Descent as
our Royal Martyr's were; and so no wonder if those who rose by the sword did
also fall by it. Nor did Phocas so far affront Justice as to pretend to put his
Master to a Trial, and Mauritius had by so base an avarice exposed so many of
his Soldiers to be cut off, and used the rest so ill, that no wonder they in
their fury against him were guilty of so foul a Conspiracy. But how much more
exquisitly wicked was the crime we now remember, when a Prince (whose Rights
were devolved on him, by so many Titles, the British, the Saxon, the Norman,
and the Scottish Races, having all united in him, (who had also in his whole
Government showed that deep sense of Religion with a most tender regard to the
good and quiet of his Subjects) was against all the rules of Justice, and yet
upon some colors of it brought to so public a death. But as Phocas as basely
treacherous and wicked as he was, was most ignominiously and shamefully courted
by Pope Gregory the Great, who writes to him in a style of so mean and servile
flattery, that it justly stains all the other good Qualities of that Prelate.
And his Successor Boniface did yet more meanly comply, and got himself declared
by him the Universal Bishop of the Church. From which we may judge of that See,
by what arts they are resolved to rise and to make use of the worst of men if
they can but serve their turn. So in this Regicide, Religion was vouched, and
God appealed to. And indeed it was no wonder that these treated his Vicegerents
so coarsely, that made so bold with God himself, as to pretend he was their
Patron and warrant in what they did. And perhaps if these actors had as fully
complied with him that pretend to be Christ's Vicegerent as Phocas did, he had
as plainly justified their actions as Gregory and Boniface did, which might
have been far rather looked for now, after all the opinions some of their
Emissaries have broached, of murdering Princes, then at that time when their
corruptions were but a-forming, and their ambition was beginning to fly at
Supremacy and Universal Jurisdiction.

But is all our work only to reflect with some horror on this infamous action?
have we no other concern in this Day? The Collect tells us, That the sins of
this Nation have been the cause which has brought this heavy judgment upon us.
We also pray, That this our land be freed from the vengeance of his blood. And
indeed had not our sins been great, so that the cup of our iniquities was quite
full, it could not have run over in a tract of a long Civil War, which brought
along with it so much bloodshed, rapine and contempt of all things sacred and
humane; and all was completed in this crime, beyond which wickedness could go
no higher. Those who were so nobly and generously loyal as to serve his late
Majesty of most blessed memory, do with a just glorying rejoice in the
reflection on their past Services; yet let me crave leave to offer even to them
how far they ought to be concerned in mourning and fasting on this Occasion. It
was our contempt of God and Religion, our being purely formal in our Religious
Worship, our forgetting to acknowledge God the author of our Peace and Plenty,
our abusing these by excess and riot, that brought on those sad and unheard of
Judgments. Among the much-abused words of the late time were Incendiary and
Incendiarism; but those were the great Incendiaries that kindled Gods wrath,
and it is from such that we may justly fear the like, or rather severer
Judgments, if our sins now be greater than they were then: Therefore the
lamenting and repenting of these sins, by which what is past may be forgiven,
and what may be feared be prevented, being the proper work of this day; I come
now to consider my Text, and what reflections may be drawn from it, though in a
case so much without a precedent as this is, it is not to be imagined that a
Text wholly pertinent can be picked up. But we shall make the most of this we
can, and consider three things in it.

First, This King whose Death was so much lamented, and in what particulars he
was a Parallel, and in what not, of our Royal Martyr.

Secondly, What reason David with the rest of the people of Israel had to mourn
for his Death, and how far that agrees with our case.

Thirdly, How they expressed their sorrow, and how far their example calls on
us to imitate it.

For the first, it was Saul the Son of Kish, whom God had by the hands of
Samuel designed to be King of Israel, for whom David had that respect, that
even when he was most unjustly hunting his life, yet he would not stretch forth
his hand against him, seeing he was the anointed of the Lord. And in this our
Royal Martyr was his Parallel, since he was, by a tract of an undisputed
Succession, that which Saul was by immediate Revelation, the Lord's Anointed.
And indeed he looked on himself as having his Authority from God, as will
appear from the following instances, (which before I mention I must preface
with this) that I will not enlarge on the whole field of that Murdered Princes
Virtues; for that were both endless, they being so many, and needless, they
being so well known: But having by a great happiness seen not a few (I may add
hundreds of) Papers under his own Royal Pen; I shall only now offer diverse
passages drawn out of those that will give some Characters of his great Soul.
And as in the Indies the Art of Painting is only the putting together little
Plumes of several colors in such method as to give a representation of what
they design; which though it be but coarse work yet the Colors are lively;
so I can promise no exact work, but true and lively Colors I will offer,
being those mixed by our Martyr himself, though perhaps unskilfully placed by
me. And as the Popish Legend tells of two Pictures of our Savior done by
himself, one particularly which he left in Veronica's Handkercher when he
wiped his face with it; so from the sweat of our Royal Martyr some
Lineaments of his Face shall be offered. And to return to make good the
character of our late Sovereign, he owned all his Authority to be derived from
God; and therefore in one of his Papers I find these words, when he is
acknovvledging the great blessings, and eminent protection he had received from
the hands of the Almighty, he adds; To whom we know we must yield a dear
account for any breach of trust, or failing of our duty toward our People. And
in another Paper reflecting on the Demand concerning the Militia, he gives the
reason why he could not consent to it as it was proposed; Because thereby he
wholly divested himself (as he conceived) of the power of the Sword entrusted
to him by God and the Laws of the Land for the Protection and Government of his
People, thereby at once disinheriting his Posterity of that Right and
Prerogative of the Crown, which is absolutely necessary for the Kingly-Office,
and so weakening Monarchy in this Kingdom, that little more than the name and
shadow of it will remain. In another Paper he expresses his zeal to preserve
the Laws, as became Gods Vicegerent, in these words: If we wanted the
Conscience we cannot the discretion, to tempt God in au unjust quarrel, the
Laws of our Kingdom shall be sacred to us, we shall refuse no hazard to defend
them, but sure we shall run none to invade them. And that Paper which is very
long, he thus concludes, God so deal with us and our Posterity, as we shall
inviolably observe the Laws and Statutes of our Kingdom, and the Protestations
we have so often made for the Defense of the true Reformed Protestant Religion,
the Laws of the Land, and the just Privileges and Freedom of Parliaments.

From these Evidences it will appear what severe thoughts he had of the
Obligations he lay under to Almighty God, from whom he had his power, and to
whom he knew he was to give account of his Administration.

2. We find it is said of Saul, that after he was anointed, God gave him
another heart, and that meeting a company of Prophets he prophesied to the
astonishment of those that beheld him. How much of this Divine Spirit rested on
our Blessed Martyr, all those Meditations which were his Exercises in his
retirement do abundantly declare. If by Readiness prophesying be meant the
foretelling what was to come, I meet somewhat very near it from his Royal Pen,
Anno 1642, in a Letter, wherein he writes these words; I have set up my rest on
the justice of my cause, being resolved that no extremity or misfortune shall
make me yield; for I will either be a Glorious King, or a Patient Martyr; and
as yet not being the first, and at present not apprehending the other, I think
it now no unfit time to express this my resolution to you. A very overly
observer will see much in these words, even without a Commentaty. Or, if by
prophesying be to be understood an elevated way of trusting in God, and adoring
him, then I shall add what I find under the same Sacred Pen, when he was at
Newcastle, in a Letter to one of his Subjects: Know that I rather expect the
worse than the better event of things; being resolved (by the Grace of God and
without the least repining at him) to suffer any thing that injury can put upon
me rather than sin against my Conscience. And in another Letter, Now for the
sad consequences I know no so good antidote as a good Conscience, which by the
Grace of God I will preserve whatever else happen to me.

A third Character we have of Saul is that he was very careful to protect his
Subjects when in danger; as appears both by his haste to relieve Iabish-Gilead
when sore pur to it by the King of Ammon, and by his engaging against the
Philistines with so much Personal danger to himself and his Family. Now what
our Martyrs zeal for protecting his Subjects was, (I speak not of his care in
protecting the oppressed Protestants in Germany and France, which I leave to
the Historians) I shall make appear from the following Evidences. What vast
Concessions he made to his native Kingdom every body knows; and therefore he
concluded a Paper he signed on his Pacification with them in these words: And
as we have just reason to believe that to our peaceable and well-affected
Subjects this will be satisfactory; so we take God and the World to witness
that whatever Calamities shall ensue by our necessitated suppressing of the
Insolences of such as shall continue in their disobedient Courses, is not
occasioned by us, but by their own procurement. And in a Letter to one of his
Commissioners, there he writes: But if the madness of our Subjects be such,
that they will not rest satisfied with what we have given you power to
condescend to; which notwithstanding all their Insolences we still allow you
to make good to them; We take God to witness that what misery soever fall to
that Country hereafter, it is no fault of ours but their own procurement. And
in another Letter at that same time: We take God to witness we have permitted
them to do many things for establishing of Peace contrary to our own judgment.
How far he complied with their most unreasonable desires to the very great
diminutions of his Royal Authority is well enough known.

When he saw them inclined to engage in the Civil War in this Kingdom, he left
no mean unessayed to satisfy even all their jealousies and fears; and
therefore in a Paper under his own Pen he writes these words: We do conjure all
our good Subjects of that our Native Kingdom, by the long happy and
uninterrupted Government of us and our Royal Progenitors over them, by the
memory of these many large and public Blessings they enjoyed under our dear
Father, by these ample favors and benefits they have received from us, not to
suffer themselves to be misled and corrupted in their affections and duty to us
by the cunning malice and industry of these Incendiaries.

And when he heard these dismal news of that most barbarous Rebellion in
Ireland, with what zeal he set about the sending relief to them may appear from
the following words of one of his Letters to one in his Native Kingdom after he
had lamented the miseries and afflictions, to which his good Subjects in
Ireland were reduced through the inhumane and unheard of cruelties of the
Rebels there; and had regrated the delays of sending supplies to them through
the distractions of England; he adds: So that if some extraordinary course be
not taken for their present supply, it is not like their miseries will end
sooner their days. Therefore he required them to haste the sending over their
Forces, assuring them, That if the Parliament of England did not punctually pay
them, he would engage his own Revenue, rather than delay so good and so
necessary a work; and that he would issue out such Warrants under the Great
Seal of England, and grant all their other desires which in reason could be
demanded for the advancement of it. And after that, seeing that work went on
slowly, he was resolved to have gone in person to have carried it on more
vigorously, and to have hazarded himself that he might preserve his People. But
finding that Resolution gave great Jealousies to those who censured him
whatever he did, he gave it over.

How careful he was to prevent a Rupture in this Nation, not only his great
Concessions prove, but his constant offers of Treaty, even when things went
prosperously with him, do demonstrate, therefore reflecting on this in a Paper
(under his own Pen) he writes; We denied not any thing, but what by the known
Law was unquestionably our own, we earnestly desired and pressed a Treaty, that
so we might but know at what price we might prevent the miseries and
desolations that was threatened; but this was absolutely and scornfully refused
and rejected. And in a Message, which though it was never sent, yet remains
under his hand, he writes these words: And now he conjures his two Houses of
Parliament as they are Englishmen, Christians, and lovers of Peace, by the duty
they owe their King, and by the bowels of Compassion they have toward their
fellow subjects, that they will accept of these offers, whereby the joyful news
of Peace may be again restored to this languishing Kingdom.

And thus far the Parallel of Saul and our Martyred King has held good, but
now they must depart from one another; and it shall appear how our late
Sovereign was on many accounts hugely preferable to the King lamented in my
Text; yet I shall name one particular in which Saul had the better of him.

Saul had by his rash Oath endangered Ionathan's life, which he seemed resolved
to execute, but the earnest intercessions of his People prevailed on him to
change these his severe and cruel resolutions. But alas! our Martyr having
firmly resolved to save a person he judged innocent, and clear of the Treason
charged on him, did to comply with the most pressing desires of his People,
consent to the putting him to death: We have seen his fault and the specious
colors that led him to it, next let me lay before you his Repentance,
expressed by himself in a Letter, Anno 1642. One thing more, which but for the
Messenger were too much to trust to Paper, the failing to one friend has
indeed gone very near me; wherefore I am resolved that no consideration
whatsoever shall ever make me do the like upon this ground. I am certain that
God has either so totally forgiven me, that he will still bless this good
cause in my hands, or that all my punishment shall be in this world, which
without performing what I have resolved I cannot flatter my self will end here.
And he ends that Letter thus: Beside generosity, to which I pretend a little,
my Conscience will make me stick to my friends. How deep his sense of that sin,
how great his apprehensions of the Judgments of God, and how true his notion of
Repentance was, cannot but easily appear upon the first hearing these words.

But for this one advantage, the King in my Text had of the King of the Day, we
shall find many great and noble Characters in which he excelled him.

And first, Saul pretended some zeal for God, he built an Altar for him; he
honored Samuel his Prophet, he went and destroyed the Amalekites; but when it
might serve his turn he did not stick to disobey God, he saved Agag, and much
of the spoil of the Amalekites, pretending it was preserved for offering
Sacrifices. He had not patience to stay for Samuel, but did sacrilegiously
offer the Sacrifice himself. But our Martyr did not only express great regard
to God in his Prosperity by many high marks of his zeal and constant attendance
on the Worship of God; his great esteem of all worthy and deserving Churchmen,
and his Royal bounty to the advancing all pious and religious purposes: But by
his constant and firm adhering to those Rights of the Church, and to all he
judged himself bound in Conscience to maintain; therefore it was that he did
choose to bear the greatest dangers rather than sin against his Conscience.
When the violence of his Native Subjects against the Order of Bishops had
brought things to that pass that it could not be maintained without much blood
and confusion, he judged that God loved mercy better than sacrifice, did give
way to their fury; but with that tender care that became a man of so severe and
exact a Conscience; and this shall appear by some evidences I go to mention.
Having signed a Paper of Concessions, wherein he had used the word, it pleased
him, reflecting on the importance of that, he wrote the following words in a
Letter to him that had the managing of that business: I must desire you to
alter one word, that I should not be thought to desire the abolishing of that
in Scotland, which I approve and maintain in England. Now the word content
expresses enough my consent to have them surcease for the present. But the
word, pleased, methinks imports as much as if I desired them to take them away,
or at least that I were well pleased they should do so: But I leave it to your
ordering, so that you make it be clearly understood that though I permit, yet I
would be better pleased they let them alone. And in the Instructions he gave
his Commissioner for consenting to the abolition of the Order of Bishops, he
wrote thus: Carry the Disputes so, that the conclusion seem not to be made in
prejudice of Episcopacy as unlawful, but only in satisfaction to the People,
and for settling the present disorders, and such other reasons of State. And he
likewise ordered him to take care, that Episcopacy should not be abjured as a
point of Popery, contrary to Gods Law, or the Protestant Religion. And at the
same time in a Letter to the Primate of that Church he wrote thus: We do assure
you that it shall be still one of our chiefest studies, how to rectify and
establish the Government of that Church aright. And he adds a little after, You
may rest secure, that though perhaps we give way for the present to that which
will be prejudicial, both to the Church and our own Government, yet we will not
leave thinking in time how to remedy both.

After God in his wise and holy, though to us unaccountable Counsels, suffered
the Rebellious Arms of his Enemies so far to prevail, that nothing did promise
any hopes of his being re-established on his Throne, but the consenting to all
the demands of these in whose hands he had cast himself, then did the strict
care he had to keep a good Conscience appear, by his hazarding all things
rather than endanger his inward quiet; and therefore he told them: That when he
was satisfied in his Conscience with the lawfulness of what they desired, then,
but not till then, could he grant their demands; and was willing to enter in
conference with any they would appoint about these two Points, the one being
the Divine Appointment of Bishops, and the other his being obliged to defend
them by his Oath of Coronation. And the account of one of his Discourses I have
seen, is thus: That he would run the hazard of all his Crowns below, rather
than endanger that above; and that though the quiet of his Kingdoms, and the
settlement of his Throne were very valuable, yet the peace of his Conscience
must be preferred by him to all things. And in a Discourse he had, which he
wrote with his own Pen, he used these words: Not to stay you too long upon so
unpleasing a subject; I assure you that nothing but the preservation of that
which is dearer to me than my life, could have hindered me from giving you full
satisfaction; for upon my word all the dangers and inconveniences which you
have laid before me do not so much trouble me, as that I cannot give full
satisfaction to the desires of my native Country; especially being so earnestly
pressed upon me: And yet here again I must tell you (for in this case
repetitions are not impertinent) that I do not give you a denial; nay, I
protest against it, and remember it is your King that desires to be heard. And
in another Paper he sent to those that governed then in his Native Kingdom, he
writes these words: If it be so clear, as you believe, that Episcopacy is
unlawful, I doubt not but God shall so enlighten mine eyes, that I shall soon
perceive it; and then I promise you to concur with you fully in matters of
Religion; and therefore he subjoyns, He hopes they would not press him to do
that which was yet against his Conscience, until he might do it without
sinning. And he concluded that Paper with a Postscript to the Ministers: That
he hoped they, as Ministers of Gods Word, would not press upon him untimeously
the matter of Church Government, until ( he adds) I may have leisure to be so
persuaded, that I may comply with what they desire without breach of
Conscience; which I am confident they, as Churchmen cannot press me to do. And
in these conscientious Resolutions he was so firm, that in a private Letter he
writes thus: For Gods sake do not so much as expect, much less linger after any
other or further matter from me; for upon the faith of a Christian you shall
have no more than what is now laid before you. And in another Letter: As for
your Covenant, when, and not before, that I shall be satisfied in my Conscience
that I may allow it, I will. He going on grounds so strict and well-pleasing to
God, it was no wonder he maintained that serenity of mind, that when he got
Letters that told him how he was to be used, being engaged at Chess, he
continued to play after he had read his Letters, without show of any commotion
or disturbance, which I have seen under the hand of an eyewitness. And in the
Month of March before his Martyrdom, when he was almost out of all hopes; yet
he would not depart from these Christian Resolutions, which I find thus
expressed by his own Pen: For any enlargement concerning Church Affairs I
desire you not to expect it from me, for such expectations have been a great
cause of this my present condition, which I assure you I am still resolved
rather to suffer than to wrong my Conscience or Honor, which I must do if I
enlarge my self any thing in these points. These are some of the true
Characters of a Defender of the Faith; of one that did approve himself to be
under God and Christ, the Supreme over the Church, and of one that was indeed
fitted to bear all things, rather than sin against God or his Conscience.

2. Another Character of Saul is his cruelty, which was so enraged that he
spared neither Son-in-law nor Son, but threw his darts at them to have killed
them, and his cruelty against David was also joined with perfidy and breach of
trust; for after he had given him the most sacred assurances, he still
continued to pursue him, and caused to be murdered fourscore and five Priests
for the pretended fault of one which he believed upon the delation of an
Edomite. This was a fact both so cruel and so impious, that he could find none
to execute it, but that uncircumcised Alien, and all this was the effect of
that evil Spirit was let loose upon him, when by his sins he had driven away
the good Spirit of God. But our Royal Martyr did daily show more and more
Evidences of a truly Divine and Christian Spirit: What full Indemnity and
Oblivion did he offer his Enemies! even though they would not allow any
Indemnity to his Friends. And how much he was against all cruel or severe
practices may appear from these Evidences; one is under his own hand, in these
words: The present distractions about Religion are so great, and of that
nature, that persuasion as well as power must be used to restore that happy
tranquillity which the Church of England has lately and miserably lost; for
certainly violence and persecution never was nor will be found a right way to
settle peoples Consciences. And this went so far with him, as to give him a
strong aversion to the excuting sanguinary Laws against even the Emissaries of
Rome, which I find he thus expresses in a Paper written with his own Pen:
Concerning Goodman the Priest, the reason why I reprieved him is, that, as I am
informed, neither Queen Elizabeth, nor my Father, did ever allow that any
Priest in their times was executed merely for Religion; which to me seems to be
this particular case; yet seeing I am pressed by both Houses to give way to his
Execution, because I will avoid the inconvenience of giving so great a
coffeehouse to my People, as I perceive this mercy may produce, I remit this
particular case to both Houses; but I desire you to take unto your serious
consideration the inconveniences which, as I conceive, may upon this occasion
fall upon my Subjects and other Protestants abroad; especially since it may
seem to other States to be a severity with surprise; which I, having thus
represented, do think my self discharged from all ill consequences, that may
ensue upon the execution of this person. For his fidelity in observing his
Treaties, I have already in another branch of this Discourse mentioned some
passages that show how religiously he resolved to observe them; and his
refusing to serve his Interests by Promises, which how useful soever they might
have been to him, yet since he could not with a good Conscience observe them,
he would not make them, shows how sacred he accounted all his Promises; and his
offering to quit the command of the Militia, either for a determinate number of
years, or for his whole life, shows how carefully he intended to observe all he
promised; since he was willing to give such a security, which as it was strong,
so it diminished his Authority in the most tender and most sacred part of it.

I shall to these add only one instance. When he saw those of his Native
Kingdom engaging in the War against him, in this Kingdom, it is obvious enough
how much the securing Berwick might have advanced his service, and his Armies
in the North could easily have done it; yet since by the Treaty with that
Kingdom it was not to be garrisoned; so religiously did he observe the Treaty,
that he would not put a Garrison in it: But that fidelity was not minded by
those who conspired against him, who did, notwithstanding the Treaty, Garrison
the place; upon which occasion he wrote what follows: No industry hitherto
could have so far prevailed with us as to have gained any belief that our
Scotch-Subjects would countenance, much less assist this bloody Rebellion in
England; yet we know not how to understand the levying Forces both Foot and
Horse within our Native Kingdom, and their entering the Town of Berwick in a
hostile manner. Our most malicious Enemies must bear us witness, how
religiously we have observed these Articles on our part; whereas if we had not
been more tender, than the advisers of this breach have been, of the Public
Faith, it is obvious to any how easily we could have secured that Town from all
Rebels. And after he had refuted the Pretense they made use of, he adds: Such
then as shelter themselves under that pretext, will find from thence but a
slender warrant before God, who knows the integrity of our heart, and how
inviolably we intend to preserve all that we have granted that Kingdom, so long
as they suffer themselves to be capable of our Protection, and those favors.
He likewise wrote in another Letter at that same time these words: Such high
indignities to us, and to our Authority make us believe they have forgot they
have a King, and their Oaths in preserving us in our just power, as their King.
But God will discover and punish such undutiful thoughts, how closely soever
they be clouded with pretenses of safety to Religion and Liberty, which they
know will be ever dearer to us than our own preservation.

3. And to close up this Parallel, Saul when in danger, betook himself to the
basest Arts, and went to the Witch at Endor, to ask Responses about the event
of that Battle he was to give the Philistines, not considering how he had
provoked God to withdraw his protection from him, and that all the powers of
Hell, and evil Spirits were no longer able to preserve him; and having got a
sad answer to his overcurious Question, (the common fate of all who will by
these forbidden Arts thrust into the secrets of the Divine Councels), we find
him woefully faint-hearted, sore afraid, fall flat on the ground and refuse to
eat. And after that fatal Battle he had neither the courage to outlive it, nor
the strength to finish his desperate design upon himself; but after he had
fallen on his own Sword, he called an Amalekite to complete that Self-murder,
which he begun by his falling on his Sword, and finished by these cruel Orders
he gave. But nothing of all this belongs to our Royal Martyr, who depended on
God, and submitted to his will in the course of all his Councels, both of Peace
and War; And when it pleased God for the punishment of his People, to expose
him to the malice and cruelty of his Enemies, even then he proved more than
Conqueror; and according to the prospect he had of it long before, he was a
Patient Martyr: Nor did he express the least meanness of spirit when brought
lowest, he would neither give up the Rights of the Church nor the Crown, of
People nor Parliaments, to their insulting pride, who trampling on all Laws
Sacred and Humane, had made themselves the sacrilegious Masters of his Person
and Power. And as he was not cowardly or languid under all his misfortunes, so
he maintained his Authority as long as he was able, and did not faintly
despond, nor abandon his own Rights, or the Protection of his People. But this
leads me to the sad part of my Discourse, wherein I am to compare the Reasons
we have for mourning, with these David and the People of Israel had on this
Occasion, and it will be easily allowed, ours must be by so much the greater,
by how much our Royal Martyr did exceed their King, which has been
demonstrated in the Parallel I have given.

First, This Kings Death was his own Deed; and though the Victory his Enemies
got, drove him to that despair, yet none of the People were of accession to it:
and for the Amalekite (if his relation was true) as it was an Alien from their
Commonwealth that did it; so Saul was well served for not destroying the
Amalekites, as Samuel had commanded him; therefore they had no particular
reason to be sorry, but only because they had lost a King, who as he was none
of the worst, so he was far from being one of the best Princes. Perhaps David
had some more reason to fast and mourn, and as his Conscience did before accuse
him for cutting off the Hem of his Garment; so now the Arms he bare against him
did trouble his Conscience. For though much may be said for David in that case,
he was the designed heir of the Crown by Gods appointment; he was very unjustly
and perfidiously used by Saul; he had kept himself on a pure defensive, and
Readiness being frenetick and possessed with an evil spirit, are great
justifications of David's little Army, or rather Guard; and his being a Man
according to Gods heart, ought to possess all with that esteem for him, as not
easily to find fault with him, or with any of his actions; yet his Army being
made up of men distressed, in debt, and discontented, is a shrewd Indication,
that the Cause was not over-good when he had such a following. Besides, his
going to live at Gath with the Uncircumcised, his cutting off the Amalekites,
and pretending to Achish that he had destroyed his own People by an
unjustifiable deceit; and finally his going out with the Armies of the
Philistines, and professing a great desire to fight against the Enemies of
Achish, who were no other but Saul, his natural liege-Lord, and the Armies of
Israel (wherein he either acted a very unsincere part, or did really resolve to
have engaged against them) are things so manifestly contrary to the Laws of
God, that they give a strong presumption, that the whole business of his taking
Arms was contrary to Law and Religion. But I shall not enter further into the
Dispute, and so leave it; inclining rather to believe, that David's Conscience
did accuse him, of having failed in his Duty to Saul.

But after all this our Case is much more justly deplorable, who did not lose
our King by the prevailing power of a hostile Invasion, but by the unnatural
hands of his own Subjects, who were (both by the tie of Subjection, by their
Oaths of Allegiance, which many of them had sworn, and by their constant
professions of fighting for the King, and in defense of his Authority, as they
gave it out, for training in the multitude by so deceitful a bait), tied to the
preservation of his person, and yet did wash their hands in his blood; and by
their pretending Religion and Justice, in a Fact so contrary to both, did (as
much as in them lay) bring the foulest imputations on both that could be. How
did this open the mouths of the Adversaries of our Religion, (whom we had
justly charged for their seditious and treasonable Doctrines) to insult over
us; but without all cause: for as all the Reasons pretended, were but upon the
matter the same with those their Doctors have published, allowing but a small
change; so those of our true and soundly reformed Church did abominate so foul
a Crime, with all possible horror; and, as was most just, did both in public
and private declare against it; and with a generous and truly Christian
constancy, endured Sequestrations, Imprisonments, and every thing which that
insulting Power put them to, rather than comply with so vile an Action and its
vile Actors.

But to all this it may be said, Let these mourn who were of accession to it,
that concerns not us. To which I must answer, That such public Crimes leave a
guilt upon the whole Nation, which therefore must be expiated with a public
universal Repentance. And if in the Law of Moses God declared, that Blood was a
crying sin which called to Heaven for vengeance, and therefore when a Murder
was discovered, and the Murderer was not known, there was to be a Sacrifice for
the whole People to expiate the guilt; how much more in a Crime, attended with
so many foul and black Circumstances, ought we by earnest Prayers to study to
avert these Judgments, which we may but too justly apprehend!

And to this let me add, that there are not so many innocent as those perhaps
imagine; for as David here did (it is probable) charge himself for arming
against the Lords Anointed; so what reason have these who engaged in
Opposition, and Arms to our Royal Martyr, to charge and judge themselves, that
they be not judged of the Lord; who not being satisfied with those great and
large Concessions, he freely and willingly offered, did pursue his Person and
Life in the Field; after which it was no wonder others learned to pursue him to
the Scaffold. May not the one be said to have killed the King that robbed him
of his Revenue, Power and Authority, and every thing was necessary for the
maintenance of the Royal Dignity; whereas the other did but murder Charles,
after he was spoiled of his Royal Power, and the Government taken out of his
hands: Though in a formal Pageantry Writs were issued in his Name. And thus we
find the grounds of our mourning grow larger, and take, or rather call in, more
mourners.

But in fine, by another advance, a great many more will be comprised within
this Duty, even all those who did not with the most vigorous opposition was
possible prevent this barbarous Regicide; which made a foreign Historian,
giving account of it, say, it was a wonder how Englishmen could look on and
behold so barbarous and unexampled a Crime: Where were the hearts and hands of
the brave English, whose loyal and noble valor appearing on this occasion, had
been a Subject to be celebrated by all the highest and most grateful
Remembrances Posterity could dedicate to so glorious an action? Did a
pusillanimous fear freez their courage, when their Head was thus struck at? Did
the care of their Fortunes prevail, when they could expect no longer to live
secure in the Possession of any of their Rights, when all was in this one Act
unhinged? Did the atrocity of the Fact astonish them so, that they were not
recovered out of this amazing surprise till it was too late? Or did the
suddenness of the Crime prevent their diligence? Or were they so charitable to
their Countrymen as not to think any could be capable of committing this Crime,
till they were convinced of it by an unanswerable Argument? yet all these
palliations or excuses will not serve turn, they should have put all to hazard
when they saw the Case so desperate, and all like to be lost. And thus it
appears many are concerned to mourn on this Occasion, who perhaps think
themselves far from any guilt.

Finally, there be yet others concerned, who (may be) do not so much as imagine
how it may come to their door, and these be the present Generation, who either
were not born then, or at least of that age that nothing could be expected from
them; but even they must consider that God visits the sins of the Fathers upon
the Children; and though no Child is guilty of his Fathers fact, unless he
concurred in it, or did afterward approve it, yet many times the Judgments of
God in Temporal things do overtake them for their Fathers faults; which is no
more unjust than for the Law to deny the Child any of the Privileges of
Subjects for the Fathers faults. From all this then it will appear how much
more reason we have to mourn, than the People of Israel had on this occasion,
who have (to the scorn and insultings of our Enemies) been one way or other so
generally guilty in the Death of so religious and pious a Prince.

2. But the People of Israel had this great allay to their grief that they had
a Prince designed by God for the Succession, who had given such approved
Evidences of his great Piety, Wisdom, Valor and Conduct, that their Government
was presently to take a settlement; though it is true Abner set up Ishbosheth,
Readiness Son, who was followed by all Israel, only Judah, David's own Tribe,
adhered to him: But this was after two years War decided, and all Israel
received David for their King; and still the Government was steady and even,
and therefore they had not that reason to afflict them which we had on the
occasion we now remember.

It is true the right of Succession was clear and undisputed, but those who
killed the Father continued their Crimes by pursuing the Son, and not only
driving him from his Rights, but when one of the Tribes of our Israel, even
that which justly glories in a nearer Interest in our Sovereigns Person, had
adhered to him, and crowned him, though with very unjustifiable reserves, then
did that party, bathed in the Fathers Blood, thirst likewise for the Son's, and
carried the War into that Kingdom; and when the Righteous Heir of our Murdered
Martyr came into this, then again did carnal wisdom, and the care of men's Lives
and Estates prevail over those strong ties of Loyalty and Subjection; God
having reserved the establishing him on his Fathers Throne to his own immediate
Arm; wherein there should be a clear declaration of his wise and wonderful
Providence, in turning about the hearts of the Nation to him; so that to
Posterity it will be a Problem, which of the two is the more astonishing,
either the Rebellion against the Father, or the recalling the Son, and that
some of the very same persons should have been instrumental in both, by the
latter action expressing their true and sincere Repentance for the former.

But alas! the Interval was long; it was not only a two-years War, like that
betwixt Readiness Son and David, but a ten-years Thraldom; wherein those that had
complained of some small encroachments on Liberty before, did totally overturn
all the Freedoms both of Parliament and People; but to color this a little,
gave a large and unrestrained Liberty in matters of Religion, by which all
sense of Order and Regular Government being quite cast off, many by the custom
of an unbounded Lawlesness, became habitually Sons of Belial; and as Heifers
unaccustomed to the yoke, cannot again be brought under these necessary
Restraints and Regularities of Religion and Law. Nay, which is worse, though
but the effect of the former, many youthful and extravagant spirits being once
delivered from all obligation to any piece of Religious Worship, come by
degrees to lose all sense of it; and seeing those irregular and ungoverned
Practices of many pretenders to Religion, who were visibly advancing their own
Designs under the colors of Piety, they came to imagine Religion was only a
pretense by which ambitious men carried on their own Ends; and the many
Subdivisions and different Parties they observed about matters of Religion,
made them also judge there could be no certainty where there was so much debate
and dispute. And to all this may be added, that by Oaths and counter-Oaths,
which they often took, (having passed from the Oath of Allegiance to the
Covenant, and from that to the Engagement) their Consciences became seared, and
past feeling; or, being much wounded by such swearing, to avoid the smart of
that, they took themselves to these cursed arts of getting quiet in their
impious Practices, by throwing off all sense of God and Religion, and setting
up professedly for Atheism; which is so natural a result of what has been said,
that I think it cannot be doubted to have sprung from it. And hitherto I
suppose it is unquestionably clear, that we have much more reason to lament the
matter now before us, than those had who are in my Text.

3. And now I advance to the third and last Part of my Discourse, to consider
what this mourning was, and what ours ought to be; they upon so sad news and so
great a loss, were both very tenderly affected for the Death of a King that had
so many good Qualities, that he being dead they had reason to forget his bad
ones; the loss also of so noble a Prince as Jonathan, (who may justly pass for
one of the bravest Hero's, and the most generous Friends that ever was) could
not but be very sad, especially to David, whose Friendship with Jonathan was
beyond what is either in History or Romance: and as hitherto all the generous
parts of the Friendship were on Ionathans side, though we find David's returns
were as tender, and rather more; for at their parting when their mutual
Friendship set them both a-crying, it is said, David exceeded. But now when
David was to have made returns suitable to what he had received from Jonathan,
he is snatched away by the Sword of the Philistines, they had also many brave
Countrymen that were killed: To this was to be added the sad condition the
House of Israel was in by so great a defeat; all which concurring, could not
but make a deep impression on the hearts of David, and the People with him,
which did set them to their Tears and Prayers, both for their own sins, and
perhaps they reckoned their arming against Saul one, and with these they also
mourned for the sins of Israel, praying God to avert his Judgments, to prevent
the mischief might follow, and to recover his People from the ignominy of so
bad a loss, and in the end to settle David so on the Throne of Saul, that their
might be under his Reign, Justice and Truth, Plenty and Peace, both at home and
abroad. This is a clear fair account of the work of those with David in my Text.

And after this the Application will be easy; from which I shall not digress
by proving the lawfulness and fitness of Anniversaries, that being so well done
by others, but refer my Hearers to Zachary, by whom we find the People of God
fasted during the Seventy years of the Captivity, the fifth and 7th Month; he
also mentions their Fasts of the 4th and 10 Month; though it is plain there are
no such Fasts commanded in the Old Testament; and yet the Prophet is so far
from blaming these stated returns that he only blames their being formal and
regardless of God in them, and gives them directions how they should have
ordered them. But leaving this unreasonable Objection, which is made by none
but those who have the chief reason to mourn and fast on this Occasion; I go
next to propose what the Nature and Ends of our Mourning and Fasting should be,
which I shall lay open briefly in two Points.

1. The one is to mourn before God for the guilt of this atrocious Sin, that if
any of us have been (as was before laid open) involved in the guilt, we may
wash off the stain of this Sin, which is of so deep a dye, and if we our selves
be on all accounts clear of it, at least we are to pray for Pardon to those who
were guilty, that God may open their eyes, so as to confess and mourn for their
sins; and in this we follow the example of our Royal Martyr, who looking to
Jesus the Author and Finisher of his Salvation, who endured the Cross,
despising the shame, and prayed for his Enemies, did with Patience run the Race
set before him, and humbly imitate his King and Savior in pardoning and
praying for his Enemies. We are also on our own accounts to pray God to deliver
the whole Land from this guilt, lest when God shall come and make inquisition
for this Innocent Blood, we be involved in the common Judgments, which cannot
fall on the Land so, but all concerned in it must bear their share. But we must
not only mourn for this particular Crime, though it be so foul as to need the
expiation of many Tears and Prayers, but we must go higher, and look to the
first beginnings of the late Troubles; and see what provoked God then to plague
us so sadly, and whether we have not re-acted these very Abominations which
then stirred up Gods wrath against us. I need not enter into a particular
enumeration of our sins before the year 40, and compare them with these that
now abound; the comparison would be as invidious as it is obvious. Let every
one then call himself to an account, how guilty he is of undervaluing Gods
mercies, and the great deliverance he gave to his Anointed, and by that to his
whole People; how he abuses our Peace and Plenty into Licentiousness,
profanity, and brutal ungoverned and avowed impiety; and how he abuses the
protection and security Law gives to Insolence, Faction and Boldness; how he
despises the Gospel, affronts Religion, and the Worship of God, either by an
impious contempt of it, a factious separating from it, or a bare formal coming
to it, without any serious or devout consideration of that Majesty he scorns,
by a pretended drawing near him with his lips, when in his heart he is far from
him. These and a great deal more of that nature (with which our Consciences
will certainly charge us, if we return our thoughts, and call our selves to a
severe account for what is past) ought to be now mourned for; otherwise the
formal observing these Annual Returns does but add to our other sins, and
enhance our guilt, when we mock God by a pretended Mourning and Fasting.

2. And the only evidence of the Sincerity of our Mourning is, our departing
from these sinful courses which may provoke Gods wrath, and from all seditious
Inclinations which may be fuel for new or worse calamities; for we may with
good reason apprehend, if the late Wars and other Plagues have not taught us to
repent of our sins, and amend our ways, that according to the gradation we find
always used in Scriptures, when Judgments are denounced, the next shall be much
sadder than any we have seen or heard of. But God is merciful and gracious,
slow to anger and ready to forgive, if we turn to him with all our hearts; let
us therefore from the deep sense of our sins, and the just apprehensions of the
deserved Judgment, turn unfeignedly to God, who has both by the gentler
methods of Love, and the severer executions of Judgments been calling on us to
Repentance; let us throw off our impious and debauching Practices, by which we
make war against Heaven, daring God by unparalled wickedness, and defying him
by our unheard of stoutness against him: But do we think to prevail against
God, are we stronger than he? Can we resist his Thunders or his Plagues, Fire
and Famine? And though we were strong enough to resist the impressions and
injuries of all our Neighbors, yet how easily can God plague us with a
Division of Hearts, and such disjointed Affections, that as a body paralytick
we fall to ruin and misery with our own weight, and without any enemy.

And for the avoiding this, next to the appeasing the Divine displeasure, let
us express our horror of this Fact by a constant, humble and dutiful Obedience
and Loyalty to his Majesty who new Reigns, and study to abstain from (not only
all these disloyal and unchristian courses, which ended so tragically, but even
from) the first beginnings of these Disorders, which as sparks of fire blown on
by some seditious Incendiaries, did set us all in a flame; and a serious Review
of the late Times, will demonstrate, that the wicked Designs of those Enemies
to Monarchy could never have become so strong, if they had not wrought on the
more innocent, the inconsiderate zeal of some (who afterward proved both good
Subjects and faithful Patriots), who complaining overseverely of some Errors of
Government, did (though as afterward it appeared contrary to their Designs)
give both strength and credit to a Faction which did soon scornfully disdain
them, whom at first they owned to be their leaders. So dangerous it is to
nourish Factions, which will quickly pass all Bounds. This, I hope, will teach
all in the time to come, how carefully and religiously they ought to guard
against the cherishing of Discontents, or the possessing the Subjects with
Jealousies and Fears, and a contempt of their Governors, or their Government;
and as no man can guard against any sin, without he consider well all these
subtle temptations that lead him to it, and all the smaller and less discerned,
or observed beginnings of it; so if we truly mourn and fast for the Sin
committed this day, we must consider and watch against all these lesser and
more unheeded Motions, Jealousies, Fears, undutiful Discourses and Censures,
which do insensibly make way and prepare men to all manner of Sedition and
Disloyalty, at least, so weakens their dutiful respect to Governors, that
faint Services are to be expected from so cold affections.

But I hope past experience will teach us more wisdom, and that this Nation
which with so Religious a zeal designs to expiate what is past, will with the
same care study the preventing every thing may lead to the re-acting these sad
Calamities, of which we have still among us many doleful Remembrances, besides
this day of Mourning and Fasting. In which God of his infinite mercy grant we
may so repent, that he may deliver us from Blood-guiltiness, and from all other
Judgments our sins have most justly deserved. To this God be Glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
SUBJECTION FOR Conscience Sake ASSERTED: IN A SERMON Preached at
COVENT-GARDEN-Church, December the Sixth, 1674.

By Gilbert Burnet.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to his most Sacred Majesty, at the
Angel in Amen-Corner, 1675.

Subjection for Conscience Sake Asserted: IN A SERMON Preached at
COVENT-GARDEN-Church the Sixth of December, 1674.
ROMANS 13. 5. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but for
Consciencesake.
IT is the great and just Glory of our most holy Faith, that it is no less the
Interest than the Duty of all men to embrace it, and live according to its
Precepts: For if we examine either the Complex of the whole Christian Religion
in gross, or the several parcels of it, and the Duties it enjoins; we must
confess all the Laws of Solon and Lycurgus, of Greece and Rome come infinitely
short of the excellent provisions it gives for the Peace of Mankind, and the
Order of Societies: So that it plainly appears, the Author of it was a Lover of
Men. What Rule of Justice can match that of doing to others what we would have
others do to us, Matthew. 7. 12.
which is so home, so easily remembered, and readily applied, that no wonder the
very Heathens admired it? But, not content with the strictest rigors of
Justice, our Savior has also obliged us to the supererogatings (if I may so
speak) of Charity, and has commanded us to love one another as Brethren; nor
must our brotherly Love be confined within the narrow bounds of a Party, but
extend it self to all Men whom it takes within its Verge, forgiving Injuries
and loving Enemies. And for the security of Order and Government, what means
are like those our Religion offers? This is even confessed by its declared
Enemies, who charge it as the contrivance of designing men for securing their
Power and Authority; and indeed all the Arts of Statesmen, the Cunnings of
Policy, the Closeness of Councils, the Exactness of Intelligence, the strength
of Armies or Navies, the strictness of Guards, regular Fortifications, great
Treasures and vast Magazines, are but Ineffectual Means, compared to this which
Religion offers for the security of a State, by setting up Conscience as a
Sentinel to watch in every man's Breast, that shall not let pass through it one
thought contrary to the Peace of the Society. Wise Statesmen hold it for a
Maxim, That the chief security of a Sovereign is in his being Master of the
Hearts and Affections of his Subjects, which will draw with them their Hands
and Purses as need shall require. But Mankind being so subject to a variety of
Passions, which by an unruly vicissitude possess the Minds, especially of the
giddy multitude, there can be no assurance in this, unless somewhat that is
more fixed and better grounded, tie subjects to the Duty they owe the Sovereign
Power. And therefore those who have attempted God and designed to discharge Men
of the sense of a Deity, or the apprehensions of another Life, are the greatest
Enemies to Authority: Their Blood and Extraction may perhaps entitle them to
Honor and a high Quality, but their Maxims destroy all Honor, and would
quickly bring on a levelling of all Qualities. He were, by the confession of
all, highly criminal, who would question the King's Title to the Crown, or
offer to void his Right; and yet this is the Crime of those Insulting Hectors:
For if there be no God, then that Sacred and Royal Reputation of Sovereign
Power, which Princes derive from him, who is the Original of it, by whom Kings
Reign, is out of doors: This levels the Prince with the Subject, and gives the
Usurper as good a Title as the lawful Sovereign can claim.

I shall not now engage in a long discourse of Policy, nor examine the Original
of Power, nor the Measures and Limits of it, nor the Nature and Extent of the
Subjection we owe Authority; much less run out in a long Digression of the
Obligation of Conscience: but shall limit my Discourse to one single point,
That Conscience is the great security of a State, the Spring of Obedience, and
the sure basis of Submission. And in opening up this I shall,

1. Show that Conscience does choke and stifle the occasions and causes of
Commotions in their first Conceptions.

2. That it drives the sense of Duty and the obligation to Obedience deeper on
our Minds than any other consideration whatsoever.

3. That it gives the strongest Arguments for convincing our Reason, and the
most engaging Motives for prevailing on our Affections, to pay the Duties of
Subjection to those God has set over us. And,

4. I shall encounter and put out of the way a formidable Objection, which may
offer it self in prejudice of what I am to deliver.

For the first, it is certain, that as the great Diseases of our Bodies are not
so much the Effects of outward Accidents as of bad Humors, to which a crisis
may be given by some foreign Impression, which may put them in a ferment, and
so endanger our Health: Thus the distempers of the Body Politic owe their
beginnings and growth to some ill Humors in it, and the real Causes of
Commotions are seldom the same with these that are pretended for training in
and engaging a Multitude; for, S. Jam. 4. 2.
from whence come wars and fightings among us, but from our lusts that war in
our members? I shall therefore consider some of those Lusts and distempered
Affections from which Commotions may arise, that I may show how Religion, and
it only, can secure Government from their bad Effects. Time will not allow me
to make good all I am to say from History; but those who know Mankind will
easily see the dependence of these Effects from the Causes I go to name, and
such as have read History will find the Confirmation of it so clear, that I may
well be excused the labor of adducing particular proofs in so plain a case.

1. But to stand no longer on Generals: One great occasion of Commotions is an
unbounded and aspiring Ambition which makes many swell big in their own
conceit, and they measuring themselves by what they appear in the glass of
their own enchanted Imagination, which both multiplies and magnifies all that
is eminent in them, expect that all the World should court them with the same
admiration which they pay themselves. Now it is a hard thing to satisfy the
pretensions of all these lofty Aspirers, nor can any State be able to gratify
them all; since nothing falls, to which many several Competitors do not put in
a claim: And though there be many Corrivals, only one carries the prize, the
rest being all big with a good opinion of themselves, and provoked at the
unjust preference, as they imagine it, do upon that think how to make
themselves considerable at their cost, who they judge consider them too little,
and set up for some pretense to draw a Party, and make a Faction. But those
mighty men in their own conceits are not at quiet when they have gained what
they did at first pretend to, as that which would terminate their ambition, but
make use of it as a step to mount them higher; and thus creep up through all
Degrees; and perhaps when they are as high as can consist with the character of
a Subject, The Case of the Duke of Guise in Henry the Thirds time,
do not rest there, but when they are become first Ministers, will next design
to justle their Master from his Throne. For Ambition is as the Grave
unsatisfied, but ever says, Give, give. This being so great an evil, let us see
what curb can be found for stopping its career. It will soon appear, that all
the Arts of Government cannot do it; Religion is that alone which teaches us to
discharge our selves of this Tympany, whose swellings are so incurable. S.
Matthew 11. 29.
Our Savior has commanded us to learn of him, who was lowly in heart; his
Apostles charge us, Phil. 2. 3.
That in lowliness of mind we esteem others better than our selves, 1 S. Pet.
5. 5.
That we humble our selves in the sight of God, and be clothed with humility as
with a garment. And indeed this blessed Doctrine does no sooner prevail on us,
but it changes that blind value and fondness we have for our selves, into a
profound unaffected Humility, that represents our Faults and Defects as clear
to us, as our former Vanity did our supposed Excellencies; and instead of vast
towerings, brings us under great Contrition, deep Selfdenial, and an humble
mistrust of our selves; and thus Conscience obliges us to be subject, by
setting out of the way this great provocation to disorder.

2. Another Cause to which not a few of the Distempers of Societies owe their
Rise and Growth, is the heat and fury of men's Passions, which being once
kindled by their pride, and blown on by many outward accidents, at length
become so fierce and violent, that no Banks can resist their torrent, but they
sweep all before them. Some are born under the disadvantage of ill Nature and a
Choleric Disposition; and if these meet any provocation (which must needs fall
out often; for as a tender Body does soon feel pain, so an ill disposed Mind is
quickly disquieted) their heated Spirits are all in a Fever, and they either
swell with Rage, fret with Envy, or boil with Revenge: And thus are their
thoughts set to work, how to drudge happily under the severe bondage of their
tyrannical Passions. One perhaps to be revenged on some triumphing Favorite,
whom he can overtake no easier way, will be ready to drive all to confusion, to
comply with his disquieting Malice: Another that is not so much in bondage
himself to those ill-natured Passions, yet being captivated with the Charms of
a fair, but imperious and spiteful Mistress, must give himself up as the
instrument of all her ill Nature, and, being distracted with the extravagant
Notions of Knight-errantry, thinks himself bravely gallant, when he has
sacrificed all things to her wicked Resentments. Private Animosities are known
to have had a larger share in public distempers, than any will willingly own;
and this must needs be so still, if there be no assured means for qualifying
the heat, and tempering the Passions of Men: For no Government can be so well
balanced, but that many will find themselves aggrieved by it, or by those who
manage it; and if upon these irritations we ask counsel at our blinded and
misled Passions, we may be well assured they will ever drive us into all the
excesses of Fury and Confusion. How excellent then must this Divine Discipline
be, which tames the wildness, and smooths the roughness of our unpolished
Natures, teaching us to put off wrath, anger, malice, blasphemy, Col. 3. 8.
and evil communication out of our mouths; and, instead of those, moulds us
into a Divine temper, like our meek Master, Col. 3 13.
obliging us to forbear one another, and forgive one another, as he has done
us: For that Divine Wisdom which he taught the World, is first pure, then
peaceable, S. Jam. 3. 17.
gentle and easy to be entreated. It no sooner gets into our breasts, but it
dulcifies our Choler, qualifies the bitterness of our Gall, and gives us the
possession of our Minds, out of which nothing can turn us; and transforms us
from that ravenous Temper into a Dove-like disposition, and, instead of these
boiling thoughts, which do ferment, gives the quiet serenities of a good
Conscience and fervent Charity; so that we are no more Sons of Thunder, but
Children of Love, and do no more bluster out in Passion, but from the Calm of a
cool Spirit do breathe out soft and gentle Affections: And if of a sudden a
storm arise within us, our Consciences will at once both arraign, condemn and
kill these Passions that raise it, and thus teaches us to be subject, by
destroying these passions that do both mar our own Quiet, and endanger the
Public Peace.

3. Another Occasion that has engaged many into seditious Courses, has been
the narrowness of their Fortunes; to which they, not understanding the
Philosophy of contracting their desires, which is the safer and easier course,
studied by all means whatsoever to enlarge them so as to satisfy the Vanities
and Prodigalities of an undiscreet Expense. As the turbulent Youth of Athens
advised his Uncle, finding him busied to prepare his accounts, rather to study
how to make none at all. Those people think they drive a sure Trade, for they
can lose little, and may gain much; therefore are ready to embark in the most
desperate Designs, hoping to fish some advantage from troubled waters. Their
Small Fortunes joined with their gaping desires, are ever setting a new edge on
their ulcerated Spirits, and none are so furious as these, who pinched with
want and cold, and armed by despair, must do or die: If the ordinary Course of
Law and Justice go on, they are undone; but the disordering these, does both
reprieve them from ruin, and feed them with some hopes. Now no treasure can
answer the demands of all ravenous devourers, who cannot dig, and are ashamed
to beg; nor can the greatest exactness of care reach every Individual of a
State; or oblige them to an expense proportioned to their Fortune, much less to
limit their desires to it; but still there be many Prodigals, who outrun
themselves, and those are often men of brisk Tempers and ungoverned Appetites:
In what disorder then must Government be, if this cannot be repressed? Perhaps
in an evener Tract of Peace and Plenty, when Order and Authority maintain their
Reputation, such dissolute wasters of their Fortunes cannot prove so
considerable, as to disturb the Peace of a Nation: But all States are subject
to Accidents that weaken them, and the Censures of an unruly multitude will
often blast the Reputation of the best Government. And at some such
disadvantage these untoward Malcontents may catch an opportunity of doing
much mischief; how great a happiness then is it to any Nation to embrace and
obey that Religion which teaches us, S Matthew. 5. 25, 34.
Not to take thought what we shall eat, drink, or put on, that disbands the
solicitudes about to morrow, and the anxious cares that oppress weaker minds;
our holy Faith teaching us, that we are pilgrims on Earth, as all our Fathers
were, calls up our thoughts above the depressions of sense, to seed our selves
with the assured hopes of approaching Glory and Happiness in another state,
which does so entirely swallow up the sense of any present Trouble, that it
leaves no other impression on us, but to make us long to be gone beyond these
shadows of Mortality and false appearances of Happiness, which do now impose on
our bewitched minds, and seduce us into a thousand Errors and Follies. And thus
again we see how Conscience stifles the very first motions of disorder, and
teaches us to be subject.

4. A fourth Occasion of disorder, is a busy meddling Temper, that cannot
contain its self within its own Limits and Sphere, but will engage in things
beyond its understanding, and above its reach: Some cannot stay at home and do
their own business, but must ramble abroad, and insinuate themselves on all
Affairs and Company, and are ever gaping for some change, hoping it may make
way for their appearing in another figure: These are ever sucking in ill
Reports, which they are sure to belch up again in all Companies, not without
additions. They delight to asperse Governors and Government, and either to
find or make faults in every thing that is done, and a volatile unfixedness of
disposition makes them weary of established Laws and Customs, and gape for
Changes through a fond affectation of Novelty. Now these Vermin creeping into
all Companies, must certainly weaken the Nerves and Sinews of Government: and
most attempts for repressing this humor make it boil with the greater
vehemence: But, as the Wiseman instructed us of old, To fear God, Prove. 24. 26.
and honor the King, and not to meddle with those that were given to change;
and not to say, Eccles. 7. 10.
Why were the former days better than these, for we do not enquire wisely
concerning that matter: 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
So the doctrine of the Gospel commands every man, To do his own business, to
stay at home, 1 S. Pet. 4. 15.
not to be a busie-body, nor meddle in other men's affairs, but to pay tribute
to whom tribute is due; fear, to whom fear; and honor, to whom honor is due.
These being the Rules of Religion, I may appeal all the World to show anything
can so settle Order and Authority, as this which guards against the first
appearances of Clouds and Storms.

But as Conscience does meet the earliest beginnings of disorders in their less
discernible and more plausible colors, so it ties a man to that severe conduct
of himself, that he cannot embark in Designs which must be managed with so much
fraud and dissimulation, as the contrivers of wicked courses must needs carry
along with them in all their practices: Pretending the highest respect, when
they mean worst, lying, and forswearing, and sometimes assassinating, as it may
serve their ends, and never meaning what they say, nor saying what they mean,
but shuffling and warping as Interest carries them. Nor can wicked Projects
appear at first barefaced, lest they should be entertained with horror by all
to whom they are proposed, but must go masked, till they be so strong, as to
dare to throw off the disguise: Nay, Religion will be perhaps called in to
serve a turn, and Scriptures wrested to a favorable construction; all this
base and foul dealing will so wound a tender and sincere Conscience, that it
will either contract a hardness and callus, and become proof against all these
awakenings; or pull a man out of these base Courses that must be carried on by
so bad Methods; for there is nothing so candid as Conscience, and therefore S.
Paul charge us not to lie one to another, Col. 3. 9.
since we have put off the old man with his deeds, and have put on the new man;
for he that does all things as in the sight of God, can do nothing that he
fears should be seen or known of men. And thus I have dispatched the First part
of my Design, that Conscience obliges us to Subjection, by resisting all the
first Motions that lead to Disorder or Confusion.

2. Nor does it only put out of the way those dangerous Stumbling Blocks, but
it drives the sense of Duty deep into our Minds. Law and Government can only
watch over the Actions and Words of Subjects, but can neither discover nor
overruled their Thoughts, which a cautious man wrapping up within himself can
reserve to a fit opportunity; but Conscience insinuates the Duty we owe the
Sovereign Power upon our secretest thoughts; Eccles. 11. 20.
and Religion obliges us not to curse the King in our thoughts; and has made
the Duty we pay Authority a part of its self, and of these returns of the holy
Fear and humble Obedience, we owe the great King of Kings. But this must not be
so far carried, as if those who are vested with the Sovereign Power, had
Authority to command us to embrace whatever Religion they enjoin, according to
the pestiferous spawn of that Infernal Leviathan, who by this Assertion does at
once destroy both Religion and Government. For that base Flatterer of Princes,
pretending to offer them more than was due to them, has struck at the Root of
their Authority, and at once robbed them of all their Rights: For we are either
bound to obey the Sovereign by some obligation the Law of God brings on us, or
not; If not, then all the Sacredness of Authority is gone, and the Prince has
nothing but Force to maintain his Right, and every Usurper that Masters him
shall have a better Right, by how much more Power he has to strengthen his
ambitious Pretensions. But if we be bound by the Laws of God to obey the
Supreme Power, then these Laws had a prior Title to our Obedience, and infer
the Duties of Subjects as a particular Effect of their Doctrine: Therefore
these Laws having the first Right to our Obedience must oblige us. Nor can we
be allowed to pick out that one, of obeying the Magistrate, and leave the rest
behind us; for all the Laws of God being enacted by the same Authority must
equally bind us; and as no deputed Magistrate can void the Laws of the Supreme
Power, so neither can Princes void the Laws of God without sopping the
Foundations of their own Authority. But none of these magnifyings of Magistracy
are necessary to make it great; it being by God himself exalted to so
culminating a height, and the rendering to God the things that are God's, does
not prejudice Caesar in the things that are Caesar's: But Religion ingages us
to so full an Obedience to the Laws, that our violating them, when they
contradict no Command of God's, makes us guilty in his sight; and though we
disguise what we do with so much cunning, that the Secular Power can fix no
Censure on us, yet our Consciences will accuse us before God for those secret
Transgressions which no humane Care can discover. There is a Tribunal set up by
God for the Magistrate in all our Breasts, which will pass Sentence severely,
and not be put off by the tricks of Law, the boldness of Denials, the cunning
of Excuses, or any other Arts that may impose upon, or abuse such Judges, who
must proceed upon clear evidence, and not on dubious conjectures: But when a
man is retired inward, and his Conscience takes him to task, then all these
visors are pulled off, and he must needs appear in the foul colors of guilt.
Another Method by which Conscience binds on us the sense of Duty and Subjection
to those set over us, is the Obligation to pray for them, according to that
great Rubric of Prayer S. Paul gives, 1. Tim. 2. 1, 2,
I exhort therefore that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions,
and giving of thanks be made for all men, for Kings and all that are in
authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty: which whosoever is a Christian must needs observe. This then must
every day awaken and keep alive the sense of Duty to those over us, so that if
we have been prevailed on to undutiful courses, when we retire to our
Devotions, this must certainly open our eyes to discern and repent of our
faults; for if we pray, and act contradictions, then we either mock God, by
praying for that we do not desire, and which we study to destroy; or we act
most impiously in opposition to that we judge our selves bound to pray for: And
every man, whose Conscience is not strangely asleep, will soon discover this
double dealing in himself, if he pray against what he acts, and be acting
against his Prayers. Thus it appears, that Conscience brings the sense of our
Duty to the Sovereign Power nearer us, and to closer conflicts with our daily
thoughts, and forces upon us a frequent review of them. Nor is this a blind
and brutish Subjection to which Conscience ties us, but it binds it on us with
the fullest evidence of Reason.

3. And this is the third Particular, to which my Design now leads me, wherein
I am to layout those Arguments that Conscience and the Doctrines of
Christianity offer for this Subjection we must pay the Magistrates. I shall not
meddle with those Reasons that may be drawn from the Rules of Humane Policy,
the Nature of Societies, the Origin and Ends of Magistracy, but shall confine
my Discourse to those which natural and revealed Religion do offer for obliging
us to Subjection to the higher Powers.

1. And first of all, we are taught that these Powers are of God, Ver. 1, 2, 3.
that they are the Ordinance of God, his Deputies, Ministers and Vicegerents,
That have the Sword of Justice put in their hands by him, for the punishment of
evil doers, and the encouragement of those that do well; and he himself has
said, They are Gods; Psalm. 82. 6.
a strain of speech, that, if Divine Authority did not warrant it, would pass
for impudent and blasphemous Flattery: Though then the Powers that are over us
be clothed with our Natures, and are subject to like Passions and Infirmities
with us, and live and die like men, yet for all that we must look on them as
Sacred and Divine by their Character. The severe Respect that Conscience
enjoins us to pay Authority appears in the Instance of David, who, though
pursued by Saul with all the violence and injustice of Oppression and Cruelty,
yet when he had him in his hands, and offered him the small affront of cutting
off the hem of his garment, 1 Samuel 24. 4, 5, 6.
his heart smote him for it: This was a Character of a man according to God's
heart, Deputed Powers are only accountable to those from whom they derive their
Authority; so the higher Powers, being deputed by God, must indeed render to
him a severe account of their administration, but not to others; we are
therefore to obey them for the Lords sake, 1. S. Pet 2. 13.
and to be, subject to them for Conscience Sake.

2. Another consideration that obliges to Subjection, which Religion offers,
is the steady and firm belief of the Government of the World, by that Unerring
Providence that wisely maintains that great Fabric and vast Frame of Beings,
which it self raised out of nothing. We are apt upon the first appearances of
things to judge rashly, even before we have seen all the sides and secrets of
humane Counsels, which would often alter our thoughts very much from our
over-forward Judgments: But the secrets of the Divine Counsels lie hid from all
the living, and yet the long experience which the Economy of the World offers
us, may justly convince us, that we are not to pass sentence hastily, and that
often those things which did look most cloudy, and threatened some dismal
Consequences, did by the secret Governings of that Supreme Mind, produce
Effects very different from those that not without great probabilities were
feared: This therefore must clear the Melancholy of our discouraged and
dejected minds, and dissipate those thick mists of fears and jealousies which
might otherwise damp and dishearten us. He that gave the Laws to Day and Night,
and can reverse these when he will; that taught the whole Frame of Nature those
Motions they observe, and yet can force the Sun both to stop and to give ground
when he will; and can make the Sea to rise up in hills, is able to extricate
the darkest and most involved Ravelings of Second Causes. We are therefore
secure, Romans 8. 28
knowing, That all things work together for good to them that love God,
believing that his Providence watches over his Church, and all that trust in
him, so that not a hair of their head falls to the ground without his care, and
that he has given his Angels charge to encamp about and Minister to the heirs
of Salvation; and this may well supersede our fears, and throw off the
anxieties of all perplexing thoughts, and compose our minds to an humble
Subjection to those God has brought us under. I know some may think I plead
here the stupidity of Fate, which must needs dishearten and slacken all good
Intentions and Designs; but we are to consider the Order God has fixed in the
Government of the World, and the particular station wherein he has placed and
posted us, out of which we are not to stir on the pretense of heroical
excitations; which, when examined, will be found the heats of a warm Fancy, or
the swellings of an elevated Mind that distrust the Providence of God, as if he
were not able to compass his designs, and therefore he must stretch out his
hands to help him, laboring under too great a load; which is indeed the
language of all those who pretending zeal for his Service, do step out of their
station, and meddle with matters that are too high for them. The fate of Uzzah
should have taught us both more Wisdom and Religion, who seeing the Ark of God
shake, 2 Samuel 6 7
and considering how dismal an Omen the overturning that sacred Repository had
been, and how disgraceful and impious it would be to see those precious Symbols
of the Divine Presence laid in the dust; and, not remembering that none but the
Family of Aaron might touch those holy Mysteries, put out his hand to hold
them, but was struck dead on the place. We are rather to look on and adore the
hidden Traces and Methods of the Divine Counsels, and patiently to wait for
that Issue of things, which notwithstanding of all the disorders may at any
time appear in humane affairs, the Eternal Wisdom of that Architectonical Mind
will in due time bring forth, and in the mean while rest satisfied in all he
does, commending things in our prayers to him, and doing every thing that
befits our Condition for preserving Peace, Order and Religion, but going no
further, S. Jam. 1. 20.
for the wrath of man does not work out the righteousness of God. And thus
Conscience, fixing our Subjection on the unshaken basis of our Faith and
Confidence in God, binds us by the strongest Ties to our Duty.

3. A third Argument Conscience offers to oblige us to be subject and quiet, is
the servent and extended Charity it possesses us with to all Mankind, which
must needs hold us from engaging in courses that will prove destructive to a
great part of it: Where we consider what the mischiefs of Rebellion and Civil
War are, what Dissolution of Government and Confusion of Justice it brings
after it, how much Blood and Rapine, Oppression, Plunder and Profanation of the
most Sacred things, are the certain Effects of Commotions, if they be
long-lived, what Lover of Mankind or Person truly charitable will engage in
courses so black, whose Catastrophe may prove so tragical, and run far beyond
what was at first designed, and produce Effects far more mischievous than those
that were complained of? How many dispeopled Cities, depopulated and burnt
Villages; what Tears of Widows and Orphans, and of Aged Persons bereft of their
Children, who were the comfort and support of their Age must follow on such
courses, when the fields are covered with the Carkases of the dead, and the
Scaffolds smoke with the blood of Innocents, and that not only with common
Gore, but Royal and Sacred Blood? A pathetick and florid Eloquence could easily
manage this Theme with those advantages, as to raise horror in all at Courses
so barbarous and unchristian, which the common Sentiments of Humanity will make
those of softer and relenting Tempers hate, much more the meek and peaceable
Christians. And that these are not the Melancholy representations of a troubled
Fancy, a little Reflection on what we have seen and known, and a penetrating
prospect into what may be before us will easily make out to all considering
Minds: Therefore strong and fervent Charity to Mankind will prove a certain
curb to repress new attempts at those disorders, the Effects whereof are not
yet old, nor out of mind. And here again Conscience obliges us to be subject.

4. The last Consideration which I shall propose, by which Conscience binds us
to Subjection, is the Practice and Example of our great Master, Heb. 2. 10.
who was made perfect through sufferings; the whole course of his Life was a
perpetual Tract of doing good and bearing ill; he paid the Tribute, when
demanded, and charged the Jews to render to Caesar the things that were
Caesar's: S. Matthew. 22. 21.
And when he was to lay down his life for us, he submitted himself patiently,
not only to the will of his Heavenly Father, but to the Civil Powers which then
governed in Iudaea: Though he, as the Heir of all things, might have claimed
the Empires of the World as his Right, yet since he humbled himself so as to be
born in the low character of a Subject, he in that, as in all other things,
became a perfect Pattern to us of all Righteousness. When the accursed Band
came out against him, though he could have brought down Legions of Angels for
his relief, yet he not only submitted himself to them, but both rejected and
reproved S. Peter's too forward zeal, and told him, S. Matthew. 26. 5.
That such as drew the sword should perish by the sword; and when the
ill-guided fervor of that great Apostle had misled him to the excess of
smiting with the Sword, our Savior expressed his displeasure at it, by his
miraculous piecing the Ear again with the maimed Head. And when he was accused
to Pilate of being an Enemy to Caesar, and pretending to set up another
Kingdom, he did in the plainest style was possible condemn all practisings
against Government upon pretense of Religion, S. John 18. 36.
by saying, My Kingdom is not of this world; if my Kingdom were of this world,
then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews, but
now is my Kingdom not from hence: This does so expressly discharge all busling
and fighting on the pretense of Religion, that we must either set up for
another Gospel, or utterly reject what is so formally condemned by the Author
of this we profess to believe. And never Cause of Religion was of so great
concern, as the preserving the Head and Author of it, whom with equal mixtures
of Injustice and Violence his enraged Enemies were against all colors of
Equity, and contrary to Law and Religion, dragging to that death, which, though
it proved the happiest thing to Mankind, yet on their part who acted it, was
the foulest Crime the Sun ever saw.

The blessed Apostles followed their Masters steps in this, as in all other
things; and therefore having learned of our Savior that lesson of bearing the
Cross, and suffering patiently, when Injustly persecuted, counted it their
glory to be conformable to him in his sufferings; and indeed, if we examine the
Nature and Design of that holy Religion our Savior delivered, we will find
nothing more diametrically opposite to all its Rules, than the distempered fury
of these misguided Zealots, who being carried on by the fierceness of their
Ungoverned Passions, have, upon colors of Religion, filled the World with
Blood and Confusion. Otherwise does S. Paul teach the Romans in this Chapter,
though then groaning under the severest rigours of Bondage and Tyranny; and S.
Peter does at full length once and again call on all Christians to prepare for
sufferings, 1 S. Pet. 2. 13. ver. to the end, and 3. 14, 15, 16, 17. verses.
and to bear them patiently; and though the bondage of the slaves was heavy and
highly contrary to all the freedoms of the humane Nature, yet he exhorts them
to bear the severities, even of their froward and unjust Masters, with this
Argument, That Christ suffered for them, leaving them an example, that they
should follow his steps. From these unerring Practices and Precepts must all
true Christians take the measures of their Actions, and the Rules of their
Life: And indeed the first Converts to Christianity embraced the Cross, and
bore it not only with Patience, but Joy; and as long as Christianity continued
pure and unallayed, this Doctrine of patient suffering was not only a big and
empty boast, but gave proofs of its Reality, by the unexempled Patience and
Sufferings of the Christians in a succession of Three Ages and Ten
Persecutions. These blessed Witnesses of our Faith were burning and shining
Lights, as well by the Purity of their Lives, as by the Stakes and Flames of
their Martyrdom. Nero unpalled them, and clothing them with Pitch-coats, made
burn them as Torches in the night; but these Fires scattered the darkness of
that Night of Idolatry in which Rome lay buried, and both enlightened and
inflamed many that lay freezing in darkness. It was the astonishment of the
World to see such numbers of all Ages, Sexes, and Qualities, with that alacrity
and cheerfulness of Submission, offer up their Lives for the Faith; and neither
the Cruelty of their unrelenting Persecutors, nor the continued Tract of their
Miseries, which did not end but with their days, prevailed on them either to
renounce the Faith, or do that which is next degree to it, throw off the Cross,
and betake themselves to seditious Practices for their preservation, but
continued steadfast both in their Faith and Patience, by which they inherited
the Promises. Nor was Christianity endamaged by all that fury; on the contrary,
the Blood of the Martyrs was the Seed of the Church, whose Field being thus
fatned, did spring up thirty, sixty and a hundred sold; so that for every new
harvest of a persecution, there was a plentiful crop of Christians. And there
is no reason to think these blessed Martyrs endured all their sufferings,
constrained by necessity, because they could do do no other; for as we find in
the inspired History, that at two Sermons there were Eight thousand Converts,
so Profane as well as Ecclesiastical Writers assure us, the numbers of the
Christians became very soon so vast, that nothing but the Conscience of the
Duty they owed the Supreme Powers obliged them to be subject. Pliny, Lib. 10.
Ep. 97.
who lived a hundred years after our Savior wrote to Trajan, That in Pontus
and Bithynia there were great numbers of Christians of all Ranks, both in
Cities and Villages, so that the Temples of their Gods were by the prevailing
Growth of Christianity, left desolate. A little after him Marcus Aurelius had a
Legion of Christians in his Army, of whom he gives this Character in his Edict,
That they carried God in their Consciences; and when there were so many in the
Army, we may on a fair computation reckon their numbers to have been very
great. Not long after that does Tertullian plead for those in his days, Cap. 37.
in his admired Apologetick, and tells the Romans, That if they would stand to
their own defense, they wanted not the strength of Numbers and Armies, that
neither the Moors nor Parthians, nor any other of the Nations that fought with
the Romans could match them, who filled the whole World, all their places,
Towns, Islands, Castles, Villages, Councils, Camps, Tribes, Senate and
Marketplaces; only they abandoned their Temples to them; adding, That to what
War were they not both fit and ready, even though they were less numerous, who
were butchered so willingly, if their Discipline did not allow them rather to
be killed than to kill? Ad Scap. c. 2.
And elsewhere he vindicates the Christians, That none of them were ever found
guilty of conspiracies against the Emperors, whom they acknowledged to be set
up by God, and therefore judged themselves bound to love, reverence and honor
them. But as the Christian Religion continued to spread by a vast and
prodigious increase, so did the spite of the Infernal Furies grow fierce
against it by the same proportion; and in the last Persecution, which continued
about twenty years, we find the Martyrs of one Province ( Egypt) reckoned to be
betwixt eight and nine hundred thousand; and yet no tumults were raised against
all this Tyranny and Injustice: And though after that the Emperors turned
Christian, and established the Faith by Law, yet neither did the subtle
attempts of Julian the Apostate, nor the open Persecutions of some Arrian
Emperors, who did with great violence prosecute the Orthodox, occasion any
seditious Combinations against Authority. These are the great Precedents this
holy Doctrine of the Cross has in the first and purest Ages, and though
Religion suffered great Decays in the succession of many Ages, yet for the
first ten Centuries no Father or Doctor of the Church, nor any Assembly of
Churchmen, did ever teach, maintain or justify any Rebellions or seditious
Doctrines or Practices.

4. And thus I have made good what I undertook to evince, That Conscience does
with the greatest evidence of Reason and Authority, bind us to an absolute
Subjection to the Higher Powers; and have observed what was the Path our
blessed Savior himself followed, the Traces whereof are to be known by those
bloody steps he has left behind him for our Example and Instruction. We have
also seen a glorious Cloud of Witnesses following him in the same way he both
opened up and consecrated to them. But after all this, it may be perhaps
objected, That all Christians, at least all pretenders to it, have not followed
the same Rule, and that some Divisions of Christendom, which in all other
things run very wide from one another, yet meet in this Doctrine of resisting
the Supreme Authority, and not only so, but they vouch Religion for their
Warrant and their Quarrel both, and pretend a Zeal for God, his Church, and his
Cause in all they do: This is the last part of my Discourse, to which I obliged
my self in the beginning; and I will handle it with the round plainness that
such a Point, how tender soever some may think it, requires. It is true, about
the end of the Eleventh Century this pestiferous Doctrine took its Rise, and
was first broached and vented by Pope Gregory the Seventh, commonly called
Hildebrand, the first Pope of that name; though a far better man had basely and
shamefully courted the cruel and perfidious Phocas, and treated him in a style
of mean and sordid Flattery that misbecame any man, much more so great a
Bishop. But the Pope I now speak of went more briskly to work, and begun that
insolent and bold pretension of the Temporal power of the Popes over all Kings
and Princes; that they being Christ's Vicars on Earth, must have all Power in
Heaven and Earth deputed to them, and that as S. Peter's Successors they had
the two Swords, the Spiritual and the Temporal put in their hands. Upon this he
aspired and exalted himself above those whom the Scripture calls Gods. Nor
did this rest in a bare speculation, but any that will read his Epistles, and
knows the History of his Life, will see what dismal confusions he brought on
Germany and Italy, and laid the Foundations of those bloody Wars which followed
and continued for some Ages: Then did the Factions of the Guelphs and Gibellins
divide Nations, Towns and Families, and fill all places with blood and
confusion. How other Popes did afterward set the same pretensions on foot,
both in France, England, and in many other places, is well enough known to all
that are acquainted with History; and for two or three Ages the Tyranny of this
was so heavy, that any Insolent Churchman was able to disturb Government, by
carrying Complaints to Rome of some pretended Encroachments on the
Ecclesiastical Immunity; upon which Monitory Breves and Bulls were dispatched
from Rome, and every Prince was either to obey these, how much soever they
might prejudice his Government, or to look for the Thunders of Excommunication,
Deposition, absolving his Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelity, and the
transferring his Dominions on some other more zealous Votary of that See. And
any that will read the Decretals, Bulls and Breves of many of the aspiring
Popes, will find that these were not only ambitious and disclaimed practices,
the guilt of which being personal, died with themselves; but they founded them
on the Rights of the Sea of Rome, and in the style of an Universal Pastor
imposed the belief of that on the World. Now I would presume to ask any of that
Communion, if they believe these Popes were Infallible in those Decisions and
Instructions they imposed on the World, or not? If any say they were Infallible
in them, they are without more ceremony of words, Traitors, who subject our
Sovereign's Rights, which he derives from God only, to a foreign Superior
Power: If they were not Infallible in these Decisions, then what is become of
the Pope's Infallibility? For the present Pope can have no more than his
Predecessors had; and if they erred, he may likewise err. But I must advance
this a little farther, to show that those of that Communion, though they reject
the Popes Infallibility, yet if they submit to the Infallibility of their
General Councils, are still in the same hazards of being Rebels: For the
Council of Lateran, which in the Roman Church is held General and Ecumenical,
that first decreed Transubstantiation, did also by the Third of its Canons
decree, That all temporal Princes should exterminate (I shall not critically
examine that word which must amount to banishment at least) all Heretics;
adding, That if any Temporal Lord, being admonished by the Church, did neglect
to purge his Lands, he should be first excommunicated, and if he continued in
his contempt and contumacy, a years notice was to be given of it to the Pope,
who thenceforth should declare his Vassals absolved from the Fidelity they owed
him, and expose his Lands to be Invaded by Catholics, who might possess it
without any contradiction, having exterminated the Heretics out of it, and
preserve it in the Purity of the Faith. This is so plain, that I suppose
without any hesitation it may be called a downright Conspiracy against all
Sovereign Princes; and this being decreed by a General Council, must either be
Infallibly true, or the Foundation on which they have raised all their
Superstructure of the Infallibility of their General Councils, is overturned.

But the same Equality of Justice and Freedom, that obliged me to lay open
this, ties me to tax also those who pretend a great heat against Rome, and
value themselves on their abhorring all the Doctrines and Practices of that
Church, and yet have carried along with them one of their most pestiferous
Opinions, pretending Reformation when they would bring all under Confusion, and
vouching the Cause and Work of God, when they were destroying that Authority he
had set up, and opposing those empowered by him: And the more Piety and Devotion
such daring pretenders put on, it still brings the greater stain and imputation
on Religion, as if it gave a Patrociny to those Practices it so plainly
condemns. This is Iudas-like, to kiss our Master when we betray him, and to own
a Zeal for Religion when we engage in courses that disgrace and destroy it.

But, blessed be God, our Church hates and condemns this Doctrine from what
hand soever it come, and has established the Rights and Authority of Princes
on sure and unalterable Foundations, enjoining an entire Obedience to all the
lawful Commands of Authority, and an absolute Submission to that Supreme Power
God has put in our Sovereign's hands. This Doctrine we justly glory in, and if
any that had their Baptism and Education in our Church have turned Renegades
from this, they proved no less enemies to the Church her self, than to the
Civil Authority. So that their Apostasy leaves no blame on our Church, which
glories in nothing more than in a well-tempered Reformation from the later
Corruptions which the dark Ages brought in, to the pure and Primitive Doctrines
which our Savior and his Apostles taught, and the first Christians retained
and practiced for many Ages.

To Resume all then: Let us adorn our holy Profession with a Life suitable to
it, and let us show to the World, that we take not up, nor maintain our
Religion upon Interest, but found it on sure and unmovable Foundations, which,
being the same always, will ever oblige us to the same Duties and Practices.
Let us study to empty our selves of all big self-conceiting Thoughts, of all
hot and inflamed Passions and Appetites, of all unruly and unbounded Desires,
of all Levity and unstayedness of mind; that with humble Hearts, calm Minds,
contented Spirits, and steady Thoughts, every one may follow the Duties of his
Station, and contain himself within it as becomes a Christian, paying inwardly
in our very thoughts that reverence we owe the Higher Powers, and offering up
to God the constant Tribute of our Prayers for them; considering they are God's
Vicegerents, and by his own warrant are called Gods: And if the Conduct of
Affairs do not suit our wishes or desires, yet for all that we are to trust to
and depend on God's Providence, not daring once to think of attempting against
the Lord's anointed, nor to engage in courses that may bring on so much
mischief and confusion, but let us ever set before our eyes our blessed
Savior, Who endured the Cross and despised the shame; who when he was reviled,
reviled not again, and when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously: And let us also consider that Cloud of
Witnesses that followed him; That so we may run with patience the race that is
set before us, and not look to or imitate the later practices of some
distempered and degenerated Christians. And then we shall be an honor to our
Profession, and give a credit to that Church wherein we were Born, Baptized and
Instructed; when we show that we are subject, not only for Wrath, but for
Conscience Sake.

And to end as I begun; Let us with astonishment and wonder, contemplate the
shining glories of our most holy Faith, which tends to raise Mankind to the
highest pitch of true Greatness that his limited Nature can ascend to, and as
far excels all the attempts of Philosophy, or any other Religion whatsoever, as
the bright Splendour of the Day does the fainter Shinings of the Night. For
nothing can be more the Interest of all men, than the receiving this Faith,
which both secures a man in all his Rights, and obliges all others to pay him
what ever is due from the Relations they stand in. Does a Father desire dutiful
Children, or Children an affectionate Father? Make them good Christians, and
they are sure of what they desire. Do Husband and Wife expect the Fidelity and
Sacred performance of the Ties of Wedlock? This must certainly follow on their
being good Christians. Do Masters desire honest and careful Servants, and
Servants a just and gentle Master? Make them good Christians and they will
prove such. Do all men desire to live by honest well-natured and affectionate
Neighbors? Their being good Christians will certainly make them such. Do
Subjects desire a good King? Let them pray that he be a good Christian, and
then he shall certainly govern well; And do Kings desire good and obedient
Subjects? Let them take care that they be good Christians, and then they will
be Subject, Not only for Wrath, but for Conscience Sake.

Now to the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, be all Honor, Praise and Glory,
for ever and ever. Amen.

THE END.

