A SERMON Preached at the CHAPEL OF THE ROLLS, On the Fifth of November, 1684.

BEING GUN-POWDER-TREASON-DAY.

By Gilbert Burnet, D. D.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin, in the
Old Bailey Corner, upon Ludgate Hill, 1684.

THis Sermon as it was the shortest I ever preached, so was not at all intended
for the Press; but some Discourses that have been raised upon it, made me
conclude, it was in some sort necessary to publish it for my own vindication.

I have writ it out with all possible exactness and fidelity; tho since I do
not read my notes, nor repeat them word for word, I cannot answer that either
in this or the other Sermons that I have printed, my pen has so governed, or
followed my tongue, that there was no variation between them; I am sure it is
here printed as near the words I used, as I can remember them; and in this I
have not depended only on my own memory, but on several of my hearers, who
hearkened to that Sermon with more than ordinary attention, and do think that it
is very punctually set down here as I spoke it.

I am sure the last part of it, that presses Loyalty and Obedience, is not at
all enlarged beyond what I not only preached in that Sermon, but on many other
occasions, in which I appeal to all my Hearers. But I leave the Sermon to speak
for it self, and me both; and will refer it to every man's conscience that reads
it, to judge whether or not I can be concluded from it to be a person
disaffected to his Majesty's Government.

PSALM. XXII. 21. Save me from the Lions mouth, for thou have heard me from the
horns of the Unicorns.
WE have no greater encouragement in our Addresses to God, than the remembrance
of past deliverances; and we never Worship him more decently, than when we mix
our acknowledgments for what is past, with our Prayers for what is to come. So
David here implores the Divine Protection in an extreme danger, which is
poetically expressed, by the Lions mouth, the figure of a Lion importing the
strength as well as the rage of his enemies; and its mouth importing the
nearness of the danger, which perhaps relates to the hazards he run of falling
into the hands of Saul. And with this he gives the reason of his confidence in
God, even in that Extremity; because in some former dangers, which are
expressed by the figure of being on the horns of the unicorn, or Rhinoceros,
and so being ready to be tossed up, or torn by it, God had heard him. This
perhaps relates to his deliverance from the Lion, and the Bear, or from Goliath.
It is needless to enlarge more upon the words. Three things occur very
naturally to our thoughts from them, with relation to this present occasion.

The first is, the apprehension of danger from a formidable and cruel Enemy.

The second is, a hope of preservation founded on former deliverances.

And the third is, the mean that is here laid before us for our preservation;
it is prayer to God, that he may save us from the lions mouth, who has before
heard us (that is, in the Seripture-phrase delivered us) from the horns of the
unicorns.

For the first Particular, I will use no Preambles, but plainly tell you, That
it is the Church of Rome which I mean, that is both so strong and so cruel an
Enemy; and is as a Lion going about seeking how to devour all that differ from
it. As for the Strength of this Enemy, it may be measured by the Empire which
that Church has assumed, not only over Men's Persons, but over their
Consciences: This being indeed the Fundamental Doctrine of of that Church, of
believing as the Church believes; of delivering up Men's Reasons and Consciences
to be led blindfold into whatsoever Doctrines or Practices their Guides impose
upon them; and making them think, that to doubt of any of these is a Sin, and
that therefore it must be opened to the Priest, and cannot be taken away, but
by his leave, and Pardon given by him. The Mystery of Popery lies not so much
in other Speculative Opinions, as in this main Point, That we ought not to
trust neither our Reason nor our Senses in the examining such Articles as that
Church proposes to us, but must take them all, and her Authority to boot, which
determines all the rest, upon her own Word: So that the main thing in
controversy between the Church of Rome and us, is, Whether we ought to inquire
into the Will of God our selves, or must take it upon trust from our Guides?

A Church that has established such a Tyranny upon the tenderest Part of our
Natures, our Reason, which is the most jealous of its Liberty, as well as the
most desirous of it, no wonder if she takes it ill to see so sacred a Secret
looked into; for, as it will not bear an Inquiry, so every Inquiry into it, is
a Step toward the shaking it off. And therefore, as her Power is absolute over
her own Votaries; so she must bear an extreme Hatred to any that will be so
impudent as to pretend, that their Understandings are exempted from her Yoke.

Other things concur in that Church to confirm this Empire. The Belief of the
Priests Power, both of Transubstantiating the Bread and the Wine, and of
granting Absolution, makes it seem very reasonable to trust a Body of Men, that
are so wonderfully qualified, with the Keeping and Conduct of other Men's
Consciences. And after the most essential, as well as the most uneasily subdued
Power of a Man was conquered, no wonder if the lesser Matters, such as Wealth
and Dominion, should follow the other, as a sort of Perquisits. He that can
forgive the Sins of the Living, and redeem the Souls of the Dead, will drive a
sure Trade for himself; for though it cannot be sure that what he does is
ratified in Heaven; yet the Belief of it, whether it gives Heaven to the
Purchaser or not, is sure to bring the best part of this Earth to the Seller.
Men do not return to tell that they were cheated in the Bargain, and to demand
an Equity. On the contrary, in dark Ages nothing was more common than pretended
Apparitions and Voices to confirm the Imposture; which have vanished in an Age
that is more apt to suspect and examine such things, as the Illusions of our
Dreams fly from us whenever we are awake.

But the Night was so long and so dark, that no wonder if so gainful a Trade
was carried on with great success: And who would stand much upon the Case,
after they had parted with the Jewel? So Men's Reasons being once given up, no
wonder if Wealth, and all other Secular Advantages, were thrown into the
Bargain. A Church established upon such a Bottom, and supported with so much
Wealth and Power, and defended by such Multitudes, who as they have all their
Proportion of the Spoil, so are tied to it by Vows, as well as engaged in it by
Interest; and that has subdued so great a part of the World, and claims a more
than ordinary Title to us, as having been once a very valuable Part of her
Empire, is justly to be looked on as a great and formidable Enemy.

But it is not the Greatness of an Enemy, that makes him so Formidable; it is
his Rage and Cruelty that gives the most mortal Apprehensions. The old Romans
made the Nations that they subdued, Gainers by the Conquest they made of them:
But the Modern Romans are more unrelenting Enemies. They first make all their
Votaries look on such as are not of their Party, as Heretics, that is, Men
hated of God, and devoted to Damnation. Now it will be no hard thing to inspire
Men with Cruelty, when they are once possessed with such inveterate Hatred and
Aversion to a sort of Men who they believe are to burn in Hell for ever; and so
they think they but cooperate with the Justice of God, if they help this
forward, and bring it on a little the sooner; especially when such Fires
purify the Air, which would be otherwise corrupted with their Heresy.

A Church that has substituted this Wildfire of Rage and Cruelty, to these
gentle Flames of Love and Charity; and that, in stead of making us love one
another, makes us destroy and burn one another, is the most opposite thing
possible to a Society founded on the Gospel; as if, in stead of the Union that
ought to be among Christians, we ought only to be bundling up Numbers of them
in Faggots, to be burnt or blown up. All means possible are taken to impose
this Cruelty on the World, which without some Practice and extraordinary
Endeavors could not be wrought up to such a Pitch, as to lay down the Bowels
of a Man, and take up the Rage of a Wolf or Lion.

Bishops among them are made to swear at their Consecration, That they shall
persecute Heretics to the utmost of their Power. Decrees of General Councils
have been made for the Extirpating Heretics; and Indulgence, with the Pardon
of Sins, have been promised to such as should assist at it. And because there
is somewhat Great and Generous in the Nature of most Princes, therefore they
have decreed, That if they are remiss in this Affair, of Extirpating such as
the Church condemns of Heresy, which is only a soft Word for being the
Churchmens Executioners, they shall be first Excommunicated; and if they
persist in their merciful Inclinations, they are next to be Deposed, their
Subjects to be acquitted of their Oaths of Allegiance, and their Dominions to
be disposed of to other more Zealous, that is, less Merciful Catholics.

Thus all possible Ways are taken to engage all sorts of People, both Clergy
and Laity, both Princes and Subjects, into these Cruel Practices; and therefore
the Bloody things that have been done among them, are not so much the Excesses
of Particular Persons, as the Natural Effects of the Established Doctrines and
Rules of their Church, which seems to have forced them upon all within it, with
so affected a Care, as if those who had managed it had been jealous that Good
Nature and Common Humanity would have been too hard for them, if this Machin
had not been set on by so many strong Springs, that nothing should withstand it.

So in short, here is an Enemy that if it prevails it must either swallow up
our Souls, or will be sure if that project fails, to succeed in that which it
has in reserve, it will devour our Bodies.

If any say, that these were effects of heat long ago, which are now disowned
by that Church.

To such this must be answered, That as Bellarmine says, the Church does not
always put in practice her power of deposing Princes, because she is not always
able to execute her Censures; so this Doctrine of extirpation is either really
hid from some good-natured Proselytes, whose hearts might perhaps turn against
a Church that should authorize such barbarities; or is cautiously and prudently
enough disowned by those who know it, till they see a fair conjuncture and a
fit opportunity: and those who do not now see it, may perhaps then feel it.

But we are not to seek long for instances of this cruelty, when we have such a
crying one in our eyes in the business of this day, which is the second thing I
proposed to speak to. Where we have a Crime before us that far past all the
invention of former Ages: for never was there any one single action, that would
have produced such mischievous effects, as one spark of fire would have done
here, if God had not heard and delivered us from the horns of the Unicorns.
None could suspect the nature of man of so black a design: and it was less to
be apprehended from men of the same Country, if the becoming a Proselyte to
Rome did not make a man both forget that he was a man, and an Englishman. Nor
was there any violent oppression in the case, which often makes even a wise man
mad, for they were under so little pressure, that the Government was a little
censured for its remisness: so that a Merciful Prince and a gentle Reign do not
allay their fury. It had been long in consultation among them, as may appear by
this one instance among many more that might be given, Delrio Dis. Mag. lib. 6.
c. 1.
Delrio a Jesuit in a book Printed at Leuvain, but five years before this,
puts a Case, Whether if a Confederate discover in Confession that he or some
else have placed Gunpowder, or such like matter under such or such a house, and
unless it be removed, the House will be blown up, the Prince destroyed, and as
many as are in or going out of the City, will sustain great mischief, or run an
extreme hazard, the Priest ought to reveal it? It is determined in the
Negative, that he ought not to do it; and for this he cites a Bull of Pope
Clement the Eighths, against the taking any notice of things discovered in
Confession, which though it related only to Superiors, and required them to
take no notice in their Government of such things as they know in Confession,
yet the Jesuit argues from thence, that the Pope approved the opinion, that
Confessors ought to behave themselves in all respects, as if they had heard
nothing at all in Confession. This being published so near England, and so near
the time when this Train was laying, shows that it was then in their thoughts:
for it is a case that had never before fallen out, and so was not likely to
have fallen into a man's thoughts, if the thing had not been in consultation
among them. In conclusion, when a sufficient number were cemented by so many
Oaths and Sacraments in such a black design, then it was laid with so much
artifice, that it was not probable it could have miscarried. Thus were our
Fathers upon the horns of the Unicorns, when by an unlookt for accident it
appeared, that that eye to which those dark places lay naked, took pity on us,
and laid this open to the preservation of King, and Queen, and Prince, the
Clergy and Nobility, the Commons and all others whom that great solemnity of
the meeting of a Parliament commonly brings together; besides the crowds round
about the place, who would very probably have had a large share of so devouring
an Earthquake, as so much Gunpowder must have produced. It is true, some
humanity was left, but it was only to their own Party; warning was given to so
many, that there were not above Three worth Saving, in their account, in all
that vast Assembly, who were not advertised to absent themselves, as Sir
Everard Digby writ out of Prison to a Friend.

One of these Advertisements being conveyed very odly to a Lord of that
Religion, gave him the happy opportunity of being the instrument that brought
out all this secret provision for so many deaths that was laid up in store. The
bold Incendiary that undertook the thing, was taken, and all broke out: but
then, though a great many of those who had not learnt the depths of Satan, were
so far overcome by the Discovery, as to confess all, yet as one of these was
prevailed with to retract that afterward, but a few minutes before his death
in prison, which prevented his suffering by the hand of Justice, so the
Jesuits showed on this occasion how they can steel their Consciences, both in
undertaking the blackest Crimes; and in throwing off that guilt with the most
impudent denials. Garnet their Provincial did this to a degree of assurance,
that astonished those who took his Examinations. Sir Everard Digby, one of the
Conspirators in his Letters, of which I have seen the Originals, calls that
Conspiracy, A Cause dearer to him than his Life; and so powerfully had the
poison of that Religion corrupted his thoughts, that in all his Letters writ
during his imprisonment, even in his last Advices to his Children, there is not
the least hint of Repentance for his engagement in so vile a design, though in
all other respects he appeared to be a man that was both Virtuously and
Religiously inclined, such an influence has that Religion even on the best
natures.

If after all this, these had been only the execrable practices of some
Assassinates, though it would have left some Imputation on a Church, for having
such Members in her bosom, yet it might be well enough put by with this; that
there will be still cockle among the Wheat, and that there was a Traitor among
the Twelve Apostles. But if these things were done pursuant to the Doctrines of
that Church, that makes it lawful to Kill Heretics, to Depose Princes, to
dissolve the Bonds of Allegiance, and to give their Dominions to other; then we
may more justly charge the guilt of this day upon the Church it self.

It gives very just grounds of suspicion that the Pope never made any
Declaration of his detestation of that Crime, though, as I have been credibly
informed, it was much desired: on the contrary, two Priests that had engaged in
it, getting beyond sea, were well received and provided for by the Pope even in
Rome it self. And the Jesuits have made Prints and Pictures for Garnet as a
Saint, and fables of straws that wrought miracles by virtue of some drops of
Blood that fell on them, which afterward were converted into little pictures,
have been proposed to the World as evidences of his Saintship. In a word, it is
plain that these who engaged in this Conspiracy, were carried into it by the
Principles of their Religion, and that they were so far from being condemned
for it, that they were supported and justified both living and dead for what
they did in it.

And that Learned King, though by the goodness of God he never felt the effects
of the bloody rage of that cruel Religion, yet he knew it well, and therefore
upon a solemn occasion he protested to his Councillors, That he would never so
much as grant a Toleration of that Religion, Crooks Reports Term. Trin. 2. Iac.
but would spend the last drop of blood in his body before he would do it; and
prayed that before any of his Issue should maintain any other Religion than
what he truly professed and maintained, that God would take them out of the
world.

Since then, notwithstanding the close management as well as the secret
contrivance of this cursed Plot, which was so near its execution, that the
whole State both of this Church and Nation was in a danger, not unfitly
expressed by their being on the horns of the Unicorns; God yet heard our
Fathers and delivered them, who have handed down to us the remembrance of that
great Salvation that he wrought for them on this blessed day; then all the
Royal Family descended from that King, all the Nobility and Gentry, whose
Ancestors were marked for destruction, all the Clergy to whose burning that
fire was the forerunner, unless they resolved to save themselves by Apostasy,
and the whole English Nation that was then like to have seen so black a day,
and have fallen under so dark a night, ought all to join together and say, O
give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, for his mercy endures for ever,
Amen and Amen.

And because his mercy endures for ever, therefore we ought still to pray to
him to preserve us, and to say to him, Save me from the Lions mouth, which is
the third thing in my Text. We believe there is a secret providence that
governs the World, and that discriminates between the good and the bad, and
therefore we ought to address our selves to that Providence, as well as to
depend on it and submit to it; and since the Religion that we profess is the
Cause of God, and the dearest of all other things to him who delivered it to
the world, who sealed it with his own Blood, and in whose hands the government
of all things in Heaven and in Earth was put by his Father, we may well quiet
our minds, amidst all the fears and apprehensions which melancholy thoughts may
suggest to us. God will not abandon his own work, nor will Christ forget that
which was the purchase of his own Blood. We may indeed make our selves unworthy
of it, and the cry of our sins may go up so loud to Heaven, as to drown these
softer whispers of our Prayers and Thanksgivings.

It is our contempt of God and Religion; our unreformed Lives amidst all the
noise we make of the Reformation, our forgetting past Mercies, and our
insensibility to all the Methods of Divine Providence, that ought to make us
fear the Lion's Mouth, and every thing else that is dismal and frightful: and
therefore if we would have our Prayers to be effectual, we must take care that
our Lives may not defeat our cold and slender Devotions.

But as we desire to have our Prayers to be heard, so we must take a particular
care to join no Endeavors with them that may argue a distrust of God, or of
our Religion: and while we have a zeal against Popery, as a bloody, a
rebellious, and a cruel Religion; we must do nothing to show that we are acted
by the Spirit of Popery, even while we seem to oppose it. All Malice to Men's
Persons, all desire of Revenge, the thirst of Blood, fierce Zeal, and indecent
Rage, are the Characters of the Persecuting Spirit that reigns there: We must
not think ill of every particular Man among them, because of their Corruptions,
which perhaps he does not know; and if he did know them, would disown them. We
must think as charitably of men as we can: for though there is very little
Charity due to the complicated Body, and the governing Part of that Church; yet
we owe a great deal to many particular men in it, who are still in it, because
they have not known the Depths of Satan; and would very probably forsake it, if
they saw so well as to discern them.

But above all these, we must never forget the Station in which God has put us,
as we are Subjects under a lawful Prince, to whom we are tied both by Divine
and Humane Laws: and even the Lion's Mouth it self opening to devour us, can
never excuse us from our Obligation to submit and suffer, if God had so ordered
it by his Providence, that we had not the blessing of being born under a Prince
that is the Defender of the Faith, but were born under one that would deliver
us up to the LION. Much less ought Jealousies to be so blown into our minds by
ill-disposed men, as to make us forget our Duty to God and the King.

Suffer me here to speak this freely, that the late Rebellion, as it was
managed with a Popish, that is, a Bloody Spirit, so many of the Arguments that
were used to defend it, were taken from Popish Authors.

When we go out of the way of Patience and Submission, of Obedience, and of
bearing the Cross; when we give scope to Passion and Rage, to Jealousy and
Mistrust, and upon this Fermentation in our Minds we break out into Wars and
Rebellion; we forget that the God whom we serve is Almighty, and can save us
either from a devouring Fire, or a Lion's Mouth; and either will save us from
these, or reward us infinitely for them: We forget that the Savior whom we
follow, was made perfect by Sufferings; and that we become then truly his
Disciples, when we bear his Cross, even though we should be crushed under it: We
forget that our Religion ought to inspire us with a contempt of Life and the
World, and with meekness and lowliness of Mind: We forget that we are the
Followers of that glorious Cloud of Witnesses, who have by Faith and Patience
inherited the Promises, and have gone to take possession of the Kingdom that
was prepared for them, through Fire, and through Blood, but it was their own
Blood. And to sum up all, we forget that our Reformation was the shaking off of
Popery, that is, a bloody Conspiracy against the Souls and Bodies of men:
against the Souls of the Weak, and against the Bodies of the Firm, but Innocent
Professors of this Holy Religion. We are not to share with them in their
Cruelty, nor imitate them in their Rebellion.

But on the other hand; If we will live so suitably to our Religion, that we
may be thereby entitled to the blessing of enjoying it, and of being secure in
it; and if our melancholy apprehensions make us pray more earnestly to the
Great Author of it, then we may lie down in quiet; for God will either make us
to dwell in safety, and deliver us from the Lion's Mouth; or if he gives us up
as a Prey, yet at least we shall even in Death overcome, and obtain the Crown
of Life.

FINIS.

