PUBLISHED By Her Majesty's Command.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN, At WHITE HALL, On the 16th. Day of JULY,
1690. BEING THE MONTHLY-FAST.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARUM.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXC.

THE Bishop of Salisbury's FAST-SERMON Before the QUEEN.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN, At WHITE HALL, etc.
Psalm. Lxxxv. Ver. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak, for he will
speak Peace unto his People, and to his Saints: but let them not turn again to
Folly.
IN all the various Turns of David's Life, we find him neither so much lifted
up with Success, nor depressed with Misfortune, that he went off from that
Confidence in God, which was his Basis, and on which all his Hopes rested;
Psalm. 3. 6.
when he was beset with ten thousands of people that had compased him round
about, he was not afraid, but laid himself down in peace and slept, Psalm. 4. 8.
for it was God only that made him to dwell in safety: and when his Afflictions
grew so high, 1 Samuel 30. 6.
that once his own People spoke of stoning him, yet even then when he had
fainted, unless he had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of
the living, he encouraged himself in the Lord his God: And when a happy reverse
of his affairs raised him to a vast Elevation, and a Series of great Successes
covered him with so much Glory, that all his Enemies did fall or fly before
him; this change of his condition wrought no change in his mind, unless it were
to the better, he employing the hours of that Tranquillity which he had
procured to himself, and to his People, in composing this Book of Psalms, in
which by a happy intermixture of the two charmingest things in the World,
Poetry and Music, he studied to raise in himself and in his People, the
loftiest Thoughts of God, and the most grateful acknowledgments of his Mercies
that was possible.

There is somewhat in Misfortune and Affliction that gives Men naturally a Cast
toward Religion and Devotion. For, the Mind being driven in upon it self, and
forced to think much, if it is apt to be overcharged with Melancholy, then it
increases its trouble by severe Thoughts, drawn from the Considerations of
Religion; but if it is naturally gay and cheerful, then it entertains it self
with such a pleasant prospect of Hope, as Religion proposes. Thus it is so
common to all men in trouble to look toward God, that unless the mind is
strongly fortified against those Impressions, they will then break in upon it.
But the Charms of Ease and Prosperity, of Greatness and Glory, do soon deface
all those good thoughts, which arise out of blacker circumstances; the mind
stays no more within it self, but is softened with pleasures, and dissipated
with business or folly, and retains neither its former wise thoughts nor good
resolutions; yea, that very Devotion which was ones Sanctuary and Relief in the
evil day, becomes matter of Raillery in the days of mirth and gaiety.

How different from all this was this great King, who though he was raised from
a low condition to an high dignity, which often brings a Giddiness over weak
minds, that cannot bear such an unlookt-for progress in their Fortunes, and
that extraordinary Merits, a high Courage, a wise Conduct, and great Virtues
made, that his advancement might be considered, as the Effect as well as the
Reward of his worth; yet he ascribes all his Deliverances, all his Victories,
and all his Glory, wholly to the Goodness of God, and to his great designs, in
which he was employed as an Instrument, that how glorious soever it might be,
was yet only an Instrument in the hands of that Eternal Mind that raises up and
uses all persons in subserviency to those ends, for which all things were made,
and do still subsist. In these his Raptures he did not think it would derogate
from his glory, to acknowledge, that he did not trust in his Bow, neither did
his Sword save him, but that it was God that had saved him from his Enemies,
and had put them to shame that hated him; that God was his Refuge and Strength;
that vain was the strength of man; that a King was not delivered by the
multitude of an Host, nor was a mighty man delivered by much Strength; that God
was his Deliverer, and his Shield, in whom he trusted, that subdued the People
under him that gave salvation to Kings, and that delivered David his servant
from the hurtful sword.

The Conquests and the Treasures of David are perhaps, Objects which strike the
minds of some Princes, while his Courage and his Wisdom raise a nobler Ambition
in others. But alas, shall his Piety and Devotion have no force to work on
great Minds, raised to great Dignities, who, how much soever they may be
exalted above the rest of Mankind, yet still in comparison to God, and when put
in the balance with him, they are altogether lighter than vanity. What a new
face would the World put on, if it were governed by Princes of such a temper,
as appears in David, when he composed this Psalm, of which my Text is a part.
He begins it with a grateful remembrance of the Deliverances of former times,
and particularly of their being redeemed out of the Bondage their Fathers
suffered in the Land of Egypt. Lord, thou have been favorable unto thy land,
thou have brought back the captivity of Jacob, thou have forgiven the iniquity
of thy people, thou have covered all their sin, thou have taken away all thy
wrath, thou have turned thy self from the fierceness of thine anger. These are
both acknowledgments of past Mercies, and encouragements to hope for a return
of the like Blessings, since such extraordinary favors were marks of a
particular care and kindness that seemed to watch over them. From these he
proceeds to an earnest Intercession for the People, who it seems were then
under signal characters of God's displeasure: Turn us, O God of our salvation,
and cause thine anger toward us to cease: Will thou be angry with us for ever?
Will thou draw out thine anger to all generations? Will thou not revive us
again, that thy people may rejoice in thee? Show us thy mercy, O Lord, and
grant us thy salvation. Words of great tenderness, that express both a deep
sense of God's anger, and a most earnest desire of being again restored to his
favor! After these comes my Text, which carries in it a Poetical Allusion to
the consulting of the Cloud of Glory, which was between the Cherubims, and to
the receiving Answers from it, upon all critical occasions. David turned his
thoughts from all the other views, he might have, to this, I will hear what God
the Lord will speak, that so he might depend wholly on the assurances that he
should receive of God's favor, upon the Repentance and Prayers of the People;
and in consideration of God's Covenant with them, he knew the answer would be
Peace; which being the form of Salutation in those Ages, among Friends,
imported an entire reconciliation. So that by speaking Peace, is to be
understood an assurance of God's love and favor to his People, and to his
Saints; that is, to the People that was sanctified, and dedicated to the
service of God by so many federal Rites. The words that follow are capable of
different rendrings, either thus, to his Saints, and to such as turn not again
to folly, or, and they shall not turn again to folly; or as it is in our
Translation, and let them not turn again unto folly. The LXX. Interpreters
differ much more, but the enlarging on any account of those various rendrings,
would require too long and too dry a Discourse for a day of this kind. Psalm.
14. 1.
Folly in Scripture stands often for Atheism and Impiety; Jer. 5. 21. and 10.
8. and 23. 13.
The fool has said in his heart, that there is not a God. Sometimes for
Idolatry, there being no instance of folly that is more extravagant, than the
giving divine Honors to the works of Men's Hands, or to the Fictions of their
vain Imaginations: but most commonly the irregularities of Vice are set forth
in Scipture under this notion, to show how contrary they are to all the
Principles of true Reason that are in our natures. The words being thus opened,
lead me to speak to these Three Heads.

I. That the great security and happiness of a Nation depends on its being at
peace with God, and in his favor; and that its greatest danger and misery
arises out of God's anger and displeasure.

II. That therefore it is necessary to use most earnest and fervent Prayers,
for removing God's anger, and for the procuring his favor: And that our great
encouragements to this, are the remembrance of past Deliverances, and the
consideration of the Attributes of God, who is naturally gracious and merciful.

III. That a Nation which would secure to it self the continuance of God's
favor, and of all the Blessings that accompany it, must above all things take
care of not relapsing into Vice and Idolatry, Ungodliness and Atheism.

To return: The greatest Security and Happiness of a Nation, depends on its
being at peace with God, and in his favor: And its greatest Danger and Misery
arises out of God's anger and displeasure. Either this is true (let our
Scoffers make it the subject of their profane Mirth as much as they will) or
there is nothing true in all Religion. If God is infinitely Wise and Perfect,
and if he made the World, which they pretend to own, then certainly he still
takes care of it: For no body can deny a Providence, that does not likewise in
his heart deny a God, and a Creation. The Prejudices against Providence arise
chiefly from the narrowness of our Minds, that cannot conceive how one Being
can have an extended and universal care of all things: But is not the prejudice
of a blind Man against the possibility of seeing, as well grounded? For how
extravagant must this appear to him, that through so small a passage as the
Pupil of the Eye, such a vast variety of Objects should enter at once, and open
themselves within the body of the Eye without confusion, and there be
represented to us in their just figures, with their distance from us, and from
one another; and in their Colors, which he cannot understand neither, and that
thus at a great distance we can reason and judge of things: To one that
pe^ceives nothing but by touch, this will appear very unconceivable. If then
the good disposition of an Organ raises one Man so far above another, that he
cannot apprehend how such an extent of perception is possible, it is a most
unreasonable thing to conclude against any Perfection in the Divine Mind,
because it is beyond our compass of thought. The other prejudice against
Providence seems a little better grounded, which is, That in the government of
the World there is such an irregularity, that it cannot be supposed to flow
from a Good and a Wise Being: But this is likewise an effect of the shortness
of our Prospect, we seeing only things that are before us, but not being able
to guide our Eye further to the end of the Scene, nor to what Revolutions or
Catastrophes are abiding those who at present seem covered with Success and
Glory. But if we believe God to be the infinitely Pure and Holy, we must
likewise believe that he loves those that are truly good, and are conformable
to his own nature, and that he has an aversion to those who are contrary to it,
and that are defiled and impure: For the Principle of Self-love that is natural
to every Being, makes it love such as resemble it, and hate such as are in an
opposition to it; not by a hatred of anger and fury, which is the effect of
Passion and Disorder, by a hatred which arises out of the contrariety of nature
that is between them. It is then, as certain as that there is a God, that he is
perfectly Pure and Holy, and that by consequence such Nations as are virtuous
and innocent, that are neither false nor cruel, vicious nor dissolute, must be
more acceptable to him, and more constantly protected by him, than those that
are corrupted by sensuality and luxury into all the degeneracies of humane
Nature, and into a scorn of Religion and Virtue.

But though it is certain, that such debauched Nations are under the Divine
Displeasure, yet as to the properest time, and the suitablest circumstances, in
which God will pour out his Indignation upon them; and as to the ballancing of
the sins of one Nation against another, and the delivering one over to be
plagued by another, till the one is purged, and the other has filled up the
measure of its Iniquities, those are Secrets lodged in that Infinite mind, into
which our sight can carry us but a very little way.

Upon the whole matter, if there is a God that made the World, he governs it;
and if he is wise and holy, he must govern it so as to favor the Good, and to
hate the Wicked. If any object to this, the long-flourishing of the Turkish
Empire, and the strange Progress and Success of Mahometism, the Answer is plain
enough, That the Eastern Christians were so far degenerated from all that is
pure and noble in the Christian Religion, that they were become a Reproach to
it, and therefore God has delivered them up into so long a Captivity, and has
rewarded the Temperance, the Justice, and the Aversion to Idolatry, that are
among the Mahometans, with so long a course of Prosperity. If the Reign of some
Princes, that have broken through the Faith of Oaths and Treaties, and through
all the sacred'st Rules of Justice and Mercy, has hitherto had a course of
Success and Glory, to which we find nothing that can be compared in History
since Augustus's days; yet even to this it must be said, That we can form no
true Judgment of it till we see to the end of it: And even this is only a
Personal Success, for that the Nation that is the Scene of that Prince's Glory,
may suffer as much under him, if not more, than it could have done from any
Enemy; since all the Protection that they enjoy under him is, that they are
preserved from the Impressions of others that they may be the entire Prey of
the Lawless Power, that devours them and all their Substance, and employs it in
the support of his Injustice and Cruelty. Besides, the great decays of true
Religion among all those Churches that carry the Name Reformed, may have
required an exemplary chastisement to awaken and parifie them; and the slow
progress that they make in this, may have occasioned so long a continuance and
increase of Glory in him whom God has made the Rod of his Anger for correcting
them But when that end of Providence is once fulfilled, we may then reasonably
hope to see that Persecutor, who is swelled up upon his success, become the
object of as much Scorn as he has been hitherto of Flattery. But alas! our
Impenitence and Irreligion keeps off still that day, and our Immoralities and
Vices do still feed his Pride, and furnish him new matter of Triumph and Glory.

In a word, nothing needs be further said for a fuller proof of this matter,
than that those very Sins that provoke the wrath of God, do likewise dissolve
and corrupt all that is great or noble in human nature; falsehood dissolves the
mutual Confidences and Union of a Nation, without which it must act feebly and
move irregularly, as a disjointed body. Cruelty brings a barbarity on men's
natures, which makes them incapable of prudent and wise Counsels. Sensuality
takes away men's Hearts, their Courage, and their Spirit. But above all things,
a brutal Impiety and scorn of Religion cuts all the Banks and Fences of Human
Society, and not only sets men loose to all their Appetites and Passions, by
taking off all inward checks and restraints, but begets a sort of
boisterousness and insolence in their Tempers, so that they become incapable of
Order and Conduct, and equally unfit both for Council and Execution.

How much of all this belongs to us is but too visible! Would to God it were
but a Secret, and not too notorious and public! Where is the ancient gravity
and composure of Behavior that made a large part of the Character of this
Nation? Where is the Truth and Fidelity which was formerly one of the
distinctions of Englishmen? Where is the Goodnature and Generosity that was
the Ornament of those that were nobly born? Where are even the Decencies of
Religion, or of the Worship of God? What is become of the Love of our Country,
and of its ancient Government and Liberty? Has not this shameful Degeneracy of
our Morals brought us so low, that there is scarce Virtue enough left, and men
enough to be found, that have even a general Tincture of it to save a Nation?
Sensuality has run many into such a deep Arrear for Vice, that they cannot be
true neither to public nor private Engagements, and then Employments will be
made the Robberies of the Public, and Vice will swallow up all that Strength
and Treasure which should go to the support of the Nation. Men are pleased or
displeased only as their Vices are fed or starved: Some pretend to be Patriots
that are so eminent for Vice, that a Government fixed, and strong enough to
reform the Nation, must throw them off as the Scum and Reproaches of it: For
let those Sons of Belial say what they will, Atheism and Impiety are as
destructive to a Nation as they are to a Church. What can secure a man's
Honesty, or give life to his Industry? What can cure all those Diseases under
which we languish, but the possessing men's minds with inward principles of
Religion, which will make them to become a Law and a Rule to themselves? What
can raise in men a generous love to their Country, which is the root of all
Political Virtues, to so high a degree as the Principles of Christian Love and
Charity, the sense of an Account to be given to God for all we do, and that
noblest Principle of all Religion, the raising up our Natures to become as like
the Divine Being as possibly we can; which will give us a Zeal of doing all the
good we can to Mankind, and of being public Blessings to the Age and Place we
live in. These are solid Principles, upon which Virtue is founded, and in these
it finds a Root, from which it receives a perpetual increase. But if Virtue has
no other Root but Honor, which is a decenter name for Pride or Humor, there
is no strength in this Principle to resist a Temptation that bears hard upon
some other corrupt Inclination, especially if one hopes that things may be
managed with Art and Secrecy.

But on the other hand, what can be desired to make a Nation great and happy,
but that which at the same time recommends it to the favor of God? When the
Principles of Truth and Goodness, of Sobriety and Temperance, of mutual Love
and Kindness, and above all, when an inward strictness in examining ones
Actions as in the sight of God, come to possess multitudes of Men, then a
Nation may reckon it self safe and happy; because as it comes under a kind and
indulgent Providence; so it has a real strength from the virtues of every
individual Person, in whom those good qualities live. The World might be well
and happily governed with a moderate proportion of Understanding, if there were
but a great deal of Virtue under it. For if it were not for Vice and Falsehood,
which must be watched over carefully, there are not such Mysteries in things,
but that they may be easily mastered. Here is then the root of all our evils on
the one hand, and the remedy to them all on the other; we have fallen from our
ancient Virtues, and our Religion has not force enough to reform or restrain
us; we went easily into corruption, when great Examples led and encouraged us
to it. But we do not so easily recover out of it, though we have now as bright
Examples before us the other way; but this has a contrary operation on depraved
Minds, and instead of making them love Virtue and Religion the better for the
luster with which it shines in the Persons of those that govern us, many
perhaps love the Government the worse, because they apprehend that Immorality
and Impiety will become more odious, less excused, and less protected. But a
noble Pattern set by Princes, though it is a great thing in it self, yet it is
not all that they owe to God, and to their People. It does indeed give them
great advantages in reforming their Courts, and their Subjects, when it appears
that they do not deny to others the freedoms of Vice, that they may appropriate
them to themselves; and that what they do this way, is not a Hypocritical
affectation for advancing other designs, but that it is a genuine effect of
their own Virtues, a Homage that they pay to God, and an effect of the Love
that they bear to their People. And we do not doubt but that every advance that
is made in the establishment of the Throne of those whom God has set over us,
will be acknowledged by them in such returns of their zeal for God, as we find
resolved on by David, That there eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land,
that they may dwell with them, and that those who walk in a perfect way shall
serve them; but that froward and wicked persons, those that work deceit and
tell lies, shall not stay within their house, nor so much as in their sight.
For as God will honor those that honor him, so he likewise expects that such
as he has honored in the sight of all the World, by so many repeated marks of
his favor, should honor him not only in their own private deportment, but
likewise in the sight of all their People: and how natural soever Clemency may
be to them, and how beautiful soever it may appear in them; yet if milder
methods cannot reform us, they must at last resolve even to cut off wicked
Doers from the City of the Lord.

Then we may carry our Hopes as far as we can do our Wishes, when God is of our
side, who commands the Seas and Winds, of which he has given us many and signal
instances, and some of these very lately, who confounds the Councils of the
wicked, who sometimes takes both their Understanding and their Hearts from
them, and at other times strikes them with such panick fears, that one man can
chase a thousand of them; and on the other hand, blesses those that depend on
him, with happy circumstances, so that the Frame of Nature is of their side,
and from those favorable appearances their Courage is raised, and their
Spirits are animated so, that nothing can stand in their way. This is often the
Portion of those that fear God: For, to conclude all, as there is nothing that
depresses and misguides men more than superstitious and false Opinions of God
and Religion; so there is nothing that does so raise and establish the Mind in
every thing that is great and noble as true Principles of Religion, which carry
a Man to the highest and best things, of which his nature and faculties are
capable.

And thus from a great variety of Considerations it is plain, that the favor
of God is the foundation both of the Security and of the Happiness of a Nation.
This then leads me very naturally to the Second Head, which is, That it is
therefore necessary to use most earnest and fervent Prayers for removing God's
anger, and for the procuring his favor.

This can be no indifferent thing, and therefore it is either to be neglected
quite, as an empty Dream; or if there is any truth in it, we ought to use all
possible means to compass it. If the favor of Princes is pursued with so much
Application and Industry, that all methods both good and bad are made use of
for gaining it; if a constant attendance, and all the arts of pleasing them,
how costly or how abject soever, are taken for securing an Interest in them,
which perhaps will never succeed, or when gained may prove of small advantage,
and may be quickly lost; what do we make of our Religion, if we own that we
believe all these things to be true, and yet will be at no pains to procure to
our selves or to our Country an interest in them. Can such cold Devotions as
ours are, that in the greatest part are only a compliance with Custom, which we
offer up to God without either attention or affection, give us a Title to such
invaluable Blessings. We pursue all things with an earnestness of desire, and a
strength of thought proportioned to the value that we set on them: And if we
are cold and slack only in the matters of Religion, when we over-doe every
thing else, this shows that either we do not at all believe them, or that we do
not at all value them. I know earnestness in Prayer is one of the Subjects of
the profane mirth of our Scoffers; they cannot think that God is moved by our
earnestness to depart from his own counsels, and therefore they think all
fervency in Prayer is a vain heating of the Imagination to no purpose. But
though it is certain that our Importunities do not overcome God, though Men are
sometimes wearied out with them, and yield to them; yet he commands us to pray
earnestly, and he promises to reward our fervor in Prayer, for this end, that
the impressions of Religion, and of our dependence on him, of our impotence
without him, and of his goodness and bounty to us, may go deep in our minds.
These are the springs of all Religion and Virtue; and when these are strong in
us, they govern us in all our actions. In fact it is certain that none are so
powerfully and effectually subdued by the Principles of Religion, as those who
are frequent and earnest in Prayer. God haing made this the condition of
bestowing his favors on us, not as it has an effect on himself, to soften and
overcome him, but as it has an effect on us to make us serious and good: from
hence it appears how reasonable a thing it is for us to pray often and
fervently. And in this all good minds may be appealed to, that set themselves
often to seek God by Fasting and Prayer, if they do not find the happy effects
of it upon their minds: That earnest agitation of their Thoughts, which is
raised by fervent Prayer, ends in an inward calm, joined with higher degrees of
confidence of God, and upon it, a good temper of mind dwells upon them, their
minds grow clearer, and their thought, brighter: Whereas such as disuse secret
Prayer, come under a flatness and deadness in the matter of Religion: It has no
life within them, it gives them neither joy nor courage, zeal nor affection:
Nor is there any thing to which the visible decay of Religion in this age is so
much owing, as to the neglect of secret Prayer; which has prevailed so
universally, that whereas in former times it would have passed for a strange
thing, if a Man had gone into any business without he had first said his
Prayers, it would now be thought ridiculous to hear that a Man was retired to
his Prayers: and the using such earnest and tender Expressions as we find here
in this Psalm, would pass for a mark of an Enthusiast, or an Hypocrite* But let
the World think and say what they will, it is by Prayer that our Souls ascend
up to God, and draw down all Blessings from him: This is that which removes his
displeasure, and procures his favor; and neither the abuse of it by
Hypocrites, nor the scorn cast upon it by Atheists, can lessen its value in the
sight of God, nor our obligation to it.

To encourage us to it, we have the consideration of the Nature and Attributes
of God: He is gracious, slow to anger, and ready to forgive: Judgment is his
strange Work; whereas Mercy and Compassion are natural to him. It is true, as
he is the just and righteous Governor of the World, he must punish when it is
necessary, for the maintaining the Order that he has established; but yet he
afflicts not willingly, nor grieves the children of men: and therefore we are
sure, that upon our turning to him, our praying earnestly, and our repenting
sincerely, he will turn from the fierceness of his anger. Of this we are
assured, both from his Nature and Attributes, and also from his Promises; and
if those limited degrees of Goodness that are in us bring us under a tenderness
of heart and readiness to forgive such as seek to us, had they offended us ever
so much, we have much more reason to assure our selves, that God will speak
Peace to us, upon our supplicating him as we ought to do.

There is in this Psalm another consideration that gives us great encouragement
in our Addresses to God for pardon, which is, That in former times, when his
People had provoked him to deliver them up to Captivity, he had, upon their
repentance, forgiven their Sins, turned away his Anger, and brought again their
Captivity. And from those instances of his mercy in pasttimes, David does
expect new proofs of it, as we may also do if we take the same method now which
had such effects formerly: The Nature and Promises of God are still the same;
Repentance and Prayer have the same effect at all times. David did here
encourage himself with the remembrance of the Deliverance of the People out of
Egypt, when after a long course of oppression, God did with a mighty Hand and
an outstretched Arm bring their Fathers out of that Bondage: and from that
time downward, God had often heard them when they groaned under the yoke of
Oppressors, into whose hands he had delivered them for their sins; but he had
also raised up Instruments, by whose means they were freed from the yoke they
lay under. And from those signal instances of God's hearing their Prayers, and
being reconciled to them, they had reason to reckon, that the Severities of his
Judgments, which at any time broke out upon them, were intended only for their
Reformation and Correction. The whole Old Testament contains a Series of
History, made up of those varieties; That People sinned, and were punished;
they repented and were delivered. In conclusion, their Sins were such, that
they were given up as a prey to the King of Babylon, but after 70 years
Captivity, they were brought back, upon the Prayers and Intercessions that
Daniel and other good men put up to God, according to God's Promises and to the
time limited by the Prophets. Upon the perfecting of that Deliverance under
Artaxerxes, they began to relapse into some of their old Sins; but Ezra and
Nehemiah, who saw well what consequences these Sins must have, and how they
might be prevented, engaged them to an early and serious repentance, the good
effects of which continued near 300 years: but then they corrupted themselves
again, upon which they were delivered up into the hands of the Kings of Syria,
who oppressed them severely, and studied to defile their Temple, and to
extirpate their Religion: Upon this they returned to God, and he raised up
Deliverers for them, in the persons of Matthias and his Sons the Maccabees, in
whose courage, conduct, and success, we see one of the beautifullest Scenes
that is in History. Those Wars did purge them quite from all that mad
inclination that had been so long among them, to Idolatry; they flourished and
had rest, about an hundred years, till they corrupted their Morals again, and
then they fell under the mischiefs of Civil Wars, which made way to their
coming first under the Tyranny of Herod, and then under the Roman Yoke; but
under all that oppression they did not as they had done formerly, Repent and
turn unto God; and though first St. John the Baptist, afterward our Savior
himself, and his Apostles after him, particularly S. James the Brother of our
Lord ceased not to call on them to repent, and threatened them with a final
extirpation if they did it not; yet this had no effect, except on some
particular persons, the rest hardened themselves in their Immoral ties and
Hypocrisies: They killed the Heir, that the Inheritance might be their own,
according to the Parable, and they stoned and slew the rest; and they being so
obstinate in their Impenitency, that neither the Calamities they lay under, nor
the Messengers sent them from God, could work on them; the Wrath of God at last
came upon them to the uttermost, and in so terrible a manner, that their
destruction is by much the most tragical piece of History.

Let us next observe in short, the History of the Christian Religion. It is an
astonishing thing to see a Doctrine, that by its Rules carries Men to the
highest degrees of Purity, and that received so great Authority from all those
Miracles that accompanied the first opening of it to the World; yet so soon
depraved, even in the Apostles days, by many false Teachers and false
Christians; this were an incredible thing, if the Epistles of the Apostles
themselves were not full of it. But upon this, God delivered many of them up to
the Fury of the Jews, and to the Cruelties of Nero; but upon their Repentance
they were spared in the final destruction of Jerusalem; and though there were
some particular Instances of Persecution under Domitian and Trajan, they
passing for a Sect of the Jews; yet after that they had a long Peace of about
140 Years continuance: In which time the Christian Religion did shine in the
purity of their Lives, who professed it, and did spread it self over the whole
Roman Empire: And the Instances of Severity that were acted in a few Places,
gave the Church the Glory of many Martyrs, while the rest were rather
encouraged by their Constancy, than terrified with their cruel Deaths. The
Writers of those Times do often make their Appeals to the Lives of the
Christians, to prove the purity of their Doctrine: Yet Numbers are generally
bad, and a long Peace brings naturally with it, a softness on Men's Minds,
together with a dissolution of their Morals; of which S. Cyprian gives us a
particular account, in terms that show he did not flatter his Side, nor the
Order of the Church, to which he was so great an Honor; for he sets out the
Corruptions, as well of the Bishops and Clergy, as of the Laity of his Time, in
a style that is far from Partiality. After this came Persecution after
Persecution; but these having the Effect for which they were appointed of God,
the Church had again forty Years Peace. But it would offend weak Minds, to hear
the words in which Eusebius sets forth the Corruption that this brought on the
Church: Then came the last Persecution, which continued Ten Years with very
little intermission, and with so excessive a Fury, that in the succession of
the Persecutors, every one studied to outdo all that had gone before him. Yet
these repeated Fires of their Martyrs, kindling another Fire in the Minds of
the Christians, and setting them on to Fastings and Prayers, God did at last
arise, and sent them a Deliverer, from this Island, Constantine, who first gave
them Quiet and Liberty, and then Protection and Favor, and then the Christian
Religion shined with a new Luster of Wealth and Prosperity: But, alas, this was
not so happy to it as that which the Fires of the Martyrs had given it. The
Church did soon degenerate, and the Bishops of the chief Sees fell into
Factions. The History of that Time gives us but a sad viow of the governing Men
of the Church. But yet even there we have a Witness in favor of that Religion
that is beyond Exception, I mean Julian, who tells his Heathen Priests, in his
Zeal for the restoring of Paganism, how both Priests and People ought to
imitate the Lives, the Temperance, the Gravity, and above all, the Charity that
was among the Christians. But insensibly in the course of an Age, Christianity
did so degenerate, that scarce any thing of the first Purity and Simplicity was
left. Great Disorders, Irreconcilable Heats, and Differences, and Disputes,
even about Authority and precedence, tore the Church, and exposed it to the
Reproaches of its Enemies: And after that God had suffered that Apostasy for a
whole Age, it drew at last a Series of Plagues upon them, that amazes every one
that reads it. The Western Empire was overrun with an Inundation of Northern
Nations, that came so thick one after another, that whatsoever one had spared,
seem to be only reserved to be destroyed by the next that came. In a word, the
Goths and Vandals, and the Hunns brought an unheard of Destruction along with
them; that was followed by Plagues and Famines, to so high a degree, that whole
Countries were almost dispeopled. The Eastern Empire was also long wasted by
the Goths and Avares, and then by the Saracens, and finally destroyed by the
Turks. In this Island we received the Christian Religion very early: We had our
Martyrs as well as the other Churches, and a particular simplicity of Manners,
which is remarked as the peculiar Ornament of our Clergy: But this did not last
long, for there followed a vast Corruption among all sorts of People, which is
set forth very sincerely and pathetically, by a very good Man that saw it, and
lamented it, I mean Gildas; after that we lost both our Religion and Liberty,
and fell under the Saxon Tyranny, than Christianity got footing again among us,
within an Age and an half after that, but it was much allayed and debased; yet,
such as it was, it made a great progress, and produced some very good Men, if
we may believe Bid. But the Nation became rather more corrupt than ever, and
then we were delivered over to the Depredations, the Burnings and Cruelty of
the Danes, which continued at several Reprises, for near two hundred Years to
be the Plague of England. At last all was melted into one Government, but then
the Nation became a Scene of Blood, what during the Competitions to the Crown,
the Barons Wars, the Wars with France, and those of the Houses of York and
Lancaster.

But to take a narrower view of the State of the Protestant Religion, both
abroad in the World, and here in England, we shall find how often God, for the
Sins of those who carried that worthy Name of Reformed Churches, but that were
not worthy of it, has brought them very low; and what sudden and unlook'd-for
Deliverances have again recovered and restored them. Upon the first opening of
the Reformation, all the World run into it. The Corruptions and Ignorance of
Popery, were things of which all Men were so weary, that they with joy welcomed
the Light and the Purity of the Gospel: but in the multitudes that embraced it,
there was a great mixture; many came in only for the Spoil, and threw off the
Yoke of all Religion, as well as that of Popery. But God punished this
severely; for though they were by much the superior force in Germany, which was
then the Scene; and were secretly favored both by England and France, yet all
their Strength did melt away, and they dividing their Forces, became an easy
Prey to Charles the 5th, who got both their Heads, the Elector of Sax, and the
Landgrave of Hesse into his Power, and made all the rest bend under him; only
the Town of Magdeburgh stood out against him: And in a course of five Years
Success, the Protestant Interest was brought so low, that it was every where
given for lost, when of a sudden, Maurice of Saxe, that had been the chief
Instrument of dividing the Party, and of delivering it up to the Emperor, gave
Matters so quick a turn, that the Emperor was forced to run out of Germany; and
he soon saw he could not hope ever to return to it, without granting the Edict
of Passaw, under which Security the Protestant Religion has subsisted there
ever since.

Not many years after that a second Storm arose, King Edward died, and while
Queen Mary persecuted and burnt the Protestants here in England, France and
Spain fell under the Ministry of two Cardinals, who seeing that the way which
they called Heresy, was gaining ground everywhere, under the shelter of the
Wars, they projected and effected a Peace, in order to the Extirpating of
Heresy; but while this was in agitation, Queen Mary died: and soon after, the
King of France was killed, and left that Kingdom under the feebleness of a long
Minority: a Deliverance sprung up also in Holland, after many unsuccessful
Attempts, by a small company of Fishermen, who seized on the Brill, and from
inconsiderable beginnings, falling happily* under the Conduct of a Family of
Heroes, have grown up to be one of the Powerfullest Nations that any Age has
seen: Here was the second Crisis carried off.

A Third was, when the League of France was formed, for the Extirpation of
Protestants, and that Spain at the same time designed the Conquest of England,
upon which they reckoned, that the War in the Low Countries would soon come to
an end: but all this was blasted, the Armada of Eighty eight was scattered and
lost, the Heads of the League were killed, and Spain became so feeble, that
those were its last efforts. In this Age, from the Year 1620, for ten Years
together, the whole Protestant Interest was everywhere sinking. The Revolution
of Bohemia, and the Reduction of Hungary, raised the House of Austria so high,
that every thing that stood in their way, fell before them; and all the
Attempts made to preserve Germany, proved fatal to those who undertook it; then
Holland was brought very low, by the loss of Breda, and the breach among
themselves occasioned by the Arminian business; the French Protestants were by
the Reduction of Rochel, brought to extremities; England fell under a
feebleness and dis-joynting at home, when of a sudden, the Great Gustavus with
a small Army broke through the whole Austrian Force, and restored the Liberty
of Germany, and obliged France that needed his Alliance to confirm the Edicts
in favor of the Protestants; so that Storm went over, and the Protestant
Religion was again as strong as ever.

The next Crisis was in Seventy Two, when the States were marked out, to be the
First Sacrifice; but we were to have gone next, and Tyranny and Popery were
everywhere to be established: That Union which had at first such an
unlook'd-for success, had almost swallowed up Holland, the Inundation breaking
in upon them with such a Rapidity, that nothing could stand before it, till a
Young Prince, who as he was the Inheritor of the Glory of Four Successive
Ancestors, every one of whom had Luster enough to have ennobled a whole Race;
so was he designed by Heaven, for a much greater Harvest of Triumph and Glory;
till he, I say, stemmed this Torrent by so small a handful at first, that it
seemed a tempting of Providence, to have hoped for success, where the Force was
so unequal. But his Virtues, and his Valor begot, first Union at home, and
then Security abroad; and though he could not all at once raise up their Armies
to imitate the Pattern he set them; yet, we now see, even in their late
misfortune, with what a Spirit of Courage such a Hero can inspire an Army. This
Crisis went off likewise, and there appeared such Characters of the Protection
of God over the Man, whom he had made strong for himself; and the State which
was then so gloriously preserved, that all the World looked on this, as an
Essay of the Great things that Heaven designed to the Age, by that Hand, whose
first Attempts proved so fortunate.

The last Crisis in which we still are, began in 85, when within the compass of
one Year, Popery was on the Throne here in England; it had likewise the
Palatinate brought under it, and the Protestant Religion was proscribed and
Persecuted, both in France and Savoy. Then the Instruments of the Pride and
Cruelty of the Persecutor, reckoned that Heresy was to be extirpated all the
World over: There was indeed no visible Hope left, but in him who had begun his
Carier with so much Glory, and seemed marked out to be the Common Deliverer of
Europe, as well as the special Blessing of all the Churches of God. I shall not
enlarge further on that, with the Sense of which I hope all your Hearts are
filled, how ungratefully soever it may be opposed by some, whose Designs,
whatever their meaning may be, tend to the bringing us under French Tyranny,
and Popish Cruelty. When we also consider the special Deliverances of this
Church, the Critical Time of Henry the Eighth's breaking with Rome; and of Q.
Mary's Death. Queen Elizabeth's Glorious Reign; the discovery of the
Gunpowder-Treason; the long Peace of Eighty Years with which this Kingdom was
blessed, to which there is not any thing that can be compared in our whole
History; the easy conclusion of a long and bloody Civil War; the First, and now
the Second Preservation of Ireland, with the surprising Circumstances of both:
What reason have we from all these to conclude, that as God has hitherto
watched over us, and preserved us in so wonderful a manner, he will still
continue to do it? But this last Deliverance of Ireland must not be past over
in general Words. Can we reflect on the many Dangers to which that Sacred Life,
on which all ours depend, in so signal a manner, was so lately exposed, without
feeling a Commotion within us, that is both melting and tender? for though it
is now past, we still tremble to think that it was once so near; while a Hand
of Heaven seemed so to lead the Bullet, that though it was suffered to touch
his Anointed, yet could do him no Harm. Do not we look amazed on one another,
when we think in what a State we had been, if it had gone deeper; while he that
received it, seemed to be the least concerned of all that beheld it. And thus
while other Princes take care of their own Safety, and grow proud upon the
Glory that their Subjects procure them; He does not think the Regal Dignity
bright enough, but as it takes a fresh Luster from Military Glory. But while we
take leave humbly to complain, that he has so little regard to himself, we must
with all Thankfulness acknowledge, that this defect of Care in him is fully
supplied by the watchfulness of that Providence, on which he does in so
particular a manner depend; If our Glory has on another side received an
Eclipse, tho even on those less fortunate Occasions we have seen particular
Instances of a watchful Providence, while the Winds changed to preserve and
favor us; and perhaps it would have been too great a provocation to Pride and
Security, if we should have had two great Victories at once. Yet if we have
failed at this time, What may not we hope from such an Essay, but that Angels
watch over him, and that the Head of Angels covers him? and that this retarding
of our Deliverance, and darkning of our Glory, is but for a new reserve of
Triumph to him, whose Scene of Success is not complete, till all that false
shining, which has so long compared it self to the Sun, is darkened; and that
not only England, but Europe, is by his Means delivered from all their Fears
and Dangers.

But how far soever such a Subject may carry me, I must not suffer you to
forget that which remains of my Text, But let them not turn again to Folly. I
shall not dwell here upon so beaten a Path, as the showing you the Madness and
Follies of Vice. You have so many Instances of so great force round about you
to demonstrate this, that it is needless to enlarge upon the Breaches that Vice
makes on Men's Persons, and their Estates, on their Reputation and Courage; its
wasting their Spirits, and depressing their Minds, are such visible things, and
have showed us so many Wrecks on all hands, that we must needs see how just and
reasonable it is to bring all these Disorders under the denomination of Folly.
Idolatry is also such a debasing the Nature, both of God and of Man, by which
the Idea's of God are brought so low, and our Natures are so affronted, while
we prostrate our selves before the Works of Men's Hands, or the Fictions of
their Minds, that this is also Folly, and a Folly of so strange a kind, that it
is not easy to imagine that Humane Nature should be capable of it: But no Folly
is more extravagant than that of imagining that things were made, and are
preserved by Chance, or Fate, without the directions of a wise and good Being:
And that either there is no God, nor Maker of all Things; or if there is one,
that he has abandoned the Works of his Hands, that he does not see through the
thick Cloud, that it is in vain to serve him, and that his Wrath is but a Word,
made use of by crafty Men to frighten Fools. This is the Language of Scoffers,
and a degree of Folly beyond all others, even the venturing upon Eternal
Misery, upon the maddest set of Principles that ever were put together. These
are the Follies that we must guard against, lest if after God has delivered us
once more, we should again relapse into them, and that then our latter End
should prove worse than the Beginning.

If God should now according to the Riches of his Grace deliver us from all our
Enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us, and should establish that which
he has wrought for us, and add to the Settlement of his true Religion, and the
happy Constitution both of Church and State among us, a secure and honorable
Peace, a fullness of Plenty, and a freedom of Trade, and should carry the Glory
of our Sovereigns so high, as to make them the Arbiters of Christendom, and the
Protectors of all Protestants. If I say, after so great an accession of Wealth
and Prosperity, of Success and Glory to us, we should then give our selves up
to our Vices, as if all our Blessings were only intended to furnish out our
Luxury with all the variety of Entertainments; if we should grow proud of the
Ancient Valor of our Nation, while we degenerate from it our selves; and by
despising our Neighbors, should both make them stronger, and our selves
weaker; if we should take up our Animosities, as if we had only made a Truce
with one another, while we had a mighty Enemy to deal with, and so would revive
these Follies, which God has by an Interposition of so many Providence called
on us to forget; if we of the Church should forget all our promises, and
resolve to yield nothing for the gaining of our Brethren, but should let our
Minds rather be soured with the old Leaven of bitterness and malice. If those
who depart from us, should rather study to strengthen their Party, than to
hearken to the Counsels of Peace; if those of a higher Rank, should become
swelled with Pride, or softened with Voluptuousness; If the Clergy should become
Lazy, Covetous, and Ambitious; and the whole Nation should again break loose
into open Vice, and divide into Parties and Factions: But above all, if Impiety
and Blasphemy, Scoffing and Atheism, should again be in vogue, and pass for Wit
and Spirit, then upon so fatal an abuse of God's Mercies, we should have reason
to look for Judgments as eminent, as such our Ingratitude should be; and that
the return of Wrath should be so heavy, that our Portion should be to perish
with an everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the
Glory of his Power. But if we become so wise, and so good as to improve the
Deliverance that is already come to us, and those which we have in prospect, to
the Noble ends for which they are designed by God, then we may expect to see an
accomplishment of all the other Blessings which David promises to himself, and
to his people in this Psalm, That Mercy and Truth should meet together, and
Righteousness and Peace should kiss each other. That a Spirit of Truth, and
Honesty, and Love, and Charity, should run through the whole Nation, and knit
it altogether in one Body; that Truth should become so natural to them, that
like the growth of the Earth, it should spring up of it self; and that
Righteousness should like a dew from Heaven, cover the whole Land; that God
should bless them with every good thing, and that they should have a rich Soil
and fruitful Seasons; and that Deliverances should be near or present at every
return of Danger, for preserving those that fear God; and the top of all, that
Glory should dwell in their Land: By which is to be understood that Cloud of
Glory which was between the Cherubins, and was the Symbol of God's Presence
among them; that is, That the True Religion, with all the happy Characters of
God's Favor, should be still continued among them, by which they were the
Glory of all Lands, and all the Nations of the Earth were to be blessed in them:
This as applied to us, is, that God may establish and continue his True
Religion among us, that he may watch over, and preserve those whom he has set
over us; and that as their Lives have been hitherto a Series of Wonders, so he
may perfect that which concerns them, and bless the Work of their Hands; and
that the whole Nation may return to its Ancient Honesty and Virtue; and that
all Differences and Divisions may be composed, we being animated with one
Heart, and one Spirit; and that to all this, the Blessings of Peace and Plenty
may be joined: which God of his Infinite Mercy grant, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
BIshop Burnet's Sermon before the King and Queen on Christmassday, 1689. on 1 Timothy 3. 16.

-- His Sermon of Peace and Union, Nov. 26. 1689. on Acts 7. 26.

-- His Fast Sermon at Bow-Church, March 12. 1689/90. on Luke 19. 41, 42.

Some Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of
Piedmont. By P. Allix, D. D. 4o.

Geologia: Or, A Discourse concerning the Earth before the Deluge, wherein the
Form and Properties ascribed to it, in a Book entitled [The Theory of the
Earth] are excepted against. And it is made appear, That the Dissolution of
that Earth was not the Cause of the Universal Flood. Also a new Explication of
that Flood is attempted. By Erasmus Warren, Rector of Worlington in Suffolk.

A Private Prayer to be used in Difficult Times.

A Thanksgiving for our late wonderful Deliverance: [recommended chiefly to
those who have made use of the Prayer in the late Difficult Times.]

A Prayer for perfecting our late Deliverance, by the happy Success of their
Majesty's Forces by Sea and Land.

A Prayer for Charity, Peace and Unity, chiefly to be used in Lent.

Dr. Tennison's Sermon of Discretion in giving Alms, 12o. on Psalm. 112. 5.

-- His Fast-Sermon before the House of Commons, June 5. 1689.

-- His Sermon concerning doing Good to Posterity. Preached before Their
Majesty's at Whitehall, on Feb. 16. 1689/90. on Psalm. 78. 5, 6.

Dr. Wake's Lent-Sermon before the Queen, April 2. 1690. on 1 Timothy 5. 22.

-- His Easter-Sermon before the Lord Mayor, 1690. on Gal. 6. 10.

-- His Sermon before the King and Queen, May 4. 1690. on Luke 16. 25.

Bishop of Chichester's Fast-Sermon before the King and Queen, April 16. 1690.
on Prove. 13. 34.

A new History of the Succession of the Crown of England. And more particularly
from the Time of King Egbert, till Henry the 8th. Collected generally from
those Historians who wrote of their own Times, and who consequently were the
best Witnesses and Relators of the Actions done therein.

Father Parsons the Jesuit's Memorial for the intended Reformation of England
[or Destruction of Her Established Church] under their first Popish Prince.
Published from the very Manuscript Copy that was presented to the late King
James II. and found in his Closet. With an Introduction, and some
Animadversions, by Edward Gee, Chaplain in Ordinary to their present Majesty's,
8o.

A Prayer for His Majesty's Success in Isis great Undertaking for Ireland.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
THere is newly Printed, A Large Folio Bible of a fair new Roman Letter, with
Annotations, and Parallel Scriptures or References (some Thousands more than
are in the Cambridg, Oxford, or any London Bibles yet Extant.) To which is
annexed, The Harmony of the Gospels: As also a Reduction of the Jewish Weights,
Coins and Measures, to our English Standards. And a Table of the Promises in
Scripture.

In One entire Volume, containing Three hundred twenty five Sheets, in good
Demi Paper. Proposed by the Booksellers undermentioned, on these Terms, viz.

I. He that Buys only one Book, to pay Twenty five Shillings Unbound.

II. He that Buys Six Books, shall have a Seventh Gratis, which reduces the
Price to a Guinea Unbound.

Which Terms are to continue until the first of September next: But after that,
no Seventh Book will be allowed, nor a single Book sold under Twenty seven
Shillings Unbound.

Richard Chiswell, Jonathan Robinson, both in St. Paul' s Churchyard.

Brabazon Aylmer, against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.

There is also newly Published a Book, Entitled, CENSVRA CELEBRIORVM AVTHORVM,
Sive TRACTATUS in quo varia Virorum Doctorum de Clarissimis cujusque Saeculi
Scriptoribus judicia traduntur. Vnde-facillimo negotio Lector dignoscere queat
quid in singulis quibusque istorum Authorum maxim memorabile sit, and quonam
in pretio apud Eruditos semper habiti fuerint. OMNIA in Studiosorum gratiam
collegit, and in ordinem digessit secundum seriem Temporis quo ipsi Authors
flornerunt THOMAS POPE-BLOUNT, Anglo-Britannus Baronettus. Cum Indice
Locupletissimo.
Containing near Two hundred Sheets in Folio, of a fair Character and Paper,
(the same as Fasciculus Rerum Expetendarum, lately Published) Printed for
RICHARD CHISWELL, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. By whom, for
the Benefit and Encouragement of Gentlemen, it is propounded as follows:

I. That whereas the Book is now sold for 18 s. in Sheets; whoever will come in
as a Subscriber, and pay to the said Richard Chiswell 16 s. and 4 d. shall
receive. One perfect Book in Sheets.

II. Whoever shall Subscribe, or procure Subscriptions, for Six, shall have a
Seventh Book Gratis: So that he that takes this Advantage, will have every Book
for 14 s. in Sheets.

III. That this Subscription-price shall continue to the first day of
Michaelmas-Term next, and no longer: And after that, what remains of the
Impression, shall not be sold under 18 s. in Sheets.

1. The Impression is but small; no more than Five hundred Printed.

2. The Book is now completely finished, and ready to be delivered, in She(...)
or Bound. Binding, Two Shillings Plain.

3. Booksellers shall have the same Allowance for their Collecting
Subscr(...)tions, as was made in the Fasciculus Rerum Expetendarum.


