Die Mercurii 6. Novembris 1689.
ORdered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That the
Thanks of this House be given to the Lord Bishop of Salisbury, for his Sermon
Preached yesterday before this House; And his Lordship is hereby desired to
Print and Publish the same.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliament.

A SERMON Preached before the House of Peers IN THE ABBEY of WESTMINSTER, On
the 5th. of November 1689. BEING GUNPOWDER TREASON-DAY, As Likewise The Day of
his Majesty's Landing IN ENGLAND. By the Right Reverend Father in God GILBERT
Lord Bishop of SARVM.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

THE BISHOP OF SALISBURY'S Sermon before the Lords November 5th. 1689.

A SERMON Preached before the HOUSE of PEERS, IN THE ABBEY of WESTMINSTER, On
the Fifth of November, 1689.
Micah VI. Verse 5. O my People, remember now what Balak King of Moab
consulted, and what Balaam the Son of Beor answered him from Shittim unto
Gilgal, that ye may know the Righteousness of the Lord.
THERE is somewhat in Ease and Prosperity, that does so weaken the Minds of
Men, who are apt enough, even without that softning, to forget all the Good
they receive, and both the Author of it, and the Instruments made use of by him
in it, that it is necessary to call upon them often to reflect on what is past;
and that not only on these visible Blessings of God to them, that fall under
the observation of all the World, but on the secret methods, as well as the
hidden designs of Providence. We are naturally apt to flatter our selves so
much, that we do easily imagine, that the happy things which at any time befall
us, are the effects of our Wisdom, or the rewards of our Virtues; if a worse
principle does not corrupt us, and make us ascribe them either to Fate or
Chance.

No Nation had ever such a wonderful series of Blessings, that did so
distinguish them from all the World round about them, and gave them such signal
Evidences of God's Power and greatness, of his Mercy and severity, of his
hatred of Idolatry, as well as of the Authority of their Law and Religion, as
the Jews had; and yet never was there any Nation under Heaven that was so apt
to forget all this, and to revolt from God into that very Idolatry, which they
saw him punish so severely in others. Never was there a more amasing Scene than
that which they had seen in Egypt, in the Red Sea, and on Mount Sinai; the
Miracles came so thick one after another, they were both so various and
extraordinary, and they were so often and so long repeated, that to one who
lays together all that they saw in a course of Forty years, it appears as
astonishing a part of that History as any of all the Miracles recorded in it,
that a People, which had such a wonderful Evidence given them for their
Religion, should yet have been so bent to Idolatry, and so apt to forget God,
and all that he had done for them. No Nation now in the World can be in this
respect so guilty as they were, because none have seen such Miracles.

But setting aside extraordinary things, it may be affirmed without any
arrogant preferring our own Nation to others, or any partiality for our selves,
in imagining that we are God's favorite People; that within this last Age (or,
if we will carry up the matter to so blessed a Period as the Reformation, that
ever since that time) we have had as many of the distinguishing Characters of
the Jewish Nation upon us, both in the Blessings that we have received from God
on the one hand, and in our Ingratitude to him on the other, as any under
Heaven.

The wonderful conjuncture of Circumstances that concurred to give the
Reformation its first footing among us; The terrible but short lived shaking it
had in Queen Mary's time, which served only to awaken, and to prepare the
Nation to the long and glorious Reign of Queen Elizabeth; The discovering and
defeating all the Designs that were laid, both against her Person and
Government; The signal overthrow of the boasted Invincible Armada. The Uniting
the Island afterward under one Head; by which we were delivered from the
danger of War within our selves. The many Rebellions of the Irish, which gave
occasion to so vast a Colony to be sent thither, which rendered that Island that
had been an Encumbrance on the Government before, so useful to it. The increase
of our Trade, the many Colonies that we have sent into America. The preserving
us during our Civil Wars, from being made a prey to our Neighbors, and from
Strangers getting footing among us. The putting an end to Anarchy and
Enthusiasm in so serene a manner in the Year 60. the long continued Peace and
Happiness since that time, and the preserving us from our own Follies, and the
restraining those Passions which had like to have been fatal to us, if the
precipitated haste of our Enemies had not brought us to our Senses again before
it was too late.

But to come to the repeated Deliverances of this Auspicious Day, when one
Train that was laid to blow up the Nation, in its Head and Representatives,
that was so well managed, and brought so near the Critical Minute, was just
then discovered and prevented; and now again, when another that was laid to
destroy both Church and State, not only in their Representatives but in Person,
has been not indeed discovered, but happily prevented and brought to nothing.
For our late Conspirators were not so cautious as to hide the Fuel that was
prepared for our Destruction, since we saw them persecute in so many other
places of Europe at the same time that they talked of Toleration here among us.
When, I say, we have had such a Series of Deliverances, as perhaps cannot be
matched in History, since that of the Israelites coming out of Egypt; there is
but one thing wanting to make the Parallel complete* and that is our
Ingratitude.

The Israelites were always murmuring both against God, and against the
Instruments whom he had raised up for their Deliverance; and after all that
they had seen to render Idolatry detestable to them, yet they were always apt
to relapse into it. But here the Parallel agrees too exactly; for it is but too
apparent, that upon every new Instance of Gods care of us, we have given also
new Instances of our Rebellion and Ingratitude, of our not only forgetting his
Mercies, but Repining at them, and of our hardening our selves in our Vices and
ill Nature. God charged his Ancient People in the Words before my Text, Verse 3.
O my People what have I done unto thee, and wherein have I weari^^ thee;
testify against me, for I brought, thee up out of the Land of Egypt, and
redeemed thee out of the House of Servants; and I sent before thee M^ses,
Aaron, and Miriam. These Words may be applied to this Nation, in some respect,
more literally than to the Jews, for they might have said that God had wearied
them, by giving them a Religion that had so many troublesome and costly Rites in
it; though on the other hand these were nothing in Comparison of the Rites of
Paganism round about them; but what can we object to God's methods toward us?
He has given us a plain and simple Religion; he has delivered us from all
Bondage, both in our Spiritual and Temporal Concerns; and he has sent us mighty
Deliverers; Aarons in the Church, and Moses and Miriams in the State, an
Elizabeth and a MARY, as well as an Edward, a Charles, and a WILLIAM.

But because a general View of too many things may tend to Evaporate our
Thoughts, rather than to fix them. There is in the Words that I have read, one
Particular set before the Israelites, which carries indeed a great variety of
Instruction in it: They are called on to remember what Balak the King of Moab
Consulted, and what Balaam the Son of Beor Answered.

In order to the setting this in its true light, it will be necessary to take a
short view of that Transaction. When the Israelites, after their long march
through the Wilderness, were ^ome near the Border of the Land, which God ^ad
given them, two Kings that were in their ^ay, Numb. 21. 21.
Sihon King of the Amorites and Og the the King of Bashan, not only refused
them passage through their Kingdoms, which they had desired in a Regular and
Peaceable way; but not satisfied with this, they carried the Matter further,
and brought together their Forces to stop their march; but they were defeated
and their Kingdoms were conquered. Upon this Balak King of Moab apprehended
that he might likewise become a Prey to them: so he fancying, according to the
Idolatry of that time, that there were Peculiar Gods for every Nation and that
the Successes of a Nation depended on the prevalency of the Deity that
protected it, sent to Balaam, who was a Prophet held in Veneration in those
Parts, hoping that if he could be got to curse them, then the Divinity which
inspired him would espouse the Qua^rel. It were too long a Digression here to
examine Balaams Prophecy, who seems to have acknowledged the true God, and to
have ha^ Divine Inspirations. He had a strange mixture in him, an Awe of God,
and yet a love (...) Money; he was a Prophet of God, and ye^ a Servant of the
Devil; he either could no^ or would not falsify the Divine Enthusiasm that
were Impressed on his Mind, and yet (...) could give the most effectual Council
possible to Balak, for his first debauching the Israelites, and then destroying
them. The most probable account of Balaam's Inspiration is this, that God
continued for some Ages after the Flood, to raise up in several Nations
Prophets by an immediate Commission to be his Witnesses against Idolatry, and
against the Corruption of the Traditional Religion, which was handed down by
the first and long-lived Patriarchs: But so imperfect was this Conveiance,
though the long Lives of the Fathers gave it advantages, which it could never
have since that time, that Men did very quickly corrupt both their Religion and
their Morals; and in Abraham's time Idolatry had got strange footing all the
World over: Men in all Ages have had a strange biass to a sensible Religion,
and to a visible Object of it. In many of these Nations it is highly probable,
that God raised up both Prophets and Preachers of Righteousness, that so they
might be without excuse: And as Noah warned the Old World, and Lot the Men of
Sodom, before those Terrible Judgments of God which destroyed them fell upon
them; so Melchisedeck and Balaam seem to have been inspired Persons, in whom
God made the last Essay upon these Nations. But with this difference, that the
former was a Person that did in all things answer his Character; whereas the
other was only passive in his Inspirations; but these had no effect upon
himself; so that while he Preached to others he himself was a Reprobate: For
though God made such impressions on his Imagination, as gave him views of
future Events, and furnished him in the expressing them with a due degree of
Sublimity of Style, yet these neither came from his Heart, nor could make any
Impression upon it. He loved Balak's Presents, Numb 22. 7.
which are called the rewards of his Divination, so well, that he would gladly
have done any thing to have deserved them at his hands; yet he was so
restrained by the Divine Prohibition, that he refused to go to him at first:
But a second Message, carried by more Honorable Messengers, Verse 13. 15.
enforced with a Promise of Promoting him to great honor, and of doing
whatsoever he should desire of him, was a Bait which he could not reject; so
his Heart being set on going, God so far gave way to it, that he suffered him
to go, Verse 20.
that from the Prophesies which he should be forced to Pronounce, there might
be a further Declaration made of his Blessing the Israelites, not only in the
Success and Prosperity that was then to attend upon them, but in that wonderful
view that was given him of a Star, that at a great distance of time should
shine, Numb. 24.
and that then a Scepter should rise out of Israel, Verse 17. 19.
to which all the Nations round about should submit; for out of Jacob should he
come that was to have Dominion. Balak according to his fond and Superstitious
Notions, fancied that the offering many Sacrifices, and the giving Balaam a new
Prospect of the Israelites in several Places, would have changed the Matter;
and so he gave him three different views of them, at every one of which there
were Seven Altars built, and a Bullock and a Ram were offered on every one of
these Altars; but all the Preparation that Balak made, and all this shifting
the Scene of often, had no other Effect, Numb. 23. 24.
but that reitterated Blessings on the Israelites were Pronounced at every
time: And when this provoked Balak so much, that he would have no more of
Balaam's Prophesies, Numb. 24. 10. 17.
he then of himself gave forth the most express and positive one of them all,
in favor of the Jewish Nation, of their Success, and of that vast Glory that
should accrue to them, when that Prince, whose appearance should be accompanied
with a Star, should come. But though Balaam, Numb. 22. 23.
as he said himself, had no power to speak any thing but the words which God
should put in his mouth; in which it seems he was so entirely Passive, that he
was not at all Master of himself, when he fell into those Trances; yet after
those Essays he had vainly made to Curse them, he offer^d an advice to Balak,
that had a more certain Effect than all the Curses that were desired from him
could have had; which was this, he knew well that God's favor to that People
was Conditional, and so could last no longer than they should continue
observing their Part of the Covenant; therefore he Counseled Balak to
endeavor first to Corrupt their Morals, and then to Debauch them in their
Religion; or as it is expressed by the Spirit of God, Rev. 2. 4. He taught
Balak to cast a Stumbling Block before the People of Israel, to eat things
Sacrificed to Idols, and to commit Fornication; lewd Women were sent in among
them, to entice them first to Vice, and then to the Idolatry of Baal-peor; the
Rites of which were so Indecent, that as the Scripture wraps them up in general
words; so it is better to pass them over, than to explain them. This had the
desired effect; the People did defile themselves in both; They sat down to eat
and drink, and rose up to play. But, though God was by this highly provoked,
yet he would not deliver them up into the Hands of their Enemies, he sent a
Plague among them, by which in one day there fell Four and twenty Thousand.
Numb. 25. v. 1.
This was done in Shittim, which is here mentioned in my Text; but when the
Wrath of God had broke out v. 4. 5.
upon them, in so severe a manner, that besides the destruction made by the
Plague, Moses was commanded by God to hang up all the Heads of the People
against the Sun; and he charged the Judges to stay every one of them his Men
that were joined unto Baalpeor; this struck the whole Congregation, so that
they were weeping before the Door of the Tabernacle. But so impudent a thing is
Vice, when strengthened by Idolatry, that Zunri, one of the Princes of Israel,
brought in a Prostitute before them all, as if he had gloried in that which was
his shame. This was an Object that must needs have given Horror to all that
saw it, Ps. 106.
and it raised such Indignation in Phinehas, that in a Transport of Zeal he
killed them both; upon which the Plague was staid, God was reconciled to his
People, and in a Battle which they had soon after this, Numb. 16. 31. v. 8.
Balaam, that was the Author of this cursed Advice, was slain: This is that
transaction which the Prophet calls upon them to remember, and in doing it, to
consider of the Righteousness of the Lord. Righteousness in the strict notion
of the Word, is Justice; and in that sense they might, in calling to mind the
passages of that story, reflect on God's righteous Judgments in punishing their
Fathers, when they had departed from him, in sending a Plague among them; in
stopping it upon their Repentance, and upon Phinehas's zealous deportment; and
in turning the course of his Wrath upon the wicked Instruments that had cast
those Temptations in their way, and particularly on Balaam, the chief Author of
the Counsel. Ps. 112. 8,.9.
But if Righteousness may be taken, Ps. 116. 5.
as it often is, in a larger sense, Prove. 10. 2.
for Goodness and Mercy, Mar. 1. 19.
then these words import this, That in reflecting on that Story, they should
observe God's Goodness to his People, in disappointing all the Designs of their
Enemies; in restraining a false Prophet, that would have willingly divined for
hire, and prophesied whatsoever Balak should have dictated to him; and
afterward, in not suffering that Corruption, which began to spread among the
Israelites, to go long unpunished; but by the early punishing of a few, staying
the Progress of the Defection, and upon that zealous performance of Phinehas,
staying the Plague likewise. Here are eminent Characters both of Justice and
Mercy: And therefore, since the People were at this time so apt to fall into
Idolatry, it was fit to put them in mind both of the Severity and of the
Goodness of God, that in both they might see effectual Reasons to persuade them
to serve God, as it is expressed in the following words, in doing Justice,
loving Mercy, and in walking humbly with their God.

So far I have gone in explaining my Text, as it related to the People of
Israel; I come now to make it look toward this Nation, and the Blessings of
this Happy day: I shall not stretch the Parallel so far, as to make every thing
come within it, or to force any strained Allusions, but shall only consider
such things as are both obvious and easy. It is well known, that when we had
got out of the House of Bondage, the neighboring Nations began to be afraid of
us, they combined against us, to enslave and destroy us; they had their false
Prophet more entirely at their command, than Balaam was at Balak's, who was, of
his own accord, ready enough to curse us: he needed no Hire to be persuaded to
it, his own Interest was deep enough engaged in it. It is true, his Thunders
were spent in angry and lofty words, without the designed effect: Wars were
indeed raised within and without, and a mighty League was formed above an Age
ago, which went on with great success for several years, till it had its Crisis
in 88, and then a Fleet, armed with all that either the Blessings or Curses of
that See could add to it, came against us, while we seemed to be as Sheep
numbered out to the Slaughter, or, at least, appointed to be Slaves; but all
this Storm went over, and in it we had many occasions, that invited us to
reflect on the Righteousness of the Lord; when all that Scene of Curses was
spent and turned on them that had denounced them against us: Then the open
Methods of Enmity proving so unsuccessful, secreter Practices were thought the
safer: We were cursed, and devoted to endless Destruction, so that nothing was
thought too bad for us; and by a succession of many Conspiracies, the Life of
that Great Princess, upon which our Safety then depended, was struck at; most
of those were well laid, many of them were almost quite ripe, when by
unlook'd-for Accidents and Methods they were discovered: At last a Design was
laid, in which there was a complicated Train of all the Mischief that could
possibly be done us in one minute; and even that was brought so near its
conclusion, that had not the tenderness of a Sister prevailed over her zeal for
her Religion, to the preserving her Brother, as is generally believed, the
greatest and happiest Nation in Europe, had become, in a moment, the most
miserable. How far this was concerted among the Balaks and Balaams of that
time, we do not certainly know: But, a Case of this nature being put by one of
their Writers some years before, in a printed Book, and determined in the
Negative, That a Priest was bound not to reveal any such design, if discovered
to him in Confession; gives a shrewd indication, that it was then projected
among a sort of Men, who have never seemed guilty of the least tenderness of
Nature, when Heresy was in the case. But when their Curses proved harmless
things, and their Designs were fatal only to themselves, and to their Friends;
then they fell on new Methods, which have indeed succeeded better with them.
One has been the dividing us among our selves, and the engaging us into such
mutual quarrellings, that their assistance might be always some way or other
necessary to the Party that was deprest. Thus, though they themselves were the
most inconsiderable Party in the Nation, yet they have so managed the matter by
shifting sides, as their Interests led them to it; that they who could not have
stood it out by their own strength, yet by joining themselves to those who
needed such an accession, and were willing to support themselves by it, came
not only to preserve themselves, but to make a much more considerable Figure
among us, than without those their Practices and our own Follies, they could
ever have pretended to. They had Art enough on the one hand to make one side
maintain vigorously some indifferent things, while they could on the other hand
engage the other to as obstinate an opposition to them: They knew well, that in
this Dispute, which side soever lost, they must needs gain, both by the
weakening that it gave us, and by the advantages that it furnished them: For,
while we grew afraid only of one another, and angry only at one another; they
were no more looked after; and so they had opportunities to work so long under
ground and unobserved, that they had almost quite undermined us before we were
sensible of our danger: And when they could conceal it no longer, but that the
Mask must fall off, they even then could so far work on our mutual Animosities
as to make us Instruments for doing half their work: while some were so far
deluded, as to be their Tools in the destroying our Civil Liberties, and
others, who had complained of the former, had yet no sooner an opportunity
offered them, than they struck in to overthrow all the Security that we had for
our Religion, under the pretense of enjoying a Toleration, when the price of it
was the owning a Dispensing Power, that must needs have devoured all in a
little time. So that both sides have deserved by Turns this Reproach; That our
Enemies could manage their Passions so, as to graft their own Designs on them,
and to make them grow out of them, only with this difference, That the last
deceived are certainly the more inexcusable, since they had seen and censured
other men's Errors, and yet fell into the same Follies themselves, when the
Designs were become more barefaced; and, by consequence, Errors of that sort
were the more Criminal. This we have all felt, so long, that it may be now
reasonably expected, that the Experience of past-times, and the public and
solemn Promises that were made in the late Distress, should now bring us to a
right temper, and, that we should now join all our Forces together, for we
shall have occasion for our whole strength, while we struggle with such
powerful and vigilant Enemies.

3. But the second Artifice, which comes nearer to that in my Text, has been no
less succesful to Them, than fatal to Us; and that is, The vitiating all our
Notions of Religion, and the corrupting the Morals of the whole Nation. It is
plain that they thought it was a good step to bring us over to their Religion,
once to make us have none of our own. True Morality can never bear a Religion
that dissolves all Duties, and dispences with all Obligations; nor can a sense
of Religion, once rightly awak'ned, bear the impositions of Tyranny,
Superstition, and Infallibility: Therefore it was necessary for them to
propagate Atheism among us, since men that had no Religion could easily be
brought to profess that which is next to none, and that agreed best with their
Interests. And this they carried on in one respect very avowedly; for in their
Books they studied plainly to prove, That men could have no Certainty for the
Christian Religion, unless they took it on their word; and so they set
themselves to weaken the force of all those Arguments by which the Truth of the
Christian Faith is proved, and to put the whole Authority of it upon the
Testimony of the Church. This was no small comfort to the Atheists, who from
the common Principles of Sense saw the unreasonableness of believing or
submitting implicitly to the Authority of the Church, and so were glad to be
told that this was all the Evidence that could be brought for Christianity it
self.

But the debauching our Morals, was that which seemed chiefly necessary for the
completing their Designs; and in this their Agents had too much matter to work
upon. The folly and hypocrisy of some, that in the late Times had given great
Advantages against the profession of Religion, was a handle that they failed
not to make use of, to render all secret Prayer, the reading the Scriptures,
and the observation of the Lord's Day, together with all the shows of Piety,
ridiculous; Morality was thought the effect of a mean Education, and of a
narrow Mind; True Piety was despised as a Cant; The strictness of Virtue, the
fidelity to the Vow of Marriage, Chastity, and Sobriety, were put out of
countenance, as signs of ill-breeding, or of a weak and superstitious temper.
It looked big and gallant to laugh at Religion, to despise the Worship of God,
to affront those that Ministered in Holy Things, and to set up for the most
avowed Disorders on that Day which is dedicated to the Worship of God. The open
practice of the blackest Vices, was a good step to assure a man of their
favor, and to make him pass for one on whom they could depend. Instruments of
Vice were ready to carry on the Design: and, as if we had been to be drawn to
their Idolatry by the same sort of persons that were sent in by Balak to
corrupt the Israalites, their Balaks had likewise their Moabitish Women to send
among us; which was practiced almost as barefacedly as when Zimri brought in
Cosbi before the door of the Tabernacle in the face of the whole Congregation.

This was a Train that being once laid, and having taken fire, could not but
prove fatal to a Nation that is but too apt to be corrupted; and the effects of
it we feel to this day: For Vice having overrun us so entirely as once it did,
we cannot be soon freed from so infectious a Disease; which, wheresoever it
once takes root, drives it so deep, that it cannot be easily extirpated. When a
Nation is once given up to pleasure, and to a profuseness of living, to
Falsehood and Treachery, and to all the arts of dissembling and supplanting one
another, it must be the work of an Age to bring men back to a decent Frugality
and Sobriety, to an exactness of Truth, and a strictness of Virtue. Nature will
be long of the side of Pleasure and Interest; these things being soon learned,
and foarce ever forgotten.

Out of a due reflection on all these things, we must come at last to know the
Righteousness of the Lord: God has disappointed the Councels of our Enemies,
and made all their Diviners mad; they have been taken in their own Craft, and
in the Net which they laid for us was their own foot taken. In every step that
they made, a Spirit of Giddiness and Infatuation seemed to have been poured out
upon them. I need not repeat things that must still be fresh in all your
memory, and I hope will be so long; for we must ever acknowledge, that we owe
our Preservation and Deliverance much more to Their Folly, than to Our own
Wisdom. When we were broken to pieces, they used Arts on design indeed to
divide us further, but they helped to reconcile us: When we were guilty, even
to madness, of believing every Promise that they made us, they took care to let
us see how little regard they themselves had to any of them: When we could not
believe that they would break any of our Laws, they broke through them all at
once, and showed us what feeble things either Promises or Laws are, when
Heresy stands in their way. And thus God in his just and righteous Judgments
suffered them so far to precipitate all matters, that they ruined their own
designs by their over driving them.

We must have acknowledged that God had been just and righteous, if he had
delivered us over as a prey unto them. We had by our contempt of the Gospel,
and by the ill use we had made of all his Mercies, and of all former
Deliverances, provoked him to cast us off; and when we consider the extreme
Miseries into which he has cast other Churches, the long Oppression, and the
hard struggle through which Scotland has passed, and the pangs in which Ireland
continues still, being now a Scene of Blood and Misery, and like to be so yet
for some time, if we do not more effectually interpose for bringing their
Deliverance to a quicker Conclusion; and if we compare with all this, the
gentle Visitation that we have had, and that has passed over us in so easy and
harmless a manner, that few broke their sleep, or interrupted their method of
living for it: We must, in our reflections on these things, change the
signification of the word Righteousness, and instead of using it in the sense
that imports strict Justice, we must take it in the other that imports Mercy
and Goodness; for who can reflect on these Two Fifths of November, without
adoring the riches of God's Mercy and Goodness to us in them both? The former
was in it self a great Deliverance, but its Consequences were not so signal as
might have been expected. If that cursed Train had wrought the designed Effect,
it had been indeed the most fatal Blow that ever was given: but after all, the
Nation, though cast by it into a most dreadful Convulsion, would probably have
had strength enough to have recovered it self; the Crime would have been
revenged, and the Nation for ever purged from all such Instruments of Cruelty.
The Circumstances of the Discovery, and the Judgments of God on the
Conspirators, had particular Characters of his Righteousness in them, as the
prevarications and denials of the Criminals had also their Characters of that
cursed School in which they had learned the depths of Satan. The whole thing
was such a Contexture of the Wickedness of Man on the One hand, and of the
Mercy and Goodness of God on the Other, as is indeed without an Example in the
Histories of former Times.

But without derogating from the Blessing of such a Wonderful Preservation, it
may be affirmed, That as the Danger which we lately run was greater, so by
Consequence, the Deliverance which had its beginning this day, is not only the
fresher Blessing, and so the more sensible to us; but is likewise the more
Important in it self of the two. The Gunpowder-Treason was a Personal thing,
but the late Conspiracy was National: The former was levelled at the person of
one King, and some of the Branches of the Royal Family, but the latter was
against the Crown it self; by which one half of that Authority that belongs to
it, was to have been surrendered up to Rome, and the other half must have become
tributary to France. Our Religion must indeed have suffered highly by the one;
but it was to have been quite extirpated by the other. A great many had
perished in a quick and sudden fire by the one; whereas the end of the other
would have been, that we must all have languished in such slow fires as
Inquisitors might have made for us, or under the studied Cruelties of Dragoons,
according to the French Pattern, if we would not have consigned our selves over
to Everlasting Burnings, by renouncing our Religion. Our Laws and Liberties
might have suffered in the One, though Spain at that time was not in a condition
to have made so great a Conquest: But all must have gone now, when they had so
vast a Power so near them as France is, to have supported and completed that
Destruction of our Liberties which was so barefacedly begun, and that had
already made so great a progress among us.

And when I have named France, I have said all that is necessary to give you a
Complete Idea of the Blackest Tyranny over Men's Consciences, Persons, and
Estates, that can possibly be imagined, where every Thing that the Subject
possesses is at the Mercy of a boundless Power, and of a Severity that has no
mixtures either of Truth or Goodness to govern or allay it; and by which
Subjects are treated with as much Cruelty, as Enemies are with Barbarity; That
has broke through all that is Sacred among Men, and has bid Defiance both to
Heaven and Earth. This is a short view of that from which we are now a second
time delivered. I need not enlarge on the particular Characters of the Hand of
God in our Deliverance. These were too visible not to have been observed by all
Men, and they are yet too fresh in our Memories to be forgotten by any; but
that which few are apt either to reflect on, or to remember, is the Design of
Heaven in all this, that so we may understand the loving Kindness, as well as
the Righteousness of the Lord in it.

We had by our Sins, and our Divisions, brought our selves very low, we had
provoked God, and irritated one another, therefore he has made us to see and
feel the Effects both of our Sins and Follies, that so we may be brought to
repent of the one, and to correct the other.

Let us then resolve to turn to God in good earnest, and not to provoke him any
more, lest if we stir up his Wrath again against us, his Displeasure break out
upon us in as terrible a manner as has been hitherto again and again designed
by our Enemies, but still prevented by his watchful Providence.

Let us grow ashamed of those Vices which have so dispirited and corrupted the
Nation, that we were both fit for Destruction, and had made our selves an easy
Prey to our Enemies, being so shamefully degenerated from the Virtues of our
Ancestors. Let us compose our Minds to softer Thoughts of one another, that
those Animosities which have arisen from some small Diversities in Opinions and
Ceremonies, may be allayed, and that we may make such Observations on the
Practices of our Enemies, as from these to form righter Judgments of Things,
and so come to such temperate Resolutions, as to love one another; at least, if
we cannot be so wise, or so happy as to agree all our Differences.

And let us in a more particular manner rejoice in the Goodness of God who now
gives us the hopes of happy Days, under the Man whom he has made so strong for
Himself, whom he made first the Instrument of saving the best Church and People
upon Earth after our own, and who now again has been put on to preserve and
rescue us, as if he were born to be the Deliverer and Darling of Mankind. God
be blessed for it, we have now a King and Queen, whose Examples we hope shall
have a great an Influence over us for making us truly Good, as their Government
has for making us really Happy.

Let us then study to be Peaceable and Obedient to them; and thankful to God
for them, and then we need not fear what either the Balaks or the Balaams, that
are contriving our Destruction, and consulting the Methods of doing it, can
project or set on foot against us. For if we are at peace with God, and united
at Home, we may assure our selves, that the course of Blessings which has
hitherto followed Him, whom God in his Providence has set over us, shall not be
interrupted but by a glorious Progress of Triumphs it shall be carried on, till
both the Balak that is now set on our Destruction, shall fall before him, and
those Balaams that divine for her, and that prophesy falsely, be put to
confusion: Which God of his great Mercy grant, for the glory of his great Name,
through Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for Ric. Chiswell.
THE Doctrine of Non-Resistance, or Passive Obedience no way concerned in the
Controversies now depending between the Willia^^^ and the Iacobites.

Jacobi Usserii Armachani Archiep. Historia dogmatica Controversiae inter
Orthodoxos and Pontificios de Scripturis and Sacris Vernaculis, nunc primum
(...) Accesserunt Ejusdem dissertationes de Pseudo-Dionysii scriptis, and de
Epistola ad Laodicenos ante hac inedite. Descripsit, digessit and notis atque
Auctuario (...) pletavit Henricus Wharton, A. M. R. Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacris
Domest. 4o

A Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a new Separation (...) Account
of the Oaths. With an Answer to The History of Passive Obedie^^^.

A Discourse concerning the Ecclesiastical Commission opened in the
Ierusalem-Chamber, October. 10. 1689.

Fasciculus Rerum expetendarum and fugiendarum cum Appendice (underta^^ to be
Printed upon Subscription, by Richard Chiswell) is now finished, (...) will be
ready for delivery on the 25th day of this instant November, at (...) Rose and
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard; to which place all Subscrib^^^ are desired to
send in their second Payment, and their Acquittances for (...) First.


