Dr. BURNET'S TRAVELS, OR LETTERS CONTAINING An ACCOUNT Of what Seemed most
Remarkable IN Switzerland, Italy, France, and Germany, etc.


Written by GILBERT BVRNET, D.D. TO THE Honorable R. B. Esquire; Fellow of the
Royal Society.

At, AMSTERDAM, Printed, for Peter Savouret and W. Fenner in Warmoes-street
near the Dam, 1687.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
THE Reverend Author's Reflections upon Varilla's his History of Heresy, having
met with the Reception owing to the merit of all his Productions, has made me
sensible, that I can never mount to a higher strain of obliging the Public,
than in Continuing to entertain it with the Masterly pieces of the same hand;
this Consideration induced me to go to Work upon these his incomparable
Traveling Remarks, and having in this, as well as I had in the Reflections, the
advantage of an English Gentleman to Correct and Over-see the Press, this
Edition will be found to be altogether refined, from the gross and innumerable
faults, with which the Impression of Rotterdam is not throughout only,
blemished, but almost rendered unintelligible. Thus, kind Reader, I may well
expect from thee a due Sense of this my Industrious Performance, and that thou will have a suitable reguard for a Present of such inestimable value.

Vale. P. Savouret.

LETTERS, CONTAINING An Account of what seemed most remarkable in Switzerland,
in various Parts of Germany and Italy, etc.
LETTER I. Zurich, the First of September, 1685.
SIR,
IT is so common to write Travels, that for one who has seen so little, and as
it were in haste, it may look like a presumptuous Affectation to be reckoned
among Voyagers, if he attempts to say any thing upon so short a Ramble, and
concerning Places so much visited, and by consequence so well known: Yet having
had opportunities that do not offer themselves to all that travel, and having
joined to those a curiosity almost equal to the advantages I enjoyed, I fancy
it will not be an ungrateful Entertainment, if I give you some account of those
things that pleased me most in the Places through which I have passed: but I
will avoid saying such things as occurr in ordinary Books, for which I refer
you to the Prints; for as you know that I have no great inclination to copy
what others have said; so a Traveller has not leisure nor humor enough for so
dull an Employment.

As I came all the way from Paris to Lions, I was amazed to see so much misery
as appeared, not only in Villages, but even in big Towns, where all the marks
of an extreme Poverty, showed themselves both in the Buildings, the Clothes,
and almost in the Looks of the Inhabitants. And a general dis-peopling in all
the Towns, was a very visible effect of the hardships under which they lay.

I need tell you nothing of the irregular and yet magnificent Situation of
Lions, of the noble Rivers that meet there, of the Rock cut from so vast a
height for a Prison, of the Carthusians Gardens, of the Townhouse, of the
Jesuits College and Library, of the famous Nunnery of St. Peter, of the
Churches, particularly St. Irenees, of the Remnants of the Aqueducts, of the
Columns and the old Mosaic in the Abbey Dean: in short, Mr. Spon has given
such an account of the Curiosities there, that it were a very presumptuous
Attempt to offer to come after him.

The Speech of Claudius engraven on a Plate of Brass, and set in the end of the
low Walk in the Townhouse, is one of the noblest Antiquities in the World; by
which we see the way of Writing and Pointing in that Age very copiously. The
Shield of Silver of twenty two pound weight, in which some Remains of gilding
do yet appear, and that seems to represent that generous Action of Scipio's, of
restoring a fair Captive to a Celtiberian Prince, is certainly the noblest
piece of Plate that is now extant: the embossing of it is so fine and so
entire, that it is indeed unvaluable; and if there were an Inscription upon it
to put us beyond conjecture, it were yet much more inestimable.

A great many Inscriptions are to be seen of the late and barbarous Ages, as
Bonum Memorium, and Epitaphium hunc. There are twenty three Inscriptions in the
Garden of the Fathers of Mercy, but so placed as it shows how little those who
possess them do either understand or value them. I shall only give you one,
because I made a little Reflection on it, though it is not perhaps too well
grounded, because none of the Critics have thought on it.

The Inscription is this, D. M. Et Memoriae AEternae Sutiae Anthidis. Quae
vixit Annis XXV. M. XI. DV. Quae dum Nimia pia fuit, facta est Impia: and Attio
Probatiolo, Cecalius Calistio Conjux and Pater, and sibi vivo ponendum curavit
and sub ascia dedicavit. This must be toward the barbarous Age, as appears by
the false Latin in Nimia: But the Inscription seems so extravagant, that a man
dedicating a Burial-stone for his Wife and Son, and under which himself was to
be laid, with Ceremonies of Religion, should tax his Wife of Impiety, and give
so extraordinary an account of her becoming so through an excess of Piety, that
it deserves some consideration.

It seems the Impiety was public, otherwise a Husband would not have recorded
it in such a manner; and it is plain that he thought it rose from an excess of
Piety.

I need not examine the Conjectures of others; but will choose rather to give
you my own, and submit it to your censure.

It seems to me, that this Sutia Anthis was a Christian; for the Christians,
because they would not worship the Gods of the Heathens, nor participate with
them in their sacred Rites, were accused both of Atheism and Impiety. This is
so often objected, and the Fathers in their Apologies have answered it so
often, that it were lost labor to prove it: so this Wife of Cerealius Calistio
having turned Christian, it seems he thought he was bound to take some notice
of it in the Inscription. But by it he gives a honorable Character of the
Christian Doctrine at the same time that he seems to accuse it; that through an
excess of Piety his Wise was carried to it; since a mind seriously possessed
with a true sense of Piety could not avoid the falling under a distaste of
Paganism, and the becoming Christian.

At Grenoble there is not much to be seen. The learned Mr. Chorier has some
Manuscripts of considerable Antiquity. In one of Vegetius de re Militari, there
is a clear correction of a Passage that in all the printed Editions is not
sense. In the Chapter of the size of the Soldiers, he begins; Scio semper
mensuram a Mario Consule exactam: a is in no MS. and Mario Consule is a mistake
for trium Cubitorum, for III which are for trium have been read M. and C, which
stands for Cubitorum, as appears by all that follows, was by a mistake read
Consule; so the true reading of that Passage, is, Scio mensuram trium Cubitorum
fuisse semper exactam. He showed me another MS. of about five or six hundred
years old, in which St. John's Revelation is contained, all exemplified in
Figures; and after that came Aesop's Fables, likewise all designed in Figures:
from which he inferred, that those who designed those two Books valued both
equally, and so put them together.

I will not describe the Valley of Dauphine, all to Chambery, nor entertain you
with a Landscape of the Country, which deserves a better Pencil than mine, and
in which the height and rudeness of the Mountains that almost shut upon it,
together with the beauty, the evenness, and fruitfulness of the Valley, that is
all along well watered with the River of Liserre, make such an agreeable
mixture, that this vast diversity of Objects that do at once fill the Eye,
gives it a very entertaining Prospect.

Chambery has nothing in it that deserves a long Description; and Geneva is too
well known to be much insisted on. It is a little State, but it has so many
good Constitutions in it, that the greatest may justly learn at it. The Chamber
of the Corn has always two years Provision for the City in store, and forces
none but the Bakers to buy of it at a taxed price; and so it is both necessary
for any Extremities under which the State may fall, and is likewise of great
advantage; for it gives a good yearly Income, that has helped the State to pay
near a Million of Debt contracted during the Wars; and the Citizens are not
oppressed by it; for every Inhabitant may buy his own Corn as he pleases, only
Public Houses must buy from the Chamber. And if one will compare the faith of
Rome and Geneva together by this particular, he will be enforced to prefer the
latter; for if good Works are a strong presumption, if not a sure Indication of
a good Faith, then Justice being a good Work of the first form, Geneva will
certainly carry it.

At Rome, the Pope buys in all the Corn of the Patrimony; for none of the
Landlords can sell it either to Merchants or Bakers. He buys it at five Crowns
their Measure, and even that is slowly and ill paid; so that there was eight
hundred thousand Crowns owing upon that score when I was at Rome. In selling
this out, the Measure is lessened a fifth part, and the price of the whole is
doubled; so that what was bought at five Crowns, is sold out at twelve: and if
the Bakers, who are obliged to take a determined quantity of Corn from the
Chamber, cannot retail out all that is imposed upon them, but are forced to
return some part of it back, the Chamber discounts to them only the first price
of five Crowns: whereas in Geneva the measure by which they buy and sell is the
same; and the Gain is so inconsiderable, that it is very little beyond the
common Market price: so that upon the whole matter, the Chamber of the Corn is
but the Merchant to the State. But if the Public makes a moderate Gain by the
Corn, that and all the other Revenues of this small Commonwealth are so well
employed, that there is no cause of complaint given in the Administration of
the public Purse; which with the advanta es that arise out of the Chamber of
the Corn, is about one hundred thousand Crowns Revenue. But there is much to go
out of this: Three hundred Soldiers are paid; an Arsenal is maintained, that
in proportion to the State is the greatest in the World; for it contains Arms
for more men than are in the State: there is a great number of Ministers and
Professors, in all twenty four, paid out of it, besides all the public
Charges and Offices of the Government. Every one of the lesser Council of
twenty five, having a hundred Crowns, and every Syndic having two hundred
Crowns Pension: and after all this come the accidental Charges of the Deputies,
that they are obliged to send often to Paris, to Savoy, and to Zwitzerland; so
that it is very apparent, no man can enrich himself at the Cost of the Public.
And the appointments of the little Council are a very small recompense for the
great attendance that they are obliged to give the Public, which is commonly
four or five hours a day. The Salary for the Professors and Ministers is indeed
small, not above two hundred Crowns; but to balance this, which was a more
competent Provision when it was first set off a hundred and fifty years ago,
the price of all things, and the way of living, being now much heightened, those
Employments are here held in their due Reputation, and the richest Citizens in
the Town breed up their Children so as to qualify them for those Places: And a
Minister that is suitable to his Character, is thought so good a Match, that
generally they have such Estates, either by Succession or Marriage, as support
them sutably to the rank they hold. And in Geneva there is so great a
regulation upon Expenses of all sorts, that a small Sum goes a great way. It is
a surprising thing, to see so much Learning as one finds in Geneva, not only
among those whose Profession obliges them to Study, but among the Magistrates
and Citizens; and if there are not many men of the first form of Learning among
them, yet every body almost here has a good tincture of a learned Education;
insomuch that they are Masters of the Latin, they know the Controversies of
Religion and History, and they are generally men of good sense.

There is an universal Civility, not only toward Strangers, but toward one
another, that reigns all the Town over, and leans to an excess; so that in them
one sees a mixture of a French Openness, and an Italian Exactness: there is
indeed a little too much of the last.

The public Justice of the City is quick and good, and more commended than the
private Justice of those that deal in Trade: a want of Sincerity is much
lamented by those that know the Town wall. There is no public Lewdness
to^lerated, and the disorders of that sort are managed with great address. And
notwithstanding their Neighborhood to the Switzers, drinking is very little
known among them. One of the best parts of their Law is the way of selling
Estates; which is likewise practiced in Switzerland, and is called
Subhastation, from the Roman Custom of selling Subhasta. A man that is to buy
an Estate agrees with the Owner, and then intimates it to the Government; who
order three several Proclamations to be made six Weeks one after another, of
the intended Sale, that is to be on such a day: when the day comes, the
Creditors of the Seller, if they apprehend that the Estate is sold at an
under-value, may out-bid the Buyer; but if they do not interpose, the Buyer
delivers the money to the State, which upon that gives him his Title to the
Estate, which can never be so much as brought under a Debate in Law; and the
price is paid into the State, and is by them given either to the Debtors of the
Seller, if he owes money, or to the Seller himself.

This Custom prevails likewise in Swisse, where also twelve Years Possession
gives a Prescription; so that in no place of the World are the Titles to
Estates so secure as here. The Constitution of the Government is the same both
in Geneva, and in most of the Cantons. The Sovereignty lies in the Council of
Two hundred, and this Council chooses out of its number Twenty five, who are the
lesser Council; and the censure of the Twenty five belongs to the great
Council: they are chosen by a sort of Ballet; so that it is not known for whom
they give their Votes: which is an effectual method to suppress Factions and
Resentments; since in a competition no man can know who voted for him or
against him: yet the Election is not so carried, but that the whole Town is in
an Intrigue concerning it: for since the being of the little Council leads one
to the Sindicat, which is the chief Honor of the State; this Dignity is
courted here with as active and sollicitous an Ambition, as appears elsewhere
for greater matters. The Two hundred are chosen and censured by the Twenty
five; so that these two Councils, which are both for Life, are checks one upon
another. The Magistracy is in the one, and the Sovereignty in the other. The
Number of Twenty five is never exceeded in the lesser Council; but for the
greater, though it passes by the Name of the Council of Two hundred, yet there
are commonly eight or ten more: so that notwithstanding the absence or sickness
of some of the Number, they may still be able to call together near the full
Number. There is another Council besides these two, composed of Sixty,
consisting of those of the Two hundred that have borne Offices, such as
Auditors, Attorney-Generals, or those that have been in other Employments,
which are given for a determinate number of Years: This Court has no Authority,
but is called together by the Twenty five, when any extraordinary occasion
makes it advisable for them to call for a more general Concurrence in the
Resolutions that they are about to form. And this Council is of the nature of a
Council of State that only gives Advice, but has no power in it self to enforce
its Advices. The whole Body of the Burgesses chooses the Sindicks the first
Sunday in the Year, and there are some other Elections that do likewise belong
to them. The difference between the Burgesses and Citizens is, that the former
degree may be bought or given to Strangers, and they are capable to be of the
Two hundred: but none is a Citizen but he that is the Son of a Burgess, and
that is born within the Town.

I need say no more of the Constitution of this little Republic: Its chief
support is in the firm Alliance that has stood now so long between it and the
Cantons of Bern and Zurich; and it is so visibly the Interest of all
Switzerland to preserve it as the Key, by which it may be all laid open: that
if the Cantons had not forgotten their Interest so palpably in suffering the
French to become Masters of the Franche Comte, one would think that they would
not be capable of suffering Geneva to be touched: for all that can be done in
fortifying the Town, can signify no more, but to put it in case to resist a
Surprise or Scalade; since if a Royal Army comes against it to besiege it in
form, it is certain, that unless the Switzers come down with a Force able to
raise the Siege, those within will be able to make a very short resistance.

From Geneva I went throngh the Country of Vaud or the Valley, and Lausanne,
its chief Town, in my way to Bern. The Town of Lausanne is situated on three
Hills, so that the whole Town is ascent and descent, and that very steep,
chiefly on the side on which the Church stands, which is a very noble Fabric.
The South-wall of the Cross was so split by an Earthquake about thirty years
ago, that there was a rent made from top to bottom above a foot wide; which was
so closed up ten years after by another Earthquake, that now one only sees
where the breach was. This extravagant situation of the Town was occasioned by
a Legend of some Miracles wrought near the Church: which prevailed so much on
the Credulity of that Age, that by it the Church, and so in consequence the
Buildings near it, were added to the old Town, which stood on the other Hill,
where there was a Town made on the Highway from the Lake into Switzerland, to
which the chief Privileges of the Town, particularly the judicature of Life
and Death, do still belong. Between Geneva and this, lies the Lake which at the
one end is called the Lake of Geneva, and at the other the Lake of Lausanne. I
need not mention the Dimensions of it which are so well known, only in some
Places the depth has never been found, for it is more than five hundred Fathom:
The banks of the Lake are the beautifullest Plots of Ground that can be
imagined, for they look as if they had been laid by art: the sloping is so
easy and so equal, and the Grounds are so well cultivated and peopled, that a
more delighting Prospect cannot be seen any where: The Lake is well stocked
with excellent Fish; but their Numbers do sensibly decrease, and one sort is
quite lost: it is not only to be ascribed to the ravenousness of the Pikes that
abound in it, but to another sort of Fish that they call Moutails, which were
never taken in the Lake until within six years last past: they are in the Lake
of Neuf-chastel, and some of the other Lakes of Switzerland, and it is likely
that by some conveyance under ground they may have come into Channels that fall
into the Lake: the Water of the Lake is all clear and fresh. It is not only a
great Pond made by the Rhosne that runs into it, but does not pass through it
unmixed, as some Travelers have fondly imagined, because sometimes a soft Gale
makes a curling of the Waters in some places, which runs smooth in the places
over which that soft breath of Wind does not pa^s, the Gale varying its place
often. But it is believed that there are also many great Fountains all over the
Lake: these Springs d^ very probably flow from some vast Cavities that are in
the neighboring Mountains, which are a great Cisterns that discharge
themselves in the Valleys which are covered over with Lakes. And on the two
sides of the Alps, both North and South, there is so great a number of those
little Seas, that it may be easily ghessed they must have vast Sorces that feed
so constantly those huge Ponds. And when one considers the height of those
Hills, the chain of so many of them together, and their extent both in length
and breadth; if at first he thinks of the old Fables of laying one Hill upon
the top of another, he will be afterward apt to imagine, according to the
ingenious Conjecture of one that traveled over them oftener than once, that
these cannot be the primary Productions of the Author of Nature, but are the
vast ruins of the first World, which at the Deluge broke here into so many
Inequalities.

One Hill not far from Geneva, called Maudit, or Cursed, of which one Third is
always covered with Snow, is two miles of perpendicular height, according to
the Observation of that incomparable Mathematician and Philosopher, Nicolas
Fatio Duilier, who at Twenty two Years of Age is already one of the greatest
men of his Age, and seems to be born to carry Learning some sizes beyond what
it has yet attained.

But now I will entertain you a little with the State of Bern, for that Canton
alone is above a third part of all Switzerland. I will say nothing of its
Beginnings nor History: nor will I enlarge upon the Constitutions which are all
well known. It has a Counsel of Two hundred, that goes by that Name, though it
consists almost of Three hundred; and another of Twenty five, as Geneva. The
chief Magistrates are two Advoyers, who are not annual, as the Sindicks of
Geneva, but are for life, and have an Authority not unlike that of the Roman
Consuls; each being his Year by turns the Advoyer in Office. After them there
are the four Bannerets, who answer to the Tribunes of the People in Rome: then
come the two Bursars or Treasurers, one for the ancient German Territory, the
other for the French Territory or the Country of Vaud, and the two last, chosen
of the Twenty five, are called the Secrets; for to them all Secrets relating to
the State are discovered: and they have an Authority of calling the Two hundred
together when they think fit, and of accusing those of the Magistracy, the
Advoyers themselves not excepted, as they see cause; though this falls out seldom.

There are seventy two Bailiages, into which the whole Canton of Bern is
divided, and in every one of those there is a Bailiff named by the Council of
Two hundred, who must be a Citizen of Bern, and one of the Two hundred, to
which Council no man can be chosen till he is married. These Bailiages are
Employments both of Honor and Profit; for the Bailiff is the Governor and
Judge in that Jurisdiction: since though he has some Assessors who are chosen out
of the Bailiage, yet he may by his Authority carry matters which way he will,
against all their Opinions: and the Bailiffs have all the Confiscations and
Fines; so that Drinking being so common in the Country, and that producing many
Quarrels, the Bailiff makes his advantage of all those disorders: and in the
six years of his Government according to the quality of his Bailiage, he not
only lives by it, but will carry perhaps twenty thousand Crowns with him back
to Bern; on which he lives till he can carry another Bailiage; for one is
capable of being twice Bailiff: but though some have been thrice Bailiffs, this
is very extraordinary. The Exactions of the Bailiff are the only Impositions or
Charges to which the Inhabitants are subjected; and these falling only on the
Irregularities and Disorders of the more debauched, makes that this Grievance,
though in some particulas Cases it presses hard, yet is not so universally felt:
for a sober and regular man is in no danger. Many in this Canton are as in
England, Lords of Castles and Manors, and have a Jurisdiction annexed to their
Estates, and name their Magistrate, who is called the Castellan, In matters of
small consequence there lies no Appeal from him to the Bailiff; but beyond the
value of two Pistols an Appeal lies; and no Sentence of Death is executed till
it is confirmed at Bern. There lies also an Appeal from the Bailiff to the
Council at Bern. There are many Complaints of the injustice of the Bailiffs;
but their Law is short and clear, so that a Suit is soon ended: two or three
Hearings is the most that even an intricate Suit amounts to, either in the
first Instance before the Bailiff, or in the second Judgment at Bern. The
Citizens of Bern consider these Bailiages as their Inheritance, and they are
courted in this State, perhaps, with as much Intrigue as was ever used among
the Romans in the distribution of their Provinces: and so little signify the
best Regulations when there are intrinsic Diseases in a State, that though
there is all possible Precaution used in the Nomination of these Bailiffs, yet
that has not preserved this State from falling under so great a mischief by
those little Provinces; that as it has already in a great measure corrupted
their Morals, so it may, likely, turn in Conclusion to the Ruin of this
Republic. All the Electors give their Voices by Ballot; so that they are free
from all after-Game in the Nomination of the Person; All the Kindred of the
Pretenders, even to the remotest degrees, are excluded from Voting, as are also
all their Creditors; so that none can vote, but those who seem to have no
interest in the Issue of the Competition: and yet there is so much Intrigue,
and so great Corruption in the distribution of these Employments, That the
whole Business, in which all Bern is ever in motion, is the catching of the
best Bailiages, on which a Family will have its Eye for many Years before they
fall. For the Counselors of Bern give a very small share of their Estates to
their Children when they marry them: all that they purpose is, to make a
Bailiage sure to them: for this they feast and drink, and spare nothing by
which they may make sure a sufficient number of Votes: but it is the Chamber of
the Bannerets that admits the Pretenders to the Competition. When the Bailiff
is chosen, he takes all possible methods to make the best of it he can, and
lets few Crimes pass that carry either Confiscations or Fines after them: his
Justice also is generally suspected. It is true, those of the Bailiage may
complain to the Council at Bern, as the oppressed Provinces did anciently to
the Senate of Rome: and there have been severe Judgments against some more
exorbitant Bailiffs; yet as Complaints are not made, except upon great
Occasions, which are not often given by the Bailiffs, so it being the general
Interest of the Citizens of Bern to make all possible Advantages of those
Employments, the Censure will be but gentle, except the Complaint is crying.

In Bern there is very little Trade, only what is necessary for the support of
the Towns They maintain Professors in the Universities of Bern and Lausanne,
the one for the German Territory, which is the ancient Canton, and the other
for the new Conquest, which is the French. In the former there are about three
hundred Parishes, in the other there are but about a hundred and fifty: but in
the Benefices of the German side, the ancient Rights of the Incumbents are
generally preserved, so that some Benefices are worth a thousand Crowns;
whereas in the Pais des Vaud the Provisions are generally from a hundred to two
hundred Crowns. It is visible that those of Bern trust more to the Affections
and Fidelity of their Subjects, than to the strength of their Walls: for as
they have never finished them, so what is built cannot be brought to a regular
Fortification; and it is not preserved with any care, nor furnished with Canon;
but if they have none on their Ramparts, they have good store in their Arsenal,
in which they say there are Arms for forty thousand men.

The Peasants are generally rich, chiefly in the German side, and are all well
armed: they pay no Duties to the Public; and the Soil is capable of great
Cultivation, in which some succeed so well, that I was showed some that were by
accident at Bern, who, as I was told, had of Estate to the value of a hundred
thousand Crowns, but that is not ordinary; yet ten thousand Crowns for a
Peasant is no extraordinary matter. They live much on their Milk and Corn,
which in some Places, as about Payern, yields an increase of fifteen measures
after one: they breed many Horses, which bring them in a great deal of money.
The worst thing in the Country is the moisture of the Air, which is not only
occasioned by the many Lakes that are in it, and the Neighboring Mountains
that are covered with Snow, some all the Summer long, and the rest till
Mid-summer; but by the vast quantity of Woods of Fir-trees, which seem to fill
very near the half of their Soil; and if these were for the most part rooted
out, as they would have much more Soil, so their Air would be much purer; yet
till they find either Coal or Turf for their Fuel this cannot be done. I was
told that they had found Coal in some Places. If the Coal is conveniently
situated, so that by their Lakes and Rivers it can be easily carried over the
Country, it may save them a great extent of ground, that as it is covered with
Wood, so the Air becomes thereby the more unwholesome.

They have some Fountains of Salt Water; but the making Salt consumes so much
Wood, that hitherto it has not turned to any Account.

The Men are generally sincere, but heavy: they think it necessary to correct
the moisture of the Air with liberal Entertainments, and they are well
furnished with all necessary Ingredients: for as their Soil produces good
Cattle, so their Lakes abound in Fish, and their Woods in Fowl, the Wine is
also light and good. The Women are generally employed in their domestic
Affairs, and the Wives even of the chief Magistrates of Bern look into all the
Concerns of the House and Kitchen as much as the Wives of the meanest Peasants.
Men and Women do not converse promiscuously together; and the Women are so much
amused with the Management at home, and enter so little into Intrigues, that
among them, as an eminent Physician there told me, they know not what Vapors
are, which he imputed to the Idleness and Intrigues that abound elsewhere,
whereas he said, among them the Blood was cleansed by their Labor, and as that
made them sleep well, so they did not amuse themselves with much thinking, nor
did they know what Amors were. The third Adultery is punished with Death,
which is also the punishment of the fifth Act of ^ornication; of which I saw an
instance while I was at Bern: for, a Woman who confessed her self guilty of
many Whoredoms, and designed to be revenged on some Men that did not furnish
her liberally with Money, was upon that condemned and executed: the manner was
solemn; for the Advoyer comes into an open Bench in the middle of the Street,
and for the Satisfaction of the People, the whole Process was read, and
Sentence was pronounced in the hearing of all; the Counselors both of the
great and lesser Council standing about the Advoyer, who after Sentence took
the Criminal very gently by the hand, and prayed for her Soul: and after
Execution, there was a Sermon for the Instruction of the People.

The whole State is disposed for War, for every man that can bear Arms is
listed, and knows his Post and Arms; and there are Beacons so laid over the
Country, that the Signal can run over the whole Canton in a night: and their
Military Lists are so laid, that every man knows whither he is to come out upon
first or second, or not till the general Summons. They assured me at Bern, That
upon a general Summons they could bring above eighty thousand Men together. The
Men are robust and strong, and capable of great Hardship, and of good
Discipline, and have generally an extreme sense of Liberty, and a great Love to
their Country; but they labor under a want of Officers. And though the Subjects
of the State are rich, yet the Public is poor: they can well resist a sudden
Invasion of their Country, but they would soon grow weary of a long War: and
the Soil requires so much Cultivation, that they could not spare from their
Labor the Men that would be necessary to preserve their Country. They were
indeed as happy as a People could be, when the Emperor had Alsace on the one
hand, and the Spaniards had the Franche Comte on the other; they had no reason
to fear their Neighbors: but now that both those Provinces are in the hands of
the French, the case is quite altered; for as Basil is every moment in danger
from the Garrison of Hunningen, that is but a Canon shot distant from it, so
all the Pais de Vaud lies open to the Franche Comte, and has neither fortified
Places, nor good Passes to secure it; so that their Error in suffering this to
fall into the hands of the French was so gross, that I took some pains to be
informed concerning it, and will here give you this Account that I had from one
who was then in a very eminent Post; so that as he certainly knew the Secret,
he seemed to speak sincerely to me. He told me that the Duke of Lorrain had
often moved in the Councils of War, That the Invasion of France ought to be
made on that side in which France lay open, and was very ill fortified: This he
repeated often, and it was known in France: so that the King resolved to
possess himself of the Comte, but used that Precaution, that fearing to provoke
the Switsers, he offered a Neutrality on that side: but the Spaniards who judged
right, that it was as much the interest of the Cantons, as it was theirs, to
preserve the Comte in their hands, refused to consent to it; but they took no
care to defend it, and seemed to leave that to the Switsers.

In the mean while the French Money went about very liberally at Bern, and
after those that were most likely to make opposition were gained, the French
Minister proposed to them the necesity in which his Master found himself
engaged to secure himself on that side; but that still he would grant a
Neutrallity on their account, if the Spaniards would agree to it; and with
this, all the assurances that could be given in words were offered to them,
that they should never find the least prejudice from the Neighborhood of the
French, but on the contrary all possible Protection; There was just cause given
by the Spaniards to consider them very little in their Deliberation: for they
would neither accept of the Neutrality, nor send a considerable force Force to
preserve the Comte, so that it seemed almost inevitable to give way to the
French proposition; but one proposed that, which an anbyassed Assembly would
certainly have accepted, that they should go themselves and take the Comte, and
by so doing they would secure the Neutrality, which was all that the French
pretended to desire, and they might easily satisfy the Spaniards and reimburse
themselves of the Expense of the Invasion, by restoring the Comte to them when
a General Peace should be made. He laid out the misery to which their Country
must be reduced by so powerful a Neighbor, but all was lost labor, so he went
out in a rage and published through the Town, that the State was Sold and all
was lost. They now see their Error too late, and would repair ^t, if it were
possible, but the truth is, many of the particular Members of this State, do so
prey upon the public, that unless they do with one consent reform those
abuses, they will never be in condition to do much: for in many of their
Bailiages, of which some are Abbeys, the Bailiffs not only feed on the
Subjects, but likewise on the State, and pretend they are so far
super-expended, that they discount a great deal of the public revenue, of
which they are the receivers, for their reimbursement: which made Mr. d'
Erlack, once say, when one of those accounts was presented, that it was very
strange if the Abbey could not feed the Monks. It is true, the power of their
Bannerets is so great, that one would think they might redress many Abuses. The
City of Bern is divided into four Bodies not unlike our Comp^nies of London,
which are the Bakers, the Butchers, the Tanners, and the Blacksmiths, and every
Citizen of Bern does incorporate himself into one of these Societies, which
they call Abbeys. For it is likely they were anciently a sort of a Religious
Fraternity: every one of these chooses two Bannerets, who bear Office by turns,
from Four Years to Four Years, and every one of them has a Bailiage annexed to
his Office, which he holds for Life. They carry their Names from the Banners of
the several Abbeys as the Gonfaloniers of Italy: and the Advoyers carry still
their Name from the ancient Titles Ecdicus or Advocate, that was the Title of
the chief Magistrates of the Towns in the Times of the Roman Emperors. The
Chamber of the four Bannerets that bear Office, has a vast power, they examine
and pass all Accounts, and they admit all the competitors to any Offices, so
that no man can be proposed to the Council of Two Hundred without their
Approbation, and this being now the chief Intrigue of their State, they have so
absolute an Authority in shutting men out from Employments, that their office,
which is for life, is no less considerable than that of the Advoyer, though they
are inferior to him in Rank. They manage matters with great address, of which
this instance was given me in a competition for the Advoyership not long ago:
There was one whos^ temper was violent, that had made it so sure among those
who were qualified to vote in it, as being neither of his Kindred nor Alliance,
that they believed he would carry it from the other Competitor, whom they
favored; so they set up a third Competitor, whose Kindred were the Persons
that were made sure to him, whose Advancement they opposed; and by this means
they were all shut out from voting: so that the Election went according to the
Design of the Bannerets. The chief Man now in Bern, who was the reigning
Advoyer when I was there, is Mr. d' Erlack, Nephew to that Mr. d' Erlack who
was Governor of Brisack, and had a Brevet to be a Marshal of France. This is
one of the noblest Families in Bern, that acted a great part in shaking of the
Austrian Tyranny; and they have been ever since very much distinguished there
from all the rest of their Nobility. The present Head of it is a very
extraordinary Man; he has a great Authority in his Canton, not only as he is
Advoyer, but by the particular esteem which is paid him; for he is thought the
wisest and worthiest Man of the State, though it is somewhat strange how he
should bear such a sway in such a Government, for he neither feasts nor drinks
with the rest: He is a Man of great Sobriety and Gravity, very reserved, and
behaves himself liker a Minister of State in a Monarchy, than a Magistrate in a
Popular Government: for one sees in him none of those Arts that seem necessary
in such a Government. He has a great Estate, and no Children, so he has no
Projects for his Fa^ily, and does what he can to correct the Abuses of the
State, though the disease is inveterate, and seems past Cure.

He had a Misfortune in a War that was thirty years ago, in the Year 1656,
between the Popish and the Protestant Cantons, the Occasion of which will
engage (...) in a short Digression. The Peace of Switzerland is chiefly
preserved by a Law agreed on among all the Cantons, that every Canton may make
what Regulations concerning Religion they think fit, without pre^udice to the
general League. Now the Popish Cantons have made Laws, That it shall be capital
to any to change their Religion; and on a set day every year they go all to
Mass, and the Masters of Families swear to continue true to the State, and firm
in their Religion to their lives end, and so they pretend they punish their
falling into Heresy with Death and Confiscation of Goods, because it is a
violation of the Faith which is so solemnly sworn. But on the other hand, in
the Protestant Cantons such as turn are only obliged to go and live out of the
Canton; but for their Estates they still preserve them, and are permitted to
sell them. One cannot but observe more of the merciful Spirit of the Gospel in
the one than in the other. In two Cantons, Appenzel and Glaris, both Religions
are tolerated, and are capable of equal Privileges; and in some Bailiages
that were conquered in common by the Cantons of Bern and Friburg, in the Wars
with Savoy, the two Cantons name the Bailiffs by turns, and both Religions are
so equally tolerated, that in the same Church they have both Mass and Sermon,
so equally, that on one Sunday the Mass begins and the Sermon follows, the next
Sunday the Sermon begins and the Mass comes next, without the least disorder or
murmuring.

But in the year 1656, some of the Canton of Schwitz changing their Religion,
and retiring to Zurich, their Estates were confiscated; and some others that
had also changed, but had not left the Canton, were taken and beheaded. Zurich
demanded the Estates of the Refugies, but instead of granting this, the Canton
of Schwitz demanded back their Subjects, that they might proceed against them
as Delinquents; and they founded this on a Law, by which the Cantons are
obliged to deliver up the Criminals of another Canton when they come among
them, if they are demanded by the Canton to which they belong: but those of
Zurich and Bern thought this was both inhumane and unchristian, though the Deputy
of Basil was of another mind, and thought that they ought to be delivered up,
which extremely disgusted those of Zurich. Those of Schwitz committed some
Insolences upon the Subjects of Zurich, and refused to give Satisfaction. Upon
all which a War followed between the Protestant and Popish Cantons. The Cantons
of Bern and Zurich raised an Army of Twenty five thousand Men, which was
commanded by Mr. d' Erlack, but was dispersed in several Bodies: And the
Papists had not above Six thousand, yet they surprised Mr. d' Erlack with a
Body not much superior to theirs: both sides, after a short Engagement, run:
The Canon of the Canton of Bern was left in the Field a whole day; at last
those of Lucern seeing that none stayed to defend the Canon, carried them off:
This loss raised such a Tumult in Bern, that they seemed resolved to sacrifice
Mr. d' Erlack; but he came with such a Presence of Mind, and gave so satisfying
an Account of the Misfortune, that the Tumult ceased, and soon after the War
ended. Upon this many thought, that though the Papists acted cruelly, yet it was
according to their Laws, and that no other Canton could pretend to interpose or
quarrel with those of Schwitz, for what they did upon that occasion. Within
these few Years there were some Quarrels like to arise in the Canton of Glaris,
where it was said the equal Privileges agreed on to both Religions, were not
preserved, but on this occasion the Pope's Nuntio acted a very different Part
from that which might have been expected from him: for whereas the Ministers of
that Court have been commonly the Incendiaries in all the Disputes that concern
Religion, he acted rather the part of a Mediator; and whereas it was visible
that the Injustice lay on the side of the Papists, he interposed so effectually
with those of Lucern, which is the chief of the Popish Cantons, that the
difference was composed.

But to return to Bern, The Buildings have neither great Magnificence nor many
Apartments, but they are convenient, and suited to the way of living in the
Country. The Streets not only of Bern and the bigger Towns, but even of the
smallest Villages, are furnished with Fountains that run continually; which ^s
they are of great use, so they want not their Beauty. The great Church of Bern
is a very noble Fabric: but being built on the top of the Hill on which the
Town stands, it seems the ground began to fail; so to support it they have
raised a vast Fabric, which has cost more than the Church it self: for there
is a Platform made, which is a Square to which the Church is one side, and the
farther side is a vast Wall, fortified with Buttresses about a hundred and
fifty foot high. They told me, That all the Ground, down to the bottom of the
Hill, was dug into Vaults: This Platform is the chief Walk of the Town, chiefly
about Sunset: and the River underneath presents a very beautiful Prospect; for
there is a Cur taken off from it for the Mills, but all along as this Cur goes
the Water of Aar runs, over a stoping bank of Stone, which they say was made at
a vast Charge, and makes a noble and large Cascade.

The second Church is the Dominicans Chapel, where I saw the famous Hole that
went to an Image in the Church, from one of the Cells of the Dominicans; which
leads me to set down that Story at some length; for it was one of the most
signal Cheats that the World has known: so it falling out about 20 years before
the Reformation was received in Bern, it is very probable that it contributed
not a little to the preparing of the Spirits of the People to that change. I am
the more able to give a particular account of it, because I read the Original
Process in the Latin Record signed by the Notaries of the Court of the
Delegates that the Pope sent to try the matter. The Record is a hundred and
thirty Sheets writ close and of all sides, it being indeed a large Volume: and
I found the Printed Accounts so desective, that I was at the pain^ of reading
the whole Process; of which I will give here a true Abstract.

The two famous Orders that had possessed themselves of the esteem of those
dark Ages were engaged in a mighty Rivalry. The Dominicans were the more
learned, They were the eminentest Preachers of those Times, and had the Conduct
of the Courts of Inquisition, and the other chief Offices in the Church in
their hands. But on the other hand, the Franciscans had an outward Appearance
of more Severity, a ruder Habit, stricter Rules, and greater Poverty: all which
gave them such advantages in the eyes of the simple multitude, as were able to
balance the other Honors of the Dominican Order. In short, The two Orders
were engaged in a high Rivalry; but the Devotion toward the Virgin being the
prevailing Passion of those Times, the Franciscans upon this had great
Apvantages. The Dominicans, that are all engaged in the Defense of Thomas
Aquinas's Opinions, were thereby obliged to assert that she was born in
Original Sin: this was proposed to the People by the Franciscans as no less
than Blasphemy; and by this the Dominicans began to lose ground extremely in
the minds of the People, who were strongly prepossessed in favors of the
immaculate Conception.

About the beginning of the fifteenth Century, a Franciscan happened to preach
in Francfort, and one Wigand a Dominican coming into the Church, the Cordelier
seeing him, brake out into Exclamations, praising God that he was not of an
Order that profaned the Virgin, or that poisoned Princes in the Sacrament, (for
a Dominican had poisoned the Emperor Henry the Seventh with the Sacrament.)
Wigand being extremely provoked with this bloody Reproach, gave him the Lie:
upon which a Dispute arose, which ended in a Tumult, that had almost cost the
Dominican his Life: yet he got away. The whole Order resolved to take their
Revenge, and in a Chapter held at Vim^sen in the Year 1504. They contrived a
method for supporting the Credit of their Order, which was much ^unk in the
Opinion of the People, and for bearing down the Reputation of the Franciscans.
Four of the Juncto undertook to manage the Design; for they said since the
People were so much dis^osed to believe Dreams and Fables, they must dream on
their side, and endeavor to Cheat the People as well as the others had done.
They resolved to make Bern the Scene in which the Project should be put in
Execution; for they found the People of Bern at that time apt to swallow any
thing, and not disposed to make severe enquiries into extraordinary matters.
When they had formed their Design, a fit tool presented it self, for one Jetzer
came to take their habit as a Lay-brother, who had all the dispositions that
was necessary for the execution of their Project: For he was extreme simple,
and was much inclined to Austerities, so havi^g observed his temper well, they
began to execute their Project, the very Night after he took the habit, which
was on Lady Day 1507. One of the Friars conveyed himself secretly into his
Cell, and appe^red to him as if he had been in Purgatory, in a strange f^^ure,
and he had (...) Box near his mouth upon which as he blew, fire seemed to come
out of his mouth. He had al^o some Dogs about him that ap^eared as his
tormentors, in this posture he came near the Friar while he was a Bed, and took
up a celebrated Story that they used to tell all their Friars, to beget in them
a great d^ead at the laying aside their habit, which was, that one of the
Order, who was Superior of their House at Soloturn had gone to Paris, but
laying aside his Habit was killed in his Lay-habit. The Friar in the Vizar said
he was that person, and was condemned to Purgatory for that Crime; but he added
That he might be rescued out of it by his means, and he seconded this with most
horrible Cries, expressing the miseries which he suffered. The poor Friar
(Jetzer) was excessively frighted, but the other advanced and required a
promise of him to do that which he should desire of him, in order to the
delivering him out of his torment. The frighted Friar promised all that he
asked of him, then the other said he knew he was a great Saint, and that his
Prayers and Mortifications would prevail, but they must be very great and
extraordinary. The whole Monastery must for a week together discipline
themselves with a Whip, and he must lie prostrate in the form of one on a Cross
in one of their Chappe^s, while Mass was said in the sight of all that should
come together to it; and he ^dded, That if he did this, he should find the
^ffects of the Love that the B. Virgin did bear him, together with many other
extraordinary things: and said he would appear again accompani-with two other
Spirits, and assured him that all that he did suffer for his d^liverance should
be most gloriously rewarded. Morning was no sooner come than the Friar gave an
account of this Apparition to the rest of the Convent, who seemed extremely
surprised at it, they all pressed him to undergo the discipline that was
enjoined him, and every one undertook to bear his share, so the poor deluded
Friar performed it all exactly in one of the Chapels of their Church: T^is
drew a vast number of Spectators together, who all considered the poor Friar as
a Saint, and in the mean while the four Friars that managed the imposture
ma^nified the Miracle of the Apparition to the Skies in their Sermons. The
Friars Confessor was upon the Secret, and by this means they knew all the
little passages of the poor Frier's Life, even to his thoughts, which helped
them not a little in the Conduct of the matter. The Confessor gave him an
Hostie, with a piece of Wood, that was, as he pretended, a true piece of the
Cross, and by these he was to fortify himself, if any other Apparitions should
come to him, since evil Spirits would be certainly chained up by them. The
night after that the former Apparition was renewed, and the masqued Friar
brought two others with him in such Vizards, that the F^ier thought they were
Devils indeed. The F^ier presented the Hosty to them, which gave them such a
check, that he was fully satisfied of the virtue of this Preservative.

The Friar, that pretended he was suffering in Purgatory, said so many things
to him relating to the secrets of his Life and Thoughts, which he had from the
Confessor, that the poor Friar was fully possessed with the Opinion of the
reality of the App^rition. In two of these Apparitions, that were both managed
in the same manner. the Friar in the Mask talked much of the Dominican Order
which he said was excessively dear to the B. Virgin. who knew her self to be
conceived in original sin, and that the Doctors who taught the contrary were in
Purgatory; that the Story of St. Bernard's appearing with a spot on him, for
having opposed himself to the Feast of the Conception, was a Fo^gery; but that
it was true that some hideous Flies had appeared on St Bonaventure's Tomb who
taught the contrary: that the B. Virgin abhorred the Cordeliers for making her
equal to her Son, that Scotus was damned, whose Canonization the Cordeliers
were then soliciting hard at Rome: and that the Town of Bern would be destroyed
for harboring such Plagues within their Walls. When the enjoined Di^cipline
was fully performed, the Spirit appeared again, and said, He was now delivered
out of Purgatory; but before he could be admitted to Heaven he must receive the
Sacrament, having died without it, and after that he would say Mass for tho e
who had by their great Charities rescued him out of his pains. The Friar
fancied the Voice resembled the Priors a little: but he was then so far from
suspecting any thing, that he gave no great heed to this suspicion. Some days
after this, the same Friar appeared as a Nun all in glory, and told the poor
Friar that she was St. Barbara, for whom he had a particular Devotion, and
added, that the B. Virgin was so much pleased with his Charity, that she
intended to come and visit him. He immediately called the Convent together, and
gave the rest of the Fri^rs an account of this Apparition, which was
entertained by them all with great joy; and the Friar languished in desires for
the accomplishment of the Promise that St. Barbara had made him. After some
days the longed for delusion appeared to him, clothed as the Virgin used to be
on the great Feasts, and indeed in the same Habits: there were about her some
Angels, which he afterward found were the little statues of An^els which they
set on the Altars on the great Holidays. There was also a pulley fastened in the
Room over his head, and a Cord tied to the Angels, that made them rise up in
the Air, and fly about the Virgin, which increased the Delusion. The Virgin,
after some endearments to himself, extolling the merit of his Charity and
Discipline, told him, That she was conceived in original sin, and that Pope
Julius the Second, that then reigned, was to put an end to the Dispute, and was
to abolish the Feast of her Conception, which Sixtus the Fourth had instituted,
and that the Friar was to be the Instrument of persuading the Pope of the truth
in that matter. She gave him three drops of her Sons Blood, which were th^ee
tears of Blood that he had shed over Jerusalem; and this signified that she was
three hours in original Sin, after which she was, by his mercy, delivered out
of that State: for it seems the Dominicans were resolved so to compound the
matter, that they should gain the main Point of her Conception in Sin, yet they
would comply so far with the Reverence for the Virgin, with which the World was
possessed, that she should be believed to have remained a very short while in
that State. She gave him also five drops of Blood in the form of a Cross, which
were Tears of Blood that she had shed while her Son was on the Cross. And, to
convince him more fully, she presented an Hosty to him, that appeared as an
ordinary Hosty, and of a sudden it appeared to be of a deep red color. The
Cheat of those supposed Visits was often repeated to the abused Friar; at last
the Virgin told him that she was to give him such marks of her Son's Love to
him, that the matter should be past all doubt. She said, That the five Wounds
of St. Lucia and St. Catharine were real Wounds, and that she would also
imprint them on him, so she bid him reach his hand: he had no great mind to
receive a Favor in which he was to suffer so much: but she forced his hand and
struck a Nail through it; the Hole was as big as a Grain of Pease, and he saw
the Candle clearly through it: this threw him out of a supposed Transport into
a real Agony: but she seemed to touch his Hand, and he thought he smelt an
Ointment with which she anointed it, though his Co^fessor persuaded him that that
was only an Imagination: so the supposed Virgin left him for that time.

The next Night the Apparition returned, and brought some linen Clothes, which
had some real or imaginary virtue to allay his torment: and the pretended
Virgin said, they were some of the linings in which Christ was wrapped, and
with that she gave him a soporiferous draught, and while he was fast asleep,
the other four Wounds were imprinted on his body in such a manner that he felt
no pain.

But in order to the doing of this, the Friars be took themselves to Charms,
and the Subprior showed the rest a Book full of them: but he said that before
they could be ^ffectual they must renounce God: and he not only did this
himself, but by a formal Act put in Writ^ng, signed with his Blood, he
dedicated himself to the D^vil: it is true he did not oblige the rest to this,
but only to renounce God. The Composition of the Draught was a mixture of some
Fountain Water and Chrisme the Hairs of the Eyebrows of a Child, some
Quicksilver, some Grains of Incense, somewhat of a^ Easter Wax-candle, some
consecrated Salt, and the Blood of an unbaptized Child. This Composition was a
Secret which the Subprior did not communicate to the other Friars. By this the
poor Friar, Jetzer was made almost quite insensible. When he was awake and came
out of this deep sleep, he felt this wonderful Impression on his Body, and now
he was ra^ished out of measure, and came to fancy himself to be acting all the
parts of our Savior's Passion. He was exposed to the people on the great
Altar, to the amazement of the whole Town, and to the no small Mortification of
the Franciscans. The Dominicans gave him some other Draughts, that threw him
into Convulsions: and when he came out of those, a Voice was heard, which came
through that Hole which yet remains and runs from one of the Cells along a
great part of the Wall of the Church: for a Friar spoke through a Pipe, and at
the end of the Hole there was an Image of the Virgins with a little Jesus in
her Arms, between whom and his Mother the Voice seemed to come; the Image also
seemed to shed Tears: and a Painter had drawn those on her Face so lively, that
the People were deceived by it. The little Jesus asked why she wept; and she
said it was because his Honor was given to her, since it was said, That she
was born without sin. ^n conclusion, the Friars did so over-act this Matter,
that at last even the poor deluded Friar himself came to discover it, and
resolved to quit the Order.

It was in vain to delude him with more Apparitions, for he well nigh killed a
Friar that came to him personating the Virgin in another shape, with a Crown on
her Head. He also overheard the Friars once talking amongst themselves of the
Contrivance and Success of the Imposture, so plainly, that he discovered the
whole matter, and upon that, as may be easily imagined, he was filled with all
the horror with which such a Discovery could inspire him.

The Friars fearing that an Imposture, which was carried on hitherto with so
much success, should be quite spoiled, and be turned against them, thought the
surest way was to own the whole matter to him, and to engage him to carry on
the Cheat. They told him in what esteem he would be, if he continued to support
the Reputation that he had acquired, that he would become the chief person of
the Order, and in the end they persuaded him to go on with the Imposture. But
at last they, fearing lest he should discover all, resolved to poison him: of
which he was so apprehensive, that once a Loaf being brought him that was
prepared with some Spices, he kept it for some time, and it growing green, he
threw it to some young Wolves Whelps that were in the Monastery, who died
immediately. His Constitution was also so vigorous, that though they gave him
Poison five several times, he was not destroyed by it. They also pressed him
earnestly to renounce God, which they judged necessary, that so their Charms
might have their effect on him; but he would never consent to that: at last
they forced him to take a poisoned Hosty, which yet he vomited up soon after he
had swallowed it down: that failing, they used him so cruelly, whipping him
with an iron Chain, and girding him about so strait with it, that to avoid
farther torment, he swore to them, in a most imprecating style, That he would
never discover the Secret, but would still carry it on: and so he deluded them,
till he found an opportunity of getting out of the Convent, and of throwing
himself into the Hands of the Magistrates, to whom he discovered all.

The four Friars were seized on, and put in Prison, and an account of the whole
Matter was sent, first to the Bishop of Lausanne and then to Rome; and it may
be easily imagined, that the Franciscans took all possible care to have it well
examined; and the Bishops of Lausanne and of Zyon, with the Provincial of the
Dominicans, were appointed to form the Process. The four Friars first excepted
to Jetzers Credit, but that was rejected; then being threatened with the
Question they put in a long Plea against that: but though the Provincial would
not consent to that, yet they were put to the Question: some endured it long,
but at last they all confessed the whole progress of the Imposture. The
Provincial appeared concerned: for though Jetzer had opened the whole matter to
him, yet he would give no credit to him; on the contrary, he charged him to be
obedient to them; and one of the Friars said plainly, that he was on the whole
Secret, and so he withdrew, but he died some days after at Constance, having
poisoned himself, as was believed. The matter lay asleep some time: but a year
after that, a Spanish Bishop came, authorized with full Powers from Rome, and
the whole Cheat being fully proved, the four Friars were solemnly degraded from
their Priesthood, and eight days after, it being the last of May 1509, they
were burnt in a Meadow on the other side of the River over against the great
Church. The place of their Execution was showed me, as well as the Hole in the
Wall through which the Voice was conveyed to the Image. It was certainly one of
the blackest, and yet the best ca^ried on Cheat, that has been ever known; and
no doubt had the poo^ Friar died before the Discovery, it had passed down to
Posterity as one of the greatest Miracles that ever was; and it gives a shrewd
Suspicion, that many of the other Miracles of that Church were of the same
nature, but more successfully finished.

I shall not entertain you any farther with the State of Bern, but shall only
add one general Remark, which was too visible not to be observed every where
and of too great ^mportance not to d^serve a particular Reflection: it belongs
in general to all the Cantons, but I give it here because I had more occasion
to make it ^n Bern, having seen it more, and stayed longer in it than in the
other Canton.

Switzerland lies between France and Italy, that are both of them Countries
incomparably more rich, and better furnished with all the Pleasures and
Conveniences of Life than it is; and yet Italy is almost quite dispeopled, and
the People in it are reduced to a misery, that can scarce be imagined by those
who have not seen it: and France is in a great measure dispeopled, and the
Inhabitants are reduced to a poverty that appears in all the Marks in which it
can show it self, both in their Houses, Furniture, Clothes, and Looks.

On the contrary, Switzerland is extreme full of people, and in every place, in
the Villages as well as in their Towns, one sees all the Marks he can look for
of Plenty and Wealth: Their Houses and Windows are in good case, the Highways
are well maintained, all people are well clothed, and every one lives at his
ease. This Observation surprised me yet more in the Country of the Grisons, who
have almost no Soil at all, being situated in Valleys that are almost washed
away with the Torrents that fall down from the Hills, and swell their Brooks
sometimes so violently and so suddenly, that in many places the whole Soil is
washed away, and yet those Valleys are well peopled, and every one lives happy
and at ease, under a gentle Government, whilst other rich and plentiful
Countries are reduced to such misery, that as many of the Inhabitants are
forced to change their Seats, so those who stay behind can scarce live and pay
those grievous Impositions that are laid upon them. The rude People generally
reason very simply when they enter into Speculations of Government; but they
feel true, though they argue false: so an easy Government, though joined to an ill
Soil, and accompanied with great Inconveniences draws, or at least keeps people
in it, whereas a severe Government, though in general Idea's it may appear
reasonable, drives its Subjects even out of the best and most desirable Seats.

In my way from Bern to this place I passed by Solo-turn, as I came through
Fribourg in my way from Lausanne to Bern, these are two of the Chief of the
Popish Cantons, after Lucerne, and one sees in them a heat and a bigottry
beyond what app^ars either in France or Italy: long before they come within the
Church-doors they kneel down in the Streets when Mass is a saying in it. The
Images are extreme gross. In the chief Church of Soloturn there is an Image of
God the Father, as an Old man with a great black beard, having our Savior on
his knees, and a Pigeon over his head. Here also begins a devotion at the
Ave-Mary-Bell, which is scarce known in France, but it is practiced all Italy
over: At Noon and at Sunset the Bell rings, and all say the Ave-Mary; and a
short Prayer to the Virgin; but whereas in Italy they content themselves with
putting off their Hats; in Switzerland they do for the most part kneel down in
the Streets, which I saw no where practiced in Italy except at Venice, and
there it is not commonly done. But notwithstanding this extreme bigotry, all
the Switzers see their common Interest so well, that they live in very good
understanding one with another. This is indeed chiefly owing to the Canton of
Lucern, where there is a Spirit in the Government very different from what is
in most of the other Popish Cantons: the residence of the Spanish Ambassador
and of the Nuntio in that Town, contributes also much to the preserving it in
so good a temper it being their interest to unite Switz^rland, and by this
means the heat and indiscretion of the rest i^ often moderated. The Jesuits
begin to grow as powerful in Switzerland as they are elsewhere: they have a
noble College and Chapel situated in the best place of Friburg. It is not
long since they were received at Soloturn, where there was a Revenue o^ One
Thousand Livres a Year set off for the maintenance of ten of them, with this
provi^ion, That they should never exceed that number, but where they are once
settled they find means to break through all limitations, and they are now
become s^ rich there, that they are raising a Church and College, which will
cost before it is finished above F^ur hundred thousand Livres, to which the
French Ring gives ten thousand Livres for the frontis-piece: For this being the
Canton in which his Ambassador resides, he thought it suitable to his glory to
have a monument of his bounty raised by an Order that will never be wanting to
^latter their ben^factors, as long as they find their account in it.

In the same Canton there is an Abbey that has One hundred thousand Livre^ of
Revenue, there is also a very r^ch H^use of Nuns that wear the Cupuchins Habit,
that as I was told had Sixty thousand Livres of Revenue, and but Sixty Nuns in
it, who having thus One t^ou^and Livre^ a piece, may live in all p ssible
plenty in a Country where a very little money ^oes a great way. But that which
surprises one most at Soloturn, is the great Fortification that they are
building of a Wall about the ^own, the ^oblest and solidest that is any where
to be seen: The Stone with which it is faced is a ^ort of cour^e Mar^le, but of
that higne^s, that many Stones are ^en foot long, and two foot of breadth and
thickness: but though this will be a Work of vast expense and great Beauty, yet
it would signify little against a great Army that would attack it vigorously.
The Wall is finished on the side of the River, on which the Town stand: the
Ditch is very broad, and the Counterscarp and Glas^er are also finished, and
they are working at a Fort on the other side of the River, which they int^nd to
fortify in the same manner. This has cost them near two Millions of Livres;
and this vast Expense has made them often repent the Undertaking: and it is
certain, that a Fortification that is able to resist the Rage o^ their Peasants
in the case of a Rebellion, is all that i^ needful. This Canton has two
Advoyers, as Bern: the little Council consists of Thirty six; they have twelv^
Bailiages belonging to them, which are very profitable to those that can carry
them; they have one Bursar^ and but one Banneret. All the Cantons have their
Bailiages; but if there are Disorders at Bern in the Choice of their Bailiff^,
there are far greater among the Popish Cantons, where all things are sold, as a
Foreign Minister that resides there told me, who though he knew what my Religion
was, did not stick to own frankly to me, That the Catholic Cantons were not
near so well governed as the Protestant Cantons. Justice is generally sold
among them; and in their Treaties with Foreign Princes, they have sometimes
taken money both from the French and Spanish Ambassadors, and have signed
contradictory Articles at the same time.

Baden has nothing in it that is remarkable, except its convenient Situation,
which makes it the Seat of the general Diet of the Canton though it is not one of
them, but is a Bailiage that belongs in common to eight of the ancient Cantons.
At last I came to this Place, which as it is the first and most honorable of
all the Cantons, so with relation to us it has a precedence of a higher Nature,
it being the first that received the Reformation.

This Canton is much less than Bern, yet the Public is much richer: They
reckon that they can bring fifty thousand Men together upon twenty four hours
warning: their Subjects live happy; for the Bailiffs here have regulated
Appointments, and have only the hundredth Penny of the Fines; so that they are
not tempted as those of Bern are, to whom the Fine belongs entirely, to strain
matters against their Subjects; and whereas at Bern the constant Intrigue of
the whole Town is concerning their Bailiages, here, on the contrary it is a
Service to which the Citizens are bound to submit according to their
Constitution, but to which they do not aspire. The Government is almost the
same as at Bern, and the Magistrate that is called the Advoyer at Bern is here
called the Bourgomaster. The Revenue of the State is here justly accounted for,
so tha^ ^he public purse is much richer than at B^rn; the Arse^al is much
better furnished, and the Fortifications are more re^ular. There is a great
Trade stirring here, and as their Lake that is Twenty f^ur miles long and about
two or three broad, sup^lies them well with provisio^, so their River carry
their Manufacture to the Rhine, from whence it is conveyed as they please. One
of their chief Manu^acturies is Cr^pe, which is in all respects the best I ever
saw. I will not describe the Situation of the Town, but shall co tent my self
to tell you that it is extreme pleasant, the Country about it is Mountanous,
and the Winters are hard; for the Lake freezes quite over, only in some places
the ^ce never lies, which is believed a mark that some Springs rise there,
which cause that heat; so also in the Lake of Geneva, though it is never quite
frozen, yet great boards of Ice lie in several parts, but these are never seen
in some parts of the Lake, which is supposed to flow from the same Cause.

But to return to Zurich, one sees here the true ancient simplicity of the
Switzens, not corrupted with Luxry or Vanity, their Women not only do not
converse familiarly with Men, except th^se of their near Kindred, but even on
the Streets do not make any returns to the Civility of Strangers; for it is
only Strangers that put off their Hats to Women, but they make no courtesies:
and here as in all Switzerland, Women are not saluted, but the Civility is
expressed by taking them by the Hand There is one thing singular in the
Constitution of Zurich, that is their little Council consists of Fifty Persons,
but there sit in it only Twenty five at a time, and so the two halves of this
Council, as each of them has his proper Bourgomaster, have also the Government
in their hands by turns, and they shift every six Months, at Midsummer and at
Christ-Mass. The whole Canton is divided into nine great Baliages, and 21
Castellaneries; in the former the Bailiff resides constantly, but the Castellan
who is also one of the great Council, has so little to do that he lives at
Zurich, and goes only at some set-times of the Year to do Justice.

The virtue of this Canton has appeared signally in their adhering firmly to
the ancient Capitulations with the French, and not slackening in any Article,
which has been done by all the other Cantons, where Money has a Sovereign
infl^ence: but here it has never prevailed. They have converted the ancient
Revenues of the Church, more generally to pious uses than has been done any
where else, that I know of. They have many Hospitals well entertained, in one
as I was told, there was Six hundred and fifty Poor kept: but as they support
the real Charities, which belongs to such Endowments, so they despise that vain
magnificence of buildings which is too generally affected elsewhere; for theirs
are very plain, and one of the Government there said to me very sensibly, that
they thought it enough to maintain their Poor as Poor, and did not judge it
proper to lodge them as Princes.

The Dean and Chapter are likewise still continued as a Corporation, and enjoy
the Revenues which they had before the Reformation, but if they subsist
plentifully, they labor hard, for they have generally two or three Sermons a
day, and at least one: the first b^gins at Five a Clock in the m^rning. For at
Geneva, and all Switzerland over there are daily Sermons, which were
substituted upon the Reformation to the Mass. But the Sermons are generally too
long, and the Preachers have departed from the first d^sign of these Sermons,
which were intended to be an explication of a whole Chapter, and an exhortation
upon it, and if this were so contrived that it were in all not above a quarter
of an hour long, as it would be heard by the people with less Weariness and
more Profit, so it would be a vast advantage to the Preachers; For as it would
oblige them to study the Scriptures much, so having once made themselves
Masters of the practical parts of the Scripture, such short and simple
discourses would cost them less pains, than those more lab^ured Sermons do,
which consume the greatest part of their time, and too often to very little
purpose.

Among the Archives of the Dean and Chapter, there is a vast collection of
Letters, written either to Bullinger, or by him; they are bound up, and make a
great many Volumes in Folio, and out of these no doubt but one might discover a
great many particulars relating to the History of the Reform^tion: For as
Bullinger lived long, so he was much esteemed. He procured a very kind
reception to be given to some of our English Exiles in Queen Mary's Reign, in
particular to Sands afterward. Archbishop of York, to Horn afterward Bishop
of Winchester, and to Jewel Bishop of Salisbu^y. He gave them Lodgings in the
Close, and used them with all possible kindness, and as they presented some
Silver Cups to the College, with an Inscription acknowledging the kind
reception they had found there, which I savv, so they continued to keep a
constant Correspondence with Bullinger, after the happy re-establishment of the
Reformation under Queen Elizabeth: Of which I read almost a whole Volume while
I was there: Most of them contain only the general News, but some were more
importan^, and relate to the Disputes then on foot, concerning the Habits of
the Clergy, which gave the first beginnings to our unhappy divisions: and by
the Letters, of which I read the Originals, it appears that the Bishops
preserved the ancient Habits rather in compliance with the Queens inclinations,
then out of any liking they had to them; so far they were from liking them,
that they plainly expressed their dislike of them, Jewel, in a Letter bearing
date the Eighth of Februury, 1566. wishes that the Vestments together with all
the other remnants of Popery might be thrown both out of their Churches, and
out of the minds of the People, and laments the Queens fixedness to them, so
that she would suffer no change to be made. And in January the same year, Sands
writes to the same purpose, Contenditur de vestibus Papisticis utendis vel non
utendis, dabit Deus his quoque finem. Disputes are now on foot concerning the
Popish Vestments whether they should be used or not, but God will put an end to
those things. Horn, Bishop of Winchester, went farther: for in a Letter, dated
the Sixteenth of July 1565. he writes of the Act concerning tha Habits with
great regret, and expresses some hopes that, it might be repealed, next Session
of Parliament, if the Popish Party did not hinder it; and he seems to stand in
doubt whether he should conform himself to it or not, upon which he desires
Bullinger's Advice. And in many Letters writ on that Subject, it is asserted,
That both Cranmer and Ridley intended to procure an Act for abolishing the
Habits, and that they only defended their Lawfulness, but not their Fitness;
and therefore they blamed private Persons that refused to obey the Laws.
Grindal, in a Letter dated the Twenty seventh of August, 1566. writes, That all
the Bishops, who had been beyond Sea, had at their Return dealt with the Queen
to let the matter of the Habits fall: but she was so prepossessed, that though
they had all endeavored to divert her from prosecuting that matter, she
continued still inflexible. This had made them resolve to submit to the Laws,
and to wait for a fit opportunity to reverse them. He laments the ill effects
of the opposition that some had made to them, which extremely irritated the
Queens Spirit, so than she was now much more heated in those matters than
formerly: He also thanks Bullinger for the Letter that he had writ, justifying
the lawful use of the Habits, which he says had done great Service Cox, Bishop
of Ely, in one of his Letters, laments the Aversion that they found in the
Parliament to all the Propositions that were made for the reformation of
Abuses. Jewel, in a Letter dated the Two and Twentieth of May 1559, writes,
That the Queen refused to be called Head of the Church, and adds, That that
Title could not be justly given to any Mortal, it being due only to Christ, and
that such Titles had been so much abused by Antichrist, that they ought not to
be any longer continued. On all these Passages I will make no Reflections here:
for I set them down only to show what was the sense of our chief Churchmen at
that time, concerning those matters, which have since engaged us into such warm
and angry Disputes; and this may be no inconsiderable Instruction to one that
intends to write the History of that time. The last particular with which I
intend to end this Letter, might seem a little too learned, if I were writing
to a less knowing Man than your self.

I have taken some pains in my Travels to examine all the Ancient Manuscripts
of the New Testament, concerning that doubted Passage of St. John's Epistle,
There are three that bear Witness in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit, and these three are one. Bullinger doubted much of it, because he found
it not in an ancient Latin Manuscript at Zurich, which seems to be about eight
hundred years old; for it is written in that hand that began to be used in
harles the Great's time. I turned the Manuscript, and found the Passage was not
there: but this was certainly the error or omission of the Copier: for before
the General Epistles in that Manuscript, the Preface of St Jerome's is to be
found; in which he says, that he was the more exact in that T^anslation, that
so he might discover the Fraud of the Arrians, who had struck out that Passage
concerning the Trinity. This Preface is printed in Lira's Bible; but how it
came to be left out by Erasmus, in his Edition of that Father's Works, is that
of which I can give no Account: for as on the one hand Erasmus's Sincerity
ought not to be too rashly censured, so on the other hand, that Preface being
in all the Manuscripts, ancient or modern, of those Bibles that have the other
Prefaces in them that I ever yet saw, it is not easy to imagine what made
Erasmus not to publish it: and it is in the Manuscript Bibles at Basle, where
he printed his Edition of St. Jerome's Works. In the old Manuscript Bible of
Geneva, that seems to be above seven hundred Years old, both the Preface and
the Passage are extant, but with this difference from the common Editions, that
the common Editions set the Verse concerning the Father, the Word, and the
Spirit, before that of the Water, the Blood, and the Spirit; which comes after
it in this Copy. And that I may in this place end all the Readings I found of
this Passage in my Travels, there is a Manuscript in St. Mark's Library in
Venice in three Languages, Greek, Latin, and Arabic, that seems not above four
hundred Years old, in which this Passage is not in the Greek, but it is in the
Latin set after the other three, with a sicut to join it to what goes before.
And in a Manuscript Latin Bible in the Library of St. Laurence at Florence,
both St. Jerome's Preface and this Passage are extant: but this Passage comes
after the other, and is pinned to it with a sicut, as is that of Venice; yet
sicut is not in the Geneva Manuscript. There are two Greek Ma^uscripts of the
Epistles at Basle, that seem to be about five hundred years old, in neither of
which this Passage is to found: they have also an ancient Latin Bible, which is
about eight hundred years old; in which though St. Jerome's Prologue is inserted,
yet this Passage is wanting. At Strasburg I saw four very ancient Manuscripts
of the New Testament in Latin: three of these seemed to be about the time of
Charles the Great; but the fourth seemed to be much ancienter, and may belong
to the seventh Century: in it neither the Prologue nor the Place is extant; but
it is added at the foot of the Page with another hand. In two of the other the
Prologue is extant, but the Place is not; only in one of them it is added on
the Margent. In the fourth, as the Prologue is extrant, so is the Place
likewise; but it comes after the Verse of the other three, and is joined to it
thus, Sicut tres sunt in coelo.

It seemed st^ange to me, and it is almost incredible, that in the Vatican
Library there are no ancient Latin Bibles, where above all other places they
ought to be looked for; but I saw none above four hundred years old. There is
indeed the famous Greek Manuscript of great value, which the Chanoine
Shelstrat, that was Library Keeper, asserted to be One thousand four hundred
years old, and proved it by the great similitude of the Characters with those
that are upon St. Hippolite's Statue, which is so evident, that if his Statue
was made about his time, the Antiquity of this Manuscript is not to be
disputed. If the Characters are not so fair, and have not all the marks of
Antiquity that appears in the King's Manuscript at St. James's, yet this has
been much better preserved, and is much more entire. The Passage that has led
me into this Digression, is not to be found in the Vatican Manuscript, no more
than it is in the Ki^g's Manuscript. And with this I will finish my Account of
Zurich. The public Library is very noble: the Hall in which it is placed is
large and well contr^ved: there is a very handsome Cabinet of Medals; and so I
will break off. But when I have gone so much farther that I have gathered
materials for another Letter of this Volume, you may look for a second
Entertainment, such as it is, from

Your etc.
POSTSCRIPT.
I told you, that in Bern the Bailiages are given by a sort of a Ballot, which
is so managed, that no man's Vote is known: but I must now add, that since I was
first there, they have made a considerable Regulation in the way of voting,
when Offices are to be given, which approaches much nearer the Venetian method,
and which exposes the Competitors more to chance, and by consequence may put an
end to the Intrigues, that are so much in use for obtaining those Employments.
There is a number of Balls put into a Box, equal to the number of those that
have right to Vote, and that are present; of these the third part is gilt, and
two parts are only silvered; so every one takes out a Ball; but none can vote,
except those who have the gilt Balls: so that hereafter a man may have more
than two thirds sure, and yet be cast in a Competition.

There is one thing for which the Switzers, in particular those of Bern, cannot
be enough commended: they have ever since the Persecution began first in
France, opened a Sanctuary to such as have retired thither, in so generous and
so Christian a manner, that it deserves all the honorable Remembrances that
can be made of it: such Ministers and others, that were, at first, condemned in
France, for the Affair of the Cevennes, have not only found a kind Reception
here, but all the Support that could be expe^^ed, and indeed much more than
could have been in ^ea^on expected. For they have assigned the French Mi^^sters
a Pension of five Crowns a month, if they were unmarried, and have increased it
to such as had Wife and Children, so that some h^d abov^ ten Crowns a month
pension. They dispersed them over all the Pais de Vaud: but the greatest number
s^ai^ at Lau^anne and Ve^^^. In order t^ the supporting of this Ch^rge, the
Charities of Zu^ich and the other neighboring Protestant States, were brought
hither. Not only the Protestant Can^ons, but the Grisons, and some small Stares
that are under the protection of the Cantons, such as Neufchastel, S. Gall, and
some others that have sent in their Charities to Bern, who dispense them with
great discretion, and bear what further charge this relief brings upon them,
and in this last total and deplorable dispersion of those Churches, the whole
Country has been animated with such a Spirit of Charity and Compassion, that
^very Man's house and purse has been opened to the Refugi^s that have passed
thither in such numbers, that sometimes there have been above Two thousand in
Lausanne alone, and of these there were at one time near Two hundred Ministers,
and they all met with a kindness and free-heartedness, that looked more like
somewhat of the Primitive Age revived, than the degeneracy of the A^e in which
we live.

I shall Conclude this Postscript, which is already swelled to the bigness of a
Letter, with a sad Instance of the Anger and Heat that rises among Divines
concerning matters of very small consequence.

The middle way that Amirald, Daille, and some others in France took in the
matters that were disputed in Holland, concerning the Divine Decrees and the
extent of the death of Christ, as it came to be generally followed in France,
so it had some assertors both in Geneva and Switzerland, who denied the
imputation of Adam's Sin, and asserted the Universality of Christ's death,
to^ether with a sufficient Grace given to all men, asserting with this a
particular and free Decree of Election with an efficacious Grace for those
included in it: these came to be called Vniversalists, and began to grow very
considerable in Geneva: two of the Professors of Divinity there being known to
favor those Opinions. Upon this those who adhered strictly to the opposite
Doctrine, were inflamed, and the Contention grew to that height, that almost
the whole Town came to be concerned, and all were divided into parties. If upon
this the M^gistrate^ had enjoined silence to both parties, they had certainly
acted wisely: for these are speculations so little certain, and so little
essential to Religion, that a diversity of Opinions ought not to be made the
occasion of heat or faction. But though the party of the Vniversalists were
considerable in Geneva, it was very small in Switzerland, therefore some
Divines there, that adhered to the Old received Doctrine, dr w up some Articles
in which all these Doctrines were ^ot only condemned, together with some
speculations that were asserted concerning Adam's Immortality, and other
qualities belonging to the state of Innocence; but because Capel and some other
Critics had not only asserted the novelty of the points, but had taken the
liberty to correct the reading of the Hebrew; supposing that some Errors had
been committed by the coppiers of the Bible, both in the vowels and consonants,
in opposition to this, they cond^mned all corrections of the Hebrew Bible, and
asserted the Antiquity of the points, or at least of the power and reading
according to them, by which though they did not engage all to be of Buxtorfs
Opinion, as to the Antiquity of the points, yet they shut the door against all
Co^rections of the present punctuation. If this consent of Doctrine, for so
they termed it, had been made only the standard against which no man might have
taught, without incurring Censures, the severity had been more tolerable: but
they obliged all such as should be admitted either to the Ministry, or to a
Professors Chair to sign sic sentio, so I think, and this being so settled at
Bern and Zurich, it was also carried by their authority at Geneva: but for
those in Office the Moderator and Clerk signed it in all their Names: and thus
they were not contented to make only a Regulation in those matters, but they
would needs, according to a maxim that has been so often fatal to the Church,
enter into peoples Consciences, and either shut out young men from Employments,
or impose a Test upon them, which perhaps some ha e signed, not without
struglings in their Conscience. Yet ome that set on this Test or Consent, are
men of such extraordinary wor^h, that I am confident they have acted in this
matter out of a sinc^re zeal for that which they believe t^ be the truth, only
I wish they had larger and freer Souls.

The only considerable Tax under which the Switzers lie, is, that when Est^tes
are sold, the fifth part of the Price belongs to the Public, and all the
Abatement that the Bailiff can make is to bring it to a sixth part. This they
call the Lod, which is derived from Alodium; only there are some Lands that are
Frankalod, which lie not under this Tax: but this falling only on the ^ellers
of Estates, it was thought a just Punishment, and a wise restraint on ill
Husbands of their Estates.

I was the more confirmed in the Account I have given you of the Derivation of
Advoyer, when I found that in some small Towns in the Canton of Bern the chief
Magistrate is still so called; as in Payerne: so that I make no doubt, but as
the Ancient Magistrates in the time of the Romans, that were to give an account
of the Town, were called Advocates, and afterward the Judge in Civil Matte s,
that was named by the Bishops, was called at first Advocate, and afterward
Vidam or Vicedominus; so this was the Title that was still continued in Bern,
while they were under the Austrian and German Yoke, and was preserved by them
when they threw it off.

I have, perhaps, touched too slightly the last difference that was in
Switzerland, which related to the Can on of Glaris. In the Canton of Apenzell.
as the two Religions are tole^ated, so they are separated in different
Quarters, those of one Religion have the one half of the Canton, and those of
the other Religion have the other half, so they live apart; but in Glaris they
are mixed: and now the number of the Papists is become very low: one assured me
there were not above two hundred Families of that Religion, and those are also
so poor, that their Necessity: di^pose some of them every day to change their
Religion. The other Popish Cantons seeing the danger of losing their Interest
entirely in that Canton, and being set on by the Intrigues of a Court that has
understood well the Policy of imbroiling all other States, made great use of
some Complaints that were brought by the Papists of Glaris, as if the
prevailing of the other Religion exposed them to much injustice and oppression;
and upon that they p^oposed that the Canton should b equally divided into two
halves, as Appenzel was: this was extremely unjust, since the Papists were not
the tenth or perhaps the twentieth pa t of the Canton. It is true it was so
situated in the midst of the Popish Cantons, that the Protestant Can^ons could
not easily come to their Assistance: but those of Glaris resolved to die rather
than suffer this injustice; and the Protestant Cantons resolved to engage in a
War with the Popish Cantons if they imposed this matter on their Brethren of
Glaris. At last this Temper was found, that in all Suits of Law between those
of different Religions, two Thirds of the Judges should be always of the
Religion of the Defendant. But while this Contest was on foot, those, who as is
believed, fomented it, if they did not set it on, knew how to make their
advantage of the Conjuncture; for then was the Fortification of Huninghen at
the Ports of Basle much advanced, of the importance of which they are now very
apprehensive when it is too late. There are six Noble Families in Bern, that
have still this Privilege, That when any of them is chosen to be of the
Council, they take place before all the Ancient Counselors; whereas all the
rest take place according to the Order in which they were chosen to be of the
Council.



LETTER II. Millan, the First of October, 1685.
AFter a short stay at Zurich we went down the Lake, where we past under the
Bridge at Ripperswood, which is a very noble Work for such a Country; the Lake
is there, about half a mile broad, the Bridge is about twelve foot broad, but
has no Rails on either side, ^o that if the wind blows hard, which is no
extraordinary thing there, a man is in great danger of being blown into the
Lakes: and this same defect I found in almost all the Bridges of Lombardy,
which seemed very strange; for since that defense is made upon so small an
expense, it was amazing to see Bridges so naked: and that was more surprising
in some places where the Bridges are both high and long: yet I never heard of
any Mischief that followed on this, but those are sober Countries where
drinking is not much in use. After two days journey we came to Coire which is
the chief Town of the Grisons, and where we found a general Diet of the three
Leagues sitting, so that having staid ten days there, I came to be informed of
a great many particulars concerning those Leagues, which are not commonly
known: The Town is but little, and may contain between four and five thousand
Souls; it lies in a bottom upon a small brook, that a little below the Town
falls into the Rhine. It is environed with Mountains on all hands, so that they
have a very short Summer, for the Snow is not melted till May or June; and it
began to Snow in September when I was there: On a rising groun^ at the East End
of the Town is the Cathedral, the Bishop's Palace, and the Close, where the
Dean and six Prebendaries live; all within the Close are Papists, but all the
Town are Protestants, and they live pretty Neighbourly together. Above a
q^arter of a mile high in the Hill one goes up by a steep ascent to S. Lucius
Chapel; my Curiosity carried me thither, though I gave no Faith to the Legend of
King Lucius, and of his coming so far from home to be the Apostle of the
Grisons. His Chapel is a little Vault about ten Foot square, where there is an
Altar, and where Mass is said upon some great Festivites; it is situated under
a natural Arch that is in the Rock, which was thought proper to be given out to
have been the Cell of a Hermit, from it some drops of a small Fountain fall
down near the Chapel; the Bishop assured me it had a miraculovs virtue for
weak ey^s, and that it was Oily: but neither Taste nor Feeling could discover to
me any Oilyness: I believe it may be very good for the Eyes, as all Rock-water
is; but when I offered to show the good Old Bishop that the legend of Lucius
was a Fable in all the parts of it; but most remarkably in that which related
to the Grisons; and that we had no Kings in Britain at that time, but were a
Province to the Romans, that no ancient Au^hors speak of it, Bid being the
first that mentions it; and that the pretended Letter to Pope Eleutherius,
together with his Answer, has evident Characters of Forgery in it, all this
signified nothing to the Bishop, who assured me that they had a Tradition of
that in their Church, and it was inserted in their Breviary which he firmly
believed. He also told me the other legend of King Lucius's Sister S. Emerita,
who was burnt there, an^ of whose Veil there was yet a considerable remnant
reserved among their Relics; I confess I never saw a Relick so ill disguised,
for it is a piece of worn linen Cloth lately washed, and the burning did not
s^em to be a month old; and yet when they took it out of the Case to show it
me, there were some there that with great Devotion rubbed their beads upon ir.
The Bishop had some Contests with his Dean, and being a Prince of the Empire he
had proscribed him: the Dean had also behaved himself so insolently, that by an
order of the Diet, to which even the Bishop, as was believed, consented, he was
put in Prison as he came out of the Cathedral. By the common consent both of
the Popish and Protestant Communities, a Law was long ago made against
Ecclesiastical Immunities: this attempt on the Dean was made four years ago; as
soon as he was let out, he went to Rome, and made great Complaints of the
Bishop, and it was thought the Popish Party intended to move in the Diet while
we were there, for the Repealing of that Law, but they did it nor. The
foundation of the quarrel between the Bishop and Dean, was the Exemptions to
which the Dean and Chapter pretended, and upon which the Bishop made some
invasion. Upon which I took occasion to show him the novelty of those
Exemptions, and that in the Primitive Church it was believed that the Bishop
had the Authority over his Presbyters by a Divine Right; and if it was by a
Divine Right, then the Pope could not exempt them from his Obedience: but the
Bishop would not carry the matter so high, and contented himself with two
maxims; the one was, That the Bishop was Christ's Vicar in his Diocese: and the
other was, That what the Pope was in the Catholick-Church, the Bishop was the
same in his Diocese.

He was a good natured man, and did not make use of the great Authority that he
has over the Papists there, to set them on to live uneasily with their
Neighbors of another Religion. That Bishop was anciently a great Prince, and
the greatest part of the League that carries still the Name of The House of
God, belonged to him, though I was assured that Pregallia, one of these
Communities was a Free State above Six hundred years ago, and that they have
Records yet extant that prove this: The other Communities to this League bought
their Liberties from several Bishops some considerable time before the
Reformation, of which the Deeds are yet extant: So that it is an impudent thing
to say, as some have done, That they shook off his Yoke at that time.

The Bishop has yet reserved a Revenue of about One thousand pound sterling a
year, and every one of the Prebendaries has near Two hundred pound a year. It
is not easy to imagine out of what the Riches of this Country is raised, for
one sees nothing but a tract of vast Mountains that seem barren Rocks, and some
little Valleys among them not a mile broad, and the best part of these is
washed away by the Rhine, and some Brooks that fall into it: but their we^lth
consists chiefly in their Hills, which afford much Pasture, and in the hot
Months, in which all the Pasture of Italy is generally parched, the Cattle are
driven into these Hills, which brings them in a Revenue of above Two hundred
thousand Crowns a year. The Public is indeed very poor, but particul^r persons
are so rich, that I knew a great many there, who were believed to have Estates
to the value of One hundred thousand Crowns, Mr. Schovestein that is accounted
the richest man in the Country, is believed to be worth a million, I mean of
Livres. The Government here is purely a Commonwealth, for in the Choice of
their Magistrates every man that is above sixteen years Old has his voice,
which is also the Constitution of some of the small Cantons. The three Leagues
are, the League of the Grisons, that of the House of God, and that of The Ten
Jurisdictions.

They believe that upon the incursions of the Goths and Vandals, as some fled
to the Venetian Islands, out of which arose that famous Commonwealth; so
others came and sheltred themselves in those Valleys. They told me of an
ancient Inscription lately found, of a Stone where on the one side is graven
Omitto Rhetos Indomitos, and ne plus Vltra is on the other; which they pretend
was made by Julius Caesar; the Stone on which this Inscription is is upon one
of their Mountains, but I did not pass that way, so I can make no judgment
concerning it. After the first forming of this People, they were cast into
little States, according to the different Valleys which they inhabited, and in
which Justice was administered, and so they fell under the power of some little
Princes that became severe Masters; but when they saw the Example that the
Switzers had set them, in shaking off the Austrinn Yoke above two hundred years
ago, they likewise combin^d to shake off theirs; only some few of those small
Princes used their Authority better, and concurred with the People in shaking
off the yoke, and so they are still parts of the body; only Haldenstein is an
absolute Soveranity, it is about two miles from Coire to the West, on the other
side of the Rhine; the whole Territory is about half a mile long at the foot of
the Alps, where there is scarce any breadth. The Authority of these Barons was
formerly more absolute than it is now, for the Subjects were their Slaves: but
to keep together the little Village, they have granted them a power of naming a
list for their Magistrates, the person being to be named by the Baron; who has
also the Right of Pardoning, a Right of Coining, and every thing also that
belongs to a Sovereign. I saw thss little Prince in Coire, in an Equipage not
suitable to his quality, for he was in all points like a very ordinary
Gentleman. There are Three other Baronies that are members of the Diet, and
subject to it; the chief belonged to the Archdukes of Inspruck; the other two
belong to Mr. Schovenstein and Mr. de M^nt, they are the Heads of those
Communities of which their Baronies are composed; they name the Magistrates out
of the lists that are presented to them by their Subjects; and they have the
Right of Pardoning and of Confiscations: That belonging to the House of Austria
is the biggest, it has five voices in the Diet, and it can raise Twelve
hundred Men. One Travers bought it of the Emperor in the year 1679. he entered
upon the Rights of the ancient Barons, which are specified in an Agreement that
past between him and his Peasants, and was confirmed by the Emperor. Travers
made many encroachments upon the Privileges of his Subjects, who upon that
made their complaints to the league; but Travers would have the matter judged
at Inspruck, and the Emperor supported him in this pretension, and sent an
Agent to the Diet: I was present when he had his Audience, in whiah there was
nothing but general Complemen^s: But the Diet stood firm to their Constitution,
and asserted that the Emperor had no Authority to judge in that matter which
belonged only to them, so Travers was forced to let his Pretensions fall.

All the other parts of this State are purely Democratical, there are Three
different Bodies or Leagues, and every one of these are an entire Government,
and the Assembly or Diet of the Three Leagues, is only a Confederacy like the
United Provinces or the Cantons: There are Sixty-seven Voices in the general
Diet, which are thus divided: the league of the Grisons has twenty-eight
Voices, that of the House of God has twenty four, and that of the
Jurisdictions has fifteen. The Jurisdictions belonged anciently to the House
of Austria, but they having shaken off that Authority, were incorporated into
the Diet, but in the last Wars of Germany, the Austrians thought to have
brought them again under their yoke, yet they defended their Liberty with so
much vigor, that the Austrians it seems thought the Conquest not worth the
while, and that it would not quit the cost. They were affrighted by two
extraordinary actions; in one Village which was quite abandoned by all the Men
belonging to it, who left the Women in it, some hundreds, as I was told, were
quartered, and were apprehensive of no danger from their Hostesses; but the
Women intended to let their Husbands see that they were capable of contriving
and executing a bold design; though it must be confessed it was a little too rough
and barbarous for the Sex: They entered into a Combination to cut the Throats of
all the Soldiers at one time; the Woman that proposed this had four lodged
with her, and she with her own hands dispatched them all, and so did all the
rest, not one Soldier escaping to carry away the News of so unheard of a Rage.
In another place a Body of the Austrians came into a Valley that was quite
abandoned, for the Men that had no Arms but their Clubs and Staves, got up to
the Mountains; but they took their measures so well, and possessed themselves
so of the Passes, that they came down upon the Soldiers with so much fury,
that they defeated them quite, so that very few escaped, and it is certain that
the subduing them would have proved a very hard work. It is true they are not
in a condition to hold out long, the public is so poor; so that though
particular persons are extreme rich, yet they have no public Revenue, but
every man is concerned to preserve his Liberty, which is more entire here than
in Switzerland, but this often swells too much, and throws them into great
convulsion. The league of the Grisons is the first and most ancient, and it is
composed of eight and twenty Communities, of which there are eighteen Papists,
and the rest are Protestants; the Communities of the two Religions live
Neighbourly together, yet they do not suffer those of another Religion to live
among them, so that every Community is entirely of the same Religion, and if
any one changes he must go into another Community. Each Community is an entire
State within it self, and all Persons must meet once a year to choose the Judge
and his Assistants, whom they change or continne from year to year as they see
cause: There is no difference made between Gentleman and Peasant, and the
Tenant has a Vote as well as his Landlord, nor dare his Landlord use him ill
when he Votes contrary to his Intentions, for the Peasants would ^ook upon that
as a common Quarrel. An Appeal lies from the Judge of the Community to the
Assembly of the Leag^e, where all matters end; for there lies no Appeal to the
general Diet of the three Leagues, except in matters that concern the conquered
Countries, which belong in common to all the three. There is one chosen by the
Deputies for the Assembly of the League, who is called the head of the League,
that can call them together as he sees cause, and can likewise bring a cause
that has been once judged, to a second hearing. Ilants is the chief Town of
this League, where their Diet meets. The second League is that of the House of
God, in which there are four and twenty Communities; the Burgomaster of Coire
is always the head of this League: This League is almost wholly Protestant, and
the two Valleys of the upper and lower Engedin are pointed out by the Papists,
as little less than Cannibals toward such Catholics as come among them; but
Friar Ssondrato, Nephew to Pope Gregory the fourteenth, whose Mother the
Marquess of Borgomaniero, that was in England, has married, found the contrary
of all this to be true, to his great regret. About eighteen years ago he was
believed to have wrought Miracles, and he became so much in love with the Crown
of Martyrdom, that he went through the Engedm. not doubting but he would find
there that which he desired. His Brother had come sometime before into the
Country to drink mineral Waters, and was well known to the Gentry, so some of
these hearing of the Friars coming, went and waited on him; and he was
entertained by them in their Houses and conveyed him through the Country; though
he took all possible ways to provoke them, for he was often railing at their
Religion, but to all that they made no answer, only they continued their
Civilitie^ still, which did so inrage the warm Friar, that he went to Bormio,
and there (as was believed) he died of Grief. An accident fell out five year
ago, that the People of the Country esteemed a sort of a Miracle. The Papists
in their Processions go sometimes out of one Community into another, and when
they pass through Protestant Communities they lower the Cross, and give over
Singing till they are again upon Popish ground; but then they went on bearing
up the Cross, and singing as they went, upon which the Protestants stopped them,
and would not suffer them to go on in that manner: they finding that they were
not equal in number to the Protestants, sent to a Catholic Community, and
desired them to come to their Assistance: Two thousand came, and by all
appearance the dispute would have had a bloody issue: for the Protestants were
resolved to maintain the Rights of their Community, and the others were no less
resolved to force their way: but an extraordinary thick mist arose, and through
it the Papists fancied they saw a vast body of men, which was no other then a
Wood: but terrified with the appearance of such a Number they retired, and this
saved a little Battle that probably would not only have ended in the shedding
much Blood, but might have very much disordered the whole Constitution and
union of their Leagnes.

The Papists of Quality endeavor much to keep their People in order, but they
acknowledged to my self, that the Protestants were much peaceabler than the
Catholics. The Jurisdictions have fifteen Votes in the general Diet, yet they
are generally called the ten Jurisdictions, and the greater part of them are
likewise of the Religion; for upon the general computation of the three
Leagues, the Protestants are about two thirds. In their Diets there are three
Tables, one in the middle and two on either side, at every Table sits the head
of the League and Secretary near him, and from the Table there goes down
Benches on both hands for the Deputies from the communities of that league:
They hold their Diets by turns in the chief Towns of the s^veral Leagues, and
it hapened to be the turn of the House of God when I was there, so they met at
Coire.

The three Leagues have a conquered Country in Italy divided into three
Districts, the Valteline, Chavennes, and Bormio. When John Galeasse possessed
himself of the Duchy of Milan, and drove out Barnabas, Mastinus one of
Barnabas's Sons, to whom his Father had given those three Branches of the
Duchy of Milan, retired to Coire, and being hospitably received and
entertained by the Bishop, when he died he gave his Right to those Territories
to the Cathedral of Coire: but here was a Title without a force able to make it
good. But when the Wars of Italy were on foot, the three Leagues being much
courted by both the Crowns, since they were Masters of the Passes by which
either the Switzers or Germans could come into Italy, they resolved to lay hold
on that opportunity; yet they had not zeal enough for their Bishop to engage
deep upon his account: so they agreed with him to pay him such a Revenue, and
he transferred his Title to them; and they were so considerable to the
Spaniards, that without much ado, they yielded those parcels of the Duchy of
Milan to them, and by this means they are possessed of them. Those Accessions
to this State are much better than the principal; for as certainly the
Valteline, which is above forty miles long and two broad, is one of the richest
Valleys in the World, in which there are three Harvests some years, so the
Chavennes and Bormio are much preferable to the best Valleys of the Grisons;
yet the engagement that people have to their native homes appears signally
here, since the Grisons have not forsaken their Country that they might situate
themselves so advantageously: but they love their rugged Valleys, and think the
safety they enjoy in them beyond the Plea^ures of their acquired Dominions, so
they govern them by Bailiffs and Podesta's, and other Officers whom they send
among them: and all the advantages that they draw from them, is, That the
Magistrates whom they send to govern them, do enrich thems^l^es, as the
Bailiffs in Switzerland do. All those Offices go round the several Communities
who have the right of Nomination in their turn: but if there is n^^e of the
Community proper for the Employment, a^^ one of another Community may buy of
them the Nomination for that turn, and the Community distribu^e among them the
money that he gives them The Public draws nothing out of those Parts, except
the Fines, which in some years amounts to no considerable Sum, and ten or
twelve thousand Crowns is thought a great deal to be raised out of them in a
Year, so that their Subjects live happy and f^ee of all Taxes, which made their
last Revolt appear the more extraordinary; and it was indeed the effect of a
very surprising Bigotry, when a People under the gentlest Yoke in the World,
who had no other Gri^vance, but that now and then their Magistrates were of
another Religion, and that the Protestant Religion was tolerated amongst them,
would therefore throw off their Masters, cut the Throats of their Neighbors,
and cast themselves into the hands of the Spaniards, who are the terriblest
Masters in the World.

But to give a more particular relation of that matter, and to tell the
Circumstances which seem a little to lessen that Rebellion and Massacre. I must
give an account of a part of this C^nstitution that is very terrible, and which
makes the greatest men in it to tremble. The Peasants come sometimes in great
Bodies and demand a Chamber of Justice from the general Diet; and they are
bound to grant it always when it is thus demanded, which comes about generally
once in twenty years: commonly this Tumult of the Peasants is set on by some of
the male contented Gentry, and generally there are a great many Sacrifices
made. This Court is composed of ten Judges our of every League, and twenty
Advocates, who manage such Accusations as are presented to them: this Court is
^aramount to Law, and acts like a Court of Inquisition; th y give the Question,
and do every thing that they think necessary to discover the Truth of such
Accusations as are presented to them: and the decisions of this Court can never
be brought under a second review, though there is an Exception to this; for about
a hundred Years ago, one Court of J^stice reversed all that another had done:
but that is a single Instance The Peasants are in as great a Jealousy of the
Spaniards, as the Switzers are of the French, and the good men am^ng them are
extr^am sensible of a great dissolution of Morals that the Spanish Service
brings among them; for there is a Grison Regiment kept still in Pay by the
Spaniards; there are in it twelve Companies of F^fty a-piece, and the Captai^s
have a thousand Crowns Pay, though they are not obliged to attend upon the
Service. This is upon the matter a Pension paid under a more decent Name, to
the most considerable Men of the Country, and this is shared among them without
any distinction of Protestant and Pap^st, and is believed to sway their
Councils much. The Peasants are apt to take fire, and to believe they are
betrayed by those Pensioners of Spain; and when Rumors are blown about among
them, they come in great numbers to demand a Chamber of Justice. The common
question that they give, which is also used all Switzerland over, and in
Geneva, is, that they tie the Hands of the suspected person behind his Back,
and pull them up to his Head, and so draw them about, by which the Arms, and
chiefly the Shoulder-blades, are disjoynted. And when a Person put to the
Question confesses his Crime, and is upon that condemned to die, he is obliged
to renew his confession upon oath at the place of execution, and if he goes off
from it then, and says that his confession was extorted by the violence of the
torture, he is put again to the question: for this passes for a maxim that no
man must die unless he confesses himself guilty: Generally when the fury of
demanding this Chamber is spread among the people, the Gentry run away and
leave the whole matter in the power of the Peasants, for they know not where it
will end, and so the Peasa^ts being named to be Judges, the Justice go^s quick
till some sacrifices appease the rage. Two year ago upon the sale of a common
to the Bishop of Como, to which he had an ancient pretension, the Peasants
having no more the liberty of the common, were enraged at their Magist ates,
and a report was spread abroad, of which the first Author could never be
discovered, that the Spaniards had sent a hundred thousand Crowns among them to
corrupt all their Magistrates, upon this they were so set on fire, that it was
generally thought there would have been many sacrifices made to this fury: but
the Gentry happened to be then so much united, that there was none of them
engaged among the Peasants, or that managed their rage: a Chamber of Justice
was granted, but the matter was so ordered that it did not appear that any one
was guilty, yet some that had dealt in that transaction were sined, not so much
for any fault of theirs, as to raise a fonds to pay the expenses of the
Chamber, and because they could not find color enough to raise so much out of
the sines, there was a fine of five hundred Livers laid on every one of the
Spanish Companies. I hope this digression will not appear tedious to you, and
the rather because you will soon see that it was a little necessary to open the
matter of the Rebellion and Massacre in the Valteline.

In the year 1618. there was a report s^t about, that the Spaniards had a
treaty on foot to tear away the Valteline fram the leagues, this was supported
by the Fort Fuentes, that the Governor of Milan was building upon the Lake of
Como, near the Valteline. There was one Ganatz a Minister, but a bloody and
perfidious Man, that set on and managed the rage of the Peasants, and there was
great reason to suspect some underhand dealing, tho he threw it which way he
pleased. A Chamber of Justice was appointed to sit at Tossane, which is a
considerable Town twelve miles from Coire, on the way to Italy, near Alta
Rhetia, which is a high and small Hill, to which there is no access but on one
side, where there are yet the ruins of a Castle and a Church, and which they
believe was the Palace of Rhetus the first Prince of the Country: There was
severe justice done in this Chamber, a Priest was put to the question, and so
ill used that he died in it, which is a crying thing among them. The chief
suspicion lay upon one Pianta, who being of one of the best Families of the
Grisons, was then one of the Captains in the Spanish Regiment; he withdrew
himself from the storm, but the Peasants led on by Ganatz pursued him so, that
at last they found him and hewed him in pieces, Ganatz himself striking the
first stroke with an Ax, which was taken up and preserved by his Friends, and
four and twenty years after fifty or sixty of his Friends fell upon Ganatz in
Coire, and killed him with the same Ax, which they brought along with them,
that they might execute their design by the same tool with which their Friend
was murdered, Ganatz had during the Wars abandoned both his Religion and
Profession, being, indeed, a disgrace to both, and had served first in the
Venetian, and then in the Spanish Troops. After the peace was made he became so
considerable, being supported by the Spanish Faction, that he was chosen
Governor of Chavennes, and was come over to Coire to a Diet, he being then in
so important a charge: but he was so much hated, that tho the murdering of a
Magistrate in Office, and at a public assembly in so terrible a manner ought
to have been severely punished, yet no inquiry was made into the crime, nor was
any man so much as questioned for it. In that Chamber, many that were put to
the question confessed enough to hang them, some endured the question and
escaped with the loss of the use of their Arm. Those of the Valteline have made
use of this severity, as that which gave the rise to the Massacre, and it is
very probable this might have drawn in some, that would have been otherwise
more moderate, and that it did likewise precipitate that barbarous action: yet
it was afterward found out that the Plot had been formed long before, so that
the industry and rage of the Priests managed by Spanish Emissaries, working
upon the bigotry of the people was the real cause, and this was only made use
of as a pretext to give some more plausible colors to the Massacre, which was
executed some months after this Chamber was dissolved. It began while the
Protestants were at Church, there were some hundreds destroyed, the rest got
all up to the Mountains, and so escaped into the Country of the Grisons, and
those of Chavennes got likewise up to the Hills, for they are situated just at
the bottom of them.

I shall not prosecure the rest of that War, the French savv of what advantage
it was to them not to let this pass from Italy into Germany fall into the
hands of the Spaniards; so Bassompiere was sent to Madrid, and obtained a
promise, that all things should be put in the same state in which they were
before the year 1618, but when that order was sent to the Governor of Milan,
it was plain he had secret orders to the contrary, for he refused to execute
it: so a War follovved, in which the Grisons found it was not easy for them
to support the charge of it, without employing the assistance of the French.
But the Spaniards pretended to have no other interest in the affairs of the
Valteline then the preservation of the Catholic Religion, and to show their
sincerity, they put the Country into the Pope's hands, knovving that he could
not preserve it but by their assistance, nor restore it without securing it
from all change of Religion. The French willingly undertook the cause of the
Grisons, and because the Duke of Rohan was like to be the most favorable
General, as being of the Religion, he was sent to command some forces that
marched thither: But he savv that if the French once made themselves Masters of
the passes of the Country, it would turn to their ruin, and finding the
Grisons reposed an entire confidence in him, he thought it unbecoming him to be
an instrument in that which he savv must be fatal to them. The Spaniards
seeing the French engage in the quarrel, and fearing lest they should possess
themselves of the passes, offered to restore all the Territory in Italy, for
Chavennes and Bormio had likewise revolted, only the Pretestants got away so
quick upon the disorders in the Valteline, that they prevented the rage of the
Priests. The Spaniards asked these conditions, that an Amnesty should be
granted for what was past, that there should be no exercise of the Protestant
Religion tolerated in the Country, and that even the Bailiffs and other
Magistrates of the Religion, that came to be sent into the Valteline, should
have no exercise of their Religion, and as for other persons, that none of the
Religion might stay above six vveeks at a time in the Country. The Duke of
Rohan seeing that conditions of so much advantage to the Leagues were offered
to them, did underhand advise those of the Religion to accept of them, at the
same time that he seemed openly to oppose the treaty set on foot on those
terms, and that he might get out of this employment with the less dishonor,
he advised their clapping him up in prison till they had finished their treaty
with the Spaniards. So that they very gratefully to this day own that they
owe the preservation of their Country to the wise advices of that great Man.
Many that were of the Religion returned to their Houses and Estates, but the
greatest part fearing such another Massacre, have since changed their Religion,
others have sold their Estates and left the Country, some stay still and go
two or three hours journey to some of the Protestant communities, where they
have the exercise of the Religion: And tho they may not stay in the Valteline
above six weeks at a time, yet they avoid that by going for a day or two out of
the Country once within that time, nor is that matter at present so severely
examined, so that there is a calm among them as to those matters. But when it
comes to the turn of the Protestant communities to send one of the Religion to
those employments, he is often much embarassed by the Bishop of Como, to whose
Diocese those Territories belong, for if the Bishop fancies that they do any
thing contrary to the Ecclesiastical immunities, he excommunicates them, and
tho this may appear a ridiculous thing, since they are already in a worse state
by being Heretics, yet it produces a very sensible effect, for the people that
are extremely superstitious, will not after that come near such Magistrates, so
that about three years ago a Bailiff found himself obliged to desire to be
recalled, tho his time was not out, since being excommunicated he could no
longer maintain the Government in his own person,

Among the Grisons the Roman Law prevails, modified a little by their Customs.
One that was a little particular, was executed when I was there.

A Man that has an Estate by his Wife, enjoys it after her Death as long as he
continues a Widovver, but when he marries again he is bound to divide it among
the Children that he had by her. The Justice is short and simple; but it is often
thought that Bribes go here, though but meanly in proportion to their Poverty, as
well as in other Places. The married Women here do scarce appear abroad except
at Church, but the young Women have more Liberty before they are married. There
is such a plenty of all things, by reason of the gentleness of the Government
and the industry of the People, that in all the ten days in which I stayed at
Coire, I was but once asked an Alms in the Streets. There are two Churches in
Coire, in the one there is an Organ that joins with their Voices in the singing
of the Psalms; and there was for the honor of the Diet, while we were there,
an Anthem sung by a set of Musicians very regularly. In all the Churches both
of Switzerland and the Grisons, except in this only, the Minister preaches
covered, but here he is bare-headed. And I observed a particular Devotion used
here in saying of the Lord's Prayer, that the Ministers who wear Caps put them
off when it was said. The Women here, as in Bern, turn all to the East in time
of Prayer, and also in their private Devotions before and after the public
Prayers: many also bow at the Name of Jesus. They Christen discovering the
whole Head, and pouring the Water on the hind-head, using a trine Aspersion,
which is also the practice of the Switzers. It was matter of much Edification,
to see the great Numbers both here and all Switzerland over, that come every
day to Prayers morning and evening. They give here in the middle of the Prayer
a good interval of Silence for the private Devotions of the Assembly. The
Schools here go not above Latin. Greek, and Logic: and for the ^est they send
their Children to Zurich or Basil. The Clergy here are very meanly provided:
for most part they have nothing but the benevolence of their People: they
complained much to me of a great coldness in their People in the matters of
Religion, and of a great Corruption in their morals. The Commons are extreme
insolent, and many Crimes go unpunished if the Persons that commit them have
either great credit or much money. The poor Ministers here are under a terrible
slavery: for the Grisons pretend that in all times they had not only the
Patronage of their Churches, but a power to dismiss their Ch^rch-men as they
saw cause. How it is among the Papists I cannot tell, but the Dean of the Synod
of the House of God told me they had an ill custom of ordaining their Ministers
without a Title, upon an Examination of their Qualifications and Abilities,
which took them up generally six or seven hours: and when this Trial was thus
dispatched, if the Person was found qualified, they ordained him; and it was
too ordinary for those that were thus ordained, to endeavor to undermine the
Ministers already in Employment, if their people grew disgusted at them, or as
they became disabled by Age: and often the Interest and Kindred of the Intruder
carried the matter against the Incumbent without any color or pretense; and in
that case the Synod was bound to receive the Intruder. In one half of the
Country they preach in High Dutch, and in the other half in a corrupt Italian,
which they call Romanish, that is a mixture of French and Italian. In every
League they have a Synod, and as the People choose their Ministers, so in
imitation of the Switzers every Syn^d chooses their Antist^s or S. perintendant;
he is called the Dean among the Grisons, and has a sort of an Episcopal Power,
but he is accountable to the Synod. The Office is for life, but the Synod, upon
great cause given, may make a change. The people of this Country are much more
lively than the Switzers, and they begin to have some tincture of the Italian
Temper. They are extreme civil to Strangers; but it seems in all Commonwealths
Innkeepers think they have a right to exact upon Strangers, which one finds
here as well as in Holland or in Switzerland.

I shall conclude what I have to say concerning the Grisons, with a very
extraordinary Story, which I had both from the Ministers of Coire and several
other Gentlemen, that saw in April 1685. about five hundred persons of
different Sexes and Ages that past through the Town; who gave this account of
themselves. They were the Inhabitants of a Valley in Tirol, belonging for the
greatest part to the Archbishopric of Saltsburg, but some of them were in the
Diocesses of Trent and Bresse; they seemed to be a Remnant of the old
Waldenses, they worshipped neither Images nor Saints, and they believed the
Sacrament was only a commemoration of the Death of Christ; and in many other
Points they had their peculiar Opinions different from those of the Church of
Rome: they knew nothing neither of Lutherians nor Calvinists, and the Grisons.
though their Neighbors, had never heard of this nearness of theirs to the
Protestant Religion. They had Mass said among them, but some years since some
of the Valley going over Germany to earn somewhat by their labor, happened to go
into the Palatinate, where they were better instructed in ma^ters of Religion;
and these brought back with them into the Valley the Heidelberg Catechism,
together with ^om^ other German Books, which un over the V^lley; and they being
before that in a good di^position, those Books had such an effect upon them,
that they gave over going to Mass any more, and began to worship God in a way
more suitable to the Rules set down in Scripture: some of their Priests
concurred with them in this happy Change, but others that adhered still to the
Mass, went and gave the Archbishop of Saltsburg an account of it: upon which he
sent some into the Country to examine the truth of the matter, to exhort them
to return to Ma^s, and t^ threaten them with all severity if they continued
obstinate: so they seeing a terrible Storm ready to break upon them, resolved
to abandon their Houses and all they had, rather than sin against their
Consciences. And the whole Inhabitants of the Valley, old and young, Men and
Women, to the number of two thousand, divided themselves into several Bodies:
some intended to go to Brandenburgh. others to the Palatinate, and about five
hundred took the way of Coire, intending to disperse the^^elves in Switzerland.
The Ministers told me they were much edified with their Simplicity and Modesty,
for a Collection being made for them, they desired only a little Bread to carry
them on their way. From Coire we went to Tossane, and from that through the way
that is justly called Via Mala. ^t is through a bottom between two Rocks,
through which the Rhine runs but under ground or a great part of the way. The
Way is cut out in the middle of the Rock in some places, and in several places
the steepness of the Rock being such that a Way could not be cut out, there are
beams driven into it, over which, Boards and Earth are laid: this way holds an
hour. After that, there is for two hours good way, and we past through two
considerable Villages: there is good Lodging in both. From thence there is, for
two hours Journey, ter^ible Way, almost as bad as the Via Mala: then an hours
Journey good way to Splagen, which is a large Village of above two hundred
Houses, that are well built, and the Inhabitants seem all to live at their
ease, though they have no sort of Soil but a little Meadow ground about them.
This is the last Protestant Church that was in our Way, it was well endowed,
for the Provision of the Minister was near two hundred Crowns. Those of this
Village are the Carriers between Italy and Germany, so they drive a great
Trade, for there is here a perpetual Carriage going and coming, and we were
told, that there pass gen^rally a hundred Horses through this Town one day with
another: and there are above five hundred Carriage-Horse that belong to this
Town. From this place we went mounting for three hours, till we got to the top
of the Hills, where there is only one great Inn. After that the way was
tollerably good for two hours, and for two hours there is a constant descent,
which for the most part is as steep as if we were all the while going down
Stairs. At the foot of this is a little Village, called Campdolcin, and here we
found we were in Italy, both by the vast difference of the Climate; for whereas
we were freezing on the other side, the hear of the Sun was uneasy here, and
also by the number of the B^ggars, though it may seem the reverse of what one
ought to expect, since the richest Country of Europe is full of B^ggars; and
the Grisons, that are one of the poorest States, have no Beggars at all. One
thing is also strange, that among the Grisons, the rich Wine of the Valteline,
after it is carried three days Journey, is sold cheaper than the Wine of other
Countries where it grows at the door: but there are no Taxes nor Impositions
here. From Campdolcin there is three hours Journey to Chavennes, all in a slow
Descent, and in some places the way is extreme r^gged and stoney. Chavennes is
very pleasantly situated at the very foot of the Mountains: there runs through
the Town a pleasant little River. It is nobly built, and has a great many
rich Vineyards about it; and the rebound of the Sunbeams from the Mountains,
does so increase the h^ats here, that the soil is as rich here as in any place
of Italy. Here one begins to see a Noble Architecture in a great many houses;
in short all the marks of a rich Soil and a free Government appear here, The
Town stood a little more to the North, about five hundred year ago, but a Slice
of the Alps came down upon it, and buried it quite, and at the ^pper end of the
Town there are some Rocks that look like Ruins; about which there has been a
very extraordinary expense to divide them one from another, and to make them
fit places for Forts, and Castles: the marks of the Tools appeared all over the
Rock in one place. I measured the breadth of the one from the other, which is
twenty foot, the length is four hundred and fifty foot, and as we could guess
the Rock was two hundred foot high, cut down on both sides in a line as even as
a wall; toward the top of one the name Salvius is cut in great Letters a
little Gothic. On the tops of those Rocks which are inaccessible, except on
the one side, and to that the ascent is extreme uneasy, they had Garrisons
during the Wars of the Valteline: there were 1500 in G^rrison in that which is
in the middle: There falls down frequently slices from the Hills that do
^x^reamly fatten the g^ound which they cov^r, so that it becomes frui^ful
beyond expr^ssion, and I saw a Lime tree that was plan^ed 38 years ago, in a
piece of ground which had been so covered, that was ^wo fathom, and a half, of
compass. On both sides of the River, the Town and the Gardens belonging to it,
cover the whole Bottom that lies between the Hills, and at the roots of the
Mountains they dig great Cellars, and grot toes, and strike a hole about a foot
square, ten or twelve foot into the Hill, which all the Summer long blows a
fresh Air into the Cellar, so that the Wine of those Cellars drinks almost as
cold as if it were in Ice; but this windpipe did not blow when I was there,
which was toward the end of September: For the Sun opening the pores of the
Earth, and rarifying the exterior Air, that which is compressed within the
cavities that are in the Mountains, rushes out with a constant Wind; but when
the operation of the Sun is weakened, this course of the Air is less sensible.
Before or over those Vaults they build little pleasant Rooms like
Summer-houses, and in them they go to Collation generally at night in Summer. I
never saw bigger Grapes then grow there, there is one sort bigger then the
biggest Damascene Plums that we have in England.

There is a sort of Wine he^e and in the Valteline, which I never heard named
any where else, that is called Aromatic Wine, and as the taste makes one think
it must be a composition, for it tastes like a Strong-water drawn off Spices, so
its strength being equal to a weak Brandy, disposes one to believe that it
cannot be a natural Wine, and yet it is the pure juice of the Grape without any
mixture. The Liquor being singular, I informed my self particularly of the way
of preparing it: the Grapes are red, tho it drinks white; they let the Grapes
hang on the Vines till November that they are extreme ripe, then they carry
them to their Garrets, and set them all upright on their ends by one another
for two or three months, then they pick all the Grapes and throw away those in
which there is the least appearance of rottenness, so that they press none but
sound Grapes: after they are pressed they put the Liquor in an open Vessel, in
which it throws up a scum, which they take off twice a day, and when no more
scum comes up, which according to the difference of the season is sooner or
later, for sometimes the scum comes no more after eight days, and at other
times it continues a Fortnight, then they put it in a close Vessel; for the
first year it is extreme sweet and luscious, but at the end of the year they
pierce it a little higher then the middle of the Vessel, almost two thirds from
the bottom, and drink it off till it comes so low, and then every year they
fill it up a new: once a year in the month of March it ferments, and cannot be
drunk till that is over, which continues a month, but their other Wine ferments
not at that time. Madam Salis a Lady of that Country who entertained us three
days with a magnificence equal to what can be done in London or Paris, had Wine
of this composition that was forty years old, and was so very strong that one
could hardly drink above a spoonful, and it tasted high of Spicery, tho she
assured me there was not one grain of Spice in it, nor of any other mixture
whatsoever. Thus the heat that is in this Wine, becomes a fire and distills it
self, throwing up the more spirituous parts of it to the top of the Hogs-Head.

Both here and in the Grisons the meat is very juycy, the Fowl is Excellent,
their Roots and Herbs very tastful, but the Fish of their Lakes is beyond any
thing I ever saw. They live in a great simplicity as to their habit and
furniture, but they have plenty of all things, and are extreme Rich, the Family
where we were so Nobly Entertained is believed to have about two hundred
thousand Crowns: here the Italian custom of one only of a Family that Marries
takes place generally. There is a sort of Pots of Stone that is used not only
in all the Kitchins here, but almost all Lombardy over, called Lavege, the
Stone feels oily and scaly, so that a scale sticks to ones Finger that touches
it, and is somewhat of the nature of a slate, there are but three Mines of it
known in these parts, one near Chavennes, another in the Valteline, and the
third in the Grisons, but the first is much the best, they generally cut it in
the Mine round, of about a foot and a half Diameter, and about a foot and a
quarter thick, and they work it in a Mill, where the Chizzels that cut the
Stone are driven about by a Wheel that is set a going by Water, and which is
so ordered that he who manages the Chizzel, very easily draws forward the
Wheel out of the course of the Water; they turn off first the outward Coat of
this Stone till it is exactly smooth, and then they separate one Pot after
another by those small and hooked Chizzels, by which they make a nest of Pots
all one within another, the outward and biggest being as big as an ordinary
Beef-pot, and the inward Pot being no bigger than a small Pipkin; these they
arm with hooks and circles of Brass, and so they are served by them in their
Kitchins. One of these Stone-pots takes heat and boils sooner than any Pot of
Mettle; and whereas the bottoms of Mettle-pots transmit the heat so entirely to
the Liquor within, that they are not insufferably hot, the bottom of this
Stone-pot, which is about twice so thick as a Pot of Mettle, burns extremely;
it never cracks, neither gives it any sort of taste to the Liquor that is
boiled in it, but if it falls to the ground it is very brittle, yet this is
repaired by p^^ching it up, for they piece their broken Pots so close, tho
without any cement, by sowing with Iron-wire the broken Parcels together, that
in the holes which they pierce with the Wire, there is not the least breach
made, except that which the Wire both makes and sills. The passage to this Mine
is very inconvenient, for the must creep into it for near half a mile through a
(...) that is so hard that the passage is not above three foot high, and so
those that draw out the Stones creep all along upon their Belly, having a
Candle fastened in their forehead, and the Stone laid on a sort of Cushion made
for it upon their hips: The Stones are commonly two hundred weight.

But having mentioned some falls of Mountains in those parts, I cannot pass by
the extraordinary fate of the Town of Pleurs, that was about a league from
Chavennes to the North in the same bottom, but on a ground that is a little
more raised: The Town was half the bigness of Chavenness, the number of the
Inhabitants was about two and twenty hundred persons, but it was much more
nobly Built; for besides the great Palace of the Francken, that cost some
millions, there were many other Palaces that were built by several rich Factors
both of Milan and the other parts of Italy, who liked the situation and Air,
as well as the freedom of the Government of this place, so they used to come
hither, during the heats, and here they gave themselves all the Indulgences
that a vast wealth could furnish. By one of the Palaces that was a little
distant from the Town, which was not overwhelmed with it, one may judge of the
rest: It was an out-house of the Family of the Francken, and yet it may compare
with many Palaces in Italy, and certainly House and Gardens could not cost so
little as one hundred thousand Crowns. The voluptuousness of this place became
very crying, and Mad^m de Salis, told m^ that she heard her Mother often relate
some passages of a Protestant Ministers Sermons, that preached in a little
Church, which those of the Religion had there, and warned them often of the
terrible judgments of God, which were hanging over their heads, and that he
believed would suddenly break ou^ ^^on them. On the 25th of August, 1618: An^
^^bitant came and told them to be gone, for he saw the Mountains cleaving, but
he was laughed at for his pains: He had a Daughter whom he persuaded to leave
all and go with him, but when she was gone out of Town with him, she called to
mind that she had not locked the Door of a Room, in which she had some things
of value, and so she went back to do that, and was buried with the rest; for at
the hour of Supper the Hill fell down and buried the Town and all the
Inhabitants, so that not one person escaped: The fall of the Mountains did so
fill the Channel of the River, that the first news those of Chavennes had of it
was by the failing of their River, for three or four hours there came not a
drop of Water, but the River wrought for it self a new course and returned to
them. I could hear no particular character of the Man who escaped, so I must
leave the secret reason of so singular a preservation to the great discovery at
the last day of those steps of Divine Providence that are now so unaccountable.
Some of the Family of the Francken got some Miners to work under ground, to
find out the wealth that was buried in their Palace; for besides their Plate
and Furniture there was a great cash and many Jewels in the House: the Miners
pretended they could find nothing, but they went to their Country of Tirol,
and built fine Houses and a great wealth appeared, of which no other visible
account could be given but this, that they had found some of that treasure. The
chief Factors of Italy have been Grisons, and they told me that as the Trade of
Banking began in Lombardy, so that all Europe over a Lombard and a Bank
signified the same thing, so the great Bankiers of Lombardy were Grisons, and
to this day the Grisons drive a great Trade in money; for a Man there of a
hundred thousand Crowns Estate, has not perhaps a third part of this within
the Country, but puts it out in the neighboring States: And the liberty of
the Country is such, that the Natives when they have made up Estates
elsewhere, are glad to leave even Italy and the best parts of Germany, and to
come and live among those Mountains, of which the very sight is enough to fill
a Man with horror.

From Chavennes we went for two hours through a plain to the Lake of Chavennes,
which is almost round, and is about two mile Diameter. This Lake falls into the
Lake of Como over against the Fort Fuentes; when we passed there, the Water was
so low that the Boat could not easily get over a Bank that lay between the two
Lakes. The Lake of Como is about eight and forty miles long and four broad, it
runs between two ranges of Hills: I did not stay long enough in Como to give
any description of it, for I thought to have returned that way from a ^ittle
Tour that I made into the Ba^ia^es that the Switzers have in Italy, of Lugane,
Locarmo and Bellinzona: But I took another course, so I saw nothing in Como;
the best thing in it is a fine Chapel, which the present Pope, who is a native
of Como is building. From Como we went eight miles to Codelago, which belongs
to the Switzers, and from thence to Lugane we had eight miles of Lake: this
Lake does not run in an even current as the other Lakes that rise under the
Alps; but the situation of the Hills about it throws it into several courses.

The Switzers have here several little Provinces or Baliages, of which during
the Wars of Italy, between the Dukes of Milan and the two Crowns in Francis the
First, and Charles the Fifths time, they possessed themselves as a pledge for
payment of their Arrears, and they were then such considerable Allies, that
they made both the Competitors for the Durchy of Milan Court them by turns, and
became the peaceable Possessors of almost all that Tract that lies between the
Lake of Como, to the Country of the V^lessii or the Valleys: The Inhabitants
here are so well used, they live to free of all Impositions, and the Switzers
Government is so gentle, that h^re I must tell you another Paradox, this is the
worst Country, the least Productive, the most exposed to cold, and the least
capable of Trade of all Italy, and yet is by far the best peopled of any that I
saw in all Italy: There belongs to the Baliage of Lugane alone ninety nine
Villages, of which a great many are very large, and all are full of people. The
twelve ancient Cantons have their turns of all the Baliages and other Officers
here: but when it comes to the turn of those of the Religion, their Bailiffs
must be contented with private Devotions in their own House, but can have no
public exercises, nor so much as a Minister in their Houses. For here as in
the Valteline when the Spaniards confirmed the right of the Cantons to those
Territories, they made an express provision, that no Religion except the Popish
should be tolerated here; so that the Bailiff who is the Prince often has not
the free Liberty of his Religion in these parts. The Bailiffs here make their
advantages as well as in the other parts of Switzerland, but yet with more
caution, for they take great care not to give the natives any distaste, tho the
miseries to which they see all their Neighbors exposed, and the abundance and
liberty in which they live should by all appearance deliver their Masters from
any great apprehensions of a revolt: A geeat many Mechanics of all sorts live
in these parts, who go all Summer long over Italy, and come back hither with
what they have gained, and live free of all Taxes.

I was told that some Nephews of Popes, in particular the Barberines had
Treated with the Switzers to buy this Country from them, and so to erect it
into a principality, and that they had resolved to offer twelve thousand Crowns
to the twelve Cantons, but they found it would certainly be rejected, so they
made not the proposition to the Diet of the Cantons as they once intended, and
it is certain whenever this Country is brought under a yoke like that which
the rest of Italy bears it will be soon abandoned, for there is nothing that
draws so many people to live in so ill a soil, when they are in sight of the
best soil of Europe, but the easiness of the Government. From Lugane I went to
the Lago Maggiore, which is a great and Noble Lake, it is six and fifty miles
long, and in most places six miles broad, and a Hundred Fathom deep about the
middle of it, it makes a great Bay to the VVestward, and their lies here two
Islands called the Borromean Islands, that are certainly the loveliest spots of
ground in the World, there is nothing in all Italy that can be compared to
them, they have the full view of the Lake, and the ground rises so sweetly in
them that nothing can be imagined like the Terrasses here, they belong to two
Counts of the Borromean Family. I was only in one of them which belongs to the
head of the Family, who is Nephew to the Famous Cardinal known by the name of
S. Carlo: on the VVest-end lies the Palace, which is one of the best of Italy,
for the lodgings within, tho the Architecture is but ordinary, there is one
Noble apartment above four and twenty foot high, and there is a vast addition
making to it, and here is a great Collection of Noble Pictures beyond any thing
I saw out of Rome: The whole Island is a Garden except a little corner to the
South set off for a Village of about forty little Houses, and because the
figure of the Island was not made regular by nature, they have built great
Vaults and Portaca's along the Rock, which are all made Grotesque, and so they
have brought it to a regular form by laying Earth over those Vaults. There is
first a Garden to the East that rises up from the Lake by five rows of
Terrasses, on the three sides of the Garden that are watered by the Lake, the
Stairs are Noble, the VValls are all covered with Oranges and Citrons, and a
more beautiful spot of a Garden cannot be seen: There are two buildings in the
two corners of this Garden, the one is only a milne for fetching up the Water,
and the other is a noble Summer House all wainscotted, if I may speak so, with
Alabaster and Marble of a fine color inclining to red, from this Garden one
goes in a level to all the rest of the Allies and parterres, Herb-Gardens and
Flower-Gardens, in all which there are varieties of Fountains and Arbors, but
the great parterre is a surprising thing, for as it is well furnished with
Statues and Fountains, and is of a vast extent, and justly situated to the
Palace, so at the furtherend of it there is a great Mount, that face of it that
looks to the Parterre is made like a Theater all full of Fountains and Statues,
the height rising up in five several rows, it being about Fifty foot high, and
about Fourscore foot in front, and round this Mount answering to the Five rows
into which the Theater is divided, there goes as many terrasses of noble walks,
the Walls are all as close covered with Oranges and Citrons as any of our Walls
in England are with Laurel; the top of the Mount is Seventy foot long and Forty
broad, and here is a vast Cistern into which the Mill plays up the Water that
must furnish all the Fountains: The Fountains were not quite finished when I
was there, but when all is finished this place will look like an Enchanted
Island. The freshness of the Air, it being both in a Lake and near the
Mountains, the fragrant smell, the beautiful prospect, and the delighting
variety that is here makes it such a habitation for Summer, that perhaps the
whole World has nothing like it. From this I went to Sestio, a miserable
Village at the end of the Lake, and here I began to feel a mighty change being
now in Lombardy, which is certainly the beautifullest Country that can be
imagined, the ground lies so even, it is so well watered, so sweetly divided by
rows of Trees enclosing every piece of ground of an Acre or two Acres compass,
that it cannot be denied that here is a vast extent of soil above Two Hundred
miles long, and in many places a Hundred-miles broad, where the whole Country
is equal to the loveliest spots in all England or France, it has all the
sweetness that Holland or Flanders have, but with a warmer Sun and a better
Air, the Neighborhood of the Mountains causes a freshness of Air here, that
makes the soil the most desirable place to live in that can be seen, if the
Government were not so excessively severe that there is nothing but poverty
over all this rich Country. A Traveller in many places finds almost nothing,
and is so ill furnished, that if he does not buy provisions in the great Towns,
he will be obliged to a very severe Diet, in a Country that he should think
flowed with Milk and Honey; but I shall say more of this hereafter. The Lago
Maggiore discharges it self in the River Tesine, which runs with such a force
that we went Thirty miles in three hours, having but one Rower, and the Water
was no way swelled. From this we went into the Canale, which Francis the first
cut from this River to the Town of Milan, which is about Thirty foot broad, and
on both its banks there are such provisions to discharge the Water when it
rises, to such a height, that it can never be fuller of Water then is intended
it should be; it lies also so even that sometimes for six miles together one
sees the line so exact that there is not the least crook; it is Thirty miles
long, and is the best advantage that the Town of Milan has for Water carriage.

I will not entertain you with a long description of this great City, which is
one of the noblest in the World, to be an Inland Town that has no great Court,
no commerce either by Sea or any Navigable River, and that is now the
Metropolis of a very small State; for that which is not Mountainous in this
state, is not above sixty miles square, and yet it produces a wealth that is
surprising: It paies for an establishment of Seven and Forty Thousand Men, and
yet there are not Sixteen Thousand Soldiers effectively in it, so many are eat
up by those in whose hands the Government is lodged: But the vastness of the
Town, the Nobleness of the Buildings, and above all the surprising riches of
the Churches and Convents are signs of great wealth: The Dome has nothing to
commend it of Architecture, it being built in the rude Go^^ick manner, but for
the vastness and riches of the Building, it is equal to any in Italy, S. Peter's
it self not excepted. It is all marble, both pavement, and Walls both outside
and inside, and on the top it is all flagg'd with Marble; and there is the
vastest number of niches for Statues of Marble, both within and without, that
are any where to be seen. It is true the Statues in some of the niches are not
proportioned to the niches themselves; the Frontispiece is not yet made, it is
to be all over covered with Statues and bas reliefs; and the Pillars of which
there are Four rows in the body of the Church, have each of them Eight niches
at the top for so many Statues; and though one would think this Church so full
of Statues, that almost every Saint has his statue, yet I was assured they
wanted Seven Thousand to finish the design, but these must chiefly belong to
the Frontispiece: The Church as I could measure it by walking over it in an
equal pace, is Five Hundred foot long, and Two Hundred wide; the Quire is
wainschotted and carried in so extraordinary a manner, that I never saw Passion
so well expressed in Wood; it contains Sixty stalls, and they have almost all
the Histories of the Gospel represented in them. Just under the Cupulo lies S.
Carlo's body, as I was told, in a great case of Cristal of vast value, but I
could not come near it; for we were there on two Holy Days, and there was a
perpetual crowd about it; and the superstition of the People for his body, is
such, that on a Holy Day one runs a hazard that comes near it without doing
some reverence. His Canonization cost the Town a Hundred Thousand Crowns, they
pretend they have miracles too, for Cardinal Frederigo Borromee; but they will
not set about his Canonization, the price is so high. The Plate and other
presents made to S. Carlo are things of a prodigious value; some services for
the Altar are all of Gold, some very massy and set with Jewels, others so
finely wrought that the fashion is thought equal to the value of the mettle;
the Habits and all the other Ornaments for the Function of his Canonization are
all of an incredible Wealth. He was indeed a Prelate of great merit, and
according to the answer that a Friar made to Philip de Comines, when he asked
him how they came to qualify one of the worst of their Princes with the Title
of Saint in an Inscription which he read, which was that they gave that Title
to all their Benefactors; never Man deserved of a Town this Title so justly as
Cardinal Borromee did, for he laid out a prodigious Wealth in Milan, leaving
nothing to his Family, but the honor of having produced so great a Man, which
is a real temporal Inheritance to it, for as there have been, since that time,
two Cardinals of that Family, so it is esteemed a Casa Santa; and every time
that it produces an Ecclesiastic of any considerable merit, he is sure, if he
lives to it, to be raised to this Archbishopric, for if there were one of the
Family capable of it, and that did not carry it that alone might dispose the
State to a Rebellion, and he were a bold Man that would adventure on a
competition with one of this Family. He laid out a great deal on the Dome and
consecrated it, though the work will not be quite finished yet for some Ages,
that being one of the crafts of the Italian Priests never to finish a great
design, that so by keeping it still in an unfinisht estate, they may be always
drawing great donatives to it, from the superstition of the People. He built
the Archbishops Palace, which is very noble, and a seminary, a College for
the Switzers, several Parish Churches, and many Convents. In short the whole
Town is full of the marks of his Wealth. The riches of the Churches of Milan
strike one with amazement, the Building, the Painting, the Altars, and the
Plate, and every thing in the Convents, except their Libraires, are all signs
both of great Wealth and o^ a very powerful superstition, but their Libraires
not only here, but all Italy over are scandalous things, the room is often fine
and richly adorned, but the Books are few, ill bound, and worse chosen, and the
ignorance of the Priests both Secular and Regular is such, that no Man that
has not had occasion to discover it, can easily believe it. The Convent of S.
Victor that is without the Town, is by much the richest, it is composed of
Canons Regular, called in Italy the Order of Mount Olive, or Olivetan, that of
the Bernabites is extreme rich, there is a Pulpit and a Confessional all inlaid
with Agates of different colors, finely spotted Marbles, and of Lapis Lazulis
that are thought almost inestimable. S. Laurence has a noble Cupulo, and a
Pulpit of the same form with that of the Bernabites. The Jesuits, the
Theatines, the Dominicans, and S. Sebastians are very rich. The Citadel is too
well known to need a description, it is very regularly built, and is a most
effectual restraint to keep the Town in order, but it could not stand out
against a good Army three days; for it is so little, and so f^ll of buildings,
that it could not resist a shower of Bombs. The Hospital is indeed a Royal
Building, I was told it had Ninety Thousand Crowns Revenue: The old Court is
large, and would look noble if it were not for the new Court that is near it,
which is Two Hundred and Fifty foot square, and there are three rows of
Corridors or Galleries all round the Court, one in every stage according to the
Italian manner, which makes the lodgings very convenient, and gives a Gallery
before every door: It is true these take up a great deal of the Building, being
ordinarily Eight or Ten foot broad; but then here is an open space that is
extreme cool on that side where the Sun does not lie, for it is all open to the
Air, the Wall being only supported by Pillars, at the distance of Fifteen or
Twenty foot one from another. In this Hospital there are not only Galleries
full of Beds on both sides, as is ordinary in all Hospitals; but there are also
a great many Chambers in which Persons whose condition was formerly
distinguished are treated with a particular care. There is an out-house which
is called the Lazarette, that is without the Walls, which belongs to this
Hospital, it is an exact quarter of a mile square, and there are Three Hundred
and Sixty Rooms in it, and a Gallery runs all along before the Chambers, so
that as the service is convenient, the sick have a covered walk before their
Doors. In the middle of this vast square there is an Octangular Chapel, so
contrived that the sick from all their Beds may see the elevation of the Hostie
and adore it: This House is for the Plague or for infectious Fevers, and the
Sick that want a freer Air, are also removed hither.

As for the devotions of this place, I saw here the Ambrosian Office, which is
distinguished from the Roman, both in the Music which is much simpler, and in
some other rites: the Gospel is read in a high Pulpit at the lower end of the
Quire, that so it may be heard by all the People, though this is needless,
since it is read in a Language that they do not understand; when they go to say
high Mass, the Priests comes from the high Altar to the lower-end of the Quire,
where the Offertory of the Bread and the Wine is made by some of the Laity,
they were Nuns that made it when I was there, I heard a Capucin Preach here; it
was the first Sermon I heard in Italy, and I was much surprised at many Comical
expressions and gestures, but most of all with the conclusion; for there being
in all the Pulpits of Italy a Crucifix on the side of the Pulpit toward the
Altar; he, after a long address to it, at last in a forced transport, took it
in his Arms and hugged it and kissed it: But I observed that before he kissed
it; he seeing some dust on it, blew it off very carefully, for I was just under
the Pulpit: He entertained it with a long and tender caress, and held it out to
the People, and would have forced tears both from himself and them, yet I saw
none shed. But if the Sermon in the Morning surprised me, I wondered no less at
two discourses that I heard in one Church, at the same time, in the afternoon;
for there were two bodies of Men set down in different places of the Church all
covered, and two Laymen in ordinary habits were entertaining them with
discourses of Religion in a Catechetical style: These were Confrairies, and
those were some of the more devout that instructed the rest. This I never saw
any where else, so I do not know whether it is peculiar to Milan or not. My
Conductor could not speak Latin, and the Italian there is so different from the
true Tuscan, which I only knew, that I could not understand him when he was
engaged in a long discourse, so I was not clearly informed of this matter; but
I am apt to think it might have been some institution of Cardinal Borromees.
The Ambrosian Library founded by Cardinal Frederick Borromee is a very noble
Room and well furnished, only it is too full of Schoolmen and Canonists, which
are the chief studies of Italy, and it has too few Books of a more solid and
useful learning. One part of the disposition of the Room was pleasant, there is
a great number of Chairs placed all round it at a competent distance from one
another, and to every Chair there belongs a Desk with an Ecritoire that has
Pen, Ink, and Paper in it, so that every Man finds tools here for such extracts
as he would make. There is a little Room of Manuscripts at the end of the great
Gallery, but the Library Keeper knows little of them, a great many of them
relate to their Saint Charles. I saw some fragments of Latin Bibles, but none
seemed to be above Six Hundred Years old, there are also some fragments of
Saint Ambroses works, and of Saint Jerome's Epistle that are of the same
antiquity. I was sorry not to find St. Ambrose's Works entire, that I might
have seen whether the Books of the Sacraments are ascribed to him in ancient
Copies, for perhaps they belong to a more modern Author.

It is true, in these Books the Doctrine of a sort of a Corporal Presence is
asserted in very high expressions; but there is one thing mentioned in them,
which is stronger against it than all those citations can be for it; for the
Author gives us the formal words of the Prayer of Consecration in his time,
which he Prefaces with solemnity: Will you know how the change is wrought, hear
the Heavenly words? For the Priest says, but whereas in the present Canon of
the Mass, the Prayer of Consecration is for a good part of it very near in the
same words with those which he mentions, there is one essential difference, for
in the Canon they now pray that the Hosty may be to them the Body and Blood of
Christ, (which by the way does not agree too well with the notion of
Transubstantiation, and approaches more to the Doctrine of the Lutherians:)
whereas in the Prayer, cited by that Author, the Hosty is said to be the figure
of the Body and Blood of Christ: here is the language of the whole Church of
that time, and in the most important part of the divine Office, which
signifies more to me than a Thousand Quotations out of particular Writers,
which are but their private opinions: But this is the voice of the whole body
in its addresses to God: And it seems the Church of Rome, when the new Doctrine
of the Corporal Presence was received, saw that this Prayer of Consecration
could not consist with it, which made her change such a main part of the
Office. This gave me a curiosity every where to search for ancient Offices, but
I sound none in the Abbey of St. Germains that seemed older than the times of
Charles the Great; so I found none of any great Antiquity in all Italy: Those
published by Cardinal Bona, and since by P. Mabillon, that were brought from
Heidelberg, are the most ancient that are in the Vatican; but these seem not to
be above Eight hundred Years old: There are none of the ancient Roman Offices
now to be seen in the Vatican. I was amazed to find none of any great
Antiquity; which made me conclude that either they were destroyed, that so the
difference between Ancient and Modern Rituals might not be turned against that
Church, as an undeniable Evidence to prove the Changes that she has made in
divine matters, or that they were so well kept that Heretics were not to be
suffered to look into them. But to return to the Ambrosian Library, there is in
it a Manuscript of great Antiquity, though not of such great consequence, which
is Ruffinus's Translation of Josephus, that is written in the old Roman hand,
which is very hard to read. But there is a deed in the curious Collection that
Count Mascardo has made at Verona, which by the date appears to have been
written in Theodosius's time, which is the same sort of writing with the
Manuscript of Ruffinus, so that it may be reckoned to have been writ in
Ruffinus's own time, and this is the most valuable, though the least known
curiosity in the whole Library.

I need not say any thing of the curious Works in Crystal that are to be seen
in Milan; the greatest quantities that are in Europe, are found in the Alps;
and are wrought here; but this is too well known to need any further
enlargement. It is certain, the Alps have much Wealth shut up in their Rocks,
if the Inhabitants knew how to search for it: But I heard of no Mines that were
wrought except Iron Mines; yet by the colorings, that in many places, the
Fountains make, as they run along the Rocks, one sees cause to believe that
there are Mines and Minerals shut up within them. Gold has been often found in
the River of Arve, that runs by Geneva.

The last Curiosity that I shall mention of the Town of Milan, is the Cabinet
of the Chanoine Settala, which is now in his Brothers hands, where there are a
great many very valuable things, both of Art and Nature: there is a lump of
Ore, in which there is both Gold, Silver, Emeralds, and Diamonds, which was
brought from Peru. There are many curious motions where by an unseen Spring, a
Ball, after it has rolled down through many winding descents, is thrown up,
and so it seems to be a perpetual motion; This is done in several forms, and is
well enough disguised to deceive the vulgar. Many motions of little Animals
that run about by Springs, are also very pretty. There is a Loadstone of a vast
force that carries a great Chain: There is also a monstrous Child that was
lately born in the Hospital, which is preserved in Spirit of Wine: It is double
below, it has one Breast and Neck, two pair of Ears, a vast Head, and but one
Face. As for the Buildings in Milan, they are big and substantial, but they
have not much regular or beautiful Architecture: The Governors Palace has some
noble apartments in it: The chief Place of the Town is that of the Homodei,
which was built by a Bankier. There is one inconvenience in Milan, which throws
down all the pleasure that one can find in it: they have no Glass Windows, so
that one is either exposed to the Air, or shut up in a Dungeon: and this so
universal, that there is not one house of ten that has Glass in their Windows:
The same defect is in Florence, besides all the small Towns of Italy, which is
an effect of their poverty: For what by the oppression of the Government, what
by the no less squeezing oppression of their Priests, who drain all the rest of
their Wealth that is not eat up by the Prince, to enrich their Churches and
Convents, the People here are reduced to a poverty, that cannot be easily
believed by one that sees the Wealth that is in their Churches, and this is
going on so constantly in Milan, that it is scarce accountable from whence so
vast a treasure can be found; but Purgatory is a fond not easily exhausted. The
Wealth of the Milanese consists chiefly in their Silks, and that Trade falls so
mightily by the vast Importations that the East India Companies bring into
Europe, that all Italy feels this very sensibly, and languishes extremely by
the great fall that is in the Silk-Trade: There is a great magnificence in
Milan; the Nobility affect to make a noble appearance both in their Clothes,
their Coaches, and their Attendants; and the Women go abroad with more freedom
here than in any Town of Italy. And thus I have told you all that has hitherto
occurred to me, that I thought worth your knowledge. I am

Yours.
Postscript.
IN the account that I gave you of Geneva, I forgot to mention a very
extraordinary Person that is there, Mrs. Walkier; her Father is of Shaff House,
she lost her sight when she was but a Year old, by being too near a Stove that
was very hot: There rests in her Eye so much sight, that she distinguishes Day
from Night; and when any Person stands between her and the light she will
distinguish by the Head and its dress a Man from a Woman; but when she turns
down her Eyes she sees nothing: she has a vast memory; besides the French that
is her natural language, she speaks both High Dutch, Italian and Latin: she
has all the Psalms by heart, in French, and many of them in Dutch and Italian:
the understands the Old Philosophy well, and is now studying the New: she has
studied the body of Divinity well, and has the Text of the Scriptures very
ready: On all which matters I had long conversations with her; she not only
sings well, but she plays rarely on the Organ; and I was told she played on the
Violin, but her Violin was out of order. But that which is most of all, is, she
writes legibly: in order to her learning to write, her Father who is a worthy
Man, and has such tenderness for her, that he furnishes her with Masters of
all sorts, ordered Letters to be carved in Wood, and she by feeling the
Characters formed such an Idea of them, that she writes with a Crayon so
distinctly, that her writing can be well read, of which I have several Essays.
I saw her write, she does it more nimbly than can be imagined; she has a
Machine that holds the Paper, and keeps her always in line. But that which is
above all the rest, she is a person of extraordinary Devotion, great
resignation to the Will of God, and a profound humility: The Preceptor that the
Father kept in the house with her, has likewise a wonderful faculty of
acquiring Tongues. When he came first to Geneva, (for he is of Zurich) he spoke
not a word of French, and within Thirteen months he Preached in French
correctly, and with a good accent: He also began to study Italian in the month
of November, and before the end of the following February he preached in
Italian; his accent was good, and his style was florid, which was very
extraordinary, for the Italian language is not spoken in Geneva, though the
Race of the Italians do keep up still an Italian Church there.



THE THIRD LETTER. Florence the 5th. of November.
I Have now another Month over my head since I writ last to you, and so I know
you expect an account of the most considerable things that have occurred to me
since my last from Milan. Twenty miles from Milan we past through Lodi a
miserable Garrison, though a Frontier Town; but indeed the Frontiers, both of
the Spaniards and the Venetians, as well as those of other Princes of Italy,
show that they are not very apprehensive of one another; and when one passes
through those places, which are represented in History as places of great
strength, capable of resisting a long Siege, he must acknowledge that the sight
of them, brings the Idea that he had conceived of them, a great many degrees
lower. For Lombardy, which was so long the seat of War, could not stand out a
good Army now for so many Days, as it did then for Years. The Garrison of
Crema, which is the first of the Venetian Territory, is no better than that of
Lodi, only the People in the Venetian Dominion live happier than under the
Spaniard.

The Senate sends Podesta's, much like the Bailifs of the Switzers, who order
the Justice and the Civil Government of the Jurisdiction assigned them: There
is also a Captain General who has the Military Authority in his hands; and
these two are checks upon one another, as the Bassa's and the Cadi's are among
the Turks. But here in Crema the Town is so small that both these are in one
Person. We were there in the time of the Fair, Linen Cloth and Cheese, which
though it goes by the name of Parmesan, is made chiefly in Lodi, are the main
Ingredients of the Fair. The magnificence of the Podesta appeared very
extraordinary, for he went through the Fair with a great train of Coaches, all
in his own Livery; and the two Coaches in which he and his Lady ride, were both
extraordinary rich: his was a huge Bed-coach, all the out side black Velvet,
and a mighty rich Gold fringe, lined with black Damask, flowred with Gold. From
Crema it is Thirty miles to Brescia, which is a great Town, and full of Trade
and Wealth, here they make the best Barrils for Pistols and Muskets of all
Italy: There are great Iron Works near it; but the War with the Turk had
occasioned an Order that none be sold without a permission from Venice: They
are building a Noble Dome at Brescia: I was showed a Nunnery there, which is
now under a great disgrace, some years ago a new Bishop coming thither, began
with the Visitation of that Nunnery: he discovered two Vaults, by one, Men came
ordinarily into it: and by another the Nuns that were big went and lay-in of
Childbed: when he was examining the Nuns severely concerning those Vaults,
some of them told him, that his own Priests did much worse: He shut up the
Nuns, so that those who are professed live still there, but none come to take
the Vail: and by this means the House will soon come to an end: The Citadel
lies over the Town on a Rock, and commands it absolutely. Both here and in
Crema the Towns have begun a Complement within these last Ten or Twelve Years
to their Podesta's, which is a matter of great Ornament to their Palaces, but
will grow to a vast charge, for they erect Statues to their Podesta's: and this
being once begun, must be carried on: otherwise those, to whom the like Honor
is not done, will resent it as a high affront, and the revenges of the Noble
Venetians, are dreadful things their to Subjects. This name of Podesta is very
ancient, for in the Roman times, the chief Magistrates of the lesser Towns was
called the Potestas, as appears by that of Juveral-Fidenarum Gabiorumve esse
potestas.

From Brescia the beauty of Lombardy is a little interrupted; for as all the
way from Milan to Brescia is as one Garden, so here on the one side we come
under the Mountains, and we pass by the Lake of Guarda, which is Forty miles
long, and where it is broadest, is Twenty miles broad: The miles indeed, all
Lombardy over, are extreme short, for I walked often four or five miles in a
walk, and I found a Thousand paces made their common mile; but in Tuscany and
the Kingdom of Naples, the mile is Fifteen Hundred paces. We pass through a
great Heath for Seven or Eight miles on this side of Verona, which begins to be
cultivated. Verona is a vast Town, and much of it well built; there are many
rich Churches in it; but there is so little Trade stirring, and so little money
going, that it is not easy here to change a Pistol, without taking their coin
of base alloy, which does not pass out of the Veronese; for this seems a
strange maxim of the Venetians to suffer those small states, to retain still a
coin peculiar to them, which is extreme inconvenient for Commerce. The known
Antiquity of Verona is the Amphitheater, one of the least of all that the
Romans built, but the best preserved, for though most of the great stones of
the outside are picked out; yet the great flopping Vault on which the rows of
the seats are also entire, they are four and forty rows, every row is a foot
and half high, and as much in breadth, so that a Man sits conveniently in them,
under the feet of those of the higher row: and allowing every Man a foot and a
half, the whole Amphitheater can hold Twenty three thousand persons. In the
Vaults, under the rows of seats, were the Stalls for the Beasts that were
presented to entertain the Company: the thickness of the building, from the
outward Wall to the lowest row of seats, is ninety foot: But this Noble remnant
of Antiquity is so often and so copiously described, that I will say no more of
it. The next thing of value is the famous Museum Calceolarium, now in the hands
of the Count Mascardo, where there is a whole apartment of Rooms all furnished
with Antiquities and Rarities: There are some old Inscriptions made by two
Towns in Africa, to the Honor of M. Crassus: There is a great collection of
Medals and Medaillons, and of the Roman Weights, and their Instruments for
their Sacrifices, there are many Curiosities of Nature, and a great collection
of Pictures, of which many are of Paulo Veronese's hand. There is a noble
Garden in Verona that rises up in Terrasses the whole height of a Hill, in
which there are many ancient Inscriptions, which belongs to Count Giusto. As we
go from Verona to Vincenza which is thirty miles, we return to the beauty of
Lombardy, for there is all the way as it were a succession of Gardens, the
Ground is better cultivated here than I saw it in any other place of Italy: But
the Wine is not good, for at the roots of all their Trees they plant a Vine
which grows up winding about the Tree to which it joins; but the Soil is too
rich to produce a rich Wine, for that requires a dry ground: There is near the
Lake of Guarda a very extraordinary Wine which they call Vino Santo, which
drinks like the best sort of Canary, it is not made till Christmas, and from
thence it carries the name of Holy Wine, and it is not to be drunk till
Midsummer, for it is so long before it is quite wrought clear, but I have not
marked down how long it may be kept: We had it there for a groat an English
quart, I wondered that they did not Trade with it. All the Cattle of Italy are
gray or white, and all their Hogs are black, except in the Bolognese, and there
they are red. I will not inquire into the reasons of these things: It is
certain Hogs-Flesh in Italy is much better than it is in France and England,
whether the truffs on which they feed much in Winter, occasion this or not, I
know not, the husks of the pressed Grapes is also a mighty nourishment to them;
but Cattle of that grayish color are certainly weaker: The carriage of Italy
is generally performed by them, and this is very hard work in Lombardy when it
has rained never so little, for the ground being quite level, and there being
no raised Highways or Cause-ways, the Carts go deep and are hardly drawn.

Vincenza has still more of its ancient liberty reserved than any of these
Towns, as Padua has less, for it delivered it self to the Venetians, whereas
the other disputed long with it, and brought it often very low: one sees the
marks of Liberty in Vincenza in the riches of their Palaces and Churches, of
which many are newly built: They have a modern Theater made in imitation of the
ancient Roman Theaters. Count Valarano's Gardens at the Port of Verona, is the
sinest thing of the Town, there is in it a very noble Alley of Oranges and
Cttrons, some as big as a Man's body, but those are covered all the Winter long,
for in this appears the sensible difference of Lombardy from those parts of
Italy, that lies to the South of the Apenins, that here generally they keep
their Oranges and Citrons in great Boxes as we do in England, that so they may
be lodged in Winter, and defended from the breezes that blow sometimes so sharp
from the Alps, that otherwise they would kill those delicate Plants: whereas in
Tuscany they grow as other Trees in their Gardens, and in the Kingdom of Naples
they grow wild without any care or cultivation. We were at Vincenza upon a
Holy Day, and there I saw a preparation for a Procession that was to be in the
afternoon: I did not wonder at what a French Papist said to me, that he could
hardly bear the Religion of Italy, the Idolatry in it was so gross. The statue
of the Virgin was of Wood so finely painted, that I thought the Head was Wax,
it was richly clad, and had a Crown on its Head, and was set full of Flowers:
how they did when it was carried about, I do not know; but in the morning all
People run to it and said their Prayers to it, and kissed the ground before it
with all the appearances of devotion.

From Vincenza it is Eighteen miles to Padua all like a Garden; here one sees
the decays of a vast City, which was, once, one of the biggest of all Italy;
the compass is the same that it was, but there is much uninhabited ground in
it, and Houses there go almost for nothing, their Air is extreme good, and
there is so great a plenty of all things except money, that a little money goes
a great way. The University here, though so much supported by the Venetians,
that they pay fifty Professors, yet sinks extremely: there are no Men of any
great fame now in it: and the quarrels among the Students have driven away most
of the strangers that used to come and study here, for it is not safe to stir
abroad here after Sun set: The number of the Palaces here is incredible, and
though the Nobility of Padua is almost quite ruined, yet the beauty of their
ancient Palaces shows what they once were. The Venetians have been willing to
let the ancient quarrels that were in all those conquered Cities continue still
among them, for while one kills another, and the Children of the other take
their revenges afterward, both comes under the bando by this means, and the
Confiscation goes to the Senate. At some times of grace when the Senate wants
Money, and offers a Pardon to all that will compound for it, the numbers of the
guilty Persons are incredible. In Vincenza and the Country that belongs to it,
I was assured by Monsieur Patin, that learned Antiquary, that has been many
years a Professor in Padua, that there were Five and thirty thousand pardoned
at the last Grace; this I could hardly believe, but he bid me write it down
upon his word. The Nobility of Padua and of the other Towns, seem not to see
what a profit their quarrels bring to the Venetians, and how they eat out their
Families: For one Family in the same Man's time, who was alive while I was
there, was reduced from Fourteen thousand Ducats revenue to less than Three
thousand, by its falling at several times under the bando: But their jealousies
and their revenges are pursued by them with so much vigor, that when these are
in their way, all other things are forgot by them. There is here the remnant of
the Amphitheater, though nothing but the outward Wall stands: There is here, as
well as in Milan, an inward Town, called the City, and an outward, without
that, called the Burgo; but though there is a Ditch about the City, the great
Ditch and Wall goes about all and Padua is Eight miles in compass; it lies
almost round: The public Hall is the Noblest of Italy: the Dome is an ancient
and mean Building; but the Church of St. Anthony, especially the Holy Chapel in
it where the Saint lies, is one of the best pieces of modern Sculpture; for
round the Chapel the chief Miracles in the legend of that Saint are represented
in Mezzo rilievo, in a very surprising manner: The devotion that is paid to
this Saint, all Lombardy over, is amazing; he is called by way of excellence il
Santo, and the Beggars generally ask Alms for his sake: But among the little,
Vows that hang without the Holy Chapel, there is one that is the highest pitch
of Blasphemy that can be imagined Exaudit, speaking of the Saint quos non audit
and ipse Deus, he hears those whom God himself does not hear. St. Justina is a
Church so well ordered within, the Architecture is so beautiful, it is so well
enlightened, and the Cupulo's are so advantagiously placed that if the outside
answered the inside, it would be one of the best Churches of Italy, but the
Building is of Brick, and it has no Frontispiece, there are many new Altars
made as fine as they are Idolatrous, all full of Statues of Marble. This Abbey
has a Hundred Thousand Ducats of Revenue, and so by its Wealth one may
conclude that it belongs to the Benedictine Order. Cardinal Barberigo is Bishop
here, he seems to set St. Carlo before him as his pattern; he has founded a
Noble Seminary for the secular Priests; he lives in a constant discipline
himself, and endeavors to reform his Clergy all he can; but he is now in ill
terms with his Canons, who are all Noble Venetians, and so allow themselves
great liberties, of which they will not be willingly abridged; he is charitable
to a high degree, and is in all respects a very extraordinary Man.

In the Venetian Territory, their subjects live easy and happy, if they could
be so wise as to give over their quarrels, but though the taxes are not high,
they oppress their Tenants so severely, that the Pesants live most miserably,
yet on all hands round about them, the oppressions being more intolerable,
they know not whither to go for ease, whereas on the contrary, the miseries
under which their neighbors groan, chiefly those of the Ecclesiastical state,
send in an increase of People among them, so that they are well stockt with
People, but the Venetians are so jealous of their subjects understanding
Military matters, which may dispose them to revolt, that they never make any
Levies among them for their Wars, this jealousy is the true ground of that
maxim, though another is pretended that is more plausible, which is their care
of their own People, whom they study to preserve, and therefore they hire
Strangers rather than expose their Subjects. It is certain a revolt here were
no hard matter to effectuate, for the Garrisons and Fortifications are so
slight, that those great Towns could easily shake off their yoke, if it were
not for the factions that still reign among them, by which one party would
choose rather to expose the other to the rigor of the Inquisitors than concur
with them in asserting their liberty, and the Inquisitors in such cases proceed
so secretly, and yet so effectually that none dares trust another with a secret
of such consequence, and the oppressed Nobility of those States retain still so
much of their old and unsubdued insolence, and treat such as are under them so
cruelly, that the Venetian^ ^^e as secure in those Conquests, as if they had
many strong Cittadels and numerous Garrisons spread up and down among them.
From Padua down to Venice, all along the River Brent, there are many Palaces of
the Noble Venetians on both sides of the River, built with so great a variety
of Architecture, that there is not one of them like another, there is also the
like diversity in the laying out of their Gardens, and here they retire during
the hot months, and some allow themselves all the excesses of dissolute liberty
that can possibly be imagined. From Lizza Fucina which is at the mouth of the
Brent, we pass for Five or Six miles on the Lagunes or shallows to Venice,
these shallows sink of late so much that the preserving Venice still an Island,
is like to become as great a charge to the Venetians, as the keeping out the
Sea is to the Dutch; for they use all possible industry to cleanse the Channels
of their lagunes, and to keep them full of water; and yet many think that the
water has failed so much in this last age, that if it continues to abate at
the same rate, within an age or two more, Venice may become apart of the Terra
firma. It is certainly the most surprising sight in the whole World, to see so
vast a city, situated thus in the Sea, and such a number of Islands so united
together by Bridges brought to such a regular figure, the Pilotty supplying the
want of earth to build on, and all so nobly built, which is of all the things
that one can see the most amazing. And though this Republic is much sunk from
what it was, both by the great losses they have suffered in their Wars with the
Turks, and by the great decay of Trade, yet there is an incredible Wealth, and
a vast plenty of all things in this place. I will not offer to describe neither
the Church nor the Palace of S. Mark, which are too well known to need a long
digression to be made for them. The painting of the Walls and the roofs of the
Halls, and public Rooms in the Palace, are of vast value: Here I saw that
Story of Pope Alexander the III. treading on the neck of the Emperor Frederick
Barbarossa. The nobleness of the stair-cases, the riches of the Halls, and the
beauty of the whole building, are much prejudiced by the beastliness of those
that walk along, and that leave their marks behind them, as if this were rather
a common house of Office, than so Noble a Palace: And the great Hall, where the
whole body of the Nobility meet, in the Great Council, has nothing but the
roof and walls that answers to such an Assembly; for the seats are liker the
benches of an Auditory of Scholars, than of so glorious a body. When the two
sides of this Palace are built as the third, which is the most hid, it will be
one of the gloriousest Palaces that the World can show. The two sides that are
most seen, the one facing the square of St. Mark, and the other the great
Canale, are only of Brick, the third being all of Marble, but the War of Candy
put a stop to the building. St. Mark's Church has nothing to recommend it, but
its great antiquity, and the vast riches of the building, it is dark and low,
but the pavement is so rich a Mosaic, and the whole roof is also Mosaic, the
outside, and inside are of such excellent Marble, the frontispiece is adorned
with so many Pillars of Porphiry and Jasp, and above all with the four Horses
of Corinthian Brass, that Tiridates brought to Tiberius, which were carried
afterward to Constantinople, and were brought from thence to Venice, and in
which the gilding is still very bright, that when all this is considered one
does no where see so much cost brought together. I did not see the Gospel of
St. Mark, which is one of the valuablest things of the Treasure; but they do
not now open it to strangers, yet Doctor Grandi, a famous Physician there, told
me that, by a particular order, he was suffered to open it; he told me it was
all writ in Capital Letters, but the characters were so worn out, that though
he could discern the ends of some Letters, he could not see enough to help him
to distinguish them or to know whether the M. S. was in Greek or Latin. I will
not say one word of the Arsenal, for as I saw it in its worst state, the War
that is now on foot having disfurnished a great deal of it, so it has been
often described, and it is known to be the Noblest Magazine, the best ordered,
and of the greatest variety that is in the whole World; its true it is all that
this State has, so that if the Magazines of other Princes, which lie spread up
and down in the different places of their dominions were gathered together,
they would make a much greater show. The Noblest Convent of Venice is that of
the Dominicans, called St. John, and S. Paul, the Church, and Chapels are
vastly rich; there is one of St. Luke's Madona's here as they pretend; the
Dormitory is very great; the Room for the Library, and every thing in it,
except the Books, is extreme fine. But St. George, which is a Convent of the
Benedictines in an Isle entirely possessed by them over against the St. Mark's
square is much the richest; the Church is well contrived and well adorned; and
not only the whole building is very magnificent, but which is more
extraordinary at Venice they have a large Garden, and noble walks in it. The
Redemptore, and the Salute are two Noble Churches that are the effects of Vows
that the Senate made when they were afflicted with the Plague, the latter is
much the finer, it is to the Virgin, and the other is only to our Savior; so
naturally does the devotion of that Church carry it higher for the Mother than
the Son: It is true the Salute is later than the other, so no wonder if the
Architecture, and the riches exceed that which is more ancient. The School of
St. Roch. and the Chapel, and Hall are full of great pieces of Tintorets; a
Cena of Paulo Veronese in the Refectory of St. George, and the Picture of St.
Peter the Martyr of Titians are the most celebrated pieces of Venice: Duke
Pesaro's Tomb in the Frairy is the Noblest I ever saw. But if the riches of all
the Convents, and the Parish Churches of Venice amazed me, the fronts
especially, many of which are of white Marble, beautified with several Statues;
the meanness of the Library of St. Mark did no less surprise me. There are in
the Antichamber to it, Statues of vast value, and the whole roof of the Library
is composed of several pieces of the greatest Masters put in several frames;
but the Library has nothing answerable to the riches of the case, for the
Greek Manuscripts are all modern, I turned over a great many, and saw none
above Five Hundred Years old: I was indeed told that the last Library Keeper
was accused for having conveyed away many of their Manuscripts; and that Four
Years ago being clapped in Prison for this by the Inquisitors, he, to prevent
further severities, poisoned himself. I went to the Convent of the Servi, but I
found Father Paul was not in such consideration there, as he is else where: I
asked for his Tomb, but they made no account of him, and seemed not to know
where it was; it is true the Person to whom I was recommended was not in
Venice, so perhaps they refined too much in this matter: I had great discourse
with some at Venice concerning the memorials out of which F. Paul drew his
History, which are no doubt all preserved with great care in their Archives,
and since the transactions of the Council of Trent, as they are of great
importance, so they are become now much controverted by the different relations
that F. Paul, and Cardinal Pallavicini have given the World of that matter; the
only way to put an end to all disputes in matter of fact, is to print the
Originals themselves: A Person of great credit at Venice promised to me to do
his utmost, to get that proposition set on foot, tho the great exactness that
the Government there has always affected as to the matter of their Archives,
is held so sacred that this made him apprehend they would not give way to any
such search. The affinity of the matter brings into my mind a long Conversation
that I had with a Person of great Eminence at Venice, that as he was long at
Constantinople, so was learned far beyond what is to be met with in Italy, he
told me he was at Constantinople when the Inquiry into the Doctrine of the
Greek Church was set on foot, occasioned by the famous Dispute between Mr.
Arnaud and Mr. Claude, he being a zealous Roman Catholic, was dealt with to
assist in that business; but being a Man of great Honor and Sincerity, he
excused himself, and said he could not meddle in it: He has a very low and bad
opinion of the Greeks, and he told me that none of their Priests were more
inveterate enemies to the Church of Rome, than those that were bred up at Rome;
for they to free themselves of the prejudices that their Contrymen are apt
to conceive against them, because of their education among the Latins do
affect to show an opposition to the Latin Church beyond any other Greeks. He
told me that he knew the ignorance and corruption of the Greeks was such, that
as they did not know the Doctrines of their own Church, so a very little Money,
or the hope of Protection from any of the Ambassadors that come from the West,
would prevail with them to sign any that that co^ld be desired of them: He
added one thing, that though he firmly believed Transubstantiation himself, he
did not think they believed it; let them say what they pleased themselves, he
took his measures of the Doctrine of their Church, rather from what they did,
than from what they said: For their Rites not being changed now for a great
many ages were the true Indications of the doctrines received among them;
whereas they were both ignorant of the tradition of their doctrine, and very
apt to ^revaricate when they saw advantages or protection s^t before them,
therefore he concluded that since they did not adore the Sacrament after the
Consecration, that was an evident sign that they did not believe the corporal
presence, and was of a force well able to balance all their subscriptions: He
told me he was often scandalized to see them open the bag in which the
Sacrament was preserved, and show it with no sort of respect no more than when
they showed any Manuscript, and he looked on adoration as such a necessary
consequence of Transubstantiation, that he could not imagine that the latter
was received in a Church that did not practice the former. To this I will add
what an eminent Catholic at Paris told me, he said the Originals of those
attestations were in too exact and too correct a style to have been formed in
Greece, he assured me they were penned at Paris by one that was a Master of the
purity of the Greek tongue. I do not name those Persons because they are yet
alive, and this might be a prejudice to them, One of the chief Ornaments of
Venice was the famous young Woman that spoke five Tongues well, of which the
Latin and Greek were two; she passed Doctor of Physic at Padua according to
the ordinary forms; but which was beyond all, she was a Person of such
extraordinary virtue and piety, that she is spoken of as a Saint, she died some
months before I came to Venice: she was of the noble Family of the Cornara's,
though not of the three chief branches, which are Saint Mauri^e, Saint Paul and
Call, who are descended from the three Brothers of the renowned Queen of
Cyprus, but the distinction of her Family was Piscopia. Her extraordinary merit
made all People unwilling to remember the blemish of her descent of the one
side, for though the Cornara's reckon themselves a size of Nobility beyond all
the other Families of Venice, yet her Father having entertained a Gondalier's
Daughter so long that he had some Children by her, at last for their sakes
Married the Mother, and paid a considerable fine to save the forfeiture of
Nobility, which his Children must have undergone, by reason of the meanness of
the Mothers birth. The Cornara's carry it so high that many of the Daughters of
that Family have made themselves Nuns, because they thought their own name was
so Noble that they could not induce themselves to change it with any other, and
when lately one of that Family married the Heir of the Sagredo, which is also
one of the ancientest Families that was extreme rich, and she had scarce any
portion at all, for the Cornara's are now very low, some of their Friends came
to wish them joy of so advantageous a match; but they very coldly rejected the
complement, and bid the others go and wish the Sagreda joy, since they thought
the advantage was wholly of their side.

There are of the truly ancient Noble Families of Venice Four and Twenty yet
remaining, and even among these there are twelve that are thought superior to
the rest in rank; since the first formation of their Senate they have created
many Senators. In their Wars with Genua they conferred that honor on Thirty
Families; several of their Generals have had that honor given them as a reward
of their service: They have also offered this honor to some Royal Families:
for both the Families of Valois and Bourbon were nobles of Venice, and Henry
the III. when he came through Venice from Poland to take possession of the
Crown of France, went and sat among them, and drew his ballot as a Noble
Venetian; many Popes have procured this honor for their Nephews; Only the
Barberines would have the Venetians offer it to them without their asking it,
and the Venetians would not give it without the others asked it, and so it
stuck at this. But during the War of Candy Cardinal Francis Barberin gave
Twelve Thousand Crowns a Year toward the War, and the temper found for making
them Noble Venetians was, that the Queen Mother of France moved the Senate to
grant it. In all the Creations of Senators before the last War of Candy, they
were free; and the considerations were either great services, or the great
dignity of those on whom they bestowed this Honor. Those new Families are
divided into those that are called Ducal Families, and those that were called
simply new Families, the reason of the former designation is not rightly
understood; but one that knew all that related to that constitution
particularly well gave me a good account of it: That which naturally occurs as
the reason of it, is, that all those Families that are called Ducal, have had
the Dukedom in their house: But as all the old Families have had the same
honor, though they carry not that Title, so some of the new Families have also
had it, that yet are not called Ducal. Others say that those Families that have
had branches, who have been made Dukes, without their being first Procurators
of S. Mark, or that have been chosen to that honor, without their pretending
to it, are called Ducal: But the true account of this is, that from the Year
1450. to the Year 1620. for a Hundred and Seventy Years there was a combination
made among those new Families to preserve the Dukedom still among them: For the
old Families carrying it high, and excluding the new Families from the chief
Honors, Nineteen of the new Families entered into mutual engagements to exclude
the ancient Nobility: It is true they made the Dukedom sometimes fall on some
of the new Families that were not of this Association; but this was more
indifferent to them, as long as the ancient Families were shut out, and that it
appeared that they bore the chief sway in the Election. This Combination was a
thing known to the very People, though the Inquisitors did all they could to
break it, and at least to hide it, so that I never met with it in any of their
Authors: But this failed in the Year 1620. when Memmio was chosen Duke, who was
descended of one of the ancient Nobility, which was so great a mortification to
the case Ducale that one of them (Venniero) hanged himself, by the rage to
which that disgrace drove him, yet his Man came into the room in time before he
was dead, and cut him down, and he lived long after that in a better mind.
Since that time one of the Bembo's, two of the Cornaro's, and one of the
Contrarini's, and the present Prince of the Justiniani, the first of that
Family that has had that honor, have been Dukes, who are all of the ancient
Families: So that this F^ction is now so entirely buried, that it is not
generally known, even in Venice it self, that it was ever amongst them; and
thus time and other accidents bring about happy events, which no care nor
industry could produce: For that which all the endeavors of the Inquisitors
could not compass, was brought about of it self.

It is true, the Factions in Venice, though violent enough in the persons of
those who manage them, yet are not derived by them as an inheritance to their
Posterity, as it was among the Florentines; who though they value themselves as
a size of Men much above the Venetians, whom they despise as a phlegmatic and
dull race of People, yet showed how little they understood with all their
vivacity, to conduct their state, since by their domestic heats they lost
their liberty, which the Venetians have had the wisdom still to preserve. This
Faction of the Case Ducale was perhaps willing to let the matter fall, for they
lost more than they got by it; for the ancient Families in revenge set
themselves against them, and excluded them from all the other advantageous
employments of the State. For the others being only united in that single point
relating to the Dukedom, the ancient Families let them carry it, but in all
other Competitions they set up always such Competitors against the pretenders
that were of the Ducal Families, that were much more esteemed than these were,
so that they shut them out of all the best Offices of the Republic. Such a
Faction as this was, ^f it had been still kept up, might in conclusion have
proved fatal to their Liberty. It is indeed a wonder to see, the Dignity of the
Duke so much courted, for h^ is only a prisoner of state, tied up to such
rules, so severely r^strained and shut up as it were in an apartment of the
Palace of St. Mark, that it is not strange to see some of the greatest
Families, in particular the Cornara's, decline it. All the Family, if ever so
numerous, must retire o^t of the Senate, when a Duke is chosen out of it, only
one that is next to him of kin sits still, but without a Vote: And the only
real Privilege that the Duke has, is, that he can of himself, without
communicating with the Savii, propose matters, either to the Council of Ten; to
the Senate, or to the Great Council; whereas all other propositions must be
first offered to the Savii, and examined by them, who have a so^t of
Tribunitian power to reject what they d^slike, and though they cannot hinder
the Duke to make a proposition, yet they can mortify him when he has made it:
They can h^^der it to be voted, and after it is voted they can suspend the
execution of it till it is examined over again: And a Duke that is of an active
Spirit must resolve to endure many of these afflictions, and it is certain that
the Savii do sometimes affect to show the greatness of their Authority, and
exercise a sort of Tyranny in the rejecting of Pro^ositions when they intend to
humble those that make them. Yet the greatest part of the best Families court
this Honor of Dukedom extremely; when Segrado was upon the point of being
chosen Duke, there was so violent an outcry against it over all Venice, because
of the disgrace, that they thought would come on the Republic, if they had a
Prince whose Note had miscarried in some unfortunate disorders, the Senate
complied so far with this Aversion, that the People testified, That though the
Inquisitors took care to hang or drown many of the chief of the Mutineers, yet
they let the design for Sagredo fall: Upon which he was so much disgusted that
he retired to a house he had in the Terra firma, and never appeared more at
Venice: During which time of his retirement, he writ two Books, the one Memory
Ottomaniche, which is Printed, and he is accounted the best of all the Modern
Authors: The other was Memoir^s of the Government, and History of Venice, which
has never been Printed; and some say it is too sincere, and too particular, so
that it is thought it will be reserved among their Archives. It has been a
sort of maxim now for some time, not to choose a married Man to be Duke, for the
Coronation of a Duchess goes high, and has cost above Hundred thousand
Ducats. Some of the ancient Families have affected the Title of Prince, and
have called their branches Princes of the Blood, and though the Cornara's have
done this more than any other, yet others upon the account of some
Principalities, that their Ancestors had in the Islands of the Archipelago,
have also affected those vain Titles: But the Inquisitors have long ago obliged
them to lay aside all those high Titles, and such of them that boast too much
of their Blood, find the dislike which that brings on them very sensibly; for
whenever they pretend to any great Employments, they find themselves always
excluded. When an Election of Ambassadors was proposed, or of any of the chief
Offices, it was wont to be made in those terms, that the Council must choose one
of its principal Members for such an Employment: But because this looked like a
term of distinction, among the Nobility, they changed it Five and twenty Years
ago; and instead of Principal, they use now the term Honorable, which
comprehends the whole body of the Nobility, without any distinction. It is at
Venice in the Church, as well as in the State, that the Head of the Body has a
great Title, and particular Honors done him; whereas in the mean while this is
a mere Pageantry, and under these big words there is lodged only a light shadow
of Authority; for their Bishop has the glorious Title of Patriark, as well as
the Duke is called their Prince, and his serenity, and has his name stamped
upon their Coin, so the Patriark with all his high Title has really no
Authority: For not only St. Mark's Church is entirely exempted from his
jurisdiction, and is immediately subject to the Duke, but his Authority is in
all other things so subject to the Senate, and so regulated by them, that he
has no more power than they are pleased to allow him: So that the Senate is as
really the supreme Governor over all Persons, and in all Causes as the Kings of
England have pretended to be in their own Dominions since the Rrformation: But
besides all this, the Clergy of Venice have a very extraordinary sort of
exemption, and are a sort of a Body like a Presbytery independent of the
Bishop: The Curats are chosen by the Inhabitants of every Parish, and this
makes that no Noble Venetian is suffered to pretend to any Curacy, for they
think it below that Dignity to suffer one of their Body to engage in a
Competition with one of a lower Order, and to run the hazard of being rejected.

I was told the manner of those Elections was the most scandalous thing
possible, for the several Candidates appear on the day of election, and set out
their own merits, and defame the other pretenders in the foulest language, and
in the most scurrilous manner imaginable; the secrets of all their lives are
published in most reproachful terms, and nothing is so abject and ridiculous
that is not put in practice on those occasions: There is a sort of an
Association among the Curats for judging of their common concerns, and some of
the Laity of the several Parishes assist in those Courts, so that here is a
real Presbytery. The great libertinage that is so undecently practiced by most
sorts of people at Venice, extends it self to the Clergy to such a degree, that
though ignorance and vice seem the only indelible characters that they carry
generally over all Italy, yet those appear here in a much more conspicuous
manner than elsewhere, and upon those popular elections all comes out. The Nuns
of Venice have been under much scandal for a great while; there are some
Monasteries that are as famous for their strictness and exactness to their
rules, as others are for the liberties they take; chiefly those of St. Zachary
and St. Lawrence, where none but Noble Venetians are admitted, and where it is
not so much as pretended that they have retired for devotion; but it is owned
to be done merely that they might not be too great a charge to their Family:
They are not veiled, their neck and breast is bare, and they receive much
company: but that which I saw was in a public Room, in which there were many
grills for several Parlors, so that the conversation is very confused, for
there being a different company at every grill, and the Italians speaking
generally very loud, the noise of so many loud talkers is very disagreeable.
The Nuns talk much and very ungracefully, and allow themselves a liberty in
rallying that other places could not bear. About four years ago the Patriark
intended to bring in a reform into those Houses, but the Nuns of St. Lawrence
with whom he began, told him plainly they were Noble Venetians, who had chosen
that way of life as more convenient for them, but they would not subject
themselves to his regulations, yet he came and would shut up their house, so
they went to set fire to it; upon which the Senate interposed and ordered the
Patriark to desist. There is no Christian State in the World that has
expressed a jealousy of Churchmens getting into the public Councels so much
as the Venetians, for as a Noble Venetian that goes into Orders, looses thereby
his right of going to vote in the great Council, so when any of them are
promoted to be Cardinals, the whole kindred and family must during their lives,
withdraw from the great Council, and are also incapable of all employments: And
by a clause which they added when they received the Inquisition, which seemed
of no great consequence, they have made it to become a Court absolutely subject
to them; for it being provided that the Inquisitors should do nothing but in
the presence of such as should be Deputed by the Senate to be the witnesses of
their proceedings; those Deputies either will not come but when they think fit,
or will not stay longer than they are pleased with their proceedings; so that
either their absence or their withdrawing dissolves the Court: for a citation
cannot be made, a witness cannot be examined, nor the least point of form
carried on if the Deputies of the Senate are not present: and thus it is, that
though there is a Court of Inquisition at Venice, yet there is scarce any
person brought into trouble by it, and there are many of the Protestant
Religion that live there without any trouble; and though there is a
Congregation of them there that has their exercises of Religion very
regularly, yet the Senate gives them no trouble. It is true, the Hosty's not
being carried about in Procession, but secretly by the Priest to the Sick,
makes that this uneasy discrimination of Protestant and Papist does not offer
it self here as in other places, for the straitness of the Streets and the
Channels through which one must go almost every foot, makes that this could not
be done in Venice as it is elsewhere, and from Venice this rule is carried over
their whole Territory, tho the like reason does not hold in the Terra Firma The
Venetians are generally ignorant of the matters of Religion to a scandal, and
they are as unconconcerned in them as they are strangers to them, so that all
that vast pomp in their Ceremonies and wealth in their Churches is affected
rather as a point of magnificence, or a matter of emulation among families,
then that superstition has here such a power over the Spirits of the people as
it has elsewhere: for the Atheism that is received by many here is the dullest
and cursest thing that can be imagined. The young Nobility are so generally
corrupted in their Morals, and so given up to a most supine ignorance of all
sort of knowledge, that a man cannot easily imagine to what a height this is
grown, and for Military Courage there is scarce so much as the ambition of
being thought brave remaining among the greater part of them. It seemed to me a
strange thing to see the Broglio so full of graceful young Senators and Nobles,
when there was so glorious a Wa on foot with the Turks, but instead of being
heated in point of honor to hazard their lives, they rather think it an
extravagant piece of folly for them to go and hazard it when a little money can
hire strangers that do it on such easy terms; and thus their Arms are in the
hands of strangers, while they stay at home managing their intrigues in the
Broglio, and dissolving their spirits among their Courtisans. And the
reputation of their service is of late years so much sunk, that it is very
strange to see so many come to a service so decried, where there is so little
care had of the Soldiers, and so little regard had to the Officers; the
arrears are so slowly paid, and the rewards are so scantly distributed, that if
they do not change their maxims they may come to feel this very sensibly; for
as their Subjects are not acquainted with Warlike matters, so their. Nobility
have no so^t of ambition that way, and strangers are extremely disgusted. It is
chiefly to the conjecture of affairs that they owe their safety, for the
feebleness of all their Neighbors, the Turk, the Emperor, the King of Spain,
the Pope, and the Duke of Mantua, preserves them from the apprehension of an
Invasion, and the quarrels, and the degeneracy of their Subjects, save them
from the fears of a Revolt, but a formidable Neighbor would put them hard to
it. One great occasion of the degeneracy of the Italians, and in particular of
the Venetian Nobility, is a maxim that has been taken up for some considerable
time, that for the preservation of their Families, it is fit than only one of a
Family should marry; to which I will not add that it is generally believed that
the Wife is in common to the whole Family: By this means the younger Brothers
that have appointments for life, and that have no Families that come from them,
are not stirred up by any ambition to signalize themselves or to make Families,
and so they give way to all the laziness of luxury, and are quite enervated by
it.

Whereas the best services done in other States flows from the necessities as
well as the aspirings of younger Brothers or their Families, whose blood
qualifies them to pretend, as well as their pride and necessities push them on,
to acquire first a reputation, and then a fortune: But all this is a mystery to
the Venetians, who apprehend so much from the active Spirits of a necessitous
Nobility, that to lay those to sleep, they encourage them in all those things
that may blunt and depress their minds, and youth nat^rally hates Letters as
much as it loves pleasure, when it is so far from being restrained, that it is
rather pushed on to all the licentiousness of unlimited disorders.

Yet I must add one thing, that though Venice, is the place in the whole World
where pleasure is most studied, and where the youth have both the greatest
Wealth, and the most leisure to pursue it: yet it is the place that I ever saw
where true and innocent pleasure is the least understood, in which I will make
a little digression that perhaps will not be unpleasant. As for the pleasures
of friendship or marriage they are strangers to them, for the horrible
distrust, in which they all live, of one another, makes that it is very rare to
find a friend in Italy, but most of all in Venice: and though we have been told
of several stories of celebrated friendships there, yet these are now very
rare. As for their Wives they are bred to so much ignorance, they converse so
little, that they know nothing but the dull superstition on Holy Days in which
they stay in the Churches as long as they can, and so prolong the little
liberty they have of going abroad on those days as Children do their hours of
play: They are not employed in their domestic affairs, and generally they
understand no sort of work, so that I was told that they were the insipidest
creatures imaginable; they are, perhaps, as vicious as in other places; but it
is among them downright lewdness, for they are not drawn into it by the
intranglements of amor that inveigle and lead many persons much farther than
they imagined or intended at first, but in them the first step without any
preamble or preparative, is downright beastliness. And an Italian that knew
the World well, said upon this matter a very lively thing to me, he said their
jealousy made them restrain their Daughters, and their Wives so much, that
they could have none of those domestic entertainments of Wit, Conversation,
and Friendship, that the French or English have at home: It is true those he
said hazard a little the honor of their Families by that liberty, but the
Italians by their excessive caution, made that they had none of the true
delights of a Married State; and notwithstanding all their uneasy jealousy,
they were still in danger of a contraband Nobility, therefore he thought they
would do much better to hazard a little, when it would produce a certain
satisfaction, then to watch so anxiously, and thereby have an insipid companion
instead of a lively Friend, though she might, perhaps, have some ill moments.
As for their houses they have nothing convenient at Venice, for the
Architecture is almost all the same, one staircase, a Hall that runs along the
body of the house, and chambers on both hands, but there are no apartments, no
Closets or Back-stairs; so that in houses that are of an excessive wealth, they
have yet no sort of convenience; Their Bedsteads are of Iron, because of the
Vermin that their moisture produces, the bottoms are of boards, upon which they
lay so many quilts that it is a huge step to get up to them, their great Chairs
are all upright without a stop in the back, hard in the bottom, and the wood of
the arms is not covered; they mix water with their wine in their Hogsheads, so
that for above half the year the wine is either dead or sour, they do not
leaven their Bread, so that it is extreme heavy, and the Oven is too much
heated, so that the crum is as Dough, when the crust is hard as a stone, in all
Inns they boil Meat first before it is roasted, and thus, as indeed they make
it tender, so it is quite tastless and insipid: And as for their Land-carriage
all Lombardy over, it is extreme inconvenient, for their Coaches are fastened to
the perch, which makes them as uneasy as a Cart: It it true, they begin to
have at Rome, and Naples, Coaches that are fastened to a sort of double perch,
that runs round the bottom of the Coach of both sides, which are thin that they
ply to the motion of the Coach, and are extreme easy, but those are not known
in Lombardy, and besides this, their Caleshes are open, so that one is exposed
to the Sun, and dust in Summer, and to the Weather in Winter: But though they
are covered as ours are, on the other side of the Appenins, yet I saw none that
were covered in Lombardy: And thus by an enumeration of many of the innocent
pleasures, and conveniences of life, it appears that the Venetians pursue so
violently forbidden pleasures, that they know not how to find out that which is
allowable. Their constant practices in the Broglio is their chief business,
where those that are necessitous are pursuing for Employments of advantage, and
those that are full of wealth take a sort of pleasure in crossing their
pretentions, and in embroiling matters. The walk in which the Nobility tread is
left to them, for no others dare walk among them, and they change the side of
the square of St. Mark as the Sun, and the Weather directs them. Perhaps a
derivation that Mr. Patin gave me of Brolio from the Greek Peribolaion, a
little corrupted is not forced; and since they make all their parties, and
manage all their intreague in those Walks, I am apt to think that broils,
brovillons and imbroilments are derived from the agitations that are managed in
those walks.

As for the last created Nobility of Venice, I came to know some particulars
that I have not yet seen in any books, which I suppose will not be unacceptable
to you. It is certain that if the Venetians could have foreseen at the
beginning of the War of Candy, the vast expense in which the length of it
engaged them, they would have abandoned the Isle, rather than have wasted their
Treasure, and debased their Nobility. This last was extreme sensible to them;
for as the dignity of the rank they hold is so much the more eminent as it is
restrained to a small number, so all the best Employments and Honors of the
State belonging to this body, the admitting such a number into it, as must rise
out of Seventy Eight Families, was in effect the sharing their Inheritance
among so many adopted Brothers. This had been less Infamous if they had
communicated that Honor only to the ancient Citizens of Venice, or to the
Nobility of those States that they have subdued in the Terra firma; for as
there are many Citizens who are as ancient as the Nobility, only their
Ancesto^s not happening to be of that Council that assumed the Government about
Four Hundred Years ago, they have not been raised to that Honor, so there had
been no Infamy in creating some of them to be of the Nobility. It had been also
brought under consultation long ago, upon the reduction of those States in the
Terra firma, whether it was not advisable according to the maxims of the
ancient Romans to communicate that dignity to some of their chief Families, as
being the surest way to give some contentment to those States, it being also a
real as well as a cheap security, when the chief Families in those Cities, were
admitted to a Share in all the Honors of the Republic. It is true some of the
Nobility of those States thought they had Honor enough by their birth, and so
Zambara of Brescia refused to accept an Honor from those that had robbed his
Country of its liberty, yet his posterity are now o another mind, for they came
and bought in this last sale of honor that which was freely offered to their
Ancestor, and was rejected by him. When the Senate found it self extremely
pressed for money during the war it was at first proposed that some Families,
to the number of Five, might be enobled; they offering Sixty Thousand Ducats if
they were Venetians, and Seventy Thousand if they were Strangers: There was but
one Person that opposed this in the Senate, so it being passed there, was
presented to the great Council; and there it was like to have passed without
any difficulty, but one Person opposed it with so much vigor, that though the
Duke desired him to give over his opposition, since the necessities of the War
required a great supply, yet he persisted still; and though one of the Savii
set forth with tears the extremities to which the State was reduced, he still
insisted and fell upon one conceit that turned the whole Council, he said they
were not sure if Five Persons could be found that would purchase that honor at
such a rate, and then it would be a vast disgrace, to expose the offer of
Nobility first to sale, and then to the affront of finding no buyers when it
was offered to be sold, and by this means he put by the resolution for that
time: But then another method was taken that was more honorable, and was of a
more extended consequence. Labia was the first that presented a Petition to the
great Council, setting forth his merits toward the Republic, and desiring
that he might be thought worthy to offer a Hundred Thousand Ducats toward the
service of the State; this was understood to be the asking to be made noble at
that price. Delfino said he thought every Man might be well judged worthy to
offer such an assistance to the Public, and that such as brought that supply
might expect a suitable acknowledgment from the Senate, who might afterward of
their own accord bestow that honor on those that expressed so much zeal for
the Public; and this would be too much debased if it were thus bought and
sold; but it seems the purchasers had no mind to part with their money, and to
leave the reward to the gratitude of the Council, so the Petition was granted
in plain terms; and the Nobility so acquired was not only to descend to the
Children of him that was enobled, but to his Brothers and the whole Family to
such a degree. After Labia a great many more came with the like Petitions, and
it was not unpleasant to see in what terms Merchants, that came to buy this
Honor set forth their merits, which were that they had taken care to furnish
the Republic with such things as were necessary for its preservation. There
was a sort of a Triumvirat formed of a Jew, a Greek, and an Italian, who were
the Brokers, and found out the Merchants; and at last brought down the price
from a Hundred Thousand to Sixty Thousand Ducats, and no other qualifications
were required if they had money enough; For when Correge said to the Duke that
he was afraid to ask that honor for want of merit, the Duke asked him if he
had a Hundred Thousand Ducats, and when the other answered the Sum was ready,
the Duke told him that was a great merit. At last Seventy Eight purchased this
honor to the great regret of Labia; who said that if he had imagined that so
many would have followed him in that demand, he would have bid so high for it
that it should have been out of their power to have done it. It is true many of
the Purchasers were Ancient and Noble Families, but many others were not only
Merchants, but were of the lowest sort of them; who as they had enriched
themselves by Trade, did then impoverish themselves by the acquisition of an
honor that as it obliged them to give over their Trade, and put them in a
higher way of living, so it has not brought them yet in any advantage to
balance that loss; for they are so much despised, that they are generally
excluded when they compete with the ancient Nobility, though this is done with
that discretion, that the old Families do not declare always against the new,
for that would throw the new into a faction against them, which might be a great
prejudice to them, for the new are much more numerous than the old.

Another great prejudice that the Republic feels by this great Promotion, is
that the chief Families of the Citizens of Venice, who had been long practiced
in the affairs of State, and out of whom the Envoyes, the Secretaries of State,
and the Chancellor that is the head of the Citizens, as well as the Duke is
the head of the Nobility, are to be chosen, having purchased the chief Honor
of the State there is not now a sufficient number of capable Citizens, left for
serving the State in those Employments; but this defect will be redrest with
the help of a little time. But if this increase of the Nobility has lessened
the Dignity of the ancient Families, there is a regulation made in this Age
that still preserves a considerable distinction of Authority in their hands.
Crimes against the State, when committed by any of the Nobility, were always
judged by the Inquisitors, and the Council of Ten, but all other Crimes were
judged by the Council of Forty. But in the Year 1624. one of the Nobles was
accused of Peculat committed in one of their Governments, and the Avogadore in
the pleading, as he set forth his Crime, called him a Rogue and a Robber: yet
though his crimes were manifest, there being but Six and twenty Judges present,
Twelve only condemned him, and Fourteen acquitted him; this gave great offense,
for though he was acquitted by his Judges, his Crimes were evident; so that his
Fame could not be restored: for the Depositions of the Witnesses, and the
Avogadores (or the Attorney Generals) Charge were heard by the People; so it
was proposed to make a difference between the Nobility and the other Subjects:
and since all Trials before the Forty were public, and the Trials before the
Ten were in secret, it seemed fit to remit the Nobility to be tried by the Ten:
Some foresaw that this would tend to a Tyranny, and raise the Dignity of the
ancient Families, of whom the Council of Ten is always composed, too high:
Therefore they opposed it upon this ground, That since the Council of Forty
sent out many Orders to the Governors, it would very much lessen their
Authority, if they were not to be the Judges of those who obliged to receive
their Orders: But to qualify this Opposition, a Proviso was made that reserved
to the Council of Forty, a power to Judge of the Obedience that was given to
their Orders, but all other Accusations of the Nobility were remitted to the
Council of Ten: and the body of the Nobility were so pleased with this
Distinction that was put between them and the other Subjects, that they did not
see that this did really enslave them so much the more, and brought them under
more danger: since those who judge in secret have a freer scope to their
passions, than those whose proceedings are public, and so are in effect judged
by the Public, which is often a very effectual restraint upon the Judges
themselves. But the Council of Ten being generally in the hands of the great
Families: Whereas those of all sorts are of the Council of Forty, which was the
chief Judicatory of the State, and is much Ancienter than that of Ten: It had
been much more wisely done of them to have been still Judged by the Forty: And
if they had thought it for their Honor to have a difference made in the way of
judging the Nobility, and the other Subjects, it had been more for their
security to have brought their Trials to this, That whereas the Forty Judge all
other offenders with open doors, the Nobility should be judged the doors being
shut, which is a thing they very much desire now, but without any hope of ever
obtaining it: For this power of Judging the Nobility is now considered as Right
of the Ten, and if any Man would go about to change it, the Inquisitors would
be perhaps, very quick with him, as a mover of Sedition, and be, in that case,
both Judge, and Party; Yet the Inquisitors being apprehensive of the distaste
that this might breed in the body of the Nobility, have made a sort of
regulation, though it does not amount to much; which is, that the Nobility
shall be Judged before the Council of Ten for atrocious cases, such as matter
of State, the robbing the Public, and other enormous Crimes; but that for all
other matters they are to be Judged by the Forty: yet the Council of Ten draws
all cases before them, and none dare dispute with them.

But this leads me to say a little to you of that part of this Constitution,
which is so much censured by strangers: but is really both the greatest glory,
and the chief security of this Republic, which is the unlimited power of
Inquisitors, that extends not only to the chief of the Nobility, but to the
Duke himself, who is so subject to them, that they may not only give him severe
reprimands, but search his Papers, make his Process, and in conclusion, put him
to death without being bound to give an account of their Proceedings, except to
the Council of Ten. This is the dread not only of all the Subjects, but of the
whole Nobility, and of all that bear Office in the Republic, and makes the
greatest among them tremble, and so obliges them to an exact conduct. But
though it is not to be denied that upon some occasions they may have been a
little too sudden, particularly in the known story of Foscarini, yet such
unjustifiable severities have occurred so seldom, that as the wisdom of this
Body in making and preserving such an Institution, cannot be enough admired, so
the dextrous conduct of those who manage this vast trust, so as not to force
the Body to take it out of their hands, is likewise highly to be wondered at.
In short, the insolence, the factions, the revenges, the necessities and
ambition that must needs possess a great many Members of so vast a Body as is
the Nobility of Venice, must have thrown them often into many fatal
Convulsions, if it were not for the dread in which they all stand of this
Court: which has so many spies abroad, chiefly among the Gondaliers, who
cannot fail to discover all the secret Commerce of Venice, besides the secret
advices that are thrown in at so many of those Lions mouths that are in several
places of St. Mark's Palace, within which there are boxes that are under the
Keys of the Inquisitors, so that it is scarce possible for a Man to be long in
any design against the State, and not to be discovered by them. And when they
find any in fault, they are so inexorable, and so quick, as well as severe in
their Justice, that the very fear of this is so effectual a restraint, that
perhaps the long preservation of Venice, and of its Liberty, is owing to this
single piece of their constitution: and the Inquisitors are Persons generally
so distinguished for their merit who must be all of different Families; and
their Authority lasts so short a while, that the advantages of this vast
Authority that is lodged with them, are constant and visible; whereas the
unhappy instances of their being imposed on, an^ carrying their suspicions too
far, are so few, that when ever the Nobility grows weary of his yoke, and throw
it off, one may reckon the Glory and Prosperity of Venice at an end. It was
terribly attackt not long ago by Cornaro, when Jerome Cornaro was put to death
for his correspondence with Spain; he was not near a kin to the great Family of
that name, yet the Family thought their Honor was so much touched when one of
its remotest branches was condemned of Treason, that they offered a Hundred
thousand Crowns to have saved him, and by consequence to have preserved the
Family from that Infamy; but though this was not accepted, for he suffered as
he well deserved, yet it was so visible that none of the Family were concerned
in his Crimes, that it did not at all turn to their prejudice. But upon the
first occasion that offered it self after that, to quarrel with the proceeding
of the Inquisitors, they laid hold on it, and aggravated the matter extremely,
and moved for the limiting of their Authority, but the Great Council was wiser
than to touch so sacred a part of the Government, so they retained their power
very entire, but they manage it with all possible caution; A Forreigner that
has been many years in their Service, told me that the Stories with which
strangers were frighted at the Arbitrary power that was rested in those
Inquisitors were slight things, in comparison of the advantages that they found
from it: And after Eleven Years spent in their service, he said, he never was
so much as once sent for to receive a reprimand from them. And if the Nobility,
that have any Commerce with strangers, confess it sincerely to the Inquisitors,
they are in danger by it; by if they conceal it, or any main circumstances of
it, their Process will be soon dispatched. These are the most remarkable things
that I could pick up, during my stay at Venice. I have avoided to say any thing
relating to their several Councels, Officers, and Judicatories, or to the other
parts of their Government, which are to be found in all Books; and the Forms,
by which they give Votes by Ballot, are so well known, that it were an abusing
of your time to enlarge my self concerning them; nor was I sufficiently
informed concerning the particulars of the Sale of Nobility that is now on foot
since this last War with the Turks, which has made them willing to take up
once again this easy way of raising of Money: Nor could I give credit to that
of which a Person of great Eminence there assured me, that there was a poysoner
general in Venice, that had a Salary, and was employed by the Inquisitors to
dispatch those against whom a public proceeding would make too great a noise;
this I could not believe, though my Author protested, that the Brother of one
that was solicited to accept of the Employment, discovered it to him. There is
no place in the World where strangers live with more freedom and I was amazed
to see so little exactness among the Searchers of the Custom-house; for though
we had a Mullets load of Trunks and Portmantles, yet none offered to ask us,
either coming or going, what we were, or what we carried with us. But the best
and Noblest Entertainment that Venice afforded while I was there, was the
company of Mr. dela Hay the French Ambassador, who as he has spent his whole
life in public Embassies, so he has acquired so great a knowledge of the
World, with so true a Judgment, and so obliging a civility, that he may well
pass for a Pattern; and it is no wonder to see him still engaged in a constant
succession of public Employments; and his Lady is so wonderful a Person, that
I pay them both but a very small part of what I owe them, in this
acknowledgement, which I judge my self bound to make of their extraordinary
civilities to me: and indeed without the advantage of such a rendezvous as I
had there, a fortnights stay at Venice had been a very tedious matter: From
Venice we went again to Padua; From thence to Rovigo, which is but a small
Town, and so to the Po, which divides the Territory of the Republic, from the
Ferrarese, which is now the Popes Country, and here one sees what a difference
a good and a bad Government makes in a Country; for though the Soil is the
same on both sides of the River, and the Ferrarese was once one of the
beautifullest spots of all Italy, as Ferrara was one of its best Towns, while
they had Princes of their own, who for a course of some Ages were Princes of
such Eminent virtue, and of so Heroical a Nobleness, that they were really the
Fathers of their Country, nothing can be imagined more changed than all this is
now. The Soil is abandoned, and uncultivated, nor were there hands enough so
much as to mow their Grass, which we saw withering in their Meadows to our no
small wonder. We were amazed to see so rich a Soil thus forsaken of its
Inhabitants, and much more when we passed through that vast Town, which by its
extent shows what it was about an Age ago, and is now so much deserted, that
there are whole sides of Streets without Inhabitants, and the poverty of the
place appears signally in the Churches, which are mean and poorly adorned, for
the superstition of Italy is so ravenous, and makes such progress in this Age,
that one may justly take the measures of the Wealth of any place from the
Churches. The Superstition or Vanity of this Age, is so much beyond that of the
past, though the contrary to this is commonly believed, that all the vast
buildings of great Churches or rich Convents, and the surprising Wealth that
appears in them on Festival days are the donatives of the present Age; so that
it is a vulgar error that some have taken up, who fancy that Superstition is at
a stand, if not in a decay, unless it be acknowledged that the craft of the
Priests has opened to them a new method to support their riches, when the old
ones of Purgatory, and Indulgences were become less effectual in an Age of more
knowledge, and better enlightened, and that is to engage Men to an emulation and
a vanity in enriching their Churches, as much as other Italians have in the
enriching there Palaces, so that as they have a pleasure as well as a vanity in
seeing so much dead Wealth in their houses, they have translated the same
humor to their Churches: And the vanity of the present Age that believes
little or nothing of those contrivances, of Purgatory, or the like, produces
the same, if not greater effects, in the building and enriching their Churches,
and so carries it in expense and prodigality from the Superstition of the
former Ages that believed every thing. But to return to Ferrara, I could not
but ask all I saw, how it came, that so rich a Soil was so strangely abandoned,
some said the Air was become so unhealthy, that those who stay in it were very
short lived; but it is well known that Fourscore Years ago it was well peopled;
and the ill Air is occasioned by the want of Inhabitants; for there not being
people to drain the ground and to keep the Ditches clean, this makes that there
is a great deal of Water that lies on the ground and rots, which infects the
Air in the same manner as is observed in that vast and rich, but uninhabited
Champaign of Rome, so that the ill Air is the effect rather than the cause of
the dispeopling of the Popes Dominions. The true cause is the severity of the
Government, and the heavy Taxes, and frequent Confiscations, by which the
Nephews of several Popes, as they have devoured many of the Families of
Ferrara, so they have driven away many more. And this appears more visibly by
the different state, as well as the Constitution of Bologna, which is full of
People that abound in Wealth, and as the Soil is extreme rich, so it is
cultivated with all due care. For Bologna delivered it self to the Popedom upon
a capitulation, by which there are many Privileges reserved to it: Crimes
there are only punished in the Persons of those who commit them, but there are
no confiscations of Estates; and though the Authority, in Criminal matters,
belongs to the Pope, and is managed by a Legate and his Officers, yet the Civil
Government, the Magistracy, and the power of Judicature in Civil matters, is
entirely in the hands of the State: And by this regulation it is, that as the
riches of Bologna amaze a stranger, it neither being on a Navigable River, by
which it is not capable of much Trade, nor being the Center of a Sovereignty
where a Court is kept; so the Taxes that the Popes fetch from thence, are so
considerable, that he draws much more from this place of Liberty, than from
those where his Authority is unlimited and absolute, but that are by those
means almost quite abandoned; for the greatness of a Prince or State rising
from the numbers of the Subjects, those maxims that retain the Subjects, and
that draw strangers to come among them, are certainly the truest maxims for
advancing the greatness of the Master. And I could not but with much scorn,
observe the folly of some Frenchmen, who made use of this argument to show the
greatness of their Nation, that one found many Frenchmen in all places to which
one could come, whereas there were no English nor Dutch, nor Switzers, and very
few Germans: But is just contrary to the right consequence that ought to be
drawn from this observation. It is certain, that few leave their Country, and
go to settle elsewhere, if they are not pressed with so much uneasiness at home
that they cannot well live among their Friends and Kindred; so that a mild
Government drives out no swarms: Whereas it is the sure mark of a severe
Government that weakens it self, when many of the Subjects find it so hard to
subsist at home, that they are forced to seek that abroad, which they would
much rather do in their own Country, if Impositions, and other severities did
not force them to change their habitations.

But to return to the wealth of Bologna, it appears in every corner of the
Town, and all round it; though its situation is not very favorable, for it
lies at the foot of the Appenins on the North-side, and is extreme cold in
Winter. The houses are built as at Padua and Bern, so that one walks all the
Town over covered under Piazza's; but the walks here are both higher and larger
than any where else, there are many Noble Palaces all over the Town, and the
Churches, and Convents are incredibly rich; within the Town the richest are the
Dominicans, which is the chief house of the Order, where their Founders body is
laid in one of the best Chapels of Italy; and next to them are the Franciscans,
the Servites, the Jesuits, and the Canons Regular of St. Salvator. In this
last there is a scrowl of the Hebrew Bible, which though it is not the tenth
part of the Bible, they fancy to be the whole Bible; and they were made believe
by some Jew, that has no doubt sold it at a high rate, that it was written by
Ezrah's own hand, and this has past long for current; but the Manuscript is
only a fine Copy like those that the Jews use in their Synagogues, that may be,
perhaps, Three or Four Hundred Years old; that part of it on which I cast my
eye was the book of Esther, so by the bulk of the scrowl, I judged it to be the
collection of those small books of the Old Testament that the Jews set after
the Law; but those of the house fancy they have a great treasure in it, and
perhaps such Jews as have seen it are willing to laugh at their ignorance, and
so suffer them to go on in their error. The chief Church in the Town is St.
Petrone's, and there one sees the curious and exact Meridional-line, which that
rare Astronomer Cassini laid along a great part of the pavement in a brass
Circle; it marks the true point of midday from June to January, and is one of
the best performances that perhaps the World ever saw. In the great square
before the Church, on the one side of which is the Legates Palace, among other
Statues one surprised me much, it was Pope Joans, which is so named by the
People of the Town, it is true the Learned Men say it is the Statue of Pope
Nicolas the IV. who had indeed a youthly and womanish face. But as I looked at
this Statue very attentively, through a little prospect that I carried with me,
it appeared plainly to have the face of a young Woman, and was very unlike that
of Pope Nicolas the IV. which is in St. Maria Maggiore at Rome: For the Statue
of that Pope, though it has no beard, yet has an age in it that is very much
different from the Statue at Bologna. I do not build any thing on this Statue,
for I do not believe that Story at all, and I my self saw in England a
Manuscript of Martinus Polonus, who is one of the ancient Authors of this
matter, which did not seem to be written long after the Author's time; In it
this Story is not in the Text, but is added on the margin by another hand. On
the Hill above Bologna stands the Monastery of St. Michael in Bosco, which has
a most charming situation, and prospect, and is one of the best Monasteries in
Italy; it has many Courts, and one that is Cloistered, and is Octangular;
which is so nobly painted in Fresco, that it is great pity to see such work
exposed to the Air: All was retouched by the famous Guido Reni, yet it is now
again much decayed: The Dormitory is very Magnificent; the Chapel is little
but very fine, and the Stalls are richly carved. On the other-side of Bologna,
in the Bottom, the Carthusians have also a very rich Monastery: Four miles from
Bologna there is a Madona of St. Lukes, and because many go thither in great
devotion, there is a portico a building, which is already carried on almost
half way; it is walled toward the North, but stands on Pillars to the South,
and is about Twelve Foot broad, and Fifteen Foot high, which is carried on very
vigorously, for in Eight or Ten Years the half is built, so that in a little
time, the whole will be very probably finished, and this may prove the
b^ginning of many such like Portico's in Italy, for things of this kind want
only a beginning, and when they are once set on foot they do quickly spread
themselves in a Country that is so entirely subdued by superstition and the
artifices of their Priests. In Bologna they reckon there are Seventy Thousand
Persons. I saw not one of the chief glories of this place for the famous
Malapighi was out of Town while I was there. I saw a Play there, but the Poesy
was so bad, the Farces so rude, and all was so ill acted, that I was not a
little amazed to see the Company express so great a satisfaction in that which
would have been hissed off the Stage either in England or France. From Bologna
we go Eight miles in a Plain, and then we engage into that range of Hills that
carry the name of Apenins, though that is str^ctly given only to one that is
the highest: All the way to Florence this track of Hills continues, though
there are several bottoms, and some considerable little Towns in them, but all
is up-hill and down-hill, and Florence it self is just at the bottom of the
last Hill. The highways all along these Hills are kept in so very good case,
that in few of the best Inhabited Countries does one find the highways so well
maintained as in those forsaken Mountains; but this is so great a passage that
all that are concerned in it find their account in the expense they lay out
upon it. On the last of these Hills, though in a little bottom, in the midst of
a Hill, stands Pratolino, one of the great Dukes Palaces, where the retreat in
summer must be very agreeable, for the Air of those Mountains is extreme thin
and pure. The Gardens in Italy are made at a great cost, the Statues and
Fountains are very rich and noble, the Grounds are well laid out, and the Walks
are long and even: But as they have no Gravel to give them those firm and
beautiful walks that we have in England, so the constant greenness of the Box
does so much please them, that they preferring the sight to the smell, have
their Gardens so high sented by plots made within them, that there is no
pleasure to walk in them; they also lay their walks so between hedges, that one
is much confined in them. I saw first in a Garden at Vincenza, that which I
found afterward in many Gardens in Italy, which was extreme convenient, there
went a course of Water round about the Walls, about a foot from the ground in a
channel of stone that went along the side of the Wall; and in this there
were-holes so made, that a pipe of white Iron or Wood put to them, conveyed the
Water to such plants, as in dry season, needed watering; and a cock, set the
Water a running in this course, so that without the trouble of carrying Water,
one Person could easily manage the watring of a great Garden. Florence is a
beautiful and noble Town, full of great Palaces, rich Churches, and stately
Convents. The streets are paved in imitation of the old Roman highways, with
great Stone bigger than our common pavement Stone, but much thicker, which are
so hollowed in their joinings to one another, that horses find fastening enough
to their feet: There are many Statues and Fountains in the streets, so that in
every corner one meets with many agreeable objects. I will not entertain you
with a description of the great Dukes Palace and Gardens, or of the old Palace
and the Gallery that joins to it, and of the vast Collection of Pictures,
Statues, Cabinets, and other curiosities that must needs amaze every one that
sees them; the Plate, and in particular the Gold Plate, and the great Coach,
are all such extraordinary things that they would require a very copious
description; if that had not been done so often, that it were to very little
purpose to Copy what others have said; and these things are so exactly seen by
every traveller, that I can say nothing that is more particular of these
subjects then you will find in the common Itineraries of all Travelers. The
great Dome is a magnificent building, but the Frontispiece to the great Gate is
not yet made. The Cupulo, is after S. Peter's, the greatest and highest that I
saw in Italy; it is Three Hundred foot high, and of a vast compass, and the
whole Architecture of this Fabric is very singular as well as regular. Only
that which was intended to add to its beauty, lessned it very much in my
thoughts; for the Walls that are all of Marble being of white and black Marble
laid in different figures and orders, looked too like a livery, and had not
that air of nobleness which in my opinion becomes so glorious a Fabric. The
Baptistery that stands before it was a Noble Heathen Temple; its Gates of brass
are the best of that sort that are in the World: There are so many Histories so
well represented in bas reliefs in them, with so much exactness, the work is so
natural and yet so fine, that a curious Man could find entertainment for many
days, if he would examine the three Gates of this Temple, with a critical
exactness. The Annunciata, S. Marks, S. Croce, and S. Maria Novella, are
Churches of great beauty and vast riches; but the Church and Chapel of S.
Laurence exceeds them all as much in the riches within, as it is inferior to
them in the outside which is quite flayed, if I may so speak, but on design to
give it a rich outside of Marble. In a Chapel within this Church, the Bodies
of the great Dukes lie deposited, till the famous Chapel is finished. But I
was much scandalized to see Statues with nudities here, which I do not remember
to have seen any where else in Churches. I will not offer at a description of
the Glorious Chapel, which as it is without doubt the richest piece of
building that perhaps the World ever saw, so it goes on so slowly, that though
there are always many at work, yet it does not seem to advance proportionably
to the number of the hands that are employed in it. Among the Statues that are
to be in it, there is one of the Virgins made by Michael Angelo, which
represents her grief at the Passion of her Blessed Son, that has the most life
in it of all the Statues I ever saw.

But the famous Library that belongs to this Convent, took up more of my time
than all the other Curiosities of Florence; for here is a collection of many
Manuscripts, most of them are Greek, that were gathered together by Pope
Clement the VII. and given to his Country: There are very few Printed Books
mixed with them; and those Books that are there, are so rare, that they are
almost as curious as Manuscripts. I saw some of Virgils Poems in old Capitals.
There is a Manuscript in which some parts both of Tacitus and Apeuleius are
written, and in one place, one in a different hand has writ, that he had
compared those Manuscripts: and he adds a date to this in Olibrius's time,
which is above Twelve hundred Years ago. I found some Dipthongs in it cast into
one Letter, which surprised me, for I thought that way of writing of them had
not been so ancient: but that which pleased me most, was, that the
Library Keeper assured me, that one had lately found the famous Epistle of St.
Chrisostomes to Cesarius in Greek, in the end of a Volume full of other things,
and not among the Manuscripts of that Fathers Books of which they have a great
many. He thought he remembered well the place where the Book stood; so we turned
over all the Books that stood near it, but I found it not: He promised to look
it out for me, if I came back that way. But I changing my design, and going
back another way, could not see the bottom of this. It is true, the Famous
Magliabecchi, who is the Great Dukes Library Keeper, and is a Person of most
wonderful civility and full of candor, as well as he is learned beyond
imagination, assured me that this could be no other than a mistake of the
Library-keepers; he said such a discovery could not have been made without
making so much noise that he must have heard of it. He added there was not one
Man in Florence that either understood Greek, or that examined Manuscripts, so
that he assured me I could not build on what an Ignorant Library Keeper had
told me: So I set down this matter as I found it without building much on it.
Florence is much sunk from what it was, for they do not reckon that there are
above Fifty thousand Souls in it: and the other States that were once great
Republics, such as Siena and Pisa, while they retained their liberty, are now
shrunk almost into nothing: It is certain that all three together are now not
so numerous, as any one of them was Two hundred Years ago. Legorn is full of
People; and all round Florence there are a great many Villages; but as one goes
over Tuscany it appears so dispeopled, that one cannot wonder to find a Country
that has been a Scene of so much action and so many Wars, now so forsaken and
so poor, and that in many places the Soil is quite neglected for want of hands
to cultivate it: and in other places where there are more People, they look so
poor, and their houses are such miserable ruins, that it is scarce accountable
how there should be so much poverty in so rich a Country, which is all over
full of beggars: and here the style of begging was a little altered from what I
found in Lombardy; for whereas there they begged for the sake of S. Anthony,
here all begged for the Souls that were in Purgatory, and this was the style in
all the other parts of Italy through which I passed. In short, the dispeopling
of Tuscany, and most of the Principalities of Italy, but chiefly of the Popes
Dominions, which are more abandoned than any other part of Italy, seemed to
flow from nothing but the severity of the Government and the great decay of
Trade: for the greatest Trade of Italy being in Silk, the vast importation of
Silks that the East India Companies bring into Europe, has quite ruined all
those that deal in this manufacture: Yet this is not the chief cause of the
dispeopling of those rich Countries, the severity of the Taxes is the true
reason: notwithstanding all that decay of Trade, the Taxes are still kept up.
Besides this, the vast Wealth of the Convents, where the only People of Italy
are to be sound, that live not only at their ease, but in great plenty and
luxury, makes many forsake all sort of Industry, and seek for a retreation of
those seats of pleasure; so that the People do not increase fast enough to make
a new Race to come instead of those whom a hard Government drives away. It must
needs surprise an unattentive Traveller to see, not only the Venetian
Territory; which is indeed a rich Country, but the Baliages of the Switzers,
and the Coast of Genoa so full of People, when Tuscany, the Patrimony, and the
Kingdom of Naples have so few Inhabitants. In the Coast of Genoua, there is for
many miles as it were a constant tract of Towns and Villages, and all those are
well peopled, though they have scarce any Soil at all, lying under the
Mountains that are very barren, and that exposed them to a most uneasy Sun;
and that they lie upon a boistrous Sea that is almost always in a storm, and
that affords very few Fish: and yet the gentleness of the Government draws such
multitudes thither, and those are so full of Wealth, that Money goes at Two per
cent. But on the other hand to balance this a little, so strange and wild a
thing is the nature of Man, at least of Italians, that I was told that the
worst People of all Italy, are the Genoeses, and the most generally corrupted
in their Morals, as to all sorts of Vice, so that though a severe Government
and Slavery are contrary to the nature of Man, and to human Society, to Justice
and Equity; and to that essential equality that Nature has made among Men: yet
on the other hand, all Men cannot bear that ease and liberty that becomes
human Nature. The superstition of Italy, and the great wast of Wealth that one
sees in their Churches, particularly those prodigious masses of Plate with
which their Altars are covered on Holy Days, does also sink their Trade
extremely; for Silver being in Commerce, what blood is in the Body, when so
much of that is dead and circulates no more; it is no wonder if such
extravasation (if I may use so long and hard a word) of Silver, occasions a
great deadness in Trade. I had almost forgot one Remark that I made in the Hill
of the Appenins, just above Florence, that I never saw such tall and big
Cypresses as grew over all that Hill, which seemed a little strange, that Tree
being apt to be starved by a cold Winter among us, and there the Winters are
severe. All the way in Tuscany is very rugged, except on the sides of the Arne.
But the uneasiness of the Road is much qualified by the great care that is had
of the Highways, which are all in very good case: The Inns are wretched and ill
furnished both for Lodging and Diet. This is the plague of all Italy, when once
one has passed the Appennins: for, except in the great Towns, one really
suffers so much that way, that the pleasure of Traveling is much abated by the
inconveniences that one meets in every Stage through which he passes. I am

SIR, Yours.

BOOK II.
The Fourth Letter. From Rome the Eight of December. 1685.
I Am now in my last stage of my Voyage over Italy, for since my last from
Florence, I have not only got hither, but have been in Naples; and have now
satisfied my Curiosity so fully, that I intend to leave this Place within a day
or two, and go to Civita-vecchia, and from thence by Sea to Marseilles, and to
avoid an unpleasant Winters Journey over the Alps. It is true I close the sight
of Turin, Genoa, and some other Courts: but tho I am told these deserve well
the pains of the Journey; yet when one rises from a great Meal, no Delicacies,
how much soever they might tempt him at an other time can provoke his appetite:
so I confess freely that the sight of Naples and Rome, have so filled my stomach
that way, that the Curiosity of seeing new Places is now very low with me, and
indeed these that I have of last seen are such, that Places which at an other
time would please me much, would now make but a slight and cold Impression.

All the way from Florence, through the Great Duke's Country looked so sad,
that I concluded it must be the most dispeopled of all Italy: but indeed, I
changed my Note, when I came into the Popes Terriories at Pont Centino, where
there was a rich bottom all uncultivated, and not so much as stocked with
Cattle: But as I passed from M. Fiascone to Viterbo, this appeared yet more
amazing, for a vast Champion Country lay almost quite deserted. And that wide
Town which is of so great a compass, has yet so few Inhabitants, and those
look so poor and miserable, that the people in the Ordinary Towns in Scotland,
and in its worst places make a better appearance. When I was within a days
Journey of Rome, I fancied that the Neighborhood of so great a City must mend
the matt^t: but I was much disappointed, for a soil that was so Rich, and lay
so sweetly, that it far exceeded any thing I ever saw out of Italy, had neither
Inhabitants in it, nor Cattle upon it, to the tenth part of what it could b^ar:
The surprise that this gave me, increased upon me as I went out of Rome on its
other side, chiefly all the way to Naples, and on the way to Civita-vecchia,
for that vast and rich Champion Country that runs all along to Terracina,
which from Civita-vecchia is above a hundred miles long, and is in many places
twelve or twenty miles broad, is abandoned to such a degree, that as far as
ones eye can carry one, there is often not so much as a House to be seen; but
on the Hills that are on the North-side of this Valley, and by this dispeopling
of the Country, the Air is now become so unwholesome, that it is not safe to be
a night in it all the Summer long, for the Water that lies upon many places not
being drained, it rots: and in the Summer this produces so many noisome steams,
that it is felt even in Rome it self; and if it were not for the breeses that
come from the Mountains, the Air would be intolerable: When one sees all this
large but vast Country from the Hill of Marino twelve miles beyond Rome, he
cannot wonder enough at it. In a word, it is the rigor of the Government, that
has driven away the Inhabitants, and their being driven away, has now reduced
it to such a pass, that it is hardly possible to people it: for such as would
come to drain and cultivate it, must run a great hazard, and few can resolve on
that, when they can hope for no other reward of their Industry, but an uneasy
Government. It is the greatest solaecism in Government for the Prince to be
Elective, and yet Absolute; for an Hereditary Prince is induced to consider his
posterity, and to maintain his people, so that those that come after him may
still support the rank which they hold in the World: But an Elective Prince
has nothing of that in his eye, unless he has a pitch of generosity which is
not ordinary among men, and least of all among Italians, who have a passion for
their Families, which is not known in other places: and thus a Pope, who comes
in late to this dignity, which by consequence he cannot hope to hold long, does
very naturally turn to those Councels, by which his Family may make all the Hay
they can during this Sunshine: And tho anciently the Cardinals were a check
upon the Pope, and a sort of Council without whom he could do nothing even in
Temporals; yet now they have quite lost that; and they have no other share in
affairs than that to which the Pope thinks fit to admit them, so that he is the
most absolute Prince in Europe. It is true as to Spirituals they retain still a
large share, so that in censures and definitions, the Pope can do nothing
regularly, without their concurrence; tho it is certain that they have not so
good a Title to pretend to that, as to share in the Temporal Principality. For
if the Pope drives any thing from St. Peter, all that, is singly in himself,
and it is free to him to pr ceed by what method he thinks best; since the
Infallibility, according to their pretensions, rests singly in him: Yet because
there was not so much to be got by acting Arbitrarily in those matters, and a
Summary way of exercising this Authority, might have tempted the World to have
enquired too much into the grounds on which it is built; Therefore the Popes
have let the Cardinals retain still a share in this Supremacy over the Church,
tho they have no claim to it, neither by any Divine nor Ecclesiastical
warrants: But as for the endowments of the Sea of Rome, to which they may
justly lay claim, as being in a manner the Chapter of that See; there is so
much to be got by this, that the Popes have engrossed it wholly to themselves:
and thus it is that the Government of this Principality, is very unsteady.
Sometimes the Pope's Family are extremely glorious, and magnificent, at other
times, they think of nothing but of establishing their house: Sometimes the
Pope is a man of sense himself; Sometimes he is quite sunk, and as the last
Pope was, he become a Child again through old age: Sometimes he has a
particular stifness of temper, with a great slowness of understanding, and an
infatiable desire of heaping up wealth, which is the character of him that now
Reigns. By this diversity which appears eminently in every new Pontificate that
commonly avoids those exc^sses that made the former Reign odious, the Councels
of the Popedom are weak and disjointed. But if this is sensible to all Europe,
with relation to the general concerns of that Body, it is much more visible in
the Principality it self, that is subject to so variable a head. There has
been in this Age a succession of four ravenous Reigns, and tho there was a
short interruption in the Reign of the Rospigliosi, that coming after the
Barberins, the Pamphili, and the Ghigi's, did enrich it self: and yet it
disordered the Revenue by the vast magnificence in which he Reigned, more in
twenty nine months time, than any other had done in so many years. The Altieri
did, in a most scandalous manner, raise themselves in a very short and despised
Reign, and built one of the Noblest Palaces in Rome. He that Reigns now does
not indeed raise his Family avowedly, but he does not ease the people of their
Taxes: and as there is no magnificence in his Court, nor any public buildings
now carrying on at Rome, so the many vacant Caps, occasion many empty Palaces:
and by this means there is so little expense now made at Rome, that it is not
possible for the people to live and pay the Taxes, which has driven, as is
believed, almost a fourth part of the Inhabitants out of Rome, during this
Pontificate. And as the pre-emption of the Corn makes that there is no profit
made by the Owners, out of the cultivation of the Soil, all that going wholly
to the Pope, so there are no ways left here of employing one's Money to any
considerable advantage: For the public Banks, which are all in the Pope's
hand, do not pay in effect three per cent tho they pretend to give four per
cent of interest. The settlement is indeed four per cent, and this was thought
so great an advantage, that actions on the Pope's Bank were bought at a hundred
and Sixteen the hundred. But this Pope broke through all this, and d^clared he
would give all men their Money again, unless they would pay him thirty per cent
for the continuing of this Interest; and thus for a hundred Crowns Principal,
one not only paid at first one hundred and sixteen; but afterward thirty, in
all one hundred six and forty for the hundred which is almost the half lost:
For whenever the Pope will pay them back their Money, all the rest is lost:
And while I am here there is a report that the Pope is Treating with the
Genoeses for Money at two per cent and if he gets it on those Terms, then he
will pay his Debts; and the Subjects that have put in Money in this Bank, will,
by this means lose six and forty per cent, which is almost the half of their
Stock. A man of quality at Rome, and an eminent Churchman, who took me
likewise for one of their Clergy, because I wore the habit of a Churchman,
said that it was a horrible scandal to the whole Christian World, and made one
doubt of the Truth of the Christian Religion, to see more oppression and
cruelty in their Territory, then was to be found even in Turkey: tho it being
in the hands of Christ's Vicar, one should expect to find there the pattern of
a mild and gentle Government: and how said he can a man expect to find his
Religion here, where the common maxims of Justice and Mercy were not so much as
known: And I can never forget the lively reflection that a Roman Prince made to
me upon the folly of all those severe Oppressions, which as they drive away the
Inhabitants, so they reduce those that are left to such a degeneracy of Spirit
by their necessities, that the Spaniards, whose Dominions look so big in the
Map, are now brought so low: and if they had kept still the possession they
once had of the Vnited-Netherlands, they would signify no more toward their
preservation, than their other Provinces did: which, by their unskilful conduct
they have both dispeopled and exhausted: Whereas by their losing those seven
Provinces, those States have fallen upon such wise Notions of Government, and
have drawn so much Wealth, and such numbers of people together, that Spain it
self was now preserved by them, and was saved in this Age by the loss it made
of those Provinces in the last: and those States that if they had remained
subject to Spain, would have signified little to its support, did that now much
more considerably by being Allies, then they could have done if they had shaken
off their Yoke.

Indeed, if Spain had been so happy as to have such Viceroys and Governors, as
it has now in Nap^es, their affairs could not have declined so fast as they
have done. The Marquess of Carpi, in his youth intended to have taken so severe
a revenge of an injury that he thought the late King of Spain did him in an
amor, that he designed the blowing him up by Gunpowder, when he was in the
Council Chamber: but that crime was discovered in time, and was not only
forgiven him in consideration of the greatness of his Family, he being the Son
of Don Lewis de Haro: but after that he was made for several years Ambassador
in Rome: He is now Viceroy of Naples, and is the only Governor of all the
places through which I passed, that is, without exception beloved and esteemed
by all sorts of people: for during the few years of his Ministry, he has
redressed such abuses that seemed past cure, and that required an Age to
correct them: He has repressed the insolence of the Spaniards so much at
Naples, that the Natives have no occasion to complain of the haughtiness of
their Masters: for he proceeds against the Spaniards with no less severity,
when they give cause for it, than against the Neapolitans: He has taken the
pay of the Soldiers so immediately into his own care, that they, who before
his coming were half naked, and robbed, such as passed on the streets of Naples
in day light, are now exactly paid, well disciplined, and so decently
clothed, that it is a pleasure to see them: He examines their Musters also so
exactly, that he is sure not to be cheated by false lists: He has brought the
Markets and Weights of Naples to a true exactness: And whereas the Bread was
generally too light, he has sent for Loaves out of the several places of the
Markets and weighed them himself: And by some severe punishment on those that
sold the Bread too light, he has brought this matter to a just regulation: He
has also brought the Courts of Judicature, that were thought generally very
corrupt, to reputation aga^n, and it is believed, he has Spies to VVatch in
case the Trade of Bribes is found to be still going on: He has fortified the
Palace which was before his time, so much exposed, that it would have been no
hard thing to have mad^ a descent upon it: But the two things that raise his
reputation most, are his Extirpating of the Banditi, and the regulation of the
Coin, which he has taken in hand. It is well enough known what a Plague the
Banditi have been to the Kingdom, for they going in Troops, not only robbed the
Country, but were able to resist an ordinary Body of Soldiers, if they had set
on them: These traveled about, seeking for Spoil all the Summer long, but in
Winter they were harbored by some of the Neapolitan Barrons, who gave them
Quarters: And thereby did not only protect their own Lands, but had them as so
many Instruments ready to execute their Revenges on their Enemies. This was
well known at Naples, and there was a Council that had the care of the reducing
the Banditi committed to them, who as they catched some few, and hanged them,
so they fined such Barrons as gave them harbor; and it was believed that those
Fines amounted to near a hundred and fifty thousand Crowns a year: And thus the
Disease went on; only now and then there was a little Blood let, which never
went to the bottom of the Distemper. But when the present Viceroy entered upon
the Government, he resolved to extirpate all the Banditi, and he first let all
the Barons understand, that if they harbored them any more, a little Fine
would not save them: but that he would proceed against them with the utmost
severity, and by this means the Banditi could find no Winter Quarters: So they
betook themselves to some fastnesses among the Hills, and resolved to make good
the Passes, and to accommodate themselves the best they could amidst the
Mountains. The Viceroy sent a great Body against them, but they defended
themselves for some time vigorously, and in one Sally they killed five hundred
men: but at last, seeing that they were like to be hard pressed; and that the
Viceroy intended to come against them in Person, they accepted of the Terms
that he offered them, which was a Pardon for what was past, both as to Life and
Galleys, and six pence a day for their entertainment in Prison during Life, or
the Viceroys pleasure; and so they rendered themselves. They are kept in a large
Prison, and now and then as he sees cause for it, he sends some few of them up
and down to serve in Garrisons. And thus, beyond all men's expectation, he
finished this matter in a very few months: and the Kingdom of Naples that has
been so long a scene of Pillage and Robbery, is now so much changed, that in no
place of Europe do the Subjects enjoy a more entire security, As for the Coin,
its as all the other Spanish money, is so subject to clipping, that the whole
money of Naples is now light, and far below the true Value, so the Viceroy has
resolved to redress this: He considers that the crying down of money, that
passes upon the Public credit, is a robbing of those in whose hands the money
happens to be when such Proclamations are put out, and therefore he takes a
method that is more general, in which every one will bear his share, so that
none will be crushed by it. He has laid some Taxes on the whole Kingdom, and
has got a great many to bring in some Plate to be Coined: And when he has
thus prepared such a quantity, as may serve for the circulation that is
necessary, he intends to call in all the old money, and to give out new money
for it. Thus does this Viceroy, set such a Pattern to the other Ministers of
the Crown of Spain, that if many would follow it, the State of their affairs
would be soon altered.

The Kingdom of Naples is the richest part of all Italy: for the very Mountains
that are near the half of the Soil, are fruitful, and produce either Wine or
Oil in great abundance. Apulia is a great Corn Country, but is excessive hot,
and in some years all is burnt up. The Jesuits are the Proprietors of near the
half of Apulia, and they treat their Tenants with the same rigor that the
Barons of this Kingdom do generally use toward their Farmers; for the Commons
here are so miserably oppressed, that in many places they die of hunger, even
amidst the great plenty of their best years, for the Corn is exported to Spain:
but neither the Spaniards nor the Neapolitans understand Trade so well as to be
their own Merchants or Carriers, so that the English do generally carry away
the profit of this Trade. The Oil of this Kingdom is still a vast Trade, and
the Manufacture of the Wool and Soap of England, consum^s yearly some thousands
of Tuns. The Silk Trade is so low that it only serves themselves, but the
exportation is inconsiderable: the sloth and laziness of this people renders
them incapable of making those advantages of so rich a Soil, that a more
industrious sort of people would find out: For it amazes a Stranger to see in
their little Towns, the whole men of the Town walking in the Market places in
their torn Cloaks, and doing nothing; and tho in some big Towns, such as Capua,
there is but one Inn, yet even that is so miserable, that the best Room and Bed
in it, is so bad, that our Footmen in England would make a grievous outcry if
they were no better lodged: nor is there any thing to be had in them: the Wine
is intolerable, the Bread ill baked, no Victuals, except Pigeons, and the Oil
is rotten. In short, except one carries his whole provision from Rome or
Naples, he must resolve to endure a good deal of misery in the four days
journey that is between those two places. And this is what a Traveller, that
sees the riches of the soil, cannot comprehend: but as they have not hands
enough for their Soil, so those they have are generally too little employed,
that it is no wonder to see their Soil produce so little, that in the midst of
all that abundance that Nature has set before them, they are one of the
poorest Nations of Europe. But besides this, which I have named, the vast and
dead wealth that is in the hands of the Churchmen, is another evident cause of
their misery. One that knew the State of this Kingdom well, assured me, that if
it were divided into five parts, upon a strict Survey, it would be found that
the Churchmen had four parts of the five; which he made out thus, they have in
Soil above the half of the whole, which is two and a half: and in Tithes and
Gifts and Legacies they have one and a half more: for no man dies without
leaving a considerable Legacy to some Church or some Convent. The Wealth that
one sees in the City of Naples alone, passes imagination; there are four and
twenty Houses of the Order of the Dominicans, of both Sexes, and two and twenty
of the Franciscans, seven of the Jesuits, besides the Convents of the
Olivitanes, the Theatines, the Carmelites, the Benedictines, and above all, for
situation and riches, the Carthusians on the top of the Hill that lies over
the Town. The riches of the Annunciata are prodigious: It is the greatest
Hospital in the World, the Revenue is said to be four hundred thousand Crowns a
year: the number of the Sick is not so great as at Milan: Yet one convenience
for their Sick I observed in their Galleries, which was considerable, that
every Bed stood as in an Alcove, and had a Wall on both sides separating it
from the Beds on both hands, and as much void space of both sides of the Bed,
that the Bed it self took up but half the Room. The young Children that they
maintain are so many, that one can hardly believe the numbers that they boast
of: for they talk of many thousands that are not seen, but are at Nurse: a
great part of the Wealth of this House goes to the enriching their Church,
which will be all over within crusted with inlayings of lovely Marble, in a
great variety and beauty of colors: The Plate that is in the Treasure here and
in the Dome (which is but a mean building, because it is ancient, but has a
Noble Chapel, and a vast Treasure) and in a great many other Churches are so
prodigious, that upon the modest estimate, the Plate of the Churches of Naples
amounts to eight millions of Crowns. The new Church of the Jesuits, that of S.
John the Apostle, and that of S. Paul are surprizingly rich; the Gilding and
Painting that is on the Roofs of those Churches have cost millions: And as
there are about a hundred Convents in Naples, so every one of these, if it were
in another place, would be thought well worth seeing, tho the riches of the
greater Convents here, make many of them to be less visited. Every year there
is a new Governor of the Annunciata, who perhaps puts in his own Pocket twenty
thousand Crowns; and to make some compensation when he goes out of Office, he
gives a vast piece of Plate to the House, a Statue for a Saint in Silver, or
some Coloss of a Candlestick; for several of those Pieces of Plate, are said to
be worth ten thousand Crowns; and thus all the Silver of Naples becomes dead
and useless: The Jesuits are great Merchants here: their Wine Cellar is a vast
Vault, and holds above a thousand Hogsheads, and the best Wine of Naples is
sold by them, yet they do not retail it out so scandalously as the Minims, who
live on the great Square before the Viceroys Palace, and sell out their Wine by
retail: They pay no duty, and have extraordinary good Wine, and are in the best
place of the Town for this retail. It is true the Neapolitans are no great
Drinkers, so the profits of this Tavern are not so great as they would be in
colder Countries: for here men go only in for a draught in the mornings, or
when they are a thirst. Yet the House grows extreme rich, and has one of the
finest Chapels that is in all Naples; but the Trade seems very unbecoming men
of that Profession, and of so strict an Order. The Convents have a very
particular Privilege in this Town; for they may buy all the Houses that lie on
either side, till the first street that discontinueth the Houses; and there
being scarce a street in Naples in which there is not a Convent; by this means,
they may come to buy in the whole Town: And the progress that the wealth of the
Clergy makes in this Kingdom, is so visible, that, if there is not some stop
put to it, within an Age, they will make themselves Masters of the whole
Kingdom: It is an amazing thing to see so profound an ignorance, as Reigns
among the Clergy, prevail so effectually, for tho all the Secular Persons here
speak of them with all possible scorn, yet they are the Masters of the Spirits
of the people. The Women are infinitely superstitious, and give their Husbands
no rest, but as they draw from them great presents to the Church. It is true,
there are Societies of men at Naples of freer thoughts than can be found in any
other place of Italy: The Greek learning begins to flourish there, and the new
Philosophy is much Studied; and there is an Assembly that is held in D. Joseph
Valleta's Library (where there is a vast Collection of well chosen Books)
composed by men that have a right taste of true learning and good sense: They
are ill looked on by the C^ergy, and represented as a set of Ath^ists, and as
the spawn of Pomponatius's School: But I found no such thing ^m^ng them, for I
had the Honor to meet twice or thrice with a considerable number of them,
during the short stay that I made among them: There is a l^^rned Lawyer
Francisco Andria that is c^nside e^ as one of the most inquisitive men of the
Ass^m^ly: There is also a Grandchild of the Great Alciat, who is very curious
as well as learned. Few Churchmen come in to this att^mpt for the reviving of
Learning among them: On the contrary, it is plain, that they dread it above all
things. Only one Eminent Preacher Rinaldi, that is Archdeacon of Capua,
Associates himself with them: He was once of the Jesuits Order, but left it;
and as that alone served to give a good character of him to me, so upon a long
conversation with him, I found a great many other things that possessed me with
a high value for him. Some Physicians in Naples are brought under the scandal
of Atheism, and it is certain, that in Italy, men of searching understandings,
who have no other Idea of the Christian Religion, but that which they see
received among them, are very naturally tempted to disbelieve it quite; for
they believing it all alike in gross, without distinction, and finding such
notorious cheats as appear in many parts of their Religion, are upon that
induced to disbelieve the whole. The Preachings of the Monks in Naples are
terrible things. I saw a Jesuit go in a sort of a Procession, with a great
company about him, and calling upon all that he saw, to follow him to a place
where a Mounte-bank was selling his Medicines, near whom he took his Room, and
entertained the people with a sort of a Farce, till the Mountebank got him to
give over; fearing least his action should grow tedious, and disperse the
comp^ny that was brought together. There are no famous Preachers, nor men of
any reputation nor learning among the Jesuits: I was told they had not men
capable to teach their Schools, and that they were forced to hire Strangers:
The Order of the Oratory has not that reputation in Italy, that it has gain^d
in France, and the little Learning that is among the Clergy in Naples, is among
some few Secular Priests.

The new method of Molinos does so much prevail in Naples, that it is believed
he has above twenty thousand followers in this City: And since this has made
some noise in the World, and yet is generally but little understood, I will
give you some account of him: He is a Spanish Priest that seems to be but an
ordinary Divine, and is certainly a very ill Reasoner when he undertakes to
prove his opinions: He has writ a Book, which is entitled, Il Guida
Spirituale, which is a short abstract of the Mystical Divinity; the substance
of the whole, is reduced to this, that in our Prayers and other Devotions, the
best methods are to retire the mind from all gross Images, and so to form an
act of Faith, and thereby to present our selves before God, and then to sink
into a silence and cessation of new acts, and to let God act upon us, and so to
follow his conduct: This way he prefers to the multiplication of many new acts,
and different forms of Devotion; and he makes small account of corporal
austerities, and reduces all the exercises of Religion to this simplicity of
mind: He ^hinks this is not only to be proposed to such as live ^n Religious
Houses, but even to secular persons, and by this he has proposed a great
Reformation of men's minds and manners: He has many Priests in Italy, but
chiefly in Naples, that dispose those who confess themselves to them, to follow
his methods: The Jesuits have set themselves much against this conduct, as
foreseeing that it may much weaken the Empire that Superstition has over the
minds of people, that it may make Religion become a more plain and simple
thing, and may also open a door to Enthusiasms: They also pretend, that his
conduct ^s factious and seditious, that this may breed a Schism ^n the Church.
And because he says in some places of his Book, That the mind may rise up to
such a simplicity in its acts, that it may rise in some of its Devotions to God
immediately, without contemplating the Humanity of Christ: they have accused
him, as intending to lay a side the Doctrine of Christ's Humanity, tho it is
plain that he speaks only of the purity of some single acts: Upon all those
heads they have set themselves much against Molinos; and they have also
pretended that some of his Disciples, have infused it into their Penitents,
that they may go and Communicate as they find themselves disposed, without
going first to Confession, which they thought weakened much the Yoke, by which
the Priests subdue the Consciences of the people to their Conduct: Yet he was
much supported both in the Kingdom of Naples and in Sicily; He had also many
friends and followers at Rome. So the Jesuits, as a Provincial of the Order
assured me, finding they could not ruin him by their own force, got a great
King, that is now extremely in the Interests of their Order to interpose, and
to represent to the Pope the danger of such innovations. It is certain the Pope
understands the matter very little, and that he is possessed with a great
opinion of Molino's sanctity, yet upon the complaints of some Cardinals, that
seconded the zeal of that King, he and some of his followers were clapped in the
Inquisition, where they have been now for some months, but they are still well
used, which is believed to flow from the good opinion that the Pope has of
him, who says still, that tho he may have erred, yet he is certainly a good
man: Upon this imprisonment, Pasquin said a pleasant thing in one week, one man
had been condemned to the Galleys for somewhat he had said, another had been
hanged for somewhat he had writ, and Molinos was clapped in Prison, whose
Doctrine consisted chiefly in this, that men ought to bring their minds to a
State of inward quietness, from which the name of Quietisis was given to all
his followers: The Pasquinade upon all this, was, Si parliamo, in Galere, si
scrivemmo Impiccati, si stiamo in quiet all' Saint' Officio, e che bisogna
fare: If we speak, we are sent to the Galleys; if we write, we are hanged: if
we stand quiet, we are clapped up in the Inquisition: what must we do then? Yet
his Followers at Naples are not daun^ed but they believe he will come out of
this Trial victorious.

The City of Naples, as it is the best situated, and in the best climate, so
it is one of the Noblest Cities of Europe, and if it is not above half as big
as Paris or London, yet it has much more beauty then either of them: the
Streets are large and broad, the pavement is great and Noble, the Stones being
generally above a foot square: and it is full of Palaces and great Buildings:
The Town is well supplied by daily Markets, so that provisions are ever fresh
and in great plenty, the Wine is the best of Europe, and both the Fish and
Flesh is extreme good: it is scarce ever cold in Winter, and there is a fresh
Air comes both from the Sea and the Mountains in Summer. The Viceroys Palace is
no extraordinary Building, only the Staircase is great: But it is now very
richly furnished within, in Pictures and Statues: there are in it some Statues
of the Egyptian Deities of Touchstone, that are of great value: There are no
great Antiquities here, only there is an ancient Roman Portico that is very
Noble, before St. Paul's Church: But without the City near the Church and
Hospital of St. Gennaro, that is without the Gates, are the Noble Catacombs;
which because they were beyond any thing I saw in Italy, and to which the
Catacombs of Rome are not to be compared, and since I do nor find any account
of them, in all the Books that I have yet seen concerning Naples, I shall
describe them more particularly.

They are vast and long Galleries cut out of the Rock: there are three Stories
of them one above another. I was in two of them, but the Rock is fallen in the
lowest, so that one cannot go in to it, but I saw the passage to it: These
Galleries are generally about twenty foot broad, and about fifteen foot high:
so that they are Noble and spacious places, and not little and narrow as the
Catacombs at Rome, which are only three or four foot broad, and five or six
foot high. I was made be^ieve that these Catacombs of Naples, went into the
Rock nine mile long; but for that I have it only by report: yet if that be
true, they may perhaps run toward Puzzolo, and so they may have been the
burial places of the Towns on that Bay; but of this I have no certainty. I
walked indeed a great way, and found Galleries going off in all hands without
end, and whereas in the Roman Catacombs there are not above three or four rows
of niches that are cut out in the Rock one over another, into which the dead
bodies were laid; Here there are generally six or seven rows of those niches,
and they are both larger and higher; some niches are for Childrens bodies, and
in many places there are in the Floors, as it were great Chests hewn out of the
Rock, to lay the bones of the dead as they dried, in them; but I could see no
marks either of a cover for th^se holes that looked like the bellies of Chests,
or of a facing to shut up the niches when a dead body was laid in them; so that
it seems they were monstrous unwholesome and stinking places, where some
thousands of bodies lay rotting, without any thing to shut in so loathsome a
sight, and so odious a smell: For the niches show plainly that the Bodies were
laid in them only wrapped in the dead clothes, they being too low for Coffins. In
some places of the Rock there is as it were a little Chapel hewn out in the
Rock, that goes off from the common Gallery, and there are niches all round
about; but I saw no marks of any Wall that shut in such places, tho I am apt to
think these might be burying places appropriated to particular families. There
is in some places on the Walls and Arch, Old Mosaic work, and some Painting,
the Colors are fresh, and the manner and Characters are Gothic, which made me
conclude that this might have been done by the Normans about six hundred years
ago, after they drove out the Saracens: In some places there are Palm Trees
painted, and Vines in other places. The freshness of the Colors shows these
could not have been done while this place was employed for burying, for the
steams and rottenness of the Air, occasioned by so much corruption, must have
dissolved both Plaster and Colors. In one place there is a man Painted with a
little beard, and Paulus is written by his head: there is another reaching him
a Garland, and by his head Laud is written, and this is repeated in another
place right over against it. In another place I found a cross Painted, and
about the upper part of it these Letters J. C. X. O. and in the lower part N J
K A are Painted: A learned Antiquary that went with me, agreed with me that the
manner of the Painting and Characters did not seem to be above six hundred
years old, but neither of us knew what to make of these Letters: The lower
seemed to relate to the last word of the Vision, which it is said that
Constantine saw with the Cross that appeared to him: But tho the first two
Letters might be for Jesus, it being ordinary in old Coins and Inscriptions to
put a C. for an S. and X. stands for Christ, yet we knew not what to make of
the O. unless it were for the Greek Theta, and that the little line in the
bosom of the Theta was worn out, and then it stands for Theos; and thus the
whose Inscription is, Jesus Christ, God overcomes. Another Picture in the Wall
had written over it S. Johannes, which was a cl^ar sign of a barbarous Age: In
another place there is a Picture high in the Wall, and three Pictures under it,
that at top had no Inscription; those below it had these Inscriptions, S.
Katharina, S. Agape, and S. Margarita; these Letters a^e clearly modern,
besides that, Margaret and Katherine are modern names, and the addition of ta a
little above the S. were manifest Evidences that the highest Antiquity that can
be ascribed to this Painting is six hundred years. I saw no more Painting, and
I began to grow weary of the darkness, and the thick Air of the place, so I
staid not above an hour in the Catacombs. This made me reflect more
particularly on the Catacombs of Rome than I had done, I could imagine no
reason why so little mention is made of those of Naples, when there is so much
said concerning those of Rome; and could give my self no other account of the
matter, but that it being a maxim to keep up the reputation of the Roman
Catacombs, as the Repositories of the Relics of the primitive Christians, it
would have much lessened their credit, if it had been thought that there were
Catacombs far beyond them in all respects, that yet cannot be supposed to have
been the work of the primitive Christians; and indeed, nothing seems more
evident than that these were the common burying places of the ancient Heathens.
One enters into them without the Walls of the Towns, according to the Laws of
the twelve Tables, and such are the Catacombs of Rome that I saw, which were
those of S. Agnes and S. Sebastian, the entry into them being without the Town;
this answers the Law, tho in effect they run under it, for in those days when
they had not the use of the needle, they could not know which way they carried
on those works when they were once so far engaged under ground as to lose
themselves. It is a vain imagination to think that the Christians, in the
primitive times, were able to carry on such a work; for as this prodigious
digging into such Rocks, must have been a very visible thing by the Mountains
of Rubbish that must have been brought out, and by the vast number of hands
that must have been employed in it; so it is absurd to think that they could
hold their Assemblies amidst the annoyance of so much corruption. I found the
steams so strong, that tho I am as little subject to vapors as most men, yet I
had all the day long after I was in them, (which was not near an hour) a
confusion, and as it were a boiling in my head, that disordered me extremely;
and if there is now so much stagnating Air there, this must have been sensible
in a more eminent and insufferable manner, while there were vast numbers of
bodies rotting in those niches. But besides this improbability that presents it
self from the nature of the thing, I called to mind a passage of a Letter of
Cornelius that was Bishop of Rome, after the middle of the third Century, which
is preserved by Eusebius in his sixth Book, Chapter 43. in which we have the
State of the Church of Rome at that time set forth. There were forty six
Presbiters, seven Deacons, as many Subdeacons, and ninety four of the
Inferior Orders of the Clergy among them: there were also fifteen hundred
Widows, and other poor maintained out of the public Charities. It may be
reasonably supposed that the numbers of the Christians were as great when this
Epistle was writ, as they were at any time before Constantine's days; for as
this was writ at the end of that long peace, of which both S. Cyprian and
Lactantius speak, that had continued above a hundred years; so after this time,
there was such a succession of Persecutions that came so thick one upon
another, after short intervals of quiet, that we cannot think the numbers of
the Christians increased much beyond what they were at this time. Now there are
two particulars in this State of the Clergy, upon which one may make a probable
estimate of the numbers of the Christians, the one is their poor, which were
but fifteen hundred, now upon an exact survey, it will be found that where the
poor are well looked to, their number rises generally to be the thirtieth or
fortieth part of mankind; and this may be well believed to be the proportion of
the poor among the Christians of that Age: For as their Charity was vigorous
and tender, so we find Celsus, Julian, Lucian, Porphiry, and others, object
this to the Christians of that time, that their Charities to the poor drew vast
numbers of the lower sort among them, who made themselves Christians that they
might be supplied by their Brethren: So that this being the State of the
Christians then, we may reckon the poor the thirtieth part, and so fifteen
hundred multiplied by thirty, produce five and forty thousand: And I am the
more inclined to think that this rises up near to the full sum of their
numbers, by the other Character of the numbers of the Clergy, for as there were
forty six Presbyters, so there were ninety four of the inferior Orders, who
were by two more then the double of the number of the Priests; and this was in
a time in which the care of Souls was more exactly looked after, then it has
been in the more corrupted Ages, the Clergy having then really more work on
their hands, the instructing of their Catechumenes, the visiting their Sick,
and the supporting and comforting the weak, being tasks that required so much
application, that in so vast a City as Rome was in those days, in which it is
probable the Christians were scattered over the City, and mixed in all the
parts of it, we make a conjecture that is not ill grounded, when we reckon that
every Presbyter had perhaps about a thousand Souls committed to his care, so
this rises to six and forty thousand, which comes very near the sum that may be
gathered from the other hint, taken from the number of their poor. So that
about fifty thousand is the highest ^ccount to which we can reasonably raise
the numbers of the Christians of Rome in that time; and of so many persons, the
old, the young, and the women, make more then three fourth parts, so that men
that were in condition to work were not above twelve thousand, and by
consequence, they were in no condition to undertake and carry on so vast a
work. If Cornelius in that Letter speaks of the numbers of the Christians in
excessive Terms, and if Tertullian in his Apologetick has also set out the
numbers of the Christians of his time, in a very high strain, that is only to
be ascribed to a pompous Eloquence, which disposes people to magnify their
own party; and we must allow a good deal to a hyperbole that is very natural to
all that set forth their forces in general Terms. It is true, it is not so
clear when those vast cavities were dug out of the Rocks. We know that when the
Laws of the twelve Tables were made, sepulture was then in use: and Rome being
then grown to a vast bigness, no doubt they had repositories for their dead; so
that since none of the Roman Authors mention any such work, it may not be
unreasonable to Imagine that these Vaults had been wrought and cut out from the
first beginnings of the City, and so the latter Authors had no occasion to take
notice of it. It is also certain, that tho burning came to be in use among the
Romans, yet they returned back to their first custom of burying bodies long
before Constantines time; so that it was not the Christian Religion that
produced this change: All our modern Writers take it for granted that the
change was made in the times of the Antonines; yet there being no Law made
concerning it, and nu mention being made in an Age, full of Writers, of any
orders that were given for burying places, Velserus's opinion seems more
probable, that the custom of burning wore out by degrees, and since we are
sure that they once buried, it is more natural to think that the slaves and the
meaner sort of people were still buried, that being a less expense, and a more
simple way of bestowing their bodies ^han burning, which was both pompous and
chargeable, and (i^ there were already burying places prepared) it is much
easier to Imagine how the custom of burying grew Universal, without any Law
made concerning it.

I could not for some time find out upon what grounds the Modern Critics take
it for granted, that burying began in the times of the Antonines, till I had
the happiness to talk of this matter with the learned Gronovius, who seems to
be such a Master of all the Ancient learning, as if he had the Authors lying
always open before him: He told me, that it was certain the change from
burning to burying was not made by the Christian Emperors, for Macrobius,
(lib. 7. chap. 7.) says, in plain terms, that the Custom of burning the
Bodies of the Dead was quite worn out in that Age, which is a clear Intimation
that it was not laid aside so late as by Constantine, and as there was no Law
made by him on that head, so he, and the succeeding Emperors, gave such an
entire tolleration to Paganism, admitting those of that Religion to the
greatest Employments, that it is not to be imagined that there was any order
given against burning; so that it is clear the Heathens had changed it of their
own accord, otherwise we should have found that among the complaints that they
made of the grievances, under which they lay from the Christians; but it is
more difficult to fix the time when this change was made. Gronovius showed me a
passage of Phlegons, that mentions the Bodies that were laid in the ground, yet
he did not build on that, for it may have relation to the customs of burying
that might be elsewhere. And so Petronius gives the account of the burial of
the Ephesian Matrons Husband: but he made it apparent to me, that burying was
commonly practiced in Commodus's time; for Xiphilinus tells us, that in
Pertinax's time the friends of those whom Commodus had ordered to be put to
Death, had dug up their Bodies, some bringing out only some parts of them, and
others raising their entire Bodies. The same Author also tells us, that
Pertinax buried Commodus's Body, and so saved it from the rage of the people,
and here is a positive Evidence, that burying was the common pra^tise of that
time. It is true, it is very probable that as we see some of the Roman Families
continued to bury their dead, even when burning was the more common custom,
so, perhaps, others continued after this to burn their dead, the thing being
Indifferent, and no Law being made about it, and therefore it was particularly
objected to the Christians after this time, that they abhorred the custom of
burning the Bodies of the Dead, which is mentioned by Minutius Felix, but this,
or any other evidences, that may be brought from Meddals of Consecrations after
this time, will only prove that some were still burnt, and that the Christians
practiced burying Universally, as expressing their belief of the Resurrection;
whereas the Heathens held the thing indifferent. It is also clear from the many
genuine Inscriptions that have been found in the Catacombs, which bear the
dates of the Consuls, that these were the common Burial places of all the
Christians of the fourth and fifth Century; for I do not remember that there is
any one date that is Antienter, and yet not one of the Writers of those Ages
speak of them as the work of the Primitive Christians. They speak indeed of the
Burial places of the Martyrs, but that will prove no more but that the
Christians might have had their Quarters, and their Walks in those common
Burial places where they laid their Dead, and which might have been known among
them, tho it is not likely that they would in times of persecutions make such
Inscriptions as might have exposed the Bodies of their dead Friends to the rage
of their Enemies. And the Spurious acts of some Saints and Martyrs are of too
little credit to give any support to the common Opinion. Damasus's Poetry is of
no better authority. And the those Ages were inclined enough to give credit to
Fables, yet it seems this of those Catacombs having been the work of the
Primitive Christians, was too gross a thing to have been so early imposed on
the World. And this silence in an Age, in which Superstition was going on at so
great a rate, has much force in it, for so vast a Work, a^ those Catacombs are,
must have been well known to all the Romans. It were easy to carry this much
further, and to show that the bas reliefs that have been found in some of those
Catacombs, have nothing of the beauty of the Ancient and Roman time. This is
also more discernable in many Inscriptions that are more Gothic then Roman,
and there are so many Inscriptions relating to Fables, that it is plain these
were of later times, and we see by St Jerome, that the Monks began, even in his
time, to drive a Trade of Relics; so it is no wonder, that to raise the
credit o^ such a heap as was never to be exhausted, they made some miserable
Sculptures, and some Inscriptions; and perhaps, shut up the entries into them
with much care and secresy, intending to open them upon some dream or other
Artifice, to give them the more reputation, which was often practiced in order
to the drawing much Wealth and great Devotion, even to some single Relic; and
a few being upon this Secret, either those might have died, or by the many
revolutions that happened in Rome, they might have been dispersed before they
made the discovery: And thus the knowledge of those places was lost, and came
to be discovered by accident in the last Age, and has ever since supplied them
with an inexhaustible Magazine of Bones, which by all appearance are no other
then the Bones of the Pagan Romans; which are now sent over the World to feed a
Superstition that is as blind as it proves expensive. And thus the Bones of the
Roman Slaves, or at least those of the meaner sort, are now set in Silver and
Gold with a great deal of other costly garniture, and entertain the
superstition of those who are willing to be deceived, as well as they serve the
ends of those that seek to deceive the World. But because it cannot be
pretended that there was such a number of Christians at Naples as could have
wrought such Catacombs, and if it had been once thought that those were the
common Burial places of the ancient Heathens, that might have induced the World
to think that the Roman Catacombs were no other; therefore, there has been no
care taken to examine these. I thought this deserved a large Discourse, and
therefore I have dwelt perhaps a little too long on this Subject. I will not
enter upon a long Description of that which is so well known as Mount Vesuvio,
it had roared so loud about a month before I came to Naples, that at Naples
they could hardly sleep in the Nights, and some old Houses were so shaken by
the Earthquake that was occasioned by this convulsion of the Hill, that they
fell to the ground: And the last eruption, above fifty years ago, was so
terrible, that there was no small fear in Naples, tho it lies at the distance
of seven miles from the Hill, yet the Storm was choked under ground; for tho
it smoakt much more than ordinary, yet there was no eruption: It was, indeed,
smoking not only in the mouth of the little Mount that is formed within the
great wast that the Fire has made, but also all along the bottom, that is
between the outward mouth of this Mountain, which is four miles in compass; and
that inward Hill. When one sees the mouth of this Fire, and so great a part of
the Hill, which is covered some foot deep with Ashes and Stones of a metallic
composition, that the Fire throws out, he cannot but stand amazed, and wonder
what can be the fuel of so lasting a burning, that has calcined so much
matter, and sp^wed out such prodigious quantities. It is plain there are vast
Veins of Sulphur all along in his Soil, and it seems in this Mountain they run
along through some Mines and Rocks, and as their sl^w consumption, produces a
perpetual smoke, so when the Air within is so much ratified, that it must o^en
it self, it throws up those masses of Mettle and Rock that shut it in; but how
this Fire draws in Air to nourish its Flame, is not so easily apprehended,
unless there is either a conveyance of Air under ground, by some undiscovered
vacuity, or a more insensible transmission of Air, through the pores of the
Earth. The heat of this Hill operates so much upon the Soil that lies upon it
toward the foot of it, that it produces the richest Wine about Naples, and it
also purifieth the Air so much, that the Village at bottom is thought the best
Air of the Country, so that many come from Naples thither for their health.
Ischia, that is an Island not far from Naples, does also sometimes spew out
fire.

On the other side of Naples to the West, one passes through the Cave that
pierces the Pausalippe, and is four hundred and forty paces long, for I walked
it on foot to take its true measure, it is twenty foot broad, and at first
forty foot high; but afterward it is but twenty foot high; the Stone cut out
here is good for building, so that as this opened the way from Puzzoli to
Naples, it was also a Quarry for the building of the Town: All along the way
here one discovers a strange boiling within the ground, for a little beyond
this grot of Pausalippe, as we come near the lake of Aniano, there is of the
one hand, a bath occasioned by a steam that rises so hot out of the ground,
that as soon as one goes a little into it, he finds himself all over in a
sweat, which is very proper for some Diseases, especially that which carries
its name from Naples: And about twenty paces from thence, there is another
little grot, that sends out a poisonous steam, that as it puts out a Candle, as
soon as it comes near it, so it infallibly kills any living Creature within
a minute of time; for in half that time a Dog, upon which the experiment is
commonly tried, the grot being from thence called Grotto di Cane, fell in a
convulsion. From that one goes to see the poor rests of Puzzoli, and of all
that Bay that was o^ce all about a tract of Towns, it having been the retreat
of the Romans, during the heats of the Summer. All the rarities here, have been
so often, and so copiously described, that I am sensible I can add nothing to
what is so well known. I will say nothing of the Amphitheather, or of Cicero
and Virgils Houses, for which there is nothing but a dubious Tradition; they
are ancient Brick buildings of the Roman way, and the Vaults of Virgil's House
are still entire; The Sulfatara is a surprising thing; here is a bottom out of
which the force of the Fire, that breaks out still in many places, in a thick
steaming smoke, that is full of Brimstone, did throw up about a hundred and
fifty years ago, a vast quantity of Earth which was carried above three miles
thence, and formed the Hill, called Monte Novo upon the ruins of a Town, that
was overwhelmed with this eruption, which is of a very considerable height;
they told me that there was before that time a Channel that went from the Bay
into the Lake of Averno, of which one sees the beginnings in the Bay at some
distance from the Shore; it carries still the name of Julio's Mole, and is
believed to have been made by Julius Caesar. But by the swelling of the ground
upon the eruption of the Sulfatara, this passage is stopped, and the Averno is
now fresh water, it is eighteen fathom deep. On the side of it is that amazing
Cave, where the Sibil is said to have given out her inspirations: the hewing it
out of the Rock, has been a prodigious work, for the Rock is one of the
hardest Stones in the World, and the Cave goes in seven hundred foot long,
twenty foot broad, and as I could guess eighteen foot high; And from the end of
this great Gallery, there is a narrow passage of three foot broad, two hundred
foot long, and seven high, to a little apartment, to which we go in a constant
sloping descent from the great Cave; Here are three little Rooms, in one of
them there are some rests of an old Mosaic, with which the Walls and Roof were
laid over; there is also a spring of Water, and a Bath in which it is supposed
the Sibil bathed her self; and from this Cave it is said that there runs a Cave
all along to Cuma, which is three long miles, but the passages is now choakt by
the falling in of the Rock in several places: This piece of work amazed me. I
did not much mind the popular opinion that is easily received there, that all
this was done by the Devil; the marks of the chizzel in all the parts of the
Rock shows that this is not a work of Nature. Certainly they had both much
leisure, and many hands at their command who set about it, and it seems to have
been wrought out with no other design but to subdue the people more entirely to
the conduct of the Priests that managed this Imposture, so busy and
industrious has the ambition and fraud of the Priests been in all Ages and in
all corrupt Religions. But of all the Se^nes of Noble objects that present it
self in the Bay of Puzzoli, the rests of Caligula's Bridge are the most
amazing, for there are yet standing eight or ten of the Pillars that supported
the Arches, and of some of the Arches the half is yet entire. I had not a line
with me to examine the depth of the Water where the furthest of those Pillars
is built, but my Water-man assured me it was fifty cubits. This I cannot
believe, but it is certainly so deep that one can scarce imagine how it was
possible to build in such a depth, and for the carrying off the Sea, that seems
yet more impossible. It is a Noble Monument of the profuse and extravagant
expense of a Brutal Tyrant, who made one of the vastest Bridges that ever was
attempted over three or four miles of Sea, merely to Sacrifice so great a
Treasure to his vanity: As for Agripina's Tomb, it is no great matter, only the
bas reliefs are yet en^ire. The mavelous Fish Pond is a great Basin of Water
wrought like a huge Temple, standing upon eight and forty great Pillars, all
hewed out of the Rock; and they are laid over with four crusts of the old
Plaster, which is now as hard as Stone; this is believed to be a work of
Nero's: and about a quarter of a mile from thence there is another vast work
which goes into a Rock; but at the entrance there is a noble Portico built of
Pillars of Brick, and as one enters into the Rock he finds a great many Rooms
regularly shaped, hewed out of the Rock, and all covered over with Plaster,
which is still entire, and so white that one can hardly think that it has not
been washed over since it was first made: there are a vast number of those
Rooms, they are said to be a hundred; from whence this Cave carries the name
of the Centum Camerae: This has been as expensive a work as it is useless, it
is entitled to Nero, and here they say he kept his Prisoners. But there is
nothing in all this bay that is both so curious and so useful as the Baths,
which seems to flow from the same reason, that is the cause of those cruptions
in the Vesuvio and Sulfatara, and the Grottos formerly mentioned; that as this
heat makes some Fountains there to be boiling hot, so it sends up a steam
through the Rock that does not break through the pores of the Stone where it is
hard, but where the Rock is soft and spungy, there the steams come through with
so melting a heat that a man is soon, at it were, dissolved in sweat; but if he
stoops low in the passages that are cut in the Rock he finds no heat, because
there the Rock is hard. Those steams, as they are all hot, so they are
impregnated with such Minerals, as they find in their way through the Rock; and
near this Bath there are Galleries hewed out of the Rock and faced with a
building: in which there are, as it were, Bedsteads made in the Walls, upon
which, those that come thither, to sweat for their health, lay their Quiles and
Bed-cloaths, and so come regularly out of their sweats.

It is certain that a man can no where pass a day of his life both with so much
pleasure, and with such advantage, as he finds in this journey to Puzzoli and
all along the Bay: but tho anciently this was all so well built, so peopled,
and so beautifully laid out, yet no where does one see more visibly what a
change time brings upon all places: for Naples has so entirely eat out this
place, and drawn its Inhabitants to it, that as Puzzoli it self is but a small
Village, so th^re is now no other in all this Bay, which was anciently built
almost all round, for there were seven big Towns upon it. Having thus told you
what I found most considerable in Naples, I cannot pass by that Noble remnant
of the Via Appia that runs along thirty miles of the way between it and Rome,
without making some mention of it: this highway is twelve foot broad, all made
of huge stones, most of them blew, and they are generally a foot and half large
on all sides: the strength of this cause-way appears in its long duration, for
it has lasted above eighteen hundred Years: and is in most places for several
miles together, as entire as when it was first made: and the botches that have
been made for mending such places, that have been worn out by time, shows a
very visible difference between the Ancient and the Modern way of Paving. One
thing seems strange, that the way is level with the Earth on both sides:
whereas so much w^ight as those Stones carry should have sunk the ground under
them by its pressure: Besides that the Earth, especially in low grounds,
receives a constant increase chiefly by the dust which the Winds or Brooks
carry down from the Hills, both which reasons should make a more sensible
difference between those ways and the soil on both sides: and this makes me
apt to believe, that anciently those ways were a little raised above the level
of the ground, and that a course of so many Ages has now brought them to an
equality: Those ways were chiefly made for such as go on foot: for as nothing
is more pleasant then to walk along them, so nothing is more inconvenient for
Horses and all sorts of carriage, and indeed Mulets are the only beasts of
burden that can hold out long in this Road, which beats all Horses after they
have gone it a little while. There are several rests of Roman Antiquities at
the Mole of Cajeta; but the Isle of Caprea, now called Crapa, which is a little
way into the Sea off from Naples, gave me a strange Idea of Tiberius's Reign,
since it is hard to tell whether it was more extraordinary to see a Prince
abandon the best Seats and Palaces of Italy, and shut himself up in a little
Island, in which I was told there was a Tradition of seven little Palaces that
he built in it; or to see so vast a body as the Roman Empire so governed by
such a Tyrannical Prince, at such a distance from the chief Scene, so that all
might have been reversed long before that the news of it could have been
brought to him. And as there is nothing more wonderful in Story then to see so
vast a State that had so great a sense of liberty, subdued by so brutal and so
voluptuous a man as Anthony, and so raw a youth as Augustus; so the wonder is
much improved when we see a Prince at a hundred and fifty miles distance, shut
up in an Island, carry the Reins of so great a body in his hand, and turn it
which way he pleased.

But now I come to Rome, which as it was once the Empress of the World in a
succession of many Ages, so has in it at present more curious things to
entertain the attention of a Traveller, then any other place in Europe. On the
side of Tuscany, the entry in to Rome is very surprising to strangers, for one
comes along for a great many miles, upon the remains of the Via Flamminia,
which is not indeed so entire as the Via Appia: yet there is enough left to
raise a just Idea of the Roman greatness, who laid such cause-ways all Italy
over. And within the Gate of the Porta di Populo, there is a Noble Obelisk, a
vast Fountain, two fine little Churches, like two Twins resembling one another,
as well as placed near one another, and on several hands one sees a long Vista
of streets. There is not a Town in these parts of the World, where the
Churches, Convents, and Palaces are so Noble, and where the other Buildings are
so mean, which indeed, discovers very visibly the misery under which the Romans
groan. The Churches of Rome are so well known, that I will not adventure on any
description of them, and indeed, I had too Transi^nt a view of them to make it
with that degree of exactness which the subject requires. St. Peter's alone
would make a big Book, not to say a long Letter. Its length, height and
breadth are all so exactly proportioned, and the eye is so equally possessed
with all these, that the whole, upon the first view, does not appear so vast as
it is found to be upon a more particular attention: and as the four Pillars
upon which the Cupulo rises, are of such a prodigious bigness, that one would
think they were strong enough to bear any superstructure whatsoever; so when
one climbs up to the top of that vast height, he wonders what Foundation can
bear so huge a weight; for as the Church is of a vast height, so the Cupulo
rises four hundred and fifteen big steps above the Roof of the Church. In the
height of the Concave of this Cupulo, there is a representation, that tho it
can hardly be seen from the floor below, unless one has a good sight, and so
it does not, perhaps, give much scandal, yet it is a gross indication of the
Idolatry of that Church, for the Divinity is there pictured as an ancient man
compassed about with Angels. I will say nothing of the great Altar, of the
Chair of S. P^ter, of the great Tombs; of which the three chief are Paul the
III. Urban the VIII. and Alexander the VII. nor of the vast Vaults under this
Church, and the remains of Antiquity that are reserved in them: nor will I
undertake a description of the adjoining Palace, where the Painting of the
Corridori, and of many of the Rooms by Raphael and Michael Angelo are so rich,
that one is sorry to see work of that value laid on Fresco, and which must by
consequence ware out too soon, as in several places it is almost quite lost
already. I could not but observe in the Sala Regin that is before the famous
Chapel of Sisto V. and that is all Painted in Fresco, one corner that
represents the murder of the renowned Admiral Chastilion, and that has
written under it these words, Rex Colinii necem probat: The vast length of the
Gallery on one side, and of the Library in another do surprise one; the Gardens
have many Statues of a most excessive value, and some good Fountains; but the
Gardens are ill entertained both here and in the Palace on the Quirinal. And,
indeed, in most of the Palaces of Rome, if there were but a small cost laid out
to keep all in good case that is brought together, at so vast a charge, they
would make another sort of show, and be looked at with much more pleasure: In
the apartments of Rome there are a great many things that offend the sight: The
Doors are generally mean, and the Locks meaner, except in the Palace of Prince
Borghese, where, as there is the vastest Collection of the best pieces, and of
the hands of the greatest Masters that is in all Europe, so the Doors and Locks
give not that distaste to the eye, that one finds elsewhere. The Flooring of the
Palaces is all of Brick; which is so very-mean, that one sees the disproportion
that is between the Floors and the rest of the Room, not without a sensible
preception and dislike. It is true, they say, their Air is so cold and moist in
Winter that they cannot pave with Marble; and the heat is sometimes so great in
Summer, that Flooring of Wood would crack with heat, as well as be eat up by
the vermin that would nestle in it. But if they kept in their great Palaces
servants to wash their Floors, with that care that is used in Holland, where
the Air is moister, and the climate is more productive of Vermin, they would
not find such effects from wooden Floors, as they pretend. In a word, there are
none that lay out so much wealth all at once, as the Italians do upon the
Building and Finishing of their Palaces and Gardens, and that afterward,
bestow so little on the preserving of them: another thing I observed in their
Palaces, there is, indeed, a great series of Noble rooms one within another, of
which their apartments are composed, but I did not find, at the end of the
apartments, where the Bed Chamber is, such a disposition of rooms for
back-stairs, dressing-rooms, closets, servants rooms, and other conveniences as
are necessary for accommodating the Apartment. It is true, this is not so
necessary for an apartment of State, in which Magnificence is more considered
then convenience; but I found the same want in those apartments in which they
lodged; so that notwithstanding all the riches of their Palaces, it can not be
said that they are well lodged in them, and their Gardens are yet less
understood, and worse kept then their Palaces. It is true, the Villa Borghese
ought to be excepted, where as there is a prodigious collection of bas reliefs,
with which the Walls are, as it were, covered all over, that are of a vast
value; so the statues within, of which some are of Porphiry, and others of
Touchstone, are amazing things: The whole grounds of this Park, which is about
three miles in compass, and in which there are six or seven lodges, are laid
out so sweetly, that I thought I was in an English Park when I walked over it.
The Villa Pamphilia is better situated upon a higher ground, and has more
Waterworks, and twice the extent of the other in Soil, but neither does the
House nor Statues approach to the riches of the other, nor are the grounds so
well laid out and so well kept. But for the Furniture of the Palaces of Rome,
the public apartments are all covered over with Pictures and for those
apartments in which they lodge they are generally furnished either with red
Velvet, or red Damask, with a broad gold Galloon at every breadth of the stuff,
and a gold Fringe at top and bottom, but there is very little Tapistry in Italy.

I have been carried into all this disgression, from the general view, that I
was giving you of the Popes Palace. I named one part of it which well engage me
into new digression, as it well deserves one, and that is the Library of the
Vatican: The Case is great, but that which is lodged in it is much greater; for
here is a collection of Books that fills a man's eye: There is first a great
Hall, and at the end of it there runs out on both sides, two Galleries of so
vast a length, that tho the half of them is already furnished with Books, yet
one would, hope that there is room left for more new Books then the World will
ever produce. The Heidelberg Library stands by it self, and fills the one
side of the Gallery, as the Duke of Vrbins Library of Manuscripts fills the
other. But tho these last are very fair and beautiful, yet they are not of ^^ch
Antiquity as those of Heidelberg: When it appe^red that I was come from
England, King Henry the VIIIs. Book of the seven Sacraments, with an
inscription writ upon it with his own hand to Pope Leo the X. was showed me;
together with a collection of some Letters that he writ to Ann Bolen of which
some are in English, and some in French. I that knew his hand well saw clearly
that they were no forgeries. There are not many Latin Manuscrip^s of great
Antiquity in this Library; some few of Virgils I saw writ in Capitals. But that
which took up alm^st half of one day that I spent at one time in this place,
related to the present dispute that is on foot between Mr. Schelstrate the
Library Keeper, and Mr. Maimbourg, concerning the Council of Constance. The two
points in debate are the words of the decree made in the fourth Session and the
Popes confirmation. In the fourth Session, according to the French Manuscripts,
a Decree was made, subjecting the Pope, and all other persons whatsoever, to
the Authority of the Council, and to the Decrees it was to make, and to the
Reformation it intended to establish both in the Head and the Members: which as
it implies that the Head was corrupted and needed to be reformed, so it sets
the Council so directly above the Pope, that this Session being confirmed by
the Pope, puts those who assert the Popes infallibility to no small straits:
For if Pope Martin, that approved this Decree was infallible, then this Decree
is good still, and if he was not infallible, no other Pope was infallible: To
all thi^ Schelstrate answers from his Manuscripts, that the words of a
Reformation, in Head and Members, are not in the Decree of that Session; and he
did show me several Manuscripts, of which two were evidently writ during the
sitting of the Council, and were not at all dashed, in which these words were
not. I know the hand and way of writing of that Age too well to be easily
mistaken in my judgment concerning those Manuscripts but if those words are
wanting, there are other words in them that seem to be much stronger for the
superiority of the Council above that Pope. For it is Decreed, that Popes, and
all other persons, were bound to submit to the decisions of the Council, as to
Faith: which words are not in the French Manuscripts: Upon this I told M.
Schelstrate that I thought the words in these Manuscripts were stronger then
the other: si^ce the word Reformation, as it was used in the tim^ of that
Council, belonged chiefly to the correcting of abuses, it being often applied
to the regulations that were made in the Monastick-Orders, when they were
brought to a more exact observation of the rule of their Order: So tho the
Council had decreed a Reformation both of Head and Members, I do not see that
this would import more than that the Papacy had fallen into some disorders that
needed a Reformation: and this is not denied even by those who assert the
Pope's infallibility: but a submission to points of Faith, that is expressly
asserted in the Roman Manuscripts, is a much more positive evidence against the
Pope's Infallibility: and the word Faith is not capable of so large a sense as
may be justly ascribed to Reformation. But this difference, in so main a point
b^tween Manuscripts concerning so late a Transaction, g^ve me an occasion to
reflect on the vast uncertainty of Tradition, especially of matters that are at
a great distance from us; when those that were so lately Transacted, are so
differently represented in Manuscripts, and in which, both those of Paris and
Rome seem to carry all possible evid^nces of sinc rity. As for the Popes
confirmation of that Decree, it is true by a General Bull, Pope Martin
confirmed the Council of Constance to such a period; but besides that, he made
a particular Bull, as Schelstrat assured me, in which he enumerated all the
Decrees that he confirmed, and among those, this Decree concerning the
Superiority of the Council is not named; this seemed to be of much more
importance, and therefore I desired to see the Original of the Bull: for their
seem to be just reasons to apprehend a forgery here: He promised to do his
endeavors, tho he told me that would not be easy, for the Bulls were strictly
kept; and the next day when I came, hoping to see it, I could not be admitted:
but he assured me that if that had not been the last day of my stay at Rome, he
would have procured a Warrant for my seeing the Original: so this is all I can
say as to the Authenticalness of that Bull: But supposing it to be genuine, I
could not agree to M. Schelstrate that the General Bull of Confirmation, ought
to be limited to the other that enumerates the particular D^crees: but since
that particular Bull was never discovered till he has found it out, it seems
it was s^cretly made, and did not pass according to the forms of the
Consistory: and was a fraudulent thing of which no noise was to be made in that
Age, and therefore in all the dispute that followed in the Concel of Basil
between the Pope and the Council, upon this very point, no mention was ever
made of it by either side: and thus it can have no force, unless it be to
discover the Artifices and fraud of that Court: that at the same time in which
the necessity of their affairs obliged the Pope to confirm the Decrees of the
Council, he contrived a secret Bull, which in another Age might be made use of,
to weaken the Authority of the General Confirmation that he gave: and therefore
a Bull that does not pass in due form and is not p o^ulgated, is of no
Authority: and so this Pretended Bull cannot limit the other Bull. There were
some other things, relating to this debate, that were showed me by M.
Schelstrate, but th^se being the most important, I mention them only. I will
not give you here a large account of the learned men at Rome, Bellori is
d^servedly Famous for his knowledge of the Greek and Egyptian Antiquities, and
for all that belongs to the Mythologies and superstitions of the Heathens, and
has a Closet richly furnished with things relating to those matters. Fabrelti
is justly celebrated for his Understanding of the Old Roman Architecture and
Fabrics. Padre Fabri is the chief Honor of the Jesuit's College, and is much
above the common rate, both for Philosophy, Mathematics, and Church History.
And he to whom I was the most obliged, Abbot Nazari has so general a view of
the several parts of learning, tho he has chiefly applied himself to
Philosophy and Math^maticks, and is a man of so engaging a civility, and used
my self in so particular a manner, that I owe him, as well as those others,
whom I have mentioned, and whom I had the Honor to see, all the
acknowledgments of esteem and gratitude that I can possibly make them.

One sees in Cardinal d'Estrees all the advantages of a high birth great parts,
a generous civility, and a measure of knowledge fair above what can be
expected from a person of his rank; but as he gave a noble protection to one of
the leardnest men that this Age has produced, Mr. Launnoy, who lived many
years with him, so it is visible, that he made a great progress by the
conversation of so extraordinary a pe son; and as for Theological learning,
there is now none of the College equal to him. Cardinal Howard is too well
known in England to need any character from me. The Elevation of his present
condition has not in the least changed him; he has all the sweetness and
Gentleness of temper that we saw in him in England, and he retains the
unaffected simplicity and humility of a Friar amidst all the dignity of the
Purple, and as he shows all the generous care and concern for his Countrymen
that they can expect from him; so I met with so much of it, in so many obliging
marks of his goodness for my self, that wen^ far beyond a common civility, that
I can^o^ enough acknowledge it. I was told the Popes Confessor was a very
extraordinary man for the Oriental Learning, which is but little known in Rome:
He is a Master of the Arabic Tongue, and has writ, as Abbot Nazari told me,
the learned Book against the Mohammedan Religion; that the World has yet
seen, but it is not yet Printed: He is not so much esteemed in Rome as he would
be elsewhere, for his Learning is not in vogue, and the School Divinity and
Casuistical Learning, being that for which Divines are most esteemed there; He
whose Studies lead him another way, is not so much valued as he ought to be,
and perhaps, the small account that the Pope makes of learned men, turns
somewhat upon the Confessor, for it is certain, that this is a Reign in which
Learning is very little encouraged.

Upon the general contempt that all the Romans have, for the present
Pontificate, one made a pleasant reflection to me, he said those Popes that
intended to raise their Families, as they saw the censure that this brought
upon them, so they studied to lessen it by other things that might soften the
Spirits of the people. No man did more for beautifying Rome, for finishing St.
Peter's, and the Library, and for furnishing Rome with water, then Pope Paul the
V. tho at the same time he did not forget his Family; and tho the other Popes
that have raised great Families, have not done this to so eminent a degree as
he did, yet there are many remains of their Magnifice^ce, whereas those Popes
that have not raised Families, have it seems thought that alone was enough to
maintain their reputation, and so they have not done much either to recommend
their Government to their Subject^, or their Reign to posterity; and it is very
plain, that the present Pope takes no great care of this. His life has been
certainly very innocent, and free of all those public scandals that make a
noise in the World, and there is at present a regularity in Rome, that
deserves great commendation, for public Vices are not to be seen there: His
personal sobriety is a so singular. One assured me that the expense of his
Table did not amount to a Crown a day, tho this is, indeed, short of Sisto V.
who gave order to his Steward never to exceed five and twenty Bajokes, that is
eighteen pence a day for his Diet. The Pope is very careful of his health, and
does never expose it, for upon the least disorder he shuts himself up in his
Chamber, and often keeps his Bed for the least indisposition many days; but
his Government is severe, and his Subjects are ruined.

And here one thing comes into my mind, which perhaps is not ill grounded,
that the poverty of a Nation, not only dispeoples it, by driving the people out
of it, but by weakening the natural fertility of the Subjects; for as men and
women well clothed, and well fed, that are not exhausted with perpetual
labor, and with the tearing anxieties that want brings with it, must be much
more lively then those that are pressed with want; so it is very likely that
the one must be much more disposed to pr^pagate then the other: and this
appeared more evident to me, when I compared the fruitfulness of Geneva and
Switzerland, with the barrenness that reigns over all Italy. I saw two
extraordinary instances of the copious production of Geneva: Mr. Tronchin that
was Professor of Divinity, and Father to the judicious and worthy Professor of
the same name, that is now there, died at the age of seven^y six years, and had
a hundred and fifteen pers^ns all alive, that had either descended from him,
called him Father. And Mr. Calendrin a pious and laborious Preacher of that
Town, that is descended from the Family of the Calendrini; who r^ceiving the
Reformation about a hundred and fifty years ago, left Lucca their Native City
with the Tur^e ini, the Di^dati, and the Bourlamacchi, and some others that
came and settled at Geneva: He is now but seven and forty years old, and yet he
has a hundred and five persons that are descended of his Brothers and Sisters,
or married to them; so that if he lives but to eighty, and the Family
multiplieth as it has done; he may see some hundreds that will be in the same
relation to him; but such things as these are not to be found in Italy.

There is nothing that de^ights a Stranger more in Rome, then to see the great
Fountains of Water that are almost in all the c^rners of it: That o^d A^uaduct
which Paul the V. restored comes from a collection of Sources, five and thirty
miles distant from Rome, that runs all the way upon an Aquaduct in a Channel
that is vaulted and is liker a River then a Fountain: It breaks out in five
several Fountains, of which some give water above a foot square. That of Sixtus
the V. the great Fountain of Aqua Travi, has yet no decoration, but
discharges a prodigious quantity of Water. The glorious Fountain in the Piazza
Nav^na, that has an air of greatness in it that surprizeth one, the Fountain
in the Piazza de Spagna, those before St. Peter's: and the Palazzo Farnese, with
many others, furnish Rome so plentifully, that almost every private House has
a Fountain that runs continually: All the^e I say are noble decorations, that
carry an usefulness with them that cannot be enough commended: and gives a much
greater Idea of those who have taken care to supply this City, with one of the
chief pleasures and conveniences of life, then of oath is who have laid out
millions, merely to bring quantities of Water to give the eye a little
diversion, which would have been laid out much more nobly and usefully, and
would have more effectually eternized their Fame, if they had been employed as
the Romans did their Treasure^ in furnishing great Towns with Water.

There is an universal Civility that reigns among all sorts of people at Rome,
which in a great measure flows from their Government, for every man, being
capable of all the advancements of that State, since a simple Ecclesiastic may
become one of the Monsignori: and of these may be a C^rdinal, and one of these
may be chosen Pope, this makes every man behave himself toward all other
persons with an exactness of respect: for no man knows what any other may grow
to. But this makes professions of esteem and kindness go so promiscuously to
all sorts of persons, that one ought not to build too much on them. The
conversation of Rome is generally upon news, for tho there is no news Printed
there, yet in the several Anticham^ers of the Cardinals (where if they make any
c^nsiderable figure, there are Assemblies of those that make their Court to
them) one is sure to hear all the news of Europe together with many
speculations upon what passes. At the Queen of Swedens all that relates to
Germany or the North is ever to be found, and that Princess that must ever
reign among all that have a true taste, either of wit or learning, has still in
her drawing Rooms the best Court of the Strangers, and her civility together,
with the vast variety with which she furrisheth her conversation, makes her to
be the Chi^f of all the living rarities that one sees in R^me: I will not u^e
her own word to my self, which was, that she now grew to be one of the
Antiquities of Rome. The Ambassadors of Crowns, who live here in another form
than in any other Court, and the Cardinals and Prelates of the several Nations,
that do all meet and center here, makes that there is more news in Rome th^n
any where: For Priests and the men of Religious Orders, write larger and more
particular Letters, than any other sort of men. But such as apply themselves to
make their Court h^re, are condemned to a loss of time that had need be well
recompenc^d, for it is very great. As for one that Studies Antiquities,
Pictures, Statues, or Music, there is more entertainment for him at Rome, than
in all the rest of Europe, but if he has not a taste of these things, he will
soon be weary of a place where the Conversation is always g^neral, and where
there is little sincerity or openness practiced, and by consequence, where
friendship is little understood. The Women here b^gin to be a little more
conversable, tho a Nation naturally jealous, will hardly allow a great liberty
in a City that is composed of Ecclesiastics; who being denied the privilege
of Wives of their own, are suspected of being sometimes too bold with the Wives
of others: The liberties that were taken in the Constable of Naples's Palace,
had ind^ed disgusted the Romans much at that freedom, which had no bounds. But
the Duchess of Bracciano, that is a French Woman, has by the exactness of her
deportment, amidst all the innocents Freedoms of a Noble conversation,
recovered in a great measure, the credit of those liberties, that Ladies beyond
the Mountains, practice with all the strictness of Virtue; For she receiv^th
visits at public hours, and in Public Rooms, and by the liveliness of her
conversation, makes that her Court is the pleasantest Assembly of Strangers,
th^^ is to be found in any of the Palaces of the Italians at Rome.

I will not engage in a d^scription of Rome, either ancient or modern, this
has been done so often, and with such exactness, that nothing can be add^d to
what has been already published. It is certain that when one is in the
Capitol, and sees those poor rests of what once it was, he is surprised to see
a building of so great a fame sunk so low, that one can scarce imagine that it
was once a Castle, situated upon a Hill able to hold out against a Siege of
the Gauls: The Tarpeian Rock is now of so small a fall, that a man would think
it no great matter, for his diversion, to leap over it: and the shape of the
ground has not been so much altered on one side, as to make us think it is
very much changed on the other. For Severus's Triumphal Arch, which is at the
foot of the Hill on the other side, is not now buried above two foot within the
ground, as the vast Amphitheater of Titus is not above three foot sunk under
the level of the ground. Within the Capitol one sees many Noble remnants of
Antiquity, but none is more glorious, as well as more useful, then the Tables
of their Consuls which are upon the Walls: and the Inscription on the Columna
Rostrola, in the time of the first Punick War, is without doubt the most
valuable Antiquity in Rome. From this all along the sacred way, one finds
such remnants of Old Rome in the ruins of the Temples, in the Triumphal
Arches, in the Portico's, and other remains of that Glorious Body, that as one
cannot see these too often, so every time one sees them, they kindle in him
vast Idea's of that Republic, and make him reflect on that which he learned in
his youth with great pleasure. From the height of the Convent of Araceli, a man
has a full view of all the extent of Rome, but literally, it is now, seges ubi
Roma fuit; for the parts of the City, that were most inhabited anciently, are
those that are now laid in great Gardens, or, as they call them, Vineyards, of
which some are half a mile in compass: The vastness of the Roman magnificence
and luxury, is that which passes imagination; the prodigious Amphitheater of
Titus, that could conveniently receive eighty five thousand spectators; the
great extent of the Circus maximus; the Vaults where the Waters were received
that furnished Titus's baths, and above all Diocletian's baths, tho built when
the Empire was in it is decay, are so far above all modern buildings, that there
is not so much as room for a comparison. The extent of those baths is above
half a mile in compass: the vastness of the rooms in which the Bathers might
swim, of which the Carthusian's Church, that yet remains entire, is one, and
the many great Pillars all of one stone of Marble, beautifu^ly spotted, are
things of which these latter Ages are not capable. The beauty of their Temples,
and of the Portico's before them is amazing, chiefly that of the Rotunda, where
the Fabric without looks as mean, being only Brick, as the Architecture is
bold: for it rises up in a Vault, and yet at the Top there is an open left of
thirty foot in Diameter, which, as it is the only Window of the Church, so it
fills it with light, and is the hardiest piece of Architecture that ever was
made.

The Pillars of the Portico are also the noblest in Rome, they are the highest
and biggest that one can see any where all of one Stone: and the numbers of
those Ancient Pillars with which, not only many of the Churches are beautified,
chiefly St. Mary Maggiore, and St. John in the Lateran, but with which even
private Houses are adorned, and of the fragments of which there are such
multitudes in all the streets of Rome, gives a great Idea of the
expence-fulness of the Old Romans in their buildings: for the hewing and
fetching a few of those Pillars, must have Cost more than whole Palaces do now:
since most of them were brought from Greece: Many of these Pillars are of
Porphiry, others of Jasp, others of Granated Marble, but the greatest number is
of white Marble: The two Columns Trajans and Antonins: the two Horses that are
in the Mount Cavallo, and the other two Horses in the Capitol, which have not
indeed the postures and motion of the other, The brass Horse that as is
believed, carries Marcus Aurelius; the remains of Nero's Colossus, the Temple
of Bacchus near the Catacomb of S. Agnus, which is the entirest and the least
altered of all the Ancient Temples: The great Temple of Peace; those of the Sun
and Moon: that of Romulus and Romus, (which I considered as the ancientest
Fabric that is now left, for it is little and simple, and stands in such a
place, that when Rome grew so costly, it could not have been let alone
unchanged, if it had not been that it was reverenced for its Antiquity) the
many other Portico's, the Arches of Severus, of Titus, and Constantine, in the
last of which, one sees that the Sculpture of his age, was much sunck from what
it had been, only in the Top there are some bas reliefs that are clearly of a
much ancienter time, and of a better manner. And that which exceeds all the
rest, the many great Aqueducts that come from all hands and run over a vast
distance, are things which a man cannot see often enough, if he would form in
himself a just Idea of the vastness of that Republic, or rather Empire: There
are many Statues and Pillars, and other Antiquities of great value dug up in
all the quarters of Rome these last hundred and fourscore years, since Pope Leo
the Xs. time; who as he was the greatest Patron of Learning and Arts, that
perhaps, ever was, so was the generousest Prince that ever Reigned; and it was
he that first set on foot the inquiring into the Riches of Old Rome, that lay
till his time, for the most part, hid under ground; and indeed if he had been
less scandalous in his Impiety and Atheism, of which neither he nor his Court
were so much as ashamed, he had been one of the most celebrated persons of any
Age. Soon after him Pope Paul the III. gave the ground of the Monte Palatino to
his Family: But I was told that this large piece of ground, in which one should
look for the greatest Collection of the Antiquities of the highest value, since
this is the ruin of the Palace of the Roman Emperors, has never been yet
searched into with any exactness: So that when a curious Prince comes that is
willing to employ many hands in digging up and down this Hill, we may expect
new Scenes of Roman Antiquities. But all this matter would require Volumes, and
therefore I have only named these things, because I can add nothing to those
copious descriptions that have been so often made of them. Nor will I say any
thing of the modern Palaces or the Ornaments of them, either in Pictures or
Statues, which are things that carry one so far, that it is not easy to give
bounds to the discriptions into which one finds himself carried, when he once
enters upon so fruitful a subject. The number of the Palaces is great, and
every one of them has enough to fix the attention of a Traveller, till a new
one drives the former out of his thoughts: It is true, the Palestrina, the
Borghese, and the Farnese, have somewhat in them that leave an impression which
no new objects can wear out: and as the last has a Noble square before it with
two great Fountains in it, so the Statue of Hercules and the Bull that are
below, and the Gallery above Stairs are unvaluable, the Roof of the Gallery is
one of the best Pieces of Painting that is extant, being all of Carrachio's
hand, and there are in that Gallery the greatest number of Heads of the Greek
Philosophers and Poets that I ever saw together: That of Homer, and that of
Socrates, were the two that struck me most, chiefly the latter, which as it is,
without dispute, a true Antic, so it carries in it all the characters that
Plato and Xenophon give us of Socrates; the flat Nose, the broad Face, the
simplicity of Look, and the mean appearance which that great Philosopher made,
so that I could not return often enough to look upon it, and was delighted with
this more then with all the wonders of the Bull, which is indeed a Rock of
Marble cut out into a whole Scene of Statues; but as the History of it is not
well known, so there are such Faults in the Sculpture, that tho it is all
extreme fine, yet one sees it has not the exactness of the best times. As for
the Churches and Convents of Rome, as the number, the vastness, the riches,
both of Fabric, Furniture, Painting and other Ornaments amaze one, so here
again a Stranger is lost, and the Convent that one sees last, is always the
most admired: I confess the Minerva, which is the Dominicans, where the
Inquisition sifieth, is that which makes the most sensible Impression upon one
that passes at Rome for an Heretic, tho except one commits great follies,
he is in no danger there, and the poverty that reigns in that City makes them
find their interest so much in using Strangers well, whatsoever their Religion
may be, that no man needs be afraid there: And I have more then ordinary
reason to ackowledge this who having ventured to go thither, after all the
liberty that I had taken to write my thoughts freely both of the Church and See
of Rome, and was known by all with whom I conversed there, yet met with the
highest civilities possible among all sorts of people, and in particular, both
among the English and Scottish Jesuits, tho they knew well enough that I was
no friend to their Order.

In the Gallery of the English Jesuits, among the Pictures of their Martyrs, I
did not meet with Garnet; for perhaps that name is so well known, that they
would not expose a Picture, with such a name on it, to all Strangers, yet
Oldcorn, being a name less known, is hung there among their Martyrs, tho he was
as clearly convicted of the Gun-pouder Treason, as the other was: and it seemed
a little strange to me, to see that at a time in which, for other reasons, the
Writers of that Communion have not thought fit, to deny the truth of that
Conspiracy, a Jesuit convicted of the blackest crime that ever was projected,
should be reckoned among their Martyrs. I saw likewise there the Original of
these Emblematical Prophecies, relating to England, that the Jesuits have had
at Rome near sixty years, and of which I had some time ago procured a Copy, so
I found my Copy was true. I happened to be at Rome, during St. Gregory's Fair and
Feast, which lasted several days. In his Church the Hosty was exposed: and
from that, all that came thither, went to the Chapel that was once his House,
in which his Statue and the Table where he served the poor, are preserved: I
saw such vast numbers of people there, that one would have thought all Rome was
got together. They all kneeled down to his Statue, and after a prayer said to
it, they kissed his foot, and every one touched the Table with his Beads, as
hoping to draw some virtue from it. I will add nothing of the several Obelisks
and Pillars that are in Rome, of the celebrated Chapels that are in some of
the great Churches, in particular those of Sixtus the V. and Paul the V. in
Santa Maria Maggiore, of the Water works in the Quirinal, the Vatican, and in
many of the Vineyards: Nor will I go out of Rome to describe Frescati, (for
Tivoly I did not see) The young Prince Borgese, who is indeed one of the
glories of Rome, as well for his Learning as for his Virtue, did me the Honor
to carry me thither with those two learned Abbots Fabretri and Nazari, and
entertained me with a magnificence that became him better to give, than me to
receive. The Waterworks in the Aldobrandin Palace have a magnificence in them
beyond all that I ever saw in France, the mixture of Wind with the Water, and
the Thunders and Storms that this makes is noble: The Waterworks of the
Ludovisio, and the Monte Dragone, have likewise a greatness in them that is
natural, and indeed the riches that one meets with in all places within Doors
in Italy, and the poverty that one sees every where abroad, are the most
unsuitable things imaginable: but it is very likely that a great part of their
moveable Wealth will be ere long carried into France; for as soon as any
Picture or Statue of great value is offered to be sold, those that are employed
by the King of France, do presently buy it up, so that as that King has
already, the greatest collection of Pictures that is in Europe, he will very
probably in a few years more, bring together the chief Treasures of Italy.

I have now given you an account of all that appeared most remarkable to me in
Rome. I shall to this add a very extraordinary piece of Natural History, that
fell out there within these two years, which I had first from those two learned
Abbots Fabretti and Nazari, and that was afterward more authentically
confirmed to me by Cardinal Howard, who was one of the Congregation of
Cardinals that examined and judged the matter. There were two Nuns near Rome,
one as I remember was in the City, and the other not far from it, who, after
they had been for some years in a Nunnery, perceived a very strange change in
Nature, and that their Sex was altered, which grew by some degrees a total
alteration in one: and tho the other was not so entire a change, yet it was
visible she was more Man than Woman; upon this the matter was looked into: That
which naturally offers it self here, is that these two had been always what
they then appeared to be; but that they had gone into a Nunnery in a disguise
to gratify a brutal appetite. But to this, when I proposed it, answer was
made, that as the breasts of a Woman that remained still, did in a great
measure shake off that objection, so the proofs were given so fully of their
having been real females, that there was no doubt left of that, nor had they
given any sort of scandal in the change of their Sex; And if there had been any
room left to suspect a cheat or disguise, the proceedings would have been both
more severe and more secret: and these persons would have been burnt, or at
least put to death in some terrible manner. Some Physicians and Chyrurgions
were appointed to examine the matter, and at last, after a long and exact
enquiry, they were judged to be absolved from their vows, and were dismissed
from the obligation of a Religious life, and required to go in men's habit. One
of them was a Valet de Chamber to a Roman Marquess, when I was there: I heard
of this matter only two days before I left Rome, so that I had not time to
enquire after it more particularly; but I judged it so extraordinary, that I
thought it was worth communicating it to so curious an Inquirer into nature.

And since I am upon the subject of the changes that have been made in nature,
I shall add one of another sort that I examined while I was at Geneva. There is
a Minister of S. Gervais, Mr. Gody, who has a Daughter, that is now Sixteen
years old: Her Nurse had an extraordinary thickness of hearing, at a year old,
the Child spoke all those little words that Children begin usually to learn at
that age, but she made no progress; yet this was not observed, till it was too
late, and as she grew to be two years old, they perceived there that she had
lost her hearing, and was so deaf that ever since tho she hears great noises,
yet she hears nothing that one can speak to her. It seems while the milk of her
Nurse, was more abundant, and that the Child sucked more moderately the first
year, those humors in the blood and milk had not that effect on her, that
appeared after she came to suck more violently: and that her Nurses milk being
in less quantity, was thicker, and more charged with that vapor that
occasioned the deafness. But this Child has by observing the motions of the
mouths and lips of others, acquired so many words, that out of these she has
formed a sort of jargon, in which she can hold conversation whole days with
those that can speak her own Language. I could understand some of her words,
but could not comprehend a period, for it seemed to be a confused noise: She
knows nothing that is said to her, unless she sees the motion of their mouths
that speak to her; so that in the night, when it is necessary to speak to her,
they must light a Candle: Only one thing appeared the strangest part of the
whole narration: She has a Sister with whom she has practiced her Language
more than with any other: and in the night by laying her hand on her Sisters
mouth, she can perceive by that, what she says, and so can discourse with her
in the Night. It is true, her Mother told me that this did not go far, and that
she found out only some short period in this manner, but it did not hold out
very long: Thus this young Woman without any pains taken on her, has merely by
a natural sagacity found out a method of holding discourse, that does in a
great measure lessen the misery of her deafness. I examined this matter
critically, but only the Sister was not present, so that I could not see how
the conversation past between them in the dark.

But before I give over writting concerning this place, I cannot hinder my
self, from giving you an account of a conversation that I had with one of the
most Celebrated persons that lives in it. I was talking concerning the credit
that the Order of the Jesuits had every where; It was said that all the World
mistrusted them, and yet by a strange sort of contradiction all the World
trusted them, and tho it was well known that every Jesuit was truer to the
Interests of his Order, than he could be to the Interests of any Prince
whatsoever, yet those Princes that would be very careful not to suffer spies to
come into their Courts or into their Councils suffered those spies to come into
their breasts and Consciences: and tho Princes were not generally very tender
in those parts, yet as they had often as much guilt, so they had sometimes as
much fear as other People, which a Dextrous spy knew well how to manage: Upon
which that person that pretended to be a zealous Catholic, added, that for
their part they considered only the Character that the Church gave to a Priest;
and if the Church qualified him to do the functions of a Priest, they thought
it very needless to inquire after other personal Qualities, which were but
common things, whereas the other was all Divine. On the Contrary, they thought
it was so much the better to have to do with a poor Ignorant Priest: for then
they had to do only with the Church, and not with the man. Pursuant to this,
that persons Confessor was the greatest and the most notorious block head that
could be found, and when they were asked why they made use of so weak a Man,
they answered, because they could not find a weaker: and when ever they found
one better qualified that way, if it were a groom or a footman that got into
Priest's Orders, they would certainly make use of him. For they would ask
Council of a friend; but they knew no other use of a Confessor, but to Confess
to him, and to receive Absolution from him: and in so doing, they pretended
they acted as became a true Catholic, that considered only the power of the
Church in the Priest, without regarding any thing else.

So far have I entertained you with the short ramble that I made, which was too
short to deserve the name of Traveling, and therefore the enquiries or
Observations that I could make, must be received with the abatement that ought
to be made for so short a stay: and all will be of a piece, when the remarks
are as slight, as the abode I made in the places through which I past was
short. I have avoided the troubling you with things that are commonly known, so
if I have not entertained you with a long recital of ordinary matters, yet I
have told you nothing but what I saw and knew to be true, or that I had from
such hands, that I have very good reason to believe it: and I fancy that the
things which made the greatest impression on my self, will be acceptably
received by you, to whom, as upon many accounts, I owe all the expressions of
esteem and gratitude that I can ever pay; so I had a more particular reason
that determined me to give you, so full an account of all I saw and observed:
for as you were pleased at parting to do me the Honor to desire me to
communicate to you such things as appeared most remarkable to me, so I found
such a vast advantage in many places, but more particularly at Venice, Rome and
Naples, by the happiness I have of being known to you, and of being so far
considered by you, that I could give a Copious Account both of your person and
Studies, to those in whom your curious discoveries had kindled that esteem for
you, which all the World pays both to you and to your immortal enquiries into
nature, which are among the peculiar blessings of this Age: and that are read
with no less care and pleasure in Italy then in England. This was so well
received, that I found the great advantage of this Honor I did my self, in
assuming the glorious Title of one of your friends, and I owe a great part of
that distinction which I met with, to this favorable character that I gave my
self; so that if I made any progress in the enquiries, that so short a stay
could enable one to make, I owe it in so a peculiar a manner to you, that this
return that I make is but a very small part of that I owe you, and which I will
be endeavoring to pay you to the last moment of my life.

BOOK III.
THE FIFTH LETTER.
From Nimmegen, the 20. of May 1686. SIR,
I Thought I had made so full a point at the conclusion of my last Letter, that
I should not have given you the trouble of reading any more Letters of the
Volume of the former: But new Scenes and new Matter offering themselves to me,
I fancy you will be very gentle to me, if I Engage you again to two or three
Hours reading. From Civita Vecchia I came to Marseilles, where if there were a
Road as Safe as the Harbor is covered; and if the Harbor were as large as it
is convenient, it were certainly one of the most important places in the World;
all is so well defended, that it is with respect either to Storms or Enemies
the securest Port that can be seen any where. The Freedoms of this place,
though it is now at the mercy of the Citadel, are such, and its situation
draws so much Trade to it, that there one sees another appearance of wealth
then I found in any Town of France, and there is a new street lately built
there, that for the beauty of the buildings, and the largeness of the street,
is the Noblest I ever saw. There is in that Port a perpetual heat, and the Sun
was so strong in the Christians week, that I was often driven off the Key. I
made a Tour from thence through Provence, Languedoc, and Dauphine. I will offer
you no account of Nismes, nor of the Amphitheatre in it, or the Pont du Gar
near it; which as they are stupendous things, so they are so copiously
described by many, and are so generally known to the English Nation, that if
you have never gone that way your self, yet you must needs have received so
particular a relation of them from those that have seen them on their way to
Montpelier, that I judge it needless to enlarge upon them: Nor will I say any
thing of the Soil, the Towns, or any other remarkable things that I found there.

I have a much stronger inclination to say somewhat, concerning the persecution
which I saw in its rage and utmost fury; and of which I could give you many
instances that are so much beyond all the common measures of barbarity and
cruelty, that I confess they ought not to be believed, unless I could give more
positive proofs of them, than are fitting now to be brought forth: and the
particulars that I could tell you are such, that if I should relate them with
the necessary circumstances of time, place, and persons, these might be so
fatal to many that are yet in the power of their Enemies, that my regard to
them restrains me. In short I do not think that in any Age there ever was such
a violation of all that is sacred, either with relation to God or Man: And what
I saw and knew there from the first hand, has so confirmed all the Idea's that
I had taken from Books of the cruelty of that Religion, that I hope the
impression that this has made upon me shall never end but with my life: The
applauses that the whole Clergy give to this way of proceeding, the many
Panegyricks that are already writ upon it, of which, besides the more pompous
ones that appear at Paris, there are numbers writ by smaller Authors in every
Town of any note there; and the Sermons that are all flights of flattery upon
this subject, are such evident demonstrations of their sense of this matter;
that what is now on foot may be well term^d the Act of the whole Clergy of that
Kingdom, which yet has been hitherto esteemed the most moderate part of the
Roman Communion. If any are more moderate than others; and have not so far laid
off human nature as not to go in entirely into those bloody practices, yet they
dare not own it, but whisper it in secret as if it were half Treason: but for
the greater part, they do not only magnify all that is done, but they animate
even the Dragoons to higher degrees of rage: and there was such a heat spread
over all the Country, on this occasion, that one could not go into any
Ordinary, or mix in any promiscuous conversation, without finding such effects
of it, that it was not easy for such as were touched with the least degree of
compassion for the miseries that the poor Protestants suffered, to be a witness
to the Insultings that they must meet with in all places. Some perhaps imagine
that this has not been approved in Italy, and it is true there were not any
public rejoycings upon it at Rome; no Indulgences nor Te Deums were heard of:
And the Spanish faction being so prevalent there, it is not strange if a course
of proceedings, that is without an example, was set forth, by all that were of
that interest, in its proper colors; of which I met with some instances my
self, and could not but smile to see some of the Spanish Faction so far to
forget their Courts of Inquisition as to argue against the Conversions by the
Dragoons, as a reproach to the Catholic Religion. Yet the Pope was of another
mind, for the Duke d'Estrees gave him an account of the Kings proceedings in
this matter very copiously, as he himself related it. Upon which the Pope
approved all, and expressed a great satisfaction in every thing that the King
had done in that matter; and the Pope added, that he found some Cardinals [as I
remember the Duke d'Estrees said two] were not pleased with it, and had taken
the liberty to censure it, but the Pope said, they were to blame: The Duke
d'Estrees did not name the two Cardinals, though he said he believed he knew
who they were: and it is very likely that Cardinal Pio was one, for I was told
that he spoke freely enough of this matter. I must take the liberty to add one
thing to you, that I do not see that Great Monarch is to be so much blamed in
this matter as his Religion is, which, without question, obliges him to
extirpate Heretics, and not to keep his faith to them: so that instead of
censuring him, I must only lament his being bred up in a Religion that does
certainly oblige him to divest himself of humanity, and to violate his faith,
whenever the cause of his Church and Religion requires it: Or if there is
any thing in this conduct that cannot be entirely justified from the principles
of that Religion, it is this, that he does not put the Heretics to death out
of hand, but that he forces them, by all the extremities possible, to sign an
abjuration, that all the World must needs see is done against their
Consciences: and this being the only end of their miseries, those that would
think any sort of death a happy conclusion of their sufferings, seeing no
prospect of such a glorious issue out of their troubles, are prevailed on by
the many lingering deaths of which they see no end, to make Shipwreck of their
faith: This appearance of mercy in not putting men to death, does truly verify
the character that Solomon gives of the tender mercies of the wicked, that
they are cruel.

But I will stop here, though it is not easy to retire from so copious a
subject, that as it affords so much matter, so upon many accounts raises a
heat of thought that is not easily governed. I will now lead you to a Scene
that gives less passion.

I past the Winter at Geneva, with more satisfaction that I had thought it was
possible for me to have found any where out of England: though that received
great allaies from the most lamentable Stories that we had every day from
France: but there is a sorrow by which the heart is made better. I ought to
make the most public acknowledgments possible for the Extraordinary Civilities
that I met with in any one particular: but that is too low a Subject to
entertain you with it. That which pleased me most, was of a more public
nature, before I left Geneva, the numbers of the English there was such, that I
found we could make a small Congregation. For we were Twelve or Fourteen, so I
addressed my self to the Council of Twenty five for liberty, to have our own
worship in our own Language, according to the English Liturgy. This was
immediately granted in so obliging a manner, that as there was not one person
that made any exception to it, so they sent one of their body to me, to let me
know that in case our number should grow to be so great, that it were fit for
us to assemble in a Church, they would grant us one, which had been done in
Queen Mary's reign: but till then we might hold our assemblies as we thought
fit. So after that time, during the rest of my stay there, we had every Sunday
our devotions according to the Common Prayer, Morning and Evening: and at the
Evening Prayer, I preached in a Room that was indeed too large for our small
Company, but there being a considerable number in Geneva that Understand
English and in particular some of the Professors and Ministers, we had a great
many strangers that met with us: and the last Sunday I gave the Sacrament
according to the way of the Church of England, and upon this occasion I found a
general joy in the Town, for this that I had given them an opportunity of
expressing the respect they had for our Church, and as in their public Prayers
they always prayed for the Churches of Great Britain, as well as for the King,
so in private discourse they showed all possible esteem for our Constitutions,
and they spoke of the unhappy divisions among us, and of the Separation that
was made from us, upon the account of our Government and Ceremonies with great
regret and dislike. I shall name to you only two of their Professors, that as
they are Men of great distinction, so they were the Persons with whom I
conversed the most. The one is Mr. Turretin, a Man of great Learning, that by
his Indefatigable Study and Labor has much worn out and wasted his strength;
amidst all the affluence of a great plenty of Fortune to which he was born, one
discerns in him all the modesty of a humble and mortified temper, and of an
active and fervent charity, proportioned to his abundance or rather beyond it;
and there is in him such a melting zeal for Religion, as the present
conjuncture calls for, with all the seriousness of piety and devotion, which
shows it self both in private conversation and in his most edifying Sermons by
which he enters deep into the consciences of his Hearers. The other is Mr.
Tronchin, a Man of a strong head, and of a clear and correct Judgment; who has
all his thoughts well digested; his conversation has an engaging charm in it
that cannot be resisted. He is a Man of Extraordinary virtue and of a readiness
to oblige and serve all Persons, that has scarce any measures. His Sermons have
a sublimity in them that strikes the hearer as well as it edifies him. His
thoughts are noble, and his Eloquence is Masculine and exact, and has all the
Majesty of the Chair in it, tempered with all the softness of persuasion, so
that he not only convinces his Hearers, but subdues them and triumphs over
them. In such Company it was no wonder if time seemed to go off too fast, so
that I left Geneva with a concern, that I should not have felt in leaving any
place out of the Isle of Britain.

From Geneva, I went a second time through Switzerland to Basile: At Avanche I
saw the Noble fragments of a great Roman Work, which seems to have been the
Portico to some Temple: the heads of the Pillars are about four foot square of
the Jonick Order: The Temple has been dedicated to Neptune or some Sea god;
for on the fragments of the Architrave, which are very beautiful, there are
Dolphins and Sea-horses in bas-reliefs; and the neighborhood of the place to
the Lakes of Iverdun and Morat makes this more evident: there is also a Pillar
standing up in its full height, or rather the corner of a building, in which
one sees the rests of a regular Architecture in two ranks of Pillars: If the
ground near this were carefully searched, no doubt it would discover more rests
of that Fabric. Not far from this is Morat; and a little on this side of it is
a Chapel, full of the bones of the Burgundians that were killed by the
Switzers, when this place was besieged by the famous Charles Duke of Burgundy,
who lost a great Army before it, that was entirely cut off by the besieged; the
inscription is very extraordinary, especially for that Age: for the bones being
so piled up that the Chapel is quite filled with them: the inscription bears,
that Charles Duke of Burgundy's Army having besieged Morat, Hoc sui Monumentum
reliquit, had left that Monument behind it. It cannot but seem strange to one
that views Morat, to imagine how it was possible for a Town so situated, and so
slightly fortified, to hold out against so powerful a Prince and so great an
Army that brought Cannon before it. I met with nothing remarkable between this
and Basile, except that I staid sometime at Bern, and knew it better; and at
this second time it was, that my Lord Advoyer d'Erlach gave order to show me
the Original Records of the famous Process of the four Dominicans; upon which I
have retoucht the Letter that I writ to you last year, so that I now send it to
you with the corrections and enlargements, that this second stay at Bern gave
me occasion to make.

Basile is the Town of the greatest extent of all Switzerland, but it is not
inhabited in proportion to its extent. The Rhine makes a crook before it: and
the Town is situated on a rising ground, which has a noble effect on the eye,
when one is on the Bridge, for it looks like a Theater. Little Basile on the
other side of the Rhine, is almost a fourth part of the whole: The Town is
surrounded with a Wall and Ditch, but it is so exposed on so many sides, and
has now so dreadful a Neighbor within a quarter of a League of it, the Fort
of Huningh, that it has nothing to trust to, humanly speaking, but its Union
with the other Cantons. The maxims of this Canton have hindered its being better
peopled than it is, the advantages of the Burgership are such, that the
Citizens will not share them with strangers; and by this means they do not
admit them. For I was told, that during the last War, that Alsatia was so often
the seat of both Armies, Basile having then a neutrality, it might have been
well filled, if it had not been for this maxim. And it were a great happiness
to all the Cantons, if they could have different degrees of Burgership, so that
the lower degrees might be given to strangers for their encouragement to come
and live among them: and the higher degrees which qualify men for the
advantageous Employments of the State, might be reserved for the ancient
Families of the Natives. Basile is divided into sixteen Companies, and every
one of these has four Members in the little Council, so that it consists of
sixty four: But of those four, two are chosen by the Company it self, who are
called the Masters, and the other two are chosen by the Council out of the
Company; and thus as there are two sorts of Councellers, chosen in those
different manners, there are also two chief Magistrates. There are two
Burghermasters that Reign by turns, and two Zunst-Masters that have also their
turns, and all is for life: And the last are the heads of the Companies, like
the Roman Tribunes of the people. The Fabric of the Stadt-House is ancient;
there is very good Painting in fresco upon the Walls; one Piece has given much
offense to the Papists, though they have no reason to blame the Reformation for
it; since it was done several years before it, in the year 1510. It is a
representation of the Day of Judgment, and after Sentence given, the Devil is
represented driving many before him to Hell, and among these there is several
Ecclesiastics. But it is believed that the Council which sat so long in this
place, acting so vigorously against the Pope, engaged the Town into such a
hatred of the Papacy, that this might give the rise to this representation. The
more learned in the Town ascribe the beginning of the Custom in Basile of the
Clocks anticipating the time a full Hour, to the sitting of the Council, and
they say that in order to the advancing of business, and the shortning their
Sessions, they ordered their Clocks to be set forward an Hour, which continues
to this day. The Cathedral is a great old Gothic building; the Chamber where
the Council sat, is of no great reception, and is a very ordinary Room:
Erasmus's Tomb is only a plain Inscription upon a great brass plate: There are
many of Holbens's Pictures, who was a Native of Basile, and was recommended by
Erasmus to King Henry the VIII. the two best are a Corpo or Christ dead, which
is certainly one of the best in the World: There is another Piece of his in the
Stadt-House, for this is in the public Library, of about three or four foot
square; in which, in six several Cantons, the several parts of our Saviors
Passion are represented with a life and beauty that cannot be enough admired;
it is valued at ten thousand Crowns; it is in Wood, but has that freshness of
Color on it, that seems peculiar to Holbens's Pencil. There is also a Dance
that he painted on the Walls of an House where he used to drink, that is so
worn out that very little is now to be seen, except shapes and postures: but
these show the exquisiteness of the hand. There is another longer Dance that
runs all along the side of the Convent of the Augustinians. which is now the
French Church, which is Deaths Dance; there are above threescore figures in it
at full length of Persons of all ranks, from Popes, Emperors and Kings, down to
the meanest sorts of People, and of all Ages and Professions, to whom Death
appears in an insolent and surprising posture, and the several passions that
they express are so well set out, that this was certainly a great design. But
the fresco being exposed to the Air, this was so worn out some time ago, that
they ordered the best Painter they had to lay new Color on it, but this is so
ill done that one had rather see the dead shadows of Holbens's Pencil, than
this course work. There is in Basile a Gun-Smith that makes Wind-Guns, and he
showed me one that as it received at once Air for ten shot, so it had this
particular to it, which he pretends is his own Invention, that he can discharge
all the Air that can be parcelled out in ten shot at once, to give a home blow.
I confess those are terrible instruments, and it seems the interest of Mankind
to forbid them quite, since they can be employed to assassinate persons so
dexterously, that neither noise nor sire will discover from what hand the shot
comes. The Library of Basile is, by much the best in all Switzerland, there is
a fine collection of Medals in it, and a very handsome Library of Manuscripts;
the Room is Noble, and disposed in a very good method. Their Manuscripts are
chiefly the Latin Fathers, or Latin Translations of the Greek Fathers, some
good Bibles, they have the Gospels in Greek Capitals, but they are vitiously
writ in many places: There is an infinite number of the Writers of the darker
Ages, and there are Legends and Sermons without number. All the Books that were
in the several Monasteries at the time of the Reformation were carefully
preserved; and they believe that the Bishops who sat here in the Council,
brought with them a great many Manuscripts which they never carried away. Among
their Manuscripts I saw four of Huss's Letters that he writ to the Bohemians
the day before his death, which are very devout, but excessively simple. The
Manuscripts of this Library are far more numerous than those of Bern, which
were gathered by Bongarsius, and left by him to the public Library there: They
are indeed very little considered there, and are the worst kept that ever I
saw: But it is a Noble collection of all the ancient Latin Authors, they have
some few of the best of the Roman times, writ in great Characters, and there
are many that are seven or eight hundred years old.

There is in Basile one of the best collections of Medals that ever I saw in
private hands; together with a Noble Library, in which there are Manuscripts of
good antiquity that belong to the Family of Fesch, and that goes from one
Learned Man of the Family to another: For this Inheritance can only pass to a
Man of Learning, and when the Family produces none, then it is to go to the
public. In Basile as the several Companies have been more or less strict in
admitting some to a Freedom in the Company, that have not been of the Trade, so
they retain their privileges to this day. For in such Companies that have once
received such a number that have not been of the Trade as grew to be the
majority, the Trade has never been able to recover their interest. But some
Companies have been more cautious, and have never admitted any but those that
were of the Trade, so that they retain their interest still in Government. Of
these the Butchers were named for one, so that there are always four Butchers
in the Council: The great Council consists of Two Hundred and Forty, but they
have no power left them, and they are only assembled upon some extraordinary
occasions, when the little Council thinks fit to communicate any important
matter to them. There are but six Baliages that belong to Bazile, which are not
Employments of great advantage; for the best of them does afford to the Bailif
only a Thousand livres a year: They reckon that there are in Basile Three
Thousand Men that can bear Arms, and that they could raise Four Thousand more
out of the Canton, so that the Town is almost the half of this State, and the
whole makes Thirty Parishes. There are Eighteen Professors in this University;
and there is a Spirit of a more free and generous Learning stirring there, then
I saw in all those parts. There is a great decency of habit in Bazile and the
garb both of the Counselors, Ministers, and Professors, their stiff Ruffs, and
their long Beards, have an Air that is August: The appointments are but small,
for Counselors, Ministers and Professors have but a Hundred Crowns a piece: It
is true many Ministers are Professors so this mendeth the matter a little: But
perhaps it would go better with the State of Learning there, if they had but
half the number of Professors, and if those were a little better encouraged.
No, where is the rule of St. Paul [of Women having on their heads the badge of
the authority under which they are brought, which by a phrase that is not
extraordinary, he calls power] better observed than at Bazile; for all the
Married Women go to Church with a coif on their heads, that is so folded, that
as it comes down so far as to cover their eyes, so another folding covers
also their Mouth and Chin, so that nothing but the nose appears, and then all
turns backward in a folding that hangs down to their midleg. This is always
white, so that there is there such a sight of white heads in their Churches as
cannot be found any where else: The unmarried Women wear hats turned up in the
brims before and behind; and the brims of the sides being about a foot broad,
stand out far on both hands: This fashion is also at Strasburg, and is worn
there also by the Married Women.

I mentioned formerly the constant danger to which this place is exposed from
the neighborhood of Huninghen; I was told that, at first, it was pretended
that the French King intended to build only a small Fort there, and it was
believed that one of the Burgo-masters of Bazile, who was thought not only the
wisest man of that Canton, but of all Switzerland, was gained to lay all Men
asleep, and to assure them that the suffering this Fort to be built so near
them, was of no importance to them, but now they see too late their fatal
error: For the place is great, and will hold a Garrison of Three or Four
Thousand Men; it is a Pentagone, only the side to the Rhine is so large, that
if it went round on that side, I believe it must have been a Hexagone; the
Bastions have all Orillons, and in the middle of them there is a void space,
not filled up with earth, where there is a Magazine built so thick in the Vault
that it is proof against Bombs; The Remparts are strongly faced, there is a
large Ditch, and before the Cortine, in the middle of the Ditch, there runs all
along a Horn-work which is but Ten or Twelve foot high; and from the bottom of
the Rampart, there goes a Vault to this Horn-work, that is for conveying of
Men for its defense; before this Horn-work there is a half Moon, with this that
is peculiar to those new Fortifications, that there is a Ditch that cuts the
half Moon in an Angle, and makes one half Moon within another: beyond that
there is a Counter-Scarp about Twelve foot high above the Water, with a covered
way, and a glacy designed, though not executed. There is also a great Horn-work
besides all this, which ^uns out a huge way with its outworks toward Bazile;
there is also a Bridge laid over the Rhine, and there being an Island in the
River, where the Bridge is laid, there is a Horn-work that fills and
fortifieth it. The Buildings in this Fort are beautiful, and the Square can
hold above Four Thousand Men; the Works are not yet quite finished, but when
all is completed, this will be one of the strongest places in Europe: There is
a Cavalier on one or two of the Bassions, and there are half Moons before the
Bastions, so that the Switzers see their danger now, when it is not easy to
redress it. This place is situated in a great Plain, so that it is commanded
by no rising ground on any side of it. I made a little Tower into Alsace, as
far as Mountbelliard; the Soil is extreme rich, but it has been so long a
Frontier Country; and is, by consequence, so ill peopled, that it is in many
places overgrown with Woods: In one respect it is fit to be the seat of War,
for it is full of Iron-works, which bring a great deal of Money into the
Country. I saw nothing peculiar in the Iron-works there (except that the sides
of the great Bellows were not of Leather but of Wood, which saves much Money)
so I will not stand to describe them. The River of the Rhine, all from Bazile
to Spire, is so low, and is on both sides so covered with woods, that one that
comes down in a Boat has no sight of the Country: The River runs sometimes
with such a force, that nothing but such Woods could preserve its Banks, and
even these are not able to save them quite, for the Trees are often washed away
by the very Roots, so that in many places those Trees lie along in the Channel
of the River: It has been also thought a sort of a Fortification to both sides
of the River, to have it thus faced with Woods, which makes the passing of Men
dangerous, when they must march for sometime after their passage through a
defile. The first night from Bazile we came to Brisac, which is a poor and
miserable Town, but it is a noble Fortification, and has on the West Side of
the River, over which a Bridge is laid, a regular Fort of Four or Five
Bastions. The Town of Brisac rises all on a Hill which is a considerable
height; there were near it two Hills, the one is taken within the
Fortification, and the other is so well levelled with the ground, that one
cannot so much as find out where it was; All the ground about for many miles is
plain, so that from the Hill, as from a Cavalier, one can see exactly well,
especially with the help of a Prospect, all the motions of an Enemy in case of
a Siege: The Fortification is of a huge compass, above a French league, indeed
almost a German league; the Bastions are quite filled with Earth, they are
faced with brick, and have a huge broad Ditch full of Water around them, the
Counterscarp, the covered way, which has a palisade within the Parapet, and
the Glacy, are all well exec^ted; there is a half Moon before every Cortine:
the Bastions have no Orillons except one or two, and the Cortines are so
disposed that a good part of them defends the Bastion. The Garrison of this
place in time of War must needs be Eight or Ten Thousand Men; there has not
been much done of late to this place only the Ditch is so adjusted that it is
all defended by the flanks of the Bastions. But the noblest place on the Rhine
is Strasburg: It is a Town of a huge extent, and has a double Wall and Ditch
all round it; the inner Wall is old and of no strength, nor is the outward Wall
very good, it has a Faussebraye, and is faced with Brick Twelve or Fifteen
Foot above the Ditch: the Counterscarp is in an ill condition, so that the Town
was not in case to make any long resistance; but it is now strongly fortified.
There is a Citadel built on that side that goes toward the Rhine, that is
much such a Fort as that of Huningh, and on the side of the Citadel toward
the Bridge, there is a great Horn-work that runs out a great way with outworks
belonging to it; there are also small Forts at the two chief Gates that lead to
Alsace; by which the City is so bridled that these can cut off all its
communication with the Country about, in case of a revolt; the Bridge is also
well Fortified; there are also Forts in some Islands in the Rhine, and some
Redoubts: so that all round this place, there is one of the greatest
Fortifications that is in Europe.

Hitherto the Capitulation with relation to Religion has been well kept, and
there is so small a number of new Converts, and these are for the greatest part
so inconsiderable, they not being in all above Two Hundred as I was told: The
Lutherans for the greatest part retain their animosities almost to an equal
degree both against Papists and Calvinists. I was in their Church, where if the
Music of their Psalms pleased me much, the irreverence in singing, it being
free to keep on or put off the Hat, did appear very strange to me: The Churches
are full of Pictures, in which the chief passages of our Saviors life are
represented; but there is no sort of religious respect paid them, they bow
when they name the Holy Ghost, as well as at the name of Jesus; but they have
not the Ceremonies that the Lutherans of Saxony use, which Mr. Bebel, their
Professor of Divinity, said was a great happiness, for a similitude in outward
rites might dispose the ignorant People to change too easily. I found several
good People both of the Lutheran Ministers and others, acknowledge that there
was such a corruption of morals spread over the whole City, that as they had
justly drawn down on their heads the plague of the loss of their liberty, so
this having touched them so little they had reason to look for severer strokes:
One sees, in the ruin of this City, what a mischievous thing the popular
pride of a free City is: they fancied they were able to defend themselves, and
so they refused to let an Imperial Garrison come within their Town; for if they
had received only Five Hundred Men, as that small number would not have been
able to have oppressed their Liberties, so it would have so secured the Town that
the French could not have besieged it, without making War on the Empire: but
the Town thought this was a diminution of their Freedom, and so chose rather to
pay a Garrison of Three Thousand Soldiers, which as it exhausted their
Revenue, and brought them under great Taxes, so it proved too weak for their
defense when the French Army came before them. The Town begins to sink in its
Trade, notwithstanding the great circulation of Money that the expense of the
Fortifications has brought to it; but when that is at an end, it will sink
more sensibly, for it is impossible for a place of trade, that is to have
always Light or Ten Thousand Soldiers in it, to continue long in a Flourishing
State. There was a great ^nimosity between two of the chief Families of the
Town, Dietrick and Obrecht, the former was the Burgomaster, and was once almost
run down by a Faction that the other had raised against him; but he turned the
tide, and got such an advantage against Obrecht, who had writ somewhat against
the conduct of their affairs, that he was condemned and Beheaded for writing
Libels against the Government. His Son is a Learned Man, and was Professor of
the Civil Law; and he to have his turn of revenge against Dietrick, went to
Paris last Summer, and that he might make his Court the better, changed his
Religion. Dietrick had been always looked on as one of the chief of the French
Faction, though he had been at first an Imperialist, so it was thought that he
should have been well rewarded; yet it was expected that to make himself
capable of that, he should have changed his Religion, but he was an ancient
Man, and would not purchase his Court at that rate: so without any reason
given, and against the express words of the Capitulation, he was confined to
one of the midland Provinces of France, as I remember it was Limosin; and thus
he that has been thought the chief cause of this Towns failing under the power
of the French, is the first Man that has felt the effects of it. The Library
here is considerable, the Case is a great Room very well contrived, for it is
divided into Closets all over the body of the Room, which runs about these as a
Gallery, and in these Closets all round there are the Books of the several
Professions lodged apart; there is one for Manuscripts in which there are some
of considerable Antiquity, I need say nothing to you of the vast height, and
the Gothic Architecture of the Steeple and of the great Church, nor of the
curious Clock where there is so vast a variety of motions, for these are well
known. The bas reliefs upon the tops of the great Pillars of the Church are not
so visible, but they are surprising; for this being a Fabric of Three or Four
Hundred Years old, it is very strange to see such representations as are there.
There is a Procession represented, in which a Hog carries the Pot with the
Holy Water, and Asses and Hogs in Priestly Vestments follow to make up the
Procession; there is also an Ass standing before an Altar, as if he were going
to Consecrate, and one carries a Case with Relics, within which one feeth a
Fox, and the trains of all that go in this Procession, are carried up by
Monkies. This seems to have been made in hatred of the Monks whom the Secular
Clergy abhorred at that time, because they had drawn the Wealth, and the
following of the World after them, and they had exposed the Secular Clergy so
much for their ignorance, that it is probable after some Ages, the Monks
falling under the same contempt, the Secular Clergy took their turn in exposing
them in so lasting a representation to the scorn of the World. There is also in
the Pulpit a Nun cut in Wood, lying along, and a Friar lying near her with his
Breviary open before him, and his hand under the Nuns habit, and the Nuns feet
are shod with Iron Shoes. I confess I did not look for these things, for I had
not heard of them; but my Noble Friend Mr. Ablancourt viewed them with great
exactness, while he was the French Kings Resident at Strasburg, in the company
of one of the Magistrates that waited on him; and it is upon his credit, to
which all that know his eminent sincerity, know how much is due, that I give
you this particular.

From Strasburg we went down the Rhine to Philipsburg, which lies at a quarter
of a miles distance from the River, it is but a small place, the Bastions are
but little; there is a Ravelline before almost all the Cortines, and there lie
such Marshes all round it, that in these lies the chief strength of the
place. The French had begun a great Crown-work on the side that lies to the
Rhine, and had cast out a Horn-work beyond that; but by all that appears it
seems they intended to continue that Crown work quite round the Town, and to
make a second Wall and Ditch all round it; which would have Enlarged the place
vastly, and made a compass capable enough to lodge above Ten Thousand Men; and
this would have been so terrible a Neighbor to the Palatinate and all
Franconia that it was a Masterpiece in Charles Lewis, the late Elector
Palatine, to Engage the Empire into this Siege. He saw well how much it
concerned him to have it out of the hands of the French, so that he took great
care to have the Duke of Lorrain's Camp so well supplied with all things
necessary during the Siege, that the Army lay not under the least uneasiness
all the while. From thence in three Hours time we came to Spire, which is so
naked a Town that if it were attacked, it could not make the least resistance.
The Town is neither great nor rich, and subsisteth chiefly by the Imperial
Chamber that sits here, though there is a constant dispute between the Town
and the Chamber concerning Privileges; for the Government of the Town,
pretends that the Judges of the Chamber, as they are private Men, and out of
the Court of Judicature, are subject to them; and so about a year ago they put
one of the Judges in Prison; on the other hand the Judges pretend that their
Persons are sacred. It was the consideration of the Chamber that procured to
the Town the neutrality that they enjoyed all the last War. I thought to have
seen the forms of this Court, and the way of laying up, and preserving their
Records, but the Court was not then sitting. The Building, the Halls and
Chambers of this Famous Court are mean beyond imagination, and look liker the
Halls of some small Company, then of so great a body; and I could not see the
places where they lay up their Archives: The Government of the City is all
Lutheran, but not only the Cathedral is in the hands of the Bishop and Chapter,
but there are likewise several Convents of both Sexes, and the Jesuits have
also a College there. There is little remarkable in the Cathedral, which is a
huge building in the Gothic manner of the worst sort. The Tombs of many
Emperors that lie buried there, are remarkable for their meanness; they being
only great Flag-stones laid on some small Stone ballisters of a foot and a
half high: There are also the marks of a ridiculous Fable concerning St.
Bernard, which is too foolish to be related, yet since they have taken such
pains to preserve the remembrance of it, I shall venture to write it. There are
from the Gate all along the Nef of the Church up to the Steps that go up to the
Quire, Four round Plates of Brass, above a foot Diameter, and at the distance
of Thirty foot one from another; laid in the pavement, on the first of these is
engraven: O Clemens; on the second, O Pia; on the third, O Felix; and on the
fourth, Maria: The last is about Thirty Foot distant from a Statue of the
Virgins; so they say that St. Bernard came up the whole length of the Church at
four steps, and that those four plates were laid where he stepped: and that at
every step he pronounced the word that is engraven on the Plate, and when he
came to the last, the Image of the Virgin answered him. Salve Bernarde: upon
which he answered, let a Woman keep silence in the Church, and that the Virgins
Statue has kept silence ever since, this last part of the Story is certainly
very credible. He was a man of Learning that showed me this; and he repeated it
so gravely to me, that I saw he either believed it, or at least that he had a
mind to make me believe it: and I asked him as gravely if that was firmly
believed there, he told me that one had lately writ a Book to prove the truth
of it, as I remember, it was a Jesuit: he acknowledged it was not an Article of
Faith, so I was satisfied.

There is in the Cloister an old Gothic representation of our Saviors Agony
in Stone, with a great many Figures of his Apostles, and the Company that came
to seize him, that is not ill Sculpture, for the Age in which it was made, it
being some Ages old. The Calvinists have a Church in this Town, but their
numbers are not considerable: I was told there were some ancient Manuscripts in
the Library, that belongs to the Cathedral; but one of the Prebendaries to
whom I addressed my self, being, according to the German custom, a man of
greater quality than learning, told me he heard they had some ancient
Manuscripts, but he knew nothing of it, and the Dean was absent, so I could not
see them, for he kept one of the keys. The lower Palatinate is certainly one of
the sweetest Countries of all Germany: It is a great Plain till one comes to
the Hills of Heidelberg: the Town is ill situated, just in a bottom between
two ranges of Hills, yet the Air is much commended: I need say nothing of the
Castle, nor the prodigious Wine Cellar, in which, though there is but one
celebrated Tun that is seventeen foot high, and twenty six foot long, and is
built with a strength liker that of the ribs of a ship, than the Staves of a
Tun; yet there are many other Tuns of such a prodigious bigness, that they
would seem very extraordinary if this vast one did, not Eclipse them. The late
Prince Charles Lewis showed his capacity in the peopling and and settling this
State, that had been so entirely ruined, being for many years the Seat of War,
for in four years time he brought it to a Flourishing condition: He raised the
Taxes as high as was possible without dispeopling his Country, and all men's
Estates were valued, and they were taxed at five per cent of the value of their
Estates; but their Estates were not valued to the rigor, but with such
abatements as have been ordinary in England in the times of Subsidies; so that
when the Son offered to bring the Taxes down to two per cent of the real value;
the Subjects all desired him rather to continue them as they were. There is no
Prince in Germany that is more absolute than the Elector Palatine, for he
lays on his Subjects what Taxes he pleases, without being limited to any
forms of Government. And here I saw that which I had always believed to be
true, that the Subjects of Germany are only bound to their particular Prince,
for they swear Allegiance simply to the Elector, without any reserve for the
Emperor, and in their Prayers for him they name him their Sovereign. It is true
the Prince is under some ties to the Emperor, but the Subjects are under none.
And by this D. Fabritius, a learned and judicious Professor there, explained
those words of Pareus's Commentary on the Romans, which had respect only to the
Princes of the Empire: and were quite misunderstood by those who fancied that
they favored Rebellion; for there is no place in Europe where all rebellious
Doctrine is more born down than there. I found a great spirit of moderation
with relation to those small controversies that have occasioned such heat in
the Protestant Churches reigning in the University there, which is in a great
measure owing to the prudence, learning, and the happy temper of mind of D.
Fabritius, and D. Miek; who as they were long in England, so they have that
generous largeness of Soul, which is the Noble Ornament of many of the English
Divines. Prince Charles Lewis saw that Manheim was marked out by Nature to be
the most important place of all his Territory, it being situated in the point
where the Neckar falls into the Rhine: So that those two Rivers defending it
on two sides, it was capable of a good Fortification: It is true the Air is not
thought wholesome; and the Water is not good, yet he made a fine Town there, and
a Noble Citadel with a regular Fortification about it, and he designed a great
Palace there, but he did not live to build it. He saw of what advantage Liberty
of Conscience was to the peopling of his Country, so as he suffered the Jews to
come and settle there, he resolved also not only to suffer the three Religions
tolerated by the Laws of the Empire to be professed there, but he built a
Church for them all three, which he called the Church of the Concord, in which
both Calvinists, Lutherans and Papists had, in the order in which I have set
down, the exercise of their Religion, and he maintained the peace of his
Principality so entirely, that there was not the least disorder occasioned by
this tolleration: This, indeed, made him to be looked on as a Prince that did
not much consider Religion himself: He had a wonderful application to all
affairs, and was not only his own chief Minister, but he alone did the work of
many.

But I were Injust, if I should not say somewhat to you of the Princely virtues
and the Celebrated probity of the present Prince Elector upon whom that Dignity
is devolved by the extinction of so many Princes that in this Age composed the
most numerous Family of any of that rank in Europe. This Prince as he is in
many respects an honor to the Religion that he professes, so is in nothing
more to be commended by those who differ from him, than for his exact adhering
to the promises he made his Subjects with relation to their Religion, in which
he has not even in the smallest matters, broke in upon their established Laws,
and though an Order of Men, that have turned the World upside down, have great
Credit with him, yet it is hitherto visible that they cannot carry it so far,
as to make him do any thing contrary to the established Religion; and to those
sacred promises that he made his Subjects. For he makes it appear to all the
World that he does not consider those as so many words spoken at first to lay
his people asleep, which he may now explain and observe as he thinks fit; but
as so many ties upon his Conscience and Honor, which he will Religiously
observe. And as in the other parts of his life he has set a Noble Pattern to
all the Princes of Europe, so his exactness to his promises, is that which
cannot be too much commended: of which this extraordinary Instance has been
communicated to me since I am come into this Country. The Elector had a
Procession in his Court last Corpus Christi day, upon which one of the
Ministers of Heidelberg preached a very severe Sermon against Popery, and in
particular, taxed that Procession, perhaps, with greater plainness than
discretion: This being brought to the Elector's ears, he sent presently an
Order to the Ecclesiastical Senate to suspend him. That Court is composed of
some Secular Men, and some Churchmen, and as the Princes authority is delegated
to them, so they have a sort of an Episcopal jurisdiction over all the Clergy.
This Order was a surprise to them as being a direct breach upon their Laws and
the Liberty of their Religion? so they sent a Deputation to Court, to let the
Elector know the reasons that hindered them from obeying his Orders, which were
heard with so much Justice and Gentleness, that their Prince instead of
expressing any displeasure against them, recalled the Order that he had sent
them. The way from Heidelberg to Frankfort, is, for the first twelve or fifteen
miles, the beautifullest piece of ground that can be imagined; for we went
under a ridge of little Hills that are all covered with Vines, and from them,
as far as the eye can go, there is a beautiful Plain of Cornfieldsd and
Meadows, all sweetly divided and enclosed with rows of Trees, so that I fancied
I was in Lombardy again, but with this advantage, that here all was not of a
piece, as it is in Lombardy: but the Hills as they made a pleasant inequality
in the prospect, so they made the Air purer, and produced a pleasant Wine: The
way near Darmstat, and all forwards to Frankfort, becomes more wild and more
sandy: There is a good Suburb on the South Side of the Main over against
Frankfort, which has a very considerable Fortification; there is a double
Wall, and a double Ditch that goes round it, and the outward Wall, as it is
regularly fortified, so it is faced with Brick to a considerable height. The
Town of Frankfort is of a great extent, and seemed to be but about a third part
less then Strasburg: The three Religions are also tolerated there; and though
the number of the Papists is very inconsiderable, yet they have the great
Church, which is a huge rude building; they have also several other Churches,
and some Convents there. There are several open squares for Market places, and
the Houses about them look very well without. Among their Archives they
preserve the Original of the Bulla Aurea, which is only a great Parchment writ
in High Dutch, without any beauty answering to its Title: and since I could not
have understood it, I was not at the pains of desiring to see it, for that is
not obtained without difficulty. The Lutherans have here built a new Church,
called St. Catherin's, in which there is as much painting as ever I saw in any
Popish Church, and over the high Altar there is an huge carved Crucifix, as
there are painted ones in other places of their Church. The Pulpit is extreme
fine of Marble of different colors very well polished and joined. I was here
at a Sermon where I understood nothing, but I liked one thing that I saw both
at Strasburg and here, that at the end of Prayers, there was a considerable
interval of silence left, before the conclusion, for all peoples private
devotions. In the House of their public Discipline, they retain still the old
Roman Pistrina or Hand-mill, at which lewd Women are condemned to grind, that
is, to drive about the Wheel that makes the Milstones go. There is a great
number of Jews there, though their two Synagogues are very little, and by
consequence the numbers being great, they are very nasty. I was told they were
in all above twelve hundred. The Women had the most of a tawdry Imbroidery of
Gold and Silver about them that ever I saw, for they had all Mantles of Crape,
and both about the top and the bottom, there was a border above a hand breadth
of imbroidery. The Fortification of Frankfort is considerable, their Ditch is
very broad, and very full of Water; all the Bastions have a Counter-mine that
runs along by the brim of the Ditch; but the Counterscarp is not faced with
Brick as the Walls are, and so in many places it is in an ill condition; the
covered Way and glacy are also in an ill case: The Town is rich, and drives a
great Trade, and is very pleasantly situated. Not far from hence is Hockam
that yields the best Wine of those parts. Since I took Frankfort in my way
from Heidelberg to Mentz, I could not pass by Worms, for which I was sorry. I
had a great mind to see that place where Luther made his first appearance
before the Emperor, and the Diet, and in that solemn audience expressed an
undaunted zeal for that Glorious Cause in which God made him such a blessed
Instrument. I had another piece of Curiosity on me which will, perhaps, appear
to you somewhat ridiculous. I had a mind to see a Picture that, as I was told,
is over one of the Popish Altars there, which one would think was Invented by
the Enemies of Transubstantiation to make it appear ridiculous. There is a
Windmill, and the Virgin throws Christ into the Hopper, and he comes out at the
eye of the Milne all in Waters, which some Priests take up to give the People.
This is so course an Emblem, that one would think it too gross even for
Laplanders; but a Man that can swallow Transubstantiation it self, will digest
this likewise. Mentz is very nobly situated, on a rising ground a little below
the conjunction of the two Rivers, the Rhine, and the Main; it is of too great
a compass, and too ill Peopled to be capable of a great defense: There is a
Citadel upon the highest part of the Hill that commands the Town; it is
compassed about with a dry Ditch that is considerably deep. The Walls of the
Town are faced with Brick and regularly fortified, but the Counterscarp is not
faced with Brick, so all is in a sad condition; and the Fortification is
weakest on that side where the Elector's Palace is. There is one side of a new
Palace very nobly built in a regular Architecture, only the Germans do still
retain somewhat of the Gothic manner. It is of a great length, and the design
is to build quite round the Court, and then it will be a very magnificent
Palace, only the Stone is red; for all the Quarries that are upon the Rhine,
from Bazile down to Coblentz, are of red Stone, which does not look beautiful.
The Elector of Mentz is an absolute Prince; his Subjects present Lists of their
Magistrates to him, but he is not tied to them, and may name whom he will: The
Ancient Demeasne of the Electorate is about Forty thousand Crowns: But the
Taxes rise to about Three hundred thousand Crowns; so that the Subjects here
are as heavily taxed as in the Palatinate: There is Twelve thousand Crowns a
year given the Elector for his privy Purse, and the State bears the rest of his
whole expense: It can Arm Ten thousand Men, and there is a Garrison of Two
thousand Men in Mentz: This Elector has three Councels, one as he is
Chancellor of the Empire, consisting of three Persons; the other two are for
the Policy and Justice of his Principality. He and his Chapter have Months by
turns for the Nomination of the Prebends. In the Month of January he names, if
any dies, and they choose in the Room of such as die in February, and so all the
Year round. The Prebendaries or Domeheer's have about Three thousand Crowns a
year a piece. When the Elector dies, the Emperor sends one to see the
Election made, and he recommendeth one, but the Canons may choose whom they
please; and the present Elector was not of the Emperors recommendation. Besides
the Palace at Mentz, the Elector has another near Frankfort, which is thought
the best that is in those parts of Germany: The Cathedral is a huge Gothic
Building; there is a great Cupulo in the West End, and there the Quire sings
Mass: I could not learn whether this was done only because the place here was
of greater reception than at the East End or if any burying place and endowment
obliged them to the West End. Near the Cathedral there is a huge Chapel of
great Antiquity, and on the North Door there are two great Brass Gates with a
long Inscription, which I had not time to write out, but I found it was in the
Emperor Lotharius's time. There are a vast number of Churches in this Town, but
it is poor and ill inhabited. The Rhine here is almost half an English mile
broad, and there is a Bridge of Boats laid over it. From Mentz all along to
Baccharach (which seems to carry its name (Bacchi Ara) from some famous Altar
that the Romans probably erected by reason of the good Wine that grows in the
neighborhood.) There is a great number of very considerable Villages on both
sides of the River: Here the Rats Tower is showed, and the People of the
Country do all firmly believe the story of the Rats eating up an Elector, and
that though he Fled to this Island where he built a small high Tower, they
pursued him still, and swimmed after him, and eat him up: And they told us that
there were some of his Bones to be seen still in the Tower. This extraordinary
Death makes me call to mind a peculiar and unlooked for sort of Death, that
carried off a poor Labourer off the ground a few days before I left Geneva. The
foot of one of his Cattle, as he was ploughing, went into a nest of Wasps, upon
which the whole swarm came out, and set upon him that held the Plough, and
killed him in a very little time; and his body was prodigiously swelled with
the poison of so many Stings.

But to return to the Rhine, all the way from Baccharach down to Coblents,
there is on both sides of the River hanging grounds, or little Hills, so laid
as if many of them had been laid by Art, which produce the rich Rhenish Wine:
They are indeed as well exposed to the Sun, and covered from Storms, as can be
imagined; and the ground on those Hills, which are in some places of a
considerable height, is so cultivated that there is not an inch lost that is
capable of improvement, and this brings so much wealth into the Country, that
all along there is a great number of considerable Villages. Coblentz is the
strongest place that I saw of all that belong to the Empire; the situation is
Noble, the Rhine running before it, and the Moselle passing along the side of
the Town; it is well fortified, the Ditch is large, the Counterscarp is high,
and the covered way is in a good condition; both Walls and Counterscarp are
faced with Brick, and there are Ravelines before the Cortines; but on the side
of the Moselle it is very slightly fortified, and there is no Fort at the end
of the stone Bridge that is laid over the Moselle, so that it lies quite open
on that side, which seems a strange defect in a place of that consequence:
But though the Fortifications of this place are very considerable, yet its
chief defense lies in the Fort of Hermanstan, which is built on the top of a
very high Hill, that lies on the other side of the Rhine; and which commands
this place so absolutely, that he who is Master of Hermanstan, is always Master
of Coblentz. This belongs to the Elector of Triers, whose Palace lies on the
East Side of the Rhine, just at the foot of the Hill of Hermanstan, and over
against the point where the Moselle falls into the Rhine, so that nothing can
be more pleasantly situated; only the ground begins to rise just at the back
of the House with so much steepness that there is not Room for Gardens or
Walks. The House makes a great show upon the River, but we were told that the
Apartments within were not answerable to the outside. I say we were told for
the German Princes keep such forms, that, without a great deal of ado, one
cannot come within their Courts, unless it be when they are abroad themselves;
so that we neither got within the Palace at Mentz, nor this of Hermanstan. It
is but a few Hours from this to Bonne, where the Elector of Collen keeps his
Court; the place has a regular Fortification, the Walls are faced with Brick;
but though the Ditch, which is dry, is pretty broad, the Counterscarp is in so
ill a condition, that it is not able to make a great defense. This Elector is
the Noblest born, and the best provided of all the German Clergy, for he is
Brother to the great Maximilian Duke of Bavaria; and besides Collen, he has
Liege, Munster, and Hidelsheim, which are all great Bishoprics: He has been
also Six and Thirty years in the Electorate: His Palace is very mean,
consisting but of one Court, the half of which is cast into a little Garden,
and the Wood-yard is in the very Court; the lower part of the Court was a
stable; but he has made an apartment here that is all furnished with Pictures:
where, as there are some of the hands of the greatest Masters, so there are a
great many foils to set these off, that are scarce good enough for Signposts.

The Elector has a great many gold meddals, which will give me occasion to tell
you one of the Extravagantest pieces of forgery that perhaps ever was; which
happened to be found out at the last siege of Bonne: for while they were
clearing the ground for planting a battery, they discovered a Vault in which
there was an Iron Chest that was full of meddals of gold to the value of 100000
Crowns; and of which I was told the Elector bought to the value of 30000
Crowns. They are huge big, one weighed 800. Ducats, and the gold was of the
fineness of Ducat gold; but though they bore the Impressions of Roman Meddals,
or rather Medallions they were all Counterfeit; and the imitation was so
coursely done that one must be extreme Ignorant in Meddals to be deceived by
them. Some few that seemed true were of the late Greek Emperors. Now it is
very unaccountable what could induce a Man to make a forgery upon such mettle,
and in so vast a quantity, and then to bury all this under ground, especially
in an Age in which so much gold was ten times the value of what is at present
for it is judged to have been done about Four or Five Hundred Years ago.

The Prince went out a hunting while we were there, with a very handsome Guard
of about Fourscore Horse, well mounted; so we saw the Palace, but where not
suffered to see the Apartment where he lodged: There is a great Silver
Casolette gilt, all set with Emeralds and Rubies, that though they made a fine
appearance, yet were a Composition of the Princes own making: His Officers also
showed us a Basin and Ewer, which they said were of Mercury fixed by the Prince
himself; but they added that now for many Years he wrought no more in his
Labouratory. I did not easily believe this, and as the weight of the Plate did
not approach to that of Quicksilver, so the Medicinal Virtues of fixed
Mercury, if there is any such thing, are so extraordinary, that it seemed very
strange to see Twenty or Thirty Pound of it made up in two pieces of Plate. A
quarter of a mile without the Town, the best Garden of those parts of Germany
is to be seen, in which there is a great variety of Waterworks, and very many
Noble Allies in the French manner, and the whole is of a very considerable
extent; but as it has no Statues of any value to adorn it, so the House about
which it lies in, is in ruins: and it is strange to see that so rich and so
great a Prince, during so long a Regence, has done so little to Enlarge or
beautify his Buildings. Bonne and Coblentz are both poor and small Towns.
Collen is three Hours distant from Bonne, it is of a prodigious extent, but ill
built and worse Peopled in the remote parts of it; and as the Walls are all in
an ill case, so it is not possible to fortify so vast a compass as this Town
makes, as it ought to be, without a charge that would eat out the whole Wealth
of this little State. The Jews live in a little Suburb on the other side of the
River, and may not come over without leave obtained, for which they pay
considerably. There is no exercise of the Protestant Religion suffered within
the Town, but those of the Religion are suffered to live there, and they have a
Church at two miles distance. The Arsenal here, is suitable to the
Fortifications, very mean, and ill furnished. The Quire of the great Church is
as high in the roof, as any Church I ever saw; but it seems the Wealth of
this place could not finish the whole Fabric, so as to answer the height of
the Quire, for the Body of the Church is very low: Those that are disposed to
believe Legends, have enough here to overset even a good degree of credulity,
both in the story of the three Kings, whose Chapel is visited with great
devotion, and stands at the East end of the great Quire; and in that more
copious Fable of the Eleven Thousand Vrsulins, whose Church is all over full of
rough Tombs, and of a vast number of Bones that are piled up in rows about the
Walls of the Church: These Fables are so firmly believed by the Papists there,
that the least sign which one gives of doubting of their truth, passes for an
infallible mark of an Heretic. The Jesuits have a great and noble College
and Church here. And for Thauler's sake I went to the Dominicans House and
Church; which is also very great. One grows extremely weary of walking over
this great Town, and does not find enough of entertainment in it: The present
subject of their discourse is also very melancholy: The late Rebellion that was
there, is so generally known, that I need not say much concerning it. A report
was set about the Town, by some Incendiaries, that the Magistrates did eat up
the public Revenue, and were like to ruin the City; I could not learn what
ground there was for these reports, for it is not ordinary to see reports of
that kind fly, through a body of Men, without some foundation: It is certain
this came to be so generally believed, that there was a horrible disorder
occasioned by it: The Magistrates were glad to save themselves from the storm,
and abandoned the Town to the popular fury, some of them having been made
sacrifices to it; and this rage held long: But within this last year, after
near two years disorder, those that were sent by the Emperor and Diet to Judge
the matter, having threatened to put the Town under the Imperial Bann, if it had
stood longer out, were received; and have put the Magistrates again in the
possession of their Authority, and all the chief Incendiaries were clapped in
Prison: many have already suffered, and a great many more are still in Prison;
they told us that some executions were to be made within a week when we were
there. Dusseldorp is the first considerable Town below Collen, it is the Seat
of the Duke of Juliers, who is Duke of Newburgh, eldest Son to the present
Elector Palatine. The Palace is old and Gothic enough; but the Jesuits have
their a fine College, and a noble Chapel, though there are manifest faults in
the Architecture; the Protestant Religion is tolerated and they have a Church
lately built here within these few years, that was procured by the intercession
of the Elector of Brandenburgh. who observing exactly the liberty of Religion
that was agreed to in Cleve, had reason to see the same as duly observed in his
Neighborhood, in favor of his own Religion. The Fortification here is very
ordinary, the Ramparts being faced but a few foot high with Brick. But
Keiserswart, some hours lower on the same side, which belongs to the Elector
of Collen, though it is a much worse Town then Dusseldorp, yet is much better
fortified; it has a very broad Ditch, and a very regular Fortification; the
Walls are considerably high, faced with Brick, and so is the Counterscarp,
which is also in a very good condition. The Fortification of Orsoy is now quite
demolished. Rhineberg continues as it was, but the Fortification is very mean,
only of Earth, so that it is not capable of making a great resistance. And
Wesel, though it is a very fine Town, yet is a very poor Fortification, nor can
it ever be made good, except at a vast expense; for the ground all about it
being sandy, nothing can be made there that will be durable, unless the
foundation go very deep, or that it be laid upon Piloty. In all these Towns one
sees another air of Wealth and Abundance than in much richer Countries that are
exhausted with taxes. Rees and Emmerick are good Towns, but the Fortifications
are quite ruined. So that here is a rich and populous Country, that has at
present very little defense, except what it has from its situation. Cleve is
a delicious place, the situation and prospect are charming, and the Air is
very pure, and from thence we came hither in three hours.

I will not say one word of the Country into which I am now come, for as I know
that is needless to you on many accounts, so a Picture that I see here in the
Stadthouse, puts me in mind of the perfectest Book of its kind that is perhaps
in being, For Sir William Temple, whose Picture hangs here at the upper end
of the Plenipotentiaries that negotiated the Famous Treaty of Nimmegen, has
indeed set a pattern to the World, which is done with such life, that it may
justly make others blush to copy after it, since it must be acknowledged, that
if we had as perfect an account of the other places, as he has given us of one
of the least, but yet one of the Noblest parcels of the Universe, Traveling
would become a needless thing, unless it were for diversion; since one finds
no further occasion for his curiosity in this Country, then what is fully
satisfied by his rare performance. Yet I cannot give overwriting, without
reflecting on the resistance that this place made, when so many other places
were so basely delivered up, though one does not see in the ruins of the
Fortification here, how it could make so long a resistance: yet it was that
that stem'd the tide of a progress that made all the World stand amazed; and it
gave a little time to the Dutch to recover themselves out of the consternation,
into which so many blows, that came so thick one after another, had struck them.

But then the World saw a change, that though it has not had so much Incense
given to it, as the happy conjuncture of another Prince has drawn after it,
with so much excess, that all the topics of flattery seem exhausted by it, yet
will appear to posterity one of the most surprising Scenes in History, and that
which may be well matched with the recovery of the Roman State after the Battle
of Can. When a young Prince, that had never before born Arms, or so much as
seen a Campaign, who had little or no Council about him but that which was
suggested from his own thoughts, and that had no extraordinary advantage, by
his Education either for literature or affairs, was of a sudden set at the head
of a State and Army, that was sunk with so many losses; and that saw the best
half of its Soil torn from it; and the powerfullest Enemy in the World,
surrounded with a Victorious Army that was commanded by the best Generals that
the Age has produced, come within sight, and settle his Court in one of the
best Towns, and had at the same time the greatest force both by Sea and Land,
that has been known, united together for its destruction. When the Inhabitants
were forced, that they might save themselves from so formidable an Enemy, to
let loose that which on all other occasions, is the most dreadful to them; and
to drown so great a part of their Soil for the preservation of the rest; and to
complicate together all the miseries that a Nation can dread, when to the
general consternation with which so dismal a Scene possessed them, a
distraction within doors seemed to threaten them with the last strokes; and
while their Army was so ill disciplined, that they durst scarce promise
themselves any thing from such feeble Troops, after a Peace at Land of almost
Thirty Years continuance; and while their chief Ally, that was the most
concerned in their preservation, was, like a great paralitick body, liker to
fall on those that it pretended to support, and to crush them, then to give
them any considerable assistance: When I say a young Prince came at the head of
all this, the very prospect of which would have quite dampt an ordinary
courage, he very quickly changed the Scene, he animated the Public Councils
with a generous vigor; he found them sinking into a feebleness of harkening to
Propositions for a peace, that were as little safe as they were honorable, but
he disposed them to resolve on hazarding all, rather than to submit to such
Infamous terms. His credit also among the populace seemed to Inspire them with
a new life; they easily persuaded themselves that as one WILLIAM Prince of
ORANGE had formed their State, so here another of the same name seemed marked
out to recover and preserve it. It was this Spirit of Courage which he derived
from his own breast, and infused into the whole People, as well as into the
Magistracy that preserved this Country. Some thing there was in all this that
was Divine. The Public Councils were again settled, and the People were at
quiet when they saw him vested with a full authority for that time with
Relation to peace and war, and concluded they were safe, because they were in
his hands. It soon appeared how faithfully he pursued the Interest of his
Country, and how little he regarded his own. He rejected all Propositions of
Peace that were hurtful to his Country, without so much as considering the
advantages that were offered to himself, (in which you know that I write upon
sure grounds.) He refused the offer of the Soveraign^y of its Chief City, that
was made to him by a solemn Deputation, being satisfied with that Authority
which had been so long maintained by his Ancestors with so much glory, and
being justly sensible, how much the breaking in upon established laws and
liberties, is fatal even to those that seem to get by it. He thus began his
public appearance on the stage, with all the disadvantages that a Spirit
aspiring to true Glory could wish for; since it was Visible that he had nothing
to trust to, but a good cause, a favorable Providence, and his own Integrity
and Courage; nor was success wanting to such Noble beginnings; for he in a
short time, with a Conduct and Spirit beyond any thing that the World has yet
seen, recovered this State, out of so desperate a distemper, took some places
by main force, and obliged the Enemy to abandon all that they had acquired in
so feeble a manner. And if a raw Army had not always success against more
numerous and better trained Troops, and if the want of Magazins and Stores in
their Allies Country, which was the chief Scene of the War, made that he could
not Post his Army, and wait for favorable circumstances, so that he was
sometimes forced to run to action, with a have that his necessities imposed
upon him; yet the forcing of the beginnings of a Victory out of the hands of
the greatest General of the Age, the facing a great Monarch with an Army much
inferior to his, when the other was too cautious to hazard an engagement, and
in short the forming the Dutch Army to such a pitch that it became visibly
Superior to the French, that seemed to have been fed with Conquests; and the
continuing the War, till the Prince that had sacrificed the quiet of Europe to
his GLORY, was glad to come and treat for a Peace in the Enemies Country, and
in this very place, and to set all Engines on work to obtain that, by the
mediation of some, and the jealousies of other Princes; all these are such
performances that posterity will be disposed to rank them rather among the
Idea's of what an imaginary Hero could do, then with what could be really
transacted in so short a time, and in such a manner. And in conclusion every
place that belonged to these States, and to their Neighbors along the Rhine,
together with a great many in Flanders, being restored; these Provinces do now
see themselves under his happy Conduct, re-established in their former peace
and security. And though some scars of such deep wounds do still remain, yet
they find themselves considered on all hands, as the Bulwark of Christendom,
against the fears of a new Monarchy, and as the preservers of the peace and
liberty of Europe.

Here is a Harvest, not for forced Rhetoric, or false Eloquence, but for a
severe and sincere Historian, capable of affording a work that will far exceed
all those luscious Panegyricks of mercenary pens; but a small or a Counterfeit
Jewel must be set with all possible advantages, when a true one of great value
needs only to be showed. I cannot end with a greater subject, and I must
acknowledge my self to be so inflamed with this hint, that as I cannot after
this bring my pen down to lower matters, so I dare not trust my self too long,
to the heat that so Noble an Object inspires, therefore I break off abruptly.

YOURS.

ADDENDA.
Ad Page 210. l. 22.
The same learned Person has since my first conversation with him upon this
subject, suggested to me two passages of Festus Pompeius, that seem to
determine this whole matter; and that tell us by what names those Catacombs
were known in the Roman time, where abouts they were, and what sort of Persons
were laid in them, we have also the designation by which the bearers were
commonly known, and the time when they carried out the dead bodies; and it
appears particularly by them that in the repositories of which that author
makes mention, there was no care taken to preserve the bodies that were laid in
them from rotting. His words are. Puticulos antiquissimum genus sepulturae
appellatos, quod ibi in puteis sepelirenter homines: qualis fuerit locus quo
nunc cadavera projici solent, extra portam Esquilinam; quos quod ibi
putescerent, inde prius appellatos existimat puticulos Aelius Gallus, qui ait
antiqui moris fuisse, ut patres familias in locum publicum extra oppidum
mancipia vilia projicerent, atque ita projecta, quod ibi ea putescerent, nomen
esse factum puticuli. The other passage runs thus. Vespae and Vespillones
dicuntur, qui funerandis corporibus officium gerunt, non a minutis illis
volucribus, sed quia vespertino tempore eos efferunt, qui funebri pompa duci
propter inopiam nequeunt. All this agrees so exactly to the thoughts that a
general view of those repositories give a Man, that it will not be hard to
persuade him that those burying places that are now graced with the pompous
title of Catacombs, are no other then the Puticoli mentioned by Festus
Pompeius, where the meanest sort of the Roman Slaves were laid, and so without
any further care about them were left to rot.

Ad page 218. l. 1.
I have since my being in Naples instructed one that was going thither in this
particular, and have received this account from him; that he had taken care to
plumm the water at the furthest pillar of Caligula's bridge on the Puzzolo
side; and found it was seven fathom and a half deep; but he adds that the
Watermen assured him, that that on the other side before Baia the water was 26.
fathom deep; but as he had not a plummet long enough to try that, so he
believed a good deal ought to be abated; for the Watermen had assured him that
the water was ten fathom deep on the Puzzolo side, though upon trial he found
it was only seven and a half; and by this measure one may suppose that the
water is 20. fathom deep on the other side; so that it is one of the most
astonishing things that one can think of that pillars of brick could have been
built in such a depth of water.

FINIS.

