A SERMON Preached at the CORONATION OF WILLIAM III. and MARY II. King and
Queen OF England, -- France, and Ireland, DEFENDERS of the Faith; IN THE
Abby-Church of Westminster, April 11. 1689.

By GILBERT Lord Bishop of Salisbury.

Printed by Their Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON: Printed for J. Starkey; and Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in
St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

THE SERMON AT THE CORONATION OF K. WILLIAM and Q. MARY.

2 SAMUEL XXIII. 3, 4. The God of Israel said, The Rock of Israel spoke to me: He
that rules over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of the Lord. And he
shall be as the light of the morning, when the Sun rises; even a morning
without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining
after rain.
IT is the peculiar glory of Humane Nature, that Man is made after the Image of
God: and therefore the distinctions of Honor among Men, ought to be taken from
the Characters of the Divine Nature and Perfections that appear in them. Higher
degrees of Capacity bring men so much the nearer to the Infinite Compass of
that Eternal Mind. The Elevations of Greatness, are approaches to that
unbounded Power to which all things are subject. Yet, though there is somewhat
in these which is apt to strike the World with admiration, there is another
resemblance of the Divinity which has a more peculiar beauty in it, that
consists in Justice and Goodness. The other may subdue the World, but this only
overcomes men's hearts, and triumphs over their Thoughts, as much as the
Greatest Monarch can do over their Persons. Power without Goodness is the
justest Object of men's fear and aversion; and every man is on his guard against
Wisdom, when it is not guided by Justice. An Elevation of Condition, without a
more real Dignity inherent in the mind, is only the exposing of those who are
clothed with that ill deserved Greatness to a brighter light, and more
observation, by which their Defects, which might have passed without any unkind
Comments made on them, if they had lived in a greater obscurity, become the
more Conspicuous, and are by consequence the more censured. Those who are
raised up to a high Eminence of Dignity, are so much the more accountable both
to God and man, not only for all the Ill which either they themselves, or
others acting in their Name, or by their Example, may have done, but likewise
for all the Good which they might have done, but did not. And as they have much
to answer for to God, so likewise men expect much from them; and will be severe
in exacting that, to which they think they have so just a right. God will
indeed forgive their Errors, if they repent of them; but men will not be so
merciful. They will vent their Indignation, if they cannot on their Persons,
yet at least on their Memories. The Flatterers of the Roman Emperors were not
more Ingenious in Inventing new Rites of Divine Adoration to their Arrogant
Masters, during their lives, than their Oppressed Subjects were to find out
peculiar marks of Infamy for the loading their Memories after their death. And
it is certain, That as the Memory of Good Princes shall be in everlasting
remembrance; so the Memory of Bad ones shall either quite perish, or shall rot;
either they shall be quite forgotten, or they shall be remembered indeed, but it
shall be with all possible scorn and horror.

Therefore it is that David being to leave these as his last words to all
posterity, as well as to Solomon, and such as should descend from him; and
intending to put all the weight in them, that could be in words, he introduces
them with much pomp, to give them the more authority. It is not only said, that
these are his last words, tho that must naturally create respect, especially
when it is a King that speaks after long Experience; and a Reigns as full of
all varieties of Accidents as any is in History; But Attention is also here
raised by a Poetical redoubling of many lofty Expressions. David, the Son of
Jesse, said; the man that was raised up on high, the Anointed of the God of
Jacob, and the sweet Psalmist of Israel, said. And because the Instruction that
was to be given, was too Important to rest upon a Human Authority, how eminent
soever it might be, another set of Expressions that are yet more sublime, comes
after these. The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue:
The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me: He that rules over men
must be just, ruling in the fear of the Lord. Here are the true measures of
Government; it is a Rule, and not an Absolute Dominion; it is a Rule over men,
and not a Power, like that which we have over Beasts. In a word, it is the
Conduct of free and reasonable Beings, who need indeed to be governed, but
ought not to be broken by the force and weight of Power.

Those who manage this Power, and Rule over Men, must be just, and act
according to those Eternal and Unalterable Rules of Truth and Goodness, which
are both included in the word Just. This is Universal, and binds all Princes
equally; but such as have the advantages of a more particular Revelation of the
Will of God, come under another Obligation, of Ruling in his fear, and of
administering that Authority which is put in their hands, according to that
light with which he has blessed them.

These words contain the Duty, and give the Character of a good Prince; and
those which follow, set forth the Happiness of such a Government, from two very
natural Figures, which are apt to make great Impressions on us: A temperate
Air, and a clear Sky; a fair Morning, and an unclouded Sun, are things which do
not only please, but animate; they quicken and exhilarate our Spirits; and a
kindly Spring, in which all the Productions of the Earth shoot out abundantly
upon the due intermixtures of Rain and Sun, of Heat and Moisture, gives the
Earth a new Face, and a new Life to all that dwell upon it.

And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the Sun rises; even a
morning without clouds; as the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear
shining after rain.

These being Blessings which all Men feel, and in which every Man rejoices; it
was a very natural Piece of Rhetoric, to set forth the Happiness of a good
Government under such Figures.

This then which is so Elegantly commended to us, is a Rule, and a Rule over
men. It is a Rule, and not an Arbitrary Power, without Laws and Measures. Man
is indeed born free, and so he has a Right to Liberty; but he is born likewise
with so much frailty in his Composition, that he wants Conduct, and must be
kept under Rule. It is a Question not easily determined, whether a State of
Liberty, without any restraint, that leaves all Men to a full freedom of acting
as they please; or a State of Restraint, that shuts out all Liberty, is the
more miserable of the two. The one subdues whole Nations to the Humors of one
flattered and abused Tyrant; and the other exposes Men to the Frauds and
Violences of all their Neighbors; this keeps all Men in a constant State of
War, and that makes them languish under a base depression of Spirit. In one
word, the one makes Men Beasts of Prey, and the other makes them Beasts of
Burden. The Mean between these two Extremes, is a Just Government, that
conducts those who are under it, by constant and fixed Rules, that limits Men's
Rights, and restrains their Passions; that subdues the Haughty, and protects
the Humble; that assures to every Man both his just Birthrights, and the
fruits of his Industry; and, to sum up all that renders every Man safe, and
that puts him in a way to make himself happy. Without this, Mankind would grow
into so much disorder, that the World would become a Desert, and Life it self
would be a Misery, if to live without all Rule over Men, were the Condition of
living. A firm and steady, an equal and uniform, but above all, a just
Government, changes the whole Scene; every man feels that he is secure, and
sees how he may be happy: and unless the whole Government falls under a General
Distress, no man can be miserable without Remedy, but through his own fault.
This is the Sum of all the Happiness that can be expected from Government: But
as it is a Rule, and not a sullen Authority; so it is a Rule over Men, suitable
to the Principles of Reason, to the Nature of man, and to the Ends of Civil
Society. To govern by Humor or Willfulness, either showing an unreasonable
Stiffness, in adhering too sullenly to received Maxims, or an unfixed Levity,
that has no measures, to impose things merely because those in Authority will
show their Power, and will be obeyed; to put the Frailties of Men to trials in
their Obedience, that are above Humane Patience; to exact of them that which is
either impossible or unreasonable, and to carry this Rule too far into that
which is God's Immediate Province, I mean, Men's Consciences: All this is not
the Ruling over Men, either as Men or as Christians: God himself has made his
Yoke easy, and therefore those who can pretend no higher than to be his
Vicegerents, should not exceed those Limits, within which the Author of our
Being has restrained himself. Undue Impositions, and unrelenting Severities; a
Rigor in Commanding, and a Cruelty in Punishing, must find Patterns elsewhere,
then in Gods Governing the World, or in Christ's Governing the Church. Happy we,
who are delivered from both Extremes; who neither lie under the Terror of a
Despotick Power, nor are cast loose to the wildness of ungoverned Multitudes;
who neither groan under the Tyranny of Inquisitors, nor the Madness of Lawless
Men; and whose Laws are neither writ on Sand, nor with Blood; neither easy to
be defaced; nor cruel in their Execution.

But how well tempered soever our Constitution may be, nothing can complete our
happiness, but the Justice of those who rule over us: Then may we reckon our
selves really happy, when they are truly Just; Just, I say, to their People,
and to themselves; to their Laws, and to their own Words and Promises, chiefly
to such as is the Sacred Oath of this Great Day; and when they are so exactly
scrupulous in point of Truth, that all men see, that there is no part of the
Government so unalterable as their Faith is: Just likewise to every one of
their Subjects, sheltring them all under an Impartial Protection; neither
perverting Justice themselves, nor suffering it to be perverted, as far as in
them lies, by any that act in their Name; and resolving to make severe Examples
of all that they can discover, who make them the Patrons of their Oppression:
Just to the whole Society, and the Constitution of the Government, as well as
to every Individual Member of it; not breaking through the Limits of their
Power, nor invading the Rights of their People; neither inventing new
Pretensions of Prerogative, nor stretching those that do belong to them, to the
Ruin of their Subjects: Just in distributing the Public Rewards, with a due
regard to men's Capacities and Merits; and even Just in that which to Good Kings
is always the least acceptable Exercise of their Power; I mean, in punishing
the froward and disobedient, when the ill Effects of their Lenity are visible;
for there are Cases in which Gentleness to particular Persons, becomes an
Injustice to the whole Body. When Blood is shed, it cries against the Murderer,
till it is pardoned; but then the Cry turns upon those that pardon it, and upon
the Land that is defiled with Blood. There is, after all, a Justice in showing
Mercy, as well as in punishing; otherwise Princes may fall into the Error of
being righteous overmuch: And when the Motives for Mercy are brought near an
Equality to those of the other Extreme, the Balance should ever turn to the
merciful side. He understood Government well, Prove. 20. 28.
that said, Mercy and truth preserve the King, and his Throne is upheld by
mercy.

This is the Character of a Just Prince, who sits on the Throne of Judgment,
Prove. 20. 8.
and scatters away all evil with his eyes. There is a Majesty in Justice that
makes all unrighteousness fly, and hide its face before it: Prove. 16. 12.
It is by righteousness that the Throne is established. When every man feels
the Blessings of such a Ruler, all men are easy, and pursue their Industry,
because they know they shall reap the Fruit of their Labor; and every man
becomes a Guard to the Government, that finds himself guarded by it. It is
neither the Discontents of a few ambitious and restless Spirits, nor the
Practices of those who are corrupted by the Enemies of a State, that can throw
it into Convulsions, as long as Justice and Righteousness issue out from the
Throne in so free a course, that they run down like a River.

When righteous lips are the delight of Kings, Prove. 16. 13.
and when the wicked are put away from before them, Prove. 25. 5.
and when they esteem it their honor to search out matters, not being abused
by bold Calumnies, or unjust Representations: When they relieve the Poor, and
protect the Oppressed, then by a noble sort of Conquest and Enlargement of
Empire and Prerogative, they become the absolute Masters of the Hearts and
Hands of their Subjects: When instead of making their Will the Measure of the
Law, they make the Law the Measure of their Will, they will then feel the
easiness of Ruling justly, as sensibly as their People will the happiness of
it; for here they will see their way very plain before them, whereas in all
other paths they must be often divided between an irreconcilable variety of
Interests and Passions.

But after all, though it is a great happiness when Rulers seem to have Justice
so deeply rooted in their natures, that every act of Injustice is as a Violence
done them; yet unless there is a more lasting Principle formed in them, their
Noble and Virtuous Inclinations will be so often crossed by prevailing
Interests, and they will find themselves so often beset with corrupt Men, who
court forbidden Gain, and love the wages of unrighteousness, that it will not
be possible for them to maintain their Integrity, if they have not a Principle
within them of such force, that it bears all things down before it; and that is
the fear of God: This will possess their minds with a secret awe of that
Supreme Being, which sees all things, and discovers even the hidden things of
dishonesty: This will accustom Princes to consider, that how much soever they
may be raised above their Subjects, yet they are as nothing before that God,
who as he set them up by his Providence, so he can pull them down at his
pleasure. Psalm. 107. 4.
He pours contempt upon Princes; and when he blasts the Counsels, and intends
to defeat the Designs of the Greatest and Loftiest Monarchs, how easily do
Crowns fall, and Thrones shake? This fear of God will make Princes often
remember, Psalm. 82. 6, 7.
even in the Pride of all their Glory, that though then they look like Gods,
yet they must die like Men; this Prospect will make them think sometimes on the
melancholy Reflections which the approaches of Death will probably raise within
them, if they at any time for the increase of their Treasure, or their Power,
or for any ambitious or ill Design, have perverted Judgment, or denied Justice;
if they have shed Innocent Blood, or shut their Ears against the Cries of the
Miserable: The remembrance of these things will then raise Agonies in their
Minds, which they will not be able to soften by any of all those Diversions
with which they entertained themselves in their Health and flourishing
Condition. The Violences that they have committed, and the Blood which they
have shed, will then stick too close to their Thoughts to be easily shaken off
by them: Or if they could be so charmed with the sweetness of Empire, that it
should make them deaf to all Clamours in this World; yet as soon as their Souls
pass out of their Bodies, they must leave their Crowns and all their Glory
behind them, and go into a state where all the Distinctions that now look so
gay and so shining, will signify nothing, unless it be to add to their
Account, to increase their Guilt, and to heighten their Condemnation. Then they
must appear at a Tribunal, where there is no respect of Persons; where the
Cries of those Widows and Orphans whom they either made, or oppressed, or at
least refused to relieve, will be heard; and every one of those Complaints
against which their Greatness secured them when on Earth, will be weighed in
the Scales of Impartial Justice. Then those Princes who have hardened themselves
against the Miseries of Mankind, against all that effusion of Blood and
Desolation which their desire of Glory, their Ambition, or their Revenge
occasioned in the injust Wars which they have made, will find that they have a
just and righteous God to deal with, Joh. 34. 19.
that accepts not the Persons of Princes, that revengeth Innocent Blood,
especially the Blood of his Saints, and that will reward every man according to
his works. Mat. 16. 27.
These are all Considerations of such mighty force, which rise out of the fear
of God, that if Princes do not shut them quite out of their minds they will
certainly make all their Maxims of Justice so much the firmer, as they are
graffed upon this stock, and nourished with these and such like Reflections.

Ruling in the fear of the Lord, does not only import, that this is the
Prince's secret Motive and constant Remembrancer, but that the Fear of God
becomes the Rule of the Government, as well as the Principle of him that
governs. Few Princes are so bad as to own that they have no regard to Religion
in any thing they do: It is a strong temptation to their Subjects to shake off
their Yoke, when they openly shake off God's: but as many as make a pretense of
their Religion, do with it, as they do who wear Masks, which rather hide than
disguise them; for none take the Vizar for the true Face, though it covers it:
They use Religion for the hiding some secret deformities; but the Mask is so
course, that though all Men cannot see what is under it, yet they plainly
discern that it is but a Mask. Hypocrisy, as all other things that we wear, is
capable of new Fashions, and of different Modes; and the Skill of those who use
it, is to find out that which is most likely to take, and to suit it with the
present occasion. In one Age, the endowing of Monasteries, and the building of
Churches, could sanctify the greatest Monsters: The Devotion of another Age,
was the carrying over vast Armies to be destroyed in the Holy Land: At another
time, a Zeal for some new Doctrine, or controverted piece of Worship, was the
Holiness in Vogue: The being given up blindly to a Confessor, the breaking of
Faith, and the persecuting of Heretics, to signify a zeal for Holy Church,
can serve with some to cover a multitude of Sins. At some times the Praying and
Preaching with Appearances of Fervor and Devotion, has a Charm that carries
Nations after it: And a Rigor in supporting Established Forms, and the ruining
of such as do not comply with them, will also draw to it self great Applauses.
After all these Mistakes or Impostures, the true Notion of ruling in the fear
of the Lord, is when Princes make that Religion which God has revealed, the
chief mark and measure of their whole Government: When the encouraging and
promoting of a vigorous Piety, and sublime Virtue, and the maintaining and
propagating of True Religion, by ways and means suitable to it, is the chief
design of their Rule: When Impiety and Vice are punished, and Error is
repressed, but without the ruin of such as are involved in it: When the
decency of the Worship of God is kept up, without adulterating it with
Superstition: When Order is carried on in the Church of God, without Tyranny:
And above all, when Princes are in their own deportment, Examples of the Fear
of God, but without Affectation; and when it is visible that they honor those
that fear the Lord, Psalm. 5. 4.
and that vile men are despised by them, then do they truly Rule in the Fear of
God. When we see Kings become thus truly Christian Philosophers, then we may
expect to see the City of God, the New Jerusalem, quickly come down from Heaven
to settle among us; and if we may look for a glorious Thousand Years on Earth,
we may reckon that it is not far from us, when we see Kings fall down before
him that is the King of Kings, and offer up their Crowns to him by whom they
Reign. Kings have one Prerogative which few of them are indeed willing to use
much, and that is, the Converting the World, not by Dragoons, Sanguinary Laws,
or Cruel Edicts; but by Examples of true Religion, and good Life. Kings
Examples have an Efficacy which few can resist, and none will affect to do it.
If Events that happen seldom, may be called Miracles, this may well deserve
that Name; and indeed considering that as Princes carry the Frailties of Human
Nature about them, so they have Temptations ever near them to work on these,
that the constant distraction of Affairs dissipates their Thoughts, and
exhausts their Spirits, that they are always encompassed with Flatterers, who
are on all Occasions contriving how they may please them, even when it is by
deceiving them, and that pleasures of all sorts wait on them and follow them;
when all this is laid together, the Miracle of a truly Religious Prince is
perhaps none of the smallest effects of Omnipotence, and it runs not the hazard
of losing its Value by being showed too often.

But when there is a solid Morality and genuine Piety, well tempered and mixed
together, and that Princes are both Just and Fearing God, and that they govern
Themselves and their People by those measures, then we must acknowledge that not
only the Figures which are here made use of, tho with never so much Beauty, but
all that the Richest Fancy can invent, come far short of setting forth the
Happiness of being under such a Government. The Injust Vexations of Lawsuits
would cease, if it appeared that Righteousness sat in the place of Judgment,
that the Persons of the Rich were not Regarded, nor their Presents accepted:
Men durst not offend, if they saw that nothing could redeem them from deserved
punishments: Factions and Animosities could not be kept up in Cities and
Communities, if those indirect Arts by which they might hope to biass the
Prince were cut off: When true Merit is the sure way to high Dignities, then
Men will take to the long, tho slow Method of honest Industry, instead of the
shorter way of Flattery and Importunity. When Men are put out of countenance
that will be vicious, and are denied all those Favors that the Prince will
have to be the portion of the Virtuous: When the Decencies of Virtue are more
necessary to make a Man look well at Court, than the wearing Clothes in
Fashion; when Atheism and Impiety are Things which Princes cannot bear; when a
drunken Man is a most loathsome sight, and Oaths and Curses are the most
offensive sounds to them; when Slanders, Lies and Calumnies can only hurt those
that make them, and next to the Authors, those that scatter them about. When
all these, or if that is too much to be hoped for, when but some of them appear
in the conduct of Government, Men will be tempted to doubt whether they should
wish to tarry still here on Earth, or not: How many of our Passions would then
fall off, when we should have no more occasion for them, nor provocations to
them: Fears and Jealousies, Discontent and Ill Nature could not thrive, as they
do, if all that Nourishment which the Errors of Government afford them, were
withdrawn.

But to complete the Picture, I shall only set before you the different State
of the Romans, when they passed from the Vicious Reigns of such Execrable
Monsters, as Tiberius, Caligula, Nero, and Domitian, to the happy times of
Trajan, Hadrian, Antonine, but above all, of that most sublime pattern of
Virtue and Philosophy, Marcus Aurelius. In the former, nothing was studied but
Vice and pleasure: Nothing could raise a Man but sordid Flattery, and an
obsequious courting of every Creature of Fortune and Favor. The whole business
of the Court was to corrupt and debase the Senate; and to destroy those who
still retained such a Tincture of their ancient Liberty, that nothing could
subdue it: Spies and Informers were every where employed, to engage Men into
Discourses and Plots, which were to be betrayed, while corrupt Judges and false
Witnesses were sure to carry all things before them. And their very Religion,
false as it was, was vitiated by the impudent mixtures of the most shameful
Idolatry, while their Emperors that were the reproaches of Humane Nature, had
divine Adorations paid them, and that with all the refinings and profusion of
Pomp in it, that nauseous Flattery could invent. Their great City was laid in
Ashes, only to gratify the wild Frolicks of an extravagant Tyrant; the Warlike
Spirit of the Romans was enervated by Luxury and dissoluteness; and the Empire
it self was exposed, first to the contempt, and then to the Inroads of their
formerly subdued Provinces, while a public Spectacle, an Entertainment, or a
Play, were the only cares of a Court that hated the very appearances of Virtue,
and yet still fancied it self to be the Terror and Wonder of the World, till a
fatal Revolution, or a deadly stroke awakened Men out of their Lethargy.

But this side of the Picture, is not more hideous than the other is Glorious;
the return of good Princes put a New Face on the whole Empire: Their Ancient
Sense of Liberty was revived, which must ever carry with it, all that is Great,
or Noble in humane Nature; with it Learning and good Sense, Wit and Eloquence,
were again recoverd, Frugality and Sobriety were again honored, and a Modesty
and Simplicity of living shined afresh: Truth and Virtue, and Philosophy it
self began to reign. Tacitus and Plutarch, Epictetus, and beyond them all
Marcus Aurelius himself, were such Men, that one would bless a whole Age, if it
should but produce one of that force. Marcus in a Reign of almost twenty Years
continuance, is represented by all the Writers of the succeeding as well as of
his own Age, as so perfect a Pattern, that there never appeared either in his
private Deportment, or in his Government, one Single Blemish. He was never once
seen either transported with Anger or with Joy. He was never charged with one
Light Word, or any one Rash Action. He lived in a perpetual Application to the
Affairs of the Empire, and in the intervals of business, even in his
Expeditions and Camps, he was employed in those profound Meditations of
Philosophy, which carry this Noble Title Of Himself to Himself; and in which we
see the most natural and unaffected contempt of all things, besides Virtue and
Goodness, expressed with the greatest force, and yet with the truest simplicity
of any thing that Antiquity has left us.

Under such Princes, the Romans could not but recover their ancient Discipline,
and their wonted Valor, and the Empire was again raised to its former Luster,
and regained its lost Authority; but which was much more, in them the World saw
patterns of Virtue, that were too high for that corrupt Religion which then
prevailed; and this perhaps disposed it, not a little for Christianity, that
could not only consist with such Morals, but carry them far higher.

If the opposition of these two different Scenes of Government affect this
Auditory, and if the change seems sensible, when set out in Words, it is You,
GREAT SOVEREIGNS, that must give this its best Light and utmost Force. It is
from You that we expect the Glorious Reverse of all cloudy days. You have been
hitherto our Hope and our Desire: You must now become our Glory and Crown of
rejoicing: Ordinary Virtues in You, will fall so far short of our hopes, that
we shall be tempted almost to think them Vices. It is in Your Persons, and
under Your Reign, that we hope to see an opening to a Glorious Scene, which
seems approaching. May You not only accomplish, but exceed even our Wishes. May
You be long happy in one another. May You Reign long in your Persons, and much
longer in a glorious Posterity. May You belong the Support of the Church of
God, and the Terror of all its Enemies. May You be ever happy in obedient
Subjects, in wise Councillors, and faithful Allies: May your Fleets be
prosperous, and your Armies Victorious. But may You soon have cause to use
neither; by settling both at Home and Abroad, a firm and just Peace, and by
securing the Quiet of Europe from those who have so often, with so little
regard to the Faith of Treaties, and now at last beyond all former Examples,
disturbed it. In order to the obtaining all these Blessings, and in Conclusion
a sure, tho a late admittance to the Kingdom Above, where you shall exchange
these Crowns with a more lasting, as well as a more glorious One, May not only
this Auditory, but the whole Nation, join with united Voices, and inflamed
Hearts, in saying

God Save King William and Queen Mary.
FINIS.
Book Printed for John Starkey, and Sold by Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden
Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
AN Historical and Political Discourse of the Laws and Government of England,
from the first times to the end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, with a
Vindication of the Ancient way of Parliaments in England, Collected from some
Manuscript Notes of John Seldom, Esquire by Nathaniel Bacon of Gray's Inn Esquire in
Folio, Price bound 12 s. For Printing this Book John Starkey was Outlawed, in
the year 1682, which is now by him New Published.

The Journals of all the Parliaments, during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth; both
of the House of Lords, and House of Commons. Collected by Sir Simmonds D' Ewes
of Suffolk Knight and Baroner. Revised and Published by Paul Bows of the
Middle Temple Esquire in Folio price bound 20 s.

A New Systeme of the Apocalypse, or Plain and Methodical Illustrations of all
the Visions in the Revelations of St. John, Written by a French Minister in the
year 1685, and finished but two days before the Dragoons plundered him of all
except this Treatise, to which is added this Authors Defense of his
Illustrations concerning the Non-^^stusion of the Vial, in answer to Mr.
Jurieu; faithfully Englished: In 12 o. Price bound 2 s, 6 d.

Books Lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
DR GILEERT BVRNET'S History of the Reformation of the Church of England, in 2
Volumes in Folio.

-- His Abridgment of the said History of the Reformation.

-- History of the Rights of Princes in disposing of Ecclesiastical Benefices,
and Church Lands, 12 o

-- Life of Dr. William Bedell Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland, to which are
Annexed the Letters betwixt Him and Wadsworth, about Religion.

-- His Two Letters Written upon the Discovery of the Popish Plot, together
with a Collection of several other Tracts and Discourses: Written by him
betwixt the years 1578. to 1685. To which is added a Letter written to Dr.
Burnet, giving an Account of Cardinal Pools Secret Powers. The History of the
Powder Treason, with a Vindication of the Proceedings thereupon. An Impartial
Consideration of the Five Jesuits dying Speeches, who were Executed for the
Popish Plot, 1679.

-- His Account of the Life and Death of the Earl of Rochester.

-- A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England: In which is
demonstrated, that all the Essentials of Ordination, according to the Practice
of the Primitive and Greek Churches are still retained in the Church.

-- Reflections on the Relation of the English Reformation lately printed at
Oxford In two Parts. 4 to.

-- Animadversions on the Reflections upon Dr. BVRNET's Travels. 8 o.

-- Reflections on a Paper, entitled this Majesty's Reasons for withdrawing
himself from Rochester.

-- An Enquiry into the present State of Affairs, and in particular, whether we
owe Allegiance to the King in these Circumstances? And whether we are bound to
Treat with Him, and call Him back or no?

-- A Sermon Preached in St. James's Chapel before the Prince of Orange 23d.
December 1688.

-- A Sermon Preached before the House of Commons 31 January 1688. being the
Thanksgiving day for the deliverance of this Kingdom from Popery and Arbitrary
Power.

-- His Eighteen Paper relating to the Affairs of Church and State, during the
Reign of King James the Second. Seventeen whereof were written in Holland, and
first Printed there; the other at Exeter, soon after the Prince of Orange's
Landing in England.

-- A Letter to Mr. Thevenot. Containing a Censure of Mr. Le Grand's History of
King Henry the Eighth's Divorce. To which is added, a Censure of Mr de Meaux's
History of the Variations of the Protestant Churches. Together with some
further Reflectious on Mr. Le Grand. 1689.

Dr. PARTRICKS Parable of the Pilgrim. The Sixth Edition corrected.

-- A Private Prayer to be used in difficult Times. 8 o.

-- Exposition of the Ten Commandments: 8 o.

-- His Sermon before the Prince of Orange, 20. January 1688.

-- His Sermon before the Queen at Whitehall, March 1. 1688.

-- The Pillar and Ground of Truth: A Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be that Church, and the Pillar of that Truth mentioned by St.
Paul in his first Epistle to Timothy Chap. 3. v. 15.

-- His Sermon preached on St. Peter's day, published with Enlargements.

-- His Sermon preached at St. Paul's Covent Garden, on the first Sunday in
Lent, being a Second part of a Sermon preached before the Prince of Orange
newly published.

Preparation for Death being a Letter sent to a Young Gentlewoman in France in
a distemper of which she died, By WILLIAM WAKE, M. A. Preacher to the
Honorable Society of Gray's Inn

-- His Two Discourses of Purgatory and prayers for the Dead. 4 o.

-- His Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.]

-- His Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England;
against the Exceptions of Mons. de Meaux, late B. of Condom, and his Vindicator.

-- A Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of
England, against the new Exceptions of Monsieur de Meaux, late Bishop of
Condom, and his Vindicator. The FIRST PART: in which the Account that has been
given of the Bishop of Meaux's Exposition, is fully Vindicated; the Distinction
of Old and New Popery Historically asserted, and the Doctrine of the Church of
Rome, in point of Image Worship, more particularly considered.

-- Second Defense of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England
against Monsieur de Meaux and his Vindication, the SECOND PART.

-- A Continuation of the state of the Controversy between the Church of
England and the Church of Rome, being a full account of the Books that have
been of late written on both sides.

-- An Historical Treatise of Transubstantiation. Written by an Author of the
Communion of the Church of Rome; rendered into English By William Wake M. A.
With a Preface.

Books lately Published.
A Letter Written by a Clergy Man to his Neighbor concerning the present
circumstances of the Kingdom, and the Allegiance that is due to the King and
Queen

The Case of Allegiance in our present circumstances considered, in a Letter
from a Minister in the City, to a Minister in the Country.

A Sermon preached at Fulham, in the Chapel of the Palace upon Easter day
1689. at the Consecration of the Right Reverend Father in God Gilbert Lord
Bishop of Sarum: By Anthony Horneck, D. D.

The Judgments of God upon the Roman Catholic Church, from its first Rigid
Laws for Universal Conformity to it, unto its last End. With a prospect of
these near approaching Revolutions, Viz. The Revival of the Protestant
profession in an Eminent Kingdom, where it was totally suppressed. The last End
of all Turkish Hostilities. The general Mortification of the power of the Roman
Church in all parts of its Dominions. In Explication of the Trumpets and Vials
of the Apoculypse, upon Principles generally acknowledged by Protestant
Interpreters. By Drue Cressener, D. D.

A Breviate of the State of Scotland in its Government, Supreme Courts,
Officers of State, Inferior Officers, Offices and Inferior Courts, Districts,
Jurisdictions, Buroughs Royal, and Free Corporations. Fol.

Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Historia a Literaria a Christo nato usque ad
Saeculum XIV. Facili Methodo digesta. Qua de Vita illorum ac Rebus geftis, de
Secta, Dogmatibus, Elogio, Stylo; de Scriptis genuinis, dubiis, supposititiis,
ineditis, deperditis, Fragmentis; deque variis Operum Editionibus perspicue
agitur. Accedunt Scriptores Gentiles, Christianae Religionis Oppugnatores; and
cujusvis Seculi Breviarium. Inseruntur suis locis Veterum aliquot Opuscula and
Fragmenta, tum Graeca, tum Latina hactenus inedita, Praemissa denique
Prolegomena, quibus plurima ad Antiquitatis Ecclesiasticae studium spectantia
traduntur. Opus Indicibus necessariis instructum. Autore GVILIELMO CAVE, SS.
Theol. Profes. Canonico Windesoriensi. Accedit ab Alia Manu Appendix ab ineunte
Saeulo XIV. ad Annum usque MDXVII. Fol. 1689.

Books in the Press.
Some Considerations touching Succession and Allegiance.

A Discourse concerning the Worship of Images; preached before the University
of Oxford: By George Tully Sub-Dean of York, for which he was procured to be
suspended by Obadiah Walker.

Reflections upon the late Great Revolution: Written by a Lay-Hand in the
Country, for the satisfaction of some Neighbors.

The History of the Dissertion; or an Account of all the public Affairs in
England, from the beginning of September 1688. to the Twelfth of February
following. With an Answer to a Piece called The Dissertion discussed, in a
Letter to a Country Gentleman. By a Person of Quality.


