A BRIEF TREATISE CONCERNING THE REGULATING OF PRINTING.

Humbly presented to the PARLIAMENT of England.

By WILLIAM BALL, Esquire.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1651.

A BRIEF TREATISE CONCERNING The Regulating of Printing.
AMongst many temporal Benefits which Divine Bounty has in several ages
manifested to mankind, the invention of the Mystery, or Art of Printing may
rightly be acknowledged one of the greatest, as an exact and exquisite
Instrument, opening to the understanding, not only all natural Sciences, but
even supernatural Mysteries; by the means whereof the minds of men have been
endowed with many excellent gifts. Yet even as the best things have been
abused, so has this beneficial Art been notoriously depraved by vain,
contentious, and seditious Persons; to the greatconfusion' of Doctrinall
Tenets, and Disturbance of State Affairs: For prevention (as much as may be) of
so dangerous extravagancies, the most regular Christian Potencies (or
Republics) and Illustrious Potentates have thought fit to comprehend the
liberty of Printing, (even as of Coining) within the sphere of their several
Powers: Wherein (amongst others) the late Q. Elizabeth, and her successors have
(not without mature deliberation, and sage presidents in this point) been most
vigilant, well perceiving that the Eye of understanding might be subject to be
deceived by erroneous principles in Print, as may the bodily Eye by counterfeit
Coin; In Regard whereof they propagated wholesome Orders, and Decrees for the
Regulating of Printing, and Printers; which rightly considered, cannot be
defaced, no not blemished by the notion of Tyranny. Moreover it is an Axiom of
State, that, Acta legitima Tyrannorum and Hostium Reipublicae rata esse
oportere. [Bodin. de Republica, L. I. c. 5.] The lawful Acts of Tyrants, even
of (over-Lording) enemies ought to be observed in a Commonwealth: so that
admitting Oppression, or Tyranny in some Trans-actions of these Later Princes,
yet their prudent, and just Ordinances are not to be Rejected, but rather (
mutatis mutandis) to be carefully conserved.

Wherefore with all humble submission to the High Representative of this
Natition, I have tendered these subsequent Proposalls and clauses concerning the
Regulating of Printing, and Printers, unto their grave Considerations, and
censures; part whereof I have collected out of former Ordinances, and have
partly proposed somewhat of mine own; as hereafter ensues.

I.
That no person or persons whatsoever Print, or cause to be Printed any
offensive Books, Pamphlets, Papers, or Ballads to the Derogation of this
present Government, or seditious disturbance of this Commonwealth, or of any
Dominion, Member, or Corporation thereof, nor shall sell, or dispose of any
such Books, Pamphlets, Papers, or Ballads, upon Pain that he, or they so
offending shall forfeit for every such Book, etc. the sum of 10l. The one
half to the use of the Commonwealth, the other to the party discovering the
same, and suffer such farther punishment as the Demerit of the Offense, or
Offenses shall deserve.

II.
That no person or persons whatsoever shall Print, or cause to be Printed any
Book or Pamphlet whatsoever, unless such Book or Pamphlet, and all, and
every the Titles, Epistles, Prefaces, Pro^^ems, Preambles, Introductions,
Dedications, Tables, and all other matters, and things thereunto annexed, or
therewith imprinted shall be first lawfully Liensed, and Authorized by such
Person, or Persons as the Parliament of England shall in their wisdoms
constitute, and appoint; and that all, and every such Book, or Pamphlet be also
first entered into the Register Book of the Company of Stationers; upon Pain
that every Printer offending therein shall be hereafter for ever disenabled to
exercise the Art, and Mystery of Printing, and suffer imprisonment by the space
of one whole year: provided that this extend not to the Printers of the
Parliament of England, and Council of State, for or touching any Book which
they shall Command, or allow of.

III.
That all the Books concerning Divinity, Philosophy, and Poetry shall be
Printed by special Allowance of the Chaplains in ordinary to the Council of
State, or by one of them; And in case of no such Chaplains in being, then by
three Divines for that purpose appointed, or by one of them; All Books of State
Affairs, and History (except Diurnalls) to be licenced by the Secretary of
State, with two more of the Council of State joined unto him, or by one of
them: All Books concerning Law to be Licenced by the Lords Commissioners of the
great Seal, Lord chief Justices, Master of the Rolls, or by one of them; All
Books touching Physic to be Licenced by three of the College of Physicians
appointed for that purpose, or by one of them; All Books of Mathematics to be
Licenced be three professed Mathematicians, being appointed thereinto, or by
one of them; All Books of Military Discipline to be Licenced by three of the
Council of War, or otherwise of the Grand Committee for the Militia, or by one
of them; All Books of Heraldry to be Licenced by the Principal Herald at Arms
with two other Authorized Heralds joined unto him, or by one of them; All Books
concerning foreign Languages to be allowed by three Linguists for that
purpose appointed or by one of them.

Provided that the Chancellors or Vice-Chancellors of the Universities shall
License only such Book, or Books that are to be Printed within the Limitts of
the Universities Respectively, but not in LONDON or elsewhere, not meddling
with Books of Common Law, matters of State, Military Discipline and Heraldry.

IV.
That every Person, or Persons which are, or shall be appointed, or Authorized
to License Books, shall have two several Copies entirely written; one of which
Copies shall be kept in a Public Office, or Registrie for that purpose to be
appointed, the which Copy every such Person, or Persons who shall Respectively
allow of, or license for Printing shall send into the said Office, or Registry
testified under his, or their hands, to the end that he or they may be secured,
that the Copy so licensed by him, or them, is not altered without his or their
privity; the other Copy Licensed shall remain in his hands whose Copy it is;
and all Stationers, and Printers that shall Print, or cause to be imprinted any
Copy, or Copies whatsoever differently from this Rule, to incur the penalties
contained in the second clause.

V.
That every Merchant of Books, or Person, or Persons whatsoever who shall
Import any Book, or Books from beyond the Seas into this Commonwealth of
England, shall before he, or they deliver, (...) cause to be delivered forth
any such Book, or Books out of his, or their ^^nds, or expose them to sale,
deliver ^n a true Catalogue in writing of all and every such Book, and Books
unto the Master of the Office, or Registrie for Copies aforesaid; upon pain of
forfeiture, and Confiscation of all, and every such Book and Books, and twenty
shillings fine for every such Book delivered forth, or exposed to sale; the one
half to the use of the Commonwealth, the other to the Party discovering the
same.

VI.
That no Merchant of Books, or Person, or Persons whatsoever shall import or
cause to be imported from beyond the Seas any offensive or scandalous Books
Pamphlets, Papers, Portraitures, or Ballads into any part of this Commonwealth
of England, upon incurring the penalties contained in the first clause.

VII.
That no Person, or Persons whatsoever shall within the Precincts, and
Dominions of this Commonwealth, or elsewhere Imprint, or cause to be imprinted,
or shall Import or cause to be imported into this Commonwealth of England, or
any part thereof, any Copy, Book, or Books, or part of any Copy, Book, or Books
Printed beyond the Seas, or elsewhere, which the Company of Stationers, or any
other Person, or Persons have, or shall have Right unto by Order or entrance in
their Register-Book; or otherwise by special Order of Parliament, or by
Letters-Patent, being un^^lled by this present Parliament; nor shall bind,
stitch, or expose to sale any such Book, or Books, upon pain of forfeiture all
the said Books, and twenty shillings fine for every such Book, to be ^^^led by
Writ, or Action, Bill, etc. by the Person, or Persons aggrieved.

VIII.
That every Person who shall hereafter Print, or cause to be printed any Books,
Ballads, Charts, Portraictures, or other thing, or things whatsoever, shall
thereunto, or thereon set his, and their own name, or names; as also the Name,
or names of the Author, or Authors, Maker, or Makers of the same; and by, or
for whom any such Book, or other thing is, or shall be printed, upon pain of
forfeitute of all such Books, etc. And having his, or their Presses, Letters,
and other Instruments for Printing to be utterly defaced, and made
unserviceable and twenty shillings fine for every such Book, etc. The one half
to the use of the Commonwealth, the other to the Party discovering the same.

IX.
That no person, or persons whatsoever shall Print or cause to be Printed,
forge^^ put, or counterfeit, in or upon any Book or Books, etc. the name,
title, marke^ or vinnet of the Company of Stationers or of any particular
person, or persons which has, or shall have lawful Privilege, Authority, or
Allowance to Print the same, without consent of the said Company, or of the
Party, or Parties which shall be so privileged, and Authorized, first had, and
obtained, upon pain of incurring the Penalty in the seventh clause.

X.
That no Tradesmen, Shopkeepers, or any other person or persons whatsoever,
not being a free Stationer of the City of London, or not having served 7. years
apprentice to the trade of Bookseller, Printer, or Book-binder, shall within
the City, or Suburbs of London, receive, take, or buy, to barter, sell again,
exchange, or do away any Bibles, Testaments, Primmers, Psalm-books, Almanacks,
or other Book, or Books whatsoever, upon pain if forfeiture of all such Books,
and twenty shillings fine for every such book, to be (...) by Writ, or Action,
Bill, etc. by the person, or persons aggrieved.

XI.
That no Stranger, or Forreigner whatsoever, be suffered to bring in for sale,
barter, or rent, here, any book or books printed beyond the Seas, in any
Language whatsoever, either by themselves, or their secret Factors; except such
only as be free Stationers of London, and such as have been brought up in that
profession, upon pain of confiscation of all such Books so imported, and
twenty shillings fine for every such Book to be sued by writ, or Action, etc.
by the Master, and Wardens of the Company of the Stationers.

XII.
And for as much as there may be great abuse committed by Searchers, and other
Officers of the Customs by seizure of Books, who (as I have heard credibly
reported) seize English Bibles, Testaments, and other Books, Printed in
Holland, and in other parts beyond the Seas very erroniously, to the dangerous
introduction of several Heresies within this Commonwealth, and great Injury
to such, to whom of right the Copies or Originalls of such Books belong; and
after such seizure (having as it is said first enacted custom in Gross) vent,
and disperse the said Bibles, Testaments, and Books, in England, Ireland, and
other Dominions of this Commonwealth: for prevention whereof, no Searcher, nor
other Officer of the Customs or excise whatsoever shall hereafter seize on any
Books (if discovered before he first acquaint the Master of the Office, or
Registrie for Copies aforesaid, together with the Master, and Wardens of the
Company of Stationers, (upon pain of forfeiture of his, or their Places, and
Imprisonment) who shall have Power to accompany such Searchers, and Officers of
the Customs; and shall forthwith upon discovery, take a true Catalogue of such
Books, and present it to the Honorable Council of State: And to prevent the
farther venting, and dispersing of such erroneous Bibles, Testaments, and other
Books as aforesaid, after notice given unto the Honorable Council of State,
the said Master of the Office, or Registrie for Copies, together with the
Master, and Wardens, of the Company of the Stationers, or some of them, shall
cut, or cause to be cut into waste paper, or otherwise utterly deface the said
English Bibles, Testaments, and other Books printed in Holland, and in other
parts beyond the Seas, and deliver the said waste paper, or defaced Books, to
such to whom of right the Copies, or Originalls do belong.

XIII.
Moreover for farther prevention of Importation, venting, and dispersing of
Seditious, Schismatic, and Offensive Books, as well as of the Books
aforesaid; That no Driefats, Sacks, Maunds, Chests, or Fardells of Books
whatsoever Imported into this Commonwealth be permitted by any Officers of the
Custom or Excize, to be opened or conveyed away before notice given unto the
Master of the Office, or Registry for Copies, and also to the Master, and
Wardens of the Company of Stationers (upon pain of such Officer, or Officers
forfeiture of his, or their Places, and Imprisonment. And the said Master of
the Office, or Registrie for Copies, as also the Master and Wardens of the
Company of the Stationers shall have Power to accompany the Searchers and other
Officers of the Customs, and excise within 48. hours after such notice given
(Sabbath-Dayes, and days of public Thanksgiving, and of Humiliation being
excepted out of the said 48. hours) and shall also have Power to seize on all
Seditious, Schismatic, and offensive Books, and forthwith take a true
Catalogue of such Books, and present it to the Council of State; and after
that carry the said books into the Stationers Hall, there to remain in safe
custody, until farther order taken by the Council of State; And the said
Master, and Wardens of the Company of the Stationers, if they cannot perform
the same by themselves, shall have Power to depute and nominate from time to
time, sufficient persons in his, or their stead provided that at all times one
of the said Masters or Wardens be present at every search: And the said Master
of the Office, or Registrie for Copies, and the Master, and Wardens of the
Company of the Stationers, shall have power to appoint some convenient place
where searches shall be made; and if the said Master of the Office, or
Registrie for Copies, Master, and Wardens of the Company of the Stationers
shall neglect, or omit on their parts any thing, or Duty which they ought to
perform herein, they shall incur such penalty as the Council of State (upon
Information of such their neglect, or offense shall in their wisdoms think
fit, be it by fine, or Imprisonment.

XIV.
That no person, or persons within the City of London, liberties thereof, or
elsewhere, shall erect, or cause to be erected any Press, or Printing house,
or shall demise, let, or suffer to be held, or used any House, Vault, Seller,
or other room whatsoever to, or by any persons for a Printing house, or place
to print in, unless he, or they who shall demise, let, or suffer the same to
be used, shall first give notice to the Masters, and Wardens of the Company of
the Stationers of such Demise, or suffering to work, or print, upon pain of
forfeiture of 20l. for every such offense, the one half to the use of the
Commonwealth, the other to the party discovering the same.

XV.
And for the better discovering of printing in corners without License, the
Master, and Wardens of the Company of Stationers, or such whom they shall
depute and trust, shall have Power, and Authority, to search what houses,
shops, vaults, and rooms (and at what time they shall think fit) especially
Printing houses, and to view what is in Printing, and to call for the License
to see whether it be Licenced or no, and if not, to seize upon so much as is
printed, together with the Presses, and all Instruments for printing, and to
carry the offenders before the Council of State, or the L. President thereof
for the time being, to take such farther order therein, as they shall in their
wisdoms see cause.

XVI.
That no Joyner, Carpenter, or other person shall make any printing press, nor
Smith shall forge any Iron-worke for a printing press, nor Founder cast any
letters for any person, or persons whatsoever, nor shall any person or persons
bring in from any parts beyond the (...) any letters founded, or cast, nor buy
any such letters for printing, unless he, (...) they respectively shall first
acquaint the said Master, and Wardens, or some of them for whom the said
Press, Ironworks, or Letters are to be made, forged, or cast; upon pain of
Imprisonment, and such farther penalty as the Council of State shall think fit.

XVII.
Whereas the multitude of printers is greatly increased by the late licencious
and by-printing of unlicenced pamphlets, and other seditious and impertinent
books, and papers, to the great scandal of this Commonwealth, and their own
disgrace, ignominy, and want of good, and sufficient employment, and
maintenance; for present remedy whereof, the Printers attempt a cure as bad, or
worse then the disease, by petitioning the Honorable Committee for regulating
of Printing, that they would be pleased to report to the High Representative of
this Nation, that the said Printers, might be made a Fraternity, or Company
distinct from the Stationers; against, and in opposition of such their not only
unsound, but even dangerous Petition, and desires, I have thought fit to insert
these ensuing Reasons, viz.

That Printing being of great concernment, and of important consequence, by
means whereof this Commonwealth may either enjoy benefit, or receive
notorious detriment; Printers therefore ought to have some careful, and exact
supervisors over them, even as Apothecaries (who have the College of
Physicians, and Doctors of Physique over them, not only to prescribe, but also
to peruse their Medicines) lest the first poison the minds of the People by
erroneous principles in print; as may the last their bodies, by evil Medicines,
and also by self compliance in case they should be a Fraternity, or Company
distinct (...) the Stationers) Print undecently, (...), and as they please
according to ^^ter, and Paper (as do some Printers (...) Amsterdam and Geneva)
to the dis^^^our of this Commonwealth, dis^^^ent to the people, and
pre-purposed ^^^iment of the Stationers whom they aligne, and inveigh against,
and would (...) regard of their present pressures occa^^^ned by themselves)
undermine by spe^^ous pretenses: who notwithstanding (...) chiefly the men
which this Commonwealth can subordinately entrust (in respect of their skill,
abilities and long continued industry that ways) to super^ise the Art and
Mystery of Printing, and Printers. And if they should say that ^^e Apothecaries
separated themselves ^^om the Grocers, and became a Company distinct, and why
may not the Printers do the like? I answer, that the case is not alike, for
the Apothecaries sell for the major part compounds for Medicaments, and the
Grocers simples for Nutriment, being things of a distinct nature, and quality;
but the Printers, Book-binders, and Stationers make, and sell nothing but a
book, etc. Howev^^ the Apothecaries are subject to the D^^ctors of Physique as
aforesaid, and if the printers should exempt themselves from the Stationers,
there would be non^ found, who might subordinately Regu^late, and reform such
abuses, and dis^orders which those Innovating, an^ mean undertakers may in all
probability from time to time commit.

XVIII.
Moreover it is a Maxim of Policy, as well as of Philosophy, that Frustra fit^
per plura, quod potest fieri per pa^ciora; modo ita been fiat: That thing is in
vain done by more, which may be done by less, in case it may be as well
accomplished: The Regulating of Printing, and Printers, may, not only for the
welfare of the Public, but even for the good of themselves (if not exorbitant
in their desires) be subbordinately perfor^^^^l by the Stationers, without any
crea^^^l or making the Printers a distinct company. If the number of the
Printing houses in London were stinted, and (...)l of them suffered to be
without the ^^^lties of the City of London.

If the number of Printing presses were ^^litted.

If the number of Apprentices were also ^^lited.

If the Master and Wardens of the Company of the Stationers take good (...)l,
that Journeymen-Printers (who are (...)l of the Company of Stationers) of ^lest
behavior, and able in the Art or ^sterie of Printing, be employed and ^^^on
work; and in case such Journeymen Printers are in want of work, Apprentices
to be removed from such employments as any Journeymen-Printers (...) good
behavior shall offer themselves ^o.

Lastly, if the Printers themselves will (...) subject to the good Orders and
Constitutions of the Company of Statione^ concerning all which (as also the
pri^ of useful Books) I conceive the Mas^ Wardens, and other able and
experie^^ced Stationers, are the fittest men to (...) consulted with.

XIX.
But it may be greatly suspected, the the Bible, Testament, and some of t^^
Stationers Copies and Originalls, a^ the Baits which thc Printers wou^^ catch,
or compass: As touching t^^ Bible, I take it to be a book of so hig^
consequence, wherein the Mysteries (...) Salvation are contained, that it ought
(...) be regularly, and exactly, and not comm^^nicatively printed, lest in a
Book of so hig^ importance, not only dangerous Error^ but even pernicious
Heresies be imprinte^ and propagated, and the Book it self be als^ undecently
Printed in Letter, and Paper (...) And for as much as Propriety (rightly (...)
considered is) Relatio Legalis cujuslibet (...) (...) Temporale, A legal
Relation of any one to a Temporal good; I con^^ive the sole Printing of the
Bible, and ^estament, with Power of Restraint in others, to be of Right the
Propriety of one MATTHEW BARKER, Citizen and Stationer of LONDON, in Regard
that his Father paid for the Amen^ed or Corrected Translation of the Bible
^^00.l. by reason whereof the Translated Copy did of right belong to him, and
his Assigns; yet for the better carrying ^n of so Important a Work, and the
Regulating of an Impression of so great con^ernment, in the fourteenth year of
^ing James his Reign, he continued Letters Patents granted to Robert his
Son; since when in the year of our Lord 1635. for the farther carrying on,
and Regulating of the said Important Impression, there has been paid by
Matthew Barker aforesaid 600 l. for a Reversionary Patent.

If it be said, that Matthew Barker his Father made, or might have made benefit
enough by his sole Impression of the Bible, etc. For the costs, and charges
which he was at for the amended, or corrected Translation thereof, so that
Matthew Barker himself need not have a farther benefit thereby: I answer, so
does every one of the Stationers who purchases a Copy, or Copies make benefit
enough thereby, and yet he enjoys such Copy, or Copies for himself, and his
Assigns, and so ought to do, or else any other might invade his Right: so also
every one who purchases Land at the valuation of 18. or 20. years Revenew, be
it more, or less; make at or about the determination of such time sufficient
benefit for his purchase, yet there is no Law, nor any reason that himself, his
Heirs, or Assigns should be excluded, or debarred of the Remainder, etc. That
were to Null all Law, violate all Right. And certainly according to equity (if
not Law) Matthew Barker ought to succeed his Father in the sole printing of the
Bible, etc. both in regard of his ^^thers costs and charges; as also i^ respect
(...) his own Patent Purchased dearly e^^ough, in regard it was for Reversion.

But it may be some will say, that di^^rs may make benefit by Printing of the
^^ble, and Testament, whereas if Matthew ^^rker enjoy the sole Printing thereof,
himself will also enjoy the sole benefit thereby for him, or his Assigns: to
the which I answer, the same may be objected against Miles Flesher, and his
Partners, sole Printers of all Law Books against John F^^l^ sole Printer of all
Acts for this present Parliament; against (...) Dugard sole Printer for the
Council of State, against Richard Cotes, sole ^^^^ter of all Acts,
Proclamations, and ^^her matters for the City of London* against the
University-Printers of Oxford, and Cambridge, who enjoy also the printing of
the Bible by Patent; against the Company of the Stationers themselves who enjoy
by Patent four several Books, viz. The Psalter, Psalms, Primmer, and
Almanac; yea this may be objected against very many Station^r^, and some
Printers, who notwithstanding ought not thereupon to be deprived, or debarred
of their rights; for it is, and ought to be held a Maxim in Law, and Equity,
as in Divinity, that not any shall (...) had, that good may come thereof, and
consequently not to violate any one of his Propriety, or right, that thereby
some or any benefit may accrue to others: moreover all well Regulated Politics
(especially Republiques) do con^^^ the partick^^^ Right of every Pers^^
Individually, so far at such Right ^ppeseth not the General Good, and
thereby preserve the General Good, without vi^^ing (...) ones particular Right
unjustly, (...) indirectly, according to which Rule, neither Matthew Barker, nor
other the Stationer^, or Printers nominated ought to be debarred, or deprived
any their Original^^, or Copies.

If any one should object (as lately a Stationer did unto my self) that the
Bible cannot properly be called a Copy, ^^cause it i^ the written Word of God:
^^hough, such objection be frivolous, (...) such I answers, that the several
^^^^nslations thereof are properly copies, (...) the singing, or Me^^red
Psalms (...) belonging to the Company of the (...) aforesaid, Er^s^^ his
Latin Translation of the Testament, and many others of the like nature.

XX.
Peradventuee some greedy, and it may be needy Printers, and Stationers, will
not be satisfied with Reason, unless they may against reasonable equity,
inwade other men's Proprieties, and Rights. ^ut I hope the High Representative
of this Nation, at what time they shall in their wisdoms think fit to pass
an Act, or Acts for the Regulating of Printing, will therein by express
Provisoes confirm, and ratify not only the propriety of Matthew Barker
aforesaid, for him, and his Assigns, but all such other Propriety and
Proprieties which belong to the Company of the Stationers, to every free
Stationer respectively; whereby the Prudent care of the Parliament will
suppress Licencious Encroachments upon many considerable Copies, and avoid
therein future debate and controversy.

WILLIAM BALL.

^^rtaine Additionall Answers (...) to such Objections, as may peradventure be
made.
I.
IF it should be said that the Penalties which I have proposed are too great,
and also that Penalty left to discr^^^^, in some cases may seem Rigor.

^^swer, that Abuses are seldom reformed without great Penalties; and in (...)
as great Detriment may ensue to (...) Commonwealth by scandalous, and (...)
Printing, as may by counter^^it and debased Coining, The Penalty for the one,
ought in some measure to aequalize the Penalty of the other: And Penalty in
some cases left to the Discretion of grave Personages is not Rigor, (...)
Terror, which may be regu^^^^ by Natural Equity.

II.
If it should be said that the Commissioners of the Great Seal, Judges of the
Law, Secra^tary of State, and some others whom I have nominated for Licencing
of Books, may in Regard of their great, and weighty Affairs want (...) and
(...) Books, etc.

I answer, that every one of the said Persons and (...) who shall have power to
(...) may have power to en^^^^ and depute (...) provided themselves will be
responsible for the (...) which such (...) shall Commit; and tha^ such Deputie^
set their own (...) and the (...) for whom they (...) such Books* etc. which
they shall License.

III.
(...) it should be said, That requiring double Copies, and an Office for
Registry thereof would be vexatious, etc. I (...), that the abuses to
Licensers, as (...) to Authors have been so great, (as (...) self, amongst
others can testify in a (...) Book of mine own) that no safer (...) can be
found; moreover why should (...) those things which appertain to the (...) be
kept upon Record, as are many (...) that appertain merely to Lively^^^od* and
whether men write for the Glory of Almighty God, and good of others (which
ought to be the chief (...)) or the profit of themselves, let them take so
much pains as to write the subject twice, or otherwise spare their pains for
once. And if it should be said, that by that means fewer books will ^^me into
the Press, I answer, not the ^^^merous multitude of Books, but the solid
validity of them will benefit a Commonwealth.

William Ball.


