A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mr. James Houblon, Who was buried at St.
Mary Wolnoth Church in Lombard Street, June 28. 1682.

By GILBERT BURNET, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXII.

To the Most Honored Master Peter James John Jacob Isaac Abraham Jeremiah
Houblon, Sons of the Deceased Mr. JAMES HOUBLON.
Most Honored,
AS I was invited by you to Preach this Sermon, so I am now determined by your
Desires to Print it: and do esteem it a great honor, that I was made choice of
by you, to do at once both a great Justice to the Dead, and I hope some good to
the Living, at least, by that part of it which relates to your Worthy Father.

Excellent Patterns afford great Instruction: and it is the more necessary to
propose them to the Imitation of others, in an Age in which, while we are
disputing so hotly about Opinions and Forms, the Power and Life of Religion is
like to wear out of the World: and so few instances of it appear, that no
wonder Atheists take great advantages from thence, to persuade their weak and
lewd followers, that none believe inwardly what they outwardly profess: and
upon this account, we have great reason to make the most we can of all those
living arguments that have been among us of the efficacy and amiableness of
true Religion.

When I received from you some informations concerning your dead Father, I
perceived your chief design was, to have only so much told of him, as might
preserve a just character of him to posterity; and particularly, for those
descended from him: so as it might either engage them to follow his steps and
imitate his Virtues; or remain as a witness against them, if they should
decline from that good way which he both living and dying, has so earnestly
recommended to you and them. But I found you had no mind to have his praises
raised to any indecent pitch, or to have any thing said, that savoured of
vanity; but that his Funeral Sermon should be as free from these, as his Life
was; and that it should so far resemble him, as that it should be all to
edification, and therefore that nothing should be put in it for pomp or show.
In this, your inclinations agreeing so much with my own, it was easy for me,
to observe this part of your desires very exactly: and I was very glad to find
most of the Hearers agreed with me in that which in the beginning of his
Character I say I expected from them; that they would think I had rather said
too little, than too much.

I hope he shall still live in you all, and that you shall happily reverse the
Fable of the multiplication of the Hydra's head, seven shooting out, for one
that was cut off; so I am confident that we shall have now in you, seven Heirs
to your Fathers Virtues and true Piety, and that every one of you will with a
generous, yet kind emulation, study who shall come nearest that shining example
which he set you: for which you shall never want the Prayers of,

Honored Sirs, Your most humble and most obliged Servant, G. BURNET.

PSALM xxxvii. Verse. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the
end of that man is peace.
THINGS that are very unusual and strike upon our minds by reason of their
novelty, do commonly attract our eyes, and fix our attention: New sights work
somewhat on most people, and a great deal on the weaker sort. Men of remote
Nations or Monstrous Productions are run after and gazed upon: but the proper
subject on which every wise man fixes his thoughts, is that which can afford
him such Instructions, that he becomes wiser and better by his observations:
and indeed I am sorry to add, that there are so few of those objects, that if a
desire to learn from them, does not work much on us, yet mere curiosity might
produce more than ordinary care to observe them: for we do not see such sights
every day.

We meet with crowds of fools and madmen, of corrupt and crooked men every
where, but for the perfect and upright man we may be justly called upon, Jer.
5. 1.
as Jeremy did on the People of Jerusalem, to run to and fro through the
streets, and to see and know and seek in the broad places thereof (somewhat
like Exchanges or Marketplaces) if we can find such a man, if there be any
that executes judgment and seeks the truth. If I tell you, that he who is
to be the subject of a great part of this Discourse, was such a man, I hope it
may be of some use, to let you see in what things this Character agreed to him;
though it comes with this melancholy diminution, that he was and is no more
among us. The Prophet promises in the Name of God, that upon their finding such
a one, he would pardon Jerusalem. But though upon this occasion we cannot make
that comfortable inference from the discovery we are now about, yet if the
observing what he was, does in any measure dispose us to imitate him, then we
may hope for a National Pardon, upon yet more certain grounds, unless our sins
are grown to that pitch, that God will not pardon them, and that good men among
us shall only be able to deliver their own souls, when the Day of our
Visitation shall come upon us; which indeed does not seem to be very far from
us.

But I shall prepare you for what I am to say concerning this perfect and
upright man, by considering first the importance of the words which I have read
to you. There is a great variety among the several Translations of them, which
make them have very different senses. The Hebrew as it is pointed in our
Bibles, is rendered exactly in our Translation; but the Seventy Interpreters
have read it otherwise, which in English is exactly this, keep innocence and
behold uprightness, for there is a remnant to the peaceable man. They are
followed by the Vulgar. The Chaldee Paraphrase renders them thus, Keep
integrity and behold uprightness, for the end of man is peace. The Syriack has
it thus, Observe sincerity, and choose uprightness, for there is a good end to
the man of peace. The Arabic is thus rendered, Keep meekness, and thou shall
see uprightness; for there will be an end to the peaceable man. We see all
these Translators have read the words rendered in our Bibles upright and
perfect, so, that they did not understand them of an upright and perfect man,
but of uprightness and perfection in the abstract; which the same words a
little varied in the pointing do indeed signify. The word rendered by us mark,
they have rendered keep, which it does strictly signify; and because what we
mark we keep in our memory, therefore it is often used in that sense. The word
rendered latter end does also sometimes signify a reward, because it is given
at the latter end of the performance of that for which it was promised; and so
the sense will be much the same, whether it be rendered thus, There will be a
reward at last for the men of peace, or the latter end of that man is peace.
Thus I have showed the different ways of reading and rendering these words; and
in discoursing of them, I shall consider them in all these several senses which
we see have been put on them, and shall speak to these particulars.

1. I shall show you, what is meant by perfection and uprightness, or by the
perfect and upright man. 2. I shall show, how we are to keep and observe those
Virtues, and what regard we ought to have for such as are eminent for them. 3.
I shall show, what is the happy end and conclusion of them, and of those that
possess them. And then I shall come to the Application to the occasion of our
present assembly.
To return:

First, By perfection, we are not to understand, either such essential
perfection as belongs only to that eternal being in strictness of speech; nor
such a perfection as we hope for in another state; but only such a perfection
as makes any thing complete in its kind; that is, such a soundness in the
faculties and powers of a man's soul, as makes him an entire man, that is, one
that is truly a reasonable creature, acted and guided by reason. All that
belongs to a thinking nature, is a clearness of understanding and judging, an
obsequiousness in the will to the dictates of an enlightened mind, and a
disposition to consider things carefully, which is the chief and best exercise
of the freedom of the will; together with the regulation of a man's inward
affections and passions, and the conduct of his actions. He that has a
considerable soundness in every one of these, is perfect in those parts that
may be said to compose a rational nature: But in all these there are different
degrees: some men have a greater extent of knowledge than others, though many
of the pretenders to it, are too often employed about things that are either
impertinent or hurtful to them: but every one may be called perfect in his
knowledge, who rightly apprehends and judges well those things which relate to
himself, who has his mind raised toward the best objects, and possessed with
deep impressions of God and true goodness, and the rewards of another state:
and the more deeply he considers these things, and the more frequently he
reflects on them, he is so much the more perfect, how little soever he may know
or relish those vain and empty Notions, which many magnify as the highest
flights of knowledge. Again, he who employes the powers of his will, and his
faculty of choice, or liberty to turn his understanding to the best objects,
and breaks himself either of an obstinate and ungoverned stiffness, or of a
sluggish faintness and feeble easiness, and attains to a due firmness in his
resolutions, and a stability in his purposes, avoiding the extremes of being
too peremptory, or too yielding, is also perfect in this part of a rational
nature; and if this temper prevails in the main current of a man's life, he may
be well accounted a perfect man, though in some particulars and upon some
occasions he leaves it behind him.

As for a man's passions and affections, he that resists their fury, and brings
himself to an habitual calmness and gentleness, that is not sudden and violent,
but deliberate and composed, that observes the weak sides of his constitution,
and keeps himself at as great a distance as he can from that which may inflame
him too much, that endeavors to raise his affections to the best objects,
which make him strong against inferior objects and weak assaults, he that has
learned to make a right estimate and value of things, and studies to poise
himself, so that none of the various accidents of life may very much alter him,
that keeps a watchful eye upon himself, and is jealous of every thing that is
apt to heat him too much, this is a perfect man.

I do not think a man unless he be extremely stupid, can really be perfectly
the same in all the turns of his life; and therefore I am very apt to conclude,
that the pretensions of the Stoics in this matter, were either only
extravagant boastings and vain affectations, or that they first brought their
minds by a long constraint to a heaviness and dullness, by which the active
powers of their souls were in a great measure enervated and stupefied. That
quickness of thought or acrimony in the mind which is called affection or
passion, is often necessary to animate us to great undertakings, and to support
us in difficult performances: and if a man could so far prevail on himself, as
to root it out of his mind, it might perhaps enable him to suffer uneasy
things with less pain, but it would mightily emasculate the vigor of his
active powers. So I conclude, a perfect man is he that cools his passions, and
governs his affections, and not he that roots them out entirely.

The last and most visible branch of this perfection, is a good and wise
conduct of a man's actions: he that considers well the station that God has set
him in, and the relation in which he stands, to the rest of mankind, together
with the duties incumbent on him, and acts prudently and discreetly, that
governs his tongue, so as not to give advantages against himself, nor to make
enemies needlessly, that guides his affairs with discretion, that orders his
family with prudent care and foresight, that lives to the good of mankind, that
considers himself born not only for himself, but for the public good, and
therefore lays himself out to do all the good that he can, first by his own
example and the influence that may have on the world, and then by instructing,
admonishing and directing those that are under his authority or influence, and
is ready to assist, advise and relieve those that are in any difficulty, or
stand in need of any thing that he can spare, this is the perfect man; and that
temper is the perfection which we are to observe or keep.

I would not raise the notion of perfection too high, lest any should be
discouraged from endeavoring to attain to it; nor let it fall too low, lest
some may come too easily to imagine they are already perfect. It Is good to have
such high and great notions of Virtue as are on the one hand apt to excite a
generous temper of mind in us; and yet on the other hand, are not impracticable
Idea's, which subsist only in the imaginations of high-flown men. A man that
has all these in a good and solid measure, is a perfect man, and a perfectly
religious man, though he has not yet attained to such degrees in every one of
them, as he may hope to grow up to, after some years proficiency. Single
instances and errors now and then may fall out, and yet he remain still a
perfect man: for we are to remember a distinction between a perfection of
parts, and a perfection in degrees: as a man in relation to his body is a
perfect man, if he has all the Vitals within, and all the Organs and Members
without, that belong to the structure of his Body, though there is not in all
that exact symmetry of parts, nor that agreeableness in every one of them.

As for uprightness or the upright man, the true Notion of this will be easier
formed, and the sooner dispatched. Uprightness is an exact correspondency
between a man's thoughts and his words and actions, when a man is possessed with
such a candor and probity of mind, that he lies under no temtations to
disguise or dissemble his thoughts, so that integrity and truth is that to
which he trusts, Psalm. 25. 22.
as knowing it will preserve him; and therefore concludes, that he who walks
uprightly, Prove. 10. 9.
walks surely: when a man is so far raised above the World, that neither a
desire to recommend himself to any, by abject flattery, nor to make
unreasonable gains in his dealings, can work on him, so as to say any thing
otherwise than as he thinks, he is an upright man, and such as always speaks
the truth as it is in his heart. Psalm. 15. 2.
This straightness of soul, supposes many things necessary to prepare a man to
it: he must be both innocent and humble, moderate in his designs, and free from
covetousness: for any of all these things will make a man warp insensibly, and
bend into some crooked postures, which after a long bending, will grow to be so
strangely rooted, that that which is crooked cannot be made straight: and when
a man lets his integrity once go, the fears of a discovery, together with the
other ill consequences of it, and that fatal train that is in ill actions, by
which one draws on another, will make it much harder to recover it, than it is
at first to maintain it. And if a man can once so far prevail over those honest
and candid dispositions that are in him, as to let himself cool and sleep and
go on, in any thing that is indirect or disingenious, he will come to be so
fortified against those tendernesses and awakenings of Conscience, that he is
in a probable way of growing up to any pitch of wickedness to which he may be
tempted.

And thus I have considered the importance of this Character, the perfect and
upright man, or perfection and uprightness.

I come next to the Second Particular, which is the observation and regard we
ought to have to such persons or such a temper. We ought to mark them well; to
consider what they offer for our imitation, and to keep well in our memory that
instruction which their example affords: and as we observe them, so as to learn
from them, so we ought to carry in our minds such a sense of their Virtues, as
to make us esteem them highly while they live, and pay all due honor to their
memories when they are dead.

First, We are so to mark them as to learn from them, and are to lay up in our
memories what we have observed in them; and thus we may both mark the perfect
man, and preserve or keep up that same temper in our selves: There is no way
more effectual to the study of Virtue, than the observing the excellent
patterns that good men set us. In them Virtue appears clothed with all those
circumstances, that may both represent it more amiable, and make it be more
easily imitated by us. The abstracted and Philosophical Idea's of Virtue are
indeed very beautiful and convincing to them that can frame them right, and
pursue and apply them well; but every man has not that strength of
apprehension, and clearness of judgment that is necessary for this: and
general rules are so diversified by various circumstances, that every one has
not a faculty of applying them to the several actions and in the various turns
of life: and therefore when God was to instruct mankind in the excellentest way
of Religion that was ever proposed, which was delivered in the greatest
simplicity of expression that was possible, he set at the same time before us
the perfectest pattern that ever was. John 1. 14.
The Word was made flesh and dwelt among men: and the greatest part of the
Gospels consists rather of a Narrative of his holy and exemplary Life, than of
an exact system of his Precepts: for the one is contained and delivered in the
other. In him we see those shining Virtues of Patience, Contempt of the World,
Humility, Meekness, Submission to the Will of God, Zeal for his Glory, and an
unwearied readiness to do good, which could not be overcome by the most
ungrateful and injurious returns that were possible.

There is this difference between that and all other patterns, that we cannot
exceed in our exactness of imitating it: whereas we may grow affectate and
apish in imitating any other pattern. The best men have their defects and
failings, which made St. Paul restrain and limit our being followers of the
Apostles themselves, by this Caution, 1 Cor. 11. 1.
as they were followers of Christ. There are also particular humors in very
good men, which do well enough in them, being natural to them, and being set
off with many other excellencies that are in them; but these being more visible
and coming under more common observation, some vain and foolish persons hoping
to be thought like those excellent persons, by an affectation of some Gestures
and Customs that were peculiar to them, make themselves thereby the objects of
the scorn of the Wise and Judicious. We are to observe what is truly excellent
and useful in those whom we have known, and as to small matters, we are still
to do that which is most natural, and has least of constraint in it.

It is a great blessing for one, especially in his young and tender years, in
which he is scarce capable of any thing but imitation, to have this easy and
profitable way of instruction offered to him: and every one is to consider,
that this will be put to their account, and that they have a great deal to
answer for on this very reason. If Divine Providence was thus beforehand with
them, and laid such a happiness in their way so early, that good impressions
did prevent all bad ones, then what a heavy charge will it be, if they have
endeavored to blot all these out, and to superinduce bad ones?

But as we owe our selves the good Improvement of this way of Instruction, so
we owe those Persons, to whom the Characters in my Text agree, great esteem and
reverence as long as they live, and all due respect when they are dead. We
ought to look on them as burning and shining Lights, and are to rejoice in
their Light: we ought to consider them as the Salt, the Light, and the Pillars
of the Earth: we do not know how much we owe them for the lengthning out of our
Tranquillity, their very being in the World may be a mean to suspend such
Judgments in which they might be involved, and their Prayers and Intercessions
have certainly great Efficacy; so that every time we see such a Person, it
should rejoice our Heart, and we should conclude there goes one of the
Preservers and Supporters of the Nation, if not of the World; for when the
number of the Elect is accomplished, then the rest are not to expect those
common Favors of Day and Night, of Times and Seasons, of Sunshine and Rain,
in which the wicked share more for their Neighborhood to good Men, than upon
their own account. We are to do nothing to grieve them, nor to make those Lives
that are so useful to us, uncomfortable to themselves. Every Man is to
consider a truly Good Man as his Benefactor, and as a sort of a Father to him:
but those who receive a more immediate Blessing from them, owe greater returns
of tender Affection and reverent Duty.

When they die, we are not to afflict our selves with an unmanly Sorrow,
especially if they have lived out their course, and die in a good old Age, full
of Days, and full of Children: but the true Decencies and Solemnities of a
Religious Mourning require better and more useful Exercises. Those more
immediately concerned in them, ought to reflect on their Lives, and gather, as
the remains of a Shipwreck, all that was memorable in them; that so that which
Humility and Modesty required should be kept secret while they lived, may be
then published to the honor of Religion, and for the instruction of others;
and in particular to be a Remembrance to those relating to them, or descended
from them. And, above all things, when such are withdrawn, who, as may be
reasonably supposed, were a public Blessing to the Nation, those who survive,
especially such as do more immediately fill up their room in other respects,
ought to set themselves with all possible care to make up that Loss to the
Public, and so endeavor to imitate, and as much as they can to out do them
(for in such a Case, Emulation even with ones Father is a Virtue) in all those
excellent things in which they were a Pattern to them, and a Blessing to the
Nation, or place where they lived. Thus, if we so mark Perfect and Upright Men,
as to keep the like temper in our selves, then we fully comply with the Duty in
my Text.

The third Particular is the happy End and Conclusion of those Virtues, and of
them that possess them. What ever the exact rendering of these Words may be, of
which I made mention in the beginning of this Discourse, it comes all to one
purpose, that either those Men of Peace shall have a good End, or that their
End shall be Peace. By this Peace in their End, we are not to understand an
easy or peaceable Death, though perhaps in the old Dispensation, that consisted
much in Temporal Promises, this might have been a part of their Reward. But
under the Religion of a Crucified Savior, and the Dispensation of the Crofs,
we are not to promise our selves an Exemption from uneasy and painful things,
neither in our lives, nor at our death. The greatest Glory of the Christian
Church has been in their Deaths, literally burning and shining Lights, and in
those fiery Chariots have triumphed over the World; and what the Psalmist
observed under the Old Testament, is much oftener verified under the New, that
the wicked have no Bands in their Death, 73 B. 4.
and both living and dying, seem to have great Advantages over good and
virtuous Men; of whom, as the World is not worthy, so it does not know the
Value it ought to set on them, nor the Use it ought to make of them: But
verily, there is a Reward for the Righteous, Ps. 58. 2.
because there is a God that judges in the Earth: and since he does not always
give them their Reward in this Life, it is certain he has provided one for them
after it; and in order to their having a full Reward and an higher degree of
Happiness in the next State, he does exercise them often very feverely as to
all outward Appearance in this Life.

But if they have not a great measure of Peace neither living nor dying; yet
upon the Separation of their Souls and Bodies they do then enter into Peace,
and into the Joy of their Lord, into those blessed and peaceful Habitations,
where none of those Jars and Contentions with which this World is exercised,
disturb their Rest. No Disputes about Religion, no Factions of State, mar that
everlasting Quiet, Ps. 55. v. 6, 7, 8, 9.
which they always enjoy, when they adore the God of Peace, and follow the
Lamb, the Prince of Peace. The Contests and Heats now among us must needs make
all the Sons of Peace grow weary; and wish with the Psalmist, that they had
Wings like a Dove, so that they might fly away and be at rest, and hasten their
escape from the windy Storm and Tempest; for certainly we are fallen heavily
under the Curse in the following Words: Destroy, O Lord, and divide their
Tongues; for I have seen Violence and Strife in the City: and when it is come
to that, that to be a Man of Peace, is looked on as an ill Character, of one
that is either lukewarm and indifferent, or is a false, and temporizing Man,
who would not long for those cool and silent Shades of the Grave, and for that
Peace that is in the Regions beyond it? And since this is not in a Man's Power
to bring it sooner on him, than as it is ordered by Divine Appointment, it
would at least make a Man seek a retreat in some solitary Place, where he might
neither hear nor see any more of the disorders and madness of a wicked World,
than were necessary to direct him in his Prayers and Intercessions: or, if this
is likewise denied one, and that his Station and Circumstances oblige him still
to live in the World, it will at least have this effect on him, to make him
have as little meddling, and to live as much within himself as he can; and to
maintain within himself that Peace which he has ineffectually endeavored to
advance in the World: and certainly when ever Death comes on a good Man, it
will be so much the more welcome to him, because he can find very little
Pleasure in living among People that seem to have lost both their Temper and
their Wits. Let us raise our Thoughts and Hopes above this present World, and
encourage our selves, that though we live uneasy here, and though we may be perhaps
called to end our Days in a most terrible manner, which may prove our
Punishment for those many Sins, for which though God will be merciful to us with
relation to another State, yet he may think fit to correct us severely for them
in this Life; yet if we continue so to mark the perfect Man, and so behold the
Upright, as to follow their Steps, then as their End is Peace, so shall ours
likewise be.

I have now gone through those Particulars which I proposed; the Application is
still behind; and this relates to this sad Occasion that now calls us together.
I am next to tell you what you are to mark in this perfect and upright Man, who
has now entered into Peace. But how should I adventure to speak of one that
lived so long, and in so eminent a Condition amongst you, of whose Praises you
who knew him are now so full! He that had not that Happiness, must be forgiven,
if he does not describe him with those Advantages that another might have, who
had observed him long, and had known him intimately. I will be strictly
cautious in what I shall say, because I know that excessive Commendations,
which are too ordinary on these Occasions, have this ill Effect among many
others; that because, perhaps there is a little too much said, the whole is
disbelieved; and generally those Discourses are considered, rather as a
flattery of the Living, than a piece of Justice to the Dead. I shall therefore
rather lessen things than enlarge them; and shall tell you nothing but that of
which I have good Assurance, and that upon such Information that I have no
reason to doubt of it. It is, I confess, some comfort that I am to speak of a
Man that was well known in this very place, so that I am persuaded many that
hear me, shall say, I have rather said too little than too much.

Mr. James Houblon was descended from that worthy Confessor, Mr. Houblon, a
Gentleman of Flanders, who above an hundred Years ago fled over to England,
from the Persecution that was raised there; against all that embraced the
Purity of the Christian Religion, and rejected the Idolatry and Superstition of
the Church of Rome, by the Duke of Alva, who proceeded in it with all the Rigor
and Cruelty with which that bloody Religion could inspire a Man of so fierce a
Temper, acting under a King no less bloody than his Religion; that, as a second
Herod, defiled his own House with the Blood both of a Son and a Wife, and
having resolved to root out of the World the Purity of the Christian Religion,
and to that end having set up the bloody Tribunals of the Inquisition, he put
those Provinces under that implacable Governor. Then all that received the
Reformation, were reduced to those hard Straits, which how far they are from
us, the only wise God only knows, either to act against their Consciences, and
worship as a God that which they believed was but a piece of Bread, the most
brutal and unaccountable of all the sorts of Idolatry, or to seal their Faith
with their Blood, and that with all the Preparatives of Torments before it that
merciless Inquisitors could invent, and in Conclusion, to be burnt at a Stake,
and destroyed in such numbers, that no fewer than 18000 were reckoned to have
suffered by the hand of the Executioner in seven Years time, or as the least
dreadful, to sit down with the loss of all they had, and fly for their Lives to
other Countries. This last being the most eligible, where it can be done, our
Savior having allowed us, when we are persecuted in one City, Mat. 10. 23.
to flee to another, was the choice of that noble Person, who did by this
Action both ennoble himself, and all that descended from him. It is true, in
such Persecutions every one cannot possibly fly; though this is but a melancholy
Comfort, that one by leaving their Country and Friends, and all they have, may
hope to get safe, though almost naked, to another Kingdom; yet even this small
Mercy is denied under the Influences of that cruel Religion. Here in England in
Q. Mary's Time, the Strangers were suffered to go away, yet care was taken no
secure the Ports, and not to suffer Natives to fly beyond Sea, when they were
resolved to burn them at home; and now in France, when Methods are taken to
make those of the Reformed Religion, either die of Famine and in Misery, or to
force them to commit Idolatry, it is made capital to fly, and those that
endeavor it are to be condemned to the Galleys. But I cannot leave this matter
without encouraging you to go on in your Charities, and Readiness to relieve
those that are forced to come and take Sanctuary among you. You see what the
Nation and this City has gained by the Reception of the Strangers that fled
hither for refuge in the last Age: You see how great a Citizen you had in him
that is now dead, and into how many he is now divided, who by their Interest
could almost make a City alone: and you do not know how many such may be in the
Loins of those that now come among you, who may produce many to be as great
Blessings to the next Age, as this Family is to the present. But to return to
this Upright Man.

He was born in this City, the 2d of July, 1592; so that he wanted but a few
days of being 90 Years of Age when he died. He was baptized in the French
Congregation, and continued a Member of it his whole Life; he married one of
his own Country-Women, the Daughter of Mr. Ducane, who fled over hither upon
the same account; so that this Family is descended from Confessors on both
sides. He was one of the chief Pillars of that Congregation, in which he often
served as Ancient, and to the support of which, and of all the poor Exiles that
came over, he contributed always so liberally, that if he did not still live in
so many Children, to whom God has given Hearts as well as Fortunes like his,
this loss would be very sensibly felt. He did communicate once a month
constantly, and was never absent from their Assemblies either on the Lord's Day
or on the Weekday, and this was become so customary to him, that it was not
without difficulty, that he was kept from going thither even during his
Sickness. He was known to be a very devout Man and frequent in Prayers, both in
public and private; he was always breathing out that deep Sense he had of
Religon to those about him, more particularly to his Children, on whom, as he
took care to have them all religiously educated, so as they grew up, he
continued still to exhort them to go on in that good way in which he had early
initiated them, and he often recommended to them secret Prayer, as the great
means of keeping up the Life of Religion, which he thought could not be kept up
without it; and not being satisfied with what he said to them by word of Mouth
while he lived, he took care that after his Death he should still speak to
them, in a great many excellent Letters and Papers which he left behind him,
both for all his Children in general, and for every one of them in particular,
of which I have seen some, and must say this of them, that they express a most
genuine and lively sense of Religion, without any labored Periods, or
Affectations of Words or Phrases, but with a Simplicity which shows he writ as
his Heart dictated; of which I will give you an Essay, taken out of the Letter
he writ for them all in general.

The Lord bless you all, and give you his Grace, that you may love and fear him
all your days. O! labor with all your Might to be holy in all manner of
Conversation, eschewing all Evil, and the Appearance thereof. Be charitable to
the Poor, live in Unity and Love among your selves; which if you do in
Sincerity, you may expect God's Blessings upon your Endeavors, so far as they
be lawful. Forget not daily Prayers in your Families, and walk humbly before
him all your days; if you do that which you ought as Christians, you will find
Mercy with the Lord, and Respect with good Men. The Lord in Mercy bless you all
(my sweet Ones) principally in Spiritual Blessings, Amen.

It is, I assure you, my daily Prayer, that you may so do, Amen.

All my drift in all my Papers has been, that you may live holily and
righteously before the Lord in this your Pilgrimage, that so you may be happy
to Eternity, when time shall be no more, and that through his free Grace and
Mercy in our Blessed Savior and Precious Redeemer; for without Holiness and
Sanctification none shall see him with Comfort. O love the Lord, and all Men,
and live in Love one with another, if you expect God's Blessing.

And in relation to the Government, he left this Charge on them. Fear the Lord
and honor the King, praying daily for all whom God has set over you in Church
and State, that so you may under them live a godly and peaceable Life.

You see how fervently and seriously he recommends the Fear of God, and mutual
Love, to his Children. As he saw them to his great Joy, live in this blessed
Harmony, during his own Life, so he took all possible care to have it kept up
after his Death; for he charged them to enter into solemn Promises upon his
removal to continue still to love one another; which they are resolved
religiously to perform; and of which no doubt very happy Effects will appear.

As he was very sensible of the Blessing of Brethren dwelling together in
Unity, so his Love and Charity were more diffused than to be restrained only to
his own Family. He had an univesal Charity for all good and worthy Men, against
which let hot and angry Men say what they will, it is, and still will be the
Badg of a true Disciple of Christ. He never engaged in our unhappy Differences;
but, without meddling in matters that did not belong to him, he loved all that
was good in all Men, and extended his Charity to the Relief of proper Objects
of all Persuasions, both in City and Country: Of which I need say the less,
because it was so eminent, and so many did partake of it. And he took
particular care to manage this so secretly, that often the Persons themselves
knew not from whence their Relief came: He did also industriously seek out such
proper Objects for it, without putting modest but necessitous Persons to the
uneasines of asking it. He himself, while in the City, did always join with the
French Congregation, but when he was in the Country, he joined in the Worship
of the Church of England.

He looked on the Reformed Churches, by reason of the unreformed Lives of the
Members of them, with great regret, and did apprehend there was a severe Cup to
go round them, and was afraid England might drink the Dregs of it, and might be
again brought under the Tyranny of the Church of Rome, and the inundation of a
Foreign Power, in which we have all reason to pray God that his Fears prove
not too prophetical: of this I have seen a full account in one of his Letters
to one of his Children, which was sealed up with his Will.

I need not enlarge upon other Particulars, of his Justice and fairness in his
Dealings, of his gentle and affable Deportment to all Persons, and of his
readiness to do all the Good that was in his Power: you all know so much of
those things, that I may well say the less; for I find his Memory lives, and is
like to maintain it self long in this place: the Witnesses of his Virtues being
so many and the Instances of them having been so frequent and so signal.

Thus we see what a perfect and upright Man he was; now let us a little
consider what his latter end has been. This good Man had a great deal of that
hundredfold which our Savior promised even in this Life, to those who forsook
their Houses, Mat. 19. 29.
Lands and Families for his sake. This entail descended on him from his Father,
and he having taken care to secure and maintain his Title to so great a
Blessing, has had as visible and long a share of the good things of this Life,
as, all things being put together, any Man in this Age has had.

He lived 90 Years, all to a few days; and the last 35 years of his Life, till
a little before his Death, he enjoyed a vigorous and perfect Health, together
with the greatest of all earthly Blessings, the perfect use of his Senses, his
Memory, and Judgment: so that he continued to write many Letters weekly till
his last Disease fell upon him.

About 47 years ago, an unhappy Accident had almost cut him off, when he was
yet in the Strength of his Age; he being at a Training near Morefields, some
Powder took fire, by which he, with several others, were blown up; but though
some of the rest were struck dead outright, yet God had a great deal of more
Service for him in the World, and so after an Illness of six or seven Weeks
continuance, of which it was long doubted, whether he could ever recover, he
was again restored to his Family, and lived to see his Childrens Children, and
some of their Children, to so great an Increase, that in his time a full
hundred came into the World descended from him, all born in full time, and all
baptized save one: of these, 67 are yet alive, to which, if eleven, that are
come into his Family by Marriages, be joined, there wanted but two of
fourscore, that had right to his daily Blessing. And so entirely did the first
Blessing of Increase and Multiply rest on him and his Children, that there was
never an Abortive nor a Child deadborn in all his numerous Family: A rare and
singular Happiness, to which very few have ever been known to have attained. I
shall not add any thing of the Comfort he had in them, though that is a necessary
Ingredient to make such things Blessings indeed, but that belongs too much to
the Living, to be insisted on by me. Having thus lengthened out his Days with a
great Increase both of Family and Fortune, he at last for several Years
withdrew himself from all wordly Affairs, and so lived only to fear God, and do
Good. He having so entire a Health, so plentiful a Fortune, and the Freedom of
that Leisure which he gave himself, added to his Crown of Gray-hairs, and the
Crown of his Children, that of Good Works, and at last exchanged them all for a
Crown of Glory.

A few days before Christmas last, he was taken ill, and though it might have
been imagined that in so ancient a Man, Nature was so far spent, that it could
not have held out long; yet the length of his Distemper, the great Pains and
Agonies he endured for about six Months, and the Fever in which his Life
ended, showed that there was still a great stock of Vigor and Strength in him:
but though his Memory and Judgment were sometimes clouded during his Sickness,
yet it appeared that Goodness and true Piety were become, by long Use and
Practice, so natural to him, that when the Clearness of his Mind was much
darkened, yet the excellent Temper of his Soul remained with him to the last.

During his long Sickness, and under all the returns of Pain, which were
sometimes very violent, he was never heard speak one impatient word; but was
almost always either praying to God, or praising him; he caused the Scriptures
to be read, and Psalms to be sung often about him, and heartily prayed for all
that came to see him, and amidst those his Agonies, he did not forget the
Churches of God both at home and abroad. The last sensible Words he spoke to
his Children were the Night before he died, upon his Sons coming to see him; he
prayed God to bless them, and their Children, with all Temporal Blessings, and
above all, with Spiritual Blessings; after this he spoke nothing perfect to any
of them, but was heard say in a Devotion to God; My Soul does magnify the Lord,
and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior, which he repeated several times;
and as these words were a very proper Conclusion to such a Life, so they were,
the last he spoke distinctly. And though it was likely that so long a Sickness in
so aged a Person had so shaken the whole Fabric, that the Separation of that
Soul and Body that had dwelt so long together would have been easy and perhaps
insensible, yet it proved otherwise, for he lay many Hours in his last Agonies;
but in Conclusion, God took pity on, and released him, so that he entered into
his Rest on the 20th of this Month.

Thus was this Righteous and Merciful Man taken away; he has now entered into
Peace, and we are to lay his Body in this his Bed, the Grave. I wish we may all
lay it to heart, and consider well whether this righteous Man is not taken away
from the Evil to come, which certainly must come on the sooner, for the loss of
those that stand in the breach while the measure of our Iniquities seems to be
very near filled up: for as it is in the words after my Text; The Transgressors
shall be destroyed together, and the end of the wicked shall be cut off: But
the Salvation of the Righteous is of the Lord, he is their Strength in the time
of Trouble; and the Lord shall keep them and deliver them; he shall deliver
them from the Wicked, because they trust in him.

God of his infinite Mercy give us Grace so to mark and follow this and all
other perfect and upright Men that have gone before us, and entered into Peace,
that we may die the Death of the Righteous, and that our latter end may be like
his; that is, that our end may be Peace. To which, let us earnestly pray to God
that we may attain, through Jesus Christ our Lord, that came to make Peace, who
is over all, blessed for evermore; Amen.

FINIS.

