A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT-HONOURABLE THE Lord Mayor AND ALDERMEN OF
THE City of London, AT BOW-Church, September 2. 1680.

Being the Anniversary Fast for the Burning of LONDON.

By GILBERT BVRNET.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1680.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR ROBERT CLAYTON, LORD MAYOR OF THE City of London.
My Lord,
THE Publishing this Sermon, was no easy part of my Obedience, to your
Lordships Commands, and to the desires of the Court of Aldermen: for I have no
reason to expect it should be so favorably received, when it is brought under
the Eyes and Censures of the World, as when it was first delivered. Since the
good temper the Auditory was in, upon the remembrance of that great
Conflagration, made it pass more acceptably at first hearing, than is to be
hoped for upon a stricter review of it. And some Persons of high worth and
Eminence, have been of late, treated so unsutably, either to their Merit, or
their designs in what they Preached, that it may justly give such a one as I
am, apprehensions of ill usage, for touching our sores, which are so tender,
that some cannot bear the handling them in the softest manner.

But having observed that what I said on these heads, was not unacceptable to
your Lordship, who are so great a Judge; I do the more freely adventure on
making it public. Since the Justice, Prudence, and Moderation of your
Government, has given your Lordship so great an Interest in the esteem and
affections, not only of this great City, but of the whole Nation; that as those
who are to succeed you in that high Trust, will be valued and loved, as they
follow the Pattern you have set them; so there are few things that can
recommend such a Discourse, more, than that I may, by your Lordships
permission, say, it was approved of by one of so great an understanding, and so
Excellent a temper, as yours is generally known to be.

God grant this may have some good effect on those that heard it, or may read
it, and that the sad prospect now before us, may by the mercy of God, upon our
unfeigned Repentance, be changed unto a serene and happy calm: wherein that
your Lordship may be a great Instrument, both in this City, and in the public
Councels of the Kingdom, is the Earnest Prayer of

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, and most Obedient Servant, G. BURNET.

AMOS, chap. 4. verse. 11, 12. I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew
Sodom and Gomorrah; and ye were as a Firebrand, plucked out of the Burning: Yet
have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord.

Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: And because I will do this unto
thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.


THe remembrance of that dismal Day, which brings us now together, grows too
soon stale and cold; and perhaps passes rather as a doleful Tale, that we are
to hand down to the next Age, than as a Subject by which our Repentance and
Humiliation are wrought on. We rather glory in our Wealth, and the great
Splendour of London rebuilt, than are humbled, when we remember how she was laid
in Ashes. The Largeness and Evenness of the Streets, the Regularity and Beauty
of the Houses, the Magnificence of the Churches, Halls, Gates, the Exchange,
the Canal, the Monument, with the other Glories of the City, do perhaps so much
amuse us; that, seeing now no other Marks, by which we can know what Places
were burnt, and what escaped that spreading and devouring Flame, but the
Meanness of the one, compared to the Pomp of the other, we are apt to think,
Why should so disastrous a Day be had in such constant remembrance? which might
be more suitable when the Wound was green, the Ashes and Rubbish were not
removed, when the Impression was deep, and Men were more sensible of their
Losses, which in a Succession of fourteen years, they have either digested, or
being quite broken by them, have made way for new Inhabitants, that had no
share of the former Calamity. But now it may seem too long, to perpetuate the
Memory of these black Days, and bright Nights, that so many of you looked on
then with amazement, and must still reflect on with horror.

Yet if we consider, that, how instrumental soever the Hand of Hell was in it,
certainly the Hand, or rather the Breath of Heaven was visible, both in
spreading it over so many Regions of this populous City, and in stopping it of
a sudden, when the Fire had executed its Commission; we cannot but think it
fit, after so long an Interval, still to remember what may be supposed to have
bin the procuring Causes of such an unheard of Burning, which seems since, by a
sort of Contagion, to have spread into many other Cities of the Nation: And
whereas in former Times, a Fire that carried away a few Houses was thought
dismal; now except it burn down whole Towns, or Streets at least, we think it
gentle and merciful. If we also reflect upon the Time when it broke out, that
it followed a long and an unhappy War, and a raging Pestilence, our Miseries
returning so thick upon us, as Job's Messengers did; all these things
concurring with the sad and gloomy Prospect now before us, Job 43. 31.
It is surely meet to be said unto God, I have born Chastisement, I will not
offend any more; if I have done Iniquity, I will do so no more. And joining
that we have seen and felt, with that which is almost all visibly before us, we
must conclude, it is fit to turn to Him, who did some years ago afflict us so
severely, but has since given us a long Interval of Peace and Plenty, and seems
now to be bending his Bow, whetting his Sword, Psalm. 9. 12, 13.
and preparing against us the Instruments of War.

The Words in the Text, pronounced upon the like occasion, offer to us, both
the Reflection on what is past, the Consideration of what is present, with the
Prospect of what we may look for. Of which I shall first speak a little in
General, before I apply them.

This Prophecy was given in Commission to Amos, one of the Herdsmen of Tekoa, a
Town distant twelve Miles from Jerusalem, and six from Bethlehem; so that he
lived in the Tribe of Judah, tho he was sent to the Ten Tribes, that still
continued in the Idolatry of Jeroboam. Iehu having rooted out the Sidonian
Idolatry of the Baalim, he and his Family, as a Blessing, even upon that
imperfect Reformation, reigned over these Tribes 104 Years; but the Period of
it was now near an end, and with it, of the Peace and Liberty of that Kingdom:
For Ieroboam's Son, Zacharias, reigned only six Months; Compare 2 Kin. 10. 36.
and 13. 1, 10. and 14. 23.
and his Murderer, Shallum, but one Month. Menahem, who conspired against him,
reigned ten Years; yet against him came up the King of Assyria, the conquering
Empire of that Age; and tho Menahem redeemed his present Quiet, by the Tribute
of a Thousand Talents, that procured them only a whiles respite. His Son,
Pekahiah, 2 Kin. 15. 19.
being a wicked Prince, Pekah conspired against him, and killed him, in the
second Year of his Reign. 2 Kin. 15 29.
Then Tiglath-Pileser, another Assyrian King, came, and perhaps pretended to
revenge the Death of Menahem their Allie's Son, and carried away most of the
Land of Galilee into Captivity. And the total Captivity of these Tribes
followed under their next King. 2 Kin. 17. 6.
So that from the Days of this Prophecy, what by the Revolutions of Government
at home, what by the Impressions the proud Assyrians made on them, they had a
Succession of grievous Calamities, which ended in the total Subversion of that
State. And they were so dispersed in their Captivity, that except some
Straglers that might have returned with Zorobbabel, they were never again
gathered together; so that it is now only matter of conjecture what is become
of them.

Amos was one of the last Messengers, that was sent to invite them to
Repentance. God had before spoken to them in the dismal Language of his
Judgments, by Famine, by the blasting of their Harvest, and binding up the
Clouds, that it did not rain; by such Mildew, and Vermin, as had consumed all
their Fruits, their Vines, Olives, and Figs; by War, and the Plague, to such a
degree that their Dead were not buried, but lay in the Fields, to infect the
Air, and to offend the Living. The Stink of your Camps came into your Nostrils.
Which are all mentioned in the Verses before my Text. And finally, that some of
their Cities had been burnt down by the Hand of Heaven. Two years after this
another Calamity came on them, from such an Earthquake, mentioned by Zechariah,
Zach. 14. 5.
that the People, terrified with it, thought of flying out of the Land; for
this Time being contemporary to that of Vzziah, the Earthquake there mentioned,
which became a Proverb, seems to be the same spoken of in the first Verse of
this Prophecy. So that this honest Shepherd was called from his Flocks, to see,
if the Simplicity and Plainness of the Man, and of his Style, which is the
lowest of any of all the Prophets, could be a Mean to awaken them out out of
their Impieties.

The Sins he accuses them most for, were their Irreligion, desiring to stop the
Mouths of the Prophets, saying, Prophesy not. And tho they observed the Returns
of their Festivities, their New Mons, chap. 2. 21.
and Sabbath Days; yet they were weary of them, observing them only for Forms
sake, and longed to have them over. He also charges them for their Luxury:
chap. 8. 5.
They had rebuilt their burnt and wasted Cities with hewn Stone, and had
planted pleasant Vineyards and Olive-yards; chap. 5. 11.
they drank Wine in Bowls, something like Healths now adays; they anointed
themselves with rich Ointment, chap. 6, 4, 5, 6
had their Beds of Ivory, and rich Couches about their Tables, feasted high,
and had excellent Music at their Entertainments, were guilty of great Iniquity
and Oppression, so that there was no Truth nor Justice among them. And they
were become so barefaced and impudent in their Vices, chap. 5. 7.
that good and prudent Men thought fit to keep silence in that Time, because it
was an evil Time. For all these Reasons the Prophets threaten with them a
Captivity, chap. 5. 13.
and other severe Judgments; and that because God had known them only of all
the Families of the Earth, chap. 3. 2.
therefore he would punish them for their Iniquities.

In the Words I have read, he says, I have overthrown you, (some is not in the
Hebrew) as God did Sodom and Gomorrah. As, does not import in the
Scripture Phrase an exact resemblance, but only some Similitude in general. So
that it does not necessarily import, that Fire came down from Heaven on them,
but that they were overthrown totally, perhaps by Fire, Thundering, or
Lightning. The Chaldee Paraphrast understood it more generally, and rendered it
thus: The Word of the Lord abhorred them, as he did Sodom and Gomorrah.

You were as a Firebrand, plucked out of the Burning. A proverbial Form of
Speech, either expressing the great Danger they had run, with the extraordinary
Deliverance they had met with, Zech. 3. 2.
God rescuing them on a sudden; Jude 23.
as also the despicableness of their present Condition, since nothing looks
worse than a Firebrand snatched out of the Fire.

Yet have you not returned unto me, says the Lord. They continued in their
Impieties, and irreligious Worship, in their Separation from their right way of
worshipping God at Jerusalem, in their Luxury, Sensuality, and Injustice: and
all the Judgments they had felt, which perhaps might have a little awakened
them, when they lay under them, had not any such effect, as to turn their
Hearts, or to change the Course of their Lives.

Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel; and because I will do thus unto
thee. Thus, may either relate to the former Judgments, as if they were to be
repeated upon them; or to what follows of the Captivity threatened in the
beginning of the next Chapter, The Virgin of Israel being fallen, and not able
to rise; Ten being left of an Hundred, and a Hundred of a Thousand.

Prepare thee to meet thy God, O Israel. This is either an Ironical Alarm to
them, to see what they could do to resist that God, the God of Hosts, that
formed the Mountains, created the Wind, knew the Secret of Men's Hearts, could
bring Darkness on the Earth in a bright Sunshine, and tread upon the high
Places of the Earth, the great Powers and mighty Empires, at his Pleasure: they
were to try how they were able to resist his Thunders, to bind up the Clouds,
or the Winds of Heaven, or to disperse those Armies that he was to send against
them; whom he would inspire with great Courage, when they should be struck with
pannick Fear, and such Sorrow and dejection of Mind, that all their Songs
should be turned to Lamentations. Or this, Prepare thee to meet thy God, is an
Invitation to Repentance, as that which could only avert those Judgments that
were ready to break forth on them, and dissipate the Clouds; so that instead of
the Storms they had reason to look for, they might be blessed with a serene
Calm, and entire Peace, upon their returning to God.

Having thus opened the Scope and Intention of the Prophet in the Text, I shall
now speak to these four Particulars.

I. When we have met with Judgments, signal, both in their kind, and in the
deliverance out of them, we ought to remember God's hand in them, and to
consider, for what ends he both laid them on, and took them off. II. We ought
to consider, what effect these have had on us? Whether they have made us turn
to God, or not? III. We are to consider, how much severer Judgments we may
reasonably look for, if those that have already come upon us, have not
prevailed to make us return to God. IV. Upon all this, we ought to look unto
God, and to endeavor to prevent that which we cannot otherwise avoid or
resist, by an unfeigned Repentance.
For the First of these: If we believe, that the World is governed by a Supreme
Providence, we must conclude, that more astonishing and extraordinary Events,
not only fall not out by chance, but are directed for some great ends,
proportioned to such means. If either an Accident, or a Combination of cursed
Men, first kindled this Fire, yet the Wind that waited on it, and drive it
forward with such violence, that neither the many Hands that were employed to
quench it, the Neighborhood of so much Water, the Engines used, and all the
other Means that could be thought on, were effectual to stop its Rage, till it
had done its Work, was a manifest Indication of the Hand of God it. And how
much soever Men's thoughts may be now blunted on this Subject, yet then, as I
have understood from those that saw it, there were few that looked on, that
seemed not touched with the apprehensions of God's displeasure. Many that were
not immediately concerned in it, yet smote on their Breasts, and said, This is
of God, let us return to Him.

I shall not enlarge on the Description of it, or of the unexpected stopping of
it in many places, even in the midst of very combustible Matter; so that the
quenching of it had almost as manifest Characters of a Divine Appointment on
it, as the Conflagration it self. It would very ill become one that saw it not,
to spend much Discourse about it to those that saw it, and as it is to be
presumed, will never forget it, but will tell it to the succeeding Age; as God
commanded the Israelites to convey down to Posterity, the remembrance of the
Captivity they had groaned under in Egypt, with the signal Deliverance out of
it: for things of so extraordinary a nature ought never to be forgotten.

I know it is not sit, upon every Calamity to enter into the Secrets of God's
Providence, nor to determine what were, and were not the procuring Causes: or
what were the more principal ones. In these Cases men of several Parties, have
always found out somewhat in which they thought themselves least concerned, and
have been willing to load that with the whole burden of God's Indignation; and
so upon this occasion, Men have not been wanting to assign such Causes, as
might make those from whom they differed more hateful. But who has said, What
have I done? And indeed, tho we may err in saying, one thing more than another
drew down this Judgment on us, and in the enumeration of the Causes of it, may
fail in the Account; yet it is certain, that when we lay them all together, and
more particularly reflect on such of them, wherein we find our selves most
concerned, we are in the readiest way to prevent the like, or heavier
Judgments, from coming on us for the future. It were also a vain and bold
Presumption in any, to enquire into this Secret, Why this City more than
others, or these parts of it more than others, were burnt down? Our Savior, by
his Answer upon the like occasion, concerning those whose Blood Pilate mixed
with their Sacrifices, or those on whom the Tower of Siloah fell, takes all Men
off from such Curiosities, suggesting to them a more profitable Meditation: I
tell you, Nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. In general,
Luke 13. 3, 5.
we are certain that God afflicts us not willingly; and so, without a more
particular enquiry, we may conclude, that there were great reasons for this
awakening Dispensation. And therefore, instead of looking backward any longer,
I now proceed to the Second Point, to examine, What effects this or the like
Providence have produced upon us? And whether we have returned to the Lord, or
not?

I shall confine my Discourse to those three Heads on which the Prophet founds
his Charge, Irreligion, Luxury, and Unrighteousness; and shall desire you to
bear with the Plainness, which becomes such a subject and sombere Occasion. I
cannot say upon the first Head, of Religion, that the chief part of the
Prophet's Accusation (...) us: for the Sins of Dan and Bethel do not belong
unto us; we have not set up a new Way of Religion, different from that
appointed by God; we have not bin guilty of any open Idolatry, in worshipping
the Works of Men's hands, or of making any resemblance of that invisible Being,
whom we adore. But in the Head of Religion, I shall name other things, wherein
we have bin as far from returning to God, as the Ten Tribes were.

First; They minded nothing but the external Pageantry, the Music, and other
outward Performances, and were weary often of these, so that their solemn Days
were Abominations to God. And now, if we look among our selves, tho there may
be perhaps more Care in this great City, than in any of the World, about the
decent Observation of the Sabbath; this is the Magistrates Glory, who do so
carefully restrain the Violation of that holy Time; yet many of those, who in
compliance with Custom go to Church, do it merely for Form. But if we examine
what these Assemblies amount to, for the greatest part, we cannot think but God
abhorrs and despises them. Many go to them only for Custom; others, to show
their vain Apparel, and dress themselves with such gaudy Pomp, as if it were a
Play, rather than the Worship of God, they went to bear a share in. I speak not
against modest Decency and Cleanness; but the vanity of many Peoples Dress is
no small Scandal to our Churches, who not only gratify their own Pride, but do
all they can to distract and tempt others.

In the Worship of God, how little serious are we in all the parts of it? We
confess our Sins without Contrition, we pray without Devotion, we praise God
without Affection, we hear the Scriptures without Faith: So in a word, all is
but Form, and even of that we grow soon weary. Any Excuse serves us, either to
be absent, or to come late. The too visible coldness of most People behavior
show, their Hearts join not with their Bodies or their Lips in the Worship of
God. For Sermons, they are hearkened to, as other Discourses are, which we
either censure or commend, as we see cause, or perhaps sleep all the while: But
if we do mind them, it is for most part rather to furnish our selves with some
Notion, to maintain Discourse, and to gratify our Vanity, than to be truly
edified by them. And what we hear that more immediately concerns our selves, we
put off, perhaps, with a slight Groan, and may be say within our selves, God be
merciful to us, we are all Sinners. Do we think God is pleased or can be
delighted with such Assemblies?

For the two Sacraments, the Devotion of the one is almost quite gone, it
becomes a matter of Entertainment, and is used as a Ceremony that brings much
Cost with it; the Sponsors considering more the Fees they are to give, than the
Vows they make; and these being so slightly made, no wonder they are slightly
performed. It is true, the other Sacrament is kept up with a little more
seriousness, some more Preparation and Devotion, but because People are a
little apprehensive of this, many take the best course they can to ease
themselves of it, and do not receive in many years, unless the Law of the Land
make it necessary, which is by too many more considered than the Laws of Christ
in his holy Gospel. If we sum all these together, and reflect on the Coldness
and Deadness we are all guilty of, in our Religion and religious Worship, can
we think that we have yet returned to the Lord? Can such a dead lifeless way of
serving him, be acceptable to him, that knows how far our Hearts are from him,
when we draw near to him with our Lips? Can he take pleasure in these
Assemblies, which, as all Forms must be, that are not enlivened by an internal
Devotion, grow burdensome to our selves; and are only kept up as a Compliance,
either to Custom, or some Remainder of a natural Religion, that we have not
been able to extinguish quite in our Consciences, after many Attempts made to
fear them?

But to all this it may be opposed, Are not we zealous for the Reformation?
Sure all this Heat and Flame must rise from true Religion? I deny not, but this
great City has been on all occasions very forward in expressing their Zeal for
the Reformation; but even upon this Head, God has not a few things to charge us
with. St. Paul tells us of a Zeal of a far higher Strain, than I am afraid ours
rises to, 1 Cor. 13. 2.
even of giving ones Body to be burnt; which yet would profit nothing, if it
flowed not from true Charity. So if our Heat about Religion rise not from a
true and internal Love to it, God may make it useful to others, but it shall
avail us nothing. The Corruptions of true Religion, in all Times, have risen
from this, That those who would not submit to the necessary, but hard and
difficult parts of it, have studied to cheat themselves, and if they could, to
bribe God, by setting up in room of these, some more easy and pompous things,
which their Circumstances qualified them for, and they have spent much of their
Wealth and Heat upon these. Some have adorned Churches, and adulterated several
parts of Religion, by the Splendour they have added to them: Some have been very
exact in external Performances; others have taken pleasure even in rigors on
themselves; and others have been active and zealous in that Cause, which they
took to be the Cause of God. According to the difference of Men's Constitutions,
so they have chosen various Ways, that did most suit with their Tempers, and by
a great Zeal about these, have pacified those Clamors, which otherwise are apt
to arise in a guilty Conscience. The Sanguine love Pageantry; the Phlegmatic,
the dull return of their Forms; the Melancholy affect Severities; and the
Choleric are peevish and passionate, and think those Heats that are natural to
them, are Sacrifices of great value with God. But will he accept of these from
such defiled hands?

I know, those that are inwardly possessed with the Love of God and their
Neighbor, and have a just sense of the Love their Redeemer has showed them,
must have a very lively concern in those things that relate to his Glory, and
the Salvation of our Souls. But if we only put on a heat, and counterfeit a
Zeal, where there is no good Principle under it, this is but to mock God, and
think to pay him with false Coin, because it has the superscription of the
true. If our Zeal is only Passion or Faction, then to offer this up to God, is
to bring Wildfire, and kindle it on his Altar.

There are two sad Indications, that declare the Zeal of the greatest part is
no better: The one is, that the rest of their Lives are not of a piece with
their Zeal. It is an impudent thing for any to pretend, that he is concerned
that others should glorify God, when he is so ready to dishonor him himself;
or that the sincere Belief, or pure Way of Worship, may be preserved, when he
so cares, as if he neither believed in his Heart, nor worshipped God in his
Spirit. God is not mocked, but discerns through all our Disguises, the secret
Thoughts and Intents of our Hearts. I speak not this to cool or lessen your
Zeal for the Reformation, but to direct it aright, that it being fixed on a
better Principle than either Passion or Interest, may have a deeper root, and a
stronger operation, may be more acceptable with God, and more effectual by his
Blessing: which cannot be expected to hypocritical Pretenses, or at best, the
Fermentation of Revenge or Interest.

Another sad Symptom, that shows our Zeal about Religion is not what it ought
to be, appears in these unnatural Heats, that grow every day among our selves,
for things, of which, to speak modestly, a Man must say, they deserve not that
warmth which we bestow on them. If a Man is so far free from the Contagion
which most are infected with, by being of a Party, as to consider the things
themselves, he cannot but stand amazed, to see Men, who agree in all the
Substantials of Religion, quarrel so violently about some external and less
important Matters, when the Enemy is at the Gates. It was one of the clearest
Demonstrations of the Wrath of God on Jerusalem, that during their last Siege,
the Factious were so high within, that as they had any respite from the Enemy
without, they were destroying one another. They would not know the things that
belonged to their Peace in time, and so they were hid from their Eyes in the
day of their Visitation. When the African Churches were ready to be devoured by
the Vandals, who besides the Barbarity of their Tempers, were Arrians by their
Religion; The Schism of the Donatists did so rage, and was managed with such
heat, too much of both Sides, as St. Austin laments, Lib. 1. con Parm. cap. 7.
lib. 3. con Petil. c. 49, 50.
that it was a manifest Sign of their approaching Ruin; yet that holy Father,
with the other Bishops of that time, made great Offers for comprehending the
Donatists within the Unity of the Church; one was, to take them into a share of
their Functions, and that the Surviver should be the sole Pastor. But secular
Men enflamed the Differences, and the Governors punished the Donatists so
severely, that St. Austin wrote often to them, Epist. 60, 127, 158, 159, 160.
to stop these violent Proceedings. But that holy Man died, while Hippo was
besieged, and the Prop of these Churches being removed, they soon became a Prey
to their cruel Enemies, who brought them all under a most terrible and
undistinguished Persecution.

When the Mohammedan Impiety, and Saracen Empire, was spreading in the East, the
Greek Empire fell into such Divisions and Animosities about the Will of Christ,
and the Use of Images, that disjointed them one from another, and made way for
the growth of Mahometanism. Shall we follow these Patterns so carefully, as if
we were afraid to miss such Calamities as fell on them? Are we so little
sensible of the Advantages we give our Enemies, and the weakening we bring upon
our selves, by such Jealousies and Heart-burnings. St. Paul, when the
Corinthians following their just Lawsuits before Unbelievers, brought thereby
a Scandal on Christianity, charged them rather to suffer Wrong, 1 Cor. 6. 5, 6.
than that a Brother should go to Law with a Brother. If such things, which had
a foundation in Justice and Property, were to be forborne for their Indecency; O
how much more reasonable is it now for those who publish the glad Tidings of
Peace, to lift up their Voices as a Trumpet, to sound a Retreat from this
ungodly War in our Church, and to call Men off from their unseasonable Heats,
to a greater Calm and Temper, when the Effects of them are like to be so fatal.

It has been the Device of the Church of Rome, both to keep Unity within her
self, and to foment Differences among others, ever since the Reformation. They
have Differences among them of a far higher nature than any we have among us.
The most material Differences in Matters of Doctrine, that have raised the
greatest Animosities in this Island, have been about the Nature of Divine
Grace, and the Order of the Decrees of God: but those have been carried as
high, if not higher, in the Church of Rome. I need not mention the many
Differences among the several Families of the Schoolmen, who have invented
various Explanations of almost all the Mysteries of their Religion, and have
defended their Sentiments with as little Modesty of Language, as many of our
Writers do; yet all this has not broken their Church. In that which is to them
the fundamental Point of their Religion, Where the supreme Power of judging
Controversies infallibly is lodged; tho they all agree against us, that there
must be a living infallible Judge, yet they do not agree in whom this Power is
placed. Many set up the Pope; others are so ashamed of this, that they are for
the Council, without the Pope; and others choose a middle way, and are for
ascribing it to the Pope and Council together: And yet if the Council has
either the Infallibility entirely, or has any share in it, so that it is
nowhere without its concurence, then they have no infallible Judge, it being
115 years since they had a General Council, and it is like to be much longer
before mother comes.

I need not enlarge on their other Differences, either the ancienter Contests
concerning the Immaculate Conception of the B. Virgin, which were not only
supported by ordinary Reasonings, but by Pretenses to Visions and Revelations;
and the later Contests, that are yet depending at the Court of Rome, concerning
the Morals of the Jesuits, and other modern Casuists: All these show the
Varieties among them in Matters of Doctrine.

Those who have traveled among them, and narrowly observed their Customs, see
that there are no small Diversities in the Rites and Forms of their Worship.
Every Nation, and every Religious Order, has some Rites that are peculiar to
them; and tho the Roman Office is now used most commonly, yet as the Ambrosian
continued long at Millain, and the Mozarabick in some parts of Spain; so here
in England, the Southern Parts followed the Use of Sarum; the Northern, the Use
of York; South Wales, the Use of Hereford; and North Wales, the Use of Bangor;
besides a peculiar Use that Lincoln had for that large Diocese. All which show
how willing they were to knit all People to their Communion, indulging them
some peculiar Rites, either different from, or added to the rest. So well have
they studied the Policy of keeping their whole Strength united together,
against those they call Heretics, and their common Enemies; tho they have not
been able to bring all their Votaries to an Uniformity, either in Points of
Doctrine, or the Forms of Worship.

They have no less industriously blown upon and improved all the Differences
among the Reformed, to break them among themselves. Could so small a matter, as
the Difference about the Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, (which was only a
speculative part, since their Worship did not differ,) have so divided the
Lutheran and Helvetian Churches, if some secret Practices of theirs had not
wrought on the Weakness and Passions of some angry Men? The Papists saw this as
well on the one hand, as the Princes and soberer Divines perceived it on the
other. At one Public Conference, Hist. of the Council of Trent. lib 5. Anno
1557.
appointed by the Diet of the Empire, between Papists and Protestants, for
settling Religion, the Papists knowing their weak Side, and desirous to throw a
Bone among them, proposed, that they should first agree to condemn the
Helvetians. Melancthon perceived what this aimed at, and so studied to divert
it; but other peevish Divines grew so hot about it, that they broke up the
Meeting, to the no small joy of the Popish Party.

How far they may have practiced among us to inflame our Differences, I shall
not determine: but I am sure there is nothing we can possibly contrive, more
both to their Advantage and Satisfaction, than this is. The Heathen
Philosophers had different Schools, but worshipped in the same Temples. The
Primitive Christians differed in many Customs, both about the Observation of
Easter and Lent, with many other various Rites; but they never broke that Bond
of Peace and Perfection, the Unity of the Church, till the Bishops of Rome
began to lay their Yoke upon the other Churches. It were a great happiness to
be exactly of the same mind: and such as differ from the Public Constitution,
ought certainly to examine the ground of these Differences, with calm and
unprejudiced minds: And, to pronounce my own Opinion freely, and without
reserves, I am very confident if that were done, with the Care and Application
that is requisite, the Truth would soon appear to be of our Church's side: and
if there be yet any Defects in our Constitution, or any thing that requires
Amendment or Improvement; as, no doubt, none ever was since the Apostles days
that needed it not; then let clear Reason, and calm, but steady Endeavors be
used for completing or ordering what is wanting or amiss among us; which His
late Glorious Majesty offered to redress, for settling this Church. And it will
seem strange, if any who glory so much, and so justly, in the Honor the Church
received by so great a Testimony, as his Martyrdom gave it, should not follow
those Thoughts, which He, after a long course of Sufferings, and deep and
devout study about them, had taken up; a due difference being made between the
things that he offered in compliance to the heat of that time, and the more
retired Reflections himself had.

But if so great a Happiness, as a complete, Unity cannot be attained to, let
us, at least, lay aside our Unnatural, Unchristian, and unpolitick Animosities;
condescending to the Infirmities of the Weak, and pitying them rather than
insulting over them: Let such mutual allowances be given as Humane Infirmity,
the weakness of many men's Reasons, the strength of their Passions, and the
force of Prejudice and Education require. And if we will so order our Zeal,
that its first and chief Operation be on our selves, reforming our Lives, and
purifying our Hearts, and then apply it proportionably to other things, giving
to every part of Religion such a share of it as the importance of the thing
requires; then a great deal of our heat would be soon allayed.

But to speak plainly; Is it a Christian Zeal to disseminate Lies and Scandals?
To expose men that have deserved highly, for some supposed Mistakes? These
things ought not so to be. If those that run about with the greatest violence,
blowing on such sparks, would examine themselves, as in the presence of God,
what is the secret cause or spring of all their Motions, I am sure much of it
will be found to flow from bitter Envy and Strife, James 3. 16. 17.
which bring on Confusion and every evil work: and not from the Wisdom that is
from above, and is first pure and then peaceable, and easy to be entreated.
And as we ought in meekness instruct those oppose themselves; 2 Timothy 2. 25.
so others should not express too great uneasiness at the Instructions we offer
them.

If we will reflect on the high value our Savior set on our loving one
another, John 13. 35.
that thereby all men should know that we are his Disciples, it would soon
change our Temper; so that being ashamed of our former Contests, if we could
not of a sudden come to think the same things; yet the same Spirit of Meekness,
Humility and Charity dwelling in us, we should soon grow up into one Body: from
which we are not kept, so much by the Differences themselves that we dispute
about, as by that Alienation of Mind, which has so violently rent us from one
another. And this makes that for all the Evils which we have either felt, or do
still fear, instead of accusing or condemning our selves, we lay the blame
wholly upon others. The City blames the Country, and the Country the City: We
of the Church blame those of the Separation, and they of the Separation blame
us of the Church: But alas! who look into their own Consciences, and humble
themselves before God!

This Evil is of the Lord, therefore let us turn to him with our whole Heart:
and we shall certainly feel, that as a Spirit of true and real Holiness rises
in us, we shall grow above these Contests for small matters. For God seems to
punish us with this division of Language and Heart, as he did the Builders of
Babel, for our other sins; since without a stroke from Heaven, a common measure
of Infatuation could not carry this so far.

And now I go to the next particular charged by the Prophet on these Tribes,
wherein they had not returned unto the Lord: That was Luxury. They had rebuilt
their Houses, furnished them gloriously, and surfeited themselves with their
Plenty: which they abused by their excessive Intemperance, both in eating,
drinking, and in other Jollities; being insensible of the Judgments of God,
that had either fallen on them, or were hanging over them. And in this, how
parallel are our Sins to theirs? This City is rebuilt with an increase of
Luxury, as well as Order and Beauty: How many do exceed their Rank and
Condition, the many Breakings do too manifestly declare: few are contented to
live in that moderate Frugality and Decency that their Ancestors used; and
complain of want and decay of Trade, because there comes not in enough to
supply their Vanities, or to serve their Luxury. The Intemperance that abounds
is too notorious to be much insisted on: as if those Liquors which God has
blessed us with, for refreshing and restoring our Spirits, were to be used
either for the inflaming of our Lusts, the depressing our Reasons, impairing
our Healths, and the profuse wasting of our Time and Estates. Inventions also
must be fallen on for the decent forcing others to the like Excesses, by
setting Healths about. A practice so ridiculously Brutal, that it were a loss
of words to go to expose it: Hereby men are not satisfied to Gratify their own
Intemperance, but most lay snares for others. And how studiously do these
Agents for Vice, endeavor to corrupt all that are so unhappy as to fall in
their ill Company; training them on by degrees, till they have raised them to
the like pitch of Impiety with themselves. To this is joined the Excess and
Curiosity of Entertainments, which has been long accounted one of the special
Vices of this City. Our Bodies when nourished in the most moderate manner, and
kept down with Exercise, yet are apt enough to raise many Temptations in us:
which we ought not to cherish, by laying in a too plentiful provision for the
Flesh, with its Lusts and Affections. When People give themselves up to all the
incentives to Lust, and by Jollities, Music, Balls, Drinking and Feasting,
have laid themselves out to so many Temptations, and prepared so much fuel
within for these impure Flames to work on; it is no wonder that all excess of
Riot and wantonness should follow such Disorders. The Indecencies of both Sexes
going to Taverns, the corruption of a defiled Stage, the gross Liberties which
many take, have now run us into such a mire of Filth and Sensuality, that it is
scarce decent to rake in that kennel: and to speak of the things that are done,
alas, not in secret, but in the sight of the Sun; Shall not God visit for these
things? Have we yet returned unto him? or do we not go on to dare Heaven, and
work all manner of Abominations with greediness. And while such Vices abound,
and so many Judgments hang over us, who is betaking himself to Fasting and
Prayer? who has cut off any of his former Excesses, or is accusing himself?
Sin and Lewdness are still growing, and its like will go on, till, as the
Prophet threatens, God shall make your Sun to go down at Noon, and darken the
Earth in the clear day. 8 chapter 9, 10, ver.
Poetical Expressions for unlooked for Miseries. Then he will turn your Feasts
unto mourning, and all your Songs unto Lamentations: and instead of the
vanities of your Apparel, and the costly dresses on your Heads, will bring
Sackcloth on all your loins, and baldness on all your heads, and make your
mourning to be like the mourning of an only Son.

The third thing for which the Prophet accuses the ten Tribes, is, that which
Luxury must carry with it, to support it; their Injustice and Oppression. A man
that spends profusely on himself, as he disables himself from giving the Poor
such a share of his Wealth as he ought to do; so he grows unable to perform
those stricter Duties of Justice and Equity to his Neighbors with whom he
deals. Men that will live high, must maintain it by all possible means: If the
cheating, even a Friend, the Sophisticating corrupted Goods, the defrauding
Creditors, by covering one with some Protection, or pretending he breaks to
force Abatements of just Debts, or perhaps the profuse wasting both his own
Stock, and the Stocks with which others have trusted him, become necessary to
furnish out his Luxury and Vanity, he sticks at none of them. I do not doubt
but the Regulations made in this great City are as exact and well considered as
in any such City in the World; but as long as the high way of living continues,
many unrighteous things must be invented for defraying that Expense. Justice
and Righteousness are among the first Elements of Virtue, which Nature does so
early teach all men; and are so necessary to the Peace and Government of the
World, that we do very impudently pretend to the high things of Religion, if we
have not begun with these, which are the lowest steps to it. If Trade is
carried on by Lying, Cheating, Sophisticating, Extortion, and unregulated
Usury, can a Blessing be expected from Heaven, on Wealth so acquired? If men
make their Weights small, 8 chapter 5, 6, 8, ver.
and falsify their Balances by Deceit, so that they sell the Poor bread, shall
God forget these things? shall not the Land tremble for this and every one
mourn that dwells therein? If the Mystery of some Trades consists in the
Cheats of them; if Retailing is managed by lying, if Debts are paid by
cousenage and fraud, if Bargains are made after too much Wine has nummed or
overheated the Spirits of the one Party, of which the other takes advantage; if
men have ever so much wealth and cunning both in acquiring and preserving it;
yet according to the Prophetical expressions in the Ninth Chapter, 9 chapter 2, 3,
ver.
Though they dig unto Hell God will take them thence, and though they climb up
unto Heaven he will bring them down, though they hide themselves on the tops of
Mountains, he will search and take them out from thence, and if they should lie
as close as in the Bottom of the Sea, he will command a Serpent to bite them.
In these Points we ought on such days of Humiliation, if we intend not to add
the Mockery of these to our other Sins, to examine our selves, as in the
Presence of God, and see whether we have either departed from our old Sins, or
instead of doing that, do not only continue in them, but contract new Guilt. If
we will break the Yokes of Oppression and Injustice, if we convert what
formerly went to our Luxury and Vanity, and apply it to the Necessity of our
poor Brethren; and if instead of these Forms (in the repeating which we have
too long placed all our Religion) and of our bitter Heats, we do follow Peace
with all men, and Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord: then when
we pray to him, he will hear our Prayers, our Light shall shine out under all
that Darkness, that now covers us; God shall guide us continually, and so
satisfy our Souls, that we shall delight our selves in him and his Service.

But if we will still continue in our Sins, and satisfy our selves with so
slight a way of serving God, then we may look for either the like, or heavier
Judgments: which is the third thing I proposed to speak to; Therefore thus will
I do unto thee. All the Corrections that God lays on us, are to amend us, but
if these prevail not, then other severer means must be used for the same end,
more searching Medicines when gentler ones cannot raise or carry off the
Humors; and in Conclusion, God often makes those Nations on whom he had
bestowed the most discriminating Marks of his Favor, the most public
Instances of his Justice, as he did the Jews of old, for their Idolatry, and
the Roman Empire, after they had so strangely corrupted the Christian Religion:
more signal Judgments being perhaps the only Means left to work on some, whom
indulgent Providence do not prevail with; who indeed can be awakened by
nothing, but Thunder and Lightning. In the Government of the World, the Methods
of divine Providence are so mysterious, that it very ill becomes us, to take on
us to judge how things shall fall out: yet since Solomon has observed that
there is nothing new under the Sun, Eccl. 1. 9.
and by what has been, we may collect what may be; there are two things
threatened by this Prophet; a Famine, not of Bread, nor a Thirst for Water, but
of hearing the Word of the Lord: so that they should wander from Sea to Sea, 8
chapter 11. 12.
and run to and fro to seek it, but should not find it. 9 chapter 4.
The other was, that they should go unto Captivity before their Enemies, where
God should command the Sword that it should slay them, and he would set his
Eyes on them for Evil and not for Good. It is worth our time to consider what
we may expect either of these ways.

As for a Famine of the Word of the Lord, whether it shall come upon us, from
that Religion, which openly professes its Design to be to take the Scripture
out of the hands of the People, or from any other hand; we have Reason enough
to look for it, when we consider how horridly we have neglected and abused it.
The greatest part never trouble themselves about it, and, perhaps, since their
first Education and Childhood, have never looked on it; others have read it,
and fixed it more carefully in their Memories, but rather that by talking in
that Style, they may conceal their Villainies; and by the Misapplication of it,
excuse their Errors and Faults: but how few read it with a plain Simplicity of
mind, to receive Instruction and Light from it, and to kindle greater Warmth of
Affection in them, from the many excellent Passages in it: which, what Effect
soever they may have on vulgar Readers, are, to those that read them, with a
well disposed Mind, strong and sharp as a two edged Sword. It cannot be denied
but Religion, among us, has lost much of its Force and Authority, and many,
seeing thorough the Hypocrisy of one sort, and the Formality of another, have
come to imagine, that there is nothing in it but either Custom or Interest. And
I wish the great Scandals that our Contests have given to all men of clear and
disengaged Reasons, may not have occasioned or increased this in a great
Measure. Universally the Gospel is preached and heard without that Sense, which
a thing of such high Consequence deserves; for certainly, it must be
acknowledged, that either Christianity is a Contrivance or Dream, or that it is
the most important thing in the World. How far other Accidents may deprive us
of this, of which the Force and Efficacy is, in a great part, gone, we do not
know: whether downright Atheism, or the Disbelief of all revealed Religion,
which has got such footing among us; or other extravagant Conceits of
extirpating a Gospel Ministry, as the decentest Introduction to these, may not
bring us within this Curse, I shall not play the Diviner: but the great rage by
which many endeavor to make the Clergy hateful and contemptible, with a
Concurrence of some other things, seems to give just Apprehensions, that we may
live yet to see such days.

I confess, on the other hand, the Appearances seem more probable and
threatening, that we shall be brought under the Tyranny of that Church, that can
never hope to advance her Interests, but by suppressing this Light, by
prohibiting the Scriptures, and persuading the World to deliver up their Faith
and Conscience to the keeping and governing of their Priests; for who can go
over to them, till his Mind is so loaded with Prejudices, that he dares not use
his Understanding and Reason? Can any man believe that a Bishop, chosen with
all the craft and intrigue that can be used among the cunningest Statesmen in
the World, should be presently the Head of the Church, the Universal Pastor,
St. Peter's Successor, and the Supreme Judge of all Controversies? who though
he understand no Divinity, and practices as little Morality, yet must decide
all Controversies of Religion; and that in his Sentence all must acquiesce. He
that can believe this, is well enough prepared to go over to them, and to
believe the only thing I know, which is more incredible; that a Priest, by
virtue of a Character given him, which is every whit as unintelligible as this
great Effect of it, can, by pronouncing of five words, make a piece of Bread
and a little Wine, become the whole and entire Substance of the Body and Blood
of Christ; so that it is all in every crumb and drop of it. These are things to
which men must be long and well prepared, before they can think they believe
them: for it may be justly made a Question, whether they do, or indeed can
believe them? This Religion must of necessity, for its own support, extinguish
the Light of the Scriptures: in which, the part that came more immediately,
than any other, from God himself, has not escaped their Expurgation: I mean,
the ten Commandments; of which, the Second, one of the fullest and most copious
of them is left out of their Catechismes: because it must have cleansed the
Churches of Images, and the many other Monuments of Idolatry, with which they
had defiled it. And in the New Testament, that part of it on which they have
built most, is yet so contrary to one of their Devices, that it was fit for
them not to let the People understand it. I mean the Institution of the
Eucharist, in which Christ said, Drink ye all of this, when he gave his
Disciple the Cup. They had also made their Worship so ridiculous, by the many
strange Legends read on the Saints days, to which both the Collects and
Anthems for these Offices do relate, that it had been hard to have brought the
Pople to hear these things gravely: Therefore it was very fit, for these ends,
to have their Worship in an unknown Tongue: though St. Paul has written so
copiously on that Subject, 1 Cor. 14.
that it is not easy to imagine how their minds are composed, who believe that
he was inspired, and yet approve of a Worship, in a Language not understood by
the People.

But after all these Corruptions of theirs, why should we not think it
reasonable to believe, that since we have given our selves up to some of the
worst Effects of Popery, God should abandon us so far, as to suffer us to come
again under that yoke, from which, by a mighty hand, he delivered our Fathers?
While we worship him merely out of Form, what difference is there between that
and the telling of Beads? If we think a loose Life may, by a few touches of
Sorrow, be so expiated, that these shall carry us to Heaven, is not this almost
as bad as to believe Attrition is sufficient to Salvation? If we think our
coming to Church, or Sacrament, will save us, is it not as bad as their Opus
operatum? If we blindly deliver our selves up to a Party, and follow all its
Interests, what better is this than their Implicit Obedience? and if we allow
our selves in that rage and violence, by which many carry on their Opinions,
seeking the Ruin of all who differ from them, and spare no Methods, how false
or cruel soever they be; This is not far from their Extirpating of Heretics,
and saying, there is no Faith to be kept to them. If by these and many more
particulars, we examine how much the Spirit of Popery does still leaven us,
many of these who seem most heartily opposite to it, will be found deeply
tinctured with it: And if we are secretly corrupted with some of the worst
Principles of that Religion before we are aware of it, the other parts will
more easily follow. Our Doctrine and Worship are Reformed: That we owe to the
last Age, and to our Educations: But if our Hearts and Lives are vitiated by
the same ill Principles, under another disguise, it will not be so great a Leap
as some men imagine to get over that Gulf.

Here is one danger before us: it is a great one indeed, and perhaps the very
Methods some may use to secure us from it, may precipitate us headlong unto it.
Caiaphas advised the Jews to kill our Savior, fearing that upon his pretending
to be a King, the Romans might come and take that place: But this did so
provoke God, that what they feared came upon them: so whether some by
overbending their Zeal and Fervor, may not overthrow a Church, which has been,
ever since the Reformation began, the greatest Bulwark against Popery, and
drive things much farther than at present they intend or imagine, I leave it to
the thoughts of wiser men.

The other thing threatened by the Prophet, is, their being led unto Captivity,
and given up to the Sword. Our present Wealth and Plenty, the Situation of our
Country, the strength of our Fleets, and the natural Bravery of the Nation,
may seem perhaps to raise us beyond the fear of it: England never having been
higher in Trade, our Plantations never stronger and better Peopled, our
Dominions never more extended and our Shipping going from under one end of
Heaven to another. But alas! if God blast our public Counsels, and strike us
at home with such a Division of Heart, that we cannot agree in things that are
necessary for common Safety; all our Wealth makes us but a more inviting Prey,
either for attire or Sidon, that may be near us, who would gladly carry our
Trade from us; or for a great Conqueror that hovers over any of his
Neighbors, to spy from whence he can receive an Addition to his Empire and
Glory. And if God intends to give us up to Captivity, he will take away the
Heart from our Counselors, and Spirit and Courage from our Armies and Fleets;
as the Prophets threatened the Israelites often, that those to whom God was to
deliver them up, should come upon them with so unresistable a Force, and meet
with so faint an Opposition, that they should easily fall into their hands.

There is nothing in which the overruling Force of divine Providence, shows it
self more than in the rising and falling of Empires; in which we find often,
great Kingdoms subdued by a small Force, while the one were elevated with more
than ordinary Courage, and the other side, by a Series of odd Accidents, as
much depressed: so that vast Treasures and great Armies have melted to nothing;
and sometimes without any visible Fault in the Conduct; where no rational
Account can be given, but that Heaven was on the one side. If God is against
us, he needs no Instruments to chastise us with, he can either by binding or
opening the Clouds or Winds of Heaven, blast all the Fruits of our Industry or
Trade: he can bring out of the Dust of the Earth, Swarms of Vermin to plague
us; he can discharge his Arrows, and again send the Plague or a Fire among us,
or so give us up to Madness and Disorder, that we shall again fall in unnatural
Wars at home, and destroy one another.

Some of these Dangers are not so remote, as to be looked upon as the dark
Dreams of melancholy men, or the Speculations of a disturbed Fancy; what has
been may be, and is, perhaps, nearer than we imagine. I shall not increase your
Horror at the Return of such things, by a pompous and tragical Description of
them; you need but reflect on what you have seen and known of many of them: and
what if these shall return upon us again? What if this fruitful and peaceable
Land, be again made a Field of Blood, and be watered on both sides, by the
Blood of Englishmen, Brother fighting against Brother, till being thus weakened
at home, we become an easy Acquisition, to those who long for such a Breach
among our selves? And does not the Prospect of these things affect us?

What remains then, but that I conclude with the fourth particular, of which I
proposed to speak, that our turning to God, is that which only can prevent
those Judgments that we cannot resist. There is no Council nor Divination
against God, he makes the Diviners mad, and brings the Councils of the Heathen
to nothing; he makes the Devices of the people, of none effect: we can neither
withstand his Power, defeat his Wisdom, nor escape his hand; we can only humble
our selves before him, and turn to him with our whole Hearts; and thereby avert
all that storm of heavy Wrath, that is ready to burst out upon us. If there
were a general turning from the evil of our ways, from the Intemperance,
Uncleanness, Injustice, and Impieties, that have so long prevailed among us;
then how soon would all these dreadful Symptoms of God's Displeasure fall off?
Upon the Repentance of Nineveh, those Judgments which were so near, that the
short period of forty days were prefixed to them, were put off to a longer
time: The external, but feigned Humiliation of Ahab, procured to him a Reprieve
of that Sentence the Prophet had denounced. So if there were but a ceslation
from these horrid Impieties by which God is so highly dishonored, and of those
public and avowed Vices which no Christian Nation practices now more openly
than we do; and which have, in a great measure, taken our Spirit and Sense from
us; we might hope for a longer continuance of that Tranquillity, which we still
enjoy. But if no warnings will prevail, if neither past Calamities, nor
threatened Miseries, nor the sense which some, who have gone in the same excess
of Riot, have expressed of it when they were near Death, will work on a wicked
generation, it seems such are already under that Curse given in Commission to
Esaias, Make the Heart of this People fat, (...).
and make their Ears heavy, and shut their Eyes; lest they see with their Eyes
and hear with their Ears, and understand with their Hearts, and convert and be
healed: and that this shall last till the Cities be wasted without Inhabitants,
the Houses without men, and the Lord be utterly desolate. Words expressing the
highest indignation possible against such Sinners, who had long abused the
Patience of God, and had mocked him, by drawing near to him with their Lips
when their Hearts were far from him.

But if the greatest part will still go on in their Sins, till they perish by
them; yet if there were but a small number that would seriously set themselves
to turn to God, by Prayer, Fastings, Supplications, and engaging in a course of
strict and fervent Devotion, would stand in that Breach which our Sins and
Divisions have opened; and instead of looking after News, or expecting much
from Humane Councils, till Gods Anger were appeased, would cry mightily to him;
these might be the happy Preservers and Deliverers of their Country, at least
from present Danger. Or if the Sins of England are such, that God will not be
entreated, even of these, but will give such evidences of his Displeasure, that
all shall say, Verily there is a God that Judges in the Earth, yet such
mourners shall not lose their labor: their Tears and Prayers shall return upon
themselves; they shall at the least have their own Souls for a prey, and may be
blessed Instruments of gaining some few about them; who, though they may be
involved in the common Calamity, yet shall find Mercy in the Day of the Lord.
God grant there may be many such among us, and that for their sakes, chapter 9. v
11.
he may raise up the Tabernacle of his Anointed, and close up the breaches of
it, and build it up as in the former times: and so establish us in this good
Land, which he has given us, that we may still enjoy the Blessings of his pure
Religion and holy Word, with the continuance of our Peace and Plenty: and that
if Evil be determined to come upon the Land, that we may not see it, but may be
gathered to our Fathers in Peace. To God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

