A SERMON Preached on the FAST DAY, December. 22. 1680. At. St. Margarets
Westminster, Before the Honorable House of COMMONS.

BY GILBERT BURNET, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1681.

Rev. 3. 2, 3. I have not found thy Works perfect before God. Remember
therefore how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If
therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a Thief, and thou shall
not know what hour I will come upon thee.
THere is nothing in which Men of all Religions do so constantly agree, as in
the Duties we are now about: so that it may be justly called The Voice and Law
of Nature, which directs all people, when in great Straits, or under great
Fears, to call on that God whom they serve, to implore his Pity, and pray for
his Assistance. I need not tell you how all Heathen Nations do it: the Jews
practice it: Christians of every Persuasion have upon all great Occasions, and
in all Ages, set about it solemnly. Some, with the Pageantry of Heathenish
Processions; and others, with the simplicity that becomes their Profession, as
We do this day.

When the Ship in which Jonas endeavored to have fled from the Discharge of an
uneasy Commission which God had given him, Jon. 1. 5.
was driven in a Storm, and brought to great Extremities, every Man called upon
his God: only the guilty Person, whose God could only hear and help them, lay
fast asleep. I need not enlarge on the too visible Occasions of our Calling on
God at this time: a sadness that is spread over the Faces, and fills the Hearts
of all Men; the present Distractions We are under, and the greater Mischiefs of
which We are afraid, speak aloud, and need not be further described: so that
all good Men had in their secret Mournings, and in their Wishes for a Public
Humiliation of the whole Nation, anticipated the Address of this Honorable
Assembly. It is well that We pay this visible Homage to Religion and its
blessed Author. In this Storm We have but one God to fly to, and one Lord and
Mediator, by whom We may Address to him: If the guilty Persons will sleep on
still, or do worse, continue Sinning while we are Fasting and Mourning; yet if
We Cry mightily to God, We may reasonably hope that He will ease Us of that
load of our Sins, which only can, and certainly will sink Us, if it still hang
on Us. When We consider Our present ill Condition, and alas! perhaps this is
but the beginning of Our Sorrows; and reflect on the Signal Blessings We have
received from God, and that We still retain that holy Religion which was
revealed from Heaven by Jesus Christ, The great High Priest of our Profession,
We cannot be long to seek for the true Causes of all those Evils which We
either feel or fear. Truth is still the same, and of the same Value with the
Author of it; and the God of Truth changes not. What has then separated between
God and Us? and what has raised that thick Cloud that seems to be set over Us,
Isa. 59. 1, 2.
and is ready to discharge it self in Fire, Brimstone, and a horrible Tempest?
God's Hand is not shortened, that it cannot save, neither is his Ear heavy that
it cannot hear: But it is our Iniquities have separated between Us and our God,
and our Sins have hid His face from Us, if He will not hear. Therefore those
whom you Command to plead with You, in the Name of God on such Occasions, ought
to Cry aloud, and not spare, Isa. 58. 1.
but with all the plainness that becomes this Place, and this time, Show you
your Transgressions and your Sins.

In order to this, I have made choice of these words, being a part of a short,
but weighty Epistle written by St. John, in the Name of Christ, to the Church
of Sardis. Of it in particular we have so little recorded in the History of the
Church, that We can gather nothing from thence to give Us a clearer Light into
the meaning of these words: so I shall go no further than the Epistle it self,
for setting before You the State in which it was at that time. Sardis had a
great Name among the other Churches, as being one of those planted by the
Apostles: It had a Name that it lived, yet was dead: Verse. 2.
the Power and Life of Religion was under a great decay, the remainders of it
in some few Persons, that had not defiled their Garments, were even ready to
die: Verse. 4.
they were all that left of those who had at first sincerely embraced the
Christian Religion; they were but a Remnant of what had been, and they were
like to drop off soon: but for the rest, though they retained the outward
Profession of their Religion, yet Christ knew their Works: and though in some
things they might be praiseworthy, yet they were not full Weight and Measure;
they were not such as became their Circumstances, their Light, the Advantages
they had, nor the Age they lived in, in which they ought not only to have been
blameless and harmless, but to have looked like the Sons of God, and to shine as
Lights in the World, Phil. 2. 15.
holding forth the Word of Life. In a word, their Works were not perfect before
God.

Upon this, Direction is given them, how to amend what was defective or amiss
among them: they were to Remember what they had received and heard, from the
Apostles: they were to make that the standard of their Actions: they were
neither to frame a Religion to themselves out of their own Imaginations, or
make up a mixture of Heathenism and Christianity, to which many were then
inclined; nor were they to be seduced by any false Teachers from the
Apostolical Doctrine, which was their Rule; to this they were to adhere and to
hold it fast. They were to maintain it in its Purity uncorrupted while they
lived, and to deliver it so to their Posterity at their Death.

They are also directed in the use of it, not to preserve it only as a matter
of Speculation, or as a Denomination by which they were discriminated from
others, but were to improve it so as to be the better for it; To Repent, to
change their Hearts and Lives. If they were not awakned by this Alarm given
them from Heaven, they were to look for a more terrible blow, which should
surprise them in the midst of their Securities, as a Thief when he is least
looked for: which also insinuates the Severity, as well as the suddenness of the
Stroke. Thieves that break in in the Night, commonly carry all away with them,
that is worth their pains. On the other hand, the Remnant, who were then but a
few, that kept their Garments clean, are comforted with the hopes of enjoying
God in a State of more perfect Holiness, expressed in the Figure of walking
with Christ in White: and to encourage others to follow their Steps, a general
Promise is made to all them that continued to the end in that course of life,
Verse. 5.
that they should be advanced to the same State of perfect Holiness: their
Names were now to be written in the Book of Life; and at the Great Day, when
these Books should be opened, Christ would before God, Angels, and Saints, give
such a Testimony to them as is recorded in the 25. Chap. of St. Mat. Gospel,
When I was Hungry, ye Fed me, etc. This Epistle being thus explained, it will
not be difficult to apprehend what the Particulars are on which I shall
enlarge. They are these five:

1. Jesus Christ observes, and will reckon with every Church, according to the
blessings which they have received, if they live not suitably to them. 2. The
Rule by which we are to examine our selves, and by which God will judge us, is
the Doctrine which the Churches received from the Apostles. 3. All those who
have heard and received this Doctrine, ought to keep it carefully, and to
conveigh down that Sacred Trust committed to them to the succeeding
Generations. 4. The chief Use We ought to make of this Doctrine, is to reform
our Hearts and Lives; to repent, and to forsake our Sins. 5. Such as will not
make this Use of it, have reason to look for sudden and severe Judgments. All
these things are clearly gathered out of my Text, and seem to comprehend the
full sense of these words, I have not found thy Works perfect before God:
Remember therefore how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast, and
repent. If therefore thou shall not watch, I will come on thee as a Thief, and
thou shall not know what hour I will come upon thee.
To Return to the first.
1. Jesus Christ observes, and will reckon with every Church, according to the
Blessings which they have received, if they live not suitably to them. I have
not found thy Works perfect before God. Perfect, the Greek word is different
from that which is commonly rendered Perfect; (...)
and strictly imports accomplished or filled up with such Ingredients as make
Works acceptable with God. By this we are not to understand that absolute
Perfection, which excludes all Sin, or all Defects; for Works so perfect belong
to another State; but such a Perfection as agrees to the Gospel Covenant, by
which all that is sincere is perfect in some sort, and will be so accounted for
to us by God. Wherein the Works of this Church were not perfect, We can only
guess at it, by what we find in the other Epistles* in this and the former
Chap. and in the Epistles written by S. Paul to some other Churches. There are
three things chiefly specified and insisted on.

1. Their falling from their first Love, and not doing their first Works,
charged by St. John on the Church of Ephesus, and by St. Paul on the
Galathians: they received the Gospel, according to the Parable of the Seed with
great joy: Math. 13. 20, 21. Gal. 5. 7.
they begain in the Spirit, they did run well, but the fear of Persecution, or
the Cares of the World, and the Deceitfulness of Riches, made that the Seed of
the Word of God, that had been sown among them, either withered or was choked:
their first Fervor abated, their Love cooled, they became Lukewarm, and then
quite cold and dead; so that those who began in the Spirit in a spiritual
Course, Gal. 3. 3.
or had received the Gifts or Graces of the Holy Spirit, ended in the Flesh,
became carnal and loose men.

2. They are charged for listening to false Teachers and Seducers: they had
heard many strange things from the Apostles which were new to them, and these
did raise a curiosity in them after Novelties, with a disposition to receive
them; some of them are particularly named in these Epistles: some brought in
Heathenish Sorceries and Idolatrous Rites among them, as Balaam and Jesabel had
done: others loosed all the Ties of Modesty and Wedlock, as the Nicolaitans
did: others were for subjecting the Christian Church to the Yoke of all the
Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law: and by the Arts which these Seducers used, the
Churches that had received the Apostles with great kindness, so that they were
ready to have plucked out their very Eyes for them, Gal. 4. 15.
a phrase expressing the tenderest affection, yet Were too much inclined to
entertain those false Apostles.

3. They were apt to divide and quarrel unreasonably about little and
inconsiderable things, and carried these Heats so far, that even when they
assembled together to receive the Holy Sacrament, they met for the worse, and
not for the better: 1 Cor. 11. 17, 18.
so that there were Divisions among them, and the several Parties assumed such
Names as they thought would give them the most Credit: some were for Paul, some
for Apollo, some for Cephas, and some for Christ. 1 Cor. 1. 12.
And the very Teachers themselves were factious and contentious, so that some
at Rome, when S. Paul was in Prison for the Gospel, preached there out of
Contention, Phil. 1. 15, 16.
that they might thereby add affliction to his Bonds: though in that they were
disappointed; for notwithstanding their Injustice to him, he rejoiced that
Christ was preached by them. Some one or all these had perhaps got into the
Church of Sardis, for which S. John, in the name of Christ, Expostulates with
them. They had much to answer for, to whom the Apostles had delivered what they
had seen and heard concerning Jesus Christ, confirming it with many Miracles,
and had conferred on them extraordinary Gifts, so that they were made partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and of the Powers of the World to come: These seem to have
been the sins of this as well as of the other Apostolical Churches.

And now to apply all this to Our own Case, suffer me first in the Name of God
to plead with you, and to set before you the many blessings you have received
from him, beyond most or rather any Nation now in the World: We are born in a
Country that abounds not only with all that is necessary for the Inhabitants,
but yields Us great store of very valuable Goods which We exchange with other
Nations, and bring over such things as grow not among Us; with a vast increase
of wealth, which from all parts of the World flows unto Us: Our Country being
equally well situated for security and Traffic, We have almost forgot when We
were visited with the Plague of Famine. We are under a Government so rarely
tempered by Law, that in it We have all the advantages of other Constitutions,
and avoid the mischiefs of the several forms of Government, as much as is
possible for any thing that is managed by mortal and sinful men to be: So that
after any of the Convulsions that have been among Us, it has been still found
necessary to return to the old Channel, and observe the Landmarks which Our
Forefathers set Us. These blessings We enjoy beyond any Nation in the World,
but these We have in common with the former Ages; they are also Temporal and
end with this Life, We have yet much more to answer for.

We have the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ among Us, and therein the
way to Life and Immortality hereafter, is opened to Us. This We have freed from
all the impure mixtures of Idolatry or Superstition with which it is defiled in
other Churches, and are delivered from the Tyranny of a foreign Power. We have
had Our Religion long secured to Us by Law, with all the encouragements that
can be expected, in a Church so happily constituted between the extremes of
Ecclesiastical Tyranny one the one hand, and Enthusiastical principles on the
other hand; so that it is only our own fault if We are not the Sanctuary and
Defense of all other Reformed Churches, as well as We are the chief Object of
the practices and designs of Our Enemies at Rome. This We have likewise in
common with the former Age: but I shall next enumerate those blessings that We
of this Age have been more particularly favored with: They are great and
signal, and so obvious that it will be enough to name them.

We were involved in a long and tragical War at home, but were not swallowed up
in it. Our Neighbor Island drank indeed of a bitterer Cup, and was covered
almost all over with the Blood and the Carcases of the slain. But here the
storm was not so terrible: The Conquerors were so restrained by that supreme
Power that governs the World, that it is no small wonder there was so little
mischief done, by those who had the Power to do so much: When Our Confusions
thickened so upon Us that our Government changed almost as often as the Weather,
all things returned of a sudden to their old Chanel, the King was restored, and
the Nation was settled in so serene and calm a manner, that it cannot be denied
there was a signal hand of Heaven in it. The more have We all to answer for,
that have made so ill use of so extraordinary a blessing; since that time we
have had plenty and peace at home these twenty years, no breaking out nor
complaining in Our Streets or Countries. We have all this while lived under the
clear Light of the Gospel; and though many of the Pastors have much to answer,
for their great failings, yet there have been raised up among us not a few
eminent and faithful Laborers, who have asserted the Truth and demonstrated
the power of Religion, with as much advantage as has been done in any Age
since Miracles and Persecution ceased: and these have frequently given public
and free warning to the Nation. Many excellent Books have been writ, and
Sermons have been published as well as preached, which will remain to the next
Age to testify against that we live in. God has been calling on Us aloud from
Heaven, both by his Mercies and Judgments, to turn to him and to bring forth
fruits worthy of Repentance, and meet for the Kingdom of God; that is, for his
holy Gospel. A raging Pestilence, and a consuming Fire came quick one after
another to awaken Us effectually: yet though We were then engaged in an
expenceful War, God did not deliver Us up into the hands of our Enemies, though
he corrected Us so severely himself.

These things did perhaps give a little stop to some persons, though others
went on still publishing their Sin as Sodom; but with the return of peace and
the continuance of plenty, We returned to or still continued in our Sins: We
have been delivered from another War since, and the ill designs of wicked Men
were defeated and came to nothing: and now for above seven years We have slept
in a profound Peace, and as profound a security, when there was nothing but
vastation and misery in the Countries that lie next to us: But our Enemies
slept not, they were contriving how to make Us return back again into Egypt, or
submit not our Necks only, but our Souls and Consciences to that Tyrannical
yoke of the Roman slavery; and thought the design so well laid for rooting out
that which they call a Pestilent Heresy, that it was upon the point of being
executed. Then did it appear that God was still watching over Us for good, and
he that saw all these secret contrivances, so closely carried and cemented with
so many sacred ties, disappointed all their Councils, and brought all their
designs to Light, when We were least aware of it; being, though sensible of a
great danger hovering over Us, yet little apprehensive that it was so near Us,
and was to break out in such a manner. I need not run over all those steps, by
which Divine providence has brought out what they intended we should never have
known, till We had felt it and been past the possibility of preventing or
redressing it: They are well enough known, and are often in all our Mouths, Oh
that they were as much in our Hearts!

And now put all these things together, and see if it may not be said
concerning Us, what the Prophet Isaias said of the people of the Jews, God has
planted a vinyard in a very fruitful place, with the choicest vine, and has
fenced it, and built a Tower in it: In a word what more could have been done in
this Vinyard, that has not been done in it? And therefore as partial as we are
apt to be in our own concerns, it may be referred to our selves, to judge
between God and Us. We see and acknowledge what he has done for us, let us next
consider what Grapes we have brought forth? What returns We have made to God?
Have Our works been perfect before God? Alas what do I say perfect! Have they
not been on the contrary the worst, the most impious, and immoral that many
could think on? We have exceeded the Sins of the Jews, and the Vices of the
Heathens. It has not been only a slackning or going back of the Power of
Religion, but an open revolt against Heaven; in too great a part of the Nation:
a Banner has been set up for Athiesm and Impiety, and all have been encouraged
to come about it. The Sins which our Popish forefathers and our more remote
Heathenish Ancestors were so much ashamed of, that they committed them in
corners, We have seen done in the sight of the Sun. The belief of a God that
sees, rewards and punishes, the rules of Virtue, and the doctrine of Christ
have been by some openly assaulted, and treated with indignities which no other
Nation could endure; while others have if not directly consented to them, yet
looked on as unconcerned, have laughed at and been pleased with them.
Advantages have been taken from the Hypocrisy or Euthusiasme of the last Age,
to throw off the very appearances of Religion or Virtue in this Age: and it has
passed for a piece of Gallantry and decent Breeding to be above the fears and
apprehensions of a supreme Power, or a future State. Have we forgot how
publicly that great blessing of the Kings Restoration was abused? It grew to
that height that it was thought a Scandal not to concur in all the excesses of
Riot and Intemperance that did then defile the Land. Whether shall we now turn
our Eyes? If on this place, Luxury, Immorality, and open Lewdness meet us
almost in every corner: If on the Country, how does Intemperance, Injustice,
and a total neglect, if not a resolved scorn of Religion fill most places? And
the excesses of Drinking have in many parts of the Nation, not only corrupted
Civil Conversation, but vitiated the very Vitals of our Government, by the
ascendent that such practices have had in so essential and main a part of our
security, as are the Elections of this great and Honorable Assembly: of whom
if some generously scorned such methods, too many have complied too much with
so base and so ignominious a custom. If we have thus abused the earthly
blessings of Peace and Plenty, and have much to answer for on that account: Oh
what can we say to excuse our selves who have not only brought no fruit to
perfection, notwithstanding all that seed of the Gospel that has been so
plentifully sown among us, but have done what we could to defy God himself,
and to drive him out of our Country, being weary of that very dead Form of
Religion yet remaining. And to bring this home to our present circumstances,
though we are under great apprehensions of loosing this blessed Light; what are
we doing to engage God to be on our side? We have been now for above two years
in great disorders, full of allarms, and under eminent and visible dangers; but
what Lust or ill Custom have we parted with? What demonstration have we given
to God or the World, that we consider Religion as it is indeed the Power of God
to the Salvation of our Souls? Or what do we for our holy Faith, that Infidels,
Mahometans, Jews, or Papists, would not do for their persuasions? Do we
continue still in our Lewdness, Intemperance, Oppression, Injustice, Falsehood
and ill Nature, while we are talking of preserving our Religion, and yet are
doing all we can to undermine or overthrow it?

If God is against us, all that we can do for preserving Religion or our other
just Rights, will either by his wise and holy Councils be quite blasted; or
perhaps the very methods that to us seem the most probable to secure them, may
in conclusion really introduce that which we fear so much. Are our works
perfect before God who knows them? To make a work perfect it must be good in it
self, flow from a good principle, and be directed to a good end. The greatest
part of our works are faulty in all these particulars, so that neither We nor
our Works can be accepted with that God, That is of purer Eyes than that he can
behold Iniquity. Some of our Works may be in themselves good, and such is a
zeal for the Reformed Religion; but if some do not believe that about which
they make so much noise, or if others have no design but to serve base ends or
private Interests, which they hid with the pretense of Religion, and are ready
to throw it off, when they have attained that for which they are in truth only
concerned, shall not God search this out? Things may be so dressed up, as to
have a fair appearance, but to God they appear as indeed they are: So the true
value of us and our works, is according to what we are in his sight, from whom
nothing can disguise us. From all these things it is but too evident, that our
Works are not perfect before God.

If we will consider more particularly what may be supposed to have been the
ground of the Expostulation in my Text, with this Apostolic Church of Sardis,
we shall find the parallel betwixt it and us agrees but too well. These
Churches had fallen from their first Love, and their first Works: Oh what sad
decays are we come under! And how much have we declined from that Zeal and Love
which our Fathers bore to the Reformation! There were two things that were
visible in the practice of those who first embraced it among us: the one was
the great pleasure they took in reading the Scriptures, from whence they were
in derisiion called Gospellers. When the Bibles were first set up in Churches,
and went at such rates that ordinary people could not buy them, what a running
was there to Churches, and what crowds gathered all day long about such as
could read, to hear this blessed Word, which is now in all our Hands, and yet
is scarce ever considered by us? Some read it only to abuse it and make
themselves merry with some Atheistical jests to which they wrest it: Others
judge that indecent, so because they will make no ill use of it, they make none
at all, and never open it but for fashion: some employ their time in searching
into the abstruser parts of it, with a prying and vain curiosity: some read it
merely to acquire a faculty of talking in such a Style, and so either they
pervert the Scriptures by their false Glosses, or only learn to defend some
Opinions out of it, or to Discourse in that Dialect, for private Designs, to
which that is perhaps some way necessary. But who read them with a simplicity
of Mind to be directed by them, and to be inwardly inflamed by the heavenly
strains in them? So that we have little left among us to entitle us to the Name
of Gospellers.

The other chief Character by which the Reformed were at first known, was their
applying themselves only to God through Jesus Christ. This was intended to take
men off from two fatal Errors, in which they had been formerly led; the one was
relying on such external Works as were really of no Value at all, and were only
the juglings of those deceitful Guides, that had set up Pilgrimages, slight
Penances, and the purchasing Indulgences, in the room of that which our Savior
had revealed to the World; the other was their imagining that they were
justified by the Sacraments, upon some slight acts of sorrow or devotion: In
stead of these things the Reformers set up the applying to God through Jesus
Christ according to the methods of the Gospel: so that great and frequent
addresses to the Father through his Son was the mark by which they were then
known! This begetting in them a sense of that Love which their Savior had for
them, could not but kindle returns of Love suitable to it; and that must needs
reform the inward man, upon which Purity and Holiness of Life will certainly
follow.

This was the main Article of the Reformation, and being that upon which the
hopes of Salvation depended, was indeed the thing of the greatest consequence;
though it was afterward managed with too much Metaphysical nicety. In sum this
being the chief Character of a true Protestant, we may soon see how much we
have fallen from that Love which our Fathers had to this Truth, while they
lived; and that appeared more signally by their dying for it, when they were
called to give their last Testimony to it. But what is all this to us? Are we
living under the influences of that love? do our hearts burn with the sense of
it? what reverence have we for the person, or what obedience pay we to the
Doctrine of our Crucified Savior? If any of this remain, it is much spent, at
least, and ready to dye.

The second thing charged on these Churches, was their being apt to be carried
away by the cunning slight of those who lay in wait to deceive, and their being
too easily disposed to vitiate Christianity with the mixtures of Judaism or
Hethenism or other errors. Our vices have taken us off from the practice of the
plain and indispensable duties of our holy Religion; and then it is no wonder
we find no pleasure in that Doctrine which can give no true comfort, to such as
continue in their sins. This disposes people to seek that elsewhere, which they
cannot have among us; and therefore a Religion made up of pomp and show,
wherein God and his Saints were offered to be bribed, in which they knew the
rares of sin and the price of Heaven found us but too well prepared to become
Profylites to it. Our sins have been also so visible and scandalous, that they
have made our Communion grow loathsome to many well disposed but weak minds, and
have tempted them to separate from our Assemblies, when they saw such mixed
multitudes among us: so that they have run into Sects, that had the appearance
of greater gravity and strictness.

3. And we are no less faulty in the third particular, of contending out of
measure, for things that are no way essential to salvation. Things of so
indifferent a nature, that succeeding ages will wonder how men could manage
such long and eager contests about them. We have fallen into passions
concerning them, these have grown up to a hatred, which has broken out into
most violent and dismal effects, and seems now settled into a formed rent and
separation. Where is that charitable, healing and compassionate temper which
becomes Christians, and reformed Christians? especially when they are as it
were struggling for life. Oh shall nothing make us wiser? shall neither the
advantages our enemies take, nor the prejudices Religion suffers by our
contests, dispose us to bear with one another infirmities, and to manage our
differences, if we cannot entirely bury them, with a more Christian and decent
temper! There have been extremes on all hands: neither side can free themselves
from being too much exasperated: The resentment for what has been done in the
several turns of affairs, has gone too far with us. It is not so much our
differences that divide us one from another, as our alienation one from another
which widens our differences, and makes them appear to be greater than indeed
they are. So on all accounts we must acknowledge, that when our works are
weighed in those just balances they cannot be found perfect before God. I hope
we are all in some measure convinced of this: The thing is alas too visible.
What is then to be done? but to set about a real Reformation with all possible
seriousness and sincerity. And in order to this and to direct us in it, here is
a rule and standard given, by which we may govern our selves in the means or
methods to it: and that is the second thing I proposed to speak to.

2. The Rule by which are to examine our selves, and by which God will judge
us, is the Doctrine which the Churches received from the Apostles, Remember
therefore how thou have received and heard. Here is a certain fixed rule; we
are neither left to the heats of our own fancies, nor to the uncertainties of
Tradation, nor to the impostures of such as may pretend to the government of
our Consciences: but are conducted by a more certain thread. It is true, in the
Apostles days this Doctrine was at first preached and received, before it was
written. There was no great danger as long as they lived, who might be appealed
to in any difficulty which could arise concerning their Doctrine: so it is a
vain way of arguing to infer from the mention of Tradition in the Epistles,
that we after so many ages are past, and so many impostures have been
discovered, should be obliged to receive what may be obtruded on us as
Apostolical Tradition. Tradition while the Apostles lived, was what the
Scripture is now: And indeed so uncertain a conveyance is Oral Tradition, that
in the very Apostles days or soon after, when there were no advantages to be
made by such cheats, and so there was less to tempt men to them, yet many false
Gospels were given out, and false Doctrines were infused into some weaker
people. We know how unfaithful a conveyor Tradition was of Natural Religion
among the Gentile Nations: The Gospel tells us how the Jews doted on the
Traditions of their Fathers, and by them made the Commandments of God of none
effect. The uncertainty of Tradition where it was not put in writing, appeared
within an age after the Apostles, in the contests concerning the observation of
Easter: both sides vouching the practice of the Apostles, and that even while
some were alive, that had seen them and had lived with them. But after that
wealth and greatness had corrupted the Church, and this holy Religion was made
an Engine to advance the ambition and interests of designing men, then what a
swarm of supposititious writings appeared every where to support some opinions
or designs; many of these were discovered and branded, but others passed
without a censure; so that it was long before Critics in this and the former
age, could find out what was genuine, and what was counterfeit.

The most advantageous Imposture was coined and received in the 9th Century; a
whole Volume of the Epistiles of the first Bishops of Rome from the Apostles
days downwards, was pretended to be found; in which they were represented as
governing the Church in the former ages, with the same fullness of power, that
their Successors have pretended to since. This was rejected by some in that
age, but kindly entertained by those that were more concerned for their own
greatness than for Truth: and by the Presidents in these Epistles they
justified what they did, till their Tyranie came to be generally submitted to:
And now when these Epistles are found to be spurious, they have been forced to
throw them away; but stand upon possession and prescription, tho it began at
first upon this and some other impostures, not unlike it, such as the Donation
of Constantine and many more.

They well know that their cause cannot be defended if the Scriptures are
appealed to: these in many points are directly against them, as in the worship
of Images, and Angels, the praying in an unknown tongue, and the denying the
Chalice, or saying that Christ's body which is now in Heaven, is in the
Sacrament: in other things they are silent, such as the Popes Power, the
Infallibility of a General Council, the praying to Saints, the redeeming souls
out of Purgatory, Indulgences, Pilgrimages, with a thousand other additions, by
which they have vitiated the purity of that holy Doctrine, which the Apostles
delivered to the world. This is the foundation of our whole Religion, that we
believe all that the Apostles delivered to the Churches, and no more: so we
stand to this appeal in my Text, Remember therefore that thou have received and
heard. It were easy to instance it in many particulars, and to show you how at
first ignorance and superstition let in some Customs; and perhaps those who
introduced them at first, being innocent, but weak men, meant well in it: so to
draw the Heathens off from their Idolatry, they directed them to call on
Saints, instead of the gods they had formerly worshipped: and to persuade
people to receive the Sacrament with great devotion, they strained their
eloquence and invention to recommend the value of it in high figures. Many more
might be named, but these may suffice: afterward when the Roman Empire was
overrun by the incursions of the Barbarous Nations, and Civility, Religion,
and Learning, were almost driven out of the world; then some crafty and
aspiring Priests came to graft upon the Customs of the former times, new
Opinions, and still to add new Rites, till in the end they swelled up to what
they are now at in the Roman Church. When these Opinions were first broached,
Visions and Dreams were given out to support them; and if these lesser frauds
did not prevail, pretended Miracles were not wanting to give them credit, till
they were received; and being once received, they were enrolled among the
Traditions of the Church, and so were no more to be contested or denied: if any
presumed to do it, it was at his peril. These Miracles were coined so, as to
fit not only the Doctrine it self, but the way of explaining it; and as new
ways of explaining were fallen upon, new Miracles suitable to these new
expositions were at hand.

When the Doctrine of the Corporal presence was first received in the 9th
Century, it was believed that the whole Loaf was an entire body of Christ, so
that he was sliced in pieces and eat up in gobbets; and so they continued to
understand it near 300 years. Then the Miracles to prove it were adjusted to
that conceit; it was given out that it did sometimes bleed, and pieces of it
were said to be converted to pieces of slesh: but after that the School
Divinity came to be in request, this way was not found so defensible, nor so
decent: and then it was said, Christ was in every Crumb of the Host; so that
upon the breaking it, an entire Christ flew off from the rest, which yet
remained still as entire as it was, notwithstanding that diminution: and then
as they blessed Wasers instead of a Loaf, so the former Miracles were not so
much talked of, though some ignorant Priests that did not consider that these
were contrary to the Doctrine of their Church, did in some places continue to
act the former cheats; but new ones were more generally invented, and Christ
was said to appear all in rays, over or upon the Host: so well practiced were
they in the arts of juggling, as to make their tricks always agree with their
Hypothesis.

In opposition to all these false Doctrines and lying wonders, the Reformed
have from the first beginning of the Reformation set up the whole strength of
their cause, upon this single Plea, of receiving nothing as a part of their
faith, but what could be found in the Writings of the Apostles; that so all
agreeing on a common Umpire their differences might be more easily composed.
The Church of Rome knows well what the issue must be, if this is granted, and
so have put the strength of their whole cause upon the authority of the Church,
that is themselves, and the certainty of Oral Tradition, handed down by such
men as themselves are: Whether the one or the other seems to be the more
ingenuous Principle, the more certain method of Trial, and the less liable to
deceit, I leave it to the Consciences of all wise and good men.

But as we ought to remember what we have thus received and heard, so the end
of this is not barely for speculation, to inform us about some notions, or to
furnish us with arguments and discourse: these things are only necessary for a
further end; that our minds being well informed, and our belief rightly
directed, we may govern our lives according to what the holy Apostles have left
to us. It is because their works were not perfect, that they are here charged
therefore to remember the doctrine that they had received: What shall our
knowledge, our Orthodoxie, and soundness of opinion avail us, if we do not
reduce it to practice? unless it be to heighten our condemnation, and to
entitle us to more stripes and severer judgments. Here we will find our duties
set before us, and from thence we will both know what our sins have been, and
how to turn from them. Oh that there were such a heart in us! But as we ought
to remember and improve the Doctrine delivered to the Church by the Apostles,
so we ought to keep it carefully.

3. And this is the third particular I am to speak to: All who have received
this Doctrine, ought to preserve it, and to conveigh down that sacred trust
committed to them, to the succeeding generations. This is to Hold-fast, what we
have received and heard. The meaning of this, considering the circumstances the
Church of Sardis was in, is either that they should preserve it pure, and keep
it as it was delivered to them, or that if persecutions should arise for the
Faith, they should not depart from it for the love of this present world, or
make shipwreck of it; but should hold fast the profession of their Faith
without wavering. There were many Tares sown then in the field of the Church,
many of the followers of Simon Magus were corrupting the Christian Religion; it
was necessary on that account to look carefully to that sacred Depositum, that
was put in their hands. There was also a black Cloud gathering, a persecution
was coming on the Church: One storm had passed, that had been raised by Nero,
and they were now in another set on by Domitian; therefore it was necessary to
put them on their guard, and to charge them to keep or Hold fast the Doctrine
delivered to them. This was all that they could be obliged to; but in our
circumstances there is somewhat else imported in this Holding fast, that we
ought not only to keep our Religion pure, and to be ready to suffer for it, if
we are called to it, but since we enjoy the protection and security of law and
lawful authority, we ought to hold that fast, and deliver it down to our
posterity, as we have received it from our Fathers.

We are to keep it pure from the corruptions that may be introduced to vitiate
the simplicity of our holy Religion: we know the Enemies of the Church sleep
not, tho the Watchmen sleep too often. While we have Adversaries that are so
restless and industrious, that make up in their arts of insinuation and
indefatigable diligence, what is wanting in the justice and goodness of their
Cause; on these our eyes ought to be much set. They have corrupted Religion
where ever their arts have been succesful; and have endeavored to overthrow
all Governments, and broken the peace of all Societies that have been so much
on their guard, as to look carefully to them. For that same principle that
makes them burn and destroy where they have power, makes them also incessantly
Plot and practice where they have it not. Severities in matters of Religion are
indeed contrary to that humanity that is imprinted in our nature, and to those
rules that are often repeated in Scripture. But if any Sect of Religion
continues to breed frequent and almost uninterrupted disturbances in any
Government, it is not enough to punish those that are found in the fault, but
if it is evident, as it is certainly in this case, that their Doctrine sets
them on to, and will bear them through in such conspiracies, it seems not
possible to secure the peace of a Kingdom so much infested by them, as we have
been now 120 years, but by delivering it entirely out of their hands, and
putting an utter end to the distractions we have been in, and the mischiefs we
have smarted under, by their means. They will live much better among their own
friends, beyond Sea, where they may freely exercise their own Religion; and I
am sure we will be much the happier and quieter for being freed from the
trouble they have given us. And thus we are to Hold fast the Apostles Doctrine
and to keep our selves from the infection of those who have corrupted it.

But if this cannot be done, and if God either to punish us for our former
sins, or to raise again the true spirit of the reformed Religion, to purify us
from our dross, and to melt us into one lump, and close up those breaches which
we have been rather widening than healing, will deliver us up into the hands of
our merciless and implacable Enemies; then, as we know what we are to look for,
so we ought to prepare our selves for it, and resolve to be faithful to the
death. We know what will be, not only by what has been, but by what is the
Doctrine of that Church, of extirpating Heretics, decreed in their General
Councils: and what they have met with of late among us, has so whetted their
Spirits against us, that if ever we are in their power, the cruelty of their
Religion, being quickened by their private resentments, we can look for nothing,
but either to be forced to worship a piece of bread, and to renounce that Faith
which we now profess, or to seal it with our blood, and that perhaps in the
cruellest manner. I know it is not easy for flesh and blood so much as to
think on these things without horror; But Oh, what will it be to suffer them!
It will not be our living peaceably, nor our keeping our belief to our selves
that will secure us: we must in all things comply, nay, and if we should
dissemble and comply, we must by an over-acting zeal procure our pardon for
what is past, and beget a confidence in them for the future. I shall on this
head represent a little of what you may expect, by mentioning some few passages
of Queen Mary's, never to be forgotten, bloody Reign; that are not so generally
known. At first She promised the continuance of the established Religion, soon
after She procured it to be generally changed, even while the Laws were yet in
force for it; but then it was said, none should be forced in their Consciences
if they would live peaceably: but when the change was fully brought about, then
according to the Natural Genius of that Religion, an open and undistinguish't
persecution was resolved on. Orders were then sent from the Council Table, to
the Justices of Peace, to have spies in every Parish to observe every man's
deportment: a bare suspicion was ground enough to proceed upon. Persons being
presented upon suspicion, were imprisoned: and, without any proofs or witnesses
brought against them, Articles were offered to them, to which if they did not
in all things answer according to the Doctrine of that Church, and if they
could not be induced to change their persuasions, they were condemned to the
fire, tho they had neither said nor acted any thing contrary to the established
Religion. And it went yet further. The Justices of peace having been often writ
to, grew more and more backward to these cruelties, especially when they saw
them burn poor people single at first, then by pairs, then six, eight, ten, and
thirteen, were burnt in one fire: neither the blind nor lame, aged men, nor
women near their time, no nor newborn Infants escaping the rage of these
Butchers: Then to make way for the Courts of Inquisition, a Commission was
given to a selected number, of whom three was a Quorum, to make enquiry over
all England, not only of such as were suspect of Heresy; but of all that did
not express their zeal for the Popish Religion, in taking holy Bread, or holy
Water, or going in Processions; which tho they are not things to which all in
that Communion are obliged, yet these discovering the affections and
inclinations of the people, such as did them not* were to be proceeded against
upon these suspicions. At first such as were burnt had their lives offered to
them at the Stake if they would recant, but as the persecution went on they
became more barbarous, so that it was not enough for one to recant then* for a
Sheriff was cast in, Prison and fined, for staying the execution of one who did
it: It was said if he recanted sincerely, it was better to burn him, than to
leave him to the temptations of becoming a relapse; and if he did it not
sincerely, it was pity to spare him. So which way soever it was, dye and burn
he must. And that none might escape out of their Toils, care was taken to
secure all the Ports that none might fly beyond Sea.

Here is a sad prospect before us; but in what disposition are we to bear it?
we have no reason to doubt but great numbers will turn with the tide, as they
did then. Many who seem now to be hot and zealous for the Protestant Religion,
will then, perhaps, be as busy to discover and accuse those whom they now
censure, not only rashly but maliciously. Men of ill Lives and defiled
Consciences, want that principle which must strengthen them to bear the Cross,
and make it easy and comfortable to them. It is quite another thing to own
this Faith in our present circumstances, from what it will be to adhere to it
then.

It is not yet come that, and God of his infinite mercy preserve us from it. We
are taught by him that knew our nature well, to watch and pray that we enter
not into temptation, for though the Spirit, or our sublimer powers may be
forward and willing, yet the flesh is weak. We are therefore to do all that is
in our power, and is consistent with that Religion which we prosess, to prevent
this. You of this Honorable Assembly are now entrusted with the keeping this
Doctrine, as it is a part of the Law of the Land; the people have trusted you
with all that is dear to them; and it is hoped you will acquit your selves as
worthy of so great a confidence. On this I shall enlarge no further, but apply
to you the message which Mordecai sent to Queen Esther, Esth. 4. 13*
when her people were marked out for destruction: Think not that you shall
escape more than all the rest: for if you altogether hold your peace at this
time, there may come enlargement and deliverance to us from another hand; but
you and your houses shall be destroyed: and who knows if* you are come into
this trust for such a time as this is. If any shall, either on the one hand,
give up this holy Religion, and those means which are most effectual to secure
it, for private or base ends of their own; or on the other hand shall, to
gratify their revenge, or to advance any ill design, endeavor to drive things
to confusion, so that we become a prey to a formidable Neighbor, where Popery,
with it concomitant Tyranny, shall subdue us at once; These are the betrayers
of their Religion and their Country, and do entitle themselves to the heaviest
curses in the whole Book of God.

But the Nation hopes better things from you: and, and as we pray for it, so
are we confident they shall not be ashamed or disappointed of their hope. Your
maintaining the Laws, or providing such new ones as our present circumstances
call for, for the preservation of our Religion, is not all that you are to do
for it; there are many other things besides, that come under your care, which
are also necessary, that we may Hold fast this our profession. I shall name two
particulars. The one is, that there are so many Parishes in this great and rich
Kingdom, in which there is so little provision left for those that labor in
the work of the Gospel, that it is not possible, humanely speaking, to find fit
and able Pastors to undertake such a charge upon so mean an encouragement: and
many of these fall to be the greatest and the most populous Parishes in their
Neighborhood: The labourer is worthy of his hire: but in many of these the
hire will not amount to the meanest and most frugal subsistence, that can
consist with the decency of that Function. If weak or scandalous men are cast
on such places, so that the people are neither instructed nor edified by their
labors, but are rather scandalized by them; it is worth your serious
consideration to find out effectual means for redressing so great an evil, by
which so many souls are lost, and such a door has been opened to seducers and
false teachers among us. The other is, that we will endeavor to secure the
Reformed Religion among us, by doing all we can to maintain the outworks of it,
I mean the foreign Churches, some of whom are now in a most deplorable and
sinking condition. The methods that Julian the Apostate used to extirpate
Christianity, not by the quick and sharp ways of persecution, but by flower
steps; being now taken to root out that which main force could not do. To these
we ought to extend our compassion and assistance, as we would expect the like
from others when we may be brought to drink of the like bitter Cup, which how
near it may be to us, God only knows. But all these means will prove
ineffectual if we have not God on our side; except he watch over us, and build
up our ruins, Psalm 127. 1.
you that build and we that watch shall labor in vain. This leads me to the
fourth particular, which is,

4. That the chief use we ought to make of this Doctrine, is to reform our
hearts and lives, to repent of, and forsake our sins. Repent. I shall not here
run out into a large discourse of this, but sum up in short what is
comprehended under it. The word imports more than a bare sorrowing for our
sins, or an external change of our life, and does chiefly signify the inward
change and reformation of our minds: when we put on a new disposition, come
under new principles, and are inwardly turned in the value and estimate we have
of things, and in our practical judgments and formed resolutions. Repentance
is, when a man having another sense of God, and true goodness, another
apprehension of vice and sin, other thoughts of a future state, other
impressions of the love of Christ, and the truth of the Gospel; and all these
things growing into formed principles in him, his mind is turned to such a
detestation of his former course of life, as engages him not only to forsake
it, but to enter upon a quite different Course; so that he feels himself
inwardly regenerated and changed. Oh have I not been discribing a thing little
understood! Some sorrow for sin, which is scarce possible for the worst men to
avoid, is all the notion too many have of it. Others fancy to compound for
their sins, with some austerities, by an outward pageantry, or compounding with
God or his Sains if they can, and doing it effectually where they can, with the
Priest: believing that his absolving them is of some other virtue, than a
declaration to them of what they may certainly expect if they are sincere in
their repentance. But if these things come short of a true repentance, what is
to be s^id of those who have not so much: who have no remorse for their sins,
but live on securely in them, or do worse, Glory in their shame. These are far
enough from having repented, who are growing up daily to a higher pitch in
their impieties. You have expressed your sense of the necessity of this duty,
by your addressing about it: but if it goes no further than the solemnity of a
days vacation from business, or abstaining from meat, and the hearing some
Sermons, or joining in prayers; this can have no other effect but to raise our
guilt higher, by our pretending to draw near to God with our Lips, when our
hearts are far from him. Our sins are drawing heavy judgments on us: our
repentance only can prevent them; not such a trifling performance as I have
described, but a sincere and entire turn to God. We ought to be humbling our
selves in secret, every one for those sins by which we have provoked him, and
have been adding to that great heap of guilt, by which we have been too
universally treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath. We are apt enough to
censure the vices and failings of others, especially if on other accounts we
are displeased with them, and if we our selves are not visibly faulty in the
same kind: but there are other sins besides Uncleanness and Intemperance, which
may involve us in the common ruin that threatens us. And if we know our selves
guilty, even of that which we censure in others, we by judging them do condemn
our selves. Let us recollect our Thoughts, and ask our selves, What have we
done? Have we been adding Sin to Sin, and perhaps Hypocrisy, or a counterfeit
Zeal to all the rest? We are under the Eye of the All-seeing God, to whom all
things lie naked and open, Darkness before him shines as the Day; the Darkness
and the Light are both alike to him. Let us not deceive our selves; God is
neither to be mocked, nor bribed. It is only our sincere Repentance that can
again restore us to his Favor; and if the Sins of the Nation are not grown to
that height, that, as is said of the Sin of Manasseh, God will not pardon it;
so that though Noah, Job, and Daniel, were among us, they could only deliver
their own Souls; 2 King. 24. 4. Ezekiel. 14. 14.
We may hope, that upon our Repentance, either that Cloud of Wrath now over our
Heads, may be broken and dissipated, or, at least, that our Peace and
Tranquillity may be so lengthned out, that the Evil shall not come in our days.

If we Repent truly, we will lay down our Animosities and Quarrellings about
lesser Matters; and finding how guilty we are all in the presence of God, we
will be more gentle in the Judgments we make of others, and more severe in the
Censures we pass upon our selves. We will change the course and frame of our
Lives, not only in such instances as are more scandalous, and so may be a
prejudice to us in our other Designs, but will enter upon another Method and
Way of ^^^e, such as becomes Christians. If this is not done, all that we do
beside, will not be effectual to preserve us. If God is still offended with us,
he will not want Instruments for our punishment, though we had not a Papist in
England, nor an Enemy in all the World.

But on the other hand, If we sincerely turn to God, as we know in general he
is gracious and merciful, slow to Anger, and full of Compassion; so we have, in
particular, all the Assurances that either his Promises, or the Experience of
former Times can give us, that He will receive us graciously; that he will take
away all our Iniquities, and heal all our backslidings.

Personal Repentance, and the mourning for the Sins of others, are Duties
incumbent on all: To these you stand obliged in your private Capacities; But as
you make up this Honorable Assembly, there is a further Repentance incumbent
on you. You, who represent the Nation, ought, in the Name of the whole Body of
the People, to think on such Laws as are necessary for the restraint of Vice.
It is visible, the Impiety of the Nation has made way for Popery; and though
that were out of doors, yet if the other continues still, it will prepare us to
open Atheism and Irreligion. God cannot be at Peace with us, while our
Adulteries are so many, while Drunkenness is so common, while Religion is so
much scorned, even by those who seem zealous for it; while Cursing and Swearing
are the usual Dialect; while Profanity, scurrilous Talk, and many other things
which ought not to be named among Christians, are so openly and bare-facedly
practiced among us. By your endeavors to redress these, and at least, to make
People ashamed of them, if they do not forsake them; You shall also, in your
public Capacity, show the reality of your Repentance, both to God and the
World. It is an ordinary thing for all People, who have some one great thing in
their Eye, to look only at that, and to overlook many other Things, if they do
not immediately belong to that of which they are chiefly afraid. Popery is now
in your Eye, and it ought to be so, till you have to purpose secured us from
the danger of it: But at the same time you ought to look further, to the Ground
of God's displeasure against us, to that which has brought us into all this
Danger, and must certainly bring ruin on us in conclusion, if effectual
Remedies are not found out in time. Our Irreligion and Impiety has made many to
be little concerned in these Matters; and our Contentions about some
inconsiderable Things, has diverted the Thoughts and Endeavors of others, to
the securing of particular Interests, or making of Parties.

To these, if you provide effectual Remedies, both for reforming and uniting
us, then you shall be had in perpetual remembrance, as the Repairers of our
Breaches, and the Restorers of our Ruins: so that all shall bless you, and in
their wishes, for a happy Parliament, shall name you with Honor, and wish it
may be such a one as this has been.

We have all the reason in the World to conclude, that this Nation is dear unto
God; and we are sure, the Holy Religion we profess, is from him; why should we
then despond, and not still hope in that God, who has hitherto given us such
abundant Proofs of his care of us, and of his regard to the Reformation among
us. When we remember by what steps and methods it was brought in and
established here; How short the Storm was in Queen Mary's Reign, and that she
died without Issue, which might have brought us both under Popery, and made us
a Province to a Foreign Tyranny; when we reflect on the long and glorious
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, on the happy disappointment of the Armada, believed
and called Invincible; the discovery of the Gunpowder Plot, with the later
Blessings yet in our Eyes, we have from all these much reason to conclude, that
we are in a special manner favored of God. Nothing can break off this course
of Mercies with which he has followed us, but our obstinate persisting in our
sins: If we resolve on this, there is nothing before us, but a fearful prospect
of Wrath and Indignation. And this leads me to the fifth and last Particular,
of which I proposed to speak, which is.

5. That such as do not make this use of the Gospel, as to be thereby led to
Repentance, have reason to look for sudden and severe Judgments. If therefore
thou shall not watch, I will come upon thee as a Thief, and thou shall not know
what hour I will come upon thee. God's Judgments are a great depth, and the
Methods of them are unaccountable: Some wicked Nations, and Impious and
Tyrannical Governments, have flourished long: Triumph and Victory have seemed
entailed on them. The Assyrian of old, and the Turkish Empire at present, are
great Instances of this. These are Portions of the World, which God for their
other sins gave in prey to savage Masters; whose Prosperity made them the
fitter Instruments of his Justice. But it is observable, that those Nations
whom he has more specially favored, are more signally punished when their Sins
have been so notorious, that it seemed necessary to give public Evidences of
the impartiality of God's governing the World. You only have I known of all the
Families of the Earth; therefore will I punish you for your Iniquities. Amos 3.
2.
The whole History of the Jews, till their final, and almost total destruction,
is one continued Instance of this. The Roman Empire, when it turned Christian,
but was not much reformed by that Light, was given up to be wasted by swarms of
Goths, Vandals, Huns, and other Northern Nations, who for near two Ages
together, laid it so wast, that what by the Destruction they made, and the
Famine that followed upon that, which brought after it unheard of Plagues, the
History of that Time contains a Succession of the most terrible Miseries that
can be imagined. The African Churches, that were the best regulated of any then
in the World, yet having fallen from their first Love, and being rent in pieces
by Schism, and becoming generally corrupt in their Manners, notwithstanding the
excellent Bishops that were among them; St. Austin in particular, who was the
last of those that were sent to warn them of the Jugments they might look for;
which he did faithfully, but nothing prevailing, they were first destroyed by
the Vandals, and then so totally by the Saracens and Moors, that the Name of
Christ is called on no more in them, except it be in their Dungeons, by those
miserable Captives that are kept in such slavery among them, that it should
tear every Christian's Heart to think on it. The Eastern Empire was first by
the Goths, then by the Huns and the Avares, afterward by the Saracens, and
finally by the Turks, so wasted, that the small Remainders of Christianity
among them, serve only as the Ruins of some great Fabric, to show what once it
was. The City of Antioch, once among the noblest of the World, in which that
glorious Name of Christian first began, was by a frequent return of most
terrible Earthquakes, and devouring Fires, so ruinated, that it is now but a
small inconsiderable Village. Sardis, in my Text, is no better: These Seven
Churches here writ to, are now under the slavery of Mahometans, and indeed
retain little but the Name of Christian; some of them are so entirely
destroyed, that it is not so much as certain where they stood. When we hear of
these things, we ought wisely to consider of these Works of the Lord: Why
should we hope to escape, if we are as guilty as they were? But to turn your
Eyes to what is nearer you; After the Gospel was planted here in Britain, while
we were under the Roman Yoke, and was watered with the Blood of many Martyrs
that suffered under the Heathenish Persecutions; The Britons being blessed with
Peace and Prosperity, did soon forget God, and fell from their first Love. Then
what Judgments fell on them? The Northern People being more Warlike, broke into
the Southern Parts, who were soft and luxurious: These hiring the Saxons to
their Assistance, were thereby brought under a much more cruel Bondage; and
those either rooted out the Christian Religion, or drove it up into the
mountainous parts of this Kingdom. What the Sins, both of the Clergy and Laity
were, is set out by Gildas, that lived not long after that Time, and they
resemble our present Condition so much, that it gives us cause to fear the
parallel shall be as equal in our Judgments, as it is now in our Sins. When the
Reformation began first in England, many run into it, rather out of hatred to
the Clergy, and love to their Lands, than out of Zeal for the Truth. So that
the Bishops in King Edward's Time, did, by some Letters which they sent about
among their Clergy, call upon them to warn the People of the heavy Judgments of
God, ready to fall upon them: but they went on in their Sins with a high hand,
so that the Land was full of Oppression and Injustice, Adultery and Sensuality:
God visited them for these things, and took away that blessed young King, and
left them in the hands of a superstitious and bloody Princess, who fearing her
own Power was not strong enough to alter the established Religion, married the
Prince of Spain, and by a vast Treasure which he brought over into England,
corrupted the great Men, and the Public Councils of the Kingdom; so that all
that had been building up in twenty five years, was overthrown in a little more
than one, by Parliaments, over whom Spanish Gold had greater influence, than
the Sense of their Trust, or their Regard to God and their Country. Shall I put
you in mind of the terrible Judgment of God, that broke out lately on our
neighboring Island, where, the Barbarity of the Natives being sharpened by the
Cruelty of their Religion, and the Practices of their Priests, a Massacre and
Destruction did almost wholly consume them? How near were we brought to utter
Ruin, and how long were we ruled by the Sword, during the late Wars?

Are all these things forgotten? Or do we remember them, only to furnish out
Discourse with them? We at present are all sufficiently apprehensive of our ill
condition, we see the great danger we are in of Popery's subduing us; we see an
overgrown Neighbor ready to break in upon us, or at least, upon that which is
but a step from us. There is a Fermentation among our selves, so high, that it
is like to involve us in great Confusions: The things that belong to our Peace
seem to be hid from our eyes. Is not all this of the Lord? Most of the Evils we
either feel or apprehend, are the natural effects of our Sins and Vices, as
well as of the Judgment of God punishing us for them. The Vices too common
amongst us, have corrupted the Minds, and darkened the Understandings of many,
and are like to become their own Punishments.

All these things are but the beginnings of Sorrows, which seem to be coming on
us. What do we then? Do we sit crossing our hands, accusing one another, or it
may be, faintly condemning our selves? We perhaps imagine, if we were rid of
Popery all would be well; it is certain, we should be much better than we are:
but if the Root of our Distemper remains, the carrying off one Symptom will but
dispose the way to another. God can either plague us, by delivering us up to a
foreign Enemy, who shall have no pity on us; or can again send his Arrows
among us, a Pestilence to sweep away our Inhabitants, or a Fire to burn down
our Cities. He can leave us to bite and devour another, till we are consumed
one of another. And if he come upon us, what can we do to withstand his mighty
Arm? Can we restrain his Thunders, or be Proof against his Arrows? Oh how weak
are all Devices, when God blasts them! If our Distractions continue, we are
like the Builders of Babel, so divided, that nothing but utter and irremediable
Confusion is like to be the end of them, if we once fall in pieces.

Well, we are yet in Peace, we rise up and lie down in quiet; how long it will
be so, we cannot tell: We seem to be near great Convulsions; we have no reason
to desire them. We are now full of Wealth, our Trade is free, and much spread;
we have a Concurrence, both at home and abroad, of many things, that might yet
make us a great and happy People, but want the Power to improve it. What shall
the end of these things be? It were too great a presumption in me, nor proper
for this place or occasion, to enter into Particulars; but one thing I may
adventure on, which is, If you of this Honorable Assembly, who have now
bespoke the Prayers of the whole Nation upon your Consultations, would
frequently address your selves to God, and set off such Hours as your Business
can admit of, for earnest Prayer to God, to direct and bless your Councils, and
to bend all your Hearts, to that which is both most for his Glory, the
Establishment of his true Religion, and the Security, Peace, and Happiness of
the Kingdom; we might justly hope, that God, even our God, would give his
Blessing to Endeavors so begun, and so managed: Then should the Light of the
Gospel, which is our Glory, still dwell in our Land: Mercy and Truth should
meet together, and Righteousness and Peace should kiss one another: Then should
the Lord give us that which is good, and our Land should yield her increase. O
that there were such an Heart in us, that we might fear him, and keep his
Commandments always; that so it may be well with us, and our Children after us,
for ever.

To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, both now and
evermore.
FINIS.

