ROMES GLORY; OR, A Collection of diverse MIRACLES Wrought by POPISH SAINTS,
Both during their Lives, and after their Deaths. Collected out of their own
Authors, for Information of all true-hearted PROTESTANTS. TOGETHER With a
Prefatory Discourse, declaring the Impossibility and Folly of such vain
Impostures.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by Moses Pit, at the sign of the White
Heart in Little Britain. 1673.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER,
THe grand design of this Collection of Popish Miracles, is to inform thee of
the Absurdities and Wickedness of the Church of Rome, in compelling her Members
to believe such ridiculous Stories, as are here related out of Popish Authors,
set out and owned by their Church; and some of them very lately published to
the World by Mr. Cressy, in his Church History, Printed, 1668, who has raked
together out of Bid, Capgrave, and others, such stuff, as I am sure must needs
fill thee with admiration.

As for Ignatius, the Character given of him in his Life denotes him to be
little better than a lunatic Person, for page 146. this is related of him, But
that he had regard to the good of his neighbor, (for which it was necessary
for him to uphold himself and his authority) he would have walked the streets
half naked, in a contemptible manner, that so he might have been held and
reputed a Madman. And page 80. we have an account of the Devils appearing to
him, endeavoring to fright and distract him in his Prayers, and was often with
a little stick chased away by him. And page 48. we have this Vision, At such
time as he composed the Constitutions of his Society, having one day
consecrated the Holy Host, and offered to Almighty God the Rules of his
Society, God the Father appeared most graciously unto him, insinuating by some
mystical signification, that it would be a thing pleasing to his Divine
Majesty, that the Mother of God should offer up her Prayers unto Him for him;
whereupon the Blessed Virgin suddenly appeared, recommending St. Ignatius to
the Eternal Father; and demonstrating, that her own flesh was there present in
the Eucharist, in the flesh of her Son. At one time we have account, that both
Father and Son appeared to him; and at another, the Holy Spirit: And many such
extravagant passages, which are more probable to be the Frenzies of a Madman,
than the Visions of a Saint: For God says, Exodus 33. 20. There shall no man see
me and live. But it is in vain to bring Scripture against those, that both deny
the Scriptures to be the Judge of Controversy, and likewise make it their
business to derogate from it. In a Spanish Catechism, entitled, Caton
Christiano, composed by Geronimo de Rosales, a Jesuit, and Printed at Sevil,
1670. this plainly appears, for instead of citing Siripture to confirm the
Doctrins of the Roman Church, he brings in forged Miracles for Examples: As to
instance only in one: To prove the lawfulness of Praying to the Virgin Mary, he
tells this wonderful Story: A great Sinner put himself into a Religious Order,
and being grossly ignorant, he was not able to learn the Christian Doctrine, no
not so much as the Ave Maria throughout, but only these words, Hail Mary full
of Grace, which he repeated many times. This man died, and afterward there
grew on his Grave a very handsome Tree, on whose Leaves were these words
written, Hail Mary full of Grace: The Miracle was divulged, the Bishop came and
caused the Tree to be dug up, and they found that the Root of this Tree came
out of the Man's Mouth. This is their way of proving their Doctrins, as may be
seen throughout this Catechism.

That most of these Miracles were invented by the Romish Priests and Monks, to
make the ignorant Laity have a more venerable esteem for them, (than which
nothing has more contributed thereto,) and to distribute their Riches amongst
them for Pardons, Masses for freeing their Souls from Purgatory, etc. needs no
other proof, than the impossibility and impertinency of the things related, and
the Doctrins they maintain, viz. Invocation of Saints, Worshipping of Images,
etc. which are quite contrary to the revealed Will of God, and the Practice of
the Holy Apostles: And therefore if some things of this nature have been
miraculously acted, it is not to be attributed to our most holy God, since it
tends to the violating his Commands, by setting up new Doctrins contradictory
thereto; but rather to the subtilty and power of the Devil, who in all Ages has
made it his business to seduce Men to the most abominable Sin of Idolatry, and
for that end did work many Miracles in the Temples of the Heathen; so that it
is no new thing for him to work Miracles, when it is to gain himself
Proselytes; and that the Church of Rome has been so far deluded by him, as to
break the Second Commandment, in giving Divine Worship to Images, is learnedly
proved by Dr. Moore, Dr. Stillingfleet, and others, in their Books of the
Idolatry of that Church.

By this, they may see what danger they are in, whilst they communicate with a
Church, that imposes such notorious Lies on her Members to support her false
Doctrins. God give them grace to see their Errors, that so they may withdraw
themselves from that Idolatrous Church, and cast anchor in the true Protestant,
grounded on Scripture, and the Practice of the Primitive Christians; which is
the hearty desire of the Publisher.

ROMES GLORY: OR, An Account OF MIRACLES Wrought by Popish SAINTS.
Miracles wrought by Ignatius, as they are related in Chapter 16 and 17. of The
Glory of the Blessed Father St. Ignatius, Printed at Rouen, 1633. after the
Copy compiled at Cracovia.
1. The famous Miracles wrought by St. Ignatius, in his Life time.
Ignatius, Founder of the Society of Jesus, is reported to have done these
following Miracles in his Life time.

It fell out at Barcelona, that two Brothers, about their Patrimony; had long
sued one another, and he, in fine, whose fortune it was to lose the Suit,
falling through too vehement apprehension into despair, hung himself with a
Halter upon a Beam in his Chamber: The bruit of which came no sooner to the
Ears of St. Ignatius, but suddenly he betook himself to the place, and cutting
asunder the Halter from that unfortunate Rafter, gave order that the dead Body
should be laid upon a Bed; which done, falling a part upon his Knees, he began
with many tears to demand the safety of that miserable Creature at the Hands of
Almighty God; but whilst Ignatius (being at that time but a Student in the
Grammar School) was thus earnest in his Prayers, they who were there present
standing in suspense, with their Eyes fixed upon the Bed, (a thing full of
miracle) the dead Man returned suddenly to life, and had the use of his Voice
so long, till calling for a ghostly Father he had confessed his Sins and
received Absolution, and then at last gave up the Ghost, lately redeemed from
out the Jaws of Hell, into the Hands of his Creator.

He recovered immediately a certain Man called Bastida, who had been many years
sick of the Falling Sickness, by casting up his Eyes and Prayers for him to
Heaven.

He often chased the Devil out of possessed Persons, by the Sign of the Cross.

He restored a Woman to health, who lay half dead of a Consumption.

He delivered one Simon Rodriguez, being also at Death's door, from his
Disease, by a pious Embrace.

John Baptista Coco, who by accident one Evening had so burnt his Hand, that it
became utterly unserviceable, and disabled for any manual Function, the next
day by his Prayers had his Hand healed and restored.

Returning sick into his own Country of a quotidian Ague, and Preaching often
in the open Fields, (because the Churches were not capable of the Concourse of
People) howbeit his weakness would not permit him to raise his Voice aloud, yet
every word of his Sermon was perfectly and distinctly heard and understood by
all Men for the space of more than 300 Paces.

Coming once to visit one Alexander Petro^io, who lay sick in a dark and close
Chamber and Bed, in regard the Windows and Doors were kept shut to keep out the
light, he replenished the Room with the supernatural splendor of his Face, and
recovered the sick Person.

He freed one Elutherio Pontano, who had been grievously molested for the space
of more than two years with certain foul tentations of the Devil, by his only
seeing and discoursing with the Party.

The College of Loretto being fearfully haunted with Spirits, appearing in
sundry foul shapes of Men and Beasts, and the ordinary Exorcisms and other
Ceremonies usually havitg been applied, and those fearful Apparitions
nevertheless not ceasing, the Rector of the College addressed himself by
Letters to St. Ignatius, commending the business to his holy Sacrifices and
Prayers, who no sooner received news of it, but he absolutely freed the House
from those haunts of ill Spirits by his Prayers and Letter, not for the present
only, but for ever after.

St. Ignatius his Linen, being washed with devotion by a certain devout Woman,
restored life and motion to her withered and dead Arm.

One Isaac, a Jew, refusing with a passionate obstinacy to become a Christian,
and contemning courtesies, and all other courses taken with him by others, was
by St. Ignatius soon satisfied, appeased, and persuaded to be Baptized, by the
only uttering of these three words, Mane nobiscum Isaac.

A certain Person of Note, being of a more turbulent Spirit than was fit longer
to be endured, and St. Ignatius not being able by gentle persuasions to cure
his diseased Mind, changing at last his style, and beginning to call upon the
Justice of God, and represent unto him the Vengeance of Heaven, he did it with
such a feeling, and expression of servour, that the Walls and House appeared to
him to tremble and shake with horror; with the sight of which, the standers
by, being stricken, immediately fell upon their Knees, imploring the Mercy of
God by their Prayers and Vows; and the Delinquent, prostrating himself at the
Feet of St. Ignatius, and with a Voice of Confusion begging pardon for his
offense, promised from thence forward an amendment of himself.

Father Leonard Kesselius, residing at Colen, had a vehement desire to see St.
Ignatius, then at Rome, above 300 Leagues distant from thence; and having
besought the B. Father by Letters, that it might be lawful for him to travel on
foot to Rome; he made answer, that his presence was necessary at Colen for the
good of others, enjoining him besides not to stir from thence, for that
Almighty God peradventure by some other course might so provide, that he might
see him without the pains and toil of so tedious a journey; the Father
therefore being one day at his Prayers, St. Ignatius appeared unto him, being
yet alive and breathing, and discoursed long with him, to his infinite
contentment.

The B. Father lying often sick, if in the mean time any difficulty happened, for
the solving of which his virtue and wisdom was required, he seemed in a manner
to be perfectly recovered, and his Mind guiding his Body, appeared a sound Man;
so that it became familiar to them of the Household, as often as he fell sick,
to desire that some Business of Consequence might happen, for the facilitating
of which St. Ignatius might rise, and be quit of his Disease.

2. Diverse Miracles wrought by St. Ignatius after his decease.
In the Processes for the Canonization of St. Ignatius, commenced by the
Authority of the Ordinaries first, and afterward by that of the Sea
Apostolic, more than 200 Miracles are related, wrought by the Merits and
Intercession of St. Ignatius after his decease; besides which, there are diverse
others as authentical, not yet published, (because those former for his
Canonization were more than sufficient) confirmed nevertheless by the grave
Testimonies of Men beyond exception, and Printed at Rome and other Parts of
Italy, in Spain, and in Germany and other Places, by the approbation of them
whom it concerns to approve them: Here only I will relate some few, because
my brevity promised will not permit many.

When the Body of St. Ignatius lay exposed upon the Bier, for the performance
of his Funeral Rites, one Bernadina, a Roman, had a vehement desire to bring a
Daughter of hers, who had been long troubled with the Emcroids, so grievously,
that no Art of Physic could cure her, to kiss the Hands of his dead Body,
assuring her self the recovery of her Daughter by that touch; but the Daughter,
transported often times by the press of People, not being able for the throng
to approach near the Body, her Mother laid hold of a piece of his Garment, and
had no sooner applied it to her Daughters Body but she was quit of her Disease.

Father Nicholas Bobadilla, having been long sick of an Ague, was recovered by
lying in the Bed of St. Ignatius.

At Manresa, a certain Lady of Quality feeling no living motion of her Child in
her Womb, for the space of three hours before she was brought to Bed, at last
was delivered of a dead Child; the unfortunate success of which, being much
lamented by the standers by, the rather because the Child had not been
Christened; the Midwife about half an hour after the delivery of the Woman,
implored with confidence the help of St. Ignatius, and had scarce begun her
Prayers, but the Child, before pale and black, returned now to Life.

St. Ignatius being besought for the Life of a little dead Intant of an Indian
Woman, restored the Child to Life.

He restored many blind Men their Sight, deaf Men their Hearing, lame Men their
Limbs, cured Men stricken with the Palsy, others given over by the Physicians
and lying at deaths door he restored perfectly to their Health. He appeared to
many after his decease, either delivering them from grievous tentations, or
freeing them from their Diseases or other dangers, or giving them good Counsel,
or foretelling things to come, or comforting such as served him with divine
Consolations; and in his Journey to Heaven, at the very instant of his decease
at Rome (as afterward appeared by computation of Hours) he appeared in Glory
to that Noble and Religious Lady Margareta de Lilus, commending the Society to
her, as a principal Benefactress of the College of Bolonia.

Many Devils have been cast out of possessed Persons, and out of Houses which
they haunted, by the Relicts of the Holy Father, or by hanging up his Picture.

The Oil of the Lamp which burns before his Body, has wrought many strange
Cures.

He has eased many Women who have called upon him in the extremity of their
Childbearing Labors, and bestowed Children upon barren Women.

At Carpentras, a certain Woman being delivered of a Child without motion, and
of the Complexion of a Blackmoor, so that it was doubtful what course was to be
taken in the prodigious accident, whether the Child ought to be Christened or
no^ or whether it were to be deferred ti^^ some motion were discovered in it at
last, by the persuasion of a certain Canon, they implored the ai^ of St.
Ignatius, by which the Child was suddenly not recovered only but so recovered
that his Countenance became cheerful and fair.

He cured diverse of the Pleurisy.

He protected many Men from the fury of their Enemies; others being fallen
headlong from some dangerous precipice, were defended from all hurt by
invoking his Name.

At Cesenza, one Angelo Lopez, upon the Eve of St. Ignatius, in expression of
his affection, had filled his Windows with many Paper-Lanthorns* adding to each
Lanthorn the Picture of the Saint, and with infinite demonstrations of
gratulation, repeated often these words, Io Loyola, B. Pater io! but in the
midst of this triumph, by chance it came to pass, that by the greatness of the
Wind the Fire had taken hold of his Lanthorns, which when it was observed by
some Raskallity of the Vulgar, they began to scoff at his devotion, upbraiding
the Man for his superstition, and with a bitter allusion to his Motto of
Triumph, invert the words of it thus; At, at, Beatus uritur: at, Loyola
crematur! At which the Man growing insinitely out of patience, out of his sense
of this irreligion used to St. Ignatius; And I for my part, quoth he, ^ave so
high an esteem of the Sanctity of the B. Father, that I believe him to be able
to protect his singed Picture from the Fire: Neither was he deceived in his
belief, for the Flame having consumed the Paper round about it, forbore to
touch the Picture, either in demonstration of the Sanctity of the B. Father, or
in observancy of the Zeal of him who desired it.

At Braga, a certain Woman having been lately brought to Bed, was so much
weakened, for many days after, with a continual Flux of Blood, that life could
hardly be kept in her from following the Course of the Flux; who drinking of
the Water into which her Child had been dipped, having been wrapped immediately
before in the Garments of Saint Ignatius, her Flux suddenly stopped, and she
recovered her accustomed strength.

In the Town of Guimarent, a certain Woman having lost the use of her Sight and
Hearing, and received the holy Oil and other Rites of the Church, lay utterly
out of her senses; and whilst some about her, out of Devotion, were
endeavoring to put her in mind of her last words, a certain Woman who in
courtesy came to visit her, called to remembrance, that a little piece of the
Girdle St. Ignatius used in his life time, having lately been sent to her by a
Son of hers of the Society; which she with great Confidence, and Reverence
toward God, presently applied to the sick Woman; which done, she began to
recover her senses by degrees, to Breath, to stretch out her Hands, and make
signs for Meat, to the Admiration of the Physicians, for the suddenness of the
Cure. All which things were afterward confirmed by the Attestation of sworn
Witnesses.

At Caglari a certain elder Brother snatching up a Knife at dinner time, hurt
his younger Brother in the Eye; and at the same time, the Daughter of a certain
Gentlewoman, carving at the Table, was sorely hurt in like manner, in one of
her Eyes; both which calling upon the Aid of Saint Ignatius, were delivered
from danger, beyond expectation.

Another Woman had been so weakened, for the space of four Months, with
continual Pains, that she was utterly deprived of the Use of her Feet; but the
Feast of St. Ignatius drawing near, she desirous to partake of the common
Jollity that day expressed in our Church, was not frustrated of her desire; for
her Pain ceasing, and her Feet being restored to their wonted Strength, she
came thither with Joy, to have a share in the Devotion.

In the same place, upon the Eve of St. Ignatius, the Artillery playing round,
a little Infant who could not speak, and who had never heard the Name of St.
Ignatius, cried out, to the Admiration of all standers by, To morrow is the Day
of B. Ignatius. But they who were present, hearing a thing so full of Wonder,
for Experiment sake, demanded again of the Child, What was to be done to
morrow, who Answered as before.

At Majorca dwelt a certain Woman, who through the Contraction of her Sinews,
was become so Lame, that she could not go without Crutches; the whole Town
therefore being filled with the noises of Trumpets, Voices, and other Musical
Instruments, Almighty God inspired her with a desire of Visiting our Church;
who put her self in readiness to go, notwithstanding the disswasions of her
Sister, who feared she might Miscarry by the press of People, she nevertheless
gave no Ear to her Disswasions, but put her self upon the way, and was suddenly
Cured, and recovered strength in her Feet; and throwing away her Crutches,
without any help betook her self to the Church, where in Thanksgiving she
caused a Mass of the B. Sacrament to be said.

Another Woman, who some Years past had received her Sight by the means of this
B. Father, lying now again desperately Sick, and being given over by four
Physicians, not forgetful by whom she had received Light before, now again
reposed all her Hopes and Confidence in the same Physician. One Night therefore
she called out upon one of the Women, who were accustomed to Watch with her,
Make haste, quoth she, come hither with speed and behold this Glorious
Splendour! O if thou had come sooner, thou should have beheld my St.
Ignatius visiting me! for I am now Recovered, and perfectly Well. And the Event
confirmed it to be true; for the Physicians themselves could not deny, but that
she was Cured by some Secret Power.

At Monte in Gallicia, a great Fire raging for many Days together, and
consuming a certain Wood, gathered still new forces, dispersing and spreading
it self far and near, there being no Human means to stop or restrain it, to
which the Wind rising upon a sudden, drove the Flames toward the Barns and
bordering Town, so that the Fire was now advanced within three or four Paces of
the Corn and Houses; a certain person therefore, taking the Picture of St.
Ignatius, which he had about him, and falling to his Prayers, threw it into the
midst of the Flames, there where the Fire raged most, and threatened greatest
Ruin, and immediately the fury and rage of it ceased, the Flames which flew
highest descended and vanished, and the whole Fire returned upon a sudden from
whence it began. And which is worth Admiration, a certain Woman, who had
observed the throwing in of the Picture, leaping into the midst of the smoking
Brands, raked away the Ashes with her Fingers, and being unhurt, brought away
the Picture from the midst of the burning Coals.

At Friburg, a little Child of three years of age by chance had broken his Arm,
the Mother of whom fearing the displeasure of her Husband, being then absent,
invoketh the help of St. Ignatius, but she had scarce ended her Prayers, when,
to her infinite contentment, she found her Child before her eyes, whole and
without hurt.

St. Ignatius being invoked, wrought a present Cure upon diverse who had been
sorely wounded, whose Cure would otherwise have exacted a long time.

Many Men by the presence of St. Ignatius his Picture, or by the presence, or
by the application or touch of his Relics, have cured the Plague when it
raged most sorely and consumed multitudes.

A certain Nobleman at Placa perceiving the Sky to be overcast with thick
Clouds, and fearing a great spoil of his Corn, lying yet open in the Field,
made a Vow to St. Ignatius for the preventing of the Tempest, so that when all
the adjoining Territories swelled with floods of Rain, not a drop had touched
or fallen upon his Fields.

At Naples, one Vincentio Pagano having prepared certain artificial Fires for
the Celebration of the Feast of St. Ignatius, had dangerously through his own
folly scorched his Hand, upon which accident, certain Women of his acquaintance
began to flock about him, applying to his burnt Hand a Note or Superscription
of St. Ignatius his Handwriting, the touch of which presently eased his pain,
and the raging of the burnt part, which usually cease not till a certain day,
was out of hand appeased.

At Catanzaro, a certain pious Woman, having a Son by one Gasper Mariscano, her
Husband, out of her devotion to St. Ignatius, had a desire to have him
Christened by the name of Ignatius, howbeit her Husband (in regard the Relics
of Irenaeus were preserved in that City) had rather the Child should have been
called Irenaeus; but in conclusion, after much debate about the business, they
concluded the Child should be named Ignatius Irenaeus; but this contention
occasioned many differences betwixt the Man and Wife, for the Wife ever after
called her Child Ignatius, and gave a strict command to them of her Household to
do the like; and Gasper on the other side, commanded them to call him Irenaeus:
The difference had continued thus betwixt them almost three months, when
arguing the business one morning, they both grew somewhat hot, till the Father,
at last, in jest; Well, quoth he, let the strife be put to the arbitrament of
the Child it self; to which the Mother was contented to agree, whereupon the
Father, in merriment, demanded of his Child, at that time but three months old,
by what name he would have himself called? when, behold! the Child miraculously
received the use of his Tongue, distinctly pronouncing the name of Ignatius;
which Voice so took his Father with admiration of the Miracle, that from thence
forward he gave order his Child should be called Ignatius, dedicating him to
the Service of St. Ignatius.

In the Territory of Peru in the West Indies, one Christopher Martinez de
Peredes, for the space of four years together, was forced through the lameness
of his Feet, to make use of one Crutch in the beginning, and afterward of two;
who hearing, upon the Feast of St. Ignatius, the triumph of the People, And
shall I, quoth he, upon this day, when all Men are in jollity, remain as it
were an unbidden Guest? shall I alone remain destitute? which words he had
scarce uttered, when his Feet recovered forces, and he found himself so strong,
that early the next morning, without any other help, he betook himself to the
College.

One Benedicto Lopez, Prefect of the silver Mines, pursuing a certain Ethiopian
Fugitive, was set upon by five others at unawares, who stabbing and butchering
him in sundry places dragged him from his Horse in a most barbarous manner: In
which his extremeties he implored the aid of St. Ignatius, who presently
presented himself to him in these exigents, and laying hold of his Cloak, bore
off, with both hands, the Blows of his Enemies, so that at last (his Enemies
being departed, and the B. Father vanished) he found himself safe, and without
hurt, saving that his Hat and other Garments were pierced.

A certain Lady at Avignon, had a Son much afflicted with a violent continual
Fever, who besides the Disease it self, with the violence of it, had one of
his Hands disjointed, and in a deformed manner turned the wrong side outward,
so that in the opinion of the Physicians he was in danger of the loss of his
Hand, if not of his Life with it; which lamentable case, a certain Religious
Woman, allied to the sick Youth, compassionating, vowed three Masses, and as
many Wax Candles to St. Ignatius, for the Health of her Kinsman; which done,
the Youth immediately recovered, and for a more infallible confirmation of the
Miracle, his Hand was replaced in the right place.

At Barcelona, one Elizabeth Rebels, a Religious Woman, being in some high
place busy about her work, upon a sudden unfortunately tumbled headlong to the
ground, and received so sore a blow, that her Thigh Bone, which is the solidest
Bone of the Body, was utterly broken: The Physician and Chyrurgeon were
immediately called, who for more than forty days together, with what diligence
was possible, applied all the Remedies their Arts afforded, howbeit to little
purpose; in conclusion, the sick Woman was brought to those terms, that in all
Men's judgments she was past recovery, and as it was conceived, could not last
longer than that day; yet notwithstanding, as soon as a Relic of St. Ignatius
was applied to her Heart, she presently recovered.

One Hierome Humphrey, a Boy of ten years of age, upon one of his Eyebrows
near the Temples, had received a mortal wound, which occasioned an inflammation
in his Eye, and cast him into a Fever; for which the Chyrurgeon had him in
Cure a month, not being able to help him, for the wound did not only not heal,
but grew so wide, that it received a tent of a finger long, and voided so much
filth as amazed the Chyrurgeon: The Mother of the Child made a Vow to St.
Ignatius, commending her Child to him; and behold! when (another Chyrurgeon in
the mean time having been called, for the better consulting about the Cure) the
bands of the sore were unfolded, they found the wound perfectly healed, closed
up, and sound.

One Ferdinando Pertel, having fallen into a Tertian Ague, which afterward
proved to be a double Tertian, and at last a pestilent Fever, with a kind of
raving and fearful horror of his Senses, was forsaken by the Physicians, and
lay in his last extremity; being prepared with all the Rites of the Church, and
invoking St. Ignatius, whose Picture he held in his hand, he began suddenly to
recover, and was cured of his Disease.

One Anne Barzellona, a Woman of sixty years of age, having for about the space
of two years been so miserably strooken with the Palsy, that she was unfit for
any labor, and unable without Crutches to go up and down stairs, and with her
Crutches also seemed rather to creep than go; to which when the application of
no Remedies would serve, and she besides was taken with an Apoplexy in her
other side, so that she became impotent, and was confined to her Bed; finding
her self thus void of all Human help, by the assistance of her Crutches and one
Margaret her Sister, she betook her self to a Chapel of St. Ignatius, two
hours traveling distant from her Lodging, where making a Vow in honor of St.
Ignatius, immediately she began to find her self better, and was able to bow
her Knee, which before was grown stiff; and having ended her Devotions, arose
full of contentment, and returned a joyful Woman nimbly to her Lodging.

A Bone and Superscription of St. Ignatius being applied to the Eyes of a
certain Widow of Majorca called Jane Clara Noguera, who was Blind, restored her
to sight.

Diverse other Miracles of St. Ignatius are related in a late Life of his, set
forth by Father Pedro Ribadeneira in Spanish, Printed at Madrid in the year
1601, and Translated by others into Latin, Greek, Italian, the Polish and other
Languages, and published in the chief Cities of Italy, Spain, France, Germany,
and other places, where such as are curious to peruse them, may find them.

Miracles wrought by Saint Francis Xaverius and Saint Philip Nerius, taken out
Chapt. 18 and 20. of the forementioned Book.
Upon the Frontiers of Piscaria he raised a Boy, who for many hours together
had layn drowned in a Well. In the Town of Mutan in like manner he raised
another Boy, who dying of a Pestilential Fever, had remained dead four and
twenty hours. At Comire he raised a third Body, which had layn buried under the
Earth a whole day together. Near the Promontory of Comori he raised a Girl; not
far from that place, a certain married Woman. In the Island of Vaccare near
Zeilan, the Son of a certain Infidel. At Malaca, the Daughter of one who had
been lately Converted. At Bembari, a certain Boy: Another at Comari. At Punical
he raised a Man who had lain dead a whole day. Near Manapar he raised one
Antoni Miranda. At Malaca, a certain man's Daughter who had been three days
Buried and overwhelmed with Earth. He restored to Life in like manner the Son
of one Mahomet Sarangio, who had lain three days under Water; to omit others
Raised by him in his Life time.

After his Death he restored almost as many to Life. In the Processes of his
Canonization mention is made of above five and twenty persons raised by him
from death to life. He often restored Blind men to their sight: dispossessed
possessed persons: cured many lying desperate, and given over by the
Physicians: healed Lepers: calmed Tempestuous Seas: preserved Ships from
Wrecks: restored the Lame to their Limbs: and recovered men strooken with the
Palsy. He foretold infallibly many things to come, penetrated men's concealed
thoughts, had a certain knowledge of Secrets and things absent. He appeared in
diverse places far distant at one and the self same time; he spoke several
Languages which he had never learned, as readily, congruously and eloquently as
if he had been born and bred among those Nations. And it fell out often times,
that at such times as he Preached to multitudes of people, men of several
Nations, at the same time, heard him utter their own Language; and with one and
the self-same Answer he often satisfied the demands of several Infidels. He was
so ravished and transported with the desire and love of God, that he was often
and miraculously raised from the ground, with a countenance inflamed, Eyes
sparkling and fixed upon the Heavens; and being surcharged with Celestial joy,
was forced to exclaim, Sat est Domine! sat est. By the sign of the Cross he
turned salt Water into fresh, in several vessels at Sea. Having dipped a brazen
Crucifix which he wore about his Neck into the Sea, to appease a Tempest, and
by accident lost it, walking next day upon the shore, he espied a Sea-Crab
miraculously bringing him his Crucifix in his claws, which having delivered it,
suddenly returned back into the Sea, from whence it came.

He ended his life at Sancion, near China, in the year 1552. famous for many
Miracles. His Body was found entire long after his death, howbeit it was
neither bowelled nor balmed, but buried in Quicklime; and it appeared many
Months after its decease, lively, full of juice and fresh color, soft and
tractable, sending forth an admirable sweet favor, and many times Bleeding,
for which he was honored, and reputed a Saint immediately after his death. It
appears by the Process of his Canonization, that many-dead Bodies were raised
by him, after his death; that many Lamps burned before his Body with Water only
put into them, as clearly as if they had only been filled with Oil; which being
oftentimes extinguished, took fire again of themselves without Human help: that
diverse were Cured by him, or by his Relics, or Pictures, of Leprosy, Palsy,
and other incurable Diseases.

Saint Philip Nerius preserved his Virginity untouched, and he discerned in
chaste persons the persume of Chastity, and in others the rankness and stenoh of
Unchastity. He arrived to the Knowledge of many things concealed from him, such
as are the most intimate Secrets of men's Hearts. He restored one dead Man to
life, in his life time; another after his own decease. He was seen raised from
the ground in the time of his Masses.

Miracles of some others, taken out of their Lives.
POpe John, when he came to Corinth, a Gentleman lent unto him a Horse whereon
his Wife used often to ride, and when the Horse was sent back, he would never
abide that the Woman should come on his back; so that it seemed, that Beast
which had carried the greatest Man of Dignity and Authority in the World,
disdained to be checked and ruled by a Woman; the Gentleman marking it, and
holding it for a very strange thing, (as it was indeed,) sent the Horse to be
given unto the Pope. Page 147.

A Ship wherein were three hundred persons being in a Storm, and in danger to
be cast away, they recommended themselves to St. Iuvenal, and they saw him walk
on the waves of the Sea, and the Tempest ceased. See his Life, page 60.

St. Anthony was a corpulent man, but the Devil displeased with his good life,
molested him, and one night would have strangled him, and had already set his
Hands to his Throat, so that he was in danger of death; but recommending
himself to the glorious Virgin, and saying the Hymn, O Gloriosa Domina, the
Devil left him, and vanished away. See his Life, page 193.

Saint Anthony had the gift of Tongues, with a pleasant, clear and ringing
Voice; and though there was at his Sermons many Thousand persons of different
Languages, yet they all understood him. As at Rome, where the People of sundry
Nations listening unto him, and he Preaching in the Italian Tongue, yet they
all understood him.

Preaching one time in France, near Bruges, in the Field because of the
multitude of People, (it was Summer) and whilst he Preached it began to
Thunder and Lighten grievously, wherefore the People doubting to be thoroughly
wet, began to haste away to shelter; St. Anthony bade them be quiet, for they
should not be wet; all the People gave credit to his words, and none stirred
out of his place, then it began to Rain very much throughout all the Country,
but upon the People that heard his Sermon there fell not one Drop.

It happened in the same Province in France, that a devout Woman was desirous
to go to the Sermon of St. Anthony, but her Husband would not suffer her
because she was sickly; she went up unto the top of her House, looking toward
the place where he Preached, and though she was two Miles off, yet she heard
the words of the Preacher as if she had been hard by. Of this the Husband of
the good Woman was witness, who calling her, and she answering, that she stayed
there to hear the Sermon; he scoffed and derided at her words, and with some
pain he went up to the place where his Wife was, and he also heard the words as
plain as if he had been hard by.

One time St. Anthony Preaching; he saw a Traveller approach unto a Noble Lady
which was at the Sermon, and speak unto her; the Saint seeing her much
troubled, and change Countenance, bade her (as he stood in the Pulpit) not to
believe that false Messenger, who brought her news that her Son was dead, for
it was a lie without doubt, and said withal, that he that told it her was the
Devil. The wicked Fiend would by this Lie have disturbed the Sermon, but seeing
himself discovered, he vanished away in all their sights.

St. Anthony being in Padua, it was revealed to him that his Father was in
danger of death at Lisbon, being accused of Manslaughter, whereof he was
innocent; wherefore he asked leave of his Guardian, and having obtained it, he
was carried in one Night only (by an Angel) from Padua unto Lisbon. Being come
thither he spoke with his Father, and brought to pass, that the Judges caused
the dead Body to be brought before him; St. Anthony before much people asked
him if his Father had killed him, the dead Body spoke, and said No, and that he
was falsely accused thereof. The Judge having seen the strange Miracle set free
the Father of St. Anthony, who remained in his company all night, and the next
day he was carried back from Lisbon unto Padua, as he had been brought thither.

One time St. Anthony Preaching at the Funeral of a Rich man, and among other
things discoursed upon these words, Where thy treasure is, there is thy heart;
to confirm these words, the Father said, that the former words be true, it is
evident in this Rich man, who was covetous, for his Heart was to be found in
his Chest, where his Money lies; forthwith some went and opened it, and there
they found the Heart of the Covetous man indeed, as fresh, as if it had been
taken out of the Breast of a Man.

It happened often at the end of the Sermons of St. Anthony, that the People
departed with such desire to be Confessed, that the Confessors of his Order,
and of the other Orders also were not sufficient to satisfy them. He also
heard Confessions, among others he heard the Confession of a Paduan, who told
him that he had kicked his Mother; St. Anthony reproved him sharply, and told
him, that the Foot that had struck his Mother was worthy to be cut off. The
words of St. Anthony were of such force in the mind of him that was Confessed,
that when he came home, he himself cut off the same Foot: St. Anthony being
advertised thereof, caused him to be brought unto him, and restored him his
Foot again, with the sign of the Cross.

All these Stories that follow are taken out of Cressy's Church History.
ST. Winwaloc and his Disciples being not content with their Habitation, prayed
to God that he would direct them to a more convenient one; he showed them a
place remote in the Sea; but wanting a Ship, he renewed his Prayers, and having
done this he said to his Brethren, Be courageous and firm in a strong faith,
and as you see me lead this Brother by the hand, so do every one of you take
his next fellows hand, and follow one another. Then invoking the Name of our
Lord, with his Pastoral Staff he struck the Sea, upon which it opened a passage
for them; so that taking one another by the hand, and himself marching in the
front, they walked securely over the dry Sands, the Waters on both sides
standing like Walls. Cress. page 183.

St. Benignus discovered to St. Patrick the Motives of his Journey to a
solitary place, who exhorted him to pursue his purpose, saying, Go Brother,
take only your Staff with you, and when you shall be arrived at the place for
your repose, wheresoever having fixed your staff in the ground you shall see it
flourish and grow green, there know you must make your abode. St. Benignus
being accompanied only with a Youth named Pincius, began his Journey through
woody and marish places, but as soon as he was arrived in an Island where he
saw a solitary place, he presently fixed his Staff in the ground, which without
delay wonderfully grew green, and brought forth fresh Leaves, and to this day
the same Tree remains flourishing with green Boughs. Yet one incommodity it
had, that there was no Water near, whereupon St. Benignus gave his Staff to
young Pincius, commanding him to go to a certain place full of Reeds, and there
striking the ground with his Staff, he should without doubt find Water so
earnestly desired by them, the Child obeyed, went to the place and struck the
ground three times, making three holes in it with the end of his Staff, which
he had no sooner done, but immediately a Fountain gusht forth, from whence to
this day a Brook is supplied, which is good for Fishing, and healthfu^ for many
Infirmities. Cr. p. 194.

St. Piran fed ten Irish Kings and their Armies with 3 Cows, raised to life
dead Pigs, and dead Men. Cr. p. 195*

At the Church of St. Almedh^ one especial thing usually happening on the
Solemnity of this Virgin, seems to me very remarkable; for you may oftentimes
see there young Men and Maids, sometimes in the Church, sometimes in the
Churchyard, and sometimes whilst they are Dancing in an even ground
encompassing it, to fall down on a sudden to the ground; at first they lie
quiet, as if they were rapt in an Ecstasy, but presently after they will leap
up, as if possessed with a Frenzy, and both with their Hands and Feet before
the People they will represent whatsoever servile Works they unlawfully
performed upon Feast-days of the Church; one will walk as if he were holding
the Plough, another as if he were driving the Oxen with a Goad, and both of
them at the same time singing some rude Tune, as if to ease their toil; one
will act the Trade of a Shoemaker, another of a Tanner, a third of one that
were Spinning. Here you may see a Maid busily weaving, and expressing all the
postures usually in that work: After all which, being brought with Offerings
unto the Altar, you would be astonished to see how they would return to their
Senses again. Cr. p. 217.

The manner of St. Kentigern's Birth.
A certain King of Britanny who was a Pagan begot of his Wife a very beautiful
Danghter, she having been a frequent hearer of Sermons, became a Christian, and
though she had not been Baptized, yet she was addicted to the duties of
Ecclesiastical Discipline, as much as the fear of incensing her Father would
permit: she bore so great Devotion to the fruitful Virginity of the blessed
Virgin, that moved with Womanish presumption, she begged that she might imitate
her in her Conception and Birth. At length, as she thought, she obtained her
desire, for she found her self with Child. Now it is not to be conceived that
this happened without the embraces of a man, notwithstanding who that man was, or
in what manner, or when this was done, she often protested, and with Oaths
confirmed it, that she was utterly ignorant. Her Father perceiving this, and
not being able by fair speeches or threatenings to wrest from her, who was the
Father of the Child; for she seriously protested, that she had never suffered
the unlawful embraces of any man; hereupon in a rage he determined to execute
upon her the Law established by his Ancestors, by which it was enacted, That
whatsoever young Maid should be with Child by Fornication in her Fathers house,
should be thrown down headlong from the top of a high Mountain, and the person
corrupting her, should lose his Head. In conformity therefore to this Law, the
young Woman was placed on the highest point of a Mountain in that Country,
called Dunpelder, from thence to be thrown down and torn in pieces. She
therefore with deep sighs, looking up to Heaven, implored Mercy: After this,
she was cast down; but by the Fall was neither bruised, nor received the least
harm, but sliding down easily and slowly, came safe to the bottom. The Pagans
ascribed this to the Magical Enchantments of Christians, therefore they carried
her several Miles into the Sea, and there left her, destitute of all humane
help, in a small Boat made of Leather without Oars, but the Boat was carried to
a far distant Haven with great swiftness; being arrived there, the young Lady
went out of the Boat, and presently after was brought to Bed of a Son, without
the assistance of a Midwife. The next morning St. Servanus came to the place,
and seeing the Mother with her Infant, he took them into his care, and baptized
them, and called the Mother Thanen, and the Child Kentigern. Cr. p. 231.

St. Justinian having reproved his Servants for idleness, and mispending their
time, they were inflamed with fury against him, insomuch as rushing upon him
they threw him to the ground, and most cruelly cut off his Head. But in the
place where his sacred Head fell to the ground, a Fountain of pure water
presently flowed, by drinking of which in following times, many were
miraculously restored to Health. But Miracles greater than these, immediately
succeeded his Death; for the Body of the Martyr presently rose, and taking the
Head between the two Arms, went down to the Sea Shore, and walking thence on
the Sea, past over to the Port called by his Name, and being arrived to the
place where a Church is now built to his memory, it fell down, and was there
buried by St. David. Cr. p. 234.

St. David being enjoined to Preach, he commanded a Child which attended him,
and had lately been restored to Life by him, to spread a Napkin under his Feet,
and standing upon it he began to expound the Gospel and the Law to the
Auditory. All the while this Oration continued, a snow white Dove descending
from Heaven, sat upon his Shoulders; and moreover the Earth on which he stood,
raised it self under him, till it became a Hill, from whence his Voice like a
Trumpet, was clearly heard and understood by all, both near and far off. On the
top of which Hill a Church was afterward built, which remains to this day. Cr.
p. 235.

St. David, when Priest, went to Paulens, who in a certain Island lived a holy
Life, with him St. David lived many years; now it fell out that his Master
Paulens fell blind, hereupon calling his Disciples together, he desired that
one after another they would look upon his Eyes, and say a Prayer or
Benediction on them. When they had done this, and that he received no ease or
remedy, David said thus to him, Father, I pray you do not command me to look
you in the Face, for ten years are passed since I studied with you, and in all
that time I never had the boldness to look you in the Face. Paulens admiring
his humility said, Since it is so, it will suffice, if by touching my Eyes thou
pronounce a Benediction on them. Presently therefore, as soon as he touched
them, Sight was restored to them. Cr. p. 238.

St. John, a British Priest, avoided the Sight of Men, confining himself to a
little Cell, where in a little Orchard, cultivated by himself, he had planted a
few Laurel Trees, which are now so increased that they afford a very pleasing
shade, his custom was, under these to sit, read, or write, as he thought fit.
After his death, among the said Trees there was one which through age was
withered; then he to whom the care of the Place was committed dug up the
Roots of the said dry Tree, and of the Body of it hewed out a Seat or Bench,
upon which he used to sit. After he had used the Seat for the space of above
two years, a thought of remorse coming into his heart, he said, Alas, Sinner
that I am, why do I for my own convenience make use of a Seat framed of the
Tree which so holy a Priest planted with his own hands! Having said this, he
presently took a Spade, and digging a deep hole in the ground, he put the Seat
into it, after he had cut off the Feet which supported it, and then covered it
with Earth. Now behold a great wonder! The very next Spring, this dry Bench,
thus buried, sprouted forth into green branches as the other Trees did, which
prospered so well, that at this day there are proceeded from it several young
Trees, five or six Foot high, and some higher, which every year do more and
more flourish. Cr. p. 246. Here Mr. Cressy brags, that the Centuriators took
notice of this Saint, and of the Orchard, but concealed this Wonder.

The Miracle of St. Ivo's Translation.
St. Ivo's Body remained several Ages in the place of his Burial, insomuch that
his Memory was lost in that place; but at last, in the year 1001. a certain
Husbandman, as he was plowing the ground, lighted upon his Tomb, which being
taken up and opened, the Body of a Bishop in his Pontifical Ornaments was seen
in it; whereupon the Pastor of that Village being sent for, they with his
advice carried the Body to the Church, and with great reverence placed it near
the the Altar; the night following St. Ivo appeared in a very reverend form,
and with great brightness, to a Carpenter called Ezi, and told him who he was,
commanding him to signify to Ednoth Abbot of Ramsey, that he should translate
his and his Companions Bodies from thence to his Monastery; but the poor Man,
not having the boldness to relate this Vision, he appeared to him the second
time, repeating the same commands; which he still neglecting to perform, at the
third apparition the Bishop smote him on the side with his Crosier, telling
him, that the pain of that stroke should remain till he had performed what he
had enjoined him. The Man awaking, presently after found as grievous a pain in
his side as if a Sword had pierced it. Thus was he compelled to declare his
Vision to the Abbot, which as soon as he had done he was freed of his pain: But
the Abbot would give no credit to what the Man told him, but calling him Clown
and Fool, said, Must we translate and venerate the Ashes of I know not what
Cobbler? The night following the Bishop appeared to the Abbot, and said, Rise
quickly, for I whom thou scornfully call'st Cobbler, have brought thee here a
pair of Boots that will last a good while, these thou must put on and wear for
my sake. Having said thus, he seemed to draw on his Legs a pair of Boots, with
care to make them sit smooth and handsome. Presently the Abbot waking felt such
horrible pain in his Legs, that he was not able to walk or stand, and fifteen
years did he remain in this Infirmity. By this Miracle, the sanctity of the
Bishop was approved, and his Body translated to Ramsey, to whose honor the
Abbot Ednoth built a Church; in which he placed his Tomb in such manner, that
half of it appeared within, and half without the Wall, to the end, that a
Fountain of Water that flowed thence might be ready for the use of every one
who came in devotion, whether the Church was shut or not; which Water, by the
Merits of the Bishop, had the virtue to cure many Diseases; one great Miracle
wrought there was on a Monk troubled with a Dropsy, his skin was strangely
swelled, and his breath so noisome, none could approach him, and his drought
was so excessive, that he thought he could drink whole barrels; on a time, by
admonition received in his sleep, he went to Saint Ivo's Monument, where after
he had taken three draughts of the Water, he cast up all the superfluous
Humors within him, and was restored to perfect health. Cr. p. 293.

King Sebert having built St. Peter's Church at Westminster, and endowed it with
many possessions; now on the night before the day designed for the Dedication
of this Church, St. Peter appearing to a certain Fisherman in the habit of a
stranger, on the other side of the River of Thames, demanded to be wafted over,
which was done; being gone out of the Boat, he entered into the Church in the
sight of the Fisherman, and presently a Heavenly light shone so clear, that it
turned the Night into Day. There was with the Apostle a multitude of Heavenly
Citizens, coming out and going into the Church, a Divine Melody sounded, and an
Odor of unexpressible fragrancy shed abroad. As soon as all things pertaining
to the Dedication of the Church were performed, St. Peter returned to the poor
Fisherman, who was so affrighted with his Divine splendour that he almost lost
his senses, but Saint Peter kindly comforting him, brought him to himself. Thus
both of them entering into the Boat, St. Peter asked him if he had any
provision? who answered, that partly being stupefied with seeing so great a
Light, and partly detained by his return, he had taken nothing, being withal
assured of a good Reward from him: Hereto St. Peter replied, let down thy Nets,
the Fisherman obeyed, and immediately the Net was filled with a multitude of
Fishes, they were all of the same kind, except one Salmon of a wonderful
largeness. Having then drawn them to the shore, St. Peter said, Carry from me
this great Fish to Mellitus the Bishop, and all the rest take for thy hire; and
moreover be assured, that both thou all thy life time, and thy Children after
thee for many years shall be plentifully furnished with these kind of Fishes;
only be careful you Fish not on our Lords days. I who speak now with thee am
Peter, and I my self have now Dedicated this Church, built to my
fellow-Citizens and to My Honor, so preventing by my own Authority the
Episcopal Benediction. Acquaint the Bishop therefore with the things thou have
seen and heard, and the Sign yet marked on the Wall will confirm thy speeches.
Let him therefore surcease from his design of Consecrating the Church, and only
supply what I have omitted, the Celebration of the Sacrament, and the
Instruction of the People. Let him likewise give notice to all, that I my self
will oftentimes visit this place, and be present at the Prayers of the
faithful; and will open the Gates of Heaven to all that live soberly, justly
and piously in this World. As soon as he said this, he presently vanished from
his sight. The next morning, as the Bishop Mellitus was going in Procession to
the Church, with an intention to Dedicate it, the Fisherman met him with the
Fish, and related to him whatsoever St. Peter had enjoined him: at which the
Bishop was astonished, and having unlockt the Church doors, he saw the Pavement
marked with Letters and Inscriptions both in Greek and Latin, and the Wall
anointed in twelve several places with Holy Oil; he saw likewise the
remainders of twelve Torches sticking to as many Crosses, and the Church every
where yet moist with Aspersions. All which being observed by the Bishop and
People, they gave thanks. A further Testimony of this Miracle is afforded by
the whole Progeny of this Fisherman, for his Children, according to the command
from their Father, brought the Tithes of all their gains by Fishing, and
Offered them to St. Peter, and the Priests attending Divine Service in his
Church. But one among them having presumed to defraud the Church of this
Oblation, presently was deprived of the wonted benefit of his Trade, till
having confessed his fault, and restored what he had reserved, he promised
amendment for the future. And moreover, the Fisherman, who was very simple, and
as yet not a Christian, described to the Bishop very exactly the Shape and
Lineaments of St. Peter, well known to the Bishop by his Picture at Rome. Cr.
p. 308.

St. Lawrence found the Son of a man who had kindly entertained him, dead, and
the Parents in great sorrow, who with a loud voice cried to him, O holy man!
restore our Son to us, that we may more firmly believe in Christ. Hereupon the
Bishop having offered up his Prayers, said to the Child, arise, who presently
rose up, and withal testified, That being dead, his Soul was violently drawn by
horrible Spirits to the flames of Hell; but upon the Prayers of St. Lawrence it
was by Angels shining with brightness brought back to the Body. Cr. p. 327.

A Miracle wrought at King Oswald's Cross.
Bothelm, a Monk of Hagulstad, walking unwarily by night upon, the Ice, fell
suddenly and broke his Arm; one morning having heard that one of his Brethren
was to go that day to the place of the Holy Cross, he desired him to bring him
a small portion of that sacred Wood, for he said he was confident it would cure
him by Gods help. The Brother performed what he desired, and gave him a little
of the Moss which covered the outside of the Wood, which he put into his bosom;
when he went to bed, forgetting to lay it by, it remained in his bosom all
night, but waking about midnight, he felt something that was cold lying against
his side, and searching for it with his Hand, he perceived that both his Hand
and Arm were become perfectly whole. Cr. p. 347.

A certain Woman who had a long time been deprived both of her Sight and
Hearing; to her it was suggested by Revelation, that she should repair to the
Bishop Birinus for her Cure, she delayed not therefore, but took with her a
Guide to conduct her. The Bishop therefore seeing the Woman's piety, immediately
made the sign of the Cross upon her Eyes and Ears, whereupon both her-Sight and
Hearing were restored to her. Cr. p. 351.

St. Fursey's wonderful Visions.
On a certaim time he was rapt from his body, and in that ecstasy, which
continued from evening to Cock-crowing, he was favored with the sight of
troops of Angels. Three days after, being again in an ecstasy, he saw yet more
glorious apparitions of Angels. Moreover there were discovered to him, very
earnest contentions of wicked Spirits, who by many Accusations of a certain
Sinner, lately dead, endeavored to stop his passage to Heaven, but by reason
the holy Angels protected him, they could not effect their desire. On a certain
time being elevated in spirit, he was commanded by the Angels which conducted
him, to look down upon the Earth; whereupon, bowing his Eyes downward, he saw
as it were a dark Valley under him, in a very low bottom: He saw likewise in
the Air four Fires, not much distant one from another, and asking the Angels
what Fires those were, he was told, that those were the Fires which now
inflamed the World, and would in the end consume it, viz. the Fire of Lying,
the Fire of Covetousness, the Fire of Dissension, and the Fire of Iniquity. Now
these four Fires increasing by little, at last joined together, and became an
immense Flame; and when they approached near them, Fursey was afraid, and said
to the Angel, Sir, behold, the Flames come close to us; but the Angel answered,
Fear not, for since thou did not kindle this Fire, it will not burn thee; for
though this Flame seems to thee great and terrible, yet it tryes every one
according to his Merits, so that the Concupiscence which is in any one, shall
burn in this Fire; for accordingly as every one being in the Body is inflamed
by unlawful pleasures, so being loosed from his Body shall he burn by condign
torment. Then he saw one of the three Angels, which in both Visions had been
his Conductors, go before the other and divide the Flame, and the other two
flying on each side of him, which defended him from the danger of the Fire. He
saw likewise many Devils flying through the Fire, and kindling war against the
Just: These malign Spirits pursued him likewise with Accusations, but the good
Angels defended him: And after this, he saw great numbers of blessed Spirits,
among which some were of his own Nation, Priests who had well discharged their
Office, as he had heard by report; by these he was informed of many things,
very profitable, both to himself and all who are willing to attend them. When
they had finished their speeches, and were returned to Heaven with the rest of
the Angels, there remained only with St. Fursey the three Angels mentioned
before, who were to restore him to his body. And when he came close to the
foresaid great Fire, one of the Angels divided it as before; but when the Man
of God was come to a door which stood open among the Flames, the unclean
Spirits snatching up one of those whom they were tormenting in the Flames, and
casting him against him touched him, and burnt his Shoulder and one of his
Cheeks. He knew the Man, and remembered when he was ready to dye he had received
from him a Garment. But the Angel, laying hold of him, cast him back into the
Fire; but the Devil answered, Do not cast him back, since you have once
received him; for as you have taken the Goods belonging to a Sinner, so you
must be partakers of his Punnishment; but the Angel replied, He took not that
out of Covetuousness, but for saving the Man's Soul. After this, the burning
ceased, and the Angel turning himself to St. Fursey, said, The Fire that thou
have kindled has now burnt thee, for if thou had not received Money from this
Man who is dead in his sins, thou had not tasted of his torments. St. Fursey
being afterward restored to his body, carried visibly in his shoulder and
cheek, all his life time, the marks of the burning which he had suffered in his
soul. Cr. p. 354.

St. Eanswitha's Monastery being seated on the top of high Rocks, they found
this incommodity in their retirement, which was a penury of sweet water: The
holy Virgin was sensible of this inconvenience; and after she had by Prayer
solicited our Lord, she went to the Fountain more than a mile remote from the
Monastery, and striking the water with a Staff commanded it to follow her; the
deaf Element heard and obeyed the sacred Virgins voice, and against the
inclination of Nature followed her steps, till overcoming all the difficulties
of the passage, it mounted up to the Monastery, where it abundantly served all
their uses. One particular more increased the admiration of the event; for this
Rivulet in the way being to pass through a Pool, flowed notwithstanding pure
and free from all mixture. Cr. p. 357.

St. Cuthbert when a Child, saw St. Aidan's Soul carried into Heaven. And
likewise on a certain day, as he was journeying alone, about the third hour, he
turned aside into the House of a certain Matron, being desirous to repose there
a while, and to get food not for himself but his Horse: The Woman received him
kindly, and earnestly desired that she might make something ready for his
refection; but he refused, telling her, that he could not eat, because it was a
day of Fast, for it was indeed Friday, she notwithstanding persisted in her
desire, and told him, that all the rest of his Journey he would find no
Habitation, therefore I desire you would eat, lest you should faint if you fast
all day; notwithstanding out of love to fasting, he would not be overcome by
the Woman's importunity, but fasting as he was he continued his Journey till
evening; when St. Cuthbert saw he could not finish his Journey that day,
neither was there any Lodging near, as he was riding he saw certain Cottages,
which in the Summer time the Heardsmen had built for their present use, but
then the Winter approaching, they were left empty; thither he went with an
intention to stay all night, and tying his Horse to the Wall, he gathered up a
bundle of Hay which the wind had blown from the House-covering, and gave it him
to eat, and himself passed his time in Prayer. But on a sudden he saw the Horse
lift up his head, and with his teeth biting somewhat that was on the
House-roof, and presently after he drew down a linen Cloth wrapped up; being
desirous therefore to know what that was, he took up the linen, and found
wrapped up in it half a Loaf of Bread warm from the Oven, and so much Flesh as
would suffice himself for one refection; he blessed God, who vouchsafed to
provide a Supper for him and his companion; half of the bread therefore he gave
to his Horse, and the other half he eat himself. Cr. p. 366.

A Secular Priest foolishly adventured to make a trial whether Saint
Ethelreda's Body yet remained uncorrupted, fastening therefore a Candle to the
end of a Rod, he passed it through a hole which the Danes had made in the
Sepulcher, and looking in as curiously as he could, searched round about the
Tomb. And not content with this, with the end of a forked stick he endeavored
to draw to him the Clothes in which her Body was enwrapped, and some part of
the Body he discovered; when the H. Virgin, having indignation that a vile
person should presume to look upon her naked Body, with great violence drew
back the Clothes, insomuch as he striving against her fell backwards, and was
forcibly dashed against the Pavement; by which fall he became Lame all his
life, and afterward was struck with Madness. Cr. p. 383.

A doubt entering into the minds of some touching the Incorruption of St.
Withburga sister to St. Ethelreda 55 years after her death, when the bodies of
these two Virgins were Translated, that doubt was put to the trial. As touching
St. Ethelred, considering the ancient proofs of her incorruption, none durst
presume to touch her body; but they discovered the body of St. Withburga as far
as her Breasts, and she was seen perfectly entire, more like to one asleep than
dead, with a silk Cushion under her Head, her Veil and Vestments shining as if
they had been new, her Countenance cheerful, with a Rosy blush; her Teeth
white, her Lips a little opened, and her Breasts exceeding small. One of the
Monks adventuring to touch her body, a lively blush colored her Cheeks, as if
she still had breath in her. Cr. p. 385.

It happened on a certain Sunday, when St. Winefrids Parents were gone to Church,
some necessary occasions detained her at home; at which time a certain Young
man named Caradoc, the Son of Alan Prince of the Country entered the House,
where he found the Virgin alone sitting by the Fire; she knowing the Prince,
hastily rose up, and desired to know his pleasure. His answer was, You are not
ignorant who I am, and how I abound in riches and honor; all these riches and
honors you shall partake if you will yield to my will. The Virgin perceiving
his intent, held down her Head and blushed extremely: At first she seemed as if
she were much troubled that he should find her unadorned, and she told him,
Sir, you being a Prince, there is no doubt but you are able to heap upon me all
wordly happiness in abundance, if I were your Wife; however be pleased to
expect here a while till my Fathers return, in the mean time I have some
business in my Chamber, and will return presently. This she said to gain a
little time, for she saw the Young man burning with Lust; with much ado he
permitted her to go to her Chamber, having hopes she would return as soon as
she was dressed; she therefore entered hastily her Chamber, and as hastily went
out at the other door, and ran toward the Church. As soon as the Young man
perceived this, he drew his Sword, run after her, and soon overtaking her, with
a stern countenance struck off her Head; and immediately in the place where it
fell to the Earth, a most pure and plentiful Spring gushed forth, which flows
to this day, and by the Holy Virgins merits gives Health to a World of Diseased
persons. It being in the steep descent of a Hill where the Virgins Head was cut
off, it lightly running down to the bottom, slid into the Church, whereas the
Body remained in the place where it first fell. The Congregation were
wonderfully astonished to see the Head tumbling among their Feet, they all went
out, and found the Murderer near the liveless body, wiping his Sword on the
grass: S. Bueno therefore seeing his pride, and having in his hand the Virgins
Head, looked on him and said, Impious Villain! have thou no shame of the stain
wherewith thou have defiled thy high Birth? and show thou no repentance of
this horrible crime? thou have disturbed the peace, thou have polluted the
Church, thou have provoked God: since therefore it is so, I beseech him without
delay to inflict on thee a just punishment for this thy detestable crime. As
soon as he had ended these words the Young man fell to the ground, gave up the
Ghost, and which was more wonderful, his Body presently disappeared, and many
say it was swallowed up by the Earth, and with the wicked Soul sunk into Hell.
But Bueno kissing the Head which he had in his hand, joined it to the body,
covering it with his Mantle, celebrated Mass at the Altar, Preached, and prayed
that the Virgins Soul might return to her Body; this Prayer being ended the
Virgin rose up as from sleep, and cleansing her Face from the dust and sweat,
filled the Congregation with wonder and Joy. Now in the place where the Head
was rejoyned to the body there appeared a white circle compassing the Neck,
small as a white Thread, which continued so all her life; and from that white
circle she had the name of Winefrid; and after her death when she appeared to
any, that white mark was always visible. The place where her blood was shed is
at this day called St. Winefrids Well. The stones likewise both where the
Springs gusheth forth, and beneath in the Current, having been sprinkled with
her blood, retain the redness to these times; which color neither the length
of many Ages, nor the continual sliding of the water over them, has been able
to wash away. And moreover a certain Moss, which sticks to the said stones,
renders a fragrant odor like Incense. Cr. p. 389.

St. Clare, an Hermit, when come to years of maturity, was by his Parents
affianced to a beautiful Virgin; but when the time wherein the Marriage was to
be solemnized approached, the young Man withdrew himself form his Parents
House, and out of Britany passed over into France; but there a Noble Woman
dwelling near him, inflamed with lust, impudently attempted his Chastity; but
St. Clare resolutely resisted the shameless Lady; notwithstanding which
resistance, when her solicitations still more and more increased, he was
forced to forsake his Monastery; the lascivious Lady desperately enraged with
his departure, sent two Murderers in search of him, who at last found him in a
poor Cottage, there they set upon him with opprobrious speeches, and at last
drawing out their Swords they cut off his Head: St. Clare presently after
arose, and with his Hands taking up his Head, by the assistance of Angels,
carried it to a Fountain not far distant, into which he cast it, and then
carried the same back to the Oratory of his Cell, and going on a little further
toward a Village near the River Epta, he there consummated his Course. Cr. p.
411.

Two Kentish Princes, Ethelred and Ethelbert, being murdered, and buried under
the Seat where the King was wont to sit, the Murder was most miraculously
discovered; wherefore taking up the Bodies, and honorably putting them in
Coffins, the Archbishop Theodorus commanded to carry them to Christ-Church in
Canterbury, but in vain they attempted this, for with all the force they could
use they could not remove them out of the place; whereupon, changing his
purpose, he advised to transport them to the Church of St. Augustine, but with
as little success as before; at last, it was agreed they should be carried to
the Monastery of Wering, of great renown in those days, which being resolved
upon, the Bodies were as easily removed as if they had no weight at all; being
arrived at that place, the Bodies were buried near the great Altar, where many
wonderful Miracles are daily wrought. Cr. p. 412.

St. Wilfrid entering into a Village called Tiddafrey, there met him a great
multitude of Women, offering their Children to be confirmed by him. Amongst
them, one Woman mingled her self, craftily carrying in her Arms her dead Child,
pretending that he should be Catechized, but inwardly persuaded that by the
Bishops sanctity he should be restored to Life; the Bishop therefore uncovering
the Child's face, to the end he might perform the due Rites, found that he was
dead; then the Woman perceiving that her fraud did not succeed, betook her self
to prayers, earnestly beseeching him for God and his Holy Mothers sake, if he
had any Faith or Pity, torestore Life to her Child, saying this, she cast her
self at his Feet, and would not be removed, thus offering an importunate
violence toward him: All this while the Bishop continued doubtful, whether he
should seem rash in attempting the Miracle, or reject the Tears and Prayers of
the disconsolate Woman, but a charitable Pity at last got the victory;
therefore, after he had with a low voice repeated certain devout passages out
of the Psalms, he laid his Right Hand upon the dead Body, whereupon immediately
the Soul was restored, for by gasping, moving his Eyelids, and stirring his
whole Body, he gave proof that he was alive. The Child was called Ethelwald,
who was afterward a Monk at Rippon.

Another Miracle wrought by St. Wilfrid on a Monk, who falling from the top of
the Church, whilst it was a building at the cost of King Egbert, broke all his
Bones, and tore asunder all his Members, was restored to Health by the Prayers
of the Bishop and his Covent. Cr. p. 422.

St. Ositha's Head being cut off by a Danish Pirate, at the very place a clear
Fountain broke forth, which cured several kind of Diseases; moreover as soon as
her Head was off, the Body presently rose up, and taking up the Head in the
Hands, by the conduct of Angels walked firmly the straight way to the Church of
St. Peter and Paul, about a quarter of a Mile distant from the place of her
suffering; and when it was come there, it knocked at the door with the bloody
Hands, as desiring it might be opened, and thereon left marks of blood; having
done this, it fell there down to the ground. Cr. p. 424.

The Miracle of St. Wereburga's driving away Wild-geese.
At Chester there was near the Walls of the Town a Farm belonging to the
Monastery, the Corn whereof was much wasted by flocks of Wild-geese, which the
Steward of the place endeavored, but in vain, to chase away; of which
incommodity he made complaint to St. Wereburga, whereupon she commanded him,
saying, Go your ways and shut them all up in a house. He wondering at so strange
a command, thought the Saint spoke those words in jest: but when she renewed
the same injunction constantly, and in a serious manner, he returned among the
Corn, where seeing great numbers of such fowl devouring the grain, he with a
loud voice commanded them in his Mistresses name to follow him; hereupon
immedately they all in one drove followed him, and were shut up together in a
House. Now it happened that a certain servant privately stole one of the said
birds, which he killed and hid, with intention to eat it. The next morning
early the Holy Virgin went to the house, where after she had in a chiding
manner reprehended the birds for usurping that which belonged not to them, she
commanded them to fly away and not return: Immediately the whole army of them
took wing; but being sensible of the injury done them, they flew not away, but
hovering over the Holy Virgins head, with wonderful noise made complaint of
their loss. She hearing their importunate clamours, understood by inspiration
the cause thereof; and after search made, the Offender confessed his theft;
whereupon she commanded the bird to be restored to her companions; after which
they all with one consent flew away, so as not any bird of that kind was
afterward seen in that Territory. Cr. p. 427.

After St. Wereburga was dead her Body was carried to the Church of
Trickingham, where it was most diligently kept, the doors of the Church being
carefully barred, and a Watch moreover set upon it. But one night a deep sleep
suddenly seized on those which watched; and at the same time great multitudes
of the inhabitants of Hambury coming on them, all the doors of the Monastery
became opened, the Locks and Bars without any violence offered, falling to the
ground. Whereupon they took away the Body, not any one resisting, and with
great joy carried it to Hambury, where it was honorably buried. In which place
sick persons recover health, sight is restored to the blind, hearing to the
dumb, the leprous are cleansed, and persons oppressed with several other
Diseases, do there praise God for their recovery. Cr. p. 427.

St. Milburga rests at Wenlock: In ancient times her memory was celebrated by
the inhabitants, but after the coming in of the Normans, by reason that the
place of her Sepulcher was unknown, she became forgotten. But of late a Covent
of Cluny-Monks having been established there, whilst they were busy in
erecting the Fabric of a new Church, a certain Child running earnestly over
the pavement, the vault of her Sepulcher broke under him, by which means the
Body of the H. Virgin was discovered, which being taken up, a most odoriferous
vapor, as of a most precious Balsam, perfumed the whole Church: And such a
world of Miracles were wrought by her Intercession, that wonderful multitudes
flocked thither, both rich and poor, insomuch as there was scarce room in the
open Fields to receive them, so strong a faith they had to find remedy there
for their maladies. Neither did they fail of their expectation, for none
departed away without a Cure, or at least a mitigation of their Diseases. And
particularly the King's Evil, incurable by Physicians, was through the Merits of
the Holy Virgin, healed perfectly in several persons. Cr. p. 429.

A wonderful Miracle, showing the efficacy of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass.
In a Battle where Prince Elwin was slain, among others there was one of the
Princes Soldiers named Imma slain, (at least in opinion.) This Soldier all
that day and the night following lay among the other dead bodies, as if he had
been slain; but at last his Spirit returning he sat up, and as well as he
could, bound up the wounds he had received; then resting himself a while, he
raised himself on his feet, and began to walk away, with an intention to find
out, if possible, some friends, who might take care of him. As he was going
away, he was met with and taken by some of the enemies, the Mercians, and
brought to their Captain, a principal Officer of King Ethelred, who examined
him what he was. The poor man was afraid to acknowledge himself a Soldier,
therefore he answered that he was a poor countryman, who had a Wife, and was
come in this Expedition with several others of the like quality, to bring
Provision to the Army. Upon this answer the Officer commanded that care should
be taken of his Wounds, and when they began to be almost cured, he made him
every night to be put in Chains, to prevent his running away; but no Chains
could hold him, for after they were gone which had put the Chains upon him,
they presently fell off. And the cause of this Wonder was this; He had a
Brother named Tunna, a Priest and Abbot of a Monastery in a certain Town which
at this day from his name is called Tunnacestir. This Abbot having heard that
his Brother was slain in the late battle, came himself to search for his body;
and having found another in all regards very like to his, he carried it to his
Monastery, and there buried it honorably. Moreover he took care that several
Masses should be said for the pardon of his sins; and by virtue of those Masses
it came to pass that no bands could hold him, but they presently fell loose
from him. In the mean time the Officer whose Prisoner he was, began to ask him,
How came it to pass that he could not be bound? Whether he had about him
certain Charms, which as some think, have a power to untie all bands? His
answer was, that he was utterly ignorant of such unlawful Arts; But, said he, I
have a Brother in mine own country, and I am assured that he thinking I am
slain, says frequent Masses for me; so that if I were now in the other World, I
doubt not but my Soul by his intercession and prayers, would be absolved from
all pains. After he had continued a good space a Prisoner to the said Officer,
those who guarded him observed by his countenance, gesture and speeches that he
was no countrey-peasant, but a person of quality. Thereupon the Officer calling
him aside privately, enquired more diligently who he was; withal promising him
that if he would simply declare his condition, he would not use him any thing
the worse. He then plainly manifested to him that he was a Servant of the King
of the Northumbers. Whereupon the Officer replied, I did assure my self by the
manner of thy speech, that thou were not of a base condition: and now thou
deservest to dye, in revenge of all my brethren and kinsmen who have been slain
in the Battle: but because I will not break my promise, I will not kill thee.
As soon therefore as he had recovered health and strength the Officer sold him
to a certain man at London called Freson. But neither could he be bound by his
new Master; for after trial of several sorts of Bands and Chains, they became
all unloosed. When he therefore who had bought him perceived that he could not
be restrained by Fetters, he gave him permission to redeem himself, if he
could. For commonly after nine of the Clock in the morning, the usual time of
Masses, his Bands were untyed. Upon this offer the Prisoner was suffered to
depart, having first given his promise by Oath, that he would either send the
money agreed on for his Ransom, or return and yield himself a Prisoner again.
He went therefore from London into Kent, to King Lothere, Nephew to the famous
Queen Ethelreda by her Sister, who likewise had formerly been a Servant to the
said Queen; and from him the Prisoner received the Money appointed for his
Ransom, which according to promise he sent to his Master. Being thus free,
after some time he returned to his Country, and coming to his Brother the
Abbot, he related to him particularly all the Accidents, both good and bad,
which had befaln him; and then perceived, that his Chains for the most part had
been loosed precisely at the Hours in which Masses had been celebrated for him,
and moreover that many other commodities and comforts had befaln him from
Heaven in his dangers, by his Brothers Prayers, and the Oblation of the Saving
Sacrifice. Cr. p. 439.

On a certain day St. Cuthbert came to the Village of a certain Count, whose
Wife at that time lay sick at the point of death; the Count himself met him in
the way, and conducted him into his House, and acquainted him with the
desperate state of his Wife, beseeching him that he would give his benediction
to Water for sprinkling her; the Bishop assented to the Man's request; and Water
being brought, he blessed it, and gave it to a Priest, commanding him to
sprinkle the sick Lady with it; who thereupon entered into her Chamber, where
she lay like one deprived of sense and life, and both sprinkled her face and
bed, yea withal, opening her Mouth, distilled a few drops into it; the Holy
Water had no sooner touched her, but O wonderful! though she was utterly
ignorant of what had been done, she presently recovered a perfect health of
Body and Mind, and without delay rising up, she her self came to do service to
the Bishop, being the first of the whole Family which presented to him a Cup of
refection. Cr. page 469.

The Divine Disposition being pleased to demonstrate in how great Glory St.
Cuthbert lived after his death, gave this Testimony: Eleven years after his
burial his Brother Monks, opening his Sepulcher to take up his bones, found his
body perfectly entire, with a lively freshness, and all his limbs as flexible
as if he had been alive, so that he appeared like a person rather asleep than
dead; moreover all his Vestments were not only undecayed, but appeared in their
primitive freshness, and also with the addition of a wonderful luster. Cr. p.
473.

A Coffin of stone was prepared for entombing the body of King Sebbe, but when
they endeavored to put the body into it, they found that it was a hands
breadth too long for the Coffin; whereupon paring away as much of the stone at
each end as they could, they thereby lengthened it about the measure of two
fingers breadths, yet after all it would not receive the body, whereupon
finding so great a difficulty to inter him, they intended, either to seek out a
new Coffin, or to endeavor by hewing the body to shorten it so much as to make
it enter into the Coffin; but by a wonderful accident, which could proceed from
no less than an Heavenly Power, both these designs of theirs were prevented,
for presently in the sight of the Bishop, and Sighard Son to the said King and
Monk, who together with his brother Seofrid Reigned after him, a great
multitude of others being likewise present, the Coffin was found of a
convenient length, insomuch that there was room enough to lay a Cushion under
his head, and yet at the feet there remained four fingers breadths beyond the
body. Cr. p. 486.

The wonderful Story of a Man revived, and recounting his Visions.
A certain Man who had been a good while dead, was restored to the life of his
body, and related many notable things which he had seen. This Man was an honest
Housekeeper, who with his Family lived a Religious Life in a Region of the
Northumbers, called Incuningum; who having been struck with a Disease, the same
growing more and more violent upon him, it brought him to extremity, so that on
a certain day toward evening he died; but the day following early he came to
life, and suddenly raising himself up in his bed, all those who mournfully
watched the body, were terribly affrighted and ran away, only his Wife, whose
love to him was excessive, though she trembled at the sight, staid still by him.

The Man seeing his Wife, bid her be of comfort: Fear not, said he, for I am
truly restored to life from death which had seized me, and permission is given
me to live a while longer among Men; but my conversation hereafter, must be
quite otherwise than formerly it has been. Having said this, he presently rose,
and went to an Oratory of that Village, where he remained a good while in
Prayer: Afterward having divided his whole Substance into three Portions, one
Portion he gave to his Wife, a second to his Children, and the third he
distributed to the Poor.

Not long after, having thus freed himself from all worldly cares, he went to
the Monastery of Mailros, where having received Tonsure he entered into a
Religious Life.

Now the account which he gave of his Visions, was on this manner: A certain
person brightly shining in his face and vestments, conducted me, and we walked
together silently, as it seemed to me, toward the place where the Sun rises in
high Summer: Thus walking together, we came to a place where there was on our
left hand, a Valley of a vast depth and breadth, and the length of it seemed
infinite; one side of this Valley was terrible with its burning flames, and the
other no less intolerable for the cold blasts, hail and snow, driving through
it; and both these places were full of men's souls, which seemed to be forcibly
tossed from one side to the other, for those which were in the fire, not being
able to endure its scorching, leaped into the horrible cold, and not finding
ease there, they leaped back into the unquenchable flames. Having observed an
infinite number of deformed souls thus tormented, with an interchangeable
vicissitude of tortures, without any respite of ease, I began to think that
this place was surely Hell, of whose intolerable torments I had often heard
Preachers speak. But my Conductor who went before me, answered these my
thoughts, saying, Do not entertain such an imagination; for this is not Hell,
as thou think.

But when he saw me affrighted with so horrible a spectacle, he conducted me
leisurely somewhat further, where I saw all places round about me become
obscure, and at length filled with utter darkness. Into which when we were
entered, the darkness was so thick, that I could see nothing but the shape and
vestment of my Conductor. And as we went on further in this shady darkness, on
a sudden there appeared before us frequent globes of hideous flames ascending
out of a deep pit, and again falling down into it.

When I was come thither, presently my Guide vanished out of sight, leaving me
alone in the midst of this darkness and horrid spectacle. But when the said
globes of Fire without any intermission mounted up, and again fell down, I
perceive that they full of were humane Souls, which like sparks of fire carried
up by the smoke, were sometimes cast upward, and then drawn back by the vapors
of fire. Moreover an unexpressibly noysom stink belched out by those vapors
filled all the dark spaces round about. As I was thus standing still in a
terrible fright, being uncertain what to do, whither to go, and what would be
the end of all this, I heard behind my back a most horrible noise, as of
persons wailing in unutterable misery, and also at the same time I heard others
loudly and scornfully laughing, as the rude vulgar people are wont to do when
they insult over their captive enemies. When this noise came nearer to me, I
perceived a troop of wicked Spirits haling into the midst of that darkness the
Souls of men which woefully cried out, whilst the others burst forth into
laughters. And among these Souls I could distinctly see one that was shaved
like an Ecclesiastical person, another was a Layman, and a third was a Woman.
These unhappy Souls thus haled along by those spitefully malicious Spirits, at
length were plunged into the midst of that burning pit. Into which after they
were descended a good way, I could no longer distinctly hear the wailing of
Men, and laughing of Devils, but only had in mine ears remaining a confused
promiscuous sound.

In the mean time certain obscure, Spirits ascended out of that firevomiting
pit, which approached me on all sides, and with flaming eyes and stinking fire
issuing out of their mouths and nostrils vexed me grievously. Moreover, with
fiery pincers which they held in their hands they threatened to catch me; but
for all that, though they frighted me, they had not the boldness to touch me.
Being thus on all sides encompassed with darkness and enemies, I turned mine
eyes every way to see if there were any one to deliver me. At last there
appeared by the way which I had passed something that shone like a Star, which
increasing and approaching nearer and nearer, as soon as it came to me, all
those hateful Spirits which had endeavored with their fiery pincers to lay
hold on me, were dispersed and fled.

Now he whose coming drove away these Spirits was the same who at first had
been my Conductor; who presently after turning his steps more southerly toward
the East, led me out of that darkness into a clear and lightsom air; in which
after we had walked a while, I saw before us a mighty Wall, of the length and
height whereof every way I could see no end, I began then to marvel to what
purpose we should go to that Wall, in which I could discover neither door,
window, nor any other passage. But being come to it, presently, I know not by
what means, we found our selves on the top of it. And there appeared to me a
most large pleasant Field, so replenished with all sorts of odoriferous
Flowers, that the sweet fragrancy of them immediately took away all the former
stench of the dark fiery furnace. And so great was the light there on all
sides, that it far exceeded the brightness of midday. Moreover there were in
that field innumerable assemblies of men in pure white garments, all rejoicing
and singing. Now as he led me among these happy Quires, I began to think, that
this might be the Kingdom of Heaven, which I had often heard preached of. But he
again answered to my thought, No, this is not Heaven, as thou supposest.

And as we passed on in our progress, I saw before mine eyes a far greater and
more pleasant Light than we had seen before, and in that Light I heard a most
sweet melody of persons joyfully singing, and so wonderful a fragrancy of a
most sweet odor issued from thence, that the former sweetness, which before
seemed excessive to me, now I very meanly esteemed; as likewise the former
Light compared with this, appeared almost obscure. Now, when I was in a hopeful
expectation that we should enter into this blessed place, my Guide made a stop;
and presently turning his steps, he lead me back again the way that we had come.

And when in our return we were come to the joyful mansions of those
Inhabitants clothed in white garments, he said to me, Do thou know what
these things are which thou have seen? I answered, No. He replied, That Valley
which thou saw so terrible by the scorching flames and horrible frosts, is
the place in which those souls are to be tried and afflicted, which having
delayed to confess and amend their sins, at the very point of death retire for
safety to repentance, and so depart out of the body: These, because even in the
last moment of their lives, they confessed and were contrite for their sins,
they shall all at least in the day of Judgment come to the Kingdom of Heaven;
and many of them before that day, are eased and delivered by the Prayers,
Fasting, and Alms of the Living, and especially by the celebrating the most
Holy Sacrifice. Moreover, that flame-vomiting and stinking pit which thou
saw, is the very Mouth of Hell, into which whosoever once falls, he shall
never come out of it for all eternity.

As for this pleasant flowery field here before thine eyes, in which thou see
such multitudes of youth making merry, and clothed with white raiment, this is
the place which is the Receptacle of such souls which have continued to their
death in the exercise of virtue, but yet their works have not been of such
perfection, as to deserve their present admission into the Kingdom of Heaven;
yet all these in the day of Judgment shall arrive unto the Vision of our Lord,
and the joys of his heavenly Kingdom. But as for those, who in their words,
works and thoughts, have attained to perfection, such as soon as they have left
the body shall enter into that blessed Kingdom. To the Confines of which
Kingdom, that Place pertains where thou saw so great a Light, and heardest
so sweet Harmony, and wast refreshed with so admirably sweetsmelling Odours.

Thou therefore having seen all these things, must presently return to thy
Body, and again as formerly live among men. If then hereafter thou will be
diligent to examine all thine actions, and to observe uprightness and
simplicity in thy conversation and speeches, thou also after death shall
receive a mansion among these joyful troops of happy Spirits. For I, having
departed for a time from thee, did it to this end, that I might see what would
in the end become of thee. When he had spoken thus to me, I had a horrible
aversion from returning to my Body, being extremely delighted with the
sweetness and beauty of that place which I saw, and the happy society of the
persons living in it. Notwithstanding I had not the boldness to make any such
request to my Guide. And whilst I was busy in these thoughts, I know not how,
I presently perceived that I was again alive among men. Cr. p. 500.

Saint Decumanus, when his Head was cut from his Body, the Trunk raising it
self up, took the Head, which it carried from the place where it was slain to a
Spring not far off, which flowed with a most chrystalline Water, in which with
the Hands it washed the blood away; which Spring, in reverend memory of the
Saint, is to this day called St. Decumanus Spring; near to which place the Body
together with the Head was buried. Cr. p. 526.

In those days there was in the Territory of Worcester a certain place wholly
uncultivated, and almost unpassable by reason of thorns and briars growing
thick there. This place formerly called Homme, was in succeeding times named
Eovesham, for the reason which I shall now declare. St. Egwin had appoinetd
four Shepherds to feed their flocks about the said Wood for the sustenance of
his Monks. Now on a certain day it happened that one of the said Shepherds, named
Eoves, entering deeply into the midst of the Wood, there appeared before him a
certain most glorious Virgin, attended by two others, her splendor darkened
that of the Sun it self, and her beauty incomparably exceeded all wordly
features: she held in her Hand a Book, out of which she with the other two
Virgins, sung Hymns of praise to God. The poor man dazeled with this splendour
upon which he durst not fix his eyes, stood a while silent and trembling, and
presently after in great fear retired home, and repairing to the Bishop
acquainted him with his Vision. The Holy Bishop considering the matter
advisedly with himself, on a certain day after he had fasted and prayed, taking
three companions with him, went toward the place described by the Shepherd,
walking all the way barefoot, praying and singing Psalms; and commanding his
attendants to stop at a distance, he himself passed further into the Wood, and
being come to the place, he fell prostrate on the ground, where with many sighs
and tears he remained a good space imploring a merciful regard from our Lord.
After which he rose up from prayer, and immediately there appeared to him the
three Virgins, with the same majesty and glory as before; among whom she who
stood in the midst seemed more tall and resplendent than the other, in pure
whiteness infinitely excelling Lillies, and in freshness Roses, and from her
proceeded a celestial and inestimable odor: she held in her hand a Book,
together with a golden Cross casting forth bright heams of light. Now whilst he
thought within himself, that surely this was the Mother of our Lord, the said
glorious Virgin as it were approving such his inward pious cogitation,
stretching forth the said Cross gave him a Benediction with it, and presently
with that farewell disappeared. The Holy man with great joy rendering thanks to
God for this favor, understood thereby that it was God will that the same
place should be consecrated to his Service, and dedicated to the honor of the
Blessed Virgin Mother of Lord. For during his former afflictions and
persecutions he had made a Vow, that if God would vouchsafe to give a
prosperous end to his desires, he would build a Church to his Service. Hereupon
without delay he cleansed the place, began the work, and shortly brought it to
perfection. Cr. p. 528.

St. Egwin, Bishop of Worcester, undertook a painful Pilgrimage to Rome,
thereby to satisfy for the offenses of his People, and withal to do a
rigorous Penance for some faults committed in his youth: And to render his
Pilgrimage more painful, he in the presence of a great multitude bound about
his Legs certain Iron Chains, and cast the Key which locked them together into
the River of Avon, publicly protesting, that he would never esteem himself
secure of the pardon of his sins, till either the Key were restored to him, or
the Chains unloosed by a power supernatural. Having with great pain performed
his Voyage, he at last arrived at Rome, where, whilst he was performing his
Devotions in the Church of St. Peter, his Servants going to the Rivers side to
buy provision for their Master, they found in a Fishes belly the Key which had
formerly locked the Chains about his Legs, which being brought to him, he in
the presence of a great multitude unlocked the said Chains. So that he who
before was looked upon as a Sinner, was afterward honored as a Saint. Cr. p.
528.

In the year 711, when St. Swibert went into a certain Village to celebrate
Mass, a certain rich Man who had been a Pagan, but converted and called Peter,
conducting a Cart laden with Materials for building a Monastery; in the way by
the malice of the Devil Peter fell from the Cart under the Wheels, and was
taken up dead, having his Head and other Members grievously wounded, by
occasion of which, there assembled a great concourse of People, when
preparation was making for his Funeral, St. Swibert came to the place, and
commanded the Body to be carried to his Cell, which being done, he with many
sighs and tears poured forth his Prayers to restore to life the said Peter, who
was a Servant of his Monastery, then rising up, and kissing the Body,
immediately the dead Man revived, and rose up perfectly whole, insomuch as
there was not left on his Body the least marks of any wounds, nor no settling
of any blood. Cr. p. 538.

In the same hour St. Swibert died his Soul appeared to St. Willebrord,
requesting him that he would be present at his Funerals in Werda; whereupon he
presently took Boat, and with several others made haste to Werda; where all
these, as they were the day following, according to Custom, singing the Vigile
of the Dead, a young Man was brought among them, who had been made blind by
Lightning, and with his clamours interrupting the Psalmody, and calling to the
Saint to have his sight restored, as soon as he had touched the Coffin he
immediately recovered his sight. Another, who was raging mad, being brought in,
and kissing the cover of the same Coffin was presently restored to his Senses.
A third also, who was possessed of the Devil, by the same means was freed from
the wicked Spirit. Cr. p. 556.

St. Boniface one morning celebrated Mass in St. Michael's Church in Ordorf;
after which, he commanded that Dinner should be made ready; but being told that
there was no Meat, Is it so, answered he, how many thousand did God feed in the
Wilderness, forty years together? Cannot he provide for his Servant, how
unworthy soever, nourishment for one day? Having said this, he commanded the
Table should be covered, and presently a great Bird flew thither, bringing in
her mouth a Fish, sufficient to satisfy all their hunger, this Fish he bade
should be dressed, which having eaten, the remainder was cast into the River.
Cr. p. 569.

A certain devout Lady named Irmgardis, attended only by two Maids, and her Son
Gocellin, a Child of little more than eight years of age, came to see the
Solemnity of the Canonization of St. Swibert, (the first Saint that was
solemnly Canonized,) and to demand the Popes Benediction. Now it happened that
whilst the Boat in which they came, was amongst others turned about for
landing, the young Child who then stood near his Mother, by reason of the
rushing of the Boats against one another, not being able to keep his standing,
fell into the River; which his Mother seeing, would have thrown her self after
him, if she had not been held back by such as were present. This happened about
five of the Clock at even. Presently one of the Maids ran in have to acquaint
the Archbishop with this calamity; who came and found the Lady in the Church,
shreiking out, and almost mad with grief; he with much ado conducted her to his
lodging, and endeavored to assuage her grief; but all in vain, for the whole
night she spent in weeping, groaning and praying to St. Swibert, by his
accustomed piety to succor his afflicted servant; vowing withal, that if she
might have her Child restored, she would consecrate him for ever to Gods
service in his Church. The day following about eight of the clock in the
morning the dead body was found and taken up out of the River: Which being
presented to his Mother, she became pale and fell into a swoon; but being
recovered, she took the body in her arms, and attended with a great troop of
men and women weeping with her, she carried it into the Church, and laid it
before the Sepulcher of St. Swibert. After which the whole company betook
themselves to their Prayers; and within a very short time the Child's Spirit
returned into him, so that he opened his eyes, and standing upon his feet he
looked about with wonder on so great a multitude, and spoke some tender and
kind words to his Mother. Cr. p. 687.

The Pagans having cut off St. Edmond's Head, they cast it into a secret place
in a Thicket of the Wood adjoining, there it remained a whole years space;
after which the said Pagans retiring out of the Country, the first care of the
Christians was to honor their holy King and Martyr. Assembling themselves
therefore together out of their lurking-places, they reverently took his Body
out of the unclean place where it had been cast, and then with all diligence
sought for the Head; and whilst every one of them with equal affection searched
each corner of the Wood, there happened a Wonder not heard of in any age before.
For whilst they dispersed themselves in all parts, and each one demanded of his
companions, where it was that the Danes had cast the Head, the same Head
answered them aloud in their own tongue, Here, here, here; neither did it cease
to cry out in the same words, till it had brought them to the place. And to add
to the wonder, there they found a mighty and fierce Wolf, which with its
fore-feet held the Head, as if appointed to watch and defend it from other
beasts. When they were come, the Wolf quietly resigned it to them. So with
joyful hymns to God they carried and joined it to the body, the Wolf in the
mean time following them to the place where they buried it, after which, the
Beast returned into the Wood; in all which time, neither did the Wolf hurt any
one, neither did any one show the least intention to hurt the Wolf. Cr. p. 736.

A certain Scotchman buried in the Church at Rhemes, lay many years there
unknown, till the ground being afterward dug for the burial of another, his
Coffin was found, but could by no force of Men be opened, till the Pastor of
the Place, whose Name was Hildegarius, comeing, opened it a little, and was
infinitely ravished with the odoriferous smell issuing out of it; within the
Coffin he saw a Body entire, clothed with Priestly Vestments, therefore not
daring further to violate the Sepulcher, but laying boards over it, upon those
boards he placed the other dead Body. The night following his Uncle, who had
been dead many years, and was a Priest, appeared to him, telling him, that he
had much offended God in violating the Sepulcher of a Holy Man. The like did
the Holy Man himself make known to another, commanding him to signify to the
Priest, that unless he removed from out his Grave the stinking Carkase, he
should quickly receive from God a severe punnishment. Whereupon without delay
he caused a new Grave to be made for the newly dead Persons Body. Afterward the
same Holy Man in a Vision required a Husbandman, and again a Priest, to advise
him in his Name to remove his Body from without into the Church, withal
signifying, that he was of the Scottish Nation, that his Name was Merilolan,
and had been murdered in his way toward Rome on the River Aisne (Axona). And
least he should forget the Name, he commanded him to write it with Chalk, which
he seemed to give him upon the Cover of a Chest standing by; which he
accordingly did, and writing it false, was corrected by the Holy Man. The next
morning he found the Name written in so perfect a manner, that he could not
write so well, though waking and in the light. Cr. p. 813.

A debate happening between the Secular Canons and the Monks, about their
Revenue and Possession, the Canons pretentions were supported by the Queen,
etc. on the Monks side stood King Edward, Saint Dunstan, etc. When the debate
was in the Assembly, St. Dunstan was silent, and holding down his head, he
debated in his mind what might be the best course to proceed in this Affair. A
great silence was observed by the whole Assembly, every one expecting the
Archbishops answer and resolution; when on a sudden an Image of our Lord upon
the Cross, which was fastened aloft in the room, in the hearing of all that were
present, spoke these words distinctly; It must not be, it must not be; you have
ordered things well, you shall do ill to change them. This struck a terror
into the whole Assembly, and thereupon St. Dunstan said, My brethren, what
would you have more? you have heard the present Affair decided by a Divine
sentence; they answered, We have heard it. And upon this the Monks of
Winchester remained secure. Cr. p. 883.

St. Editha, Daughter to King Edgar, a little before her death built a Church
to the honor of St. Dionysius; at the Consecration whereof by St. Dunstan he
observed how the Virgin frequently with her Thumb made the sign of the Cross
upon her Forehead; at which being much delighted, he said, May that Thumb never
be corrupted. Thirteen months after her death, St. Dunstan in a vision of sleep
saw St. Dionysius holding the Virgin by the hand, who commanded that her memory
should be celebrated on earth; the Virgin her self likewise admonished him to
take up her Body; withal telling him that he should find her upper parts, her
Eyes and Hands all corrupted, because in her childish age she had employed them
lightly and vainly; but her Thumb which she had frequently used in signing her
self with the Cross, and all her lower parts remained uncorrupted, in as much
as she had been always free from impurity and gluttony; hereupon St. Dunstan
went to Wilton, and taking up her sacred Relics, found all she had said to be
true. But Canutus the Danish King, who made small account of English Saints,
was wont to say in jest, he could never believe that a King so licentious and
cruel as K. Edgar could have a Saint to his Daughter. And when Archbishop Ednot
defended the sanctity of S. Editha, the King being then at Wilton, in a passion
commanded her Sepulcher to be opened; which being done, the holy Virgin was
seen to sit up, with a Veyl before her face, in a posture as if she intended to
assault the King; at which he terribly affrighted started back, and fell half
dead to the ground. But coming to himself, he ever held the holy Virgin in
great veneration; and once being endangered by a Tempest at Sea, he implored
her assistance; upon which the Tempest immediately ceased, and he came safe to
land. Cr. p. 895.

In the year of Grace a thousand and twelve, the people of a Town of Saxony
named Colewiz (or Colbec) being assembled in the Church dedicated to the Holy
Martyr Magnus, on the Vigil of our Lords Nativity, the Priest named Robert
according to custom began the first Solemn Mass. At the same time there were
fifteen men and three women in the Churchyard dancing and singing profane
Songs, and they made such a noise that they hindered the Priest, for their
voices were louder than the Quire which sung at Mass. The Priest therefore sent
to them once and again to be quiet, but they contemned his command; whereupon
in great indignation he said, May it please God and St. Magnus, that you may
continue singing thus till a year be passed. Now what followed? This
imprecation of the Priest had such force, that Azo a Son of the same Priest
taking his Sister, called Ava, by the arm to draw her from the rest, and she
not being able to leave them, he pulled her Arm from her body, and yet not a
drop of Blood was seen. She therefore with the rest remained singing a whole
year. No rain fell upon them; neither cold nor heat, hunger nor thirst, nor
weariness troubled them. Their clothes and shoes were not worn out, but they
continued incessantly, like mad people, their singing. They by dancing so wore
away the ground, that they sunk into the earth first to the knees, and
afterward to the middle, the trench became so deep. There was by their friends
a kind of pent-house raised over them, to defend them from the foul weather;
but there was no need of it. At last, when the year was ended, Herebert
Archbishop of Colen came to the place and absolved them from their bonds, and
bringing them before the Altar of St. Magnus, he there reconciled them. The
Priests Daughter with two others presently gave up the ghost; the rest slept
three days and three nights without waking. Some of them dyed shortly after;
but some remained many years alive, and by a trembling of all their members
published to the world their sin and punishment. Cr. p. 919.

Judith, Wife of Count Tosti, desiring of Agelwin Bishop of Durham to bestow on
her some portion of the Relics of that glorious Martyr St. Oswin King of the
Deiri, received from him a large lock of his Hair, altogether incorrupted. And
being desirous to confirm in Faith certain incredulous persons, she caused a
great Fire to be kindled in the midst of her Hall, into which she cast the same
Hair, which received no prejudice at all, but on the contrary a great lustere.
Whereupon the Countess by the Bishops order laid up the said Relic in a
precious Repository. Cr. p. 988.

A certain Church being to be Consecrated to the honor of Saint John the
Evangelist, devout King Edward the Confessor attended the Procession thither;
when upon a sudden a Person in a strangers habit pressing near the King,
earnestly begged an Alms of him for Saint John's sake, the King having
charitably given away all the Money he brought thither, took a rich Ring from
off his finger and gave it to the stranger, who returning him many thanks,
presently disappeared. It happened afterward, that two Englishmen went to adore
the Sepulcher of our Savior at Jerusalem; who at their return lost their way,
and the night coming on them, they were in great pain what would become of
them. Being in this perplexity, they saw passing by them a company of beautiful
young men in white shining garments, before whom went two carrying Torches in
their hands, which took away all the obscurity of the night. After them
followed a comely Old man, attended by two on each hand, who looking aside, and
spying the two Pilgrims, he stayed, asking them, who and whence they were, what
Religion they professed, who was their King, and what was the cause of their
journey thither? They told him they were Englishmen, and Christians, that their
Kings name was Edward, that they came to visit the holy places of our Lords
Passion and Resurrection, and that the same day having wandered out of their
way, they knew not where to find lodging or entertainment. Then the venerable
Old man with a cheerful countenance bid them follow him, conducting them into a
most beautiful City, where they were most delicately nourished and lodged. In
the morning the same Old man brought them on their way, and being out of the
City he said to them, My Brethren, doubt not but God will give you a prosperous
journey homeward; I am John the Apostle and Evangelist; your King I
affectionately love for his chastity, salute him in my name; and to take from
him all doubt, restore him this Ring which at the Dedication of a Church to my
name he gave me, being then disguised in the habit of a Pilgrim; tell him
withal that the day of his death, approaches, and that six months hence I will
visit him, and conduct him after the Lamb, who is always attended by pure
chaste souls. As soon as he had said these words, they presently found
themselves in their right way; and with great joy returned home. Whither being
come, they presented the Ring to the King, acquainted him with the Oracle, and
taking him aside discovered to him what was told them of his death. As soon as
they had mentioned the Name of St. John, the King burst forth into tears, and
after he had diligently enquired of them touching the things they had seen and
heard in their Journey, he dismissed them with thanks. Cr. p. 988.

Thus you have some Miracles of Ignatius, S. Anthony, etc. and a few of Mr.
Cressy's many Stories of the Miracles of our English Saints; if these gain your
Acceptance, you will oblige me farther to prosecute this Collection from more
of their Legends, and present you with another small Book of the like nature.

FINIS.

