A SERMON Preached before the ALDERMEN OF THE City of London, AT St.
Lawrence-Church, Ian 30. 1680/1. Being the day of the Martyrdom of K. CHARLES
I. By GILBERT BURNET, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1681.

TO THE Right Honorable Sr. Patience Ward LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON.
My Lord,
THE favorable account that was brought your Lordship of this Sermon (your
self by an Indisposition being kept from bearing it) as it induced you to
desire to see it in Print, which seconded by the Order of the Court of
Aldermen, does now make it appear in public; so it will give a new discovery
of the little credit that is due to Report: which though it errs more generally
on the severer side, yet in this Instance was too partial to so poor a
Performance.

But the Argument treated in it will cover many faults: Especially meeting with
such Equitable Judges as your Lordship is. Since the acquitting the Reformed
Religion of such a scandal as has been cast on it upon the account of that
great wickedness then commemorated, and the persuading all Protestants to live
in Peace and Love together, are subjects so acceptable to your Lordship, and so
suitable to our present unhappy Circumstances, that the most imperfect Essay
toward them will, I presume, be well received, and the Defe is of it easily
forgiven, by one that employs himself with so much Zeal and Fidelity in the
securing our Holy Religion, and the maintaining of Truth and Peace in that
Great City now under your Lordships Government.

May the God of Truth and Peace lead us into the way of his Truth, and make us
know the things that belong to our peace; and may your Lordship be a great
Instrument in promoting it. This is earnestly prayed for by.

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient servant, G. BURNET.

ZECHARY VIII. 19. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, The Fast of the Fourth month,
and the Fast of the Fifth, and the Fast of the Seventh, and the Fast of the
Tenth shall be to the House of Judah joy and gladness and cheerful Feasts;
therefore love the Truth and Peace.
IT may be justly doubted whether horrid and unexempled crimes, ought not
rather to be buried in oblivion, than be remembered, though with the greatest
detestation possible. The mentioning them too often, may make them grow too
familiar to our thoughts: and some may be tempted to like them, and approve
what it is designed they should abhor: Yet on the other hand, some things carry
in the first appearance of them, such odious characters, that the nature of man
shrinks at the very mentioning them; so that the frequent remembering them will
increase the horror at them: and the showing the precipice over which some
have fallen, may warn others to beware of approaching too near it, for fear of
the like ruin and destruction.

I acknowledge it were better if we could have Job's wish, That that day should
perish, that darkness and the shadow of death should cover it, that it should
not see the dawning of the day, nor should the light shine upon it. It were
better to strike it out of our Calendar, and to make our January determine at
the 29th, and add these remaining days to February. But alas! this cannot be
done; we cannot wipe out this blot: what was done, can never be forgotten. It
cannot by others, and by us it ought not to be forgotten. The whole world looked
on with amazement, not knowing whether more to admire the heinousness of the
crime, the wickedness of the actors, or the patience and constancy of the
sufferer. The cry was loud on Earth, but much louder in Heaven. The shrieks and
tears of many good Subjects, and particularly in this Great City, which, as I
have been informed, spent that day in a general mourning, and bitter
lamentation and astonishment, followed it fast, to deprecate those judgments
which such guilt gave them cause to apprehend: But the prayers of this Martyr
went before it, for averting that Curse, which he feared should (but prayed
that it might not) fall on his people. We have been since above twenty years
putting up by public authority, and in the name of the whole Nation, David's
Prayer, Deliver us from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou God of our our Salvation.
So it may be now perhaps thought that after so long a continuance of mourning
this sin is expiated, and the land purged from the defilement of it: Upon which
some may ask the Question set down in the former Chapter, Should I weep,
separating Chap. 7. 3.
my self as I have done these so many years?

The Jews had during the seventy years of the Captivity Fasted in those months
mentioned in my Text; the chief steps of that calamity which had so overwhelmed
them having been made in these months. On the tenth month and the tenth day of
the month (which according to Archbishop Usher is exactly our 30th of January)
the King of Babylon besieged Jerusalem: he took it on the fourth month. It was
burnt on the 2 King. 21. 1. Ibid. ver. 3. Ibid. v. ^. Ibid. v. 25.
fifth month: and on the seventh month was Gedaliah killed: Upon which the few
that were left behind, were broken among themselves, and dispersed. But of all
these that on the fifth month was the most solemn Fast; and therefore when the
Question was put concerning the continuance of the Fast, that is only
mentioned: and no wonder: For the burning of the Temple, was not only a
temporal calamity, but it deprived them of all the means of obtaining the
favor of God, of expiating their sins by sacrifices, and of consulting the
Urim and Thummim. It seemed reasonable enough for them to Fast during the
Captivity, while they lay under the sensible effects of these judgments, which
had broke out upon them in those days: But that being over, and they being
again restored to their Native Country, it was no unreasonable thing for them
to put the Question, whether that should be still kept up. To this three things
are answered.

First, That they had not Fasted aright on these days, Chapter 7. v. 5.
When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even these seventy
years, did ye at all fast unto me, even unto me? Intimating that it had been
only Pageantry and matter of form; they had perhaps hanged down their heads
like a Bull-rush, put on Sackcloth, and covered their heads with ashes, which
were the usual rites of mourning among them: but there had been nothing done on
those days, suitable to the occasion, for averting the wrath of God which had
then broke out, and was still hanging over them.

Secondly, The Prophet directs them to do such things which became true
penitents, and those that indeed afflicted their souls; to execute true
judgment, Ibid. 8, 9, 10. ver. 17.
and show mercy and compassions every man to his neighbor, not to oppress the
widow or the fatherless, the stranger nor the prisoner, and that none of them
should imagine evil against his brother in his heart: and in this Chapter, V.
16, 17.
that they should speak every man the truth (...) (...) neighbor, and execute
the judgment of truth and peace in their Gates. This being done

The Third thing is in my Text, that upon their loving truth and peace, those
black and mournful days should be converted to days of joy and gladness.

How these Anniversaries were first set up, and by what authority, whether by
the direction of any Prophet, or by common agreement, does not appear to us. We
have both the Institution and the continuance of another Anniversary a little
before this expressly set down. Upon Iosiah's death, Jeremy that foresaw 2 Chronicles. ^5. 25.
what was to follow under the reigns of his degenerated issue, made a
lamentation, and set it to be sung by the Quire of the mourners: upon which an
Ordinance was made: and those lamentations continued in use to the day in which
that Book of the Chronicles was writ: which, as appears by the last Verses,
that mention the return of the Captivity under Cy^us, was above eighty years at
least after Iosiah's death: for his children reigned above ten years, and the
Captivity lasted seventy; so long had that Anniversary been observed. And it
seems to be almost a law of nature, to commemorate both mercies and judgments
on those days in which they have been sent us.

We of this Island have had occasion for Fasts on all these months: On the
fourth month, reckoning according to the Jewish account, were the fatal
Standards set up: On the seventh the horrid Massacre and Rebellion of Ireland
broke out, and in England on that same day of the month, but a year after, the
first Battle at Edgehill was fought: On the tenth and on the tenth day of it
was that wickedness done which we now mourn for: The King was murdered, and the
Government wholly subverted: and on the fifth month were his Majesty's Armies,
that now reigns, defeated both at Dunbar and Worcester. It might have been
expected that our 29th of May should have worn out the remembrance of the 30th
of January, and now at the end of two and thirty years it may be reasonably
asked, Should we still continue to Fast and mourn? Shall the yearly return of
this black and dismal day, with the melancholy thoughts and reflections which
accompany it, be for ever observed? Shall we convey this entail of sorrow to
our posterity? Does this blood continue still to cry for vengeance, as the
blood of Abel did: or as the Jews say the blood of Zacharias the son of
Iehojada the High Priest, continued still to bubble on the floor of the Court
of the Temple, where he was killed, till the Captivity, that many thousand
Priests being killed on the place, the Earth drunk it up: and shall neither the
execution of Justice on the Murderers, nor the Prayers of the whole Nation
remove this guilt?

On this occasion it may be no improper thing to run out on the horridness of
so unexempled a wickedness: but I hope it is needless: I hope all men carry
still in their minds such a horror at that fact, that their thoughts boil
afresh within them at every time they reflect on it. Bloodshed without lawful
authority fills the mind of the Criminal with black and terrible thoughts: and
makes him often a terror to himself, so that either the dead Ghost, or the
apprehensions of guilt, haunt and follow such till they grow even weary of
life; since there can be no reparation made to the party injured: So that it is
scarce possible for the Murderer to stop even the cry of Blood in his own
Conscience. The Innocence, and the Dignity, and the Sacredness of the person
Murdered, are vast aggravations: and if such a crime comes in the conclusion,
after so great an effusion of blood, that it has run down like water; and above
all, if the actors have done what they could to entitle God to it, doing it
with the forms of Justice, so that in the place of judgment and righteousness,
there was Eccl. 3. 10.
iniquity and wickedness, and by their high pretensions to Piety and Zeal for
Religion, the enemies of all Religion have taken advantage to mock at true
Holiness, and the enemies of the Reformed Religion have thought they were now
furnished with somewhat, by which they might cast back that heavy but just
imputation laid on them, of setting up the doctrines and encouraging the
practices of deposing and killing of Kings, on the Protestants; All these
things concur to aggravate this crime, Blood desiles the land, and it cannot
Numb. 35. 33.
be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that
shed it: And by Moses law when that could not be found out, God appointed a
solemn Deuteronomy. 21. 6, 7, 8, 9, ver.
expiation to be made amongst the Jews, in the name of the whole Nation. Blood
is of so crying a nature, that it is said of that shed by Manass^s, that God
would, not pardon it: neither his late Repentance, nor the Reformation 2 King.
24. 4.
carried on by Josiah could avert those judgments, that were the just
punishments of such heinous sins. All these things concur to give us a right
sense of that guilt, which we now lament and endeavor to remove.

It may be expected that I should in the next place enlarge on the Virtues, the
Piety, Chastity, Temperance, the Magnanimity and Constancy of mind of this
Murdered Prince. But the performing this as it ought to be, I confess, is a
task above my strength: especially coming after so many who have done it with
such life, that any thing I could add, would be but a flat repetition of what
has been often much better said. And indeed we have his character given us in
such true and lasting colors, in that Picture which he drew for himself, in
his solitudes and sufferings, that it is perhaps a piece of presumption to take
up the Pencil again, and to add any touches to what is so perfect, that it may
be made worse, but can hardly be the better for any addition. Besides, that the
strains of a Panegyric do not agree so well with the solemnities of a Fast. I
shall therefore say no more, neither to raise the just esteem and veneration of
this Royal Martyr, nor to possess you with more detestation of so unparalleled
a wickedness; which as it had no pattern in any former age, so I hope shall
never be a precedent for after times: But shall return to the Question put to
the Prophet in the former Chapter, with the answer given to it both there and
here, and in speaking to it, shall discourse of these three particulars.

First, What ought to be the measures and rules of continuing Anniversary
mournings upon such great occasions.

Secondly, What is to be done to have the occasions of our mourning converted
into joy and gladness. We ought to love the Truth and Peace.

Thirdly, That upon our doing this sincerely, all the sad effects of that which
we now mourn for, shall be so entirely removed, that our days of Fasting shall
be turned into cheerful or solemn Feasts. To the First:

There is a temper to be observed in public as well as in private mournings,
that they be neither so short, as that it may thence appear we have a slight
sense of matters of such great consequence; nor so long, as that either our
sorrows rise out of measure high, or by the too frequent returns of those days,
the object of our griefs grows too flat. There is a mean between these
extremes, There is a time to mourn as well as a time to rejoice: and every
thing is beautiful in its season. I shall therefore offer two rules, by which
it may be reasonably determined how long such solemn mournings ought to be
continued, and apply them to the present occasion.

One is, As long as the sad effects of that which originally caused them,
continue, we ought to keep up our Fasts: for so long God seems to continue his
displeasure against us, and therefore we should be still renewing our
intercessions to turn it away. As long as the Captivity lasted, the people of
the Jews did not doubt continuing the observation of their Fasts, but when they
were brought back again to their Land, it seemed then more proper to put this
Question.

A second is, When the same or the like sins, which procured those Judgments
that are so much lamented, do continue: and when the circumstances of a Nation
seem to be almost the same, that they were on the occasion that at first called
for their mourning; then it is fit either to continue or to renew their
observation of those set Fasts. This was the case at this time of the Jews,
they were beginning to contract alliances with the Idolatrous Heathens round
about them, which had let in the former Idolatry, that had been the cause of
their former Captivity: they became guilty of the same immoralities, and
therefore they are commanded to love the Truth and Peace that so they being
delivered from the Wrath of God, might serve him without fear. And now to apply
this to our present Occasion.

There were two very ill effects that followed upon the Crime acted this day,
which still continue: The one was, the advantage that many weak and prejudiced
persons took against the appearances of Religion, Prayer, and the motions of
Gods Spirit; all these having been so much pretended to at that time. Many that
were assured the fact was Barbarous, and against all Law, Divine and Humane,
came upon that to infer, that Religion, the addressing to God in Prayer, and
the being guided by the inward motions of Grace and Gods holy Spirit, were at
best but the illusions of fancy, if not the contrivances of designing Men. The
Inference was as unjust as could be: yet so it was, that this falling upon
young and raw persons, who were by the heat of their tempers, much inclined to
entertain those prejudices; and that being wrought on by so great an Agent of
Hell, as the Author of Leviathan was; many were upon this corrupted in their
Principles about Religion in general. And for all the sleights of Wit, the
shows of Reason, and softness of Style that were in that Book, it could never
have been so mischievously successeful, as it then was, if it had not been for
the scandals which were given by the impudent pretensions of many of that time.
Their unintelligible way of talking about Religion, their crumbling into so
many Sects, the aspirings of many under all the shows of Humility and
Mortification, tended to make the Seeds of Atheism grow up plentifully. And to
this, I speak it knowingly, we owe the beginnings of all those impious and
immoral Maxims which have since overrun the Land. And do not these effects
continue still? Is not Devotion accounted by many to be either a matter of
Form, or a piece of Enthusiasm? for earnestness in Prayer, and depending on the
inward assistances of Gods holy Spirit, how have men who know or value these
things little themselves, taken occasion from thence to disparage them with
much Impudence and Scorn? Some have thought they could not be esteemed Loyal,
if they appeared devout: and therefore to purchase the one Character were
willing not only to throw off, but openly to reproach the other all they could.
What ill effects this has had, how the Nation has been much corrupted by these
Maxims, and God highly offended, is so obvious to every Man's observation, that
I need dwell no longer on it.

The other ill effect that still continues, is the prejudice that the Enemies
of our Church have cast on the Reformed Religion: as holding that very Doctrine
of killing Kings, for which they had been so justly charged. And perhaps that
which at present is the ground of all our fears, had its rise in a great
measure from the Jealousies which upon this occasion were infused against the
Protestant Religion. It will be therefore no improper thing to show you how
justly the Church of Rome is accused of this, and how unjustly it is cast on
those of the Reformed Religion. That this charge is truly fastened on the Church
of Rome will appear in these particulars.

The power of deposing Kings is certainly a Doctrine of their Church, as
appears in the universal agreement to it, and the Tradition of it for above
five Ages, in a more uninterrupted and uncontroverted series, in all that time,
than can be showed even for Transubstantiation it self. Now if a King is
deposed by the Pope, and after such deposition, if he is not so tame as to lay
aside his Regal Dignity, which it is very likely few Princes will do, then they
being lawfully deposed, are Kings no more: and if they pretend to be Kings
still, they are Usurpers: so he that kills them does not kill a King but an
Usurper. And if the Pope creates a new Prince, which by the same Authority is
vested in him, and is indeed a branch of the deposing power; then the new
Prince being lawfully vested with the Regal Authority, may as justly authorize
any to kill the deposed King, as a lawful King may set a price upon any Rebels
head. This was well observed by those who undertook to defend the deposing
power. Swarez writing against King James tells him in plain terms, In Reg.
Majest. Brit. Lib. 6. c. 4. Sect. 10
That a King who is canonically deposed may be killed by any private man
whatsoever. Valentia says, In Thom. Tom. 3. Disp. 151. g. 4. p. 2.
That an heretical Prince may be by the Popes sentence deprived of life: and
Becanus though Confessor to an Emperor, Ferdinand the II. says, Cont. Ang. p.
115.
No man doubts but if Princes are contumacious the Pope may order their lives
to be taken away. I might name many more, but these may suffice: especially
since it is visible that this is a certain and necessary consequence of the
deposing Doctrine. And though Gerson one of the best Men of his Age, did at the
Council of Constance where the Papal power was trodden under foot, and the Court
of Rome had no influence (so vain a thing it is to distinguish between the
Court and Church of Rome) press much for the obtaining of a Decree, That no
subject should murder his King or Prince, even that could not easily pass: and
he himself was in danger of his life for soliciting it so earnestly. In
conclusion it was done, but with such a reservation as shows they would only
condemn the assassinations of private cutthroats; for those were only
condemned Who killed their King without waiting for the sentence of any Judge
whatsoever: so if sentence is past by any Judge (the Ecclesiastical as well as
the Civil) then this decree notwithstanding, it will be lawful for a Subject to
kill his King.

I might here run out into many Instances to show you how acceptable the
killing of Kings has been to those of that Church: how Sixtus the V. made a
Panegyrique upon Clements murdering Henry the III. of France before a
Congregation of Cardinals: how Francis Veronno wrote both in defense of that
fact, and of Chastells attempt on Henry the IV. how Garnet and Hall that
suffered for the most desperate attempt that ever was, I mean the Gunpowder
Treason, are reckoned among the Martyrs in the Catalogues set out by the
Jesuits: and under the pictures and prints made for Garnet he is called the
true Martyr of Christ. Legends of miracles have been also made for them, which
will be reserved till a fit time comes for their Canonization: which they
deserve full as well as Thomas Becket did, who was the greatest Saint in the
Church for some Ages, the blessed Virgin, nay, which is more, Jesus Christ
himself not excepted, if we may judge by the devotion that was paid at his
Shrine, since by the Legier books of Canterbury, it appears yet on Record, that
in some years above 950 l. was offered at his Altar, and not a six pence at our
Saviors Altar, and but a few pounds at the blessed Virgins. And to show how
well they approved of the Gunpowder Treason at Rome, Gerard, and Greenwoll or
Tesmond, two of the principal Conspirators, were so well entertained there,
that escaping thither from the Justice of this Nation, the one was made the
Popes Penitentiary, and the other lived in the English College there, and
officiated often in St. Peter's in the Vatican.

After all this evidence, in which I have not once named Mariana, though they
would make us believe, he is the only person of their Communion that ever
maintained this opinion, it is apparent that the killing of Kings has been
openly taught, and publicly encouraged in that Church: and that it is a
necessary consequence of the Deposing Doctrine. What hand they had in this
execrable crime, and how far they disguised themselves into all the forms and
divisions about Religion that were among us, I shall not positively assert: It
has been done with very much assurance, by persons of great worth and credit:
and there are many probabilities to induce us to believe it.

Two things were observable in the methods of carrying on this great
wickedness, clearly borrowed from them: The one was, the actors pretending to
Enthusiasms, and inward directions for what they did, though it was clearly
contrary both to the Laws of God and Man. That the person of our Prince is
Sacred, and exempted from punishment, is a constant Maxim of our Government:
which makes his ill Ministers and Counselors accountable for every thing that
is done amiss. That the House of Commons cannot set up, by their single
Authority, a Court to judge of the life of the meanest subject: that a force
put on either House, though but a small part were violently excluded, makes it
to be no more a House of Parliament; and that much more when the far greater
part was secluded, they were certainly no House of Commons: That one House
without the concurrence of the other, and the Royal assent joined to both,
could not do any thing legally: and finally, That the Officers of the Army had
no right to assume the Government into their hands; were all things so manifest
according to the constitutions of this Kingdom, that they who acted so contrary
to them, knew they could never justify themselves by either Law or President.
It was necessary then to fly to somewhat, that should seem to be above all the
limitations and restraints of Law: and that was to pretend secret directions
from God. A Doctrine that overthrows the main and fundamental principle of the
Reformation, which is, That in all things which relate to God, the Scriptures
only are to be our Rule. And indeed it is hard to determine whether the
referring all controversies of Religion to one infallible Judge, or the giving
up of men to the heats of their own fancies, be the most dangerous principle.
The latter seems worse: for the former leaves us to the mercy of one man,
whereas the other exposes mankind to the fury and humor of every brainsick or
designing man. It is certain, that in the public actions of our lives, and in
moral matters, Inspiration without a warrant from Scripture, or a clear proof
of a Divine Mission attested by some public and supernatural sign or miracle,
is not only a fallacious, but may be a pernicious guide. That this was all
borrowed from the Writings, and the public and encouraged practices of the
Church of Rome, from whom that which is true and rank Fanaticism has issued
out, though perhaps many Dr. Stillingfleet of the Fanaticism of the Church of
Rome.
of those among us are not aware of it, has been made out so fully, and beyond
contradiction by an eminent Writer of our own, that I need add nothing in
confirmation of what must be universally acknowledged, by all who have read his
learned Book on this subject.

A 2d thing that appeared in carrying on the wickedness of this day, borrowed
from the Doctrines of that Church, was, a principle that all the rules and
constitutions of Government may be broke through by the sounder and better part
of the people at their pleasure: that Princes and Parliaments, and the major
part of either House were subject not only to the whole body of the people, for
this would not have served their turn, but to the sounder and better part. The
resolving all power in the people, was first taken up by the assertors of the
Popes deposing power: for they argued, that if it belonged to the people, then
the Pope representing the Universal Church, all their rights did accrue to him;
so that in their names he was to dispose of Crowns as he pleased. But here
these maxims were thus varied: The power was said to belong to the people in
common, but was to be managed by the better part, that is the stronger, the
Army, who assumed to themselves the name of the better and sounder part: for I
am sure I speak within bounds, if I say it was not the Twentieth man, and I do
not exceed if I say it was not the hundredth man of England that approved of it.

It is therefore a most unjust blemish cast on the Protestant Religion, or the
English Nation, to accuse either the one or the other for that which was but
the crime of a few hot headed Enthusiasts, or ambitious Soldiers: and those
who suffer themselves to be wrought on by so ill grounded a prejudice, and to
be so far carried by it, as to renounce our Communion, and go over to the
Church of Rome, discover plainly that they neither understand their principles
nor ours. We detest and condemn it, and they encourage and approve the like
practices: and they may as justly accuse the Protestant Religion of Adultery
and Theft, because some among us have been avowedly guilty of these sins. The
Church of England has ever witnessed her detestation of these practices and
principles, and shared deeply in the sufferings of their King: The whole Nation
by their Representatives in Parliament has condemned it, and appointed this
solemn humiliation for expiating the guilt of it. And many of the most
considerable Dissenters, did even then, when it was not so safe to do it as it
is now, openly declare against it both in their Sermons and Writings. This is
what in Justice cannot be denied them, and many of them were no less active and
industrious, and were indeed highly instrumental in the bringing home of his
Majesty that now Reigns. If some few have justified the shedding of this blood,
as their number has been but inconsiderable, so their Maxims have been chiefly
borrowed from Popish Writers. One great instance of this appeared in many
speeches that were printed at that time, and were said to be delivered in their
Junto, which were almost word for word taken out of a book, that had been often
condemned, and was strictly prohibited, that went under the name of Dolman; but
was believed to be written by Parsons the Jesuit, who was perhaps one of the
greatest men that that order has produced, so manifestly did they copy from the
Jesuits School: and by that great impiety then acted by them, they have given
some seeming but very false colors for taxing the Reformed Religion; by which
Popery has had such footing among us. By these things it may appear that we are
yet under the ill effects of the guilt of this day, both in the strength that
Atheism received by it, and the advantages which the Papists have taken from it.

The other reason of continuing public mournings is, when we are warned by any
sad symptoms, to fear the return of the like or of new calamities: and that
this still presses on us, to repeat our solemn humiliations, is so evident,
that I need not stand long to make it out. We have been long under fears, that
it might happen to us as it did to the Jewish Church, when it was her
lamentation, The anointed of the Lord, who was Lament. 4. 20.
the breath of our Nostrils, is fallen into their pits. Our King is more to us
in our circumstances than theirs was to them, and we have had more cause to
fear that he should fall by the hand of a Clement, or a Ravilliac, and then
what a black prospect have we of most terrible confusions to follow, on such a
fatal blow? or if even that sacred life should in a natural way expire, what
can we see beyond it but fatal and gloomy days? Or if the disorders among our
selves should burst out into blood, what distractions and miseries are like to
follow? It is not to be conceived, that among them who are so zealous in the
opposing of a Plot against His Majesty's Person, our holy Religion, and the
peace and safety of the Nation, there can be any that dares mock God and Man so
audaciously as to be designing any such thing, at the same time that they are
accusing others for it. To suppose it otherwise, were to give credit to the
false suggestions and base contrivances of those who design nothing more than
to take us off from watching over their motions; by engaging us one against
another, and infusing such Jealousies as may effectually divide us among our
selves: the only way that is now left, without a foreign power, first to
break, and then to conquer those in separated parties, whose united strength
they know they cannot resist. I shall therefore rather encourage you to
continue in this duty, than endeavor to persuade you to it. Let us remember
that we are commanded to Fear God, and next to Honor the King, and by well
doing to put to silence the 1 Pet. 2. 17
ignorance of foolish men: and that every soul ought to be subject to the
higher powers, for the powers that are, are of Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
God, and whosoever resists them, resists the Ordinance of God, and they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation; for they are the Ministers of
God, wherefore we must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but for Conscience
sake. Christ himself taught us to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
and to God the things that are Gods: Math. 22. 27.
and he being in his state of humiliation but a private subject, would not
suffer the Sword to be drawn in his Math. 26. 52.
defense, and expressly said, that though he was a King, yet his Kingdom was not
of this world, else his servants Joh. 18. 36
would have fought for him. These things are plain and clear, and need no
Commentary: His Apostles also charged those whom they employed in settling the
Churches, to put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Titus 3. 1.
Powers, to obey Magistrates, and to pray for Kings, and all that are in
Authority; that under them we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all
Godliness and Honesty. 1 Timothy 2. 2
And if it is ever seasonable to enlarge on these duties, it is most necessary
on such a day; and that is a principal reason for the continuance of this
Anniversary: And thus I hope I have sufficiently vindicated the continuance of
our public humiliation on this and such like solemn days.

2. The next thing I proposed to speak to, was the duties that belong to such
solemn Mournings: Great and extreme sorrow cannot be expected, when so few that
were concerned in it are alive; or if they are, I cannot believe that any such
are here in this place: And for them that were not so concerned, a bare horror
at the fact, with prayers for averting the Judgments that may be consequent to
it, is too slight a thing. My Text directs us to things of more value and
importance. We are to love the Truth and Peace. By Truth is either to be
understood the entire complex of their Religion, called often by David, the way
of Gods Truth: or by Truth is meant candor and fidelity among men: so this
applied to us must be understood either of the truth of the Gospel, or of
sincerity and honesty in our discourses and actions.

For the first of these, we may well call our Religion Truth; since we believe
nothing, but what Jesus Christ and his Apostles delivered to the world, in the
name of God: we have no new Doctrines added to this, introduced by false and
deceitful men, supported by lying wonders, or counterfeited Writings. Our
Doctrine as it is the truth of God, so is to be maintained and promoted by
means suitable to the being and nature of that God from whom it is derived. We
found nothing on made stories, or forged Records; we teach none of the
Doctrines of falsehood and equivocation, breach of faith or vows: dispencing
with Oaths, dissolving of Leagues or Treaties. All these we have left to that
Church, that as she grew up by lies and forgeries, so continues that trade
still, which has been in former ages of such advantage to her. I need not
insist on the Popes dispensing what the Oaths of Allegiance of Subjects to
their Princes, breaking and dissolving Treaties, though confirmed by Oaths and
Sacraments; a public instance of which appeared in the battle of Uarna, where
the Turk appealed to Jesus Christ, whose name those Christians had affronted by
breaking what was sealed by the most sacred tie. The issue was both fatal and
disgraceful to the Christian Army: All was done by the Popes Instigation, as
well as Authority. A publicker instance was yet given at Constance, which
showed that the Church was no better than the Court of Rome: When those who
came upon a safe conduct, were notwithstanding that condemned to be burnt: and
a Decree was made, That Faith given to Heretics in Sess. 19.
such a sort was not to be kept; though they had come to the place of judgment
trusting to it, and would not have come without it. And how far they have since
that time carried on the Doctrine of Lying and Swearing falsely, may appear by
this one clear and undeniable proof: In March 79. there were many Propositions
complained of at Rome, gathered out of the Writings of the Casuists, among
which these are two.

A man either alone or before others, may when he is Decree of the Pope lately
printed in Latin and English. Prop. 26
asked, or of his own accord, or for his diversion, or any other end, swear
that he did not do a thing, which he really did: having a secret meaning either
of some other thing which he did not do, or of another way of doing it, or of
any other Truth which he adds to it, in which case he is in Truth neither a
Liar nor is he Perjured. A just cause of using those secret meanings is as often
as it Prop. 27.
is necessary or profitable for the preservation of Life, or Honor, or saving
ones Goods, or any other act of Virtue, so that the concealment of Truth seems
in that case expedient or desirable.
Upon this a condemnation followed by the Pope and the Congregation de
propaganda Fide In it we have a Confession beyond exception that these Tenets
have been taught among them. But it may be urged that they are now condemned:
It is true they are so: But first, though they have been long complained of,
they were not condemned till within these two years. Secondly, They were not
condemned by the Pope in the Consistory; which would have made the Censure more
Authoritative: but by the Pope and the Cardinals of the Court of the
Inquisition: upon which a remarkable thing followed. The Jesuits who were much
provoked at this Censure, moved the Procureur de Roy, or Attorney General at
Paris, to put in a complaint against the publishing that Decree, since it came
from the Court of the Inquisition; which not being acknowledged in France
nothing flowing from that Authority could be received in that Kingdom: upon
which the Decree was prohibited and suppressed: so ready are they to bear down
any thing that strikes against these strong holds of of Satan among them. And
thirdly, This Censure is so penned that it does not import a condemnation, but
is indeed only a prohibition: for these Propositions are not declared to be
impious and immoral, or contrary to the Laws of God and of Nature: That had
been more candid and ingenuous dealing. They are only condemned as being
scandalous and pernicious in practice, that is to say of ill consequence: and
all are required in the virtue of holy obedience and under the pains of
Excommunication to teach them no more: so if a case happens that these may turn
useful in practice, then a faculty may be secretly granted for taking off this
Censure. From this it may appear what a door they have opened for the most
disingenuous practices imaginable: which is a shrewd presumption that their
Doctrine is not the Truth, when it is mixed with such arts that savor more of
him that was a liar from the beginning than of the God of Truth.

We then that are of the Truth ought to Love it, to reckon it our greatest
honor that we are called to the Knowledge and profession of this holy Faith:
we ought to adhere to it as long as we Live, and to be ready to lay down our
Lives for it, if God should call us to it. But our loving it, signifies more
than barely to speak honorably or passionately concerning it: or to like it in
opposition to Popery. To be a Protestant without being first a Christian can
signify nothing before God. To Love it then, is inwardly to delight in it, to
be wrought on by its Precepts, so as to conform both our Hearts and Lives to
it. Then we Love it sincerely when we measure our Belief by the Doctrines it
delivers, and our Lives by the Rules it gives us. And as a particular branch,
of Truth in the general notion, we must be candid and sincere in all our
discourses and dealings: We are not to advance even the best ends by acts of
injustice; but to be strict to these Rules of Truth the Gospel prescribes: Not
to lie, or spread lies, nor to slander even our greatest Enemies; not to
deceive or cousen those that deal with us: but to do to others as we would have
others do to us; to do every thing as considering we are under the allseeing
Eye of that God, who will judge us for all our actions ere long, and will bring
to light the hidden things of dishonesty. If we do thus love the Truth, both in
the speculations of it and in reducing these to practice, then we have made one
step toward that here promised in my Text.

The other thing enjoined is, That we love Peace likewise; not Peace in
prejudice of, or opposition to Truth: but that as far as possibly we can we may
live peaceably with all men. Where we are in all things agreed, there to love
Peace is an easy and cheap piece of virtue: Of this may be said what our
Savior said of loving them that love us, Do not Heathens and Publicans the
same? It is a sign of a nature strangely corrupted to begin quarrels and
contests, when there is no cause given for them. To avoid this is such a common
piece of good nature, that it is rather a wonder how a man can do otherwise:
but then does it appear that we love peace, if we can bring our minds to live
peaceably with those that differ from us, and have perhaps besides the
difference of Opinion really wronged us, or at least done their endeavors. If
with such we live peaceably then it appears that we are indeed the Sons and
lovers of Peace. It is a false Maxim to think we are then the truest
Protestants, when we have departed the furthest that is possible from every
opinion or practice of the Church of Rome: for in this we may run into
extremes: But we are sure we can never run into any extreme, by receding as far
as we can from that ill temper of mind, which naturally follows that Religion,
or rather is become a part of it. How little they love Peace, is apparent from
the conduct of Religion in their Hands from Pope Victors days downwards. He
condemned the Eastern Churches for a thing of so little consequence, as whether
Easter was to be observed on the 14 day of the month or on the Sunday
following. Since that time it were endless to show you what disquiet they have
given to the Christian World. They broke with the Greek Churches because they
would not become subordinate to them: and then pretended other things, as that
they Consecrated leavened and not unleavened Bread in the Sacrament, and that
they Taught that the Holy Ghost proceeded from the Father by the Son, and not
from the Son as well as from the Father: and upon these things not only broke
Communion with them, but hindered the Princes of the Western Churches to give
them any assistance, to defend them from the impressions that the Turks were
making on them: and resolved rather to deliver up those ancient Churches, and
so many Millions of Souls, to Mahometans, than that there should be any
Christians upon Earth that would not become in all things obedient and subject
to the Papacy. Shall I add to this, their sending so many great Princes with
vast Armies, to be destroyed in the Wars, for recovering Palestine, which they
called the holy War? The many Croisado's that they Proclaimed against Heretics
or even Catholic Princes, as they called them, upon any imperious demands of
theirs, when the Emperors or Kings did not tamely deliver up their
Prerogatives, as well as their Necks to be trampled upon by them? It were long
to reckon up the Princes they have deposed, and the Wars set on by them; but it
were endless to reckon all the dismal effects of them. How was Italy and
Germany rent in pieces by their means, with the factions of the Guelphes and
Gibellines? And how often did England and France tremble at their thunders?
Surely these cannot be the Sons of Peace, nor the Head of them the Vicar of the
Prince of Peace. Those that dare differ from them, know what the fruits of
their Peace is: To be hunted after, To be damned first, and burnt next, are all
the effects of their lenity. And as a great man expressed it pleasantly, Though
we L. Faulkland.
are not sure that all whom they damn are damned, yet we are very sure that all
whom they burn are burnt. It is a vain attempt to hope ever to be at Peace with
them, for that on which their Church founds all their other Doctrines, being
her Infallibility, it is a foolish thing to endeavor to convince them, that
they have been in any one error, who make this the fundamental Article of their
Religion, that their Church cannot err. So that all such designs, show either
the simplicity and weakness, or the vanity and the self-conceit of the
undertakers. There is no peace to be had with them but at the expense of Truth:
if we will renounce our Religion, and believe whatever they shall think fit to
prescribe, we may hope to purchase their favor; on other terms we must despair
of it: and I hope we will not buy it so dear.

But since we cannot have peace with them, let us seek to have it among our
selves: God be thanked none of our differences are such as we may despair of
reconciling them; or at least of bearing with one another infirmities and
mistakes. When we come to die we will have another sense of these things than
we now have. Then all those heats and animosities which do now inflame us, will
yield us no comfort; but on the contrary, Dr. Lewis au Moulin.
will beget in us severe challenges. Of this I my self was lately an eye
witness when called to assist one on his deathbed, who had allowed himself to
write with as much virulency as he could invent: but then he with many tears
lamented it. It is true, he did not retract his opinions, nor was it thought
seasonable at such a time to disturb him with controversy; but he sincerely
repented of that bitterness of spirit, upon the account of our differences, and
that censuring and detracting humor to which he had given too much way before:
He wished his Soul with the good men of the Church of England. He vowed that if
he recovered, he should never return to that Vomit: and because he thought he
was to die, he signed a retractation of all that was personal in his Writings;
and exhorted all others to manage their differences with a more meek and
Christian temper. I mention this in so public a manner, because he authorized
the printing of that retractation, which he signed on his deathbed: and I
enlarge the more on this, hoping that such an example, from so learned and
zealous a man, will have great influence on others to moderate their heat, and
to allay their passions. Oh! for more of that wisdom that is from above, which
is first pure, then peaceable, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.

The circumstances of this day should dispose us all more to this happy temper.
I cannot say the breach between the late blessed King and his Parliament, or
the War that followed was begun or carried on merely upon the account of
Religion; but certainly the sourness that was on peoples tempers by reason of
their differences in Religion, set it on much, and made it more lasting, and
end more Tragically. Many were transported at first beyond their duties, by the
extreme way of carrying matters before the War, by some that were more zealous
then prudent: and certainly things were driven much further in conclusion, than
was at first intended by them that took up Arms. There is a fatal series in
some distractions; one step not only makes way for another, but makes it in
some sort necessary for their security that have gone too far. In the end all
were losers, and the Nation was like to be ruined. Those of the Church not only
lost all that they enjoyed, their Goods, and their Benefices and Dignities, but
they lost him who was their Head on Earth, who was and still must be, one of
the greatest Glories of this Church. Those of the separation were not gainers
by it; a new party not thought of at first, rose up and took the game out of
their hands: and when they had forced the Parliament, and killed the King, they
entitled the rest to all they had done: and pretended they had gone on truly
according to the principles upon which they had set out at first. And though
they were gentler to these of the Division, than to those of the Church, yet
they were to have been devoured at last, if a happy revolution had not taken
the Nation out of their hands. Upon such a sad experiment, especially seconded
with those dreadful hazards to which we see our selves now exposed, it might be
expected that men of all sides should grow wiser and more temperate; and that
many that are for the Church should abate of their stiffness, in things not
Essential; and that they on the other hand, that insist on some indifferent
matters, would consider things better without any heat and animosity. And thus
if we come to love the Truth and Peace, that is, to secure the Protestant
Religion against those enemies of Truth and Peace at Rome, and unite at home
all that are capable of it, by adjusting matters among our selves, and those
that cannot come into that Union, being at least inoffensive to them that do,
and so all living in Love and Peace one with another, then we may hope to see
that accomplished in our case, which is in my Text promised to the Jews, the
third thing I proposed to speak to.

3. That all the sad effects of that for which we now mourn shall be then
entirely removed: that our days of Fasting shall be turned into solemn and
cheerful Feasts: then should our twenty ninth of May, swallow up the
remembrance of the thirtieth of January: or perhaps as the Prophet foretold
such happy deliverances should come to the Jews, as should make even that out
of Egypt, be forgotten; so we might hope for such days as should outshine and
darken the very twenty ninth of May. Then might we hope to see Halcyon days,
or, to speak in an English phrase, Queen Elizabeth days again. If we were
delivered from the fears of Popery, and an end were put to our contests at
home; if King and People, if City and Country, if Conformists and Dissenters
all would happily conspire in the duties proposed in my Text, of loving Truth
and Peace, Then should all our drooping Hearts revive again, all the mists that
now environ us should vanish; all our fears and jealousies should fall off: and
we being of one Heart and Mind should be the Paradise and Joy of the whole
Earth, and the Glory and Bulwark of the Reformed Religion: and this great City
should be a City wherein Righteousness should dwell. Then should we lie down
and rise in Peace: Allarms and Distractions should cease: Peace should be
within your Gates, and Prosperity within your Houses, or rather Palaces for
such many of them are. Oh may we ever hope to see such days, and such a time.
If we come to love the Truth and Peace, then shall even this Fast of the tenth
month, according to the Jewish account, be to us Joy and Gladness and a
cheerful Feast. The God of Truth and Peace give us Grace to set about it
sincerely. To him be all Honor and Glory both now and evermore.

FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
Guillim's Display of Herauldry, with large Additions. Folio.

Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of England; The first
Part. Fol.

-- His second Part, completing the said History, is now in the Press.

-- His Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England. Oct.

-- His Relation of the Massacre of the Protestants in France. 4to.

-- His Sermon before the L. Mayor, upon the Fast for the Fire. 4to.

-- His Account of Eve Cohan, a Person of Quality of the Jewish Religion,
lately converted to Christianity. 4to.

-- Some Passages of the Lite and Death of the Right Honorable John, late Earl
of Rochester; written by his Lordship's own direction, on his Death Bed, by the
said Gilbert Burnet, D. D. Octo.

Dr. Burlace's History of the Irish Rebellion. Fol.

Herodoti Historia, Gr. Lat. Fol.

Mr. Williams Sermon before the Lord Mayor, October. 12. 1679.

-- His impartial Examination of the Speeches of the five Jesuits, lately
executed for Treason. Fol.

-- His History of the Powder Plot; with a Vindication of the proceedings, and
Matters relating thereunto, from the Exceptions made against it, by the Author
of the Catholic Apology. To which is added, A Parallel betwixt that and the
present Plot. 4to.

Mr. Ia. Brome's two Fast Sermons, 1679.

Dr. Iane's Fast Sermon before the House of Commons, Apr. 11. 79. 4to.

Mr. John James Visitation Sermon. 4to.

Mr. John Cave's Fast Sermon, Ian. 30. 79. 4to.

-- His Assise Sermon at Leicester, July 31. 79.

Dr. William Cavt's Sermon before the L. Mayor, November. 5. 1680.

Dr. Puller's Discourse, of the Moderation of the Church of England. Octo.

Dr. Saywell's Original of all the Plots in Christendom, Octo.

Sir John Manson's Discourse of Supreme Power and Common Right. Octo.

Dr. Edw. Bagshaw's Discourses on several Select Texts. Octo.

Speculum Baxterianum; or Baxter. against Baxter. 4to.

Mr. Rushworth's Historical Collections, the 2d Vol. in two Parts. Fol.

-- His large and exact Account of the Earl of Strafford's Trial. Fol.

The Country Man's Physician.

An Apology for a Treatise of Humane Reason. By Matthew. Clifford Esquire 125.

The Laws against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and c. explained, by diverse
Judgments and Resolutions of the Judges, and other Observations thereupon. By
Will. Cawley Esquire Fol.

Fowiis's History of Romish Conspiracies, Treasons, and Usurpation. Fol.

Rob. Seller's Remarques on the State of the Church of the 3 first Centuries.
Oct.

^p. Sanderson's Sermons. Fol.

Dr. Hurnet's Fast Sermon before the House of Commons. December. 22. 1680.

-- His Translation of the Decree made at Rome, March 22. 1679. condemning some
Opinion of the Jesuits, and other Casuists. 4to.


