A SERMON Preached before the KING and QUEEN, AT WHITE HALL, On the 19th Day of
OCTOBER, 1690. BEING THE Day of Thanksgiving, FOR His MAJESTY'S PRESERVATION
and SUCCESS in IRELAND.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARVM.

LONDON: Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXC.

THE Bishop of SALISBVRY's Thanksgiving-Sermon FOR The KING'S PRESERVATION IN
IRELAND.

PSALM CXLIV. 10, 11. It is He that gives salvation unto Kings, who delivers
David his servant from the hurtful sword.

Rid me and deliver me from the hand of strange children, whose mouth speaks
vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood.


THIS Place as well as this Day is dedicated to the Honor of the great God, to
the Celebrating of his Praise, and the Glory of the Deliverance and Victory
that he has given us. Those whom he has made the Blessed Instruments of
procuring it to us, do so entirely offer up the Acknowledgments due for it to
that Providence which they signally Adore, that as they ^ould not endure so
sacrilegious a thought, as ^he putting the Honor that belongs to Them in ^he
least degree of Competition with the Praises that are to be offered up to the
Great KING of KINGS; so by a Modesty which gives a peculiar Grace to all they
do, they cannot bear even that which is just, and in some sort necessary upon
such occasions. In other Places and Courts, Invention and Fancy are put to the
rack to find out the highest Figures, and the noblest Expressions to raise the
Glory of Princes, even when their Successes do more eminently belong to some
secret Design of Providence, since no share of them can be ascribed either to
their Courage or Conduct. But here we are so confined by Orders which one knows
as little how to obey, as how to disobey, that how large soever the Field, and
how rich soever the Prospect is, it must either be quite overlookt, or if it be
suffered to be showed, it must be by Reversing the Telescope in Little and
contracted. Princes, whose Actions are their own Panegyricks, cannot bear that
others should make any for them; for what they themselves do, exceeds all that
can be said by others: Whereas the want of real Merit must be hid or supplied
by the false appearances of it* The Sun and Stars must be brought down, and in
every comparison be humbled in the Preference that is to be given to the
Flattered Prince* How many a Reproach must the Sun have endured in some Courts,
if when the day is at it longest, the Prince had for some hours prevented his
Rising, and continued his watchful Fatigue till after he was Set; and that a
Wound which made so wide a breach upon him by the certainest Instrument of
Death, could scarce interrupt his Motion. Here had been a copious Theme for
Hungry and Mercenary Flattery: The Sun would have been for ever after that,
despised as a diminution to their Prince's Glory, when compared to him. Impious
Attempts which were once began, would have been pursued, of calling ^im the
King of Glory, who is strong and mighty in bat^^l. One King was signally struck
from Heaven, for admitting Divine Honors that were offered up to him: That
Jealous God who will not suffer his Glory to be given to another, ^nows what
are the properest Times and Methods for Punishing all the Blasphemy that is in
^he Courts of Princes who encourage and engage their Subjects, or rather their
Slaves, to fly to such an extravagant pitch. But to us, who acknowledge that
Most High God, that rules in the Kingdom of men, Dan, 4. 25.
and gives it to whosoever he will, and that he sets up and pulls down
according to the hidden Designs of his Wise Providence; As all that approaches
to such irreligious Excesses, (...) matter of Horror; so the Princes we serve,
make this an easy Duty to us, they being as deeply possessed with the Belief
of Providence, as they are free from all those swellings which must be fed with
gross and exorbitant Flattery.

And therefore I am not afraid to make this the Subject of my present
Discourse: It ts God that gives Salvation to Kings, that delivers David his
servent from the hurtful sword. If any considers the situation of these words,
between those that go before, and those that come after, they will see, that
the Sentence is cut by this as an abrupt Meditation, which probably was to be
sung by the Chorus; whereas what is before and after, was, as is most likely,
sung by single Voices in the person of David. The first part of this Verse
contains a general Position, That the Advancement of Kings, and the Progress of
Empires, the Victories obtained by them, their Escapes and Deliverances, is of
God, and is the effect of signal Providence, that watch over them. The words
that follow relate more particulary to David himself. (...) shall not determine
whether the word hurtful or evil sword is only a Poetical Epithete, to swell up
and beautify the Period; or if it relates to poisonous Swords, that gave a
certain Death with every wound.

In the second Verse that I have read, there is a Prayer for a complete
Deliverance; that which is here celebrated being yet imperfect: therefore the
Psalmist, returning to his former Thread, says, Rid me and deliver me from the
hand, that is, from the power, of strange children, or the children of the
strange God, that is, Idolaters. Idols in the Scripture phrase are called
strange Gods; and as the People of Israel are called the Children of God, so
Idolaters are called the Children of the Stranger, or of the Idol. There
follows a description of Idolaters by their Words, and by their Actions: Their
mouth speaks vanity; that is, either falsehood, in which sense vanity
frequently stands in Scripture; or words of arrogance and insolent scorn.
Right Hand, in the phrase of the Old Testament, is to be understood, either of
Oaths made by the Ceremony of lifting up the right hand to Heaven, or of
Compacts and Agreements confirmed by the joining men's right-hands; from which
came the phrase of the right hand of fellowship. Their right hand, that is,
either their Oaths or their Covenants, is a right hand of falsehood, or of a
lie, according to that in Isaiah 44. 20. A lie is in their right hand. Since in
all these they were double and false. The Characters here given them, may
either be thus understood; They are false both in their Words and Oaths: or
thus; There is much haughtiness and pride in their Discourses, and as much
falsehood in all their Treaties and Engagements.

To return to the first words in my Text.

There appear often Eminent Characters of God's Providence, in the raising up
and preserving of Kingdoms, and in the Victories and Salvation given to Kings.
If there is a Providence that watches over any part of this lower World, then
certainly the most eminent parts of it, upon which the rest does so much
depend, are its chief care: This has been so universally confessed, that those
among the Philosophers who thought it below the Infinite Greatness of the
Divine Being, that it should take care of the most inconsiderable parts of the
Creation, did yet believe that the greater and more important Transactions were
conducted by it: Though this slowed from the low and narrow Conceptions which
they had of God, as if an Universal Providence had been too great a
distraction, and too mean a care for a Being infinitely Perfect. But there is
such a Chain in all things, the most Important Matters taking often their rise or
turn from very inconsiderable Circumstances, that it is certain that either
there is no Providence at all, or that it has no limits, and takes all things
within its care. Yet God having put the whole Frame of Nature under certain
Rules and Laws, the greatest part of Providence is only the Supporting and
Directing of those Beings that do still act according to their own Natures; and
in these, though Providence is less discernable, yet it is still the Spring of
the whole Machine, which, though covered and unseen, gives motion to all the
parts of it. There are other more solemn Occasions, in which some second causes
are raised above their own pitch, and are animated beyond the ordinary rate;
and others are at the same time as far depressed below themselves, the Spirits
of the One abating, as much as those of the Other are elevated. This has never
appeared with more eminent Characters than in the Revolutions of States and
Empires, in which both the course of Natural Agents, the Winds and Seasons, and
the tempers of men's minds, seem to have been managed by such a direction, that
not only every thing, but every circumstance has co-operated to carry on Great
Designs in such a Conjunction, that those who observe them with due attention,
are forced on many occasions to cry out, This is the finger of God! this is the
Lord's doing! And we may the more certainly conclude, that such a Systeme of
things is the effect of a special and directing Providence, when the tendency
of it is to advance some Design in which the Honor of God is more particularly
concerned.

Cyrus, in whom the second Great Monarchy began, and by whom God's Judgments
against Babylon, and the bringing back the Captivity of the Jews, were to be
executed, according to what Isaiah had prophesied above 150 years before he was
born; Cyrus, I say, a small Prince, and doomed to an early Death by a
superstitious Grandfather, escaped that severe Fate, and was bred up in
obscurity: He first dethroned Astyages, his Grandfather; and after that, he
extended his Conquests into Lydia and Asia the less: During all the progress of
his Glory, the Babylonians, instead of putting a timous stop to his Victories,
thought only of fortifying their Capital City; which when they had done to a
degree that almost passes belief, he, by diverting the Course of the River,
made himself Master both of City and Empire; and sent the Jews back to rebuild
their Temple, retaining still his Authority over them.

When the final Period of this Monarchy came, then one of the smallest Powers
in Greece did effect it. The Kingdom of Macedon had been one of the most
inconsiderable of all that Body, tho it was become more Powerful in Philip's
time. The Greeks had been twice attacked by the Persians, and vast numbers had
fallen before handfuls of them; upon this, as had been prophesied by Daniel,
Alexander, a Haughty, a Vain, and a Dissolute Prince, with an Army of 37000
men, invaded the Persian Empire, and after Three great Battles, in the First of
which 200000 came against him; 600000 in the Second, and a Million in the
Third, he carried his Conquests on to the Ganges with such a Rapidity of
Victory and Success, that nothing could stand in his way: Among the conquered
Provinces, Tudea was one which came under his Protection, and continued for 146
years under that Branch of his Empire that reigned in Syria.

But to give another instance of this, that has a greater relation to the
People of God, after the Jews had been long under the Syrian Yoke; Antiochus
Epiphanes, not content with the Subjection that they had paid his Ancestors,
set himself totally to destroy both their Religion and their Nation; upon which
Mattathias, the Father of Judas, and his Brethren, a Priest full of Zeal for
God and for his Country, was raised up to resist that Fury; he only began the
opposition, but dying soon after, he left the conduct of the Deliverance of his
Country from Persecution and Tyranny, to his Son Judas Maccabeus, from whom it
passed to his Brethren, and to their Posterity. A total Subversion of their
Religion and Policy, was begun, and that according to the sense of all mankind,
has ever been esteemed a Dissolution of Government; and Mattathias and his
children their venturing on so dangerous an Undertaking, is reckoned up in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, among the Heroical Attempts of Faith; it is reserved to
the last place, and enlarged on in a variety of lofty Expressions, to show that
it was one of the greatest Performances of Faith: And it was so indeed, for it
seemed to be a desperate Attempt, in which the best Success that, reasonably
speaking, they could have expected, was a speedy and a glorious Death; they had
nothing to trust to, but Miracles of Providence; they were few in number,
destitute of every thing, and the Kings of Syria were Masters of all the Strong
Places in Judea, and poured in at several times, Seven or Eight great Armies
upon them: But that Deliverance which began in a Cloud that was no bigger than
a hand-breadth, made such a Progress under several Heads who conducted the Jews
with equal degrees of Prudence and Courage, that tho they were unprovided of
all things, but what were afforded them from the Spoils of their Enemies; they,
after a War of Twenty-four years Continuance, and a Series of constant and
amazing Successes, became at last a free People, both with relation to their
Religion and Government.

Shall I give you another Instance of him, during whose peaceful Reign, the
Savior of the World was born? Augustus was the Son of a Roman Knight, and was
but Eighteen years old when his Uncle Julius Caesar was killed, whose
Usurpation upon his Country had rendered him and his Family the Objects of the
Hatred of Rome; yet he not only escaped the first Rages of that Popular Fury,
but was very soon at the Head of their Armies; he entered into the Triumvirate,
and was in a few years rid of the other two; and after that first scene of
Artifice and Cruelty was over, he became the Wisest, the Moderatest, and was
the Happiest Prince, and the longest (...) of any in History, having had a
course of Glory of Fifty-six years Continuance.

But not to weary you with a dry Recital of too much History, I shall conclude
with one whose Circumstances were as remarkable in themselves, as in the
Effects that followed on them: When Dioclesian and Maximian had, chiefly by the
Instigation of Galerius, begun the last Persecution of the Christians, the
Design seemed so well laid, and was managed with so much Fury, that by all the
appearances of things, it could not miscarry, when Successors were prepared to
carry it on steddily; Galerius, that had been the most violent of all the
Persecutors, having chosen Maximinus Daia, that had been an ordinary Grazier,
for his Successor, who had not any one quality to recommend him to that
Elevation, but his Fury against the Christians: It is true there was a part of
the Empire that fell not under the common Calamity; it was indeed that part in
which there were the fewest Christians. Constantius Chlarus had for Sixteen
Years governed the West, first as Caesar, then as Emperor, in which time he had
kept both Gaul and Spain in perfect quiet; he had reduced all Britain, and had
frequently beat the Germains, and driven them beyond the Rhine: These Successes
made him so formidable, that tho he was favorable to the Christians, and would
not persecute them in his share of the Empire, yet Galerius durst not plainly
fall upon him, but he had got his Son Constantine into his hands, and kept him
about him at his Court in Nicomedia: His Father began to languish, and upon
that sent for him, but Galerius put him off by delays; and tho he did not
flatly refuse to let him go, yet he plainly saw that he had no mind to grant
it. But Galerius happening as he often did, to get drunk, he obtained then his
leave to be gone, and got his Seal for it. Upon this he went away immediately,
and crossed the Sea, near to the place where Constantinople was afterward
built by him; and because he apprehended that Galerius when he came to himself
would send after him, he took up all the Horses that were in every Stage, and
at the end of it disabled them; so he passed quite through to Italy, and it was
impossible for those whom Galerius sent after him, ever to overtake him: He
came to his Father at York, whom he found just expiring: He immediately
declared him his Successor; which he was not willing to accept of, till the
Soldiery in some sort forced him to it, and made him take the Purple. He went
over after that into Gaul, where his Father-in-law Maximian, who had abdicated
the Empire, came to him, and intending to return to it again, he pretended
kindness to his Son-in-law, the more effectually to betray him: He was
practicing upon his Army, when he had advised himself to go on an Expedition
with a small part of it; but Constantine was informed of this in time, and came
back so quick upon him, that he being both afraid and ashamed, fled to
Marseilles: Constantine pursued him, and those within refusing to stand by him,
he delivered himself into his hands, who for two years after that, used him in
all respects as became a Great Prince, and his Father-in-law. Yet nothing being
able to overcome his restless Ambition, he solicited his Daughter to let him
into her Bedchamber, while Constantine was in Bed; she thought her ties to a
good Husband were stronger than to a bad Father, and therefore discovered all
to him; so an Eunuch was laid in the bed, and a door being left open by the
Empress, Maximian came in and killed the Eunuch; Constantine was in the next
room, and rushed in with some of his Guards about him, and Maximian being so
fully convicted of the Crime, all the Grace that Constantine thought fit then
to show him, was to leave the manner of his Death to his own choice; he chose
the worst, for he hanged himself. Another signal Instance of God's care of
Constantine, was, that when he advanced toward Rome to possess himself of the
Seat of the Empire, Maxentius, that was Maximian's Son, who had assumed the
Power there, came out to fight him: But he had taken care the night before, to
cut the Timbers and Beams of the Wooden Bridge over the Tyber, so that they must
have cracked, if any great weight had been upon them; and he reckoned according
to the disposition of the Battle, that Constantine should be forced to take
that Bridge, and so perish with its fall; but the issue of the Battle was such,
that he himself was forced to pass over the Bridge, which cracked under him, and
he was drowned in the Tyber. Through this tract of wonderful circumstances, was
Constantiue brought to the Possession of the Empire, by whom not only the
Persecution of the Christians was put to an end, but in pursuance of the Dream
he had the night before, he defeated Maxentius, that represented to him the
Figure of the Cross, as that under which he was to conquer, he himself both
turned Christian, and made it the Religion of the Empire.

Such have been the Methods by which God has raised up Kings and Empires for
the advancing the Glory of his great Name, for the punishing and humbling
persecuting Tyrants, and for giving Salvation and Protection to his People.

But we need not weary our selves in seeking instances of this in past times,
when in our own days, we have seen a Prince, born indeed to have a rank among
Sovereigns, but with no intrinsic Power to support any great Undertaking; born
an Orphan and an Abortive both, and, as to all appearance, crushed under a
double misfortune: A Royal Family to which he was allied, was become an
encumbrance to him, and his own was under a vast and a seemingly insuperable
depression; his Country tied up by Oaths to exclude Him; and those from whom in
Justice and Gratitude he ought afterward to have promised himself a mighty
Protection, leaving him to his own Strength and Conduct: yet, by a series of
steps which need not be reckoned up, Him we have seen raised from a Plant that
seemed to rise out of a dry ground, to be a Great Tree, under whose Shade all
the Beasts of the Field come for shelter, and in whose Boughs all the Fowls of
the Air come now to lodge. It is this very day two full years since he first
set to Sea, to calm our Storms. The beginning was rough and inauspicious; yet
even that seemed to be intended only to those about Him a Lesson which He had
long before well learnt, of observing Providence, and depending upon it. Since
that time, fair Winds, good Seasons, prosperous Undertakings, happy
Discoveries, Success and Victory, seem to have been chained to Him, and bound
to follow Him; and now He has not only the Necks of His Enemies, but the Hearts
of all His People, as well as the Hopes of all Europe fastened on him. He
triumphs over His Enemies, as well by His Mercy in pardoning, as by His Courage
in conquering; and, which is more, He triumphs over all the Accidents of Life
by such an unshaken Equality of Mind, that His most glorious days and His
less-prosperous hours do not create in Him any varieties of temper and
behavior. And what can we now think, but that a Life which has been a sequel
of Wonders, will be carried on and concluded as it has been hitherto advanced;
and that if there is a Nebuchadnezzar, or an Antiochus Epiphanius, a Galerius,
or a Maximinian now in being, that God is by This Hand to deliver his Church
from them? For it is God that gives Salvation to Kings; Psalm. 2. 9.
he puts down one, and sets up another. He raises up Kings to break his
Enemies with a rod of iron, Ps. 5. 12.
and to ^^sh them in pieces like a Potters vessel; for the oppression of the
poor, and for the sighing of the needy, God will at last arise, and set him in
safety from him that puffs at him.

The second part of this Verse will also afford us matter of useful
speculation, which is, the bringing the general Observation to a particular
Head in the Instance of David, who was preserved from many Dangers, the
Accidents of War, as well as the Attempts of Saul; He was raised up from being
the youngest of many Brethren, and from looking after his Father's Flock, to be
the Shepherd of Israel. Ps. 78. 71.
God girded him with strength, and taught his hands to war, and his fingers to
fight, and gave him the shield of his Salvation; he delivered him from the Lion
and the Bear, Ps. 18. 35.
and from the Philistine that defied the Arms of the living God; Ver. 43.
he delivered him also from the strivings of the people, and made him the Head
of all the Nations round about him. Therefore it was that He, who had seen so
many Essays of the goodness of God to him, besides his active Zeal when settled
on the Throne for advancing God's Glory, and the beauty and solemnity of his
Worship, he employed many of his thoughts and hours in composing this Book of
Psalms, as the highest return he could make to God, that by the Elegance and
Variety of those inspired Hymns, not only that Age and Nation, but all
succeeding ones, might be furnished with a stock of the most elevating
Devotions possible, which might give wings to their minds, and raise^ them up
toward God. So much of the David in my Text, which leads me to say somewhat of
the David of the Day.

Is it nothing to you all, that see and hear the signal steps of Providence,
that have so gloriously watched over, and conducted this our David? I reckon
not among the greatest of these, his being raised up to a Throne of such high
Dignity among the Kingdoms of the Earth, by a Title, that, let ungrateful men
say what they will, has more both from God and man in it, than any the World
has seen for many Ages. But Kingdoms and Crowns are so distributed in the World
according to the secret Designs of Providence, that this singly is but an
ordinary Blessing, and given in common to him with other Crowned Heads. To be a
Deliverer of Mankind, a Preserver of Religion, a Fence against Tyranny and
Cruelty; to have for his first Essay saved his own Country from utter ruin,
when it seemed to be in its last Agonies; and to have not only resisted, but
beat back a mighty Torrent that swept every thing before it; to have stopped the
blackest Designs that were formed against Religion and Liberty both there and
here; for the preserving the United Provinces, and their Religion and
Government, was at that time likewise the saving this Church and Nation; so
soon did he begin to be a Deliverer to us: this, perhaps, was not then known to
every one; but we do now all know, that we were to have been the second
Sacrifice); All this, I say, one should think was Greatness and Glory enough to
have fallen to any one man's share. But that a reserve of Blessings should yet
be kept in store for the same Person, is a peculiar Favor of Heaven; and shows
us, That this is the man whom God delights to honor, and whom he has made
strong for himself. That the day of our Extremity being come, when we saw the
Net spread over us, and that a little time was only wanting, to model the Army,
and to make a Parliament, that just then the conjuncture of Affairs over all
Europe, and the disposition of all men's minds in the Netherlands, the Errors
and Follies of our Enemies, both within and without this Kingdom, with the
zealous assistance of our Friends and Allies; but above all, That the
Insensible Creation, the Seas, the Winds, and the Seasons, should all have
joined together to promote that great Undertaking, showed the care and
tenderness of that wise Conduct that watched over us. Every one of these
Particulars is extraordinary in it self; but the conjunction of them all
together is such a scene of Wonders, that no man who knows the contexture of
all the parts of this Deliverance, can look upon them, without seeing such a
prospect of Providence as raises his Mind into all the heights of Joy and
Wonder. But to view next the second Scene of God's raising his Glory on this
Stage, when our Sins had for a while retarded the progress and the finishing of
our Happiness, when many among our selves were wishing to be again in Egypt,
and were saying, We will not have this Man to rule over us; when many of those
who had formerly aggravated our Dangers, as much as any, were changing their
Style, and fancying that a Power thrust upon us from France, and supported and
guarded from thence, was, or would be a tame and harmless thing, and seemed to
forget all the Affections that Nature gives for our Country, and that Religion
gives for the Church of God, so that a new and perhaps a greater Crisis than
the former had returned upon us; then it was that our David resolved to be no
longer a Spectator and a Director of his Forces, and to make War by Proxy, but
again to venture that sacred Life, in which, if in a Day of rejoicing we may
mix any Complaints with our Jubilee, we must venture to say, that by a Courage
which is too prodigal of that in which we have all so great a share, even while
he preserves us by his happy Genius, yet he exposes us too much by the repeated
Dangers to which that Life is exposed, by which as we all live, so all Europe
is kept united against the great Destroyer and Enemy of Mankind.

Here again; the Winds and Seasons, the Courage and Fidelity of all about him,
the feeble Counsels and Conduct of the Enemy, conspired of his his side; but
above all, the Watchfulness of Providence showed it self in Instances that
Posterity will be tempted to think the Contrivances of a happy Imagination to
beautify our History. But Invention could hardly be so bold or so fruitful, as
to represent a Prince just in the Eve of a Day, upon which not only the
Security of his Throne, but that which to a Mind like his is much more
valuable, the Preservation and Happiness of his People depended, receiving a
Wound by that, which of all the Inventions of giving Death, is the most
infallible, and yet so slight a Wound, that it seemed sent upon no other
Intent, but that the firmness of his Mind, upon so extraordinary an Accident,
and the care of Heaven in so critical a minute, might be showed in the
properest time, and in the sight of all his Army, both for animating and
assuring them, that there was an invisible Guard watching about the Person of
him, under whose Standards they were to triumph next day. This proved so
inconsiderable, that it neither hindered the continuance of a Fatigue of
nineteen hours that day, nor a return to one of sixteen the next, in which his
Presence was every where so necessary, that the slightest Wound which had
disabled him from that, might have proved a mortal one to us all. The Glories
of that Day, that was neither stained with a great effusion of Blood, nor with
any of that sort that might have lessened the beauty of the Victory, the
entireness of the Defeat, the Consequences that followed upon it, the Quiet
that it secured to us here as well as that it procured there; the unhappy State
out of which it delivered us, when we were beginning to languish by a
Misfortune which I unwillingly mention, because nothing that is melancholy
ought to be mixed with the Joys of this Day. All these things carry in them
such matter of reflection, that tho I must now crowd them together, yet they
are capable of affording great variety of thoughts. Our Spirits here were as
much depressed, as those of some unnatural Englishmen were exalted in the
prospect they had of the approaching Ruin of their Country. Some were not
ashamed to say, that we needed fear nothing from the French, they would not
hurt us: and thus the terriblest of all the Calamities that can befall our
Nation, was set forth by some as an innocent, or rather as a desirable thing,
that would prove a Deliverance and not an Invasion. While this Fermentation was
working, even in the very moment in which we wanted so mighty a Support, came
the happy News which put a new face upon our Affairs. Some feared that in the
absence of our Sun we should have only had a faint Moonlight to guide us, and
that the gentle Hand which then held the Rudder should have proved too feeble
for such rough Work, especially when the first Essay was in a Storm, and that
there was an Enemy so powerful triumphing in view, and on our Coasts, and so
many ill Instruments at work within. But to our Admiration, and to the eternal
Praise of Divine Providence, we found we had another Sun in our Firmament, and
that Spirit which till then Gentleness and Modesty had shut in, now finding
that the Conjuncture required it, showed it self with so much firmness and so
bright a luster, that we began to doubt whether one Soul did not animate both,
and give its Influences equally in both. So much Skill in Government, tempered
with so much Softness, such a dexterity in Management, such a constancy of
Devotion, and so unwearied an application to Business, are things so much out
of all common Roads, that we must look up to Heaven, and acknowledge that this
was of God, that has raised up and conducted these our Deliverers and
Preservers. He has also literally preserved our David from the hurtful or the
evil Sword, since we know that the chief of our Enemies in the secret
Corresponcies, encouraged themselves, when the prospect of their Affairs seemed
melancholy and desperate, with a reserve of Hope from the Negotiation of an
Assassinate whom they had employed: but God has delivered his Servant even from
this evil Sword; and to crown all the Blessings of this Year, he has now given
Him the Hearts of his People, in so eminent a manner, that the Q. Elizabeth's
Days seem to return again upon us, in which the Purses of the Subject were that
happy Queen's never-failing Treasure, who reckoned that their Money was never
more their own, and never better placed, nor better employed, than when it was
in the Queen's Hands. She twice discharged the Subjects of the Taxes they had
given her for a War, when a Treaty of Peace put an end to her Warlike
Preparations. Such a Justice to her self, and to her People, gave her so sure a
Title to their Wealth, that she was indeed the Mistress of it all, and knew
that she could call for as much of it as the Public Occasions required. When
we see the same Confidence in the Crown returning in the Nation, which has been
so long and so fatally interrupted, we may then reckon that our Kings are
become truly great, and the Masters of the whole Property of England, not by
the strained and false Pretensions of a devouring Prerogative, but by the
surest and best-grounded Dominion, which they have over the Hearts of their
People, which must infallibly draw every thing else after it: For a Nation can
deny nothing that it can give, when it is both asked and laid out for their own
Defense and Preservation.

And now, DREAD SOVEREIGNS, suffer me, in the Name of God, to turn my self to
You. It cannot seem a small thing in your Eyes, that he has not only raised you
up to so sublime a Dignity, and set a Crown of pure Gold on your Heads, but
that he has watched over your Persons, and blessed your Councils, that you both
do now shine with the Luster becoming each Sex, the one with the Glory of a
Conqueror of Enemies, and the other with the softer Rays of a Preserver of your
People; that this has given you the Hearts of your Subjects, and made you the
Terror and Dread of your Enemies, of which they have made an ample confession,
in those barbarous Jollities upon the supposed Death of You, Great Sir, every
extravagant Demonstration of that inhumane Joy, being a loud discovery of what
they apprehended from You. God has drawn the Eyes of all the World upon You,
who hope that by You that tempestuous Sea, whose Inundations have destroyed so
many Countries, shall be shut up within Bounds, and that You shall set Bars and
Doors to it; and that by You God shall say to it, Hitherto shall thou come, and
no further* and here shall thy proud Waves be staid. It is from You that Europe
expects Liberty and Peace, and the Reformation a Recovery and a new luster. By
You exiled Princes hope to be restored to their Rights, and exiled Subjects to
their Houses, Churches, and Edicts. It is from Your Influence that our Elder
Brethren, the first begotten of the Reformation, or rather the last Remnant of
True and Primitive Christianity, hope to be confirmed in the Settlement that
their Prince has granted them. It is from Your Counsels and Arms, that both
Your Subjects and Your Allies expect a happy and a secure Peace. What more
could have been hitherto done for the gradual raising of your Glory than has
been done? You are now advanced to be as true Representatives of God, as
Mortals can be made, since from your Power, your Justice, your Wisdom, and your
Goodness, so great a part of the World waits for happy Influences, for great
Undertakings, and for glorious Successes, that shall be the Joy of the present
Age, and the Wonder of the next.

But remember, O ye Kings, that to whom much is given, of them much shall be
required; and if You expect from those that You imloy, degrees of Fidelity,
Zeal, and Application, proportioned to the Favors and Trusts You bestow upon
them; think a little, I know You do a great deal, what Examples of Piety and
Virtue You ought to set your People, and how much You ought to employ your
Authority in promoting his Glory, who has covered You with so much of his own
Image. Ordinary degrees of Zeal may be accepted from those of a lower Form, but
the highest pitch of it is the least Sacrifice that You can offer. The
discountenancing and driving from You all that profane scorn of Religion and
Virtue, which has so deeply infected the Nation, that strong Remedies must be
used before we are purged from it. The disgracing and punishing such as are not
ashamed of the most open and crying Vices, the encouraging Virtue by all the
distinguishing Marks of your Favor to those who pursue it. The Reforming your
Court and your People, and particularly that Body which of all others should
need your Care least, but I am afraid does it but too much, I mean those who
Minister in Holy Things: these are the Returns that God expects from you. I
know all cannot be done at once, and the leisure as well as the calm of Peace
will be necessary to bring this about. But as your resolving on it inwardly
before God, will be accepted by him who knows the sincerity of your Hearts, and
does not oblige you to endanger the Public too much, by a violent and
precipitated Cure: So when it is once understood that You are settled in these
Noble Purposes, this will make the execution of them easy to You. And to
conclude, I must crave leave to add one thing more; Your Royal Grandfather, who
had great Virtues in himself, was perhaps too easy to Vice in others, and from
hence sprang in a great measure the ruin of his Affairs; for dissolute and
depraved Men will be always truer to their Vices, than to their Masters. I am
not afraid of Your displeasure for this freedom, it becomes the Place I am in,
and the Station You have raised me to; and I am sure the other parts of this
Discourse, which the Occasion has made necessary, have been much more uneasy to
You than this is.

But David's Joy was not so entire, when he composed this Psalm, that there was
no need of praying for a further and a more complete Deliverance; therefore he
adds to this joyful Note a mournful One; Rid me, and deliver me; he was yet
encompassed with Idolaters, and not only common Idolaters, but Men whose Morals
were as defiled as their Worship; who were Treacherous and Insolent, to whose
Oaths and Treaties no regard was due, who in the time that they made up their
Treaties, were intending to break them, which is imported in this, that a Lie
was in their right Hand; and whose Mouths were full of Insolence, daring Pride,
and haughty Scorn: who how much soever they depressed their God by their
Idolatry, yet were swelled up in themselves to all the Caresses of lofty
Arrogance; they perhaps loved to be celebrated by Statues, Titles, and
Inscriptions, which might render their Names Immortal, tho they could not make
their Persons so: They might delight in all the Contrivances of servile
Flattery, to set them above all other Mortals, and by hearing that often said,
they might fancy themselves to be really so; they might suffer all the Topics
of Flattery to be exhausted, and all the Methods of it to be employed in
adoring them with that Tinsel. It might be understood that it was the surest
way of raising ones Fortune much more infallible than any Merit whatsoever, to
find out some new Strains of Commendation; and when that once appeared, then
Minds made for nobler Purposes when pressed with a lowness of Fortune, would
stoop to the abjectest Things of Humane Nature by turning their Wits to every
Artifice that might give a false Light and Luster to counterfeit Ware.

But to complete the Character of David's Enemies, we are to consider them as
breaking through the sacredest Bonds, and protesting that they would maintain
them in the midst of the most public Violations of them, as if they had been
equally voi^ both of Truth and Shame, giving and breaking their Faith as often as
either their Interests or their Vanity required it, violating the Ties of
Nature, as well as breaking the bonds of humane Society, robbin^ all their
Neighbors, invading Orphans trusted t^ their Care, and ruining whole Provinces
after the^ had purchased their Protection at the most extravagant Rates,
sparing neither Age nor Sex, but destroying both Cities and Countries, and
hoping to compensate for all the Crimes to which their Ambition and Fury could
lead them, by a pretense of Zeal for ^^eir Idol, and that way of Idolatry which
best plea^^d them; and yet sometimes with the basest sort (...) Idolaters, who
beat and whip their Idols when ^^ey think they are not favorable enough to
them, ^^ey might even rob their own Idol, and profane eve^^ thing that had
relation to it, when they them^^lves were not made the chief Idol, and served
with (...) deepest Veneration: Such were many of the Ido^^ers of the Heathen
Nations. Perhaps the Cha^^^ters I have set them out in, may not all frequent^^
meet in the same Persons: yet tho many In^^ances of every part of this
Description might soon (...) found out, I will not interrupt the Cheerfulness
(...) this Day, by setting before you Objects that ^^st give horror: Nor will
I seek for any of these the present Scene of the World, nor examine any (...)
our David's Enemies, and see how well these ^^haracters may fit them. We serve
Princes who ^^e as little to hear their Enemies reproached, as ^^emselves
commended; but it will be no hard ^^ing, upon a general Survey of the present
State (...) Europe, to pronounce who seem to be born to the Blessings, and who
the Curses and Plagues the Age.

But what or whosoever our Enemies may be, both Kings and Subjects ought to
join in their most earnest Prayers to God, that we may be delivered from all
the Children of the strange God, who may think that the offering up those that
are of a different Worship to that of their Baal, is a Sacrifice that will
atone for all the Rapine and Bloodshed, and every others Immorality of which
they may be guilty. It was no wonder that David by repeated Prayers desired to
be delivered from such Enemies; for we find this Petition, and this Character
of them is twice in this short Psalm, with this addition in the 7th verse, that
imports their Strength and Numbers; Send thy Hand from above, rid me and
deliver me out of great Waters, from the Hand of strange Children. We who are
now the happiest Nation under Heaven, want nothing to make us the most
miserable, but to fall under the Power of those who have no remnants either of
Truth or Goodness left in them.

But while our Kings are consulting, and our Parliaments are assisting, while
our Fleets and Armies are a preparing, and our Allies are uniting; while the
joint Endeavors of so many within and without the Kingdom, are all at work to
procure us an entire riddance and deliverance from the Hands, the rough and
Iron Hands of these our Enemies; There is one thing I am afraid is too
generally neglected or forgotten, and that is, our praying to God earnestly to
rid and deliver us from those false and cruel Men. We have been this last
Summer frequently brought together to fast and pray for Success and Victory;
God has heard our Prayers, and in that has given us all possible encouragement
to continue our praying to him. We are now, as to outward appearance, following
the Method that he has prescribed; Psalm. 50. 12.
Call upon me in the day of Trouble; I will hear thee, and thou shall glorify
me. We have called, God has heard, and we are now glorifying his Name, and
rejoicing in the great Salvation that he has wrought for us: And if we desire
a return of such happy Occasions, we must in the mean while continue our most
earnest Prayers to God; and when we are called on to it, we must return to our
monthly Fasts and Humiliations. It did not derogate neither from David's
Courage nor Conduct, that he acknowledged God was his Fortress, Ver. 2.
his high Tower, his Shield and Deliverer, in whom he trusted; who subdued his
People under him; and being full of the sense of his Glory, he reflected on
himself, and on all his People as nothing; Lord, what is Man, that thou take
knowledge of him, or the Son of Man, that thou make account of him? Man is
like Vanity, his days are like a Shadow that passes away: Therefore it is that
he prays earnestly, Bow the Heavens, O Lord, and come down.

Here is a Noble Pattern to excite and encourage our Devotion, and we have all
reason to conclude, that the Blessings we now Celebrate, are in a great measure
owing to the Prayers of those happy Souls that have been the Intercessors for
the Nation, of which it is not to be doubted but we have a great many among us,
for it is certain that we have never seen a more solemn Observation, as to all
outward appearance, of such Days as was on those monthly Returns; and tho many
were very barefaced in their neglect of them, and others that should have
animated the Public Zeal, were extreme cold in the observance of them, yet
much earnestness and fervor showed it self in many places. We see God has
heard the Prayers of those who cried mightily to him; and we have all reason to
hope, that he who has delivered us from so great a Calamity as then threatened
us, will still hear and deliver us, if we continue still to call upon him.

But let the Murmurers and the Troublers of our Israel say what they will, God
has wrought in the midst of us a mighty Deliverance, and he will perfect and
stablish that which he has wrought for us, if we do not, by our Ingratitude
and Rebellions, stop that course of Blessings that seems ready to flow in upon
us, as soon as we are delivered from our Enemies, and from the Hands of all
that hate us. Then we may hope to have the True Religion, and the best Church
in the World established among us, and the Reformation by our Means secured and
maintained elsewhere: We may hope to see this Nation become the Center of the
Union and Peace of Europe, that shall assert and warrant it against every bold
or perfidious Invader: We may hope to see this whole Island become one Church
and one Body, as it has one Head; and the neighboring Island set upon a
Foundation liable to no more Shakings nor Convulsions. We may hope to see Law
and Justice become the constant and certain Measures of our Government; Charity
and mutual Forbearance, become the Strength as well as the Ornament of our
Church, and our Church become the Pattern, as well as the Glory, of the whole
Reformation. And in conclusion, we may hope to see our Princes Heads still
covered with fresh Laurels, ever triumphing over their Enemies, and yet never
making themselves Enemies to any, but to the Invaders and Enemies of Mankind;
giving Security to all about them, and in a length of Days, and a stability of
Peace, giving a fullness of Wealth and Happiness to all that are under them; an
increase of Trade, an improvement of Soil, and such an advancement of the
Prosperity of the Nation, as is expressed in the followed words of the Psalm,
That our Garners may be full, affording all manner of Store; that our Sheep may
bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our Streets: That our Oxen may be
strong to labor; that there be no breaking in, nor going out; and that there
be no complaining in our Streets. Happy are the Princes, and happy is that
People that is in such a Case; yea, and happy are the Princes, and happy is
that People whose God is the Lord.

FINIS.

